XL. QVESTIONS Concerning the SOUL.

Propounded By Dr. BALTHAZAR WALTER.

And Answered, By JACOB BEHMEN.

Alias Teutonicus Philosophus.

And in his Answer to the first Question is the Turned EYE, OR, Philosophic
GLOBE. (Which in it self contains all Mysteries) with an Exposition of it.

Written in the Germane Language.

ANNO. 1620.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for H. Blunden, at the Castle in Corne-hill. 1647.

A CATALOGUE OF THE 40. QUESTIONS.
READER,
THe Author wrote this Answer to these Questions, chiefly for his friends sake
that sent them to him, as also for the benefit of all such as love the
knowledge of Mysteries: this friend of his was Dr. Balthazar Walter, who
traveled for Learning and hidden Wisdom, and in his return home, happened to
hear of this Author in the City of Gerlitz, and when he had obtained
acquaintance with him, he rejoiced that at last he had found at home in a poor
Cottage, that which he had traveled for so far and not received satisfaction:
then he went to the several Universities in Germany, and did there collect
such Questions concerning the Soul, as were thought and accounted impossible
to be resolved fundamentally and convincingly; which he made this Catalogue of,
and sent to this Author, from whom he received these answers according to his
desire, wherein he and many others that saw them received full satisfaction.

QUESTION. 1. WHence the Soul proceeded at the Beginning? 2. What is its
Essence, Substance, Nature and Property? 3. How is it created the Image of God?
4. What, and when was the breathing of it in? 5. How is it peculiarly
fashioned, and what is its form? 6. What is its Power? 7. Whether is it
corporeal or not corporeal? 8. After what manner comes it into the body of
Man? 9. Which way does it unite it self with the Body? 10. Whether is it ex
traduce and propagated after an humane bodily manner? or every time new created
and breathed in from God? 11. How, and where is it seated in man? 12. How, and
what is the Illumination of it? 13. How does it feed upon the word of God? 14.
Whether is such new soul without sin? 15. How comes sin into it; seeing
it is the work and creature of God? 16. How is it kept in such union, both in
the Adamicall and Regenerate Body? 17. Whence and wherefore is the contrariety
between the flesh and the Spirit? 18. How does it depart from the Body at the
Death of a Man? 19. How is it Mortal, and how immortal? 20. How does it
return to God again? 21. Whether goes it when it departs from the Body,
be it saved or not saved? 22. What does every soul departed? does it rejoice
till the last Judgment Day? 23. Whether do the souls of the wicked, without
difference (for so long a time before the Day of Judgment) find so much as
any mitigation or refreshment? 24. Whether do men's wishes profit them any
thing? or sensibly do them any good? 25. What is the hand of God and the Bosom
of Abraham? 26. Whether does the soul take care for men, their friends or
Children, or their Goods; and whether does it know, see, approve or disapprove
their undertakings? 27. Whether does it know this or that Art, or Occupation,
whereof (while it was in the body) it had sufficient skill? 28. Whether also
does it obtain, somewhat more certain knowledge of Divine, Angelical,
Earthly and Diabolical Matters then it had in the body? 29. What is its Rest,
awakening and Glorification? 30. What is the difference between the
Resurrection of the flesh and of the Soul, both of the Living and of the Dead?
31. What kind of new Glorified bodies shall they have? 32. What shall their
form, condition, joy, and Glory be in the other Life? 34. What is that
lamentable and horrible condition of the damned Souls? 35. What is the
Enochian Life, and how long does it continue? 36. What is the soul of the
Messiah, or Christ? 37. What is the Spirit of Christ, which he willingly
commended into his Fathers hand? 38. Of the things which shall come to pass at
the end of the world? 39. What, and where is Paradise with its Inhabitants?
40. Whether is it mutable, and what shall it be afterward?
TO THE EARNEST LOVERS OF WISDOM.
THe whole world would not contain the Books that should be written of
Christ, if all that he did, and spoke should be written of him, flowing from
that Fountain of wisdom, which dwelt in him; what then can be expected in a
little Preface: but some few observations of the footsteps, and paths of
Wisdom, and they are set down here as they occasionally presented themselves
to the thoughts of him, who desires to be made fit for the acquaintance with
the lowest scholar in her School.

Many have been her scholars in their own way, which Nature has inclined
them to; or God, in them that have kindled the Divine Nature, and so have been
made partakers of it in their souls: we may perceive the excellency of every
one of them by that which has been left for a Record behind them, and their
fitness to be followed in Order, till we shall attain the highest pitch we
are capable of.

Since the true Grounds of the ancient Wisdom have been hidden in the dark
writings, of the wise men of former Ages, some in this latter Age have
endeavored, to reform the Errors, that have risen from the want of knowing
those grounds, from which they wrote: the writings of that Learned SELDOM, are
eminent in this kind, among others, by which means, the true fame, and Glory
of Learning, has been in some good part restored again; as also by contriving
means to direct the way, to raise the several kinds of knowledge from their
own true Basis, and foundation.

The Renowned, Sir Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam, Vicount of St. Albans, laid his
foundation sure, and raised his building high; by his Instauratio Magna, he
taught men, first to free themselves from the Idola mentis humanae, and then
laid down the whole process of the Mind, from a Natural, and experimental
History, to raise a Natural Philosophy: which does show the way to compose a
Divine experimental History, to the building of a Divine Philosophy, or
Mystical Divinity.

Comenius also, by his Pansophia, designeth the best way to educate all from
their childhood so, that in the shortest time they may get the highest Learning
their Natures can attain to.

Pellius in his platform concerning the Mathematics does design to raise the
Principles, and whole structure of that Art, out of every ones self,
with-without the help of Books, or Instruments, by a Treatise he calls
Mathematicus (...); which may be well transferred to a Philosophus, Medicus
Legislator, Jurisperitus, Politicus, Theologus, Theosophus, (...).

Also that strict inquirer into Truth, Comes Castri Insulae in his Book de
veritate, teaches the true progress of the mind, in finding the certain
infallible truth in all things.

Du Chartes does lay the foundation of his Philosophy in such grounds, and
Principles, as are undeniable to him that does but consider what is in his own
thoughts.

These, and some others in their kind, have gone as far, as the Natural
faculty of man's outward reason can reach; this Author Jacob Behmen, esteems
not his own outward reason, but acknowledges to have received a higher gift
from God, freely bestowed upon him, and left it in writing, for the good of
those that should live after him.

And in his writings he has discovered such a Ground, and such Principles, as
do reach into the deepest Mysteries of Nature, and lead to the attaining of
the highest powerful natural wisdom, such as was amongst the ancient
Philosophers, Hermes, Tris-megistos, Zoroaster, Pythagoras, Plato, and other
deep men, conversant in the operative Mysteries of Nature: and the modern
Trevisanus, Raymundus, Lullius, Paracelsus, Sendivogius, and others: by which
men will be satisfied, that not only they have gotten, but that we also may
get that Lapis Philosophorum, the Philosophers stone, indeed.

Those Principles do also lead to the attaining such wisdom, as was taught in
Egypt, in all which Learning Moses had skill; to the wisdom also which was
taught in Babylon among the Caldeans, Astrologians, and wisemen, or Magi, with
whom Daniel was brought up: also to that wisdom of the East, from whence came
the three Magi, Matthew. 2.1. who saw the Star that lead them to Jerusalem, and
to Bethlem, where they saw the child Jesus, and worshipped, and so returned,
with whom God himself vouchsafed to speak and direct them what to do.

The Ground and Principles in his writings, lead to the attaining the wisdom,
which excelled the wisdom of the East, 1 Kings. 4.30.31. which Solomon had,
and wrote in the Proverbs, and in a Book (which has not yet been extant with
us in Europe, but is reported to be found in the East Country, some few years
since,) wherein he wrote of all Plants, from the Cedar, to the moss that
grows upon the wall, and of all living creatures, 1 Kings 4.33.

His ground discovers the way, to attain not only the deepest Mysteries of
Nature, but Divine wisdom also, Theosophie, the wisdom of Faith, which is the
substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen with the
outward eyes: this wisdom brings our inward eyes to see such things, as
Moses saw in the Mount, when his face shone like the Sun, that it could not
be beheld: such things as Gehazi saw, when his Master Elisha had prayed that
his eyes might be opened, (his inward eyes, for his outward were as open
before, if not more then any of ours, being he was servant to so great a
Prophet) so they were opened, and he saw Angels fighting for Israel: such
things as Steven, who saw Jesus sitting at the Right hand of God; when his face
shone like the face of an Angel at his stoning: and Paul, who saw things
inutterable in Paradise, when his outward eyes were struck blind: such wisdom
as this sees and knows all Mysteries, speaks all Tongues of men, and
Angels, that Tongue which Adam named all the Creatures by in Paradise, also it
can do all Miracles: for the enjoying whereof, men would give all their goods
unto the poor, nay give their bodies to be burned; so d^sireable a thing it
is, to enjoy it in this life, but while corruption sticks to the soul, it
must have Charity, or else this seed of Faith will not bear the fruit of
eternal Life in Paradise for ever, where there is nothing, but an eternal
Miracle, of which all Miracles on Earth are but in part, but when that which is
perfect is come, then that which is imperfect shall be done away. This is the
wisdom by which Moses wrought his wonders above nature; and all the Prophets
after him to Christ, and it is that which our Savior Jesus Christ himself
taught to his Apostles, and Disciples, and which the Comforter does continually
teach the Holy servants of God ever since: and by what is written by this
Author, it may be believed that both the same wisdom may be attained now, and
the same power of the Holy Ghost, by which they spoke and wrought their
Miracles, and the cause discerned why scarce any has been wrought for so long
a while: yes, men will believe that greater things shall be done, as our
Savior tells the Apostles, then they saw him do: for it will appear, that
the power in one Man, even of one thought in a Man, is able to change the whole
universe in a moment: this Power was in part in the Prophets and Apostles, who
could raise the dead; and when the time appointed is come, that all the dead
shall rise, that Power will do it, though it should be but as a grain of
mustard seed in One Man, and restore the whole Creature to the glorious
Liberty of the sons of God: surely it will be worth our pains, to find such
wisdom as this.

By the study of these writings, men may come to know, (every one according to
his condition, property, and inclination) how all the real d fferences of
Opinions, of all sorts, may be reconciled; even the nicest differences of the
most learned Critics in all Ages: that which seems different in the writings
of the profound Magical, Mystical Chimick Philosophers, from that which we
find in the experimental Physicians, Philosophers, Astronomers, Astrologers,
and Mathematicians, may be reconeiled by considering what this Author teaches,
that the Names which were given to the seven Planets, do signify the seven
Properties of the Eternal Nature, and are the cause of all those things, which
are by experimental men accounted the first and deepest causes of all.

Also thereby the differences in Religion, may be so reconciled, that the
minds, and Consciences of all doubting persons may be satisfied about
Predestination, Election, Creation, corruption, Salvation, and Restoration, so
clearly, that all will love one another, and that hard lesson to love our
Enemies, will be readily learnt, and men will quietly contribute to the
studying that one necessary thing, that treasure hid in the field, that gold
of the Kingdom of Heaven, that precious Pearl, that All in All, Faith and
Love, and Christ, and God, when they shall perceive that all this lies hid in
every soul, in one measure or other, and may be found, and the way set down
so plain, that every soul may find it.

Thereby the writings of all men will be understood, even the very darkest
Mysteries, contained in the writings of the Prophets, and Apostles, will be
made plain, and easy to the simplest thirsty soul, and then, when that
appears which is now hidden, that excellent glory, every one will not only
see it, but walk in the way that leads to it, and so attain it in the
highest Degree of every ones capacity, and capability.

While this Wisdom is growing, it will so reform the Laws, by degrees in
every Nation, that at length, the whole world will be governed in Peace to the
Joy of All.

Perhaps some will think this impossible, let them consider, that if they be
told of a curious City, and of the incredible things that are done there, by
him that has been there, and seen what he relates, and he describe the way so
plain, that they may come thither themselves, will they not go, that they may
know, as well as he that told them: do so by this Author; Read this Book
diligently, and seriously, till you apprehend the true meaning but of some part
of the way he here describes, which may easily be done, and you will be
satisfied the things are true, and that the way he shows is true, and be able
to walk in it, and also be very thirsty to labor in that way, more and
more, till you attain your whole desire: and then you will keep it as the best
Jewel, a Memorial of all Mysteries.

But let every one read it themselves, whether it be the highest King that
sits upon a Throne, or the meanest maid that grindeth in a Mill, or hear it
read with their own ears, if they mean to partake of this so high a gift
from the most high, or else the Devil may easily bereave them of it.

TO THE READER.
IF we knew the preciousnesse of our own souls, we would confess and
acknowledge with an inward feelingnesse, the answer to Christ's Question, when
he said; What shall it profit a man to gain the whole world and loose his own
Soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? the soul is so
precious that nothing can truly be valued at so high a Rate. To save it is the
greatest gain, to loose it is the greatest loss: then who will not highly
prise the study and understanding of the way to save it. Christ says, He that
will save his soul shall loose it, and he that will loose his soul shall save
it: but who understands this? we know it is the earnest desire of every soul
to be saved, and to be happy and glorious, but the way is very unknown to us
poor fallen souls, for we can hardly suppose that loosing will be the saving
of our selves: Christ also taught that the way to Glory was through many
tribulations and Death; this way he entered into Glory, and so have all the
blessed from the beginning of the world, and can no otherwise to the end
thereof: but how shall a soul know the way to loose and deny it self, so that
it may assuredly attain Eternal Salvation? Let it listen, in its heart and
Conscience inwardly to that Teacher, which it shall find there, who is in God
himself: we have the Testimony of Moses for this; who told the Israelites the
Word, the Commandment is nigh thee, in thy heart and in thy mouth (not the
outward but the Inward heart and mouth) as also the Apostle Paul says to the
Romans, that Christ the Eternal Essential word of God, the word of Faith
which they, the Apostles, preached, is nigh us in our hearts and in our
mouths, and in another place he says, Do you not know that Christ is in you,
except you be past reproof (...) improbi? furthermore the Apostle John says,
that God is Love, and he that loves; God dwells in him, and he in God, which
we all perceive is true, for in him we live and move and have our being, and
this may be known though the Apostle Paul had not said so much, for one of the
Poets of old spoke what he knew and said, we are all of his Offspring, as the
Apostle mentions it: nay we all know that he that does well is the servant of
God, but he that does evil is the servant of the Devil who rules in his
heart: and though there is none that does good, no not one, nor can do of
himself, while he is in this mortal, life yet through Christ in him he can
desire to do well, and be sorry when he has been drawn away to do evil by
the lusts of his own heart, by which the Devil tempts us to do evil; but
if we will resist the Devil he will fly from us, if we will leave off to do
evil, and desire, try, and learn to do well, without doubt we shall be able
through God that dwells in us: and then he will teach us all things, and lead
us into all truth by his Spirit. All this we shall fully understand, and all
Mysteries when God shall manifest himself inus, if we earnestly desire it with
all humility, self-denial losing of our souls, and being nothing in our
selves; for then God will be All in All, and nothing is impossible with God:
All this and much more has the Author of this Answer to these Questions
concerning the soul, found true, and has out of his inward Mystery manifested
many things in this, and other Writings of his, the knowing whereof will be
exceeding useful to the furtherance of the salvation of every soul; which
when I had read I was very much satisfied in my own soul, and do desire that
others may be made partakers of them, so far as lies in me: I have therefore
taken in hand to put this Treatise into English, which I chose to do rather
out of the Original then out of any Translations, because they many times come
short of the Authors own meaning, and because I found many errors in some of
them, and he is so deep in his writings, that we have need to desire that our
souls may be put into such a condition as his was in, else they cannot be
fully understood: but the same God that satisfied his desires will satisfy
ours, if we cast our selves upon him in our souls, and let him do with us
what he pleases.

Concerning the Author, he was from his youth much addicted to the hearing of
Sermons; and hearing that speech of our Saviors, Luke 11. ver. 13. Your
heavenly Father will give the Holy Spirit to them that ask it, and by the
differences and controversies in Religion, which he knew not how to satisfy
himself in; he was so stirred up and moved, to ask, seek, and knock, that he
might know the truth; upon which by the Divine drawing and will, he was in
Spirit wrapped into the holy Sabbath in which he remained seven whole days in
highest joy by his own confession; after he came to himself he laid aside the
folly of youth, and was driven by Divine zeal earnestly to reprehend impudent,
scandalous, and blasphemous speeches, and did forbear in all his actions the
least appearance of evil; and continued to get his living by the labor of his
hands, till the beginning of the sixth Seculum, which was the year 160. When he
was a socond time possessed with a divine Light, and by the sight of a sudden
object, was brought to the inward ground or Center of the hidden nature: yet
somewhat doubting, he went out into an open field, and there beheld the
miraculous works of the Creator in the signatures, figures, or shapes of all
created things, very clearly and manifestly laid open; whereupon he was taken
with exceeding joy, yet held his peace in silence praising God. But ten years
after in the year 1610. through the overshadowing of the holy Spirit, he was a
third time touched by God and renewed, and became so enlightened, that least so
great grace bestowed upon him should slip out of his memory, and he resist his
God, he wrote privately for himself, (without the help of any Books but the
Holy Scriptures) many Books the Titles whereof follow at the end of this
work. Which books contaire such high and deep grounded Mysteries of the
Deity, as have not been revealed since the Apostles times.

On the 18. November. Stilo novo, betimes in the morning he called one of his
sons, and asked if he also heard that excellent music? he said no, then he bad
that the door should be opened, that that music might be the better heard.
Afterward be asked what a clock it was? being answered that it had struck two;
he said, it is not yet my time, my time is three hours hence, in the mean
time he was heard to speak these words. O thou strong God of hosts deliver me
according to thy will, O thou crucified Lord Jesus, have mercy upon me, and
receive me into thy Kingdom.

When it was near about six of the clock, he took his leave of his wife and
sons, and blessed them, and said; now I go hence into Paradise; then spoke
to his son to turn him, and sighing deeply, he mildly and quietly departed
this world.

If it were not for the great fruit that I conceive may grow to every one that
studieth it, I should be sorry that I am the Instrument, to make such things
known in my Native Language; and much more unwilling it should be published to
the view of so many various minds, as are now sprung up: But my hope is,
goodness will get the upper hand, and that the fruits of the Spirit will
prevail to the subduing of the Lusts of the flesh: now I readily submit to the
censure of those who have that good desire: and of those who are not proudly
and perversely wedded to their own conceits, (when they have considered this
Authors meaning:) whether this will not be as beneficial to us as it has been
to other Nations: Indeed my mind is lead to think, that our troubled doubting
Souls may receive much comfort leading to that inward Peace which passes all
understanding: that all the disturbing Sects and Heresies arising from the
Darkness and malice of men and Devils, will be made to vanish, and cease by
that understanding which may be kindled in them from it: they that rule will
perceive how to effect all their good purposes, to the joy and happiness of
them that are subjected to their government; and Subjects will soon learn to
obey in every thing as the Primitive Martyrs did, though they should live under
such Governors as they did: so God shall be glorified by all men's love to one
another, and peace will flourish over all the Earth.

It may be some will think it so hard to attain the understanding of this
Author, when they read the answer to the first Question, (which is far more
difficult then any of the other, because it contains the sum of them all in
brief) that they will forbear to take so much pains as they suppose is
requisite; but if it should prove a little harder then other writings, the
profit will countervaile the Labor with a hundredfold advantage; yet let every
one read it themselves, or hear it read with their own ears, that others
misreport hinder them not from so great a benefit, and they shall no doubt
attain it, for I am convinced by my own experience that every one may receive
according to their vast or narrow capacity, who have according to mine own
measure been satisfied, though I be

One of the unworthiest of the Children of Men, J. S.

THE AUTHORS PREFACE TO BALTHAZAR WALTER.
1.Dearly beloved friend, it is impossible for Reason to answer these your
Questions, for they contain the chiefest and greatest Mysteries, which are
alone known to God:

2. Hence faith Dan. 2.27. And such an answer Joseph gave to the King of Egypt.
Daniel to King Nebuchadnezzar: That which the King asks and desires of the
Learned, Chaldeans, Astrologians and Wise men, is not in their power. The God
of Heaven only can reveal secret things: it is not in my Reason to answer the
King, but yet, that the King may perceive the thoughts of his heart God has
revealed it, not that my Reason is greater then any man's living.

3. So likewise I say to you: you shall be answered (not that my reason is
greater then any man's living; but only that you may perceive the thoughts, the
earnest seeking and desire of your heart,) it is given me to answer you.

4. And you should not so anxiously seek after these things, they are in no
outward reason: But to the Spirit of God nothing is impossible; seeing we are
the children of God, and in Christ newborn of God: the son sees very well
what the father does in his house, and also learneth his Art and work.

5. Seeing also we are the mystery of God we ought not to suppose, that we must
not meddle with such mysteries, as Antichrist teaches; for none takes unto
himself any thing of Gods Mysteries unless it be given him: and St. James
says, James 1.17.
Every good and perfect gift comes down from above, from the father of
lights, with whom there is no change nor alteration.

6. And seeing you seek so eagerly after such things, you become thereby even
the cause of finding them: for God gives his mysteries both by means and also
without means, but that no man might boast, he often makes use of very mean
people about them, that it might be acknowledged that they come from his hand.

7. You shall be answered with a very sound and deep answer, yet briefly
comprised, not according to outward reason but according to the spirit of
knowledge.

8. And although I could sufficiently show and demonstrate these things in a
larger description: yet seeing they are all described, and explained at large
in my other Writings: at present I set them down but briefly for the ease and
delight of the Reader, and that it may serve for a short memorial of the great
mysteries.

9. But he that desires to know these things fully and fundamentally, let him
seek them in my former Writings, especially in the The threefold life.
third part, and there he has the whole ground of the Note that by the words
divine essence, substance, or essentialitie in the writings of this Author he
means not that essence which is God himself, but whatsoever is besides God,
and which takes its original from God, as the eternal Idea's in the wisdom
of God do. And that which is essential according to the form or figure of
the Idea, and that wherein all Idea's lie, he calls Mysterium magnum and
Coeleste Arcanum.
Diving Essence, and also of the creation of all things, of that which is
eternal, and of that which is corruptible; and how every thing was made, and
is come to be as it is, and act as it does, and what it shall be in the end.

10. And therein also lies the Key of the Mysterium magnum, so far forth as
a creature is able to comprehend or bear, and thither we refer you for
further explanation: and so I commend me to you into the brotherly love in
Christ, Anno 1620.

Jacob Boehmen.

The first Question Answered. QVESTION the First. Whence proceeded the Soul
Originally at the beginning of the World?
1. We have, both in our second and third Book sufficiently laid open the
mysteries of the Soul according to the three Principles of the Divine Essence:
where also we have set down by many Circumstances, the eternal Center of the
eternal Nature: and also the Ternary of the Divine Essence; and moreover what
Eternity has ever been, and how the beginning of the Creation Or came to be.
was brought forth; and what an Angel, and what a Soul is: Also we have laid
open the heavy fall of Lucifer, and moreover both the Mothers which have so
brought it forth, the one Engendring.
procreating the heavenly Essentiality, and the other the Hellish: where also
we have written of Light and Darkness.

2. Therefore we shall not be very well understood by the Reader in this
Treatise unless he has read over and well Or understood.
comprehended Or book.
the third part of our Writings.

3. Although that apprehending is not in humane power, yet the way thereto is
very faithfully shown him, so that if he do long to attain it, he shall
obtain a Leader, or the holy Ghost.
Guide and directer, (if he follow our counsel) who will show him the key of
the Mysterium magnum, leading to that precious Philosophers stone, and to all
Mysteries: let none think this impossible, for with God all things are
possible: He that finds God, finds all things with and in Him.

4 Now you know In or by.
according to Reason, that all things are originally sprung and derived from
Eternity: This also the holy Scripture tells you: in God are all things; In him
we live and move and have our being, and we are his offspring. Act. 17.28.


5. And although men cannot say of God that the pure Deity is Nature, but that
it is the Majesty in the Ternary: yet we must say that God is in Nature,
although Nature can as little reach or comprehend him as the Air can
comprehend the Sunshine: However we must say; that Nature is borne in his will,
and that it is a SEEKING, produced out of Eternity; for where there is no Will,
there is also no Desire.

6. But in God there is an eternal Will (which is himself) to beget his
Glance or Luster, or brightnsse of his Glory.
Heart or Son: and this Will makes the Or rousing.
stirring or proceeding out of the will of the Heart, which is a Spirit: so
that the Eternity consists in 1 Will; Father. 2 Heart; Son. 3 Proceeding or
Efflux; holy Ghost.

three Eternal Forms, which are commonly called Persons: as we have very
accurately Declared or Expounded.
explained it in our third Book.

7. Then if we discern and know that there is not only Light and Majesty, but
also Darkness, as is plain; it behooves us to know whence Darkness arises.

8. For in the Eternity beyond Nature there can be no Darkness, for there is
nothing to bring it forth: we must only look into the Will and the Desiring,
for a desiring is attracting.

9. And whereas in the Eternity it has nothing but only it self, it draws
it self into the Will, and makes the Will full, and that is its darkness,
whereas otherwise, if it were not desiring it were a Nothing, Or viz.
but an eternal stillnesse withour Or Being.
Essence.

10. Thus the Attraction makes Moveablenesse.
Mobility and Essences which otherwise could not be in the stillnesse: and so
also this makes Astringency or bitingnesse.
harshnesse, hardness, and drouth together with Acidnesse.
sharpness.

11. Neither can we say for all that, that the Darkness swalloweth up the
Light, as the Eternal Liberty; for, that which is Eternal cannot be altered
nor changed: but yet we must say that Light and Darkness are in one another.

12. Now the Light is good and has Or power.
virtue, but the Darkness has the harshnesse, hardness and coldness: and
the desire of the Will makes Essences and attracting, which is a Riggling.
stirring in the hardness, and if that which is attracted do stir by the
drawing then it causes a jarring, whereby Light and Darkness are mingled
together in the sharpness.

13. And we must consider, how the free Light is sharpened in the Essence in
the sharp stirring, whereby we come to understand the Lightening.
fire-flash, and the eagerness; and yet we cannot say that there is any
rending.

14. For that which is Eternal without beginning admits no severing, but
stands as a wheel which begets it self in it self: whereof you have a
similitude in the Mind of Man, where indeed there is a Will of a rising and
running, but no removing: the greater the Will is, the greater also is the Or
Being.
Essence, and the more strongly it is sharpened.

15. Thus the still Liberty which is neither Darkness nor Light is sharpened
in the sharp Desiring attracting, so that it appears as a flash which
shines.

16. Also we cannot say that the Liberty does take in the flash, for from
Eternity it has had Nothing: but we can well say, that the Light and Splendour
shines in the Liberty.

17. For that which is free lets in the Light, but that which is not free
(as the Or estringency.
harshnesse which makes Darkness, and is material, to speak in a
Spiritual sense) that does not receive the Light.

18. This we can truly say, that whatsoever is transparent and not of a Mild
or fluid.
gross Nature does take in the Light, as appears by the water which takes
in the Light, and the harsh Earth not.

19. Moreover in Fire you have a sufficient manifestation of the Essence of all
Essences, for you see that the Fire burns in an harsh dry matter, for it is
the harsh Desire which enters into it self like a great anguish, and reaches
after the Liberty; where also it receives the Liberty, like a flash, and it
kindles by the flash that it burns.

20. And although it must be understood that there is no such fire in the
Eternal Essence as that is which appears externally, yet it is internally,
in the harsh Desire and externally remains dark: Therefore the Eternal Fire
is externally dark, and internally, as it is in it self in the Will of the
Eternal Liberty it is a Light, which shines in the Still Eternity.

21. Or differences kinds or manners.
Now then, we understand, that in Fire there are ten Forms; all which are
borne in the Will, and all belong properly to the Eternal Will: therefore we
rightly say that the Eternal Will is Gods Will: and that the Liberty which
has the Will is God himself, for it is the Eternity and nothing else.

The first Form.
22. First, there is the Eternal Liberty, which has the Will, and is it self
the Will: now every Will has a Or longing.
seeking to do or to desire something; and herein it beholds it self, and
sees in the Eternity what it self is; it makes to it self a glass of its
own likeness, for it sees what it self is, and so finding nothing but it
self it desires it self.

The second Form.
23. The second Form is the Desiring, and yet it has nothing but it self,
thereupon its desire seeks a model of its own Will in it self, and makes
it self pregnant, so that a darkness or over-shadowing comes to be in the
Will: which the Will would not have; but the Desire: the seeking causes it;
and yet there is Nothing that is able to consume or expel the Desire.

24. For that which is before the Desire, beyond the seeking is Free and a
Nothing, and yet it is: yet if it were a thing that could be perceived, it were
an Essence, and must subsist in that Essence which brought it forth: but seeing
it is without Essence, it is the Eternity, viz. Good: For it is no source, and
has also no Mutability, but it is a Rest and an Eternal Peace.

25. But seeing the immense Space is bottomless, therein being neither number
nor end and also no beginning, therefore it is like a Glass, it is All things
and get as a Nothing: it beholds it self, and yet finds nothing but an A,
which is its Originali Textu. A V ge.
Eye

26. A V is the Eternal Original of something, for it is the Eternal
beginning and the Eternal End: Thus the Eternal Abyss looks into it self
and finds it self.

27. The A is below and the V is above, and the O is the Eye, and although it
be no Essence it self, yet thus it is the Original of Essence; there is
neither below nor above but its Glass in the A V is a sight. As the sight of
the Eye.


28. But whereas there is no ground, therefore its Glass is such an Eye as
this O; for God himself says in the Revelations I am A and O, the beginning
and the end, the first and the last.

29. Consider us according to its precious depth, for we speak not here
according to Nature in a Similitude, or Parable, or Figure.
Form, but according to the Spirit above Nature in the Go T tes Character T
Divine Character T.

30. The is the Eye of God, the Eye of Eternity; This makes and is a Glass,
and it is a round circle like a Globe not like a Ringle; for we cannot describe
it otherwise. Hereby we mean the Globe of Eternity; wherein lies the
foundation of Heaven and Earth, of the Elements, and also of the
Starry-Spheare. Or Wheel or Orb.


31. For it is a Globe like an Eye, and it is Gods wonderful Eye.
the Eye of Gods Wonders, wherein every thing was seen from Eternity, yet
without Essence, as in a Glass or Eye, for it is the Eye of the Abyss;
concerning which we have no Pen, Tongue nor utterance either to write or
speak; only the Spirit of Eternity leads the Eye of the Soul thereinto;
and so we see it, else it must remain in Silence; and this hand could not
describe any thing of it.

32. Now seeing that in the Eternity there is such an Eye, which is God
himself, (and yet is not called God but Eternity; and according to the Eye he
is called A and, before the A there is Nothing, and in the there is All, and in
the A and beginning and End) hence we find, that there is a Will in the, and
the Will is the it self which makes the A, ( viz. the Eternal beginning of
the Drawing or longing, or attracting.
seeking) so that the Abyss beholds it self, and makes a Form in it self
like a Globe.

33. For the Eye finding no bottom, it closes it self, and becomes like a
round Globe of Glass, and so it is the similitude of Eternity, in that it can
find it self: for there is no finding in the Abyss, because there is no
place or limit but the mere Abyss: and when it does find it self in the Eye,
yet it finds nothing but the Eye, which is the Globe.

34. Now the Eye makes the Globe, and it is the Globe, and all put together is
a Or an Eternal Will.
Will to seek it self, and so to see what the Eternity is, which is made
manifest in the Eye.

35. For the Eye makes a beginning and an End; and because there is nothing
that can give it, it gives it self, and it is from Eternity to Eternity, the
Eternity it self, it g touches Nothing for it is a Nothing in it self.

36. Then if there be a Will, which is the Eye, and which keeps the Eye, that
keeping is the Desire of the Eye, and so the Desire causes an attraction in
the Eye, yet nothing is there but the Eye: and the Desire only attracteth it
self in the Eye, and impregnateth the Eye with that which is attracted, so
that it becomes full, and yet also nothing is there but a darkening of the
Free Eye; yet the Eye is not dark, but the Desire in the Eye is impregnated in
it self.

37. For the Will of the Eye is still: and the Desire of the Will makes it
self full, and the Eye continues free in it self: For it is free in and from
Eternity, and this we call the Eternal Liberty in all our Writings.

The third Form.
38. Now a Desire is sharp and attractive, and that makes the third Form,
viz. a moving in it self, and it is the Original of the Essences; and hence
come the Essences in the Eye and in the Will, and yet the Will I may not suffer
it self to be attracted.

39. For its peculiar right is to be still, and to hold the Eye in the Circle
in the Globe, and yet it cannot defend it self from the drawing and filling,
for it has nothing wherewith it can defend it self, but the desire.

40. And here arises the Eternal Enmity and contrary will, the Will, will not
be dark, and its Desire makes it dark, the Will would suffer the Motion
willingly, because it is its manifestation, but the drawing in and darkning
pleases it not, though indeed the Will is not attracted nor darkened, but the
Desire in the Will impregnateth it self.

41. Now when the Desire thus sticks fast in the darkness, there is a great
anguish, for it is troubled and attracted and also darkened, and brings
anxiety to it self in it self, and desires liberty: and drawing so strongly
at the liberty, would feign draw it self into the Liberty, and so it makes it
self more eager, rough and hard, and the Darkness is like an horrible
consuming sharpness.

42. For it snatcheth the Liberty into it self: but it is so sharp that it
appears in the Liberty as a flash of lightning, which consumes the darkness
with its eagerness: and hence it is that God says, I am a Deuteronomy. 4.24.
consuming fire.

43. Hereby understand, how every Materia.
matter consists in the power of the true Fire, and how the floare shall one
day be purged: for it is the Original of the Fire, which has all power; for
it consumes whatsoever the Desiring has made, whether it be stone or
mineral, Centrum Naturae.
for it is the sharpness of the Eternal Liberty and makes the Center of
Nature.

viz. in the Desire, and then in the matter of that which is attracted, viz. in
the darkness,

45. For the Desire in the Darkness, would have nothing else but the Liberty,
and the Liberty is a light without shining, it is like a very deep blew color
mixed with green, so that it is not known what color it is, for all colors
are in it; and the Desire in it self in its eager anguish and sharpness
breaks the colors, and makes an horrible consuming flash in it self, and
changes it according to the anguish that it becomes Red.

The fourth Form.
46. Now the Liberty in the Desire suffers it self not to be bound or
captivated, but changes it self from the Red flash into Light, into a glance
of the Majesty, and it is an exulting great Joy in the Liberty.

47. For the Eye is made manifest in the Light, and the Or Substantiality.
Essentiality is made mannifest in the Will, and then it is known what Light
or Darkness is: also thus the Eternity is known, and so Gods Holiness
always arises in the wonders from Eternity, and it has neither limit nor
beginning, for it is an Eternal beginning comprehended in Nothing but only in
the Wonders, which are its own Essence, where there is neither limit nor Time
or years.
number.

48. And thus nothing is known in the still Eternity, but the glance of the
Majesty, and the Spirit which is borne in the Will, and the Majesty has the
Regiment.
Dominion.

49. Beloved friend, understand the sense right: we mean not, that the Birth
apprehends the Liberty without, but within it self in its Center, it
apprehends it self in it self, and makes Majesty in it self, and yet
there is no including there, but it is, as when life arises from Death or from
Nothing, which Life.
dwells only in it self, and this is called a Principium.
Principle: and that wherein it dwells is called Nature, which has seven
Spirits and Forms, as is to be seen in our second and third Book.

50. Yet this Principle has but one Spirit, which is the life of that
Principle, and it has but one will neither, which is the Or satiating.
fulfilling of the Eternity with the glance of the Majesty.

51. For this principle is the Power proceeding from the will of Eternity, and
the entrance, or the Eternal beginning of the Power, is the Life and the
Spirit of the power, which thrusts forth the Essences of the begettresse, and
opens the Original of the Majesty.

52. And the whole Eye (which has thus Or formed, or figured.
made it self a Glass in the A and O) is all things, it is the Eternity, and
in it self in the Eye it begets the Majesty, which is the Heart and power
of the Eye, and also the Spirit, which proceeds from the Power in the Heart,
even from the fiery Light flaming Essences.

53. Thus understand the Holy Ternary in one Essence; the Father is the
Eternity without Ground, which is Nothing and yet all things, and in the Eye of
his glance he sees that he is all things: and in the Power of the Majesty he
feels, tastes and smells that he is Good, that is, that he is God:
although the The Tau or Cross.
T. ( viz: the Schwerigkeit often Breetheit guere.
harshnesse) arises in the Center.

54. And in the Spirit is the moving of the Power, and the Multiplication
without ground and number, wherein consists an Eternal bottomless
multitude, and all in Power.

55. For, that which has no ground has no number, nor is there any shutting
up or comprehension therein, and that which is within it self cannot be known
Or without ab extra.
externally, but it may be felt by the Spirit; Thus the Internal drives out
from it self and manifests it self in Figures, or else God could not be
known.

56. Thus God is together one Spirit: and is from Eternity in three beginnings
and ends, and that only in himself: There is no place found in his sight: and
he has nothing in himself that may be compared to him; also there is nothing
which can search and manifest any thing further then his Spirit: which always
manifests it self from Eternity to Eternity.

57. He is an Eternal seeker and finder of himself in the great Wonders; and
that which he finds he finds in the Power: He is the Opener of the Power;
Nothing is like him, neither does any thing find him, but that which yields
it self to be his own, that enters into him: That which denies it self to
be, in that thing the Spirit of God is all things; For it is one only Will in
the Eternal Nothing, and yet it is in all things as Gods Spirit it self is.

58. And this, my beloved friend, is the Highest Mystery: Therefore if you
would find it seek it not in me but in your self, though not in your Reason
neither, which must be as dead, and your Desire and will must be in God: and so
God becomes the will and the deed in you: also the Spirit of God brings
your will into himself, and then you may well see what God is, and what
Spirits child this hand is, and from what kind of Spirit it writes.

59. Furthermore I brotherly exhort you, that you seek not with such
eagerness, you will not reach the bottom of it with such searching: although
you are known and beloved of God; and therefore we give you this for a Rule,
yet externally I have no power to give it you.

60. But follow my counsel, leave off your laborious searching in Reason, and
enter into the will of God, into Gods Spirit, and cast outward Reason away, and
then your will is Gods will, and Gods Spirit will seek you within you.

61. And if he find your will in him, then he manifests himself in your
will, as in his own propriety. For if you quit that will, then it is His who
is all things: and when he moves go you with him, for you have Divine Power,
and then whatsoever you search he is in it, and then nothing is hid from the
will: thus you see in his Light, and are his.

62. And let no fear terrify you, there is nothing can take it away but your
own imagination, let not that enter into your will, and so you shall work the
wonders of God in his Spirit, and acknowledge me your brother in him, else I
shall be but as one that is dumb to you: This I tell you for good will.

63. And seeing we write of the Eternity, to the end to satisfy your will,
concerning the soul, (our purpose herein being according to the will of God)
we will therefore first show you the ground of the soul, and then its
Original: and so open your eyes that you may be freed from your laborious
searching.

64. For you have now to your old age gone about this, and so far as I
understand, you have not yet found that deep Mystery in the Spirit: But seeing
it is Gods will that you should know it, and have it given you for a reward of
your so great labor, therefore have a care that you receive it aright: and
then that you cast not the Pearl before swine, which are not worthy of it, nor
will not be worthy of it to Eternity.

65. For that which shall be revealed to you here, belongs to the Children of
God, therefore be faithful and employ it according to the Spirit, and not
according to humane reason.

66. For it is so sublime that it will not endure earthlinesse which proceeds
from Covetousness, Pride, Selfe-glory and Arrogance, although you be not such;
but look well into whom you pour oil, for it is poison to many: let others
themselves seek as you have done; But give the Children bread that they may
eat, and praise Our Father which is in Heaven, for to that end it is given you.

The fifth Form of Fire in the Eternal Will.
67. As we have opened an entrance and a glass to you of the Eternal
Original, from whence the Eternal fire proceeds, and what it is, so it is
also necessary, that we show you further according to the highest depth, what
the Eternal Nature is, in its propagation.

68. Wherein we must understand two Kingdoms, the one good and pleasant, the
other an evil, wrathful, and ever envious sad one: of which the Philosophers
from the beginning of the world have treated, and sought after it, but the time
of finding it was not then.

69. But now it is at hand, that the hidden Or secret Mystery.
thing should be found, not only by me, but also by many that will be
faithful, and humble themselves to God, and seek in his Spirit and will; it
will be found in the Eye of God only, and no where else; therefore let none
dive deeper in searching elsewhere, or he will find the Devil.

70. Seeing then the Eternity is thus which yet is Nothing, and yet there is
Light and Darkness, Life and Spirit, which are all things: and so there is a
seeking (that is, a desire) in both, to find it self, though there be Nothing
that can be Or that can find any thing.
found but the Spirit.

71. Now seeing it has nothing that it can find, and yet the Desire goes on
Eternally forward, therefore the Desire is a figure of the seeking will, the
similitude of the Eye of God, and it is as a glass of the Eternal Eye which
is called God.

72. Now this is in two manner of ways, one according to the Light, and the
other according to the Darkness: for the seeking is in both; and yet there is
no departing of the one from the other; the Light is in the Internal, and the
Darkness in the External, and yet that which is most internal is also most
External, but the Light is the middlemost.

73. For it is in the Nothing; therefore it cannot be the most internal, for
it has no Place nor limit; it is its own finding, which the Darkness finds
not, but the will in the Darkness, which desires the Light, goes out from
the darkness and remains Eternally in the Light.

74. Now the Desire of the Light presents a Model like it self, wherein the
Eternity is manifest: that is, all whatsoever the Spirit, in the Eternal power
of God, finds in it self from Eternity to Eternity.

75. This Model is not God the Eternity it self; for it takes its beginning
in the Spirit, and it is the wonder of the Spirit which it seeks and finds
from Eternity; and The Model.
it is in the Eye of God as a figure, and all the wonders of the Abyss of
Eternity are therein, and are beheld in the Light of the Majesty, as one wonder
in many Endless wonders.

76. Also it is an Image of God, a Virgin full of purity and chastity, and no
begettresse, for the Holy Spirit only opens the Wonders in the Power.

Erblicket.
77. Yet this Virgin is the similitude of God, his Wisdom wherein the Spirit
Discovers it self.
discerns it self, and always and in Eternity opens the wonders therein:
and the more is opened the more is in it.

78. For she The wisdom.
is without ground and number, and as unmeasurable as the Eye of God himself
is, there is nothing like her, also nothing can be found, that may be likened
to her, for she is the only similitude of the Deity, and the Spirit of God is
her Essence therein.

79. She is a Circle and Model, which so opens our mind that we see her,
and God in her; for our will is cast into her, and she is in our Will:
Therefore we speak of God, and see him in her, as in our Own propriety,
according to the hiddennesse of the Humanity, this Or Seeing.
sight is exceeding precious.

80. We must speak somewhat also of Of the way or condition of.
Darkness: It is in it self an enclosing, though there be nothing which
barreth it up, but it shuts it self up, and begets it self, and is its
own Enemy to it self, for it makes its own source, without Ground and
number; and has no giver that can bestow this but the Darknesses own Form.

81. It arises from the first Desiring when the Desiring Or draws into it
self.
contracteth it self and impregnateth it self, so that it becomes a very
stinging, bitter Or astringent.
, harsh, hard, cold, wrathful, fire-Spirit: For the Desire causes harshnesse
by the Attracting in the will, yet the drawing is stinging and the suffering
bitter: which the Will wills not, and therefore goes forth from the stinging
and enters into it self, and makes a peculiar Principle, wherein the Majesty
appears.

82. Thus the great Anguish arises in the bitter suffering: and yet nothing is
there neither that can suffer, but it is thus in it self, and it is its own
Life: and if this were not, the Or glance.
splendor of the Majesty would not be, the one is the cause of the other, for
the flash is in the Darkness, and the Light with the Majesty is in the Liberty.

83. And this only is the Or differencing.
divorce, that the Liberty is a still Nothing, which receives the Light into
it, and makes the Darkness material, and yet there is no comprehensible Or
Substance.
Essence, but a dark Spirit and power, a filling of the Liberty, in it self,
that is within the desire and not without it: for without it is the Liberty.

84. Therefore God is the most hidden, and the most manifest, and that is the
Or Mysterium magnum.
Great Mystery, and the Abyss is hidden and yet manifest; as the Darkness is
to our fight: But the source is unsearchable, till the Will sink down into
it, and then it will be found and felt, when the Will loses its Or Life.
Light: And herein lies the Ground of True Faith; let this be told you, ye
Teachers in Babel.

85. Seeing then there is an Abyss, which in regard of the impression of the
darkness is called Ground, wherein the source is a cause of the life: (for the
wrathful flash is the awakening of the life, although it be nothing there but
in it self) and it is also a Desiring, and that desiring is a seeking, and yet
it can find nothing but a glass, and a similitude of the dark wrathful
source wherein Nothing is.

86. For it is a Figure of the Earnest wrathful flash, and of the sharp and
Stern.
severe power which is Gods according to which he calls himself, a consuming
Fire, and an Angry Or zealous.
Jealous God.

87. And this glass is also without Ground, without beginning and without End,
and yet has an Eternal beginning and an Eternal End: and is the only Cause,
that the Abyss is blew, dusky and fiery: It is the cause of the Stars and
Elements; for the Firmament is a second Glass proceeding from this.

88. As there is a Threefold source in every thing, and each is always the
Glass, begetter and cause of the other; nothing excepted, all things are
according to the Essence of the Ternarie.

89. Seeing then there is a Glass in the Abyss, in which the source beholds
it self: so it is also a figure and Image of the source, which stands before
the source, and does or brings forth nothing, but is a Virgin of the source
wherein the wrathfulnesse of the Flash Or discovers it self.
discerns it self infinitely without number; and always opens its wonders
therein, by the bitter Spirit of the Or rigling.
stirring Essences.

90. Which has its life in the flash, so that it flies more swiftly then a
Thought; and even the thoughts of the Creatures are and proceed herein, also
the Spirits of all living creatures are herein with their root; each life
according to its Principle.

91. And in this Spirit of the Fire-flash, consists the Great Almighty Life,
for it is consuming; as the flash consumes the Darkness, and as the Fire
consumes all things, and yet remains a Life in it self; yet it is an Hunger
and Thirst, and must have Substance.
Essentiality or else it remains a dark Hungry Fire: a will to devour and
to enjoy nothing, a will to Rage and sting and to find Nothing but it self:
whence Essentiality ( viz. the water) and also Or Substantiality, or Earth.
Sulphur is begotten and begets it self from Eternity to Eternity.

92. And here my beloved friend, seek the first root of the soul in the Fire
life, and the second in the life of the Light, in the Majesty, and so you shall
find Gods Image and likeness, and the Greatest Or hidden secrets.
Mysteries of the Deity lying therein.

93. And although there be such an Eye of the wrathfulnesse, wherein the
Earnest Or strong, or stern.
severe Fire life takes its Original, yet it is not at all Or rent.
severed from the life of the Light: but is one only life that has two
Principles; for it burns in two sources which are within one another; and it
is one only Spirit, having two differences, and two wills, one will dwelling
in the Fire, and the other in the Light.

94. And know certainly for a Truth; that the dark Fire-life is the Abyss of
Hell; for it is the Or stern, or fierce.
severe Anger of God.

95. But do not you seek, as Babell that great City of confusion upon Earth,
has sought: which we blame not for any thing but her negligence and
carelessenesse, and for seeking her Own Glory and power, and by that means
has ensnared her self in the wrathful Anger of God; which has a long time
subjected her under its wonders, and drawn many souls into its source.
Consider this.

96. In the third Book of our writings, this is set down at large, and that
book is somewhat easier to be understood then this is, but in this is the
deepest ground of Eternity, so far as a spirit can conceive, for it cannot
bear more, well may it be described more largely, but not more deeply, for it
is comprehended in the Abyss in both the Principles, for the soul arises in
the Abyss in both Principles, and in the spiritual will, in the Eternity.

97. And yet if it be not wary and circumspect, the Devil may easily ride in
its Chariot, viz. in its Will; but if it be circumspect, and do cast it self
into the will of the Majesty of God, then the Holy Ghost rides in its Will,
and it is his Chariot.

98. And herein you may now finely search the Ground of Heaven and Hell, of
Angels and Devils, of Evil and Good, of Life and Death, if you seek, as we
shall further direct you.

The sixth Form of Fire.
99. Seeing then, two Principles are so in one Essence, (as no man with Reason
can speak against it; for every life consists in venom and in Light, each
in its own principle, and according as it has the source, so has it also its
Light) therefore we must search what that is which sustaineth the life that it
be not starved, and what drives forth its source, that it can endure for ever.

100. This now also has two differences, for the Light-life has its own
source and driving, and the Fire-life also its source and driving, each in it
self: but the Fire-life is the cause of the Light-life, and the Light-life is
Lord of the Fire-life, and herein lies the Mysterium Magnum.
Great Mystery.

101. For if there were no Fire there would be no Light, and also no Spirit,
and if there were no Spirit to blow up the Fire it would be smothered, and
Darkness would be, and the one would be a Nothing without the other, therefore
they belong both together, and yet divide themselves one from another, but
without any Or removing.
fleeing, and yet there is a fleeing of the Spirit.

102. You may understand it by this: look upon the glowing Fire; first there
is the Matter from whence it burns, viz. the harsh attracted bitter
substance, which has an Anguish source, and is a Corpus Opacum.
dark Body, whether it be wood or any such thing.

103. Now when it comes to be kindled, you see Three Principles, first the
wood, in the Darkness with the External Property and Condition, or Quality.
source of this world, which also has its own Life, or else it would not take
fire.

104. Now the Fire has a wrathful, harsh, strong, bitter desiring Quality.
source which begets thirst, a devouring and consuming, and the great
bitterness is its right Spirit, an Enrager and awakener, which has all
Essences of the Life in it, and it is the power of the life and of the driving,
otherwise there would be no burning.

105. That makes the great anguish-seeking after the Liberty: and in the Fire
it attaineth the Liberty: for it consumes the darkness in the wrathfulnesse,
and also the Matter of the Fire, from which it burns.

106. And thereby we know that one Spirit, which divides it self into two
Principles, into two Spirits, but not Inseparabiliter.
severedly, and yet fleeing one before another, and the one catches or
apprehends not the other, and the one is the life and cause of the other.

107. And therefore they are two Principles seeing they have a twofold source
and life, and yet there is but one root from whence they proceed, and one of
them affords life, and the other affords food for that life: This is a
wonder and yet no wonder, for there is nothing that can wonder at it, for it
self is All things in one only Essence. 1. Fire. 2. Seeking. 3. Desiring
attraction. 4. Substantiality or Corporality. 5. Sting. 6. Anguish. 7. Liberty.



108. Now the fire in it self is first a seeking to draw into it self, and
that is the substantiality the Phur, for the seeking makes it in the Desiring
by its attraction; or else there were Nothing; and the Attraction is the bitter
sting, a destroyer, which the substantiality cannot endure, and will not
suffer, and that not willing to suffer is an anguish, a will to overcome the
substantiality with the bitter sting, and the anguish, pierces into it self,
and catches at the Liberty; and the Liberty is a light in comparison of
Darkness.

109. Now the Anguish is an horrible sharpness, and thus the Liberty is taken
and sharpened, so that it becomes a fire-flash and the Anguish-will in the
sharpness of the bitter flash, consumes the Substantiality, be it wood or any
other thing.

110. Now when this has consumed it, then the Anguish is a Darkness again,
and the flash remains hidden in it self again; and is an Extinguishing, and
the anguish is in the darkness as at first, before the flashing of the Fire,
and it remains only in a terrible source, where the bitterness is always
made more terrible, by the rough attraction.

111. Now this is thus according to the Outward Principle of this world, as we
see undeniably by experience; seeing then there is an always enduring Essence
in the Eternity, we therefore demonstrate it thus: behold and consider it
deeply and read this with diligence.

112. The sinking of the anguish in the Eternal darkness, is an Eternal
hunger, and an Eternal thirst, and an Eternal Desiring; and the darkness in
it self attaineth nothing in the Eternity, that Or Liberty.
it can satiate it self withal out of the Understand by this the sinking of
the hunger and thirst of Hell, and of Anger.
Eternity, therefore it is rightly and truly the hunger and thirst of the
Abyss of Hell and of the anger of God.

113. But the will in the anguish (because it can attain or find nothing)
therefore it makes a figure and a similitude to it self in the desiring with
the eager attraction, and the eager, harsh, bitter dark Essence, is the
Material similitude it self, it eats it self, and is it self the matter
of the Fire, that so the Eternal flash may always continue, and the wrath is
always an Eternally continuing burning, and burns Eternally, out of the
Darkness, and has its own Life in it self, viz. the bitter sting of the
Anguish, which rages and raveth, and is the Rigling.
stirring and original of the Life, and that is Or Principium.
A Principle.

114. And understand hereby the Eternal desiring seeking, an Eternal
Coveting, and yet having nothing but it self an Eternal Envious Enmity, a
seeking of the Essences, when the innumerable, and Groundless multitude is
always borne in the Will: and an Eternal craftiness, a continual rising in
the hunger, an Eternal finding of the similitude of its own desire, the
similitude of the Essences, in the Will, and this is manifest in the flash: for
the flash elevateth it self ever above the darkness; and the Essences are in
the flash, and are continually brought into the Will.

115. Thus the Fire-will is a Sucking or attraction.
seeking of the high swelling Pride, and a Contempt of the darkness: it
contemns its own root; it is covetous and would devour more then it has,
or more then it should, it has all lusts; for the desiring Essences are
manifest in the Fire, and thence it comes to pass that in each Will each
Essence is again a Center of a whole substance.

116. And this is the cause of the Creation of this world; viz. that the Model
has appeared from Eternity as in a Glass, and was in the Eternal Essences in
the figure, as in a virgin without bringing forth, and was seen in the light
of God: and hence comes the Matter of the Earth, Stars and Elements, also
All Arts, wit and subtlety, deceit, falsehood, covetousness, haughtiness in
the Creatures of this world.

117. For this world is a Material seeking, comes from the Eternal Viz.
seeking.
, and is become material and perceptible in the Creation, viz. in the word
Verbum Fiat, Let there be, as Fiat Lux. Genesis 1. Let there be light.
Fiat, by the Heaven of the waters, as may be seen in Earth and stones: and the
Firmament together with the Elements is yet this Or attraction.
seeking, and still it seeks the Earthy; for it cannot reach back again into
the Eternal.

118. For all substances go forward in their progress so long till the End
finds the beginning, and then the beginning swalloweth up the End again, and
is as it ever was: but that the Figure, or Idea.
Model remains, for the Model did proceed from the Eternal, from which the
Creation came forth into a substance: as The Eye of Gods wonders.

119. You must know also, that the Spirit of the Air, proceeds from the
bitter Eternal Fire-spirit, which also goes forward after the Wonders, in the
will of the Or attraction.
seeking of the Essences, which are the Stars: and therefore it makes Or
Wheelings Or Jarring.
whirlings, and comes from many places: as from above, from beneath, and
sidewayes, and many times round about like a wheel, all according as the
Fire-seeking is kindled by the Essences of the Stars.

120. This is wholly like the wheel of the Mind, and it has its own Spirit,
and a proper life of its own, and a proper Will of its own: and therefore it
is a Principle, and continues so long, till the End finds the beginning,
then the beginning takes the End into it self, and makes the Middle which
manifests what is done between both beginning and End therein, which ye will
consider further of, unless ye be Or Mid.
foolish Matthew. 25.8.
Virgins.

121. Also this Regiment. Viz. Turba Regimen secundum Werdenhagen.
Dominion continues no longer, then it can remain in the number of the
Creation: For every day of the Creation is a Circle of a Revolution in the Eye,
and has its 1. Number, or Time.
number, 10. X. 100. 1000.
Ten whereof is the the highest number: and Man has ten times ten, viz. a
hundred, for his number: and in the Crown of Paradise he has the number
Thousand; but in the Eternal Essentiality in the Divine Center of the Majesty
he has 0.
no Number.

122. Now look narrowly, with very clear Eyes: God created this world with
every substance, in six days, and they were finished about the middle of the
sixth Day, somewhat afternoon toward the Evening, and then the Rest, and the
Sabbath of the seventh Day, began on the sixth Day: And so the Eternal Rest
found the beginning of the Creation on the sixth Day afternoon; this was the
End, then came the Beginning and the End together in One again, and it was
manifest what God had made in the Days.

123. Seeing then Man by his Imagination has destroyed the heavenly Angelical
Body, and has brought it into a corruptible number, that is, into the outward
Principle, and therefore he is in it: for he has lost the Paradificall number,
and is placed in the hundredth number, wherein he is also now given up to the
Outward Life, as to his leader, that is, he has given himself up to this
Leader, so that his number, to be fulfilled in the Circle of the Outward
Principle, is clearly known to us.

124. If we knew certainly the hour of the sixth Day wherein the Creation was
finished, we could then set you down the year and day (we mean the Or
Judgment Day.
last Day) for it goes not a minute further, it has its limit hidden in the
inward Circle.

125. Therefore know for certain that the time is near; for in the sixth Day
afternoon the Rest of the Eternal Day began, and therefore God instituted the
Sabbath of the seventh Day, for a Rest, and an everlasting Remembrance.

126. And as the Rest began on the sixth Day toward the Evening, and the
Entrance to the manifestation of the Working, Viz. the wonders.
works of the Creation (the End then taking in the beginning again, and the
six Days stood thus in the Circle as a wonder) so know that ye were created in
Paradise, and yet are gone out from it into the Spirit of Wrathfulnesse into
Death Which Spirit
; which has now wrought its wonders in you these 5500. years and upwards.

127. And now the End has found the beginning again, and ye shall see, also
feel and find, what Paradise has been, even every one of them that shall be
borne in God.

128. For (to speak after the manner of Reason, and not according to God)
Paradise is borne again, but ye shall not escape mortality, nor the wrath in
the Flesh, but Paradise is now already manifest in the Mind, in the soul of
the Children of God, and they have the true taste of the Power.

129. And no subtilty nor power can hinder it, no subtilty can suppress it,
nor can any Devil destroy it; for the End has found the beginning, there can
be no hinderance of it, the Power of falsehood breaks, and then remains
nothing but a waiting for the bridegroom, for the Children of God shall be
found in Paradise, when the Turba in the Wrath shall be swallowed up. We speak
high things, yet we understand and know them certainly in the Wonders.

130. Thus as is mentioned above (if you understand us aright) there is borne
out of the Wrathfulnesse of the Anger; out of the Eternal Center (out of which
this world was produced and created, which is a Or attraction.
seeking of the Eternal:) in the Spirit of this world, (in this Principle
wherein we now live:) and there will always be borne falsehood, Covetousness,
subtilty, deceit, enmity, in the Will; Lying, Murder, Pride, desire of honor,
Selfe-Power, Art, Cunning or Policy.
wit, the wisdom of this world proceeding from Reason, they all come from this
root and remain in the Wonders of Gods Anger, and though Reason and self Or
Wit.
prudence be never so fine, yet it is in the Anger of God, and springs from
the Abyss.

131. And here behold thy self thou fair world; it is no Fable, as thou
hold it to be, it is known in Ternario Sancto, and he that cannot get
within the limit of that, he is captivated by Antichrist, and belongs at last
to that Lake from whence he sprung, it is no time to linger now, both the
doors stand open; and whatsoever has grown in the Turba shall be swallowed
up with it.

132. So also consider the Eternal Fire further, and take a similitude from
all sorts of fire in this world, for that which is a Spirit, in the Eternity,
is a substance in this world. You see also that fire in it self is an
anguishing wrathful rising bitter Essence and source, and yet you see nothing
else in the proper Form of Fire, but the flash which shines, you see not the
source, you can only feel that.

133. You see also that the fire when it burns, sends up from it self a
Smoke, in which there is water, whence soote comes which sticks to the
sides, especially where the fire is enclosed and not free, then the soote is
seen as in a chimney; and the soot and water are in one another, and thus the
Material Earth comes originally from the Eternal fire; which Lucifer
kindled; Then in the wrathfulnesse Time began, and the Creation was after that
manner which is mentioned in the Third Book.

134. Understand, the Mysterium Magnum.
Great Mystery further: you see that every Fire gives light, and you see also
that Air goes forth from the source of the Fire, and you know very well that
if the fire had no Air to blow it up, it would be smothered, as all fires are
smothered when they have no Air, and yet they produce Air.

135. The Air is the life of the fire, and the Air has its Original from
the Anguishing bitter stirring source of the Essences, out of the Will: Now you
see also very well, that fire must have fuel to burn, or else it is a
Darkness, and although it devour it self (by its eager attraction,) yet that
fire is nothing but a source in the Darkness, which we understand to be the
Abyss of the Anger of God, which is not manifest in God, but is only as a
cause of the Life in the Kingdom of God.

136. You see that all fire must have Substance.
matter, or else it will not burn, understand it thus, the fire produces
Air, and in the Air water, and it mightily attracteth the Air with the water
into it self again, whereby the source of the fire is so allayed that it
shines.

137. For without water no fire shines, if no water can be procured in a
thing, in that thing the fire will not shine, but glimmer; as for example, in
Glowing.
a red hot stone, which has the source of the fire, and no shining but a
glimmering, and hardly that, but in Iron it shines wherein the fire has
water: and therefore Iron at length comes to be consumed and gets Rust, but
a stone does not: This is thus according to the Outward Principle of this
World; but according to the inward ( viz. the Kingdom of God) it is as
follometh, observe it.

138. The Eternal fire burns Eternally; yet it is a Spirit: but not
manifested according to the wrathfulnesse in the Kingdom of God: understand it
thus: the flash makes a shining; which arises from the fire, and yet it
dwells not in the wrath of the Fire, but satia^eth the fire wholly, and
gives light also out from the fire, and is not comprehended nor retained by
the fire: but carries with it another source of its own, viz. Amiablenesse or
Friendlinesse.
Meekness, and yet has the Power Wit, reason, or knowledge.
Wisdom and Art of the Fire, for in the Light, the Essences of the Source of
the fire are first manifested.

139. Now the light makes no Or pain.
source, but it enters into it self into a Meekness, and yet is desiring,
which proceeds from the source of the Fire; and its desiring is an attraction
of the Meekness and power into it self: and so it makes it self pregnant
with Meekness.

140. For the Light is a Fire also, a very yerning fire, a desiring fire, and a
perpetual finding Fire, which always finds what is generated in the
Original.

141. All the Power which arises in the wrathful fire, is manifested in the
Light; and the Light desires it in meekness: for the wrathfulnesse of the
Fire and the shining of the Light, are two Principles, of a twofold source,
each dwelling in it self, and one comprehends not the other, to Eternity,
and yet the one is the life and the cause of the other.

142. And we must understand it thus: we must consider that an horrible
anguishing Or pain.
source makes a sinking into it self, like Death, wherein the limit of
Separation is, and yet the Anguish keeps its source in it self: but the
sinking into it self as it were into Death enters into its Sky, or
receptacle.
Ether, wherein the life of the Anguish is no more known: for the sinkng
breaks forth from the anguish source, as a dying, and it is a dying, and yet
in the Eternity there is no dying; but a kind of entering into another world, of
another Principle, of another source.

143. For the sinking enters into the still Eternity; viz. into the Liberty;
and as the source of the wrathful Fire did remain in it self, in its life,
so the sinking is a going quite out from the fire-Life, and yet it proceeds
from the fire-life, but it has not the source thereof, for it is broken off
from that in Death: and the limit of the Separation is a Death; so that the
sinking Life pierces through Death, and sprouteth through Death forth in
another world, and has another Substantiality, ( viz. another water) wherein
the Light shines: and therein is no wrathfulnesse.

144. For in the Eternity there is no Death to detain any thing with, but
there is a kind of entering into several Conditions: for that which has no
beginning has also no End nor no Foundation or bottom.
ground: and thus the Light arises from the source of the fire.

145. For the Light dwells in the Fire, and yet not in the Fire; it is
another world, and it is another Fire, called Love, Power, Wonder, sweet,
mild, pure, and it is no substance, also it is not Nature, but Extra without.
beyond Nature in another Principle.

146. It is nothing but a Light flaming Powerful Majesty, and it has its own
Spirit, which brings the sinking through Death, and which sinking out of the
Anguish through Death, makes the sprouting forth through the Death.

147. The Spirit.
It is free in it self both from the fire, and from the Light, and it is not
held or captivated by either of them both, (no more then the Fire detaineth the
Air:) It proceeds from the Light, from the power of the Light; and opens
all whatsoever is either in the source of the Fire or in the source of the
Light.

148. Yet it has no feeling of the Fire in it; but it is a blower up of the
fire of Light, a producer of the Essences of Love in the desiring Power; and an
Opener of the Essences of Love.

149. And that we might be understood (speaking of the Essences of Love, as of
another Fire, let it be observed: behold when the light is so brought forth
through the wrathfulnesse, that one fire goes forth through the other, then
the fire of Light desires the wrathfulnesse no more, for it is dead to the
wrathfulnesse, and it is a peculiar Fire in it self, and it sends forth its
life out of it self, which is a sprouting: for it is both desiring and
attracting whence Essences proceed, and it has all forms in it, as the
fire-life has, also such a rising.

150. And yet the Essences are borne out of the Or Virtue.
power of the Light, and when they fully taste one another, there is a mere
Desire and satiety, and yet there is nothing that the Desire of Love can draw
into it self, but it attracteth it self into it self, and makes it self
pregnant with the Power of the Majesty, so that this Will becomes satiate, and
yet it is nothing but this Power, which is an Image of the Wonders: It is a
similitude of the Birth; and it is the power it self: it is the Essence of the
Spirit from whence the Spirit has its food, it goes forth from the Image and
Moves, waveth.
floateth as the Air in this world does.

151. Now the Spirit finding nothing like Without it self.
it self, and so not finding it self but in the Power, therefore it is
desiring; for it dwells in the Ground of the Power, and yet is not the Power
it self, therefore its desiring makes a similitude of it self.

152. For a desiring is a seeking, and the figure of the seeking is in the
seeking; the figure makes the Seeking manifest: Thus the Spirit also dwells
in its own Figure, in the Power, and in the Light of the Majesty; and Viz. The
Desiring.
it is an Image according to the property of the Spirit.

153. The Spirit is not the Image; but the seeking and its desiring is the
Image; for it dwells in it self, in its seeking; and in its figure it is
another Person then the figure of the Power, and according to this Essence God
is said to be Threefold in Persons.

154. But that we may open your Eyes wide, that you may see the whole ground of
the Deity (for now it both shall and must be made manifest) you must look upon
the Great wonders, which we lost by going forth from Paradise, where now we
must labor in the six working days of this world; Therefore consider now
what and where we are; and you shall here find such a thing as was hidden even
to Nature.

155. Behold, when you will speak of the Trinity, then look upon the first
Number, upon the A, upon the Eternal beginning which is the Father: and then
look upon the O, in the middle, viz. the Son, and then look upon the V,
which is the proceeding of the Holy Ghost, which in himself goes with the
sinking through the sharp wrathfulnesse into the second Principle which has
E, and goes forth through the power, as a light flaming flash which has I. A.
O. V. E. I. I. E. O. V. A.


156. Now put thereto the swift going of the flaming flash that is T the
omnipotence of the Eternal GoTtes.
God, which consumes in the wrathfulnesse as a flash, but in the LIebe.
Love in the I, as an exceeding loving God Exasteth, thorough pierces and
powerfully Exulteth: Now if you put the L, thereinto, then you have the Matter
of the Divine Essence, in the power it is an Angel, and in the out-birth out of
the Center it is GOLT.
Gold.

157. The World is Covetous and Ambitious (especially those that will be
counted Masters of Arts) and say they know Gold; and are blind people; why do
you not then seek it? perhaps thou will ask, how should ye seek it? Go with
the outward life into Death, there the outward life must die, and in the
anguish yield it self up into the Number of the Crown, viz. into the number
1000. and there the End is, and the Death arises to a glorious life with a new
fair body, you need afford nothing to it but the soul, which will then bring
forth much fruit, and then thou have an Angel which is free from the
wrathfulnesse, for it is wholly pure, seek it and you shall find it.

158. Yet perhaps thou supposest thou shall find it, as thou art That is, in
the wisdom of Reason, in the Old Adam, in the Ihood and selfehood of the
outward man.
in thine old Clothes: No Sir, we will teach you another A B C, learn that
first, then seek it if you please, if not, let it alone: For the O is much
nobler then the L.

159. Behold now the A ( viz. the beginning of the Eye) together with the V
(which is the mark of the Spirit,) and go through the Middle of the Or Eye.
O and so you will make a stroke or line through the O thus Viz. two
Principles.
.

160. Now part the two principles one from another, seeing they part
themselves, and set them one to the other with its half () like a Rainbow
thus)( for so they stand in the figure, and set the wrath at the left and the
light at the Right hand, for it cannot be pourtrayed otherwise; but it is one
Globe.

161. And take the Spirit which is borne in the Fire, and go therewith out of
the wrath in the sinking through Death into the other half Eye ( viz. into the
second Principle,) and you shall see this Figure.)(

The figure following belongs to this place.

The Exposition of the Philosophic GLOBE or EYE, of both the Threefold Or
semicircles.
Circles which signify especially the two Eternal Principles, The Third
Principle.
Third being also clearly understood therein, and how it must be understood.
162. THose Circles should be like Round Globes through which a Cross should
go: for it is the Eye of Eternity which cannot be pourtrayed; It Represents
the Eye of the Essence of all Essences; the Eye of God, which is the Glass of
wisdom, wherein all wonders have been seen from Eternity: and hereby is
described how it is entered into an Essence, for the Reader of this book to
consider of.

163. Not as if it could be described or pourtrayed, for the Mind only
apprehends it, and only That Mind.
that which can walk in the Divine Mystery; Not by Art or Reason, but by that
understanding which the Spirit of God opens to the humane Spirit of the soul
in the Great Mystery, otherwise it cannot be apprehended.

164. The Reader should observe the Numbers, and also what stands within or
without a Circle, and where every word in a Circle begins and ends, all of
it has its peculiar signification and meaning: for every word stands in its
due place.

165. That which is without the Circle and wheel, signifies the Liberty of
the Abyss Extra Principium.
without the Principle.

Number. 1. Abyss.
166. The Great Mystery of the Abyss, wherein the Eternal Divine Essence, in
the Glass of Wisdom, does bring it self forth in the Or Center.
Ground; is marked with the number 1. and the number 2. stands close by it;
which is so to be understood round about that whole Circle.

Of the Three Circles.
167 The Three Circles drawn about one another, signify the Eternal Birth of
the Divine Essence; and All Etrrnall Mysteries both within-Nature and without.
Viz. the Original of All Essences, as it is here described.

Of that half of the Threefold Circle at the Left hand, and of number 2.
168. The threefold Circle at the left hand, (where also there stands without
the Circle at Number 2. the Mystery Extra Naturam.
without Nature) signifies, how the Abyss brings it self into a Ground;
that is, how the Eye of Eternity, viz. the First will (which is called the
Father of Eternity, and of all beginnings) brings it self in the wisdom
into Trinity, into an Eternal Ground, and dwells in it self and possesses
it self; and how it brings it self into Nature, also how Essence arises;
as also perceptibility and perception.

Of that half of the Threefold Circle at the Right hand.
169. The other Threefold Circle at the Right hand, signifies the Divine
Essence of the Holy Trinity; and the Angelical world, which arises from the
Great Mystery of Eternity, and is manifested by the Principle of Fire.

What the Cross signifies.
170. The Cross [whose Arms goe] through both the Threefold Or semicircles,
or half Globes.
Circles; signifies the Persons of the Deity; and how they part themselves in
the Eternal Unigeniture, as is further mentioned hereafter, according to the
Numbers.

Of the Eye in the Circle.
171. The Eye in the Circle through which the Cross goes with an Or Two Arms.
Angle, each [half of the Eye] signifies a world, both that at the Left, and
that at the Right: That at the left signifies the Great Mystery of the Dark
world, where the Eye of the Wonders brings it self into Nature: that at the
Right signifies the Light world, where the Divine Mystery having brought it
self forth through the fire, dwells in the Majestic Light, with the first
Mystery of the Wonders.

Of the in the angle of the
272. The Heart in the angle of the Cross, signifies the Ground or Center of
the Deity: Not as if it were separate and did possess a Place; (for it self
is the place or Ground of the Deity, and is the midst every where) But that men
might learn to distinguish God from Nature; and that Christians may learn to
understand the Regeneration, viz. how God has Regenerated us in Christ, out of
his Heart upon the Cross: Therefore this Figure is thus delineated, that the
Reader might further consider it. For This Figure comprehends all whatsoever
God and the Eternity is.

The Expositton of the Circle at the Left hand. number 3. 4. 5.
173. The three Or Letters.
Characters A. O. V. marked with 3. 4. 5. signify the Mystery of the Holy
Deity Or beyond.
: without Nature, and how it manifests it self in Nature.

Of the A. number 3. and of the Tincture, number 6.
174. A signifies the first Eternal Or Abyssall.
unsearchable Will: which is called Father; go round that Circle to the nether
point, where Tincture stands at number 6. which is the Ens of the Will, and
the first beginning of Naaure: for the Divine Mystery of the Trinity stands
above, and the Mystery of Nature beneath; Each Circle signifies a Person of
the Deity in the first Mystery.

Of the O. number 4. and of Principle, and of Fire; number 7.
175. The O at number 4. signifies the Ground of the Mystery; viz. the Birth
of the Heart or Word of God, which the first Will ( viz. the A) in the Glass
of Wisdom, receives and holds in it self as a Ground of its Essence: For
the O signifies also the Eye of the Glass of Wisdom: for the Eternal word
is Conceived, or formed.
comprehended in the wisdom, and manifests it self in the Light world by
the Principle of Fire, go round from the O and you will find, Principle and
Fire, beneath at N. 7.

Of V. number 5. and of Essence, number 8.
176. The V at number 5. signifies the Spirit of the Mystery Or beyond.
without Nature: viz. the Spirit of the First Eternal Or Abyssall.
unsearchable able will, it arises out of the will in the Power of the Word in
the Great Mystery, and proceeds from the Will and Word, and its Exit makes
Essence: viz. wonders of the Power colors and virtue; where yet in the
Mystery of the Abyss without Nature, no colors are Or known.
discerned, for they lie all hid in one, which is a Glimps of a Great Wonder,
and it is called an Essence of the Wonders: Go about in the Circle from V and
you shall find beneath nee^e number 8. Essence: which signifies that the
Essence of All things is under the Spirit of the Or Number Three.
Ternary, and that we must always distinguish Essence from Deity.

177. For in the Essence, Nature with its seven forms arises; For the
Ternarie is but a Spirit in the Essence; and yet there is no Essence Absque.
without the Ternary: for the desire of the Ternarie is the Eternal Magic.
Magia; and it makes Essence; it brings [things] into a Ground according to
the Or Idea.
Model which the Spirit opens in the wisdom, out of it the Creation came
forth, according to the Model in the Glass of the Virginalis sapientia.
Virgin-like Wisdom.

A further Exposition of the first Principle, and of the Mystery of the
Beginning in the Creation, also of the Dark world: and how the Angle or line
of the Cross, and number 9. at the left hand, with its upper and nether space
must be understood.
Of FATHER: N. 9.
178. AT N. 9. FATHER stands before the Or angle.
Point of the Cross, and Abyss before that, which signifies the Mystery of
the Father without Nature. For Nature begins at the Point of the Cross. The
first and Greatest Mystery is the Abyss; wherein the Nothing brings it
self into a will, which is called Father, or the Original to something: The
Creation is arisen out of the Mystery of the Father through Nature; here by
this Mystery the Eternal Nature with its seven forms is Or meant.
understood.

Soul. number 10.
179. At the Or Angle.
point of the line N. 10. Soul stands: which signifies the Original of the
Eternal Spirits, viz. of Angels and souls of Men, for the The point of the
Arm at the left hand.
point signifies the Center in Nature, where the threefold Spirit manifests
it self by Nature, which again signifies the Magic Fire in the Fathers
Property, from whence the Angels have their Original, and also the Souls of
Men.

180. We must here understand the Ground and Original of an Eternal Spirit;
for Nothing is Eternal except it have its Original from the Eternal Magic
Fire: the Original is not to be taken for the true Spirit, but for the Center,
viz. the Cause of the Spirit.

The Souls Will: number 11.
181. Every right Spirit is understood in the Light of Life, Or and so is the
understanding.
with the understanding; for no right understanding can be in the fire but in
the Desire of the Light: and therefore the fiery will must bend and incline
toward the heart of God, that is, toward the power of the Light and
understanding, as may be seen here, where the Souls will stands upon the
line of the Cross, marked with the number, 11. and there receives power from
the Heart of God, and so it becomes an understanding Spirit.

Will number 12. and Soul, number 13.
182. For it receives the Power of the Light, in the meekness and humility,
and goes with the Spirit of its will, (that is, with the Noble Image and
similitude of God,) through the power of the Heart, into the second Principle;
that is, into the Light world, as may be seen in the other Or half Globe.
Circle at the Right side of the Heart, where N. 12 Will stands, and Soul N.
13. which signifies, that the soul goes out of the source of the Fire, which
is the Fathers property, and Enters into the Sons Property: and dwells in
the Divine power in the Light world.

HOLY GHOST. number 14.
183. Or beyond.
Without the Point of the Cross, N. 14. HOLY GHOST stands signifying the
Holy GHOST, who arises from Eternity in the will of the Father at N. 9. before
the Or point of the Cross.
point at the left hand, and brings himself through Nature, along through the
Heart and Divine Power at the right hand, out Or beyond.
from Nature; and also through the power of Angels, or of the Spirit of the
soul, quite out; and dwells in the Liberty in the Glance of the power and
Majesty; and is in Nature yet not comprehended by Nature; but in the property
of the Divine power only.

Image; number 15.
184. Beyond the Word H: GHOST N. 15. Image stands, also without Nature;
which signifies that the Noble Image grows out of the Fire of the Soul, as
a flower grows out of the Earth, and has no feeling of the fiery property:
for the fire is as it were swallowed up in it, and yet it is there, but in
another source, ( viz. in the Desire of Love) a light flaming fire in the
Divine property.

Abyss number 16.
185. After Image stands Abyss N. 16. signifying that the true Image
stands in the Abyss Extra without.
: beyond all source, and dwells in Nothing, viz. in it self only, and
through it God dwells: therefore there is nothing but the Divine Power, that
can find, move, or destroy it; for it is not in Nature, although it arises
from Nature, in its Root, yet it is quite another thing; as an Apple differs
from the The tree it grows upon.
Tree; though it be upon the Tree and receives virtue from the Tree, yet the
Sun also gives virtue to it: and so the Divine Sun ( viz. the Majesty)
gives virtue to the Image.

Of the Word Omnipotence; number 17. and Wrath; number 18.
186. Furthermore, at the left hand N. 17. there stands Omnipotence, and it
stands without the Or bounds.
Circle of Nature also: which signifies the Fathers Mystery, which brings
it self by the Magia (that is, by the Desire) into Wrath: wherein the strong
founding life and strength is understood in the entrance of Nature in the first
three forms, viz. Astringency, bitterness and Anguish: and therefore the word
wrath, stands in the space under the line, N. 18. which signifies, that the
Wrath touches not the Angle of the Or number Three.
Ternarie, but is borne in the Desire.

Or Subtilty.
Craft; number 19.
187. Craft stands at N. 19. under the Word Omnipotence: which signifies the
Essence coming out of the Glass of the Principle, which Craft, in the second
Principle is changed into a right understanding, and here in the Magic fire it
is but craft; for it is subtle and sharp, and a cause of the understanding.

Devil; number 20.
188. Over against craft Devil stands, N. 20. in the space of the dark
world, which signifies the Malice of the Devil, in that he is departed from
the point of the Ternarie, and has put his will into Wrath and craft on
purpose to Domineere over the Meekness of God thereby, and to use the strength
and power of the Fire and Wrath.

Devils Art; number 21. 22.
189. Under the Word Craft stands Devils Art, N. 21. 22. Devils stands
without the Circle of Nature, and Art stands within the Circle of Nature;
which signifies, that the Devil was created out of the Mystery of the Father
upon the line or stroke of the Cross in the Eternal Nature as well as the
other Angels: But he did get his Art N. 22. in the Magic Or sucking, or
Attraction.
seeking of Nature in the Center of the dark world, whereas he should have
gotten it in the power of the Heart of God, and that is the cause of his fall
and of his Envy.

Will; Number 23.
190. Over the line number 23. stands Will; signifying that the Devil has
raised up himself from the Divine Line, (upon which he was created) as a proud
Spirit, who would feign have been his own Lord, and have ruled by his own Art
and Wit.

Darkness: number 24.
191. As also the Pride and subtilty of Men does now: who in the same manner
raise themselves up from the Line of God, from Obedience, in own selfehood in
which the will cannot reach the Divine power and light, but falls into it
self, into the dark anguishing Magic Fire; as above over the word Will, is
noted with number 24. and first into Darkness: for Reason loses the Divine
understanding, and the Divine Desire, wherein it can receive the Essence of
God, and so Or fill.
impregnate it self with Or Virtue.
power from God.

Fire; number 25.
192. And then Or Reason.
it kindles the Magic Fire of Covetousness; so that it wills to have Or
more.
much, and never has enough, as here N. 25.

Anguish; number 26.
193. And when it has filled it self with Covetousness, then the Magic Fire
in the Anguish begins to burn, N. 26. for that which is thrown into the
fire by Covetousness, is fuel for the Magic fire wherein the fire burns:
and there Death is borne; which must separate what Covetousness has brought
in.

Death; number 27.
194. And herein also consists the Grievous fall of Adam, who has imagined
as the Devil did, and desired to have the variety of this world as his own:
He would be cunning and get much Or Wit.
skill, and even the Earthly and hellish source in the skill: Had he continued
upon the stroke in the Line of God, he had not been Earthy, for the Spirit of
his will should have dwelt in God, and have brought Divine food into the body:
but now he is in the Anguish, N. 26. and must again go through the Principle
into Death, N. 27. where his body must be consumed in the Mystery.

195. And if he do not in the time of this Life turn his will into the Cross
of Christ, (as is to be seen in this Figure) then he is reserved in the
Mystery for the Judgment of God, where he shall be tried in the fire, whether
the Spirit of his will have any Divine Power or Virtue.
power in it or not, or whether he can subsist in the fire, and there his proud
Earthly works will be burned up: and if the soul remain in the Dark Magic
fire of the Will, (for it self is a Magic fire, when the Divine Light-fire is
not in it) then one Magic fire receives the other, and then there is no
remedy to help out from thence.

Will, number 28. Light, number 29. Spirit, number 30. Man: number 31.
196. But the soul which in the Time of this Life did turn again, and did
yield it self up with its will into the Death of Christ, at the line of the
Cross, N. 27. that soul is then sunk down from its proud and Or evil.
wicked works and become free in that same will, and is entered into the Death
of Christ; and sprouteth forth, with the Spirit of its will, N. 28. in the
Divine power from the Death of Christ, through the second Principle; where the
Spirit of the Will ( viz. the Image) Or reaches.
obtains the Divine Light again, N. 29. and the Or Spirit.
Image N. 30. stands again in the Divine Man, N. 31.

Image: number 32. God: number 33.
Or substantiality.
197. For when the Spirit of the Will enters into Death at the Cross, then it
puts on the Divine Essentiality (that is Christ's flesh) into it self
again, and brings it with it self, into the Light world, where the Divine
life springs forth again in the Holy Body; and the Image is free again; as
here N. 32. is to be seen, and it dwells in God N. 33. and eats of Gods
word or Essence: For the Image here is Or beyond.
without Nature, in the Liberty, but the Humanity is in Nature, as it is here
set down.

198. But for those souls, which abide in their proud covetous works in the
Anguish N. 26. they abide indeed in the Magic Fire of Anguish, and their
works are fuel for that fire.

199. But if the Spirit of the Will at length yet do incline it self toward
the death of Christ, and yet is hard bound to the wrath, then it hangs as it
were by a thread to the death of Christ.

The ninth Number; number 34.
200. This soul must needs burn thus a while, till the Spirit of the Will can
enter into the Death of Christ, and till its Sydereall fuel be burnt up: when
the Earthly body dies the Image must be Or washed, scoured, or purged.
Or washed, scoured, or purged.
bathed, which this present too wise world scorneth, but shall be forced to
try it in Death, where that little Spark, (which did hang but as by a thread)
must enwrap it self quite into the Death of Christ: for it has lost both body
and Essence, and remains naked without Divine Or substance.
Essence or body in Gods Mercy in the Divine Tincture: viz. in the ninth number
N 34. and waits for the last Judgment, wherein God will restore in the
Tincture all that which ad m lost: But the works which it has do^e he^e, will
not pass through the fire, but the Dark Magic fire has swallowed them up
into its Mystery in the Dark world; let this be told thee O Man.

Souls Eternal Habitation: number 35.
201. After the ninth Number, stands the souls Eternal Habitation noted
with the N. 35. which signifies that these escaped souls, are yet in God, in
the Angelical world, but without their works, and they cannot so highly
attain the Glance of the Majesty, as those which Or here.
in this life have clothed themselves, with the power of God. The word
Habitation enters into the Liberty, without Nature, as also above it the word
Image does. For the soul must stand in Nature, but the habitation of the Image
is without Nature in the Divine Liberty.

Angelical World: number 36.
202. Beyond the word Habitation, stands Angelical world N. 36. signifying
the whole Or place.
Court of Angels or Thrones or Principalities.
Princely Thrones in the Liberty of the Divine Majesty, whereas their root, is
in Nature but is not Or acknowledged.
felt.

Proud Devil: number 37. Will of the Devil Lucifer: number 38.
203. At the left hand in the upper space, N. 37. stands proud Devil, with
two Or Legs.
lines: one reaching to be upon the Cha acter O, N. 4. and the other reaching
up above the Great Mystery of the Ternary, where stands Will of the Devil
Lucifer N 38. Here the Devils fall is to be considered.

204. He has driven his proud will from the line of the Cross upwards, and
would domineere over the Mystery of the Divine wisdom by Or reason, or in Wit,
craft, and fury.
cunning subtilty and wrath, in the power of Fire, and Or inflame.
kindle the Mystery of the Ternary, that he might be Lord, (as indeed he did
kindle the Essence in the Mystery: where from Earth and stones proceed) and
would feign have flowen out above the Mystery of the Ternarie N. 38. as still
at this very day he desires to fly out above the highest Thrones of Angels.

Abyss of the Dark world: number 39. Eternal Hell of Devils: number 40.
205. And hence it followed that he was thrust out from the Divine Mystery,
from the highest Thrones, into the dark Magic fire, and is thrown down
beneath ( viz. into the Abyss of the Dark world; N 39.) where he must dwell
without the Principle in the horror of Fire: (that is, in the first three
forms Or till fire or before the fourth form which is fire it self.
of Fire) in the Anguish: and there he has his Hell, as below N. 40. is to be
seen, and thither also do the damned souls fall, where to Eternity they
cannot see God.

The other line of the Cross upwards.
206. Over that line N. 1. above stands Abyss Eternity, signifying the
Liberty without the Principle, and thereby is Or understood.
meant, the Mystery of the Eternity, wherein every Creature stands in its
own source, in its own fire, whether in Darkness or in Light, and has no
other light but what shines Or in the Creature it self.
in it self, and it also comprehends that light Or beside it self outwardly.
without it self: Both worlds, viz. the Light and Dark world are in one
another: but the Light is not attained, except a creature be capable Or to
receive it.
of it.

207. There are Angelical Thrones, which we know nothing of, our knowledge
reaches only In Locum, or space, or bounds.
unto the place of Or that.
this world, so far as the kindling in the Creation did reach, and For a
resemblance of it.
therefore this wheel is made with the Cross in it.

SON; number 41. and of the Heart.
208. Over the upright line stands SON N. 41. and at the left Angle or
Point N. 9. FATHER, and at the right line N. 14. HOLY GHOST: signifying, the
Persons and birth of the Holy Or Triplicity.
Trinity: The in the Cross is the Center, and signifies the Eternal band of
the Or Threenesse.
Trinity.

209. The word SON, N. 41. signifies the Word, which the Eternal FATHER
always speaks from Eternity in the Light and Dark world, according to the
property of each source.

210. But the Three Persons are free from the Cross and touch not the line,
which signifies, that God is free from Nature, and is not comprehended Or by.
in Nature, but he dwells in himself, and indeed also in Nature, but is not
comprehended by that which does not Give up it self to him.
yield it self into him.

Of the Heart in the Cross.
211. The Heart in the Cross signifies, first, that the Heart of God has
manifested it self in Nature Or with.
by the Principle of Fire, whence the Majestic Light arises: secondly, it
signifies the Manifestation in the Humanity, wherein the Heart of God has
manifested it self with a Humane Heart, and how that humane Heart has
obtained the comprehension of the Holy Trinity: as it is the Center in the
Cross; where we must understand the Inward man, viz. the Inwward Heart.

212. And we may see that the HOLY GHOST at the Right line, N. 14. goes forth
from the Heart in the Light world: which signifies that the HOLY GHOST
dwells in the Newborn Heart ( viz. in the Image,) and continually brings
the Will of the Image into the Divine Light world: and as this Heart in the
Cross is united Or with.
to the Holy Trinity: so must the Humane Heart ( Or we mean.
understand the Inward man) be united Or with.
to the Deity that God may be all in all in him, even will and deed.

213. But the word SON, number 41. standing above over the line of the Cross
severed from the Heart, signifies that the Man Christ, is become Lord Or over
All.
of All, and is King over this whole Circle: For God has manifested himself
in the Humanity, and this Man comprehends the whole Divine Or substance.
Essence in him: for there is fullness, there is God, and the Divine Or know,
or acknowledge.
Essence, in him and without him: we can find God no where else but in the Or
substance.
Essence of Christ, therein Or Deity.
is the whole fullness of the Col. 2.9.
Godhead bodily.

Heaven; number 42.
214. The word Heaven upon the upright line of the Cross, number. 42.
signifies, first, that heaven is in the Man Christ and also in us, and that we
must enter by his Cross and Death into him, in his Heaven which is himself,
for upon the Cross Heaven is opened again and borne anew Or to us.
in us. Secondly, it signifies, that the true Divine Heaven is an Habitation
For.
of the Divine Desire, viz. of the Divine Magia; Therefore it cannot be said
that we enter into it, but that we are begotten Or into it.
in it, Or by.
out of Gods Fire in the Divine Or substantiality.
Essentiality, and no otherwise but upon the Cross, viz. through and in the
Birth of the Holy Trinity.

Pure Element; number 43.
215. The words Pure Element, number 43. upon the upper line of the Cross
signifies the internal world, out of which the External, with the four
Elements, is brought forth, and its Or substance.
Essence stands in the internal root.

Holy Ghost; number 44. Son: number 45.
216. Moreover it is to be noted, how Viz. pure Element.
those words stand, begin and end: for they begin at the outward Circle at the
left hand, where above number 5. the Holy Ghosts Character V stands and below
number 8. Or Being. or substance.
Essence, and they go through the two Circles at the Right hand, to the Viz.
the space between the second Circle and the third.
second space; which signifies the Original of the pure Divine Element, the
Habitation and Or substance.
Essence whence it arises: viz. from the Spirit of the Eternal Mystery in
the Divine Essentiality; viz. in the Essence of the Great Mystery: and yet it
is manifest only in the second Principle, viz. in the Essence of the Son and
Holy Ghost, as above at the Circle on the Right hand may be seen, number 44.
and 45.

Father: number 46. Holy Spirit of Divine Or Wit, or Reason.
Wisdom and understanding; number 47.
217. The Pure Element is the working in the True Heaven, and it shuts it
self in and up with the Cross; it is the springing or stirring in the Fire
and in the Heaven of Light, whence the Divine Essentiality (understand the
Essence; and not the Spirit of God) is a life: for it reaches not into the
Essence of the Father, number 46. below which Circle there stands Divine
wisdom: but the Holy Or Ghost.
Spirit, number 47. gives Divine Or Wit, or Reason.
wisdom and Or knowledge.
understanding.

218. The Element is an Or substance.
Essence in respect of the Deity, as the life in the Flesh Must be taken to be.
is in respect of the soul; For the Tincture is higher and gives the E^s of
the Spirit, wherein the Light-fire is understood.

Humanity, Flesh: number 48.
219. Under the words Pure Element on the upper Or stroke.
line of the Cross, number 27. Death stands, and the Word begins at the
left Circle, and goes through the Cross and through the first Circle at the
Right hand. There look upon both the outward Circles, that at the left and
that at the right above and below, and then thou shall quickly find what the
Or Jurisdidiction.
Right of Death is, and that it is the dying source in the Magic fire, and
holds the Essentiality captive in it self, as at the left hand below number
8. and at the right, number 48. may be seen: and then above at this Circle
number 44. and at the left above, number 5, is seen that the spiritual life
goes and sprouteth forth through Death, and possesses the highest Circle. For
whatsoever will attain the Divine life, must go through the dying Magic Fire
and subsist therein, as the Heart on the Cross must subsist in the Or Divine
fire.
Fire of God.

220. Moreover we must know, that in Adan we have turned our selves away from
the Cross, and are above the Cross with our lust and Desire, number 23. and
gone with our will into Or own Regiment.
a self Government, and now Death has captivated us in it self: we must
therefore sink down from Death upon the Cross* upon the line of Christ into
the Heart again, and be borne anew in the Heart, or else Death retains us
captive: For Death stands now upon the line of the Cross: but at the
Judgment it shall be given to the Dark world: For our will must now enter into
Rest through the Death on the Cross, but the outward Cross shall be done
away, and then death shall be made a scorn.

221. Thirdly it signifies, that the life of God in Christ, made death a A
show.
spectacle upon the Cross, when death was destroyed on the Cross Or In.
by the Dying of Christ, where life grew up through death, and the Heart
yielded it self into the Middle ( viz. into the Center) as a Conqueror of
Death.

Paradise; number 49.
222. Under the Heart, number 49. stands Paradise: the word begins at the
outward Circle on the left hand, where above number 5. is the Spirit of the
Great Mystery of the Abyss of Eternity, viz. V. and below at the same Circle
number 8. Essence is written, and it goes through the Cross, and at the right
hand through all the three Circles, and into the Liberty; which signifies the
Or Place.
Station of Paradise: It arises in the Mystery of Eternity and grows up
through the outward world, and also through the Light world, hidden in the
outward world, and manifest in the second Principle in the Light world, and
therefore that word goes through all the Three Circles, signifying the
Original of the humane body.

Divine Or substantiality.
Essentiality; number 50.
223. For in this Place, out of this Essentiality was Adams Body (understand
the outward Body) created according to the third Principle, and the Inward body
(understand the body of the Image,) out of the heavenly part in the Light
world, out of the Divine Essentiality, as it is set down at the right hand
near Paradise, number 50.

Christ's Flesh; number 51. 52.
224. That Divine Essence (understand Essence, not Spirit) is enclosed in the
wisdom of God, and the Heavenly Tincture is in it; For this Essence brought
Gods word (which became Man, Into.
in M^^^,) into her Essentiality ( viz. in the body of the Image) which was
enclosed in Death; and in Viz. the Essentiality. Or substantiality.
it God and Man became one person: For this flesh is Christ's flesh according to
the Heavenly Part, therefore after Essentiality stands Christ's Flesh, number
51. 52.

225. Christ had such flesh in the Inward Man, as Adam had before Eve [was
taken out of him] when he stood in the Divine Image in Purity: and therefore
none can enter into Paradise except they obtain that flesh again that Adam
had before the fall, and Christ in his Incarnation: Therefore we must all be
Regenerated.
borne anew out of the Heart upon the Cross, and put on Christ.

Mystery; number 53.
226. Under the word Paradise, number 53. stands Mysterium.
Mystery, and the word arises at the left hand in the second Circle, where
above at the same Circle number 4. the Character O stands, and below
Principle and Fire, number 7. and it goes to the right hand through the
Cross, and through the first Circle at the right hand: This rightly shows
man's creation according to the body.

227. For, the body is a mystery taken out of the Inward and outward world,
from above and beneath: understand out of the Matrix of the Earth: this is the
Matrix of the Earth; out of this Principium.
Principle The Earth.
it is created, and we see that it was created out of the Inward and outward Or
substance.
Essence (that is, out of the Dark and Light world) and is mixed with Evil
(that is, with wrath) and also with Good.

Wonder; number 54. Angel; number 55. Spirit; number 56.
228. But Man was created out of the Mystery an Image and similitude of God,
for Or a wonder of God.
a Divine Wonder: Therefore at the right hand number 54. there stands Wonder,
for he was a wonder of all Essences, a Lord of all Essences, taken out of all
Essences: and he was an Angel in the Inward Image: as next the word Wonder,
there stands Angel in the Liberty, number 55. for his spirit dwelt in the
Liberty of God, that is, in the Majesty: as after the word Angel there stands
Spirit, number 56. which signifies every true Man, viz. the first before the
Fall, and the second in Christ, into whom he must enter again, or else he
remains separated from God.

Four Elements; number 57.
229. Under the word Mystery there stands at number 57. Four Elements,
which arise at the outward Circle on the left hand, and go to the right hand
through the Cross, and through two Circles; which signifies the outward
world, which arises as an Or Out-birth.
Effluence out of the inward Essence of the outward Circle; and brings its
wonders into the Mystery, first into the second Principle into the first two
Circles; for it should not go with its Essence through the third Circle at the
right hand, into the Liberty, but in the Principle pass into the Mystery, and
be Or Refined. or purified.
tried in the Principle, viz. in the Fire: for there is the limit of Separation.

The Souls Joy In the Holy Ternary or Trinity.
in Ternario Sancto; number 58.
230. Above at the second Circle on the right hand number 45. stands Son,
who is the Judge and Or Separatour.
Arbitratour, and below at the same Circle stands, Souls Joy in Ternario
Sancto: signifying, that the soul shall have Joy in its works, which it has
brought into the inward Mystery in the Angelical world, and which it has
wrought in the four Elements to the praise of God: for the four Elements
stand with their root in the Great Mystery.

231. And were not the Angelical Earth.
Earth come into such a corrupt state and Condition, and if the poison of the
Devil and his kindling had not procured it: it had been one Essence in the
other three Elements, as in the Heavenly Essence it now is.

Spiritual Bodies Habitation: number 59.
232. Adam has swallowed this morsel, and thereby lost his Angelical form:
For the four Elements should be hidden in him, and he should live but in the
one Element in Divine Power, and know nothing of Evil, as at the right hand in
the Liberty, number 59. there stands the Spiritual bodies Habitation: and
there should the body of the Image (that is, the body of the soul) dwell, but
it was hindered, it must under the Earth, and be shut up in the Earth.

Earth; number 60.
233. Under the words Four Elements stands Earth number 60. signifying that
Earth is wholly slipped out or fallen off from the inward world, for the word
Earth touches neither the left nor the right Circle, it is as it were dead,
but the Cross goes through it, signifying its Restoration: that the Humane
Earth is Regenerated on the Cross, and that the Heavenly Divine Essence shall
be severed from the Essence of the Dark world by the Divine Fire, where then
there shall be new Earth in a Heavenly source, form, Essence and property, and
that which is in the Earth hidden shall spring up again in the heavenly part:
and here the Resurrection of Man is to be considered, and further it is to be
considered, that the Earth is placed thus in the Abyss, for it reaches no
Principle, therefore it must vanish.

Earthly Man; number 61.
234. Under the word Earth stands number, 61. Earthly Man, there the Cross
is between the words, which signify the fallen Earthly Man, that is, fallen
under and into the Earth; that is, he is fallen Or to the E rth as to his own
home. Or to be subject to it.
to be the Earths, and the Cross parts the words Earthly and Man, for Man
shall be severed from the Earth again, and enter into his Eternal part,
whether it be into the Light or Dark world.

Wonder; number 62.
235. Under the line of the Cross stands, number 62. Wonder: which
signifies that the Evil Wonders and also the Evil part of the Earth, shall
Or in.
at the Judgment of God, (when God shall make separation) fall As to its own
place.
home to the Abyss of Darkness, and be the Earth for all Devils and Or Evil.
wicked people to dwell together upon: for the Abyss stands under it, number
1.

Babell; number 63.
236. Next to that word Wonder stands, number 63. Babel, signifying that
Babel is only a Wonder of the Abyss, and she works only Wonders in the
Abyss.

Or self Reason.
Own Reason in Babell; number 64.
237. A little above, under the Circle at the right hand, after Earthly Man,
number 64. stands Own Reason in Babel, which goes about the Circle of the
second Principle, and goes along in its own Power under the Divine world, it
supposes it self to be in God, and that it serves God, and yet it is without
God in it self, and teaches and does its own Matters only, it rules the
outward world according to its own Reason without the Spirit and Will of God,
even according to its own self-will only. Therefore it goes about the Light
world flattering, and gives God Or good.
fair words, but remains without God still in the Abyss and enters into it.

Wonder of the Great Folly; number 65.
238. Under Own Reason, number 65. stands Wonder of the Great Folly,
signifying Babell: which has found all Or Inventions.
Arts, Cunning deceit, fallacies.
subtleties, and Feats or tricks.
devices, and lost it self: it seeks Gold and loses God, it takes Earth
for Gold, Death for life, and that is the greatest folly that can be found in
the Or Being of all Beings.
Essence of all Essences, as is enough demonstrated in other places.

The Conclusion.
239. Thus we see where our home is; not in this world but in the two inward
worlds, in which of them we Or converse.
trade here in this life, into the same we enter when we dye; we must leave the
outward: we must be newborn only on the Cross.

240. Babell has wholly turned it self away from the Cross; which signifies
proud men wedded to their own Wit and Reason who rule themselves by their
witty folly.

241. The Earthly Man upon the Cross, number 61. signifies that simple flock
of people, which yet hang to the Cross of Christ, and are at length
regenerated through the Cross.

242. But Reason has also rent it self off from the Cross By taking its own
pleasure, and makiag Laws according to its own power, though against right.
by own pleasure, own Power and Laws, and that is the Wonder of Folly which
the very Devils do mock at.

243. The Reader should consider this further; for there lies much under it,
it has the understanding of all the three worlds; behold thy self therein, it
is a most true Glass; for the Ternarie is a Cross, and it has two Kingdoms
in One, which part themselves by sinking through Death.

244. Therefore the Devil would be above God, and therefore God became Man,
that he might bring the soul out of the Wrath, through death into another
life, into another world, which yet remains in the first, but it turns the
back to it, as this Figure is: and the Cross stands between the two
Principles, and goes from the Fire-life into the life of Light.

245. Understand us thus my beloved friend; the soul has its Original in the
fire-life (for no Spirit subsisteth Or sine, absque.
without the source of the fire:) and it goes out from it self with its own
will through Death: it accounts it self as dead, and sinketh it self down
as dead, and so falls with its will through the Principle of Fire, into the
Divine light Eye, and there it is the Chariot of the Holy Ghost, whereon he
rides.

246. But when it will go [of] it self, then it continues in its own
Fire-nest, in the Original, wherein it was awakened, as Lucifer did: for it is
awakened at the beginning of the Cross at the left hand, as is to be seen in
this Figure, and that is its Original, as shall be further mentioned hereafter.

247. The soul.
It is a whole Figure of the Cross: according to the outward Image of the body
it resembles a Crosse-Tree, the body having two Arms, signifying two
Principles, and the body in the midst, which is a whole Person: The Heart is
the first Principle, and the Brain is the second, the Heart has the soul
Viz. seated in it.
, and the brain the Spirit of the soul: and it is a new child, and yet not a
new one neither, the stock is from eternity, but the branches grow out of the
Stock.

248. And though it has not been a soul from Eternity, yet it has been
known from Eternity in the Virgin of the Divine Wisdom, upon the Cross; and
in the Root it belongs to God the Father, in the soul to God the Son, and
in the Will to God the Holy Ghost.

249. Seeing then its will could not stand in the Father (but would domineere;
and so it fell into the fire of Wrathfulnesse) therefore the Father gave it to
the Son, and the Son took it into himself, and became Man in it, and
brought it by the Verbum Fiat.
Word Fiat into the Majesty, into the Light again: for the Son brings it
through the Anger and Death into the Eye of Holiness again, at the right hand:
into another world in God to the Angels; whereof there shall be further mention
made hereafter.

Now we come again to the sixth Form of Fire.
250. Know then, wherefore we have set the Cross here; the. X.
Cross is otherwise the number ten, when we number in the order of Reason: But
according to the two Principles where the Eye appears parted, the Cross
should be between the fifth and sixth form, where Light and Darkness part.

251. But you must know, that God is both the beginning and the End, and
therefore we put the Cross at the End according to Reason: for there we go
through Death into life, it is our Resurrection.

252. Again, the Number X or 10.
Ten, is the first and also the last, and through it is death, and after death
Hell, viz. the Wrath of the Darkness; which is Or Extra Crucem.
without the Cross, for it falls again into the A, and the Creator is in
the A, into which Lucifer would feign have insinuated himself, but he is
driven out into Darkness, which is his Kingdom in the source.

253. You must understand, that we mean by the twofold Eye, a Round Globe cut
in two, wherein the Cross stood from Eternity, it cannot be drawn in any
portraiture, because the halfes are so in one another, they are one and yet
two: the Spirit only understands this, and whosoever does not enter through
death upon the Cross, into Regeneration, (that is, into the Divine Body) he
understands not this: and let him leave it Or unmastered.
uncensured, or else he will be Or make himself a Devil in so doing.
a workman and censurer for the Devil: we would have the Reader faithfully
admonished; for it is most certain.

254. For this figure contains the whole Ground as deep as a Spirit in it
self is: and the Reader cannot know it without Or right Eyes, viz. Spiritual
Eyes.
true Eyes; words cannot be set according to its right order, for the first is
also the Last, and the middlemost goes through all; and is not known but in
it self, Therefore searching is not the best way to find the Mystery in: But
to be borne Or of God.
in God is the right way to find it: for without The New Birth.
that, all is but Babell.

255. All lies in the will and in the earnestness, viz. that the will enter
into In Magiam.
Magic, for the Eternity is Magical; all things come to Essence out of
Magic: for in the Eternity in the Abyss is Nothing; But that which is, is
Magic.

256. From Magic comes Philosophy, which sounds the Magic, and seeking
finds Astrology therein Eternally; and Astrology again seeks His cause
and Ruler.
its Master and Maker: viz. Astronomy, the Sulphur and Mercurium
Sulphur and Mercury, which has its own Principle, and therein is the third
Magic, viz. the Medicus.
Physician; who seeks the Or disease wh ch destroys the health.
corrupter and would heal it; but he finds the fourth Magic, viz. the
Theologus.
Divine, who seeks the The curse of God.
Turba in all things, and would heal the Turba; but he finds the Eye of the
first Magic, and there he sees that all is the wonder of Magic: then he
leaves off from seeking, and is a Magician: (...) Matthew. 2.1.
Magus in the first will; for he sees he has all power to find and to make
what he will: and then he makes himself an Angel, and remains in himself,
and so he is free from all other things, and continues Eternally: This is the
highest Ground of the Essence of all Essences.

257. Although the Whore of Babell will by no means relish it, yet we speak
from good ground and say: that Babell and her children are Adulterous.
borne of whoredom, in their Magia. Philosophia. Astrologia. Astronomia.
Medicina. Theologia.
Magic, Philosophy, Astrology, Astronomy, Physic, and Divinity; Babell is
the true Child of none of these, she is a Refractory proud Bastard. We have
known her in the A and O, searching for Philosophy and Astrology, and have
Or found.
known her to be a Whore in all Specula mirrours, or looking Glasses, or
Expositions, representations, and illustrations, and similitudes in her
teachings.
Glasses, she commits whoredom in all Glasses.

259. She says she is the Eye, but she has a Or squint-Eye.
false Eye, that glimmereth out of her whoredom, in Pride, Envy, and Anger,
and her seat in the Magic is the Or back turned.
averse left Eye: she boasts upon the Cross, but she enters not into the
Center, she will not go through Death into life.

260. She says, I live, and yet has an unrighteous life, but that is her true
life, if she would continue in it alone to her self; But she oppresses the
Children that are borne Or live in Patience and Resignation.
upon the Cross, and treads them under her feet.

261. Therefore the Cross has bent its Bow, and will shoot away Babell from
the Cross: The Spirit of the Wonders declares this in the Magic. (The first
Cross is the first Principle, and it will shoot away Babell from the second
Principle.)

The seventh Form of Fire.
262. One Magic always proceeds from the other, and is the Glass and the
Eye of the other, wherein the wonders are known and propagated; for in the
Abyss there is nothing; but in the Magic is all, each Glass is a Center, but
yet its own, for, the lust Or longing.
seeking, and Desire, brings it forth: it is the Model of the first.

263. For when I search to the beginning of the Essence, then I find the Eye
which is God: which is a desiring will of Eternity, which enters into it
self, and seeks the Abyss in it self.

264. It is in Nothing, but it is the Glass of the Abyss; it seeks it
self, and finds it self; and that which is found seeks again a Model,
wherein it can seek, find, and see it self: and that proceeds so far
till it comes to the Number X. 10.
ten.

265. Then the last finds the first again in it self, and so the last
becomes the Model and Glass of the First, and the first of the last, and so
it becomes an Eternal Band, and it stands in the will, in the desiring,
seeking and finding, and the Great Mystery.
Mysterium Magnum is included in this Essence.

266. But now the middlemost in the Desire wills to have a Or satiating.
fulfilling, wherein it may Rest, or else all would be in an anguishing source:
and the Desiring draws forth the Middlemost of All forms, wherewith it
satiateth its hunger, wherewith also it is in Joy in it self in perfection,
and so out of the Anguish there comes a Love, a satiating of the source, and
the Middlemost is Sulphur, wherewith the Spirit Or quickneth, or enliveneth.
Refreshes it self in the will, for Sulphur has two forms in it, viz. Phur,
Power, Sul: Light.
power and Light.

267. And this together is the Essence borne out of all forms, it is Materia.
Substantiality.
Matter, Essentiality, corporality, the Divine Body, Christ's heavenly flesh,
and it is the full satiating of the Spirit in the O, also it is the Rest, and
the manifestation of the Deity; it subsisteth in the Virgin Wisdom.

268. The Cross is its Or end, pitch, Bounds.
limit: and it is the Essentiality, which by sinking enters into Death, as is
mentioned before: where the Wrath remains in Death; and it is Or quiet.
still as a Death or a Nothing, and the life sprouteth up out of it, in another
Principle.

269. It self is not the Principle, but the Principle is borne in it, all
Glasses of the Magic are manifested in it, and all the wonders of the Or
Genitrix, or Bearer.
Begettresse, it contains the Mysterium Magnum, and out of it the Spirit
opens the Wonders of Eternity: the Spirit gives it the Essences, for it is
the food for the hunger of the Spirit.

270. It is an Essence of Wonders, without Number and End, also it has no
Beginning, for the Spirit in the Desire makes it begin from Eternity, and it
continues Or in.
to Eternity: it is Or a.
the Body of the Ternary (which is called God) and the Or a.
body of Angels, so that the Spirit subsisteth in an Image; or else he would
not be known.

271. Thus he knows himself in the Image, and seeks the best Magic, and
he finds what he seeks, and eats it, and thereby gives his will to the
Divine Body, so that there is an Eternity in the Holy Principle.

272. For the Wonders arise in the will of the corporeal Spirit; which wonders
take hold of the Spirit of Eternity, viz. of the Holy Ghost, and thus there is
a sound and song proceeding from the Eternal wonders, for the Will of the
Corporeal Spirit is therein.

273. And in these seven Forms the Joy of the Deity is increased and
perfected, for it is a satiating of the Eternal desire, and it is the Eternal
food.

274. But seeing all Essences arise from fire: Therefore we will clearly set
before you the Mysterium Magnum, and show you Paradise, if any to whom this is
told and discovered, will be blind, let him adventure To perish.
it with Babell.

275. You know that every life consists in fire and Water, and the
Essentiality is its Body, and the Body proceeds from the power of the Spirit:
for it is the food of the Spirit, and the Spirit again is the food of the
body, and the highest and greatest Or Nourishment.
Nutriment is in himself: for the outward body could not sustain him, if the
true life were not in himself.

276. Now then Fire is the first cause of life, and Light is the second cause,
and the Spirit the third cause: and yet there is but one Essence, which closes
it self in one only Body, and manifests it self, and so finds by seeking.

277. And every Essence Is.
consists In.
of two Essences, viz. of an inward and an outward, one seeks and finds the
other, the outward is Nature, the inward is Spirit above Nature, and yet there
is no separation but in that which is included in a Time; there the Time
parts the limit; so that the End finds the beginning.

278. Thus you see also, how the true Essentiality arises from the Light: for
it is the satiating of the will: the water arises from the meekness of the
Light, for the Desire takes hold of the meekness and keeps it: because it
has a good Or taste.
relish: and so the meekness becomes Essential, and it is an Essence of the
Fire, a satiating of the desiring Wrath, a quenching of the Wrath, and a
corporality of the Fire: for when the body Or perishes, or dies, or
corrupts, or departs.
is dead, then its Spirit is in the beginning; in that which gave a beginning
to it, it is in that Glass.

279. Now then as the source is twofold, so also the water is twofold; viz. an
outward and an inward, the one belongs to the Spirit, the other to the
outward Life; the outward is as it were a Death, and the inward is the life of
the outward, for the outward stands between Wrath and Paradise, in the Death
that is sunk down into the Center in a thing.
insunken Death, and the Inward is Paradise it self: for the Spirit grows up
therein out of the Eternity.

280. You may very well see that this is true, as follows. Observe the Summer
and Winter, Heat and Cold, and your eyes will soon be opened, if you be borne
not Or without.
outwardly but within your self, with a true Magic will to find God; for it
is very Visible.
plain.

281. For the Water in the Deep arises from the fire, not from the Wrath but
from the Light; for the Light proceeds from the fire and has a Longing,
Sucking, Drawing.
seeking of its own, it seeks a Glass, to behold it self in, and it
seeks an Habitation, and draws it Or in.
by its desire into it self, and dwells therein, and that which is drawn in
is water which receives the Light: else if the light did not dwell in the
water, the deep of the world could not comprehend the Light: The water is the
satiating of the Desire of the Light.

282. And the water again seeks the Glass, and would have a House to dwell
in, and that is flesh; as you see, the water receives the shadow of all bodily
substances, so that the body may be seen in the water, and that is, because
the seeking of the Water has captivated it.

283. Furthermore you see herein, the End of Nature; For the Eye finds its
Life in the Water: and so goes back into the seventh Form, and sees its body
in the Water the Outward desires no more, this body desires no other body
more in the outward, but it looks back after its Mother, of which a Glass is
a true Example, which is water and fire, and it receives the Image very
plainly.

284. And thus you see, that the End goes back again, and seeks the
beginning and no further Or outwardly.
in the outward. For this world has a limit, and is included in Time, and
hasteneth to the limit, and there the End finds the beginning, and this world
is as a Model or Glass in the Beginning: by this you may find somewhat of
the Mystery, and behave your selves well in the beginning, that you may be
found to be a wonder in the Love of God.

285. And know that the second Or Form.
kind of water is in the Spirit, it is the Glass of its father, of its maker,
which dwells in the Spirit, and is found only by its Maker, it self finds
not it self: for so long as a thing goes Outward.
forward, there is no finding in the inward, but the Spirit which dwells in
the inward, that finds it self in the outward.

286. Yet the outward life finds not the inward, unless it have the Spirit
of the inward; and then it finds by the inward Spirit, and so the outward
life speaks of the inward, and knows it not; but the inward Spirit fills
the outward, so that the outward is as it were a mouth, and the Inward has,
and produces the Word, and so the Inward Kingdom is manifest in the outward
by the sound: which is a Wonder.

287. The Inward is a Prophet: and the outward apprehends it not, but if he
do apprehend it, he has the Essentiality of God in him, that is, the Divine
flesh, Christ's flesh, the flesh of the Virgin, and yet the Prophet is in the
Spirit, but that flesh receives his power and virtue, and assures the outward
Man that he does nothing but what his Maker will have done, and such a
condition this pen is in, and no otherwise.

288. And thus we know the Foundation.
Ground of this world, that it is a figure of the Inward according to both the
Mothers, that is according to both the Fires, viz. according to the fire of
Wrath, and according to the fire of Light; The Sun is a Or Idea, or instance.
Model or Glass of the Light of Eternity, and the outward fire is a Glass of
the Wrath, and the Essentiality of them both is Water and Earth: the Resembles
the Father.
Earth is the Essentiality of Wrath, and the The Son.
water of the Light, and the The Holy Ghost.
Air of the Eternal Spirit; which is called, God, the Holy Ghost.

289. Yet you must know, that this world is not the Essence of Eternity, but a
figure, or a Glass of it; therefore it is said to be a peculiar Or third
Principle.
Principle, because it has its own life, and yet consists only in the
Magic seeking of the Inward.

290. The Verbum Fiat.
Word Fiat, is the Or Maker, or Ruler, or Orderer as an Artificer.
Master of the outward; for it keeps the outward in its conceived Glass, the
outward is not the Glass; but it is a similitude in which his Spirit does Or
contrive, form. Appear.
express it self, in works of wonder: that it might see the Wonders of both
fires; viz. of the Wrath and of the Light: and so continually brings the End
of all Essences into the Beginning: therefore this world Or is like a wheel
that turns round.
turns round; for the end continually seeks the beginning: and when it
finds the Wonders, then the End gives the Wonders to the beginning, and this
is the cause of the Creation of this world.

291. The life of every Creature was a Wonder before the beginning; for the
Abyss knew nothing of it: and the beginning of the Eye finds all, and
sets the Model in it self, so that it has an Eternal number, and
delights it self in the number of the Wonders.

The eight Form of Fire.
292. Seeing then an Essence consists thus in two Forms, the one of which,
takes an Abyssal, bottomless.
unsearchable beginning into it self, and keeps it Eternally: and the other
of them, is the Model of the Eternal, Or contrived. Or conceived. Or formed.
framed, and the body of it included in a limit: therefore the Turba must be
considered, which destroys the included, framed life again, and sets the
Model of the framed Wonders in the beginning again, and presents such a
thing to the beginning as was not from Eternity, but only in the framed Time.

293. My beloved friend, such things as these, are shown to you, and such as
you are, who seek the beginning: for your Mind is our Mystery; you should
seek it in Us, not in me; I, (the outward Man) have it not: but the Inward in
the Virgin, (wherein God dwells) has it, which Or calls it self twofold.
speaks of it self in the plural number.

294. My outward Man is not worthy of the Mystery; but God has so prepared
it, that he might reveal himself to you by that means, that you should know
him by some other means, and not say my wit has done it.

295. Because you are a very learned person, therefore you shall know that God
also loves the simple, and such as are contemned of the world, if he seek God
as I have done, and you shall know also that the true Invention consists not
in Art, but in the Spirit and Will of God.

296. For this Hand is simple and accounted foolish in the Eye of the world, as
you know: and yet there lies such a Arcanum. Or an hidden treasure.
secret therein, as is incomprehensible to Reason.

297. Therefore have a care, pour Oil into the wounds, that require healing;
and consider what Christ Mark 10.23, 24, 25.
says: how hard it is for that man to enter into the Kingdom of God, who is
entangled with Or cares for the belly.
worldly cares, having great power and honor.

298. You shall not find this plant among the high ones of this world; for You
have no power with them.
you cannot, you are a Mystery to them: the Spirit it self seeks the
beginning: look to it, play not the Hypocrite; (for the beginning is
Paradisicall:) that the impure enter not into the pure, and at last the Serpent
beguile Eve again.

299. Let no Soothing.
dissimulation be in you, but plain dealing, yea and no: and fear not, for
that which is Eternal will continue, and the distemper is nothing else but the
Turba, which as a destroyer always insinuates it self, beware of that, (for
the Old Serpent is subtle) and have a care, that you may be pure both in the
beginning and in the End.

300. For this work endures no dissembling, it has a clear ground, also it
belongs not to the Turba, but to the beginning of the Or Clarity.
Glory: therefore, beware of those that are borne with a wolvish disposition;
whose Spirit is a subtle Serpent; we speak freely to you.

301. Every thing that has a beginning, is sought by the beginning, for the
beginning seeks through the Deep, and would find the Or bottom.
Ground: and if the beginning finds the Ground, and that there be a limit in
a thing, then the beginning proceeds to the limit, and leaves the Or former.
first, and seeks further till it find the Abyss: and then it must remain
in it self, and it can go no further, for there is nothing beyond.

302. But if the beginning leave the first, then it is under the power of the
Turba, which destroys it, and makes it to be as it was in the beginning.

303. Then when the thing is destroyed, the Turba is naked without a body, and
yet seeks it self, and finds it self, but without Or substance.
Essence, and then it enters into it self, and seeks it self till it come
into the Abyss, and then the first Eye is found, whence it proceeded.

304. But seeing it is naked, and without Essence; therefore it belongs to
the Fire, for it puts it self into it, and in the fire is a Desire to seek
its own body again, and so the Or Original fire.
Fire of the beginning is awakened.

305. And herein we know the last Judgment, in the Fire, and the Resurrection
of the flesh: for the Turba desires the body which it had before, though
destroyed in the limit, and the desire of the soul was the life of the body.

306. But seeing there are two fires, therefore the Turba is known in a twofold
Or Form.
manner: in an incorruptible, and in a corruptible body: viz. the one in the
fire of Wrath, and the other in the fire of Light, Viz. in the light fire.
wherein we understand the Divine Body; and in the Wrathful fire the Earthly
body, which the Turba destroys, for the Turba finds the limit of it.

307. Now the Eternal fire in the Eye of God, is Understood to be.
both the fire of Wrath, and also the light-fire of Love: and you must
understand, that the spirit without a body must remain in the wrathful fire,
for it has lost its Or substantiality, or Body.
Essentiality; the Turba in the fire has swallowed it up.

308. But the Spirit which has a body, which the Turba could not devour,
remains for ever in the Essentiality, in the Divine Body, wherein his Spirit
is: which is the body in the love of God, which is the hidden Man, in the Old
Adamicall man, which has Christ's flesh in the corruptible body.

309. And thus we understand the soul, to be a life awakened out of the Eye
of God, its Original is in the fire, and the fire is its life: but if it go
not forth out of the fire with its will and Imagination into the Light, ( viz.
through the wrathful Death into the second Principle, into the fire of Love;)
then it remains in its own original fire, and has nothing for a body but
the Turba; viz. the Astringent.
harsh wrath in the Desire in the fire, a consuming, and a hunger: and yet an
Eternal seeking, which is an eternal Anguish.

310. But the soul which with its Desiring will, enters into it self: and
sinketh down in its Reason ( viz. in its Desire) and seeks not it self, but
the Love of God; its own fire is as it were dead: for its will which the fire
awakened is dead to the Fire-life, and is gone forth out of it self into the
fire of Love, that soul is fully in the fire of love; it has also the body of
the fire of Love, for it is entered into it, and is a great Wonder in the Divine
Body, and it is no more in it self, for it has mortified its will: and
therefore the Turba also is as it were dead, and the will of love does wholly
satiate the Original fire, and therein it lives Eternally.

311. But the souls which have awakened the Turba* they have lost the Image;
for the Turba has devoured it: and therefore such souls get bestiall Images
in the Wrath, and in Hell, according as the Turba is in them: as Lucifer gat
the Image of a Serpent: as the Will was figured here in this life; it remains
then Or in its true similitude.
naked as it is.

312. For the wrathful Turba always seeks the Image, but finds it not,
and therefore it figureth the Image according to the Will: for the Earthly
desires stick in the will: and that Image remains in the Wonders of God, in
the Eye of the wrathful Principle.

313. And here we understand that the eight Form is the Turba, which seeks
the Image: and if it find the limit of it, it destroys it, and enters into
the limit, and seeks further in it self, and finds at last the
Abominations of that which the soul has wrought in this life.

314. And also we understand here the Fire (which at last shall purge the Or
threshing floare. Matthew. 3.12.
floare) and the severe Judgment, and we understand that every fire shall
receive its Essence from the Turba; and also what that Turba is.

315. Where then the fire will devour the Earth, and draw the Elements with
the wonders in them, into the Beginning: where that which was at first will be
again, and the Elements become one: and every thing will represent its own
Wonders, every thing in that fire whereinto its will entered.

316. Hearken to this you Children of men, it concerns you: for no beast
proceeds from the Eternal beginning, but from the Model of the Eternal;
and its Spirit attaineth not the Eternal, as the soul of man does.

317. Also the corruptible body cannot possess the Eternal; it belongs to
the Turba: But the new man, borne of God, shall possess the Eternal: for he
is departed from the corruptible, and has put on God in Christ, he has the
Divine Body in the Old Body.

318. The Turba takes away the Earthly source, the outward body from the
Earth, remains in the Earth, but the will takes its works along with it
self: for they are in the new body, and follow it: therefore let him consider
what he does while he is here in this life.

The ninth Form of Fire, The great Severity.
Earnestness.
309. Seeing then we understand, that all things proceeded from the Beginning,
and that one thing thus proceeds always out of an other, and seeing we
understand, that the Fire is a cause of the Life, and that the life divides it
self into two parts, and yet corrupts not, only the outward life is that
which corrupts, it falls into the Turba, which destroys it: we are now
therefore to consider, wherein the inward Eternal life consists, and what
upholdeth it, that that body Corrupts or breaks not.
fades not, seeing Essentiality has a beginning; and yet we can say with good
ground, that it has no End: for it must have a Or sure foundation to uphold it.
ground, or else the Turba will have it, and that finds the limit.

320. The Eternal Body must not have a limit, but be free in the Abyss, in
the Eternal nothing, or else another Essence would again be in that Essence,
which would divide it and make a limit.

321. We have told you before, that all which shall endure for ever, must pass
quite through the Fire, for the Turba takes that which remains in the Fire;
now no Spirit is created In.
for the fire that it should remain in it.

322. Only the Turba has captivated many of them, but not from the Will of
God, for Gods Will is only Love, but the Turba is the Will of his Wrath: which
by its vehement hunger has gotten a great Dominion, wherein it has manifested
its Wonders: viz. the Devils and wicked souls of Men.

323. But the Eternal life consists in Meekness, and has no Death or Turba
in it; therefore we must say, that the soul and Spirit are not in the Turba,
especially the Or Image.
body of the soul: if it were, the Turba would destroy it.

324. This is only to be understood, as it is mentioned before, that the will
in the anguish source, in the fire (understand, the will of the soul) sinketh
down in it self as into Death, and May not.
cannot live in the fire, and so The Will.
it falls into another world: viz. into the beginning, or (as we may better
say) into the free Eternity, into the Eternal Nothing, wherein is no source,
nor any thing that Or makes.
gives or receives a source.

325. Now there is no dying in the will that is thus sunk down; for it is
gone quite out from the fiery beginning, in the Eye, and so brings its life
into another Principle, and dwells in the Liberty, and yet it has all the
Forms of the Essences, which arise from the fire, in it, but Or imperceptible.
unperceived: For it is gone quite out from the fire.

326. And therefore the life of its Essences is in the Liberty, and it is also
desiring, and receives in the desire in its Essences, the power of the light,
which shines in the Liberty; which is power without Turba: For this fire is
only Love, which consumes not, but yet always desires and satiateth, so
that the will of the soul Gets, or attracteth.
puts on a body.

327. For the Will is a Spirit, and the soul is the great life of the Spirit,
which upholdeth the Spirit, and so the soul is Endued.
clothed with power, and dwells in two Principles, as God himself does, and
as to the outward life in three Principles, and is the similitude of God.

328. The inward Water in the spirit of the soul is the water of Eternal
Life; of which Christ said: John 4. ver. 14.
He that drink^th the water that I will give him, he shall never thirst: this
is that water.

329. And the Essentiality of the Spirit which the soul puts on, is
Gods-Christs-body, of which he says: He that eats my flesh and drinks my
blood, he Or dwells. Joh. 6.56.
is in me and I in him.

330. But the true Life in the Light of the Majesty, in the Ninth number, is
the Tincture of the Or Wisdom of God.
Virgin, it is a fire, and yet not a Fire; it burns but it consumes not, it
is the Love, the meekness, the humility; it is the life of God, and of the
Holy souls, an incorruptible life, and a Or infinite unfathomable.
groundless life; for it is in the Abyss in it self, it is in the Center of
it: which Center is its first life, and yet does not comprehend it, as the fire
does not comprehend the Light.

331. And thus the Nin h number, is the life in the fire of God, and it is Or
is called, or accounted the life in the presence of the Trinity.
the life which stands before the Ternarie: viz. an Angel standing before
the Cross Or to set forth.
for Gods works of Wonder, and Or to set forth.
the Heavenly Glory.

The 10. X.
Tenth Number and Form of Fire. The Gate Into the Holy Trinity.
in Ternarium Sanctum.
332. You know from Reason, that where there is a Root, there is a desiring
will, which is the Noble Tincture, that drives upwards, out of it self, and
seeks a similitude of its Form.

333. The Tincture is a Virgin, and is known in the Wisdom of God, in the
Wonders: it is Not one that is a bearer or bringer forth.
no begettresse, but an opener of the Wonders which are in the wisdom; it
seeks no Glass, but merely opens the Essences, that a whole similitude
may bring forth it self out of the Essences, it drives the twig out of the
Tree.

334. This we understand of Angels and the soul, they proceed from Gods
Essences, from the whole Tree, the Angels from two Principles: And the soul
with the body of the outward life from three Principles; and therefore Man is
higher then the Angels, if he continue in God.

335. And in the 10.
Tenth number at the Cross, the Angels and souls are Or first quickened, or
enlivened.
awakened, and incorporated into the Heavenly Essentiality; though you must
understand, that the Tenth number belongs to the place between the fifth and
sixth Form.
, in a Globe, and the Heart is in the midst in the Center: which is the Heart
of God: viz. the Word of God.

336. The Power in the whole Tree ( viz. the Pith in the wood) has the
Essences of the whole Tree: and thus God is a Spirit, and the Word is his
Heart, which he Speaks out of all, etc.
foundeth forth from all powers and Wonders: Therefore Isaiah calls it a Isa.
9.6
Wonder, Counselor, and Power, the Prince of Peace, as a Pacifier of the
Wrath, and an Eternal power of the Wonders; a Counselor of the begettresse.

337. For the Word upholdeth the Center of Nature, and is the Heart and Lord of
Nature, it is the begettresse in the Eye of God, a giver of Power, and it is
the strength of the Omnipotence, it holds the Center of the fire captive with
the Love-fire, so that the fire must be dark in it self, and the word only
has the Light-life.

338. We cannot find but that the Tenth number is a Cross, and it is the
Original of the By this Essence God himself is not meant, but the powers that
flow from him.
Essence of all Essences, which Essence divides it self into three
beginnings, as is mentioned before: each of which has its Essence, and they
are all in one another, and have no more but one Spirit.

339. And in the middle of the point is the Center, which is the cause of the
Life, and in the Center is the Light of the Majesty, out of which the Life
proceeds, viz. the second Principle, and out of it; the Tree of the Eternal
Life always grew from Eternity, and the twigs grew out of the Tree.

340. These twigs are the spirits of Angels, which indeed were not corporeal
from Eternity, but the Essences were in the Tree, and their Image appeared in
the Virgin of Wisdom from Eternity, for they were a figure from Eternity in
the Tincture, not corporeal, but only Essential without corporality.

341. And therefore this is the Greatest Wonder that the Eternity has wrought:
that it has Or created, or formed.
made the Eternal a Corporeal spirit, which thing no Reason can comprehend,
nor no sense find out, and it is Or not to be dived into by us.
unfadomable to us.

342. For no Spirit can found it self: It sees well its deep even into the
Abyss, but it comprehends not its Former, or moulder.
Maker, it beholds him indeed, and diveth into him even to the Abyss, but it
knows not its Forming, fashioning.
Making, this is only hidden to it, and nothing else.

343. For a child knows its Father and Mother well, but it knows not how
its Father made it; it is also as That is, as perfectly a Man. Quoad genus
humanum.
highly graduated as its Father: but it is hidden to it, how it was in the
seed: and though it found that, yet it knows not the time and place; for it
was in the seed, in the Wonders, and in the Life a Spirit in the Wonders: And
here we are commanded to leave off diving any further, and to be silent.

344 For we are a Creature, and should speak but so far as belongs to a
Creature to know, in the inward and outward, in body and soul, in God, Angels,
Men and Devils; also in Beasts, Fowls, Worms, in Plants and Grass, in
Heaven and Hell, all this we are able to found, but not our own Making.

345. And yet we know and find the first Fiat in VIZ. our own Making.
that, though indeed we know not that which first moved God to create: we know
well the making of the Soul, but how that which Or stood.
was in its Essence from Eternity, is become moveable: we know no ground of
that: for it has nothing that could awaken that, and it has an Eternal Will;
which is without beginning, and unchangeable.

346. But if we should say, the Angels and souls have been from Eternity in
the Spirit: the propagation of the soul will not permit that, as we see by
experience: Therefore this is only Gods Mystery, and the creature should
continue in humility and obedience under God, and not fear higher, for it is
not God.

347. God is a Spirit from Eternity without Ground and beginning; but the
Spirit of the soul and of Angels, has a beginning, and are in Gods hand: the
Ternarie has the Or Fan.
casting shovell, which will purge the Or threshing-floare.
floare.

348. We must only have patience and humility in Obedience, here in this
life, or else our proceeding from God avails Nothing; the Devil was indeed
an Angel, but his Pride threw him into Darkness: let none climb We should
not go beyond Obedience, Patience, humility and Chastity, and live according
to our own self-will, and desire.
above the Cross, or if he do, he will fall into Hell to the Devil.

349. God will have children near him, and not Such as will domineere.
Lords, He is Lord and none else: we have received of his fullness, we are
borne out of his Essences, we are his true children, not step-children out of a
strange Glass, also not a similitude only, but children; the body is a
similitude, and the Spirit is a similitude of Gods Spirit, but the Or right.
true soul is a Child borne out of God.

350. Romans 8.16.
Gods Spirit witnesses to our Spirits, that we are the Children of God, not in
that manner, which Babell Imagines, or dreameth.
teaches: who would so willingly be God upon Earth: but our souls are
Children begotten of Gods seed, our heavenly body, which the heavenly soul Or
is clothed with all.
wears, comes out of the Divine Body, and is hidden from the Devil, and
the Old Adam.

351. Therefore my loving brother in the Divine body, know this clearly, and
it is our Answer to your first Question, whence the soul proceeds. It
proceeds from God out of Eternity without Ground and number, and endures in
its own Eternity; but the beginning to the moving of the Creature which is
done in God, that should be mentioned no further, only we give you to
understand thus much.

353. That the Ternarie longed to have children like it self out of it self,
and so has manifested it self in Angels, and in the soul of Adam, and is
become an Image: like a Tree which brings forth fruit, and bears a Twig out
of it self: for that is the due right of Eternity, and nothing else beside.

354. It is no strange Glass; but indeed one Glass out of the other, and one
Essence out of the other, and all seek the beginning, and it is all a Wonder.

355. This is the Entrance, and now we will answer the rest of the Questions:
but briefly, for you see already in this description all your Questions
Answered.
. But for your Longings sake, and to satisfy the simple, who have not our
knowledge, we will go through with them.

The second Question. What are the Essences, Substance, Nature, and Property
of the Soul?
1. THe Essences of the soul come out of the Center of Nature, out of the
Fire, with all forms of Nature; All the three Principles lie in the soul; All
that God has and can do, and that God is in his Or Trinity, Threenesse.
Ternarie, all this is in the Essences of the soul, as the virtue of a Tree is
in the twig that grows out of it.

2. The substance of the Soul is heavenly, created out of the heavenly Divine
Essentiality: yet the will of it is free either to demerse it self, and
esteem it self Nothing, and so to eat of the Love of God, as a twig feeds
upon a Tree: or to rise up in its Fire, and be a Tree of it self, and eat of
that, and so get Or substantiality.
Essentiality, viz. Or the body of a Creature.
a creaturely Body.

3. The Nature of the soul is the The same with the Center of Nature in the
whole Nature.
Center it self, having seven spirits to propagate it self with, it is a
whole substance come out of All substances, and a similitude of the Number
Three, or Trinity.
Ternarie if it dwell in God: if not, then it is a similitude of Lucifer and
all Devils, as its Property is.

4. The Property of the first soul, was created according to both Mothers, and
thereupon came the Proba, or trial.
Temptation, and therefore it was commanded not to eat of Good and evil, but
of heavenly Paradisicall Fruit, having the Will and property of it obedient to
God.

5. But all properties lie in it, it may awaken and let in what it will: and
whatsoever it awakeneth and lets in, is pleasing to God, if its will be in
the Love of God, in humility and Obedience: and then it may do what Wonders.
Miracles it will, for then they all make for the Glory of God.

The third Question. How is the Soul created the Image of God?
1. THis has been satisfied already. The Trinity, or number three.
Ternarie, and all the three Principles did long to have a whole similitude in
Essence and property, of the Essence of all Essences.

2. And this longing was awakened in the Heart of God as a great Wonder.

3. And the awakening was thus, the Harsh.
Astringent Fiat, (viz. the Desiring attraction,) contracted all into One; and
this was an Image of the similitude of God, of Heaven, of this world, and of
the world of Anger: In verbo Domini.
The whole Fiat in the Word of the Lord created all things out of the Kingdom
of God, and out of the Kingdom of Anger.

4. And as there is nothing higher then the soul, so there is nothing that can
destroy it, for it has all things under it, and in it, it is a child of the
of the Eternal Essences that proceeded from God; or the Divine powers of the
Deity.
whole Essence of All Essences; as it was created at first.

The fourth Question. What was the Breathing in of the soul, and when?
1. EVery Spirit without a body is Crude, raw, void, or naked, feeble, or
vain.
empty, and knows not it self, and therefore every Spirit desires a Body,
for its food and for its habitation.

2. And God having created the third Principle, (which is a Glass of the
Deity) before the soul was created; and so that Glass clave already to the
Eternal Glass.
; for it was borne out of the Eternal Wonders, and so was created: and
therefore the third Principle would not leave the soul free, seeing it also
was created out of the Wonders of God, and stood in the beginning as a figure
in the wisdom of God; and desired (being it self was material,) to have a
material similitude in the soul: and therefore (in the Creation of the soul)
it stirred up its own spirit also together in the Fiat.

3. Hence the outward Image according to the Spirit of this world, with the
outward Fiat was contrived, or formed.
conceived, and a body was created out of thet Matrix of the Earth: a Mass of
Red Earth consisting of fire and water. Or Quintessence of the inward ground.


4. And the Heavenly Matrix also longed after the soul, and would that the
soul should bear its Image, and took its own The word, or some other
Creator, or Maker.
Fiat, in the Creation of the Body; and did create therewith before the Earthly
Fiat did create: it was first: for, out of the Center of the Word, the Fiat
went out Or by.
with the Word: and thus the third Principle was created in the second.

5. The Virgin of the wisdom did encompasse the Spirit of the soul, first,
with heavenly Essentiality, with heavenly Divine flesh, and the Holy Ghost gave
it the heavenly Tincture, which makes heavenly blood in the water; as is
mentioned at large in our third Book.

6. And thus the inward Man was in heaven and his Essences were Paradisicall:
his Light, or luster.
Glance in the inward Eye was Majesty, an incorruptible Body, which could
speak the Language of God, and of Angels, and the Language of Nature: as we
see in Adam Genesis 2.19, 20.
, that he could give names to all the Creatures, to every one according to its
Essence and property, he was also in the outward Image, and yet knew not the
outward Image, as indeed the body has no knowledge.

7. And in this twofold body (which was created in the sixth Day, in the sixth
hour of the Day, in the same hour in which Christ was hanged on the Cross)
after the body was finished the Note. Or Kingly.
Royal soul was breathed in from within, by the Holy Ghost into the heart, in
the Holy Man, into its principle, like an awakening of the Deity.

8. The Trinity, or Number three.
Ternarie moved it self with the Creation, and breathing in of the soul, for
it was in the Center of the seed, as a bud Or of growing Essences.
growing from the Essences, and thus it was breathed into the Inward Center,
into the Inward Man, into the heavenly heart-bloud, into the water of the
Eternal life, with both the inward Principles.

9. And the outward Spirit ( viz. the Air) and the whole outward Principle,
with the Stars and Elements did cleave to the inward, and the outward Spirit
breathed its life At the same time.
in the same manner with the soul, through the nostrills into the Heart, into
the outward Heart, into the Adams first flesh.
Earthly flesh, which was not then so Earthy, for it came from the Matrix, from
the Sucking, drawing, or longing.
seeking, from which the Earth became corporeal.

10. And thus the Holy Ghost was carried upon the Chariot of the soul, upon
the inward Majestic Will, and moved upon the water: for the water comprehended
him not, and therefore he moved upon it, and in it, it is all one: and the
soul burned out from the blood of the Heart, as a light does from a candle,
and went through all the Three Principles, as a King through his Dominions.

11. And it could Rule powerfully over the outward Principle, if its will were
entered again into the Heart of God, into the word of the Lord.

12. But the Or Property.
source of the Wrath, also insinuated it self with the breathing in, viz. with
the Original of the soul.

13. So that the soul could not remain Gods Image, unless, it remained in
humility and Obedience, and yielded its will into Gods will, wherein it was an
Angel and the Child of God) or else it were very Or dangerous.
difficult for a Creature to rule such two Principles, as the wrathful and the
outward are, the outward being also borne out of the wrathful.

14. Therefore sure its Temptation was not only the biting of an Apple, nor
did it continue only for some few hours, but forty days, just so long as
Christ was tempted in the wilderness: (and that also by all the three
Principles) and so were the Children of Israel in the Wilderness, while Moses
was forty days in the Mount, when they stood not but made a Calfe.

The fifth Question. How is the Soul peculiarly fashioned, and what is its
Form?
1. WHen a twig grows out of a Tree, the form of it is like the Tree, indeed
it is not the stock and the root, but yet the form of it is like the Tree: so
also when a Mother brings forth a Child, it is an Image of her.

2. And this cannot be otherwise; for there is nothing else that can make it
otherwise, unless it belong to the Turba, which many times awakeneth a Monster
according to the Spirit of this world, according to its The Imagination, or
longing, or lusting of a woman with child,
inceptive Maker, as in the Monde signifies the Earthly Matrix of the
Elementary Macrocosme, in the Microcosme, wherein
Menstruae, the Fiat makes a Makes a Monde Monstrum a Moon Monster, Monstum
Lunare, or a Lust-monster, such a Child, as is deformed by the Mothers wanting
of her longing.
Menstrous Monster in the Turba.

3. So we must understand that the soul is in the form of a Round Globe,
according to the Eye of God, through which the Cross goes, and which divides
it self into two parts, viz. into two Eyes, standing back to back; as we have
made the figure above with two Rainbowes, the Cross going through them both,
and with one point reaching upwards in the midst between the bows: which Or
signifies.
resembles a sprouting through the fire, through the Anguish as through Death,
and yet it is no Death, but a going forth out of it self into another source:
standing thus in the midst between the two bows, as a sprout springing out of
the Cross.

4. And the Arm of the Cross at the right hand, signifies that the Spirit of
the soul, enters into the Majesty of the Light, and cloatheth the soul, (
viz. the Center,) with Divine Essentiality.

5. The Arm at the left hand of the Cross signifies, that its original is
in the Fire, and it contains the first Principle, and so belongs to the
Father: and stands in the Original Eye, in the strong and eager power, as a
Lord and Ruler over Nature.

6. And the nether part of the Cross represents water: viz. humility or
Death: signifying that it should not domineere in the Fire, and inflame it
self, but should sink down in it self, and under it self before the
Majesty of God, and be as it were dead in its will, that God may live in it,
and the Holy Ghost lead and govern it, so that it may not do what the Turba
in the fire will: but what the Will in Or Love.
Light wills.

7. Therefore its will should sink down into soft humlilty, in the presence
of God, and so it goes out from the Turba of the Fire, for its will is not in
it: and then there can be no Imagination which can bring forth such a Glass,
as in which it may behold it self in the Fire, and find that it is a Lord;
and so be proud, and rule it self by its own Might, as Lucifer did, and Adam
in Paradise.

8. We mean thus, the soul in it self is a Globe with a Cross, and two
Eyes, an Holy Divine one, and a wrathful, hellish one in the Fire; this it
should shut and Or hiddenly.
secretly reign therewith, through the Anguish ( viz. through Death) in the
second Principle in Love.

9. And if Love embrace it, then the wrathful fire is as it were dead, and not
perceived, but it becomes the joyful life of Paradise: otherwise there would
be no life, nor Dominion in the Meekness, if the fire did not put it self
into it: but the still Eternity would remain without Essence: for all Essences
arise in the Fire.

10. And then thirdly, as to the whole Body, with all its members, the soul is
formed, as follows.

11. The soul is the stock or Root, resembling the Center of the Ternarie,
which is like an Eye, a Globe, a Cross, and its will (which proceeds from
the Eternal will) is a Spirit: which has the true soul Or under.
in its power.

And this Spirit opens the Essences in the fire and water, so that its whole
form seems like a Tree, having many twigs and branches, being distributed
into all the Branches of its Tree, which must be understood, as follows.

13. The Spirit parts it self into the whole body (we mean in the
Tincture) into all the Members, they are all of them its branches: The Spirit
of the soul resembles the whole Man, with every member.

14. And herein it is the true Image of God also, for the Holy Ghost dwells
in the Spirit of it, if it be faithful: if not, then the Devil dwells in
it: to which of these it gives it self, either to Covetousness, and
haughtiness, or to love and humility, to that it belongs.

15. But if it persevere in Malice, or abominations.
wickedness, and so loses God, then it loses the Cross, and its Eye is a
Hellish Eye, and its Turba introduces the Form, and Idea, or shape, or Image.
Model of an horrible Beast into the Eye, and into the Will and Spirit.

16. Therefore Christ called the Pharisees, Mat. 23.33.
Serpents, and Generation of Vipers: for so the figure of their Spirit in their
Pride, and covetous will appeared to him: for they would be Lords of
themselves, and not the servants of God in Love and humility.

17. And so the figure of Antichrist in Babell appears, in the presence of
God like a Dragon with seven Heads, which are seven Spirits, upon which its
hypocritical spirit rides in the Image of Man, in the Abyss; Viz. the Spirit.
It will be accounted an Angel, and yet is a Monster of a true child of God,
it bears the Name, but its heart is that Beast, Apocalypse 12. It is desirous
of God, and also of the Devil: therefore it is such a Monster, as is like a
Man, and yet contains the Devil in it.

18. O child of Man, fly away, the door is open, the Turba is come, it will
destroy this Image, if you fly not you must go with it; there is no other
Medicine, or Counsel.
remedy or help but to seek the true Image in Love, or else there remains
nothing but Tribulation and Death, says the Spirit of Wonders.

19. And this is now our direct Answer to this Question. That the soul in the
first Principle according to the Original, has the form of an Eye, and yet
twofold like a Heart, wherein there is a Cross.

20. And in the second Principle it is a Spirit, and a whole Image as the
outward Man is.

21. And in the third Principle it is a Glass of the whole world; all
whatsoever is contained in Heaven and Earth, every property of every Creature
lies therein; For that Glass is like the firmament and Stars.

22. This is such a Crown, as in which the How long he shall live.
number of the End of the life of the outward Man is contained, and all
whatsoever fortune or misforune can happen outwardly from the Spirit of this
world.

The sixth Question. What is the Power and Ability of the Soul?
1. WE know, that whatsoever comes out of the Abyss, and is the ground of it
self, can in it self do all things, for it is its Or subsisteth from it
self.
own Essence, it makes it self.

2. But though the soul be a twig out of the Tree, yet now it is Or entered
into the condition of a Creature.
become a creature, and is its Or sui Juris, or a thing of it self.
own; it is an Image of the whole, and a child of the whole: For when a
child is borne, then the Mother and the child are two, they are two persons;
but so long as it is in the seed, in the Mother, so long the seed is the
Mothers, and the Mother governs it.

3. But when the Child is borne, then it has its own life in it self, and
has the Centrum Naturae.
Center of Nature in its own power: it governs not only in it self, but
also without it self in all that which is seed.

4. We mean thus, Gods Spirit, and the Spirit of the soul are two Persons,
each is free from the other, and yet both stand in the first beginning, each
has its own will.

5. Now it is but right, that the Child should be obedient to his Father, upon
pain of losing the Fathers inheritance: For the Holy Ghost is the A
work-master, or builder.
Maker of the Soul, he created it, and therefore the Spirit of the soul
should be obedient to the Holy Ghost, upon pain of losing the Inheritance of
the Holy Ghost: viz. the Deity.

6. And though we have much to say here, yet it is very dangerous to say it,
in regard of the false Magia: for when the false Spirit knows it, it
practices Witchery therewith.

7. Yet we will speak, so that the Children may understand us, and reserve the
full speaking of it for them* for it is not good to write such things, not
knowing who shall be the Readers.

8. But to the wicked we say; that they ^ong to the Devil; and shall have no
part in our writings, we shut them out with a wall and strong enclosure, that
they may be blind and not know our Spirit; for we will not set the Serpent in
Viz. in our Spirit.
it, ^ur will is gone out from them, and therefore they shall not Or understand
us.
know us, though they should carry us in their hands: there is a fast seal
upon it.

9. Christ said, If ye Mat. 17.20.
have Faith as a grain of Mustard Seed, then y^^ might say to the Mountain,
be removed, and cast thy self into the sea: this is no vain word without
Truth: The will ( (If it be strong) note what Faith is.
that goes strongly forward) is Faith.

The first Power of the Will of the Soul.
10. It frames its own form in the Spirit, it has also such Or might.
Power, that it can frame another Image in the Spirit, out of the Center of
Nature; it can Change the body into another shape.
give another form to the body; according to the outward Spirit; for the
inward is Lord of the outward, the outward must be obedient to it: It can
change the outward into another Image; but not durably.

11. For Adams soul has let in the Turba of this world, so that, if the Turba
see a strange child, it rises against it instantly and destroys it: It
continues to endure, only so long as the inward Spirit can subdue, and
overpower the outward.

12. And this kind or manner of power.
Form is called Negromancy a Transmutation, where the inward over-powereth the
outward, for it is Natural; and we understand that when 1 Cor. 15.51.
we shall all be changed, that change will be made thus by the same Turba which
has the first Fiat in it.

13. For the body is Sulphur, and sticks in the Tincture, and the Spirit
drives forth the Tincture: now if the first ground, viz. the soul wholly
consents to it, then the soul can make another Form.
manner of Image in the Sulphur, but the Devil readily mingleth himself
therewith, for it is the Wonder of the Abyss over which he is Lord.

14. You must understand, that the earnest will (which otherwise is called
Faith,) can do great things with the Spirit, Note the power of the Will.
the will can change the Spirit it self into another form, as follows.

The second Power of the Will of the Soul.
15. If the Spirit were an Angel, the similitude of God, yet the will can make
it A wicked man.
a proud Devil; And also make a Devil an A child of God. Book of the three
Principles. cap. 15. v. 64.
Angel, if it sink it self into Death, into humility under the Cross, and
cast it self into the Spirit of God, and so submit to his Government, then it
sinketh into the Eternity, out of the source into the still Nothing, which yet
is All; and so it is in the beginning again where God created it, and the Word
Fiat which keeps the Image of God, receives it again.

The third Power of the Spirit, or Will of the Soul.
16. And then also thirdly, the Spirit of the Soul has power, to enter into
another Man, into his Marrow and bones, viz. into the Sulphur: and to bring the
Turba into him if he be Or wicked.
false, so far as every one is not armed with the Spirit of God, but is found
naked in the Spirit of this world, as may be seen by Or the bewitching Whores.
Witches.

The fourth Power of the Will of the Soul.
17. And fourthly, it has such power, if it be the child of God, that it can
lead the Turba captive, and can power it out upon the house of the wicked: as
Elias did the Fire, and Moses before Pharaoh: for it can throw down Mountains
and break Rocks.

18. This you must understand to be, so far as that thing is Or liable to the
Turba.
capable of the Turba, by awakening the wrath then it is possible, but if not,
and that the Spirit of God be in a thing, then it cannot be, for it would power
water upon the Turba of the Fire, which would then be as it were dead, and its
power would lie in Derision.

19. And therefore Heaven is a Middle between God and Hell: viz. between Love
and Anger, and was created out of the midst of the waters, so that the Devil
cannot rule with his Turba, the water turns his purpose into derision; as the
false Magic, and blinding Enchantment are Or nullified.
drowned in the water.

The fifth Power of the Will, or Spirit of the Soul.
20. And fifthly, the Spirit of the Soul has such power, that it may and can
seek all Wonders that are in Nature, viz. All Arts, Languages, buildings,
plantings, Destruction, knowledge: It can command the starry Heaven, as Joshua,
when he commanded the Josh. 10.12.
Sun, and it stood still, and Moses the Sea, and it stood up, also he
commanded the Darkness and it came; it can make an Earthly Life, as Moses made
the Lice and Frogs, also Serpents and other Or Wonders.
Wonders.

21. It has Death in its power, so that it can overpower that; if it ride in
the The will of the Holy Ghost.
Chariot of the Bride. It can bridle and overcome the Devil; if Viz. will or
Spirit of the soul.
it be in God: there is nothing can be named that it cannot subdue.

22. Only you must understand the soul has such a power from its Original,
and it had still had ability to Or give, or afford.
send forth such a Spirit out of it self; if it had not let in the Turba
Magna. Note the soul must now seek this power in Jesus Christ.
Great Turba into it self, which now gives it the Rest.

23. Unless the Holy Ghost ride upon its Chariot, as it did in Moses and
Elias, and in all the Prophets, also in Christ and his Disciples, and always
still in the Holy Children of God, they all have this Power, they can raise the
Dead and heal the sick, also drive away all Diseases, it is Natural, the
Spirit only reigns therewith over the Turba.

24. But it has this for an objection, that the soul knows well, whether it
has made any compact with the Devil, and whether he has any thing to do
with it, it will not go naked, except the Spirit of God drive it, and except
it have him for a shield, lest the subtilty of the Devil insinuate it self.

25. It does no Or Miracles.
Wonder, except the Spirit of God Or awaken it.
stir it up, it attributes the power to God and gives him the Glory, it
does as an humble Child, and stands still under the Cross, and lets the
Devil go rushing away over it, but it sprouteth forth in humility and
meekness, through Death into Eternal Life, and brings forth much fruit in
Patience.

26. And so the Devil can do nothing to it, it is as it were dead Or before.
to him, he may keep a racket with his Turba in the Earthly Life, with his
helpers the wicked men, this he has but as a scorn in the sight of God: for
he is a proud Spirit, and would be above the Wonders of God, but an humility
can Or subdue.
bind him.

27. After this manner every man may escape the false Or Magus.
Magician, and also the Negromancer: for no Power can touch him in whom God
dwells: and as Christ in his Death overcame Death and the Devil, so also can
we in Christ: for the Word which became man dwells in us, and in the Word we
can reign over the Devil and Hell, nothing can hinder us.

28. And thus we give you for an Answer to this Question, that the soul in its
Original is greatly powerful, it can do much: but its power is only in that
Principle wherein it is, for the Devil cannot reign over God.

29. Its power is not given to it, as a King gives favor and power to a man;
but it consists in a Natural Right: therefore we are Children of the Or
Allmightinesse.
Omnipotence of God, and inherit his Goods in the Omnipotence.

The seventh Question. Whether is the Soul Corporeal, or not Corporeal?
1. THat thing which comes from no beginning, has also nothing: But if it be
somewhat, then it seeks its beginning in it self; for every Spirit dwells
in the deepest Abyss of its Or Being.
Essence: and if it must make the Essence to it self, then it can dwell in
nothing that is strange to it, but in it self, in its own Essence.

2. When God created the Soul, then the Holy Ghost Or encompassed.
clothed it with the Tincture; for one part of the soul consisted in the
Tincture, it was Or without a body.
naked of it self, as the glowing Fire is Or Source.
naked, and is clothed when it has the Tincture.

3. But you understand, that the growing proceeds from the warmth, that is
the driver forth of the Tincture, it drives the twig out of its root, viz.
out of its own Fire, be it cold or hot fire.

4. For Darkness has the cold fire, so long till it attaineth the Anguish,
and then it kindles it self in the heat, as you see in an Herb, if it come
into another Or Source.
Property.

5. And thus we give you to understand, that the Tincture is the true Body of
the soul: for the soul is Fire; and the Tincture arises from the Fire: the
fire draws it again into it self, and allayeth it self therewith, so that
the wrathful source is quenched and then the Tincture subsisteth in meekness.

6. For the soul has no Essence, nor Might or ability.
Power in it self, but the Fire is its power, and thus water proceeds from
the meekness of the Tincture.

7. For, the fire is desirous, and where there is a desiring of the Original,
there is also a finding of the Original, thus the fire finds water in the
Tincture, and turns it into Sulphur, according to the power of all the seven
Spirits of Nature: and this is Or the.
a water of Life.

8. For, the Tincture springs up in the water like a sprout, and the fire in
the Abyss causes it: and so the water in the Sulphur of the seven Spirits is
turned into the Mystery; for, the Great Arcanum.
Secret, what God and the Eternity can do, lies therein.

9. And thus the Mystery contains two forms, viz. fire and water, and
changes it self according to them both, viz. according to fire, into Red, and
according to the Tincture into White; This white.
this is a splendor or Glance of the Fire, by which the Life may see and know
it self, from whence Reason and the senses arise: And the Mind is in the
wheel of the Anguish in the Fire, out of which the Essences arise.

10. And so we see what the blood is, viz. Or an Habitation.
a house of the soul, but the Tincture is its body.

11. The true soul, has no comprehensible body, which may be called soul:
but the body grows in the Tincture, in the Sulphur out of Sulphur; that is;
each Spirit of the seven Spirits of Nature desires Essentiality, and that
concrete Essentiality is Sulphur.

12. For Sul is the virtue of the Light: and Phur is the virtue of the four
Forms of the Original of Nature; as is mentioned at large in the third Book.

Mesch, mixture or concretion.
13. And thus the Phur desires flesh, that is, a r Mass of fire and water, and
it is conceived and borne in the Tincture.

14. And the Tincture is the sprouting of the body, and the fire is an
Original of the Spirit, through the Tincture; for the Spirit of the soul
takes its Original in the Tincture, which then figureth the true Image
according to the Image of God, that is, according to all the three Principles:
for in the Fire, the soul is no similitude of God; but in the Spirit it is the
Image of God.

15. For, the first soul was incorporated with the Divine Essentiality
together in the Tincture, so that it had the Divine body in the virgin of
Wisdom, in which the Tincture stands, which is the Angelical Image.

16. And so we answer you, that as to the soul only beside the Spirit; it is
a Globe of Fire, with an Eye of Fire, and an Eye of Light, which turn
themselves backwards into one another, as the wheel in Ezechiel, that could
go on every side: though Babell has contrived another meaning about it, but a
blind one without Spirit.

17. But, as to its Tincture proceeding from the Light, which arises both from
the fire and Light, The soul.
it is a Spirit, in which the Original of the soul, and of the Spirit cannot
part asunder in Eternity: It is an Eternal band, and when the blood Run out.
is gone, and the body dies, then that band remains in Eternity.

18. As to the soul only; the body belongs not to the Essence of the soul,
they are two several Essences: for the body is the Glass and dwelling house
of the soul, also its Inheritance, own Lands, or goods, or possession.
Proprietary, and it is also a cause, that the Or poor.
mere soul alters the Spirit according to the lust of the body, or of the
Spirit of this world.

19. Whereby the Image in the Spirit is altered altogether, according to the
Contence of the Will, which the soul has Or created, or formed.
brought out of the Center of Fire, also out of the Wrath into the Light, and
all according to the Imagination.

20. And, we give you to understand, that the Spirit Or in this time of the
body.
while it stays here in the body, can alter it self; which is done without
its knowledge by the Imagination, viz. by the desire of Lust-sucht.
Lust, so that the Desiring figureth such a form in the will of the soul, as
the lust either to evil or good is.

21. And we further say, that the mere soul is not corporeal, but in its
Tincture, a body grows whether it be a heavenly or a hellish body, and yet is
not a body which can be comprehended outwardly, but a vertuall body, the Divine
body, Christ's heavenly body, the heavenly flesh: which he gives us to eat in
his Testament.

22. It is such a body as the Turba cannot touch or apprehend, it is immortal
and incorruptible, concluded in nothing but only in the Noble Tincture, which
is without Or substance.
Essence, or Materiality; and that body is incomprehensible to the outward
flesh.

23. But the outward Spirit, (if the soul do not hinder it but let it in,)
brings its Imagination into it, and spoyleth it, so that another strange
Image comes to be in the Spirit, in the Tincture according to the contence of
the Lust: as the Covetous comes to be a Wolf, the envious a Dog, the Proud a
Horse, Peacock or other Beast: also Toads, Adders, Serpents and other worms,
and creeping things; Now Gods Spirit receives not their Images, so long as
they continue such.

24. And therefore Christ said, ye must be borne anew of water and of the
Spirit, if you would see the Kingdom of God: and therefore God became Man, and
brought the Divine Image again into the Tincture of the soul, when it was
spoiled in Adam: so that now we must be borne anew in Christ, if we will see
God.

25. And that also is done by the Imagination, or Faith; for Faith is an eating
of the Divine Body, as also every body grows by eating.

26. And the New Birth is not at all after such a manner as Bab^ll teaches:
her matters are only as it were a Glass of the true way to God, but that
Glass must be broken, for Moses his Veil is gone, we shall see hence-forward
with clear Paradisicall Eyes: we mean the Children of God.

The eight Question. After what manner does the Soul come into the Body of Man?
1. MY beloved friend; I understand this Question to be meant concerning its
Propagation; for Moses tells you how it came into Adam, and we have declared
that before; But if you ask concerning its Propagation, how it comes into a
child, in the Or body of the Mother.
Mothers womb, Turn over a new leaf, or change our Copy.
we must put on another habit.

2. You know what is written in our third Book, very punctually and at large,
with many Circumstances concerning its Propagation; how Adam was created one
Image, he was both Man and woman before Eve, he had both the Tincture of the
fire, and of the water; that is, soul and Spirit, and he should have brought
forth his similitude out of himself, an Image After, or according.
of himself, out of himself by his Imagination and his own Love, and that he
was able to do without rending of the body.

3. For, as we have mentioned before, the soul had might or ability.
power to change the body into another form; and so also it had power to bring
forth a Twig out of it self, according to its property, if Adam had stood out
in the Proba, or Temptation.
Trial.

4. But when he imagined In, or as, or with.
according to the Omnipotence, and let in the Spirit of this world into the
Soul, and the Serpent into the Tincture, and took a longing in himself after
the Earthly fruit, to eat of evil and good, then also his Tincture conceived
such an Image as was half Earthly: viz. a Monster, into which also the Turba
then instantly insinuated it self, and sought the limit.

5. And so the Noble Image was found in the Earthly, and then destruction and
Death began, and Adam could not Beget, or bear.
bring forth, for his Omnipotence was lost.

6. And should indeed have ever been lost, if the Heart of God had not
instantly turned it self, with the word of the Promise into Adams soul; which
did so preserve it, that its Image must perish, and the soul must sink down
with the Heavenly body through death into the new Life, where its Spirit will
be renewed again.

7. And thus Adam in Inability or weakness.
impotence fell asleep: and then the second Creation began, for God took the
Tincture of the Water; as a twig out of Adams soul, and a Rib out of Adam, and
half of the Cross that was in Adam, and Or framed, or built a woman with them.
made a woman of them.

8. As you know that the woman has the one half Cross in her head, and the
man the other, for the spirit of the soul dwells in the Head, in the brain,
out of which spirit God has taken a Twig ( viz a Child out of the spirit of
the soul of Adam) and has given it to the woman.

9. And has given the Tincture of the water to her, that she should not bring
forth Devils, and the Man has the Tincture of Fire, v^^. the true Original
of Life.

10. And therefore the woman has gotten the Matrix, viz. the Tincture of
Venus, and the Man has the Tincture of Fire: understand, the woman has the
Tincture of Light, which cannot awaken Life, the life arises in the Tincture
of Fire.

11. And so it cannot be otherwise now, but that they must propagate as Beasts
do, in two seeds, the Man sows soul, and the woman sows Spirit, and being
sown in an Earthly field, it is also brought forth after the manner of all
Beasts.

12. Yet nevertheless all the three Principles are in the seed, Note how the
soul is before the conception.
but the inward cannot be known by the outward: For in the seed the soul is
not living; but when the two Tinctures come together, then it is a whole Or
Being, or substance.
Essence: For the soul is Essential in the seed, and in the Or out-breeding,
or hatching.
Conception becomes substantial.

13. For so soon as the Fire is Hammered by the Smith, or the Faber has
struck fire.
struck upon by Vulcan, the soul is wholly perfect in the Essence, and the
Spirit goes instantly out of the Soul into the Tincture, and attracteth the
outward Rule, or Regiment, or influence.
Dominion to it self, viz. the Stars together with the Air.

14. And then it is an Eternal Child, and has the corruptible spirit also
with the Turba cleaving to it, which Adam took in by his Imagination.

15. The instantly the Turba seeks the Or bound, or term, or Goal, or End.
limit in the Spirit of this world, and will enter into the limit, and so soon
as the soul has its life, the body is old enough to die: and thus, many a
soul perishes in the Essence, while it is in the Sulphur in the seed.

16. But that you may perceive, that the Man has the Tincture of the Fire, and
the woman the Tincture of the Light in the water, viz. the Tincture of Venus;
you must observe the eager Imagination of both toward one another: For the
seed in the Essence eagerly seeks the life, the Masculine.
Man's in the Feminine.
woman's in Venus, and the woman's in the Fire, in the Original of Life: As we
have very clearly demonstrated it in the third Book: and therefore we
refer the Reader thither.

17. And we Answer here, that the soul comes not at all into the Body, or is
breathed into it Ab extra, or externally.
from without, but the three Principles have each of them its own Work-master,
workman, or Smith.
Artificer, one Forgeth or str^keth fire, Smiedet.
works Fire in the Center, and the other makes Tincture and water, and the
third makes the Earthly Great Mystery.
Mysterium Magnum.

18. And yet it is not any new thing, but the very seed of Man and woman, and
is only Or bred orth.
conceived in the mixture, and so only a twig grows out of the Tree.

The ninth Question. Which way does the Soul unite it self with the Body?
1. IT is cleared before, that all the three Principles are in one another, and
they beget a Child according to their similitude, and they all are in one
another, till the Turba destroy the body: And then the soul is in the inward
body, viz. in the Divine body, or if it be false, in the Turba; which gives a
body to it, according to the Imagination; all according to the wickednesses it
has committed.

2. The soul stands in the blood of the Heart, there it has its seat and
Original; the outward water and blood mingle themselves, but it does not
wholly receive the water of the blood, but it is captivated by the Imagination.

3. It receives indeed naturally the inward water, but it receives not the
Majesty with the Tincture of the Light, but only by the Imagination: therefore
many times a Child is more Or in a better condition.
blessed then one that is old, who Or harbors the Devil.
has the Devil for his Guest.

4. But there are not many borne Or Saints.
Holy, except only from good seed, and yet many times a wrathful Turba
windeth it self in according to some powerful Constellation, as is seen,
that honest parents many times have Or evil.
wicked Children, but God knows who are his.

5. You see it in Jacob and Esau, that strove in their Mothers Or body.
womb: also in Caine and Abell, in Isaac and Ismael, and many others.

The tenth Question. Whether is the Soul Ex Traduce, and propagated after a
humane bodily manner, or every time new created, and breathed in from God?
1. I Very much wonder what kind of understanding and Philosophy the world
now has that it cannot Grunden.
resolve this: yet I do not blame you; for I know such questions are agitated
by those, that account themselves learned Doctors in the Schools and
Universities, who make great disputations about it. I cannot but wonder at the
proud blindness, that there is no knowledge at all of God in Their Reason, or
Arts of Logic, etc.
Reason.

2. Now therefore ye wise men, behold your selves what ye are, and what you
understand; you understand even nothing of the Mystery; how will ye then be
teachers? it were better for you to carry a Shepherds Crook in your hand,
then to put on the garment of Christ.

3. O! ye shall give an account for your seducing of the world: and yet you
vaunt your selves, as if ye were God, and arrogate Divine Or might, or
Authority. Jus Divinum.
Power to your selves; Take heed what you do: you shall see against whom you
have Or striven.
kicked; I fear me ye are for the most part of you in Babell; awake, it is Day.

4. To you, my beloved friend, I give this Answer: that the soul is not every
time new created and breathed in: but is propagated after a humane manner, as a
Or twig springs.
branch grows out of a Tree, as I may better render it, as a man sets or
sows corn or seed, and so a Spirit and body grows out of it.

5. And this only is the Difference; that the three Principles are always in
Or wrestling, or contending.
strife about Man, each would feign have him: so that many times a wonderful
Turba is brought in, while yet he remains in the seed.

6. But if the Parents, both Father and Mother, have their souls clothed with
Christ's flesh, the Divine Essentiality, then it cannot be: For Christ says, a
good Tree cannot bring forth evil fruit: yet the Turba in time can enter in Or
by.
with the Reason.

7. So also an evil Tree cannot bring forth good fruit; that is, if both the
Parents be evil, and held captive by the Devil; then an evil soul is sown:
but the Principles cannot yet judge it, nor the Turba neither: It is indeed an
evil Child, yet if it turn, it may with the Imagination, enter into the In
verbum Domini.
Word of the Lord.

8. But it is rare, and seldom comes to pass, that a black Raven becomes
white: but where it is but One parent good, the other evil.
half in half; there it may more easily be done: but however it is possible,
it may very well be; God casts no soul away, unless it cast it self away:
every soul is its own Judgment.

9. Consider this ye evil Parents: ye gather Goods, Riches.
money for your Children; get them good souls, that is more necessary for them.

The eleventh Question. How and where is it seated in Man?
1. A Thing which Or ungroundable.
is unsearchable, and yet seeks and makes a ground in it self, that has
its Original and seat in its first Forming, or making.
Conception, where it conceives it self in it self: therein is its limit, viz.
in the most innermost, and it goes forth out of it self, and seeks forwards,
where then it always makes one Or resemblance.
Glass according to the other, until it find the first again: viz. the
unsearchable limit.

2. Thus also is the soul, it is in God Or formed.
conceived in the Or Son, or Word.
Heart, and the Word which conceived it was in the Heart, viz. in the Center;
and so it continues in the Figure and in the seat, as it was comprehended by
the Fiat; and so it is still at this Day.

3. It dwells in three Principles: but the Heart is its Original; it is the
inward Fire in the Heart, in the inward blood of the Heart: and the Spirit of
it which has a or splendor.
glance from the fire, is in the Tincture: for it is clothed with the
Tincture, and burns in the Heart.

4 And the Spirit moves upon the Heart in the Or concave, do^^le, or hollow
pit, or dint, or furrow of the Heart, praecordia. (...).
bosom of the Heart; where both Principles part themselves, and it burns in
the Tincture as a brimstony Light: and diffuseth it self abroad into all the
members of the whole body: for the Tincture goes through all the members.

5. But the true Ig^is saber. Vulcanus.
Fire-Smith in the Center, sits in the Heart, and governs with the Spirit
in the Head, where it has its Counsell-house, viz. the Mind and Inward senses.
senses; also the five chief Counselors, viz. the Or outward senses.
five senses; which arise from the five Spirits of understanding, as we have
declared in our Threefold life.
third Book; and in our Three Principles.
second, and also in our Aurora.
first.

6. The soul is indeed feared in the inward Principle, but it rules even in
the outward, viz. in the Stars and Elements, and if it be not an Ape, and
suffer it self to be captivated, it has power enough to rule them: and if the
soul demerse it self into God, the outward must be obedient to it.

7. And if it comes again into the outward, riding upon the Chariot of the
Bride, and so have the Holy Ghost for an assistant, no Assault of the Devil is
of any consequence, it destroys his Nest, and drives him out, and he must
stand in scorn and shame.

8. And this is our Answer to this Question; it must not be so understood, as
if when a man is beheaded, and so his blood gush out, and the outward Life
perish; that this reaches the soul and kills that; no, it loses Viz. the
third Principle.
one Principle indeed, but not the Or outward works.
Essence of that Principle, that follows it in the Tincture, in the Spirit,
as a shadow.

9. For the outward Essence reaches not the inward in the soul, but only by
the Imagination: there is nothing else in this world, no fire, not Sword, that
can touch the soul, or put it to Death, but only the Imagination; that is its
poison.

10. For it Originally proceeded from the Imagination, and remains in it
Eternally.

The twelft Question. How is the Soul enlightened, and what is the Illumination
of it?
1. WE must consider, that if the Sun were taken away out of this world, that
all things would be in Darkness, and then outward Reason would say, we are in
dark Death and in the Or bitterness.
wrathfulnesse of the cold; and it were so indeed.

2. Now observe, my beloved, mind, and consider with thy self, when thy body
perishes, and so thy spirit loses the Viz. the light of the Sun.
Sun: How can thou then enjoy the Light? and wherewith will thou see? In
simplicity we put thee in mind of this, that thou may consider it.

3. That thing which consists in the Eternal Liberty, if it always enter
again into the Eternal Liberty, it has no darkness, for it dwells in
Nothing, that does Give, make, or cause.
afford darkness: it is free as the Eye of God, which beholds it self
through a Or Being, or Essence.
substance.

4. When that imagines after somewhat, in Lust, then the will enters into
that somewhat; which the Desiring Lust it self makes: and this receives the
will into it self, and overshadoweth it, so that it dwells in darkness, and
can have no Light, unesse it go forth again out of that thing into the
Liberty.

5. Thus we earnestly give you to understand, that we have no Light is all our
matters, or business. Note the cause of our spiritual blindness.
affairs and works; if we let our will enter into that which we have
wrought, by setting our Heart and will upon the work of our own hands; in
Covetousness; then the soul is wholly blind, and we have no light in us, but
only the outward Light of the Sun, which gives light to the outward body;
and when that perishes, then the soul is imprisoned by that thing It was set
upon.


6* Thou must here understand, the Spirit and will of the soul, for the Prison
of the soul is a Dark Cave, or hole.
vale Void of Light.
having no Light; and although it do elevate it self, and inflame it self,
yet it becomes only a wrathful flash of fire, and is like the Devil, and
cannot Or reach.
attain the Divine Light in it self.

7. The cause is, it has brought Abominations into its will and spirit, which
darken the Spirit, and hold it captive with the Turba: for Gods Light goes not
backwards, but forwards into the Eternity.

8. And therefore Gods Eye is Or in two halves, or parts.
twofold, standing back to back; as before in the figure; one part tends
forwards into the still Eternity, into the Eternal Nothing, viz. into the
Liberty.

9. And the other part tends backwards into the Desire, and makes darkness
and the Center of Nature therein: and drives it to the greatest anguish and
sharpness.

10. And then the will again sinketh out of the Anguish through the darkness,
into the still Liberty, and brings the wrathfulnesse of the Mobility and
earnest sharpness, out of the Anguish with it.

11. In which sharpness, the Liberty (when the will brings the sharpness
into it) becomes a highly triumphing Majestic Light, which is called Gods
Light, which shines for ever, and cannot be Or shut up.
smothered by any thing, for it shines in the Eternal Liberty, and desires
no more.

12. And if, (as thou Earthly man perhaps do suppose) God would receive thy
spirit into his Majestic Light, while thou let in thy Abomination ( viz.
Note, Pride is the fiery life, and the reflection of Covetousness, as in a
Glass.
Covetousness, which has brought forth Pride, which is the fiery life of
Covetousness) into thy will: so that thy will sticks wholly in Earthlinesse;
thou would darken Gods Majesty, and thy spirit and will would nevertheless
stick in Covetousness, and burn out with the fiery source of the soul, as a
Reflection in a Glass, viz. in Pride, and thou should not be able to reach
the Majesty of God.

13. Nay if thou should sit in the Cross of the Holy Or Trinity.
Ternary, and were encompassed with all the Holy Angels; yet thou should sit
but in the Darkness, and thy Spirit should shine but in the Glass of that
Essence; which thou thy self have brought into the Spirit.

14. But if now the soul with its Spirit, in its Image will see God, and
behold the Eternal Light in Gods Majesty, then it must go in a twofold way,
in this world; and then it shall obtain the Eternal body, viz. the Image of
God, and also sustain the outward Life with the Earthly body: and then it
shall bring all the Wonders (for which God created it in an outward Life, which
wonders also it ought to awaken in the outward life) into the inward life, and
eternally rejoice it self in them, and have them as a Looking-glass also as a
sport.
Glass, and this is the right way which follows.

The exceeding Precious Or Gate of the Day spring from on high.
Gate of the Aurora.
15. Behold thou beloved Soul; if thou will attain the light of God, and see
with the Eye of God: and wilt also enjoy the light of this world, and sustain
thy body, and seek the wonders of God, then do this as God himself does it.

16. Thou have in thy soul two Eyes; which are set together back to back; the
In Resignation.
one looks into Eternity, the In self-hood.
other looks backwards into Nature, and proceeds forth, always and seeks
in the Desire, and always makes one Glass after another: let it be so, it
must be so, God will have it so.

17. But turn not this Viz. the left Eye.
other Eye back into the Longing; but with the Right Eye always draw the left
backwards to thee, and let not The left, or Eye of Nature.
this Eye with the will of the Wonders go from thee; viz. from that Eye which
is turned into the Liberty; but draw to thee its wonders, which it has
manifested and wrought.

18. Let this Eye seek food for the Earthly body; but let it not enter into
the food, that is, into Covetousness, but draw it close to the seeing Eye,
and let it not go.

19. But let the hands labor and get food: and let the Eye draw the Wonders to
it, but not Covetousness, Envy, Pride, or Anger.
Matter; Else that which is drawn in will be darkness to thee.

20. Let the Devil roar at thee, making a noise before thy left Eye: he
cannot get in, unless thou suffer thine Eye to receive in Somewhat wherein it
trusts.
Matter.

21. Thus, when thy Earthly body perishes, thou shall see with the right Eye,
all the Wonders Or which are in the Eye of Reason.
in the Left Eye; which thou have wrought and found out here; and when the
Earthly life is gone, then thy left Eye is free from the Ephesians. 2.3. (...).
Nature of Wrath.

22. And although it has Nature, (for it is Nature it self which does awaken
and hold the Wonders) yet then it is with the Wonders, in the Eternal Liberty:
seeing it has taken in nothing of Matter, therefore it is free.

23. And Nature with its Wonders, is a fiery sharpness, and takes hold of the
Eternal Liberty, and so makes Majesty in the Liberty in the Wonders; whence,
the Right Eye (which is as it were dead here in this life) becomes enlightened,
and does Or solace it self.
rejoice with the left Eye for ever, in the exceeding joyful Majesty, and
sees God with both Eyes eternally.

24, This is one Gate. He that sees and knows this rightly in the Spirit, he
sees all that God is, and can do, he sees also therewith, through Heaven,
Hell, and Earth, and through the Essence of all Essences: also it Or the
understanding of the whole Scripture is contained in it.
is the whole Scripture, whatsoever has been written from the beginning of the
world hitherto; but this is a rare and precious Sight, or vision.
seeing; the Old Adam knows it not, he sees it not; only the New Man that
is borne in God.

25. But seeing the weak Mind will so hardly understand us, therefore we will
set it down more plainly; Behold! if thou will see Gods Light in thy soul,
and would be enlightened from God; then do thus.

26. Thou art in the world: have thou an honest Or employment.
calling void of Deceit? continue in it, work, labor, finish thy business;
as necessity requires, seek out Wonders, both in the Earth and other
Elements; let the Art be what it will, it is all the work of God: seek Silver
and Gold in the Earth, and make Artificial works of them: build and plant:
All serves to manifest Gods works of Wonder.

But mark this Or Lesson.
A. B. C.
27. Thou must not give thy spirit leave to enter into, and fill itself
therewith, and so make a Mammon of it, and Or make its Nest therein.
set it self therein, as in a Darkness, else it is but a fool in the sight
of God, and the Devils Ape, and its will is wholly fixed therein: and so thy
noble Image is altered according to thy Imagination in the Spirit, and
according to thy will, which sticks in Covetousness, and so thou losest Gods
Image.

28. For that is Magical, it is as subtle as a spirit, yea much more subtle,
it is much more subtle, and thin then the soul it self; it is as God, who
dwells in the Eternal Liberty, and yet is not comprehended by any thing; for
he is thinner then any thing and so is thy Noble Image.

29. And yet it consists Or of.
in heavenly flesh and blood, and is an Essentiality come out of the Divine
Body; it is Christ's flesh and blood, and thy soul dwells therein; The soul.
it is the fire of the Majesty therein.

30. And the Holy Ghost sits in the Heart of the Image, and proceeds from
the Image with voices, Languages, wonders, sounds, and songs.

31. If thou be Faithful, and sincere.
upright, thou bring thy wonders into this Image, and do it thus: set thy
left will upon the work which thou do, and consider that thou art Gods
servant in the vineyard of God, and labor faithfully.

32. And direct thy Right will upon God, and that which is Eternal; and think
not thy self secure at any time; think that thou art but at thy day-labour,
and most always listen for the voice, when thy Master shall bid thee come home.

33. Give Reason no Or leave.
room to say, this is my treasure, it is mine, I have enough, I will gather
much, that I may get honor in the world, and leave much to my Children.

34. But consider, that thy Children are Gods Children, and thou Gods servant,
that thy work is Gods work, and that thy Money, Goods, mind, and blood are
in Gods hand, he may do what he will with them: when he calls thee home into
thine own Country, then he may take thy labor, and give it to another.

35. And give thy heart no Or leave.
room to suffer the Spirit of thy will to bring in haughtiness into the
Image, but cast down thy will continually in humility before God; and so thy
Image always enters with thy will in humility into the Majesty of God: and so
thy Image is continually enlightened with the high Triumphing Light of God.

36. O! how cheerful is the soul, when its anguish source of fire Or
perceives.
tastes Gods Light; how exceeding Or friendly.
courteous is it? O! how it boweth it self before God!

37. Thus the soul and the Image in the Spirit, are all three in one another,
for they are one Essence according to the Holy Trinity: My beloved brother, we
answer to this Question of yours thus, that the soul cannot be any other way
enlightened then thus, its Illumination is only after this manner.

38. The soul is in this world, and also in God; here in this life it is a
servant of Gods Wonders, which it should open with one Eye, and with the other
bring them into the beginning before God, and set and cast all its doings into
Gods will; and by no means say of any thing in this world, this is mine, I am
Lord of this, for it lies, if it say so.

39. All is Gods, thou art a servant, and should walk in Love, and Humility
toward God, and thy Brother: for thy brothers soul is a fellow-member with
thy soul, thy brothers joy in Heaven with God, is also thy joy, his Wonders
are also thy Wonders.

40. For in Heaven God is All in All, he fills all, the Holy Ghost is the
Life in All; there is mere Joy, there is no sorrow, there all is Gods, also
all belong to the Image of God; all things are common; one rejoices at the
Power, brightness, and beauty of another, there is no malice or envy; for all
that remains in Death, and Hell.

41. Therefore ye Elect Children of God, who are borne again in Christ, take
it into Consideration, depart from Covetousness and self-will: ye have been a
long time led blindfold in Babell; go out from her, you are called with a
Strong, or loud, sounding voice.
shrill voice, it will shortly raise the Dead, let it be a furtherance to you,
that you may obtain Eternal Joy in God.

42. The Spirit shows plainly, that whosoever will not grow forth, Viz. the
Eternal Word.
together with the new sprout, which grows in the Mother, shall and must be
cast into the Lake of Brimstone, with the Dragons Whore in Babell.

43. There is a time of earnestness at hand, and though thou see it not with
earthly Eyes, yet it will certainly come upon thee: thou will see well enough
in thy Death, what kind of Judgment this is, and in what time, and under what
Turba thou have lived, we speak in good earnest, as we ought.

The thirteenth Question. How does the Soul feed upon the Word of God?
1. IF the soul do enter thus (as above mentioned) into the Light of the
Majesty, and receive the light of God, then it has wholly a longing, and
lusting, and continually attracteth in its Desire, the Divine Power, viz. the
Divine body into it self; and the Holy Ghost is the Power of Gods Spirit, and
so it obtains the body and Spirit of God, and eats at Gods Table; All that
the Father has is the Sons, and whatever the Son has, that belongs to
his Image.

2. It eats Gods flesh and Christ's Body, and by this eating the Divine Body,
does also grow Or to, or from, or out of it, or as a Chicken grows in an Egg.
in it, so that it thus gets the Divine Body, and so becomes Gods Child, not
only a similttude, but a Child borne in God out of his Essences, and lives
in God.

3. When it hears Gods Children teach, and speak Gods word (even in this
world) it receives it, and eats it. Note the food of the Soul.


4. The outward Man eats Earthly bread, and the soul eats the Bread of
God, of which Christ said, that he gives us his body for meat, and his The
Author calls Baptism and the Supper of the Lord two Testaments.
Testaments are nothing else.

5. Indeed we eat not Spirit without Body, for the soul is Spirit already,
before hand, and desires to have a body, and so it gets both body and
Spirit.

6. Let this be spoken to thee O Babell, and see how thou handlest Christ's
Testaments, and what thou teach; when thou say, Christ Testaments are
Spirit without Body; thou belyest God, and denyest Gods Substantiality, Christ's
heavenly Body, which is greater then all things, which is the fullness of all
things, but in its own Principle.

7. O Earthly mouth, thou shall not bite it with teeth: the soul has another
Mouth, which receives it under the outward Element: the outward receives the
outward, and the Inward receives the Inward.

8. The Supper of Christ with his Disciples was so: the outward is a
Remembrance; the Inward is the substance; for the Kingdom of God consists in
Power, it is Magical; not as a thought; but Essential, substantial.

9. The Magia makes substance: for in the Eternal Nothing there is Nothing;
but the Magia creates Something.
where nothing is.

10. Now in God there is not only Spirit, but Nature, substance, flesh and
blood, Tincture, and All: this world outwardly is a similitude of the Inward
world.

11. We tell you, we speak what we feel, see, taste, and know, and not a
fable or Opinion, and that not for our selves only, but for you, as one member
is bound to do for another, that so our Joy may be in you, and we also may
enjoy you again, as brethren together in one Essence: He that desires to know
further of this, let him read our Threefold life. 13. Chap.
third Book, and there he shall find the Circumstances, concerning the
Seele-Messe, the food Mess Supper, or eating of the soul.
Soules-Meale, and Christ's Testaments.

The fourteenth Question. Whether is such a new Soul without Sin? We
understand here, the propagated Soul in a Child newly borne.
1. MY beloved friend; this is a very sublime, or sharp, or subtle.
deep Question; yet you shall be answered: for the time of the manifestation is
borne, the Day breaks, the Night is past; therefore eternal praise and
thanks be given to God, that has again begotten us to light, and to an
inheritance that never fades away; and has received us for his beloved
Children.

2. My beloved friend, you know well the heavy fall of Adam, as we have shown
you copiously in all our writings, viz. that the soul has turned it self
away with the right Eye, from God into the Spirit of this world, and is become
disobedient to God, and has wholly depraved its Noble Image, and changed it
into a monstrous Image; and has let in the Spirit of this world, whereas it
should have powerfully ruled over it with the will, and not have let the soul
eat of evil, and good at all.

3. But now it has plainly transgressed Gods pleasure.
Command, and has put its Imagination into the Earthly Spirit, where the Turba
which brought the Earthly Monster into its Noble Image, instantly took it
captive, and so the Turba instantly sought, and found the Limit, in which the
Image perished; and if the Word had not Set it self in the midst.
mediated, or interposed it self, it would have continued so for ever.

4. And so, now the Turba is once seated in the Earthly Abyss, and has
captivated both body and soul, it always drives the body to the limit, and
there destroys it, and casts it away, and then the poor soul remains
Naked without a Body.

5. And except it turn with its Right Eye again into the Word, and get again
a body borne out of God, it is but naked, and has the Turba in it; which
stirs up the fire in its great Anguish: for Viz. the Turba.
it is an eager hunger, a seeker, and a finder.

6. Now it is thoroughly known to us, that our soul is fast bound to the
Spirit of this world, for the Turba holds us captive in the Wrath of the
Anger of God.

7. And although our soul get out, and become Newborn in God, yet The Turba.
it possesses the outward body still, and consumes it, for it pierces
through it even to the Abyss, and there it finds that it is only a Glass
of the Eternal, and then it goes forth from the Glass into the Eternal, and
lets the body lie in the Nothing.

8. Also you know well; that the soul, with the body in the seed, is half
Earthy: for it is Sulphur, that is, Phur is power, Matter, or substance.
Phur and Sul is Spirit, or Light.
Sul In one another.
together, and the Turba is in it, which has ability enough to destroy the
seed.

9. How then can a soul be borne pure? it cannot be, it brings the Turba
with it into the world, and is sinful in the Mothers Or body.
womb.

10. But know that God is become Man, and the Word Fiat has agiane put it
self into the seed; and although the Turba be now in the Earthly part, so that
the seed is not altogether free, yet the matter stands thus with the soul.

11. The soul is not wholly forsaken of God, so far as the Father and Mother
are Or virtuous.
honest, and in God; for it comes from the soul of the Father, and of the
Mother: and although a Child dye in the Mothers womb without External
Baptism.
Baptism, yet it is baptized with the spirit of the Father, and of the Mother,
viz. with the Holy Ghost which dwells in them, and the Turba is destroyed in
Death; for the That which belongs to Faith.
Faiths-part passes through to God.

12. But the matter is far otherwise with wicked Parents; if the Child die
in the Mothers womb Vide Question. 19. ver. 12.
the soul of it falls into the Turba, and reaches not God to Eternity: it
also knows nothing of him, but it is a life according to the Essence, and
property of the Parents.

13. And yet it does not by this reach to the inflammation, for that soul it
self has not yet committed Actual.
sin; but it is a spirit in the source, quite void of selfe-desire, and
wonders, it is like burning Brimstone, like the Wandering false Lights, that
lead people astray in the night. (...).
Ignes Fatui, and cannot reach God, but remain between Heaven and Hell in the
Mystery, until the Judgment of God, which shall at last gather in its
harvest, and put every thing apart in its own place.

14. Although Or one that is learned in the letter, or carnal Reason.
Mr. Sophister may herein have other Meaning, or Opinion.
Philosophy, but we care not for his Art, we have Eyes, and he has art; we
speak what we see.

15. Thus we give you to understand, that no soul is borne into this world
without sin, how honest soever the Parents be; for it is Ausgebrutet,
engendered, or hatched.
conceived in the Earthly seed, and brings the Turba of the body with it,
which also has begirt the soul.

16. Therefore God made a Covenant with Children in the Old Testament, in the
Circumcision, and bound them in that Covenant to have their blood shed, and so
drown the Turba of the soul therewith.

17. And in the New Testament, the Baptism; wherein the Holy Ghost washes
away the Turba, with the water of Life, the water of the soul, that it may
Stand, or appear before God.
draw near to God, and be his Child.

18. But they who say, that those who have not baptism (as Jews and Turks,
and other people, who have not the knowledge thereof among them, nor the
Candlestick) are all rejected of God; (although in their Doctrine, Life, and
deeds, they do earnestly strive to enter into the Love of God;) they speak
phantastically, and without knowledge, like Babell.

19. Blessedness lies not only in the outward Word, but in Power, who shall
cast out him that enters into God?

20. Is not this Babell? which has confounded the whole world, so that People
have divided themseves in Opinions, and yet in the Will they go but one way;
what caused this but only the Antichrist, when he Took Gods Government upon
himself.
drew the Kingdom of God into his own Jurisdiction: and made a mere fable of
the New Birth, which very Children will be ashamed of, when it shall be day?

21. We can say with good ground, that Antichrists teaching is but A mere
flourish, casting a mist before the Eyes, juggling.
beating of the Air, a slight of the Serpent which continually beguileth Eve.

22. Thus we know, that no soul comes into the world without sin, each
brings the Disharmony.
Turba with it; for if it were without sin, then it must also dwell in a body
wholly pure, and having no evil will in it, and in which is no Earthly
Disharmony.
Desire.

23. Now, body and soul are thus Seeking, or strife of the four Elements.
bound together, until the Turba finds the Or knit.
Limit of the body, and then it seeks the works of the body, as is above
mentioned. Or End.


The fifteenth Question. How comes sin into the Soul? seeing it is the
work and Creature of God.
1. AS it is mentioned before, so it is: the Turba with the Earthly Seeking, or
longing.
Desire come together into this world, and so the soul is strongly drawn by
two; viz. by the Verbum Domini.
Word of the Lord, which mediated, or interposed it self, which out of Love is
become Man; this draws the soul continually into the Kingdom of God, and
plainly shows the soul the Turba; so that the soul sees in Nature what
falsehood and sin is, and if it yield it self to be drawn, then it becomes
borne again, and so beommeth Gods Image.

2. Secondly, the Turba also mightily draws the soul with its band, and
continually brings the Earthly desire into it, especially in the youth; when
the Earthly Tree sticks full of green sprouting Essences and Poison: then
the Turba does so mightily insinuate it self, that many a soul is not freed
to Eternity.

3. In a thing which has its rise from two beginnings, being of equal weight,
one part will sink down, if weight be added to it, be it either good, or
evil that is added.

4. Sin makes not it self, but the will makes it, it comes from the
Imagination into the Spirit: for the Spirit enters into a thing, and is
infected by that thing, and so the Turba of that thing comes into the Spirit,
and first destroys the Image of God.

5. And the Turba proceeds further, and searches deeper, and so it finds
the Abyss, viz. the soul; and seeks in the soul, and so finds the
wrathful Fire, by which it mingleth it self with the thing, that is so
introduced into the Spirit, and thus at length sin is wholly borne: Now
therefore whatsoever desires to bring that which is outward into the Will,
that is sin.

6. The will ought to incline to nothing, but to meekness and Love, as if it
were a Nothing, or Dead: we should only desire to live to God, so that God
may work in us, and whatsoever we do besides; our will must be directed so,
that we do it to God.

7. But if we set our will upon the Covetousness, or earthly desire, viz.
Pride, Goods, Power, and Honor.
Essence, then we bring the Essence into the Spirit, and that takes
possession of our Heart: and then the Turba is borne, and the soul is
captivated by the thing.

8. And therefore we Answer; that no soul comes pure from the Mothers Or
body.
womb, be it begotten by holy or unholy Parents.

9. And as the Abyss and the Anger of God, and also the earthly world depend
wholly on God the Father; and yet cannot comprehend, and touch his Heart and
Spirit: so it is also with the Child in the Mothers womb, if it be begotten
by godly Parents, then each Principle Or has a part, or one part, or share in
it.

Note this ye perfectists.


stands in its own part.

10. When the Turba takes the earthly body, then the Heaven takes the Spirit,
and the Majesty fills the Spirit, and then the soul is in God, it is free
from pain.

11. But while the soul remains in the Earthly Life, it is not free; because
the earthly Spirit does with its Imagination, always bring its Abominations
into it; and the Spirit must continually be in strife against the Earthly Life.

The sixteenth Question. How is the Soul kept in such union, both in the
Adamicall, and Regenerate Body?
1. WE have mentioned before, that there are three Principles, which are all
three in the soul, already beforehand, and are in one another, as one thing:
and you must understand that the strife in the soul begins before, in the
seed, while it lies hidden in both Sexes, in the Man and Woman; when also the
Turba stirs up it self before, in that it drives the Essence of the seed
to a false Imagination, to a false Desire.

2. Although the Spirit tameth the body, yet it imagines, and this the Turba
causes in the seed, and no man can well deny, but that many times this
Imagination is offensive to him, and where there is a right Spirit, it wishes
it Exeommunicated.
anathematised: And you must know, that the spirit of the soul sticks thus
in a miserable strait, and cannot be loosed, until the Turba takes the Body.

3. Now there is never any union between the outward, and the Regenerate Man;
the outward man would always devour the Regenerate, for they are in one
another, but each has its own Principle, so that the outward cannot
over-master the Inward, if the Spirit do but continue Or the Combat.
in strife.

4. They may very well depend on one another; for all three set forth Gods
works of Wonder; if they continue in due Order, each keeping its own
Principle.

Note three bear rule in Man.
5. For the soul has the Government of the Fire, and it is the cause of the
life of all three: and the The Spirit of the Soul.
Spirit has the Government of the Light, in which the Noble heavenly Image
consists with the Divine Body: and the outward Spirit has the Government of
the Earthly Life, this should seek and manifest the Wonders, and the Inward
Spirit should give it understanding to do that, and the soul should manifest
the Abyss, viz. the highest secret) to The outward Spirit.
it.

6. The Soul is the Pearl, and the Spirit of the soul is the finder of the
Pearl, and the Earthly Spirit is the seeker: the Earthly body is the Mysterium.
Mystery, wherein the Arcanum.
secret of Greatest Or hiddennesse.
abstrusenesse is coucht: for the Deity has manifested it self in the
earthlinesse, viz. in a comprehensible Essence; and therefore now three Seekers
belong thereto.

7. But you must not suppose, that we are an Enemy to the outward life, for it
is most profitable to us, as to the Wonders of God: there is nothing more
profitable to the whole man, then to stand still in his threefold Life, and not
go back at all with the outward into the Invard, but with the Inward into the
outward.

8. For, the outward is a Beast, and belongs not to the Inward; but its
wonders which it has brought forth out of the Inward, and which it has opened
in the comprehensible Essence, they belong in their figure, (not in their
Essence) to the Inward: the Inward Spirit must receive these (which are Gods
works of Wonder,) for they shall be the joy of it for ever.

9. And thus we say, that the soul may be kept very well in the New Man, if
the Spirit of its Tincture, do but hinder its Seeking, or Desire.
Longing and Imagination: and although the outward Spirit be bestiall, yet the
Inward understanding [Spirit] is able to keep in, and tame the outward, for it
is Lord over it: But he that suffers the Bestiall Spirit to be Lord, he is a
Beast, and has also a Bestiall Image in the inward Figure, in the Tincture.

10. And he that lets the Fire-Spirit, viz. the Turba, be Lord, he is an
Substantial, or Devil incanrate.
Essential Devil, in the Inward Image: therefore here it is necessary, that
the outward Spirit power Viz. humility.
water into the fire, that it may hold that Or stern.
strong Spirit captive, and that seeing it will not be Gods Image, it may At
least.
remain a Beast in the Inward Image.

11. Now if we consider our selves in the Of the Old, and New man together.
union, the outward Spirit is very profitable to us, for many souls would
perish, if the Bestiall Spirit were not: which beholds the Fire captive, and
sets before the Fire-Spirit earthly bestiall Labor and Joy, wherein it may
buisie it self, till it be able by the Or works.
Wonders, in the Imagination, to discover somewhat of its Noble Image, that it
may seek it self again.

12. My beloved Children, who are borne Or of.
in God, I tell it you: it was not for nothing, that God breathed the outward
Spirit, ( viz. the outward Life,) into Adams nostrills: for great danger did
attend this Image.

13. God knew how it went with Lucifer, and also what the great Eternal Magia
or Desire.
Magic could do: yea Adam might have been a Devil: but the outward Glass
hindered that, for where Water is, it quenches the Fire.

14. Also many a soul by its wickedness would become a Devil in a Or the
twinkling of an Eye.
moment, if the outward life did not hinder it, so that the soul cannot wholly
inflame it self.

15. How many are there that are so full of poison, and Or malice, and
wickedness.
evil, that they do murder and commit villainy: but this their Fire has
water, or else they were past remedy: As ye see in gall which is a fiery
poison, but it is mingled with water, and so the violence of the fire is
allayed.

16. Thus it is also with the Inward Essence: the Spirit of this world has
wound it self into the Abyss of the soul, and in its source has killing
water, wherewith it often bedeweth the soul, when it would spit Fire.

17. Moreover, the outward Spirit could not have life without this Fire, seeing
it has fire in all Creatures, but this Fire is only the wrath of the Inward
fire.

18. The Inward fire consumes earth and stones, also the body and blood, yea,
even the Noble Image, if it be Or kindled.
inflamed in the Will: But there the water is a Medicine for it, which pulls
down its aspiring force; whereby it labors to get above the meekness of
God, as Lucifer did.

The seventeenth Question. Whence, and wherefore is the Contrariety between the
Spirit and the Flesh?
1. MY beloved friend; you know well, that fire and water are contrary: for the
fire is Life, and the water is its Death, and you see plainly, that when water
is poured upon the Fire, the source of the Fire goes out, and so the Fire is
dead.

2. And although in Man [the fire] is not wholly dead because of the Light,
which continually causes fire, yet there is an enmity; as there is an enmity
between God and Hell; and yet Hell, or the Fire of wrath is Gods.

3. And Gods Majesty would not be manifested, if his Anger were not, which
sharpneth the dark hiddennesse of Eternity, by the wrath of Nature, so that it
is changed into Fire, whence the high Light in the free Eternity is brought
forth, which makes a Majesty in the mild source.

4. And yet the Fire is the only cause, that there is a Or life, or working.
source in the Light, in the Meekness; for the Light proceeds from the
Glance of the fire, and has the source of the Fire in it self.

5. But the Will (as is mentioned before) sinketh down in the Anguish, even
into Death, and springs again afresh in the Liberty; and this is the Light
which has the Or property.
source of the Fire; but yet it has another Principle in it, for the Anguish
is become Love.

6. After this manner also it is in the Body, where the flesh striveth against
the Spirit: the Life of the outward flesh is a Glass of the most Inward fire
life, viz. of the life of the soul; and the life of the Spirit of the Soul,
with the Light of the Tincture, is the middlemost Life, and yet it is borne out
of the soul.

7. But understand our depth aright: the Spirit of the soul, wherein the
Divine Image confistech, arises in the fire, and is first of all, the will to
the Fire, but when the Or wrathful desire, and indignation of the fire.
wrath in the fire is sharpened and inflamed, then the Will comes into a great
anguish, like a dying, and sinketh down in it self, out of the wrath into the
Eternal Liberty; and yet there is no dying, but Or second.
another world thus comes out of the first.

8. For, then the Will springs up in the other world, as a sharpness out of
the Fire: yet it is without any such Or Aching property.
Anguish source in the Eternal Liberty: and it is a moving, a driving and an
Or feeling.
acknowledging of the Anguishing Nature; it has all the Or springing virtues.
Essences, which in the first sharp fire-world are brought forth in the
Anguish; but they are like one, that goes out of Fire into water: and so the
Anguish of the fire is left in the water.

9. You must understand that this Life is the Life of the Spirit of the soul:
the soul is the Center of Nature, and the Spirit is the precious and noble
Image, which God created for his Image; herein stands the High, Or Kingly.
Royal, and precious Image of God: for, God is thus, he is comprehended in the
same source of Life.

10. The Spirit is not parted from the soul, no, as you see Fire and Light are
not parted, and yet are not one, they have a twofold Or Quality.
Source: the Fire is wrathful, the Light is Mild and Lovely: in the Light is
the Life, and in the Fire, the cause of the Life.

11. And thus without much seeking you may find, the cause of the Contrariety,
that is between the flesh and the Spirit: for, the inward Spirit has the Or
Gods body.
Divine Body from the meek Essentiality, and the outward Spirit has the Body
of the Glass, of the wrathful Fire, viz. the body of the Glass of the soul,
which would always awaken the Vehemence or fierceness.
wrathfulnesse, viz. the great Wonders which lie in the In the secret, or
hidden Myst^rie of Etern^ty.
Arcanum, in the Sternnesse, or fierceness. or strength.
eagerness of the soul; but that the inward Spirit of Love hinders it, lest
it should elevate it self, and inflame the soul, and so it would lose the The
habitation, or sweet taste.
fruition of Love and the Image, and the wrathfulnesse of the soul would
destroy it, and thus contrariety arises.

12. The Inward Spirit would be Master, for it tameth the outward, and so also
the outward would be Master, for it says, I have the Great Wonders, and the
Arcanum, thus it braggeth of the Mystery, and yet it is but a Glass of the
Mystery.

13. It is not the Essence of the Mystery, but a Seeking, or longing.
Desire, an incomprehensible Glass, in which the Mystery is beheld, but it
would be Master, seeing it has attained a Principle, and is a Life of it self,
but it is a fool in comparison of the Mystery.

14. Therefore beloved Brother, if you would seek the Mystery, seek it not in
the outward Spirit, you will be deceived, and attain nothing, but a glance of
the Mystery: enter in even to the Cross, then seek Gold and you will not be
deceived, you must seek in another world for the pure Child that is without
spot, in this world you find only the drossy Child, that is altogether
imperfect, but go about it in a right manner.

15. Go back from the Cross into the fourth form, and there you have Sol,
and Luna together, bring that in Anguish into Death, and bruise that composed
Magical body so long, till it become again, that which it was before the
Center in the Will; and then it becomes Desirous.
Magical and hungry after Nature.

16. It is a Or seeking. or Desire.
longing in the Eternal Longing, and would feign have a body, therefore give
it Sol, viz. the Soul; Or for a body.
that it may have a body, and then it will soon make a body according to the
soul; for the Will springs up in Paradise, with fair heavenly fruit without
blemish.

17. There you have the Noble Child, ye covetous gripers, we must indeed
tell this to you, seeing it is borne with it; but those only that are of our
Tribe will understand us.

18. For, we mean not here a Or similitude, figure, or Parable.
Glass or Heaven; but Gold wherewith you vaunt, which for so long a time has
been your Idoll-God: and your blind Or Cowes-eyes.
Owle-eyes are so quite put out, that you see less then before: But the
Children shall see, eat and be satisfied, that they may praise God.

19. We speak here wonderfully, yet we speak nothing but what we must speak:
Let none marvel, that he knows the Mystery, who has not learnt it from any
man; does not an herb grow without your Or direction.
Counsel, neither does it inquire for your Art: yea the Mystery is grown
also without your Art, it has its own school; like the Apostles on the Day
of Pentecost, who spoke with many Languages and Tongues without premeditation
and Art, and so is this simplicity in like manner.

20. And this foretells thy Fall O Babell, That you may be warned of it.
that thou may know it: no wrath nor Anger will help you; the Star is
borne which leads the Magi.
wisemen out of the East-Country: but seek thou only where thou art, and find
thy self; and cast the Wrangling, malice, and Tyranny.
Turba from thee, and then thou shall live with the Children, this we tell thee
in good earnest, there is no other Remedy: thy Anger is thy fire which will
destroy thy self.

21. Or do thou think that we are blind? if we did see nothing we would
still be silent; what pleasure would a lie be to God? yea we should be found in
the Turba, which searches through all humane Essences and works: or do we
this piece of service for Wages? is it our Or trade.
living? why do we not mind our bread only according to outward Reason?

But seeing it is our Day-labour, we must do what the Father will, for we
must give an account thereof at the evening, this we speak seriously, and in
good earnest.

23. Thus you may well understand the Contrariety of flesh, and Spirit, and
find very well, that two Spirits are in one another, one striving against the
other, for one desires God, the other desires bread; and both are profitable
and good.

24. But thou child of Man, let this be spoken to thee, lead thy life
circumspectly, and let the Spirit of thy soul be Master, and then thou will
have fought here a good fight, for this time is but short.

25. We all stand here in the field and grow: let every one have a care, what
fruit he bears; for at the end of the Harvest every work shall be put into
its own Granary.

26. It is better to labor a little while with toil and care, in the
vineyard, and to wait for the great wages and Refreshment, then to be a King
here for a little time, and afterward to be a Lion, a Wolf, a Dog, a Cat, a
Toad, Serpent or worm; in Or shape.
figure.

27. O child of Man! think upon this; be yet warned, we speak very
seriously, out of a wonderful Eye, ye shall very shortly find it by
experience; there is yet a little time; for the beginning has already found
the end: this is a little Rose out of the Beginning; see yet, and put
covetousness out of your Or sight.
Eyes, or else you shall wail and lament, and none will pity you; for, what a
man sows that he must also reap; what will Pomp and Honor avail, when it
leaves you?

28. Here you are very Potent, but afterward you shall be impotent; ye are
Gods, and yet ye run on headlong to the Devil; take pity on your own Life,
and on your fair heavenly Image.

29. Pray be the Children of God; and be not Devils: Let not the Hypocrites
keep you back by their Or Example.
flattery, they do it for their bellies, for their honors, and for moneys
sake, they are the servants of the Great Babell.

30. Examine your selves, ask your Conscience, whether it be in God? that will
blame you, and bid you drive the Hypocrites from you, and seek the clear
countenance of God, and look not through Or Spectacles.
a Glass.

31. God is even before you, he is in you; confess to him, come to him with
the lost Son; there is no other can take the Turba from you, you cannot enter
but through Death into the other world, whither your Hypocrites can never come;
otherwise there is no forgiveness of sin; And though you should give All to
your Hypocrites, yet then you would be as much captivated in the Turba as you
were before.

32. It is no such matter, as that one should stand ready, and take away the
Turba from you, when you give God, fair words.
him good words, no, no, it is a Magical thing; you must be borne again, as
Christ says, or else you cannot come to God; do what you will, All Hypocrisy
is deceit.

33. If you would serve God, you must do it in the New man, the Earthly Adam
can do him no acceptable service, let him sing, roar, call, confess, pray,
cry, and do what ever he will, all is but fighting with a shadow, the will
must be in it, the Heart must wholly Resign it self up into it, else it is
but a fained babble, and a fable of Antichrists, wherewith the whole Earth is
filled.

34. The will is greater and more Powerful, then much loud cry; It is able to
destroy the Turba, and to enter into the Image of God, it has power to be the
child of God; it can throw down Mountains, and raise the Dead, if it be
borne in God, and if the Holy Ghost give it leave.

35. For a man must walk in Obedience in great humility, and only cast his
will into Gods will, that God may be both the will and the Deed in him: This is
the way to salvation, and to the Kingdom of Heaven, and no other; let the Pope
or Doctors preach otherwise, all is but lies, and mere Hypocritical juggling.

The eighteenth Question. How does the Soul depart from the Body at the Death
of a Man.
1. HEre we would have the world bidden for a Guest, especially Babell the
Whore, and see whether A child of Grace can be found in her.
she can be made a true child, for Death is a terrible Host, he casts the
proud Rider, and his Horse to the ground.

2. My beloved friend, this is a very Or deep.
hard Question, and needs the Eyes of all the three Principles to see it
well: they need not dye, that would enter in and behold this; they must be
poison to Death, and a pestilence to Hell; they must take Death captive if they
will see it, no man's understanding can otherwise find it out, except he come
into death himself, and then he will feel indeed what Death is; he shall
surely taste what it is, when one Principle ( viz. the life) perishes.

3. You understood before that all Things, or substances.
Essences are See the Book of the small six Points. Point 5. ver. 65.
Magical, and that one is always the Or Resemblance.
Glass of the other, and that in this Glass the Desire of the first Glass is
opened, and comes to be an Essence; and then also that the Turba is in every
Essence, which destroys all, [till it commeth] to the first Essence, and that
is alone and has no Destroyer.

4. For, there is nothing more; it cannot be broken, it is in it self, and
without it self, and goes whither soever it will: and thus it is all over in
one only place, for it is in the Abyss, where there is no place of Rest, it
must only rest in it self.

5. Now if all Essences have proceeded from one, then the beginning is also in
the last Essence; for the last is Or retired.
gone back into the first, and seeks the first, and finds it in it self,
and when it finds the first, it lets all the other go, and dwells in
the Limit, and there it can be without Or pain.
source.

6. For there is nothing that makes it a Or dies, or falls away.
source: It is it self the matter of the first Essence, and although it be
somewhat else, yet that is but the twig of it self, and its own will and
nothing else: for, there is nothing that can give it another will.

7. Thus we give you to understand what dying is: the beginning seeks the
Limit, and when it finds it, then it casts away the seeking, viz. the
Earthly Life, that shall be cast away, it must break off it self.

8. For, the beginning ( viz. the soul) continues in the Limit: and lets
the body perish, there is no complaining about it, neither does the soul
desire it any more: it must go also into its limit, viz. into the Wonders of
that which it has been.

9. For the Spirit of the soul grieveth not when the body Or dies, or falls
away.
perishes, but the Fire-Life grieveth, because the matter of the Fire, which
the fire has produced, that also perishes, but yet only in Essence.

10. The figure continues still in the will, for the will cannot be destroyed:
and thus the soul must continue in the will, and it takes the figure instead
of matter, and burns in the will; for the first glowing of the fire does not
pass away; but it is quite deprived of the matter of the Earthly Life, viz. of
the Substance, or dross.
Phur.

11. And thus the fire becomes weak, and passes into Darkness, except the
Spirit have heavenly Substantiality, the Glans of the Majesty; the glorified
body of Christ; and Adams body before he slept: Sophia's wedding Garment.
Essentiality, viz. the Divine Body; and then the Fire ( viz. the true soul)
receives that mild body for a Or glorified body.
Sulphur, and so the soul burns in the Love-fire, and is quite gone out from
the first Viz. the Elementary fire of the outward Nature.
Fire-life.

12. It is now in Gods Principle: the first The fire of the wrath of the
outward Life.
wrathful Fire cannot touch it in Eternity, for it has received another
Source, and is truly borne again, and knows no more of the first Life, for
it is swallowed up in the Or Magic.
Magia.

13. The Turba remains in the Earthly Body; and is again become that which
it was before the body was, viz. a Nothing, a Magia, wherein all its Essences
stand in the Figure as in a Glass yet not bodily, but after the manner of
Eternity: as we know that all the Wonders before this world, stood in a
Mystery, viz. in the Virgin^ of wisdom, yet without substance.

14. Therefore we here understand, that this Mystery has been so manifested
in its parting, that it cannot be Or made one again.
extinguished in Eternity; but it remains Eternally in Distinction and
Partition; and is beheld in the Magic, in the parting in that manner, as it
formed it self here.

15. Thus we may perceive that the Or parting of the soul from the body.
Separation is, that the Turba has found the Limit of the Essence: for
sickness to death is nothing Else, but that the Turba has inflamed it self,
and would destroy the Essence: it is at the Limit, and will cast away that
which is introduced Or middle-most between the beginning* and the end,
between.

16. And this is also the cause that the body dies; the Turba thrusts it
self into the fire, and so the outward Life is extinguished; for it
withdraws the fire of the soul, and so it passes into its own Sky,
receptacle or subtility.
Ether, and is at its Limit.

17. And if the fire of the soul has not the Divine body in the Spirit, nor
in the Will in the Desire, then it is a dark fire, which burns in anguish
and great horror: for it has nothing but the first four forms of Nature in
Anguish.

18. And if the will be quite void of the power of humility, then there is no
sinking downwards or inwards, through Death into Life, but it is like a
Anxious, mad, senseless, giddy wheel.
tormentive hurrying wheel, which would continually get aloft, and yet it
goes downwards on the other side; it has the condition of Fire, but not the
burning of Fire.

19. For, the Turba is the exceeding strong Or Astringency, first Form.
harshnesse, and bitterness: and the bitterness continually seeks the 2.
Fire, and would evaporate it, but the Astringency holds it captive; so that it
is only an horrible 4. and 3.
Anguish, and continually turns in it self like a wheel, and imagines, but
finds nothing but it self: it draws it self into it self, and makes it
self pregnant: it eats it self, and is its own substance.

20. It has no other substance, but that which the Spirit of the soul
continually 3. and 4.
made in the outward life; viz. Covetousness, Pride, cursing, swearing,
reviling, backbiting, slandering, Or did, or wrought.
murder, hatred, Cruelty.
wrath, anger falsehood; this is its food, sport, and Rage, or surlinesse.
pastime: for the Turba in the will takes the substance with it: Its works
follow it. Work, or business.


21. And although it has done some good, yet that is done only in Or
Hypocrisy.
a glistering show and appearance; from an ambitious mind: and afterward it
continues thus, in its aspiring, and always endeavoring to climb up, it
always elevateth it self, it would continually be above the Meekness, and
yet it neither knows it, nor sees it: it is an uncessant elevation above
God, and yet an Eternal Depression; it seeks a ground, and there is none:
This is its Life.

22. Yet, if it had comprehended any purity of Love in its will (as many a one
that is converted at last in his end) then it thus sinketh into it self
through the Anguish: for the humble spark falls down through death into
Life, and then the Or pain.
source of the soul ends: yet it is a small twig budding forth into the
Kingdom of God.

23. It cannot sufficiently be described, what refining the soul has, and how
it is hindered and plagued by the Devil, ere it can get this spark into it
self. But this wise world will not believe this, it is too wise, and yet it is
so stark blind it understands Nothing, but hangs continually to the Letter:
O! that none might feel this by Experience, and we would gladly hold our
Peace.

24. We speak not here of any strange Or pain.
source, but only of that which is in the Turba and also of no other Power of
the Devil over the poor soul, but its own horror and Or wicked.
abominable suggestions, by which the Imagination of the soul is so tormented.

25. The condition of Hell is far otherwise then Babell teaches; she says
that the Devil whippeth.
beats and tormenteth the soul; but this is spoken in mere blindness: the
Devil is not at odds with his own Children; they must all do his will; the
anguish and horror of Hell plagueth every one of them sufficiently in their
own abominations; every one has his own Hell, there is nothing but his own
poison that apprehends him.

26. The four Forms of the Original of Nature, are the common plague which
every one feels according to his own Turba, but one far otherwise then
another: the Covetous has cold, the Angry Fire, the envious bitterness, the
proud an high aspiring, and yet an Eternal sinking and falling into the
Abyss: the Or blasphemer.
scorner swalloweth down the Turba of those abominations, which he here
belched forth: the false slandering heart has the fourth form, viz. the great
Or Aching.
Anguish.

27. For, the Turba stands in the Circle of the Fire, viz. in the heart of
the soul; and false speaking, lying and Idle words unfaithfulness, or jeering.
untruthes are an abomination and gnawing, and make it curse it self.

28. A Potentate who has oppressed the poor, and consumed his Or lahour.
sweat in Pride, he rides in the curses of the poor in the height of Fire;
for all the Or miseries.
necessities of the poor stick in him.

29. He has no Rest, his pride always climbeth up, he behaveth himself just
as he did here; he continually seeks, and yet wants all things; what he had
too much of, that he has too little of there, he continually desires to
devour his own Essence, but he has none; for he is Magical.

30. He has lost his Or right.
true Image, he has the Image as it were of a proud prancing Horse, or of what
else he has been delighted with, whatsoever he took with him in his will,
that is his Image; where his Heart is, there is his treasure also, and that to
Eternity.

31. But hearken friend, what the last Judgment will bring with it! then all
things shall pass through the Fire, and the floare shall be swept clean, and
every one shall have his own place; at this the very Devils themselves do
tremble.

The nineteenth Question. How is the Soul Mortal, and how immortal?
1. A Thing which has an Eternal beginning, has also an Eternal End, and so
has the Essence of the soul.

2. As concerning the Image which God created, and which has a Temporal
beginning, that is borne out of the Eternal, and is placed in the Eternal
Essence without Or pain, or working property, or Nature.
source.

3. And where there is no e source there is also no Death, and though there be
a source (as there is a source in Heaven) yet it is but in one only will, and
that has its foundation in the Eternity: and as nothing is there that can
find it, so there is nothing that can get into it.

4. But where there is one will only, (as in God, who is All in All,) there is
nothing that can find the will, there is no Turba there, for the will desires
nothing but it self only, and its twigs, which all stand in one tree, in one
Essence; the Tree is its own beginning, and its own End.

5. The soul is come out of the Mouth of God and when the body dies it goes
again into the Mouth of God; It is the Essence in the Word, and the Deed in
the Will.

6. Now who will condemn that which he has in his own body; now the soul is
in the Divine body, it is hidden in God from all evil, and who can find it?
none but the Spirit of God, and one soul another, also the Communion of Angels.

7. But the wicked souls have lost their Image in the Limit, for f it is
entered into a Limit, and that Limit is the End of the Image: the Turba
destroys the first Image, and attracteth the Or works.
Essences of the will for an Image; and this is also immortal, for the
Eternal Nature dies not, because it had no beginning.

8. If the Eternal Nature in the fire of Anger should die, then also Gods
Majesty would be extinguished, and the Eternal something, would again become
an Eternal Nothing; and that cannot be, but whatsoever is from Eternity, that
continues Eternally.

9. The false soul cannot awaken any other source, but that only which stood
from Eternity in the Eye of Anger, viz. in the Center of Nature.

10. All things have been from Eternity, but essentially in the Essence, not in
the Substance of the Essence, not substantial Spirits but Spirits Figurales
Spiritus.
in figure, without Corporality, they have been from Eternity as in a Magia,
one has swallowed up the other in the Magia.

11. And a third is come out of these two, according to the form of these two:
there has been a wrestling from Eternity, and a figured substance: the
Creation has placed all in the Wonders, so that now in Eternity, all things
stand thus in the Eternal Magia in the Wonders.

12. Now if the wicked souls had brought no substance into their wills, then
they should have no pain, Note the condition of the wicked souls, of such
Infants, as die in their Mothers womb, and in innocence, before they commit
sin actually.
there would be no feeling but Magia: but the substance is an Image, and that
is in the Turba, and so there is a source that may be felt.

13. There is a dying, and yet no dying, but a will of dying, viz. an anguish
in that substance which was brought into the will.

14. And this is caused by the Longing that all things have after God; and yet
are not able to reach him, which causes anguish and sorrow for the wickedness
they have let into them: when the soul continually thinks, had thou not
done this, or that, then thou might have attained the Grace of God: and the
i evil substance causes the Eternal Despair.

15. And thus we say no soul is mortal, whether it be in God, or in Hell; and
its substance remains for ever to Gods Wonders.

The twentieth Question. How does the Soul return to God again?
1. THis has been already sufficiently cleared; that it was Or breathed.
spoken out of the Mouth of God, and created by the Holy Ghost, in the Image of
God.

2. Now if it so continue, then, when it leaves this Earthly Life, it it is
already in the Mouth of God, for it is in the Divine Body, no Evil, pain, or
hurt can come at it.
Source can touch it.

The one and twentieth Question. Whether goes the Soul when it departs from
the body, be it saved, or not saved.
1. HE that rightly understands the three Principles, need not ask this
Question: for, the soul departs not out at the Mouth, for it did not come in
at the Mouth! but it only leaves the Earthly Life; the Turba snatcheth away
the Earthly Life, and then the soul remains in its own Principle.

2. For, the body retains it not, no wood, no stone, can comprehend, enclose,
keep, or withold it.
retain it, it is thinner then the Air, and if it have the Divine Body, then
it goes strait as a Conqueror through the Turba, viz. through the Anger of
God, and quite through Death, and when it is through, then it is in Gods Or
substance.
Essence.

3. It remains in its Deeds, and
wonders and Essences, which it wrought here: It beholds the Majesty of God,
and the Angels, face to face.

4. Wheresoever it is, it is in the Abyssall world, where there is no End nor
Limit: whither should it go? where the carcass is there the Eagles gather
together: It is in Christ's flesh and Blood, with Christ its Shepherd.

5. Though it should go a thousand miles off, yet it were then in the same
place from whence it went; for, in God there is no Limit; near and far off
is all one.

6. It is as swift as a Thought, it is Magical, it dwells in its Wonders,
they are its House.

7. The Essentiality that is without, it is Paradise, a springing blossoming,
and growing of all manner of fair heavenly fruits; just as we have all kinds
of fruit here in this world, which we eat after an Earthly manner; so also
there are all manner of fruits in Paradise, which the soul may eat; they have
colors and virtues in the substance, and not like a thought: though they be as
thin and subtle as a Thought, but substantial, comprehensible, and palpable
to the soul, virtuall and sappy with the water of Life, and all this from the
heavenly substantiality.

8. For, the heavenly body of the soul is from the pure Element (whence the
four Elements are brought forth) and that gives flesh, and the Tincture
gives blood: the heavenly man has flesh and blood, and Paradise is the Power
of the substantiality, it is heavenly Earth, incomprehensible to our outward
Reason.

9. But we will again teach you another A. B. C. All in this world have not
Christ's flesh in them, hidden in the Old Adam, yea among very many, not one,
but the Regenerate, who are departed from their own will into Gods will, in
whom the Noble Grain of Mustard Seed is sown, out of which a Tree is grown.

10. Most souls depart from the body without Christ's body: yet they hang as by
a The small thread of Faith.
thread; and are at last in their Faith gotten into the will: these souls
indeed are in the Image in the Spirit, but not in Flesh.

11. Such as these wait for the last Day; when the Image, ( viz. the Body)
shall come forth out of the Grave, out of the first Image, for God will raise
it up by the voice of Christ: even that Image which Adam had in his Innocence,
which has been washed with Christ's Blood.

12. But the Earthly Body shall not touch it: that must come before the
Judgment in the Turba; but after the Sentence of the Judgment, the Turba
shall swallow it up, and the Or works.
Wonders [of it] shall only remain.

13. You must understand us aright: These souls that must wait till the the
last Day for their Bodies, they remain with their bodies in the still Rest,
till the last day, without feeling any Or Source.
pain; but in another Principle.

14. They have neither Darkness, nor Majesty in the Earth, but are at rest
without pain, in the Eternal still Liberty, without touching of the Body.

15. Yet they see their Or works.
Wonders, but they effect nothing in them, for they expect God and are in
Humility, fot they are sunk down through Death, and are in another world, yet
there is a great Gulf, or distance.
Space between them, and the holy souls that are in Christ's flesh and Blood;
but not a Principle, they are in one and the same Principle.

16. But a Spirit without a body has not that Or Power.
might, which the Spirit in the body has; therefore they rest: and are under
the Altar of God.

17. When the last Day shall come, then shall they come forth, and eat of the
Bread of God, and put on the Divine Body, as is mentioned in the Revelations of
John; Rev. 6.9, 10, 11.
where the souls under the Altar clothed in White say: Lord, when will thou
avenge our Blood? and it was answered them, that they should rest a little
while, till their brethren were accomplished which should be killed for the
witness of Jesus.

18. But the souls of the wicked have another place, viz. in the most the
innermost is the utter Darkness.
innermost, which also is the most uttermost of all Darkness; they dare not
go up and down, they remain merely with the body, in their Essence or
works.
substance, yet not in this world, neither do they touch the Earth.

19. It has indeed power enough over the Earth, it can open it without Essence
and feeling.
substance and perceptibility: But it has not the outward Principle; it has
not power enough over the outward Spirit; yet it can for a time make Show
juggling tricks.
Apparitions in the Or Spirit of the Air.
sydereall Spirit.

20. As many appear again in the Astrall Spirit, and seek Or Rest.
Abstinence, and make many afraid, with keeping a racket in houses, all which
they do by the Astrall Spirit till that be consumed; and then their Or Pomp,
and show.
tricks lie in the Darkness: and they expect the last Judgment.

21. Our Babell says, it is the Devil, which goes up and down in the shape
of the soul; indeed the damned soul has enough of the Devil, but it is not
the very Devil, he is in the Abyss, and tormenteth the soul in the time of
the body willingly, in the Abyss of the soul.

22. Neither does he altogether want a cloak for his knavery, for he can put
on an outward cloak to seduce, or terrify men in.

23. But this complaint we have against Babell, that she is so extreme blind,
and has so little knowledge of God; she has cast away Magic and Philosophy,
and received the Antichrist: now she has lost her understanding; she has a
kind of Art still, but her understanding quite fails her, she has broken
the Glass and peereth through the holes of the Spectacles.

24. What shall we say? The world is blind-folded, it is led by a string, and
taken captive, and it sees it not, yet it were at liberty, if it did but see
it once: the snare wherewith it is bound is malicious Knavery: thou shall soon
be made to see: It is broad daylight, do but awake thou Keeper of Israel.

25. Thus my beloved friend, know that there is a difference of Places where
souls are; according to that whereinto the soul is entered; if it be Holy and
Regenerate, then it has a The body of Christ.
Body, which expects only the Or works.
Wonders of the body at the last Day; it has Conceived, or formed.
comprehended them already in the Will, but at the Day of Judgment it must
stand before the Judgment.

26. All souls good and bad shall every one receive their Sentence and Reward:
The Holy shall be set in the presence of the wicked, that they may see and Or
taste.
feel the cause of their Or source.
pain.

27. If any should feign a peculiar Residence, or place where they should
consort or sit together, that contradicts the Rule of the Magia: Every soul is
in its own Country, and not bound to the place of the body, but it may be
where it will; wheresoever it is, it is, either in God, or in Darkness.

28. God is every where, and Darkness is every where, the Angels also are
every where, each in its own Principle, and in its own Or sour.
Property.

29. The Fiction of outward Reason, without the knowledge of the Principles is
Or a false Glass, a Conceit.
as a fighting with a shadow: If I should ask a thousand times, and should
always be told somewhat from God himself, and yet were but in flesh and
blood, I should look upon it as Babell does; which supposes that the soul
flies into a Heaven, above the Stars; I know not that Heaven they speak of,
and I desire not to come there.

30. Heaven is indeed above; but there are the Angelical Ptincipalities and
Thrones: This Eye of the Skies Mansions, or Spheres.
Ether is our Principality, and Kingdom.

31. The same is with them above which is with us, but our Creation and Essence
is in our Ether: A soul may come to them if it earnestly desires, and the
Angels of God will lovingly entertain it.

32. For, the same Essence of God which is with us, is with them; this only is
the difference; that they have among them Angelical works, wholly, pure
without blemish, and we have the great wonders, and therefore they long to be
with us; and besides they are our servants, during the life of the body, and
withstand the Devil.

33. Now if the Angels be in this world, in the Holy Principle; whither then
shall the soul fly first might Babell think? perhaps into Pride as Lucifer
did! O no! they continue in humility, and look What God does.
upon Gods Wonders, as Gods Spirit moves so do they.

The two and twentieth Question. What does every Soul? does it rejoice till
the last Judgment Day?
1. THis Question contains the exceeding joyful Gate of Glory, leading to
the knowledge of the Or Triumphant.
victorious Garland of the soul.

2. When a Darling-Sonne travelleth a far off into a strange Country, for
Art and Honor: he often thinks of home, and of the time, when he shall enjoy
his Parents and friends, he rejoices at the thought of that Day, and expects
it with inward joy and Longing: also he plyeth himself hard in his business,
that he may get Arts and skill, wherewith he may make his Parents, kindred, and
friends rejoice.

3. Think of this similitude, and take it into consideration: It is just so
with the soul: the souls without The body of Christ.
body have a great inward Joy; and wait for the last Day with great inward
Desire, when they shall again receive its fair and Holy Body with its Or
works. which it did here.
Wonders.

4. Also their Ornament is in their will, where they behold their works after
the manner of the Eternal Abyssall Magic, which they shall then first receive
at the last Day, in the Figure with the new body out of the Old.

5. Also we know and Or fully.
highly perceive, yet in the Spirit only, according to its knowledge; that the
blessed souls do rejoice in the labor which they took here, and exceedingly
recreate themselves in their wonders which they see Magically: for they that
have led many to Righteousness, they have their Reward in the Magia, in the
will before their Eyes.

6. They that have suffered much Persecution for the Truths sake, they see
their bright Or Crown of Victory.
Triumphant Garland; which at the last Day, they shall put on upon the New body.

7. They that have done much Good, they see that plainly shining in the will.

8. They who have been scorned, contemned, persecuted, and slain for Christ's
Doctrine, honor, and Truths sake, they see the Triumphant Victory, like one
that has overcome his Enemy in a fight, and then sets it forth Triumphantly
to his Prince or King, and for which he has exceeding great Glory, when his
King receives him with great joy: and keeps him with him for his faithful
assistant.

9. We have no Pen that can write what exceeding joy is in them: only this we
know, that those for the most part, have put on the Divine Body in this world,
and so have greater perfection then the other: they expect the last Day with
great joy and Glory, when their works shall be presented to them, and set
before their Eyes in heavenly figures, and the wicked shall see them Or who
they have tyrannised over.
against whom they have kicked.

10. Every soul rejoices before the face of God, in great hope of that which
it shall receive again, for it knows its Reward, but without the body it
cannot receive it: for it has wrought its works in the Body, and therefore
its works follow it in the New body, and come to it again.

11. For, although the exceeding precious Holy souls have put on Christ's body
in this world, so that they stand in Heaven, viz. in the Image of God, yet all
their works were wrought in the Old Body, which was Gods Glass: and in the
Resurrection, they shall be represented in the true heavenly Figure, in Or Old
body.
that body.

12. For, the first Image which Adam was before the fall, is Regenerated in
Christ, and shall again with its Wonders be put upon the soul; and although
it had the Divine Body before, yet the Or works.
Wonders stand in the first Image.

13. But the Turba, with the outward Kingdom of the outward Source is gone,
for The first Image.
it was a Glass, and is now become a Wonder, it lives without Spirit as a
Wonder, and shall be put upon the soul in great Clarity, Transfiguration, or
brightness.
Glory, which it shall have from the Light of God: at which the holy souls do
exceedingly rejoice, and expect it with great longing.

14. You must know that every blessed soul trimmeth its Lamp, so that it
willingly meets its Bridegroom at the last Day: it always renews its
will, and thinks how it shall rejoice with all holy men and Angels, in its
new Body in the Wonders: there is a continual springing up of Joy in them,
when they think of that which is to come, each as it is virtues are.

15. And as their works have been different upon Earth, so also is their hope:
for, a Day-labourer, who has wrought much, rejoices at his wages: so also
here: there is a friendly Essence among them, and in them.

16. All the scorn and disgrace which was put upon them that were innocent, is
a great Triumphant Glory to them, in that they have suffered in Innocence, and
put on Patience in Hope; which they have still on, Death cannot take it away,
nor put it off, but the soul takes that with it which it has Or wrought.
conceived.

17. Its many hearty Prayers, wishes, and good deeds in love to its Neighbor,
are its food which it eats, and joyfully enjoys, till its New Body shall
eat Paradisicall fruit.

18. But they which have put on the Divine Body here, they eat at Gods Table
without ceasing: yet the Paradisicall fruit belongs to the body of the
Wonders, which shall arise out of the Grave, and which was created in Paradise;
for it was made out of the Beginning, and it brings the End with the Or
works.
Wonders into the Beginning again.

19. But wonder not, nor think that we understand it so, though we seem to
speak of two bodies of the Holiest Saints; for they are not two, but one: But
consider, that Gods Essentiality fills all, and that is the Divine Body,
which is put upon the The great Holy souls.
Holy souls, even in this life.

20. For they cast their will into Gods will, and so they receive the Divine
Body which fills all things: their will dwells in the Divine Body, and
eats of Gods Word, of Gods fruit, of Gods Or Power.
virtue, in the Divine Body; and Christ is in God; God is become Christ.

21. And so they Or are clothed with.
wear Christ's Body in God, and yet wait for their first Adamicall holy Body,
with the Viz. The works and deeds, which were done by the Elementary Body,
during the whole life.
Wonders, which shall be put upon them with Paradisicall Or quality.
property.

22. For, Gods purpose must stand, he created the first Body Or in.
for Paradise, it should have continued there Eternally, and it must go
thither again: and the soul must remain upon the Cross of the Ternary in
the Mouth of God, whence it came: and yet the whole Person continues with Body
and soul in one another; but God fills All in All.

23. O! that we had but a humane Pen, and were able to write it in the Spirit
of your soul according to our knowledge: O! how many would then return out of
Sodom and Gomorrah, out of Babell, out of the Covetous, proud vale of Misery,
which notwithstanding is but Anguish and pain, full of fear, vexation and
horror.

24. And here we shall let you know, that you may deeply consider it: what is
the lamentable and miserable condition of the damned souls, and what they have
to expect, and but briefly, seeing the following Question does it at large.

25. Their expectation is like that of an imprisoned Malefactor, who
continually listneth (when any thing stirs) when the Executioner should
come, and execute Judgment, and give him his Reward: just so do they.

26. They have a false Conscience, which gnaweth them, their sins are set
continually before them: they also see their works Magically: they see all
their unrighteousness and vanities, their unmeasurable pride and haughtiness;
they see the oppression of the poor; their scorning and suppression of them.

27. Their false belief flies from them, their Hypocrisy was only a
deceitful Glass; it reached not the Heart of God; it stands visibly before
them in the Magic, viz. in their will: but when they search therein, they
stir up the Turba of the Fire, which will always consume the Glass, and
then they are in fear and horror.

28. For, they see and know, that all must be tried at the last Day, by the
Eternal fire of Gods Anger: and they feel very well that their works will
stay in the Fire.

29. The Devils also exceedingly Tremble, when they consider their fall: which
rests in Gods Judgment what he will do; of which the Holy Scripture tells
us plainly enough: especially the Judge, Christ himself.

30. Thus know, that the totally miserable condition of the damned is, that
when they should trim their Lamps, to meet their Bridegroom at his coming,
they tremble and smother all their works, which the Turba nevertheless sets
before their Eyes.

31. But now those souls which are damned in a high degree, are very
presumptuously bold, they reject God, and curse him, and are his Most
malicioius.
worst Enemies.

32. They hold their cause to be just, they oppose God with daring impudency,
and think, is there fire? so are we fire; is there Rising, boiling properties.
source? then we will climb up above God, and Heaven in the source of the
fire: what care we for humility, we will have the strength and might of the
fire, we will be above God and do Wonders by our Power.

33. We have the Root, God has but the Glance, let us be Lords, God shall be
servant, our The wrath of the Eternal Nature.
Mother is his life, we will overthrow his strong Tower at once.

34. They have the mind of Soldiers, that scale Forts and walls, and think
the City is theirs, though indeed they loose their lives and never get it.

35. You must understand, that Hell is against Heaven, and the Inhabitants
thereof against the Inhabitants of Heaven; and this in God is also a great
Wonder, all makes for his Glory.

The three and twentieth Question. Whether do the Souls of the wicked,
without difference, (for so long a time before the Day of Judgment) feel any
ease, or Refreshment?
1. A Thing which goes into an Eternal Entrance, is also in the Eternal End;
who can put any thing into his hand that is a far off, and not present where it
is to be done? he must give it only into his hand that is by, to receive it:
And that thing, which with its will is gone forth out of it self, can receive
nothing within it self, because it desires nothing within it self.

2. Thus it is with the wicked, in this world: he is gone with his will out of
himself into Covetousness, Pride and pleasure, into vices, gormandizing,
tippling and whoring, also into Gluttony: his will is continually bent to
despise the poor; in scorn and disgrace to plague the poor, and to tread him
down by Authority.

3. He has corrupted Judgment with lies and bribes, and continually swallowed
down unrighteousness as a Cow drinks water; all that has come from him
has been Or cruel.
bitter Anger, which he prosecuted as far as his power would reach: his will
has been mere wilfulness, he has done what he listed; he has danced after
the Devils own Pipe, and has wholly entered into Covetousness; he has
accounted his money and means, his Treasure; and his will has continually
entered into it.

4. He has never retired into himself, and sought after Love, much less
humility; he has esteemed the needy, as his footstool, he has crushed him
under without measure: he has counted it his Art and wit, when he has been
able thus to gripe and overreach the simple; and deprive him of his labor.

5. He has supposed, that he had found out the finest policy, who Had gotten
an Office.
could contrive his business so sure, that he might do what he listed, then
he thought himself very cunning, and that he had great Wisdom.

6. All this, yea, and much more he has conceived in his will, and therewith
the Image of the Spirit of the soul has been filled, and all this stands in
his figure; and when ever the body Or returns to Earth.
dies, then the Turba lays hold of this in the Spirit.

7. And then if the Spirit would feign enter into it self, the Turba goes
with it, and seeks the ground, viz. the Root of the soul, and so the fire
is but Inflamed.
kindled by it.

8. And you must know, that the souls of the wicked have no ease, their best
ease and joy is when they climb up in the will, in their Employment, or Office.
works which they did here, and continually desire to do them more still: it
grieveth them that they did not afflict the honest more then they did; their
will is just so as it was here.

9. They are Spirits of Pride, like the Devil, a Covetous devouring Spirit,
which devoureth their abominations which they committed here: their joy is
only to think how they will contemn God, and be their own Lords, this is
their recreation and refreshing, and no other.

10. For, how should they receive any other refreshing? when they dare not for
shame lift up their eyes to God, nor dare they fly to the Saints, whom they
have here scorned; they are ashamed to do that, for their falsehood continually
smites them on the face, and their malice and falsehood boyleth up from
Eternity to Eternity.

11. When but the least thought of the last Day, comes into their minds,
then fear and horror stirs in them: they rather let that thought alone,
and recreate themselves in haughtiness.

12. And this is also a Wonder, and the greatest Wonder of All, that an Or an
Image of Love.
Angel should become such a furious Or mad senseless Image of Anger, and
wrath.
Devil: and so the Power of Gods Anger comes to be manifest in God: for God
has manifested himself according to both The Eye of Love, and the Eye of
wrath.
Eyes, in Love and Anger: and it is left free to Man, he may go into which of
them he will: God throws none into wrath, the soul casts it self into it.

13. But you must know, that the wrath has set its Or Jaws.
throat wide open, and draws mightily, and desires to devour All; for it is
the Covetousness, and the Pride insulting over humility.

14. And so also Love and Humility have opened their Mouth; and draw with all
their Powers, and would draw Man into Love, into Heaven.

15. Now into which of these the soul enters, in that it remains and
grows, whether in Love or in Anger; In that Tree it stands, and there is no
Deliverance in Eternity from thence: here in this Life the soul stands in a
Balance in the Angle, and may (though it have been evil) be borne again in
Love; but when the Angle breaks then it is gone: it is afterward in its own
Country, in its Principle.

16. Who shall break that which is Eternal, where no breaker can be found?
for it is its own Maker; whence then shall another Turba come, when a thing is
in the Eternity where no Limit is.

17. But that you may see for all this, that God wills not evil: He makes
his will known unto you; He sends you Prophets and teachers, and gives them
his Spirit, that they may give you warning: Now if you refuse to obey; then you
stay still willingly in the Anger, which is your Dwelling, or Prison.
wages and Kingdom.

18. God Sends you Crosses.
afflicts you, to break you off from your own will, from your voluptuous
proud, and dissolute Life! But if you go on, you shall hereafter surely taste
the hellish Dregs.

19. We teach you the Cross: and the Devil teaches you pleasure: Now you
may take which you will, you shall have it, be it Love, or wrath.

20. We labor for you, but you contemn us: what should we do more for you;
we are even your very slaves; if you will not accept us, be it at your peril,
and get you gone with that which is your own, and we will take that which is
ours, and so we are parted for ever.

21. We will nevertheless work in our Day-labour, and do what is commanded
us: at the Harvest we shall appear before one another, and then you will know
us, and do that to your selves there, which you have here done to us: we will
not hide this from you, but tell you what we see.

The four and twentieth Question. Whether do men's wishes profit them any
thing? or sensibly Help, or do them good.
avail them, or no?
1. MY beloved friend, look upon the Rich man, and poor Lazarus, so you shall
find that there is a great Or Gulf. Luc. 16.20.
space between them and us, so that those that would reach them with their
prayers, and their will, cannot; neither can they come to us, there is a
Principle between.

Psalm. 49.8.14.
2. The Prayer and wish of the Righteous pierces into Heaven, and not into
Hell: the Scripture also tells you, out of Hell there is no Or deliverance.
Redemption; they lie in Hell as dead bones, they call, and no man hears
them; no praying avails them.

3. And though many men should pray for the damned souls, yet their Prayers
remain in their own Principle, and pass into Heaven, and not into Hell:
there is no calling back again out of Hell says the Scripture.

4. You know what Christ said to his seventy Disciples, when ye enter into an
House, greet the house, and if the Child of Peace be in that house, then your
greeting and wish shall rest upon it; if not; your wish returns to you
again: and so it is also here.

5. No good wish enters into Hell: But if the wicked leave behind him much
falsehood and deceit, so that the Hellish Torment is wished to him in the Grave,
such wishes come to the wicked soul, those wishes come to pass with them; for
that soul must swallow down its abominations which it committed here: and
that is its food which the living send after it.

6. But it is altogether unfit, and does not become the Children of God at all:
for thereby they sow into Hell, into the Anger of God: they had need beware
least they also reap that which they sow; most certainly, if they do not
recall themselves and repent, it will fall out no otherwise.

7. Furthermore, we give you to understand according to our knowledge in the
Spirit (not according to the weening and conceit of the outward Man, but
according to our Gift, that those souls (which as it were hang by a The thread
of Faith, which is small and weak.
thread, and but at last enter into Repentance, and so comprehend the Kingdom
of Heaven as it were by a thread, so that doubting and Faith are mixed) are in
such a condition, that a hearty Prayer and wish redoundeth to their profit, and
pierces into the poor captive soul, into its Condition, or property, or
misery.
source, if it be made with all Earnestness.

8. For, it is neither in Hell, nor in Heaven; but in the Gate, in the middle
source of the Principle, where fire and Light sever themselves, and is held by
its Turba, that always seeks Or to devour it.
the fire: But then this small twig which it has Or comprehended.
conceived, viz. the weak Faith deeply demerseth it self; and earnestly
reaches after the Mercy of God, and yields it self patiently, into the
Death of that sinking down; and so gets out from the Anguish, and sinketh
down from the Or source.
pain into the meekness of Heaven.

9. And although many a soul is held a Or tedious while.
sufficient while, yet the Anger cannot devour that small Faith, but must at
last let it go.

10. But I leave it to him, to try what this is, who wilfully persevereth in
sin till his End, and then first desires to be saved: and then the Priest,
or Minister.
Pope forsooth must save him: he shall find it by woeful experience.

11. We say, that a man's hearty fervent prayer stands such a one in stead; for,
a zealous, earnest, faithful Prayer has power to break open the Gates of the
Deep, it breaks open a whole Principle, and seeks; and if there be any
thing there, that is capable of its will, that takes hold of it; viz. the
poor soul in its source of sin eceiveth the earnest, Divine will of its
loving Brother, and so is strengthened; and in its brothers Spirit and will, is
able to sink down out of the Anguish, through Death, and attain the Kingdom
of God.

12. But in its glorification it cannot avail it; for, it shines forth out of
its own Essence and will: The soul of a Neighbor goes no further then death
with it: (yet it is not the [neighbours] soul but the Spirit and will of his
soul that does so) and there the Anger parts, and then it is released from
the wrath; and then the Spirit enters again into its own soul.

13. In Popery much juggling has been invented about this, in saying Mass for
a soul, and that for money only: but this has been a great cheat of the Pope
of Babell; for there is earnestness required, to wrestle with the Anger of
God, and overcome it.

14. Yet we confess, and acknowledge readily that the Church of Christ has
great power to ransom such a soul; if with fervency and Earnestness it do
it: as it was done in the Primitive Church, when they had holy people, and Holy
Priests, who performed their Ministry in real Earnestness.

15. They indeed effected somewhat, but not in such a way as the Pope boasts
of saying, that he has the Key, and that he can set out a soul with his Or
Pardon.
blessing when he will, if a man will but give him money: This is a lie.

16. If he be Holy, then he bears the Mysterium Magnum.
Great Mystery; and is a Shepherd of Christ [set] over his Lambs: but then
he must with the Congregation, in great earnestness, urge God in great
Humility, and so relieve the poor soul, not for money.

17. There is always covetousness in Money, and it never reaches the earnest
The first most inward Ground.
Principle; the Prayer of the Covetous goes into his Or Christ.
Hutch: we say, that all service which is done in the Church of Christ for
Money, belongs to Antichrist in Babell, for Or they set their hearts upon it.
their hearts depend upon it: It were better men gave them meat and drink, and
necessaries, but no money: and then they should not set their hearts so much
upon it.

18. Wha^ (...) a Spirit seek and find in the Mystery, when it self is not
in the Mystery? O! there is a great deceit in that, when it is Day, you will
see that it is so: ye are still in darkness, in the Mystery, so egregiously
has Babell blinded you.

19. And it only is (because you have regarded Art and Favor, and not the
Spirit God) therefore notorious delusions are seized upon you, so that you
believe the Spirits of lies, who speak Delusions in fine outside, seeming
holiness.
Hypocrisy; on these you depend, and stick to them, and cause Hypocrisy by
your Error: Observe well what the Revelations of John and Daniel tells you!
It is Day, the Reward will shortly follow.

20. Ye have Teachers now, that wholly Or cast to the ground.
suppress the Spirit of the Primitive Church; try them, and you shall find
them to be a crew of the Whores, Wolves, which at first sprung up in the
Primitive Church, when men slept; and these are they that will devour the
Whore themselves.

21. But try them, they are Wolves sent from the Malice, sin, and the Anger of
God, for the destruction of the world.
Turba; they must do it, God permits it so to come to pass, and will have it
so; that he may sweep out one besome with another: yet they are besomes, and
after the accomplishment of the Or workings.
Wonders of the Anger, they shall both be delivered to the Or punishment, or
calamity.
Turba together.

22. Let this Spirit tell you this, it is your own Prophet, he is borne out of
your Disputing, or contention.
Turba upon the Finishing of the sixth Seal.
Crown: Awake, or else your selves must be devoured one by another.

23. For, it is no stranger that consumes you, but your own Or sin, or
malice.
Turba, which is come to the Limit; O! boast not so much as you do of a golden
time, it is a time of Wonders.

The five and twentieth Question. What is the Hand of God, and the Bosom of
Abraham?
1. IT has been sufficiently cleared already, that it is the Essential
Omnipresence of God; but in its own Principle: as the Rich man who was in
Hell, could not obtain that Abraham should send Lazarus to him, with one drop
of cold water to cool his tongue in those flames: Abraham said, there was a
great Gulf between them; that is, a whole Principle.

2. But the bosom of Abraham is to be understood thus: Abraham was the Father
of all the Faithful; and God gave him the Promise, that in his seed all people
should be blessed; this was to be understood of the Messia Chtist, who would
become man in the Or Believers.
Faithful, and as he became man in Abraham's seed, so also he would be borne
anew in the Children of the faithful, and bless them.

3. Now this is the Holy Christian Church, borne in Christ; and that is the
bosom of Abraham, for we are All one Body in Christ; and the Promise was made
to Abraham: He is the Patriarch, we are all borne in the same Promise, (we
mean [by] the New Birth in Christ) and are in the same bosom, which receives
us.

4. And when by earnest Repentance, we enter into the Promise of Abraham, then
we go into the bosom of Abraham, viz. Into the Promise that is made to us by
the Trinity.
into our Promise: and Christ is borne in us, in the bosom of Faith; this is
the fulfilling [of the Promise.]

5. And thus; in Humility; we are with Lazarus in the bosom of Abraham; for
Christ is Abraham: Christ was promised to Abraham, and now he has him, and we
also: and so we come into Abraham's bosom, and are his Children in the Promise,
and Christ is the fulfilling of it, and we in the fulfilling are in the bosom
of Abraham, and are the seed of Abraham, by Faith and Spirit.

6. Hear O ye blind Jews, open your Eyes: what was meant by Abraham's
Circumcision, nothing else, but that sin should be drowned in the blood and
death of Christ, who shed his blood for the Children of the Faith of Abraham,
and so [we] be regenerated in this blood, as in a heavenly Tincture.

7. Abraham and his Children drowned sin in their blood by Faith in Christ,
who should become Man in their blood; and now it is fulfilled: and therefore
God has set the seal of Faith That is in the Essence, or in the water.
in the substance; and now we must be, and are Regenerated in the true blood of
Christ.

8. The blood of Christ, takes away the Turba wholly from us: and so we, (
viz. the New Man out of the Old Adam) Or arise.
stand up in Christ's blood, and bear Christ's Image, Christ's flesh and blood in
us, in our Image; if we be Children of Abraham, and not Ismaels.

9. For, to Isaac belong the Goods of the Image, of the body of Christ: the
Circumcision is Ismaels, for he is conversant about works; but the Goods are
Isaacks: yet Ismaell shall dwell in Isaacks Tents at last: for Japhet shall
dwell in the Tents of Sem, but the Kingdom belongs to Sem.

10. We have the goods of Isaac not by the merit of works, but from Grace,
from the Love of God: we cannot attain them by works; but in Faith, in the
Will, in the Deed, and in entering [into the promised Inheritance.]

11. He that enters into an Inheritance, that is not his own by right of
Nature, he enters into it by the favor of the Or Giver.
Donor: why is a servant in the house angry, that his Lord is so bountiful to
give a stranger the Dominion.

12. We were strangers, and must work in his house; yet the Lord did promise
us in Paradise, that he would again freely out of Grace, give us his Kingdom:
He rejected Caines offering, but he gave the Kingdom of grace to Abell; for
Abell sought it in the Spirit, and Caine in the work.

13. Thus you understand, that Gods Kingdom is Magical; for, the earnest will
attaineth it, and not the Will in the Or work.
Essence, for that will remains in the Essence, but he that is at liberty, he
finds Eternity and the Kingdom of Grace therein, and the Promise also,
together with the Essence, and so the work dwells in the Will, and is the
wills household servant.

14. Thus you understand (if you have your sight) all the Old Testament; this
is the only ground; though comprised but in brief: If we write upon Moses, you
shall find it wholly there: and thus we have shown you the true ground of the
bosom of Abraham, and of the true Christian Religion.

15. He that teaches otherwise is of Babell; beware of him, he has not
Christ's Spirit: but he is Ismaell; and seeks but in his own conceit.

16. O! thou dear Christendom, do but open thine Eyes, or else it will no
more shine so clearly upon thee; go yet to Lazarus in the bosom of Abraham.

The six and twentieth Question. Whether do the Souls of the Dead take care
about Men, Children, friends, and goods? And whether do they know, see, allow,
or disallow their purposes, and endeavors.
1. MY beloved friend: this Question is beyond the reach of all humane Reason,
and knowledge according to outward Reason; But seeing we are Abraham's Children,
we have also Abraham's Spirit in Christ: and as Abraham looked back upon the
Promise in Paradise, and then also forward unto the fulfilling of the Promise,
so that he saw in the whole Body of Christ, what was yet to be brought to pass
in the Or the time between both the beginning and the End.
middle: and saw Christ a far off; so also we.

2. Now seeing you do so vehemently long after the great Mysteries, and seek
them with so earnest a Desire, yet giving God the glory accounting your self
unworthy in your high Art, and so humble your self before God: therefore God
gives you them, by so mean and poor an Instrument, who esteems himself
much more unworthy of them; but yet would not willingly strive against his
will: and so you are the cause that this hand finds and attaineth them.

3. For, this hand knew nothing of the Mystery: It sought only for the Faith
of Abraham, but the understanding of Abraham was also given unto it, which you
have caused by your seeking.

4. Now have a care, that you also obtain the Spirit of Abraham, which has
written in the knowledge of this hand, we will impart it to you as a brother:
for we are not your Lord in this hidden thing, but your servant.

5. Know us aright, we are Lazarus, and you may be accounted Abraham in
comparison of us; you have labored much more then we; but we are fallen into
your Harvest: nor of merit, but by the Grace of the Giver: least any tongue
should boast in the sight of God, and say, this has my understanding done.

6. You propound a deep Question, Viz. in his outward Reason, or in the Old
Adam.
I understand it not: for if I should understand it, then I should dwell in the
separated soul, and must have the very same spirit, and knowledge of that
soul.

7. But now seeing we are one body in Christ, we have all of us Christ's Spirit;
therefore in Christ we all see out of one Spirit, and have one knowledge; for
he is become man in us, and all holy souls are our fellow members, all
begotten out of one: and we all have one will in Christ, in the true bosom of
Abraham.

8. And now we have obtained strength to reveal this hidden thing to you in
Christ; for our souls sees in their soul; not as if they came to us, but we
go to them: for they are in perfection, and we but In part, or in imperfection.
in part.

9. And now we are able to answer you, not from the reason of the outward
world; but from the Image in Christ, and from his and our Spirit.

10. You ask, whether the separated souls take care of humane matters, and
allow, or disallow them? Now this you must understand to be in three different
manners, concerning three several sorts of souls.

11. First, those souls, which yet have not attained Heaven, and so stick in
the source, in the Principle, in the Birth, those have yet the humane Essence
with the works in them: they diligently search out the cause of their Or stay
in that condition.
Retention.

12. And therefore many of them come again with the Astrall Spirit, and wander
up and down in their houses and places of abode, and appear in a humane
Shape, and desire this and that, and oftentimes take care about their wills or
Testaments, and also think to procure the blessing of the Saints, that they
may rest: and if their Earthly affairs do still stick in them, they take care
many times also about their Children and friends.

13. This condition of theirs continues so long, till they fall into their
Rest; and till their Astrall Spirit be consumed; then all such doings, care,
and perplexities are at an end, and rhey also have no more knowledge thereof,
but that they see them merely in the Wonders, in the Magic.

14. But it stirs not the Turba, neither seeks what is in this world: for,
it being once passed through Death from the Turba, it desires such things no
more; It also takes no further care: for care stirs up the Turba, and then
the will of the Soul should be forced to enter with its Spirit into earthly
things; but it had rather let such things alone, because it hardly got rid of
them before; It will no more entertain the Earthly will.

15. This is an Answer concerning this first sort, and we tell you plainly,
and in Truth; that this sort (after they are once received into Grace) take no
more care purposely about humane Earthly Or affairs.
matters: but it beholds the heavenly matters, which are brought to it by the
Spirit of man, and rejoices in them; but there is somewhat still behind,
which is this.

16. A living man has such Power, that he is able with his Spirit, to go into
Heaven to the separated souls, and stir them up about some Question by a
hearty Desire: but it must be earnest, it must be Faith, that can break open a
Principle.

17. And this we see in Samuel the Prophet, whom the Saul.
King of Israel raised up: that he might make his will known to him: though
this seem otherwise to some: of whom we may well say, that they are blind and
void of knowledge, for they speak but their own scholastic Fables, and
frame Opinions about that they have no knowledge of in the Spirit: and these
are Babell.

18. Now secondly, the other sort, which sink into Death without a Or the body
of Christ.
body, they are wholly in one, and the same place of the Principle, in which
the first sort are, which afterward did sink down in themselves: All these
take no evil affairs upon them, wherein the Turba sticks.

19. But when the honest souls which are alive, send them their works, with
their Spirit and will, they rejoice in them, and are so affable, that they
appear to men Magically in sleep, and show them good ways, and many times
reveal Arts which lie in In Arcano, in the most inward Mystery.
secret, viz. in the Abyss of the soul.

20. For, seeing the Earthly Spirit thrusts its Mystery before the soul,
and keeps the soul captive in that Mystery, therefore the Spirit of the
Soul cannot always attain the deepest secrets; but after the departure of
the body, the soul is naked, and that especially, if it be without a New body;
then it beholds it it self, and also its Wonders: and it can very well show
one that is living somewhat (if he be honest and have not stirred up the Turba)
in the sleeping Magia: for Dreams are wholly Magical, and the soul without a
Body is in the Magia of God.

21. Thus know that no soul separated from the body enters into any wicked
matter, except it be a damned soul, which indeed enters in Magically, and
has its joy therein, and teaches most notorious vile prancks in Dreams, for
it is a servant of the Devil.

22. And whatsoever a wicked man desires, that the Devil readily helps him
to; for he can do it better by the soul of a man then of himself, for he is
too crude, and Makes horror in the Magia.
terrifieth the Magia, so that the Elementary Spirit is astonished, and Or
raises up.
awakeneth the body.

23. Also you must know this, that all is done Magically in the will, without
Raising of the p^^^e, or prop^^ty.
awakening of the source: no soul rises with its Essences of its own accord
to please Man; unless man raise, and disturb it himself.

24. There are many villainies in Nigromancy, which can many times vex and
torment the Spirits of men; but it can do so to no soul, that is clothed
with Christ's Essentiality; for, that soul is free.

25. The third sort of separated souls, which are in Abraham's bosom, in
Christ, having the heavenly Essentiality, none can stir them, except they
will themselves, as when they bear a favor to a soul that is like
themselves: also they take no Earthly thing upon them, except it makes for the
Glory of God, and then they are restless to reveal something in a Magical
manner.

26. But they let no Turba into them; neither do they intercede with God for
us; but whatsoever comes to them they rejoice in it, with the Angels: for,
the Angels rejoice at a sinner that repents; then much more, the souls.

27. Why should they pray to God for us? it lies not in their Prayer; but in
man's entering into God; when he strongly turns his will to God, then Gods
Spitit helps him without Their praying, or intercession for us.
Prayers.

28. For, his Arms are stretched forth day and night to help Man; what need is
there then of their Prayers? It is the will of God that man should come to him.

29. Shall then a A separated soul of a Saint.
soul be so presumptuous as to make God so severe a Judge, as not to be
willing to receive a returning sinner? surely no true knowledge of God were in
this: But when they see the soul pierce in with its Spirit to God; it is great
joy to them that Gods Kingdom is enlarged.

30. The heavenly soul has Gods will: what God wills, that it wills also;
but it is Gods Spirit it self that will help the converted sinner.

31. The souls see well how Gods Spirit pierces into the soul, if the will
of the soul do but give way to it: there is no need of the Prayers of any Or
blessed soul.
Angel: they all wish that Gods Kingdom may come, and that Gods will be done:
but the Honor of Government they give to God.

32. That men in Popery have invocated great Saints that are dead: and that
they also have appeared to men, and wrought Or Miracles.
Wonders, we acknowledge it, and it is true: and although it be now taught
against, it is by those that are indeed quite ignorant in it: It has another
A. B. C. which all of them on both sides do not understand at all.

33. The Faith of one receives the Faith of another, the Faith of the living
took hold of the Faith of the Saints departed, and the Viz. the will that is
strong.
Faith has wrought Wonders.

34. Yea it is so powerful, that it can throw down Mountains! shall then the
pure Faith of the Saints in the Faith of the living be able to do nothing?
Indeed it could even Or break in pieces.
destroy the whole world, if God would but suffer it.

35. As he has permitted it to work so far sometimes, that the Heathen have
been converted by such means, when they have seen such Wonders wrought at the
Or departure.
Death of Saints.

36. Should not a soul in heaven be willing to put forth its Faith for the
glory of God, and the working of wonders for him? This is even done by the Holy
Ghost, who has wrought the Wonders by the Faith of both parties; and they are
only the Wonders of God, and of his Children-

37. But this is wholly cast to the ground, and now there is so learned a
School, that it contemns all Gods Or Miracles.
Wonders: but it is Babell, and not the Spirit of God; It is envious Pride;
They stand aloft and cry; Come ye all to me, here is Christ, here is the
Gospel: Indeed there is Pride, Covetousness, Ambition, and self, arrogating
malepertnesse, a lifting up of proud Babell.

38. It is even the old Antichrist, and they are young twigs sprung out of the
old Tree, and they have stirred up the Turba with their strong wrathful sap:
which Turba shall root up the whole Tree, for God has cursed it: it is wholly
evil, and wormeaten, it shall down.

39. For, there is a young Tree grown out of the Root, out of the old Root,
which shall discover what the old Tree has been in its Wonders.

40. Yet we would not upbraid any, but only speak of our Wonders: and say
that the servant shall enter into the House, and be free, for the time is at
hand, that he should eat with the Son, and be merry and rejoice with him.

41. Thus we answer this your Question summarily, that indeed, the Holy souls
do certainly know of our holy works, and approve of them, but they do not at
all regard false works: for, they dwell in another Principle, into which no
evil work can come, nay, they do not so, nor do they enquire after that
which belongs to the Devil: also they know nothing but that which reaches
to their Principle.

42. Children, Parents, friends, and strangers are all alike to them; for, in
Heaven we are all Brethren: They take no greater care of Parents, or Children
then they do of others, unless they serve God, and then their service of God
is acceptable and joyful to them; but they enter not into their The evil
which they do or suffer justly.
Turba.

43. For after the last Day, honest Parents shall know nothing of their
Children which are in Hell: Therefore it is sufficiently and plainly known to
us, that they now also take no care about wicked matters.

The seven and twentieth Question. Whether do the Souls Or in Death.
departed, know and understand this, or that business and Art, whereof, while
they were in the body they had sufficient Skill.
1. THis Question is like the former: all their works appear to them in their
will after a Magical manner: they see them, but the figure of them, shall then
first be given them at the Day of Restoration; so that they shall be able
rightly to behold their works: for, they must first be tried by the Fire; and
whatsoever is false, the Uncleanness, or dross.
Turba of that must remain in the Fire, according to the words of The words of
Christ in Paul.
Christ.

2. But it is strange that men should ask whether they know Arts or no;
without Question they know all Arts, how deeply soever they are grounded: but
they dare not Or bring them into act.
awaken them, that they appear in Spirit: for, Arts are borne in the Center of
Nature, out of those Essences wherein the Wonders lie, which they sought in
this world, so far as they had the Mystery made known to them.

3. A soul that is without the Divine body, does not willingly enter into the
Mystery for Art, it stands still in its rest, it fears the Turba; It gives
God the glory.

4. But those souls that are highly enlightened, who have heavenly Essentiality
in their Spirit, They have all knowledge of heavenly things, and of whatsoever
lies hid in the Mystery: especially those who had acquaintance with the
Mystery in this Life: the other dive not in into the Mystery.

5. For, every one continues in his Or Employment.
calling; in that, which he delighted in here, although there be no such
working, yet they have their joy in it: for, in Heaven there is an humble
simple Childrens Life.

6. Why then should they search or care for Art, when the whole Mystery of God
stands open, God fills All in All: there is only a mere Wonder; they All
live in Wonders, and are all of them the Art of God: they have great knowledge;
but in a Paradisicall simple Childrens Life.

The eight and twentieth Question. Whether has the Soul any more knowledge of
Divine, Angelical, Earthly, and Devilish things? and whether can it get more
certain experience, and knowledge of them, then it had in the body?
1. COncerning Divine and Angelical knowledge, certainly it has much more of
that: for, it is in the Principle of God: the Son sees very well what the
Father does in his House; and so likewise the soul sees what is in Heaven.

2. Their knowledge is different; for the highest knowledge is in the Majesty:
and therefore most souls must wait till the last Day, when they shall receive
their new Body.

3. But the highly enlightened souls, which are in the Divine body and Power:
they have superabundant understanding and knowledge of God, and also of the
Angels: for, they continue in the Wonders of God, till they shall bring their
own Wonders thither.

4. The souls that are without a body, are in Heaven, in God, as it were
Magically: they awaken no Wonders, but are under Gods Altar, and expect the
Wonders, at the Day of the Appearance.

5. They take no care about devilish matters, it belongs to the Angels to
strive with the Devils, and to defend man: No No holy soul.
soul imagines into Hell, it is Enmity to it.

The nine and twentieth Question. What is the Souls Rest, Or Resurrection.
Awakening and Clarification, or transfiguration.
Glorification?
1. THis is already sufficiently cleared; their Rest is without Essence in the
stillnesse, where they are in Gods hand, and no Pain, or Turba.
source touches them, they have no feeling of any source, but they are as one
that lies in a sweet sleep, and rests very pleasingly.

2. Their glorification, in this mean time, is when they consider of the Joy
to come, then the Viz. the Spirit of the soul.
Spirit enters into the Majesty of God, and receives Joy, and Glorious
illustration.
Clarity: and so all this time they trim their Lamps, that they may the more
cheerfully.
readily receive their bridegroom in their New bodies.

3. There is a very sweet, Magical, Paradisicall joy in them: but Paradise is
not yet fully Stirring, or working.
manifested in them, with total perfection, for that belongs to the New
body, [which shall rise] out of the Earth.

4. The first body which God created, and Christ redeemed with his blood, that
will bring the Wonders with it, and enter again into Paradise, and be clothed
with the Majesty of God, and then the Tabernacle of God is with Men.

The thirtieth Question. What is the Difference between the Resurrection of the
flesh, and of the Soul, both of the Living and of the Dead?
1. CHrist says concerning this, that there shall be a great difference:
therefore we direct you t^ ^he Scripture, for it shall come to pass just
according to the Holy Scripture.

2. Seeing that humane Reason cannot search, or find it out, how should I
answer you more then the Scripture speaks of? yet seeing you so earnestly
desire, and long to know these things, you even become the Finder in your
seeking, and I am but the Instrument.

3. And although it be declared and given to me, yet it is not a thing that
consists in my understanding, or knowing, but the knowing consists in the
Spirit of Christ: according to which this hand speaks of us, for it speaks
from two Persons, and two Persons say, not I, but we, and speaks of two, as a
Lord who speaks of his person, and of his Office, Authority, Power, or
Jurisdiction.
Dominion.

4. Thus also the Children and servants of God, ought not to say the knowledge
is mine, the understanding is mine, but give God the glory: and in their
manifestation of the Wonders of God, should speak of two, viz. of the Giver
and Receiver.

5. Neither should any understand this our manner of writing so, as if the hand
did glory, or boast it self of its humane Authority, and worthiness; though
indeed we are worthy in Christ: but as to the outward Man we will have no
honor or Renown, for the Renown is Gods.

6. We are Children of the Father, and must do as he will have us, and not
bury the Talent (which he gives us) in the Earth, for the Father will require
it with increase, and if there be no increase of it, he takes away that which
he has given, and gives it to him who has gained much: which would be a very
lamentable taking away from me; for me to know and enjoy God, and then to lose
him again; it were much better for me to lose the whole world, and the outward
Life, then God, and the Kingdom of Heaven.

7. Neither is it a light matter to be disobedient to God: see what was brought
upon Corah, Dathan, and Abiram by Moses: we say the same shall come upon the
disobedient and scorners.

8. Indeed the scorner sees not his punishment instantly, but his Viz. his
perturbation, malice, and wickedness makes a figure of it.
Turba takes it in; if he has been a jeering scorner and Reviler, and now
would feign be delivered from his Or sin.
Turba, then he must bewail it in bitter lamentation, and sorrow in the sight
of God, or else he will carry his scorn with him into the Fire of Anger, and
then it will gnaw him for ever: we would have this spoken for a warning.

9. For, we shall here describe a very earnest matter, be not deceived, God is
not mocked: the wrathful Anger is in his Power, he has Heaven and Hell in his
Power, the last Judgment is an Severe.
earnest work.

10. And because we are to set down the Resurrection of the Dead, we must
write the manner of it; what it is, and by what power this world shall Or pass
away.
perish, and the Dead arise; it will be in earnest, account it no jesting
matter, we shall speak of the very ground of it.

11. Do not think it it is a Fable, it proceeds from the Disturbance, or
confusion.
Turba, upon the Or when the measure of your sin is full.
Crown; the The Spirit of the awakened wickednesses.
Spirit of your own Turba declares this unto you: for, the End has found the
beginning: thus the Or works.
Essences of the whole world are brought to That they may be seen.
Light in the middle, and thence your Prophet arises, viz. from the Or works.
Wonders which you have wrought, and he speaks of the Destruction.

12. For, the Spirit of the Turba, shall not Govern, but the Spirit of Christ:
he has overcome Death, and taken the Turba captive: He leads Captivity
captive as a Conqueror.

13. But the Turba will execute Or Justice.
Judgment: for it is Gods servant in the Anger, not his Master but his
servant: therefore that Thunder which shall make the Earth to tremble, will
proceed out of the Mouth of God; which shall set the Elements and Firmament on
fire.

14. The last Judgment belongs to the Judge Christ, and the Holy Ghost: for,
here the Center of the Eternal Spirit will stir up it self, having also
divided it self into three Principles, whereof one is the Spirit of Anger, and
the other the Divine Spirit of Love, and the third is the Airy Spirit of the
outward world.

15. The last Or manifestation.
moving belongs to him; who according to the Deity is in the Mouth of Christ;
but according to the wrath he is in the Hellish Or property.
source of Anguish: and according to the Or works.
Wonders, he is in the Spirit of this world.

16. And as he was the Artificer, or framer, of all things.
Worke-master of all Essences, so also it is he that shall give every thing its
own Mansion, and gather every thing into its own Granary.

17. For, he has many helpers; viz. the Angels, they shall sever and part all
asunder, and then the Father, With the word of the Lord.
cum verbo Domini, pronounces the Sentence by the Mouth of Christ, and then
the world begins to burn, and every thing enters into its own Granary and
Reservatory.

18. For, the Reservatories will be diverse, not only two, viz. the two
Principles; yet in two Principles; but with much difference: every thing
according to its Or power.
virtue.

18. For, every work has its Magical Principle, wherein it is contained as a
peculiar Wonder, both in Heaven and Hell, every thing according to its Spirit,
as it has been good or evil, so will its form appear: and so also will its
virtue be; like the flowers of the field in their differences: And, in this
manner also shall the Glorification and joy of Man be all according to the his
works which he wrought here.
Essence which he brought forth here.

20. But we understand here the Essence of Faith, (which is the virtue in the
Essence of Love,) and not of the outward work: for, all shall be represented
in the figure, in the Wonders; and that both as to the beginning and
circumstances.

21. When the last Day shall begin to dawne, then the Deity manifests it
self once more (and that is the third time) in all Forms, in Love and Anger:
and then all things together at once shall be plainly laid open, and visibly
set forth in the sight of all Creatures, in this manner following.

22. The beginning of the Creation, in the Word Fiat, has enclosed this world
in it self, as a Model; and Or appointed.
founded the limit, wherein now the Wonders are contained, which also were
revealed in the middle, in the time, and brought to Essence, which were
foreseen from Eternity in the wisdom, in the Magia of God, and will be
together all in the Essence then, and then the End, finishing, or consummation
of all things.
limit is nigh at hand, and there will be no time of seeking more, for then all
is finished: whatsoever God had in his Eternal Counsel, he has conceived and
manifested in time.

23. Now here is the End of time, for then the beginning has found the end,
and the End is then the beginning, and passes again into that which it was
from Eternity.

24. But the Viz. the world, and every creature.
middle with the Viz. all that has been done in the world from the beginning
to the End.
Wonders which were manifested in the time, continues for evermore in the
beginning and in the End, as an Eternal middle, with its Wonders, viz. with
the Angels and men, and their Essences: as also the figures of all Creatures,
and all what ever has been Essential at any time: the Earth with its Metalls,
also stones, and all material substances, as Trees, and herbs: all these
stand in the Figure, in the middle, and in the Wonders, but quite void of such
Essences and life.

25. For, no Beast comes again, but its figure continues in the Magia; for,
it arose out of the Eternal Glass, so that now (when the outward Earthly
Glass breaks) it must remain in the Eternal as a Wonder, to Gods honor
and glory for evermore.

26. And these Essences belong all to Paradise: for, they shall be the Holy
Paradise wherein the heavenly Essences shall bear Essential palpable fruit.

27. And as here in this Life, we do account the fruits of the Earth,
(proceeding from its Essence,) as Inanimate. senseless things.
dead things without Life, or sense.
understanding, so also the Bestiall and Earthly Image of this world shall
appear as a dead Essence, and so shall the Essence of all Creatures; they
shall remain as a shadow.

28. But Paradise has and bears fruit from the virtue of Eternal Life, that
is, from Gods Or Wonders.
Essences: Now all that which for the most part is hidden from us here; tstat
is enclosed in the word Fiat, in the beginning and End, and it lies therein as
a great Mystery.

29. But no^ the Spirit of the first Creation will move all the three
Principles: yet before that be brought to pass; the Word of God Forms it
self by the Spirit.
conceives it self with this Spirit; like an elevation, or manifestation of
the Deity.

30. For, the Spirit stirs the Turba of all Essences in all the three
Principles; and then whatever is in Heaven, Hell, or this world, will be
manifested in one hour.

31 For the Turba stirs up all Essences, and all creatures, and all whatever
is in Heaven and Hell, will be made visible, and every one shall see the works
of his own Heart, be they good or evil.

32. In this hour also the Judge Christ will appear, upon the Bow of the
Ternary as upon a Rainbow; according to the Principle of this world, it is a
natural Rainbow, but according to the Principle of God it is the Ternarie,
the Cross with a twofold Rainbow, having one part turned toward the
Internal Principle, that is, in the Abyss of the Anger, and there he sits
upon the Anger of God: this the Devils, and all wicked men shall see.

33. For, this Bow is included in all the three Principles, and this Judge
Christ sits upon, and in the Omnipotency of Eternity, above all that Or ever
had a Being.
is called Essence.

34. Then the Miserable horror of all Devils and wicked men will arise: and
they will houle, lament, yell, and cry, and say unto the wise Virgins, give us
some of your Oil. O! comfort us we entreat you, we beseech you teach us!
what we shall do? Give us some of your holiness that we may be able to stand
before the Angry Countenance of God; for the Eye of Hell stands wide open;
whither shall we fly from this Anger?

35. And the wise Virgins, viz. the Children of God, will say: away to your
Those that sell.
Merchants, and buy Oil for your selves; least there be not enough for us and
you: we have but enough for ourselves; away, to your Hypocrites and Deceivers,
who have tickled your ears with Seeming holiness. and purity.
flattering [fine] dissimulation for your Money; there buy for your selves:
what? have you need of us now? Have not we been your fools? Away now with the
flourishing show of your deceit and hypocrisy, we will not make our selves
partakers with you; least we smart for it.

36. They shall then stand in great horror and trembling, yelling, and crying
to the Judge Christ: but his wrathful Eye Or by.
with their Turba, enters into the very Heart, piercing through Spirit and
flesh, through marrow and bones; for, the soul in the Turba by the moving of
God is stirred up already beforehand in the Wrathfulnesse.

37. And then they will fall to the ground for very Anguish, and some of them
shall bite or gnaw their hlasphemous tongues, and the proud will say, O ye
Mountains fall on us, and ye Hills cover us from the Eye of this
wrathfulnesse: they will creep into the Caves, and clefts of the Rocks, and
endeavor to bury themselves in the Mountains: they would willingly kill
themselves, but there is no Death more; they will endeavor to bereave
themselves of Life with Weapons yet there is no dying, but Wrath and Anger left.

38. In this horror all the buildings in the world will fall down; for the
Earth will tremble, as if it were shaken with Thunder, and the horror will be
in all living things; every thing according to its Property, or Condition.
Source; a Beast has no such source as the soul has, only it is afraid of
the Turba.

39. And in this elevation and Commotion, all waters will arise above the
height of all Mountains, so that there will be no Or respiration.
breathing upon the Earth, they will rise so high that they will be as it were
consumed: All things will be so comprehended in the Anger, in the Turba, that
there will be nothing but mere Anguish in the Elements.

40. All high Mountains and Rocks cleave asunder and tumble down; the That
is, those properties which are in the Firmament: or a Magic desire, as ver.
41. following.
Stars likewise fall to the Earth with their strong influence and virtue: All
this will be brought to pass in several days; for, as the world was created,
so it shall have its End: for, the Seeking, or earnest desire.
longing of the Earth in its Anguish, will draw the Stars to it, as it has
always done Or all this while.
in this time: so that the Earthly body has drawn the Desire, or longing.
seeking of the Stars to it.

41. For, the Stars are a Magical Desire, or longing.
seeking, which has awakened Life: therefore now when the Earth is awakened in
the great Turba, it will then become so thirsty and hungry, that it will draw
down the Stars to it, there will be such an Anguish upon the Earth.

42. But the Children of God shall lift up their Eyes and hands to Christ; for
joy that the Day of their Deliverance is at hand: for the The water.
Anguish does not touch them.

43. And in those days (but how many are appointed for it, are only known to
God, for in six days the world, and all its Hoasts were created; but it is now
hidden to us) the water will return again to its own place, and fill all the
Deepes in a more abundant manner then they were before.

44. For, now Death comes thereby: and in that hour, all Creatures, except
man, shall die: also all men that have crept into the Rocks and Mountains
shall come forth, but with anguish of their Conscience (although as yet the
Turba hindered so, that the horror was in Death;) for, the falling of the water
does captivate the Turba.

45. And then the voice of the Holy Ternarie, will put forth it self according
to all the three Principles, and say by the Mouth of Christ the Judge: Arise ye
Dead and come to Judgment.

46. This voice is the original, Eternal Spirit, which upholdeth every life,
and which also has always governed in all the three Principles: for, it is
that Spirit, whence the life of every thing has sprung, and in which it
consists to Eternity; It has been the lif and motion of all things, in which
the beginning, and also the end of every life has stood, yes, even the
Eternity it self: for, it is from Eternity and the Creator of all things.

47. It has two Eternal beginnings, viz. one in the Fire, and one in the
Light: and the third beginning is become the Wherein the Eternal has been
beheld.
Glass of the Eternal, viz. the Spirit of this world; also it has been as a
Wonder in this world, and the Wonders have been made manifest by it: and it is
he to whom the last Judgment does belong, his moving is the last.

48. For, in the Creation he moved the Father; and in the Incarnation of the
Word, the Son, and now the last moving, and the Judgment is his: he will
reduce every thing to its Eternal abode; and this is done by the voice of the
word proceeding from the Mouth of Christ.

49. For, the Spirit goes forth in two Principles in God: that is, in the
Anger or Fire, he goes forth as the earnest wrath of the Fire-life; in the
light of the Love he goes forth as a flame of the Divine Majesty; and in the
Spirit of this world he goes forth as a Wonder of Life; and all this is
undeniable.

50. And if perhaps some person would arrogate such exceeding high Learning to
himself, as to gainesay it, to him we offer to demonstrate it, in every thing,
we will except nothing in this world: every thing will afford an evident
Testimony of it: let him come to us when he will: he ought not to put it off,
and say, we are mad: for if these few words will not satisfy him, we will so
evidence it to him, that he himself shall find and see who himself is: yes
though the Devil himself should burst for very Anger, yet we would set it
down plainly before his eyes.

51. Now seeing this Spirit has the word Fiat, (viz. Gods word,) and the
Center of Nature, whence it has its Eternal Original; and as the Spirit of
the Center has a twofold Effluence (the first being in the Fire, in the
Essences of the Original of Life, in the ground of the Original of the soul:
and the second in the light of the Fire, which is the second Or Property.
source, which buddeth afresh through Death, and is called the Kingdom of God;
where also in the Light it is a flame of Love, and in the Fire it is a flame of
Anger.)

52. And therefore it will break open the Gates of Death, for it shall raise
the Dead: and it has the word Fiat in it, and this Fiat is both in the soul,
and in the body also; and although the body have been long corrupted, yet the
Turba remains still in the Fiat with the Wonders of the body.

53. And now the four Elements must restore to the Fiat that Essence which
they have swallowed up: for Verbum Domini.
the word of the Lord is in it, but in its own Principle: Every thing must
Give, or yield up.
restore that which it has received, viz. the Earth, the body viz. the The
substance, or dross.
Phur' and the water also its Essence, that is, The Light.
Sul; The Air, the sound, and voice of the words: and the Fire, the Essences
of the soul, for All things must be judged.

54. All the words which the Mouth has spoken, which the Air has received
into it, and Which Air.
has served for the making of the words, these the Air shall again Or
represent.
bring forth: for it is the Glass of the Eternal Spirit: the Spirit sees
them in the Glass.

55. And so man shall be Judged according to his heart, mind, and thoughts;
for, the Turba is in all malice or wickedness; which is contrary to Love: here
will be no making of excuse; for every one will accuse himself, his own Turba
will accuse him.

56. And thus, (you must understand) the Spirit which is All in All, will raise
up every Life which has been immortal, and (by the Fiat) give it to the body;
for the Fiat draws the body to the soul: and all its deeds and Wonders with
it, yea, all that it has done in this life by word or Deed: all that has
reached the The most inward and deepest ground.
Abyss of the soul, must come forth.

57. For, in the still Eternity there shall be no Turba more; and therefore
Every Essence shall be Tried, washed, cleansed, or purged.
refined by the Fire, and the Sin and wickedness.
Turba shall remain in the Fire, and all whatever is evil and capable of the
Turba (unless it were washed away in the water of life, by the conversion of
the soul here in this life,) must remain in the Fire.

58. Now, if any man have sown much in the Fire, he shall suffer loss: as the
Scripture tells us, that the works of the wicked shall remain in the fire,
and he shall suffer loss.

59. But you must understand us aright; the body which has been here upon
Earth; that evil corruptible body which has devoured the Noble and excellent
Image of Paradise: shall come, and stand forth with its precious Image in it:
It must give an account of the Image of God.

60. Now blessed are they that have Christ's Spirit, they have their first Image
in the word Fiat; which must restore it again to the soul, and that in the
Adamicall Body.

61. But they that have not Christ's Spirit shall stand forth in the evil body:
but their soul shall have lost their true Image, and they shall have such an
Image in the Spirit of the Soul, as their wills have been here: as their daily
lust has been, so shall their Image be.

62. And in that hour also the wrathful Fiat of the Darkness shall bring
forth the Devils; who shall then receive their wages and lodging: at the
hearing of which they tremble.

63. Thus all the Dead, both good and evil shall arise, every one in his The
transitory, and Eternal body.
twofold body, and shall have the soul with the Spirit in the body.

64. One shall have the outward Earthly Life in four Copies; it may be body,
by the sense.
Life, and therein a bestiall Image in the Spirit of the Soul; and in the
Inward Image he shall have the Essentiality of the wrathful Anger.

65. Another shall have the outward body, and Christ's Image therein, and the
Divine Spirit of Love shall shine in the Spirit of his soul; which body the
word Fiat cloatheth again with the true, and pure Adamicall Image.

66. For, the pure Image has been hidden in God, in the Word which became Man:
and now when the Soul comes to the Limit, it obtains that again, and also
the fair and excellent See the book of the three Principles, chapter 12. ver. 53.
Virgin of the Wisdom of God.

67. For, the noble Image was destroyed in Adam when the woman was taken out of
him, so that he retained only the Tincture of the Fire; and the woman had the
Tincture of the Spirit: but In the Resurrection.
now both return to them wholly again.

68. For, the woman shall receive the Tincture of the Fire, in the Divine Fire,
so that she shall be as Adam was, neither Man nor woman: but a Virgin full of
Chastity, without the Form, or distinction.
shape or members of Man or woman.

69. And then they shall no more say, thou art my husband, or thou art my wife,
but they are brethren: indeed there shall some remaining tokens of the
differences be in the Divine Magical Wonders, but none will regard that: for,
they are all of them merely the Children of God, living the life of Children
in the delighting sport of love.

70. All this shall be done before the Sentence, for, the trial will be the
first, and the sentence the last Day of Judgment: and those that are then
alive shall not dye; but shall be presented with the other by the voice of God
before the Or Righteousness.
Judgment of God.

71. The word Fiat shall bring all thither, and all shall be presented in their
own Order by the Fiat, as first, Emperors and Kings, and then their Subjects
over whom they reigned, Princes, Noblemen, Governors, Magistrates, and
Superiors, every one in his Or Calling.
Condition.

72. And here, all those that have taken upon them to be Christ's Shepherds
without the calling of God, The Divine calling, or true Jus Divinum.
shall stand in the midst of their flock of sheep, and give an account of their
Doings, or works and teaching.
course of Life and Doctrine: and whether they have been Christ's Shepherds,
and have fed the Sheep, or no, or whether they have been For livings, or Money,
as Hirelings.
servants, or Ministers to their own Bellyes? And here the Spirit will make
inquiry into their calling, and try, whether they have entered into the
sheepfold by his Election and Power, or by man's favor without the Spirit and
Election of God.

73. For the Judge will say unto them, now give an account of your life,
works, words, deeds, and ways: there the Turba of every one will declare what
he has been: for now all things shall appear in the Figure, within them and
without them, so that there shall be no Or lying
denial, for the Spirit Of the Judge.
by the Turba, proves the soul, Spirit, and Flesh; here all will be
manifested.

74. Kings and Princes shall be constrained to give an account of their
Subjects, how they have ruled and protected them, what kind of Government they
have used, why they have taken away the lives of many by Tyranny, and why they
have shed innocent blood, also why they have made war for their
Covetousness, and their Pleasures sake?

75. In like manner all other Superiors will be called to an account, why they
have intruded themselves into Office, and made themselves Or Magistrates.
Lords over the simple, and have afflicted, oppressed, and squeezed them, and
why they have taken away their sweat, and spent it in Pride?

76. Here the root whence they came, and from which they are grown, will be
enquired after, whether they bear the Or stamp.
Ordinance of God, and whether they have their Original in the Heavenly Fiat,
or in the Hellish F^at from the Anger? There every one must give an account of
his Or State.
Condition; whether he has thrust himself into Office out of Covetousness
and Pride, and made himself a Magistrate, or whether his Government be
ordained of God.

77. Therefore ye Rulers and Potentates of the world, look to it, and see
whether you be the Ordinance of God? and are placed in the Right, Divine Order?
Have a care how you deal with the distressed inferior: for, now he stands
before your Eyes, and blames you, saying, that you have been the cause of all
his sins, and wickedness.

78. For, there one will cry out and accuse the other, saying, that he has
caused me to commit such ludenesse, and will curse him: the Inferior his
Superiors, and the Superiors their Superiors: Also the Prince will accuse
his false Counselors, and his Counselors the Priests, because they did not
reprove their Courses; but soothed and flattered them for Ambition, and honor
sake.

79. How will you be able to stand, ye Or Universities.
high Schools, and Doctors: even all of you who have set up your selves in
Christ's stead, and have so proudly Or disputed.
wrangled about Christ's Cup, also about Christ's Doctrine and Glory: that you
have provoked and put on the Princes of your Land (who are the Ordinance of
God) to war and bloodshed; for a few Terms of Art.
words sake, which you your selves have Or Contrived.
forged.

80. Where is Christ's teaching and Spirit of Love, who said, Love one another,
for thereby shall they know that ye are my Disciples? Where is your Love: look
upon your bloody instigations, wherewith you have encouraged men to battle, and
have lead the world astray from Love and Or Concord.
Unanimity.

81. Ye have made Rents and Divisions: so that Kings have been at variance and
enmity for your Pride sake; in that you have wrested the words of Christ, and
have not regarded whether you have had Christ's Spirit, and Or meaning.
Will or no: and therefore you above all others shall give an heavy account;
for you have known the will of the Lord, and have not done it, you have run
and thrust your selves into Christ's Office, merely to get profit, favor and
Honor: you have not regarded the Spirit of God: therefore the Spirit calls
you Babell; a confusion of all those that live.

82. You have set the whole world at ods, and though you should teach them
Love, you have taught them Contention and strife, so that one brother has
hated and persecuted another for your Opinions, or Doctrines, which you have
set down for Orthodox.
fables sake; O! how is the name of Christ Reproched, or scandal sed for your
disputations sake.
blasphemed for your contentions sake: whether will you betake your selves, and
where will you abide? when this shall be set before your Eyes, and the whole
world cry woe, woe, woe to you.

83. Also here the Angels who are the Reapers shall divide all into two Herds,
and place the Or Righteous.
Honest at the Right hand, and the wicked at the left, viz. at the Eye of
Anger; for, the Principle of Light is here called the Right hand, and the
Principle of Fire the Left.

84. And thus the Tribunal or seat of Judgment will be set: All the great
Shepherds whom God has ^e^t forth for a Light to the world, who have reproved
and taught, as the Patriarchs who taught of the Promise of Christ, shall be
placed with the Prophets and Apostles, at the Right hand of the Judgment: and
Moses, and all Teachers of the And Lawgivers.
Law, at the left hand of the Judgment.

85. For, Moses and Elias, and all those exceeding precious teachers of the
Law, bear the f^ery Sword, and require Gods Justice, and they at the Right
hand Gods Mercy.

86. And in this hour is the very last Day, when the Judge shall say, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Beginning:
for, I was hungry, thirsty, naked, sick, and in Prison, and you have
administered to me.

87. And to the wicked company: Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, I know you
not; for I have been hungry, thirsty, naked, sick, and in Prison, and you
administered not to me.

88. And then they will excuse themselves before the presence of the Judge, and
say, we knew thee not Lord, but he shall say, being you have not done this to
my poor Children, you have not done it to me.

89. And here the Spirit of God will manifest himself forthwith in all the
three Principles, and stir up the Or Ground.
Center of Nature, so that it shall burn in the fire of Anger: for all, both
Heaven, Earth, and the Firmament, will be set on Fire together.

90. And the Turba will swallow up the Earthly world in the Fire, and restore
it to that which it was before the Creation: only the Viz. All whatsoever
grew, was borne, made, or done, by word or Deed, from the beginning of the
world to the End.
Wonders remain still in two Principles; the third Principle does vanish quite
away, all but the Wonders, which shall be brought into the beginning.

91. And then the Earthly Life, and the Earthly Body will fall away, and the
Fire will consume them.

92. And the Glorious bright Paradisicall Body of the Righteous shall pass
through the Fire, with its own Wonders, which shall follow it, and whatsoever
is false shall remain in the Fire.

93. And so they shall be carried through the Fire, in the twinkling of an Eye:
and the fire comprehends them not; for, as little as the fire can retain the
light or Wind, so little can The fire of Wrath.
it retain the Light of the Holy men: for they can dwell in the Fire, without
feeling any pain.

94. Then instantly, by the kindling of the Fire, the Divine Majesty and
Paradisicall Life is made ready, and thither they enter as Children, and live
Eternally with their Father in one Love, in a simple Childe-like Life; and this
is a Communion of Saints together.

95. There is no Day, or Night there; for the Sun passes away, and the
Stars pass away, but their Or operations.
Wonders remain apparently in the Great See in the small six points what the
Magia is.
Magia to the glory of God: thus they shall pass away.

96. The wicked also must go into the Fire, and their Earthly Life will also
fall away, and their Or Vizard.
monstrous Image will appear in the Spirit, according to the shape of all
hideous abominable Beasts, like the Devils.

97. For they dwell in one and the same Principle, and Lucifer is their great
Prince, whom indeed they served here, though they depended on their Hypocrites,
for a false Paradise.

98. Thus my beloved friend, you have a brief description, and Declaration of
the last Judgment Day: for whatsoever is of this world shall pass away.

99. The Earth, and all stony Rocks, and Elements will melt away, and that
only will remain which God would have; and for the sake of which he has
created this word.

100. Both the good and the evil were clearly God has foreseen the Good
according to his Love, (according to which he is called God) and according to
his wrath, or Nature, (according to which he is called an Angry, Jealous God,
and a consuming Fire) he has foreseen the evil: but not ordained it.
foreseen in Eternity, and were only made Essential in this world, that they
might be a Wonder; and hereafter they remain so to Etetnity.

The one and thirtieth Question. What kind of New glorified Bodies shall the
Holy Souls have?
1. THis has been already sufficiently declared; for, as every one shall be
clothed with the power of Love, Righteousness, and Purity, and as his
excellent works of Faith have been, so shall he gloriously shine.

2. Yet there will be very much difference: for the works of many will all
remain in the Fire, and he himself will hardly escape; he will not shine as
the Viz. the great Saints.
Saints.

3. For, (as the Scripture says) they shall excel one another as the Stars
of Heaven: But there will be no Or envying.
grudging, but every one will rejoice at the Excellency of the other; for
there is no other light there then God, filling All in All.

4. And so every one as his Or Virtue.
Power is capable of the Light, shall receive the brightness of the Majesty of
God: for after this Life there will be no bettering, but every thing remains
as it returns home.

5. For, there the Judge Christ will deliver up the Kingdom to his Father; and
^hen we shall no more need any Teachers and Guides: But he is our King and
Brother; there is no commanding more; but we are with him as a child with the
Father: whatsoever we do, it is good; for all falsehood is done away.

The two and thirtieth Question. What shall the Form, Condition, Joy, and
Glory of the Soul be, in the Life to come?
1. HEre we must consider Paradise; for, this outward world with its fruits and
colors has been a Figure of Paradise: for, Paradise was Or within us.
in us; and the outward Spirit bereaved us of it, and drew us into it self;
for, when Adam lusted after it, his own lust took him captive.

2. But we shall now enter into it again, and Eternally solace our selves in
the excellent beautiful flourishing of all manner of flowers, and Forms, both
of Trees, and Plants, and all kind of Fruits; but they will not be so Earthly
gross and palpable.

3. For, then our bodies shall not be so; how then can that Essence be so? all
things there will be Angelical: the Fruits are more clear, subtle,
transparent, bright, and shining.
pure and fine, then are now in the outward Elements, for they make no impurity
when we have eaten them.

4. We shall have no stomach or intrailes, which we shall need to fill, as we
do here, this devouring stomach; but all there, is in Power, we shall eat in
the Mouth and not receive into the body: we shall need no teeth to chew
withal, there is mere Power; and yet in a true Natural form and manner with
shining colors.

5. And so the Kingdom of Heaven consists not in eating and drinking, but in
Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost, singing and sporting with the works of Gods
Wonders and the Loveliness of Paradise.

6. We shall lead a life like children, who rejoice and are very merry in their
Sports; for there will be no sadness in our hearts, or fear of any thing: but
a delightful Play, sport, or exercise.
Recreation with the Angels.

7. This world will be no more thought upon or regarded, for all Earthly
knowledge and cogitations, shall remain in the Turba, of the Earthly Life, in
the Fire.

8. We shall have no knowledge more of our Parents, Children, or friends, who
are in Hell.

9. We shall all know one another among our selves by Name; though the Earthly
Name shall remain in the Turba: we shall have a Name according to our first
Name, in the Language of Angels; which here in this life we do not understand:
In the Language of Nature we understand somewhat of it, but here we have no
tongue to speak it with.

10. None shall say to another, thou art my Husband, thou art my wife, thou art
my Daughter, thou art my son, my servant, or my handmayde, all are alike
there: we are all Children: there is neither Husband, nor wife, neither
child, servant or maid, but all are free; every one is all: There is but one
Sex, viz. Heavenly Virgins full of Modesty, Chastity and Purity.

11. All of us together are Gods Spouse, and he is our Husband; He sows his
power into us, and we bring him forth praise and Glory.

12. There is such a kind of dancing and singing, as Children use when they
hold hands, and sing and dance a Round.

13. All Arts will be no account: But you must know that they who have i had
the Mystery, Enjoyed the great hidden Wisdom, understanding, and Art.
and to whom that has been revealed; they shall have far greater Wisdom and
knowledge then others, and excel others much.

14. Indeed not in Teaching, and ordering, or coaction.
Doctrine and Discipline, but their wisdom will begin all manner of Exercise
in the heavenly Mystery, to the stirring up of Joy: for as Children flock
together when one begins a sport; so also here.

15. Little Children are our Schoolemasters till evil stir in them, and so
they embrace the Turba Magna, but they bring their sport from the Mothers
womb, which is a Remnant of Paradise: but all the rest is gone till we shall
receive it again.

16. A King is of no more value there then a Beggar: if he have governed well,
then his virtue follows him, and he shall have the praise thereof in the
Majesty; for he will obtain an excellent glorification, like a Shepherd over
his flock.

17. But if he have been evil, and yet at last turned and entered in as by a l
thread; The thread of Faith at the last gasp.
then his Kingly works remain in the Fire: and he will be accounted of In the
Kingdom of Heaven.
here, then a Beggar who has been honest; nay, he will not be so glorious as
he.

18. Every one will be known by his works, what he has been, when they shall
set forth their Merchandise in the heavenly Magia, as Children do in their
sport.

19. And yet you must know that it shall not be a Kingdom of Sport; but we
shall speak of the Wonders and wisdom of God, and of the great Mysteries of
the Heavenly Magia: the The song of Miriam, Moses sister.
song of the Persecutour, plaguer or oppressor.
great Hunter will continue there to the disgrace of the Devil, and to the
praise of God.

20. We shall have some knowledge of Hell, but see nothing of it save only in
the Magia, in the Mystery; for the Devils must dwell in the Darkness: the
wrathful fire which is in them is their Light, they have eyes of Fire to see
with all, all Fire besides is gone, for, the Majesty has Or allayed it.
swallowed it up that it may burn in Love.

21. Though indeed there is fire in the Center from which the Majesty arises;
but this will not be allowed to the Devils; they shall be thrust out into
Darkness, where there is howling and gnashing of Teeth, indeed more More frost
then fire.
cold then heat.

The three and thirtieth Question. What kind of matter shall our bodies have
in the Life to come?
1. MY beloved friend, this is a mighty Or strong.
hard Question; the outward man must let it alone, and not meddle with it at
all, for he is not worthy of it.

2. You know, that God is become Man, and has taken our Flesh and blood, and
soul upon him: Now Christ said, Joh. 8.23.
I am from above: Joh. 3.13.
None goes into Heaven but the Son of Man which is come from Heaven, and is
in Heaven.

3. Do you understand this, that he said, he is in Heaven? He spoke not only
of his Deity, that is, of the Word; but of the Son of Man, even of that Word
which was flesh; and this we are now to consider of: for, in that Flesh and
Blood we must live Eternally, and we must have Christ's body, if we will subsist
in God.

4. Yet we know of no other body that we shall have, but our Job. 19.26, 27.
own body, growing out of the Old Body, as a sprout grows from a kernel:
and such a Body Adam had in the Creation; but he was captivated by the Or by
the working property of this procreated world of four Elements.
Kingdom of this world, and so became Earthly; this was his Fall; and this
caused God to take a part of Adam, and make a woman of it, as we have written
at large in our Of the threefold Life.
third Book.

5. Now we know well that Adam was a chaste Virgin before his sleep, and
before Eve was made, but afterward became a Man, That is a beastiall animal
mortal man.
having Deformity like a beast, of which we are yet ashamed at this very day in
the sight of God, because we have Earthly bestiall members for propagation.

6. Now Adam had the Virgin of Divine Wisdom in him, but when he fell, then
it continued immovable in its own Principle, and Adam Or forsook it.
departed from it.

7. But know that Christ became Man in that Virgin [which was] in the Earthly
Mary; for the word of the Lord brought it with it into the body of Mary.

8. And here you must understand, that Christ became Flesh in the water of
Eternal Life; (which flesh the whole Deity fills,) and also in the
Substance, or properties.
Essences of the Earthly Mary.

9. But Mary was blessed with the Heavenly Virgin, and so Christ became man in
a pure vessel, and the Earthly man clave to him.

10. For, because of the soul which he was to receive from From the soul of
Mary.
Mary, he must therefore receive Mary's Flesh, yet in the blessing, in the
Heavenly Virgin only.

11. The Tincture of the blood in the heavenly Virgin was heavenly: for, the
The Earthly Tincture, or substantial virtue.
Earthly had not been able to pass, through the wrath of God, and through
Death, much less had it had power to rise out of the grave.

12. That word which became Flesh had the water of Eternal Life, which did
proceed from the Divine Majesty, and yet it was in Mary's blood: and here for
further information we direct you to our third Book; where it is described at
large.

13. And thus we tell you, we shall have a body consisting of Flesh and blood,
such a body as Christ had; for Christ by his Incarnation is Or borne.
become Man in us.

14. When we are borne anew of water, and of the Spirit, then in Christ's
Spirit, we are borne anew of Christ's flesh and blood, we put on Christ.

15. Christ becomes borne in the converted sinner, and he in Christ becomes
the Child of God, this is the body we shall have in Heaven.

16. No gross beastiall flesh, as we have in the Old Adam, but subtle flesh
and blood, such flesh as can pass through wood, and stone, they remaining
whole still; as Christ came in to his Disciples the door being shut: It is
such a body as has no Turba or fragility, Hell cannot retain it, it is like
Eternity: and yet it is real flesh and blood, which our heavenly hands shall
touch, and feel, and take hold of, also a visible Body as that is, which we
have here in this world.

17. Now pray consider; how is it possible that such a body as we carry about
us here, can be Comprehend, or receive.
capable of the Divine Majesty? sure it must be such a body, as is like the
Majesty, that the Majesty can shine forth from it, out of the Tincture and
water of Eternal Life.

18. Here indeed we are as it were Or not intelligitable.
dumb, to the apprehension of Reason, yet we are well enough understood by our
Brethren: this belongs to the Such as love God, and are borne of him.
Children. A Wolf desires to fill his mouth with such a piece of flesh as
will fill his belly; we speak not of such flesh, but such as Christ has given
us in his Testament, and left for a Remembrance, and as an Earnest that he will
remain for ever with us; we in him and he in us.

19. Therefore we say, that we shall have the Divine Body and Christ's body
which fills Heaven: we shall not remain in that which is his Creature: but
be joined one to another as members, brethren and Children.

20. There is but one Life in us all; there is nothing mortal, All proceed
from the Eternal one; there is nothing that has had any beginning but the
Wonders only, one Essentiality is come out of the Eternal: we are as Gods: we
are true Children of God, proceeding from his Essences in body and soul.

The four and thirtieth Question. What is the miserable and horrible Estate of
the Damned?
1. IT is sufficiently declared already: for, Gods wrath in the Darkness is
their dwelling Place: their Light is that which shines from their fiery Eyes,
like the glimmering of a flash of fire; they have no Light at all but that; for
they dwell in that which is As in utmost, or utter darkness.
most uttermost: and so ascend in haughtiness above the Thrones like strong
Champions: and yet they have different qualifications among them, as their
Spirits differ.

2. For, a Dog does like a Dog, a Wolf like a Wolf, and so a Horse, a Foul,
a Toade, a Serpent, every one in their kind: yet they are all more speedy and
swift then thoughts.

3. They have their joy in their abominations, and their chiefest joy is to
scorn God, in that they are fiery Spirits, and God a Spirit of Light.

4. Their boast is always of their strong, fiery might, they are as a Dragon
that spitteth fire: they seek destruction and find abominations.

5. They have also fruit growing out of their own Principle, as the
abominations of their wills are.

6. They have a sport like such as play with fireworkes, as Rockets, and Balls
of fire, also spitting fire out of their mouths, Jesting, jeering, scoffing,
and deriding in strange Apish gestures of face, and body.
fooling, tumbling, and juggling, is their passe-time; though indeed there is no
time; nor no fear of any other Torment, after the last judgment Day! but
their whole life is a continual fear, horror, terror and Lamentation: every
one has his work, (which he did here while he lived) in the Figure: which
awakeneth the Turba there, and so he rides in the Fire.

7. The soul has no feeling of it; because it self is Fire, but the Turba
does plague it with those Abominations which it introduced; there is an
Eternal despairing in them, and therefore they are Gods Enemies.

8. To blaspheme God is their chiefest Power: they devour Hellish brimstone
and Abominations, for their fruits are a kind of stuff that is outwardly
fair, but inwardly mere Strong Abominations malice, or wickedness.
wrathfulnesse: such Hypocrites as they have been upon Earth, such bread does
their Heaven afford them to eat.

9. They are at Liberty and not shut up at all, they may descend as deep as
they will, for the Abyss and darkness is every where, and yet they are but in
their first place: the deeper they desire to throw themselves, the deeper they
fall, and yet they find no end, or bottom.

10. Their Their time not the time of Man.
number is not the number of any humane time, their Refocillation.
breath is a mere stink of Fire and Brimstone: when they consider themselves,
in their Abominations, that they were once Angels and now Devils, then
presently the gnawing worm arises, which biteth and tormenteth them.

11. To what end should their wickednesses be described? they are evil
unclean Beasts, that which they practiced on Earth, that follows them, and
that they desire to do there also, they drink down abomination and
wickedness without measure.

12. Their Or Dominion.
Government is no way better to be known then in the Antichristian Or Beast.
horse and scornful men, who rave with cursing and blaspheming: yet this is
but a Shadow, or Resemblance.
Glass of the hellish Abominations: we will not mention them any further, for
they are not worth the speaking of.

The five and thirtieth Question. What is the Enochian Life; and how long is it
to continue?
1. THis is also above humane Reason; no outward Reason can comprehend it; but
seeing The Enochian life is brought forth.
it is borne, it must be made manifest: For there are such Mysteries couched in
it as the world is not able to conceive, neither ought we to mention them all,
for they have their Bounds, or appointed time.
limit how far they shall be mentioned: for in Time, or Age.
this, Or Wonders.
Miracles are yet to be done upon the Earth; for which cause, our speech is
taken away, and we must hold our peace in silence.

2. Indeed we may declare what kind of life it is, or whether Enoch is gone,
as also Elias and Moses: it is no Fiction, we declare only what is given us
here, we must not mention any further, we must not be believe Reason, for it
is a fool herein.

3. But we may well speak something of it, for the time is Or come.
borne, for Or prophecy.
Enoch to speak, and Or the Sword.
Elias to work again, which Babell shall find by experience: for Moses has
Or Beams, or Rays which with their light shall contend with darkness.
horns, and yet he is a patient Lamb.

4. O how will thou rejoice if thou do get into Moses his Flock, for he has
a good Message: Rejoice O heaven, and skip for joy O Earth! for E^och is in the
Field and keeps his Flock.

5. What does El^as desire? for he is clothed with a white Garment! he was
with Christ on the Mount, and spoke of the consummation of man's Redemption; he
spoke also of the entering into Paradise, and of the final deliverance from Or
driver.
the Hunter.

6. He that is borne blind sees nothing: How can a lame man get the prize? or
a deaf man distinguish Languages? does not the Sun shine daily, and yet the
Moale remains blind? shall Babell come to see? we know she is a scorn, and
therefore she must be blind though the Sun shine clearly to her

7. How can he hehold two worlds, that always lives but in one? or is it not
Art and wit, that has understanding able to search out the deep Gates? yet Art
and wit.
they pass away, as a wind which brings forth nothing, though it makes a
boasting noise: and so does Babell.

8. When we will speak of the Enochian Life; we must look into the Scripture,
and see who Enoch was, and what life he led: and then we may soon find where
he is, and what his taking up or Translation was.

9. You know that the Genesis 5.18.
Scripture says his Fathers name was See the Mysterium magnum, chapter 30. ver.
19, 20.
JARED; if you understood the Language of Nature, you had the whole ground
already.

10. And Enoch begat Methusalah, who attained the highest age of Man, and after
he had begotten him he continued in a Divine Life, till the Lord took him away
into his own Principle.

11. But we must not understand it, as if he were wholly perfect in the Light
of the Divine Majesty, and should not appear at the day of Judgment. Indeed
he is in God without Death or want of any thing; yes, he is in Gods Love, yet
but in the birth of the Divine Principle, for he had also Adams flesh.

12. And you know well, that the outward Kingdom with the Earthly flesh,
belongs to the Turba; and although it be clear, that he had the body of the
Wonders of God, in the outward body, in which Divine body of the Wonders, he
was taken away into the Mystery, so that the outward body was as it were
swallowed up by the Mystery.

13. Yet, now the Mystery must give up all whatever it has devoured: as you
know, that at the end, the outward body must appear with all its Substance, or
Essences.
works before the Judgment: and thus the Turba is in the outward body with
the Wonders, which shall be made manifest and tried in the Fire.

14. Now then if Enoch be thus taken up, both body and soul (with both the
bodies) then the outward body is in the In the outward secret hiddennesse.
Mysterium, and the Inward body in the In the inward secret hiddennesse.
Arcanum, an heavenly Mystery, and so he lives in two Mysteries, being
invisible and incomprehensible to the outward world: and thus we give you to
understand, that Paradise is yet present and unperished; though seeming to be
as it were devoured by the curse of God, and it lies yet as a Mystery, in the
curse, incorrupt.

15. For, we are able to say with good ground in Truth, that Paradise is still
upon the Earth; yet we are not in it, but Enoch is in it, and yet he has the
body of the Turba in the Mystery, and in the Heavenly i Mystery he has the
Divine body, Or Arcanum.
a Paradificall Body which is capable of Paradise: and thus he is as a Wonder,
and is a Prophet in the Crown at the Or End.
Limit of the Wonders.

16. For, you know that the Scripture says: that after he had begotten
Methusalah, viz. the Man of the greatest Age, he continued afterward in a
Divine Life, and this has a deep meaning.

17. Methusalah signifies the end of the Wonders of this world: and Enoch
remaining in his Divine Life three hundred years after the birth of
Methusalah, signifies the manifestation of the Wonders, and a plain
Ministry, viz. a preaching of Righteousness; whereby the Turba of every one
shall be shown him, and the End of the Wonders of this world shall be
declared, viz. the vengeance of God; and his Reward to the good.

18. And the time after Enoch (wherein Methusalah lived to the Viz. the end of
an Age, or Seculum.
Number of the Crown) when Enoch and his preaching was taken up, does signify
that the Enochian Light which shined in his time, will enter again into its
Principle, and seek out the Earthly body which Enoch had, and will find that
the Turba is in it still; and then there will be no further seeking, for the
Turba is found in the Limit, and works to the Fire and Judgment.

19. And thus the end of the world is as the dregs, and it works in the
Turba, to the blowing up of the Fire, and the Judgment: for the outward world
was produced out of the Turba, and took its beginning in the Turba, and the
Turba is its propriety, thus the beginning seeks the end again in the wrath.

20. And as this world was corporeal in the wrath; so the Spirit will have the
beginning at the end again in the wrath, for the Beginning and the End is one;
also you plainly perceive, that in the Beginning the Turba devoured Adam, and
brought him into the Anger: and murdered Abel.

21. Therefore O ye Elect, let none of you desire to live to the end of the
time, after Enochs taking up; but behold when Enoch preaches then the Sun
shines, and then go out from Babell, it is a golden time: but your Turba is
the cause that Enoch shall be taken up.

22. Enoch is not gone out of this world, he is entered into the Repository.
Mystery in the Wonders; for he is Gods Preacher; and after the Turba has
overcome the world, he must be silent till the six Seals have ended their
Wonders, and till the Angels of the Turba have poured out their Viols, then the
Or works.
Wonders of the Anger are finished.

23. Then Enoch comes out of the Mystery again, and enters into the
Ministerium, or Office of teaching, or preaching.
Ministry, and relates what has been done, and punishes the world because of
the Malice, or wickedness.
Turba, for suffering Or sins.
Abominations to enter into them, without resisting.

24. And after that the world is fat and wanton in the golden years, and Or
becomes.
seeks Sodom and Gomorrah again, then also its Turba will become fat and
wanton, and seek the wrath and the Limit, then the golden days are done, and
will be devoured by the Turba; and then Methusalah the oldest man dies, and
instantly the Deluge of Fire approaches: consider it, for it will be in
earnest.

25. We do not say that you shall feel Enoch with your Hands, no! Enoch did
not preach from the Spirit of the Earthly Life, but from that which was a
Prophet, which brought the outward man into the Principle: and so you shall not
feel the outward Enoch, but you shall hear the Prophet which speaks from
Enoch, from the Mystery.

26. Babell does mock, and scorn at this, and contemns Or Prophecy
Enoch for a while, and then Enoch calls Preaching, or Teaching.
Noah, but they call him old fool, for preaching so of the downfall of Babell.

27. But Noah goes into the other world through the Simplicity, or humility.
water, and calls Or Miracles.
Moses with his Wonders, and he comes: for he has the Wonders of God!

28. For he is passed through Death, and brought his body through Death, when
the Turba desired to consume it, and the Devil contended for it, and would
have the Corruption, or transitorinesse.
Turba which was in Moses, because he had been an angry man, and carried the Or
destroyer.
Turba in him.

29. But it was told the Devil that the Turba in the Fire did not belong to
him, for it belonged to the Majesty of God, and contained the Wonders; and the
Turba in the Darkness of the wrath only belonged to him: who is without the
City, he must not dwell in the City, in the Principle, but without it.

30. For God did not create him Or for.
in the Fire: let him remain therefore in his own awakened Fire-Life: he has
nothing to do with Moses his body; for his Wonders in the Anger, belong not to
his The Devil.
Turba, he is a very outcast, a castaway.

31. Also Moses his body is passed through Death; his unfadable Body which had
the Wonders, has swallowed up that which was Earthly in the Turba, and yet not
consumed it to putrefaction, but it also is in the Mystery: and his Anger
sharpness, or severity.
Turba which killed the firstborn in Egypt; drowned Pharaoh in the water;
slew them that worshipped the Calfe; and swallowed up Corah, Dathan, and Abiram
into the Earth, continued in Moses death.
Death.

32. For when he dyed, then his Spirit and soul departed Or from the Anger and
severity, and passed into Innocence: and so was but an Instrument of Gods
Anger, in true Resignation, and not in selfehood.
from the Turba: and he remained in the Wonders, in the Mystery.

33. And now he is become a Lamb, and puts his works amongst the goods of
Isaac and Sem, as a Mystery of God in his deeds of Wonder: but the house is
Isaacks: and all dwell in the Tents of Sem, in his Kingdom: take notice of
this both Jews and Christians.

34, Now therefore seeing Moses is gone with Righteousness from the strife of
the Turba, and of the Devil, into the Mystery: and yet has his first
unfadable body on him (which though it be delivered from the Turba, must yet be
tried in the Fire at the end of the Days) and therefore his Prophet is in the
Mystery.

35. And since he is become a Lamb, after the Turba; he has sent his people
many Prophets to preach the Mystery: as indeed there are not only Laws and
works contained in the Mystery, but also the Lamb Christ: into whom he is
also entered, and has brought his Or the Jews.
Law to be a servant in the Or household.
Family of the Lamb; that so his Wonders may be in the sheepfold of the Lamb.

36. This Moses calls to Or Prophecy.
Enoch, seeing that he also is in the Mystery: and is clothed with the white
Garment, which he got of the Lamb in the other world; and Moses comes to help
him with the Lambs deeds of Wonder, because they call Noah fool, who teaches
only as an honest man without Wonders.

37. Babell is not able to endure Noah's doings of simple teaching without Pomp
and Covetousness.
this, for so her Pomp and Pride will be taken away: she sets her self
against Or Miracles.
Moses, and Or Prophecy.
Enoch, and persecuteth them, she would murder them; but Moses is already
dead, and Enoch is taken up, and neither of them is in the outward life with
her: she says come on now! where is Enoch and Moses? show us their Wonders!
but she is blind and cannot see them: and so she raveth against Moses and
Enoch, and falls into Contention.

38. Then Moses calls for Or the Sword, or vengeance.
Elias, who went out of this world in the Divine Fire, into the Abyss of the
Prlnciple with body and soul: who also dwells in the Principle with mighty
Power: Now when he comes and perceives the cry, that Destroyed Christendom.
Babell is in the Fire; then he kindles the Turba, so that the great Fire
burns, which consumes flesh and blood, also stones and the Elements: then
Babell must drink her last Or the very Dregs.
draught.

39. After this Or the Prophets that preach in the Name of the Lord, and lead
a pious life.
Enoch has peace a while, and then is the golden Age, till my The Children of
God.
beloved grows voluptuous and wanton, having fatted her Turba, so that it
seeks the Limit; and then comes the End of all time.

40. Do not wonder at it; we will stay in the mean time with In simplicity.
Noah till Miracles.
Moses and Or vengeance, or destruction.
Elias come: then all the Children of God will find it true.

41. Yet it will remain hidden to the wicked, till the Turba devour them; for
they look upon this, as the Jews did upon Christ, and the first world upon
Noah: what does the Mystery profit a scorner? he looks after nothing but
eating and drinking; and takes care how to satisfy his haughty mind, that
he may ride with Pomp in Babell.

42. Thus my beloved friend, we have given you a short Hint of the Enochian
Life, and what his Office and condition is, also of Moses and Elias: as a wise
man consider further of it; for we dare not speak otherwise thereof: our
understanding and will is driven into such a phrase, neither have we leave in
this place at this time, to write more at large, or more fundamentally in
plain words.

43. But if God shall please to grant, that we may write somewhat upon the
first, and also upon the second Book of Moses, somewhat more should be
revealed: for the Names of the Fathers before the Flood which are there set
down, belong all to the Mystery, and they contain great Wonders in them:
when it is Day, you shall clearly know the whole course of the world in it.

The six and thirtieth Question. What is the Soul of the Messiah, or Christ?
1. WE have sufficiently cleared this in our third Book; of the threefold life
of man: but because every one that reads this has not that; and in regard of
the Question it self, we must answer somewhat the more here, and therefore I
set this down: for you ask in the following Question about Christ's Spirit,
which was readily obedient, or submissive.
willing, and which he commended to his Father.

2. Here the Or Mankind.
Old and sick Adam shall be comfortablely refreshed, he shall have a Or Cure
for Death.
Medicine against Death, and be Or made alive.
quickened again: for his Mother shall bring forth a young son, to live in her
bosom, and he shall exceedingly rejoice in him.

3. If we would consider the soul of Christ, we need only seek and find our
selves: for Christ's soul is a humane soul, conceived in Mary the Viz. the
Eternal wisdom of God: and the outward humanity: that is, God and Man.
twofold Virgin.

4. Yet we do not acknowledge the outward mortal Life in Mary for a pure
Virgin: for, that which is mortal has the Anger and the Turba which
corrupts all Purity, so that no pure Virgin is borne of Eve, but are all
daughters of her.

5. And Eve her self was but half a Virgin, for Adam was the other half,
according to the two Tinctures, in which man saw himself to be wholly a
Virgin in pure Love, and so saw God through himself, that is, through the
Creature he saw the Original, which produced those two out of it self.

6. And thus also in one The whole and not divided person, as Adam was before
he slept.
whole person, there is one pure Love and Chastity: for it seeks no other
Conjunction, it self is the Conjunction of both Tinctures, viz. the Tincture
of the soul, and the Tincture of the Spirit; and its power was such that it
could bring forth a Spirit out of the fiery Tincture, which is [said to be] a
soul and Spirit.

7. Which Adam Extinguished, or put out.
lost, when he suffered the Earthly Life to take him captive, and therefore he
must be divided, and a woman be made out of him, which must set her Love,
Longing delight, or lust.
Desire, and Imagination upon the Adamicall fiery Tincture: if she would be
pregnant with a Soul.

8. Thus none can say, that Eve was a pure and chaste Virgin before the
contaction of Adam: for as soon as Adam did awake from sleep, he saw her
standing by him, and did presently set his Fancy, or Desire; or lusted after
her.
Imagination upon her, and took her to him and said; this is flesh of my
flesh, and bone of my bone: she shall be called Woman, because she is taken
from Man.

9. And she (Eve) instantly set her Imagination upon Adam, and so both were
mutually kindled with the Desire of each other.

10. Where is now the pure Chastity and Modesty? is it not bestiall? is not the
outward Image become a Beast? as is to be seen plain enough in his Will and
Or doings.
Essence, that he does like a Beast, yea, more foolishly, for he has Reason,
and yet runs on against Reason, as if he were void of sense.

11. But that he might be restored, and the Image reduced into Unity, that word
which spoke the soul out of the Mouth of God, and did breath it from the Holy
Ghost into the Image, is become Man, and is entered into the Earthly Image, that
is, into the Turba of Destruction.

12. And you know very well, that the word has the water of Eternal Life, and
the Fire, the Deity, and out of the Fire [it hath] the Tincture of the Deity,
and in the Tincture, the Spirit of God, which proceeds from the Mouth of God;
and in the proceeding forth the Or Luster.
glance of the Majesty is made manifest in the operation of the Spirit.

13. This word which is in the Virgin of the wisdom of God, and encompassed
with the Wonders of Eternity, is now in humility of great Love toward our
Image which was lost in Adam, come again into us, and is in Mary (understand
the Earthly Mary, yet in the Benediction) become Man.

14. The Benediction was, that the soul of Mary was adorned with the heavenly
Virgin of the wisdom of God, which Adam had lost; therefore the Angel called
her blessed of all Women.

15. No woman from Adam to that Time was ever clothed with the heavenly
Virgin but this Mary: therefore by the blessing she became chaste and full of
Purity: for the Holy Ghost goes not into that which is Earthly, he mixeth
himself not with the Similitude, or Resemblance.
Glass, for it cannot be that the Glass should be as the Life it self.

16. Understand our high and precious depth thus; The soul of Man proceeds
from God, and is from the Eternal; and the body of man is but a Glass of the
Eternal, and so God clothed the soul of Mary with the Divine Virgin, in the
Principle of the soul; not in the Earthly flesh; as if she had been deified:
no! she must die (...) well as all other people.

17. And in this Virgin, Gods word, out of the Heart of God the Father assumed
the seed of the Woman, viz. the seed of the soul, and the seed of the first
Image, which for so long a time stood hidden in the Mystery.

18. But now at length, the Life of God entered into it, and did make it a whole
Image again: for, the water of Eternal life proceeding from the Heart of God,
mingled with the water of the Spirit of the soul: for the Spirit takes its
Original from the water, and the soul is Fire.

19. Thus the word received the Tincture of the soul, and the Holy Ghost the
Tincture of the Spirit, viz. the Tincture of the water: and both became one
soul: and yet the Creature was still distinguished from Gods Spirit, though
Gods Spirit dwelt therein: and of Gods water and Tincture, and of the seed of
Mary, from her Tincture and water, in the high benediction, a flesh and blood
was produced, so that an Heavenly Man in the Earthly was incarnate at once.

20. So that it may be said; this is the Son of the Woman; viz. the very
bodily and natural Son of Mary, with soul and body, with flesh and blood,
and all that belongs unto Man: and also the very Son of God, which was
borne from Eternity out of Gods Eternal Essence, ere the foundation of the
world was laid; who stood both in the Majesty of the Holy Ternary, and also in
the Or womb.
body of Mary at once.

21. And the soul of Christ does belong half to the Principle of this world,
and half to the Holy Ghost: for, the sou e of Christ used the Spirit of the
Air and Stars, with the virtue of the Elements; and also the Word of God and
the Divine food; for such a man Adam was in his Innocence.

22. Thus God has regenerated us in Christ; and so we are regenerated in
Christ out of Gods word and Spirit, by the water of Eternal Life, and so we
are Gods Children in Christ: and if we resign our selves up to Christ,
departing from our Reason and will, then we put on Christ's body, and our will
and Spirit lives from Christ, who is in us and we in him.

23. Hence you may understand what the Temptation of Christ was, viz. The
Regenerate man was to endure Adams Temptation [to trie] whether his soul could
stand steadfast in God: and therefore he was proved in the Turba [to trie]
whether he could stand steadfast in three Principles, and rule over the outward
Life: and therefore food was withdrawn from the outward Life, and the Inward
must over power the outward, and eat of the word of the Lord, and uphold the
outward in its own Power, and full Omnipotency, and also keep Death captive,
that it might not be able to destroy the outward Life: this must needs be a
hard Combat!

24. And the other two Temptations were these, viz. he was tempted [to trie]
whether man would live in Or complete.
full obedience, and suffer God to work in him; or whether he would exalt
himself again, and be free from God, as Lucife^ did? therefore the Devil
must tempt him, because this man was to possess his Royal Throne.

25. The Devil complained that he could not stand, because the Mother of
wrathfulnesse did draw him too hard, and there ore he was permitted to try
this man, and to set before him that which was set before himself; and if this
man stood, then he should judge the Devil, who was found to be a liar.

26. For he fully tried him in the second and third temptation, whether he
would ascend on high, in his own power, as himself had done, and so stirred
up the Anger: or whether he would put his tru^^ and affiance in God only, and
live to him both in will and deed; as a child in obedience to the Father and
this he urged upon him, just so long as Adam stood in the Temptation, before he
fell asleep.

27. And now we also must always be so tempted and proved: and we are able to
get the victory in Christ who has overcome: for his soul is our soul, and
his flesh is our flesh, if we trust in him, and give up our selves wholly to
him as Christ gave up himself to his Father.

28. And thus my beloved friend, you understand what Christ's soul and body is;
viz. that it is our soul and body if we cleave to God; but if we do not,
then we are parted; and in the outward life, we belong to the Spirit of this
world, viz. to the lost and perished Adam; and in the soul we belong to the
Devil in the Anger of God: but look for these things more at large in our
other writings; where you shall find the whole ground of Heaven, and of this
world.

The seven and thirtieth Question. What is the Spirit of Christ which was Or
obedient*
willing, and which he commended into his Fathers hands?
1. THis is that great and excellent Treasure, Gem, or Pearl.
Jewel: and we exceedingly rejoice that we know it, so that we are able to
know our selves what we are; and it is more worth to us then all the world: for
it is that Pearl, of which Christ said, that one sold all that he had and
bought that Pearl.

2. For it is more profitable to man then the whole world; it is more precious
then the Sun, for the Or the Philosophers stone.
Noble stone of the wise men lies therein; it has the heavenly and Earthly
Great Mystery.
Mysterium Magnum: and therein nothing in this world to be compared to it, but
Or trusting in God; and enduring whatsoever he lays upon us.
sincere simplicity, which is quiet, and brings forth, or stirs up no
Turba: and that has the Jewel hidden in it.

3. As Gold lies couched in the stone and is safe: if a Or spoyler.
Robber commerh not with the Earthly Turba, and destroys it: and yet he
himself gets nothing by it: so self Reason is a Robber in the That is, in
the Cabinet where the Pearl lies.
Mystery.

4. Therefore we may say upon good ground, that a simple Layman, or Idiot.
plain man, who simply without multiplicity of science, depends on God; has
the Mysterium Magnum, better and surer, yea less decayed, then a high learned
Or Father.
Doctor, who soareth aloft in Reason, and Or disputes and wrangleth about it.
spoyleth the Jewel, and Or respect of persons.
sets it in Babell: this saying will not be well relished, yet that is
nothing to us, we must speak the Truth without x partiality.

5. Now when we speak of Christ's Spirit, Reason thinks it is the soul, or
else the Spirit of the outward Life, which consists in the virtue and
operation of the Stars and Elements, but it is not so; It is somewhat else
wherein the Image of God consists: the outward Spirit belongs not to the
Deity, but to the Wonders.

6. We have spoken somewhat of it already: but because this Question does put
us in mind of it again; mentioning that when he dyed, he commended it to his
Father; therefore we must a little say how that was done.

7. You sufficiently perceive in what manner the soul is the Centrum Naturae.
Center of Nature, the Original of Life, and mobility, viz. Gods Fire: which
should be continually converted into the Eternal will of God, wherein it is
originally borne from the Magical Desire, and is a great Secret come out of
the Eternal Nothing, wherein all things are contained, even the Deity with all
the three Principles, and every Thing, Essence, or substance.
Being that can be named.

8. And you perceive that the Light and Spirit of the Air proceed from the
fire, and also that the fire does again draw the Spirit, of the Air into it
self, and so always blows it self up; and so with the Light, Air, and Or
property.
source of the Fire it is its own Life.

9. And further, we have said somewhat of the Noble Tincture which arises in
the Light, in which the meekness of the Light consists, and it comes forth
from the Anguish which is as a mortifying, and springs forth afresh through
the mortifying Anguish, as a life having another Or Source.
property, where the property of the fire is a kind of Tincture, like the
driving forth of a Spirit; and yet it is desiring, and thereby it attracteth
the virtue of the Light into it self, and makes it an Essence, viz. water.

10. And therein are two Forms: One according to the source of Fire which is
red, and therein the virtue, viz. Sulphur; And the other (which is like a thin
meekness, yet having Essentiality,) is water: which the desiring Tincture
contracteth together into one, and changes it into Blood.

11. Now the Original in the Blood, viz. Fire (which is a warmth, that is, a
Tincture) is a Life; and in the virtue of the Tincture, the thin water of the
Life proceeds, one The outward.
virtue proceeding forth from The inward.
another; and the virtue does always reassume that which goes forth: and that
which is gone forth is free from the Fire, and also from the virtue, for it is
gone forth, and yet it arose from the virtue.

12. And this is the true Spirit which is borne out of the soul, wherein the
Image of God, and the Divine virgin of Gods wisdom consists: for all
understanding and knowledge lies in this Spirit; it has the senses, and the
noble life which uniteth it self with God, this Spirit is so subtle that it
can and may enter into God.

13. If this Spirit resigneth it self up to God, and casts away the
ostentation and Reason, s^^tle^y, or vo^.
cunning of the fire of its own soul, then it attaineth the Image of God, the
Divine body: for it puts its will into God, and dwells in God with Power:
thus it is clothed with the Divine Essentiality, and is without this world in
the Life of God.

14. But seeing this Spirit arises first out of the Center of Nature, that is,
out of the Life of Fire, (although it is not the life of the Fire, but the
Spirit of it, and the Life of the Fire stands originally in the Abyss, in
the source of Gods Anger) therefore Christ did not commend this Spirit of his
to the fires owns life, but into the hands of his Father.

15. His hands are the Love-Desire, wherewith he embraces our Spirit, when we
enter into him, and commend our selves to him.

16. For, when his body was to dye on the Cross; and his soul was to pass
through Hell, through the Anger of God; there the Devils waited, and thought
with themselves, we will surely keep the soul in our Turba in the Fire; and
then Christ commended the Spirit into the Love of God.

17. And so the soul of Christ with the Spirit came into Gods hand, being
encompassed with the Fire of Anger and Death: and Death would have held it
there, but Death was destroyed and confounded.

18. For, Death smothered the outward [Spirit] viz. the outward Life, and then
thought, now surely the soul must remain in the Turba: but there was one,
stronger in the soul; viz. the word of God: which took death captive, and
destroyed the Anger, and quenched the wrath with the Love in the Spirit of
Christ.

19. It was a poison to Hell, for the Love of God to come into it, and smother
it in the soul also a Plague, Death and Destruction to Death; Death must now
suffer an Eternal Life to grow in it.

20. Thus the Spirit of Christ took the Devil captive, and drove him out of
the Fire of the soul, and cast him into Darkness: and shut him up under
darkness, out from the Fire of the soul, and out from Gods Fire; into the
wrathful harshnesse and bitterness in cold: there let him warm himself
least he freeze with cold.

21. Consider the first four Forms of Nature, and you will understand what
the Devils Mansion is: for, before Christ [came] he kept the soul captive in
the Turba, with the Fire; and although he had not the Spirit of the soul, yet
he had the root of it in the Turba: but then he was commanded to cease; and he
was thrown out, and driven into Darkness, and thus his malice was destroyed
by Christ's descending into Hell, and Christ became his Judge.

22. Thus we have in brief described what the Spirit of Christ, and our Spirit
is; viz. not the outward Spirit, but the Spirit of the soul; not the soul it
self, but the Spirit of its Life.

23. As, in God, the Holy Ternary, is distinct, being three Persons in one
Essence, and yet but one only God; where the Son has the Spirit, viz. the
Life, issuing forth from the Heart and mouth; and the Heart is the flame of
Love; and the Father the Fountain, or Property.
source of Anger, which is made meek, by the Son, in the Love, so that in
God there is but one only will and Essence.

24. Thus it is also in Man, and no otherwise, no not in the least tittle:
whatsoever God in Christ is, that we also are in Christ, in God; his true
Children: Therefore let us also commend our Spirit into his hands, and so we
may be able to pass through Death into Life, into God, with Christ.

25. Therefore be not led about, and gulled with Rattles, foolleries Bables,
shells, or outside shows, Imitation, or mimick tricks.
toys and trifles as hitherto ye have been in Babell: where this and that has
been Or pratled.
disputed about the soul, and its Spirit, one this way, and another that way;
there is no ground among them, but mere Fiction and Opinion.

26. Understanding is borne in God; not in the Schools from Art: yet we
despise it not; for if Art be borne in God, it is a tenfold Mystery, for it
always attaineth the Or perfection.
tenth Number in Or wit.
Reason, much bettter then a Or simple. Layman.
plain Man; for it can of many Numbers make Sum, or Total.
one.

27. But it is not in man's own power, no, one must enter in by the Cross as
well as the other, let him be a Doctor, or a Or Layick.
mean Man: Gods secrets will admit no Doctors but Discipulus.
Scholars into them: yet a Learned Discipulus.
Scholar may reach very far.

28. Had but this hand the High Art, and also those high gifts, then you
should see more from it: But God will have it as it is: It is indeed his
pleasure to make the wisdom of this world foolishness, and to give his Power
to the weak: that all All life, or Creatures.
may bow down before him, and acknowledge that he only is the Lord that does
whatsoever he will.

The eight and thirtieth Question. What are the things that shall come to pass
at the End of the world?
1. BEloved friend, it is not fit for me to Answer this your Question, neither
is it in my own power, and besides it is not fit, for any to ask it: for it
is the secret Counsel of God: let none endeavor to be equal with God, and to
foreknow all things.

2. Our knowledge consists in the Spirit and will of God, when that moves,
then it goes forward in the Heavenly Magia, and enters into the Wonders of
the Earthly: and then the Prophet is borne, for he stands upon the Or at the
end of a time, or Age.
Crown, and speaks Magically of the Beginning of the Wonders, and their
Turba; and shows how they shall come to an End, and be destroyed, and brought
again into the first.

3. For, all Prophets speak from the Turba, they discover that which is false,
and declare what is better, which enters into the will of God.

4. Therefore, be pleased not to urge us with this Question; for, we shall be
captivated in the Turba by it: you may understand enough in all the Questions,
what is to done hereafter, we have hinted it to you clearly enough.

5. We dare not speak any otherwise then Or by way of similitude, or in
Parables.
in a Magical manner of things to come: because the Wonders to come are all
seen in the Turba; now when the Spirit sees them, then it declares clearly
and plainly how the Turba is laden with evil, or good.

6. But behold all things are mixed: for God is become Man, and sets his Mercy
every where in the Anger, and hinders Perdition; therefore the Prophet must
speak magically, and not in express and plain terms: for it often comes
to pass, that though a thing be evil in its Or work.
Essence, yet there As at Ninivie, in Jonas his time.
soon grows a sprout out from the wickedness which destroys the Or
keeps back vengeance.
Turba, and causes a Conversion.

7. Therefore God admonishes you to subdue the firmamentall Heaven and to
oppose it; and so the evil which the firmamentall Heaven pours forth, is
many times turned into that which is better.

8. Otherwise if all should of necessity come to pass, as the firmamentall
Heaven does hold forth, then we needed no teaching: for that would be a sure
constant and perpetual Callender.

9. You know well, what Daniel, Ezekiel, and David say in their Prophesies;
especially the Revelation of Jesus Christ: In them lies all that shall
hereafter come to pass; and they also spoke In mystical terms, which outward
Reason could not comprehend.
Magically of things to come.

10. But in our writings you have them more clearly, for the time is now
nearer at end; and therefore it appears the more plainly what shall be done
at the end.

11. And be pleased to repair to our other writings, and there you shall find
enough of this: for the wicked world is not worthy of an open, plain and
manifest discovery; because thereby the great Secret, which belongs only to
the Children of God, would be Or stirred.
defiled: for God will not have us cast Pearls before Swine, but give them to
the Children for their Delight: and do you so with this also.

12. There is no need that the Mystery should lie under worldly Protection:
that is a folly; and God is dishonored by it, as if he were not able to
protect it.

13. You should not look for the Mysteries among the mighty, and Or pin your
Faith upon their sleeves, and look for a Religion from them.
confide in them more then in others, for the Persecution.
Turba presently enters in with a Law, and so the Spirit of God, is as it were
bound, and so an antichrist is brought forth.

14. Look upon Israel; when they rejected Samuel and their Judges, and
thought, that if their Doctrine were but under a worldly Arm, and that they
had but a King then they would keep their Law: but it is known how they did:
did not their Kings bring in the Idolatry.
Turba and make Calves to be worshipped, and compel the people to adore their
Idols; this is mentioned out of my affection, and good will.

15. But we give you no particular resolution of this Question, you shall
find enough of it in the other Questions, and we dare write no plainer.

The nine and thirtieth Question. What, and where is Paradise with the
Inhabitants thereof?
1. WE have also hinted in the Enochian Life, that it is in this world, yet as
it were swallowed up in the Mystery, but it is not altered in it self, it is
only withdrawn from our sight, and our Property, or sense.
Source; for if our Eyes were opened we should see it.

2. Yes, God in his Ternary is with us: how then should Paradise be lost? we
have lost its Property or working.
source and fruit in the outward Life: as the Devil lost God, when he wilfully
exalted himself as an haughty Spirit, and would be Lord; so it is with us.

3. When Adam did eat of the Earthly fruit of good and evil, then he also
gat an Earthly Life, good and evil, and was driven out of the fair Garden of
Paradise, (where heavenly fruit did grow) into this Earthly Life.

4. Many have written wonderful strangely of Paradise, but now the Image of
their blindness is manifested as clear as the Day: yet we contemn them not,
for they were Seekers: Every Or Seculnra.
Age has had its Seekers, who have sought the Or hidden Mystery.
Mysterium; but it has been a long time very dark in Babell.

5. Now for these two hundred years it has begun to be manifest, in which
time the fall of Antichrist has discovered it self, and men have begun to
storm Babell on one side, but her strong Or Bulworke.
Tower stands fast still; indeed the Whore has been somewhat discovered, yet
her Worldly Authority.
Beast has but grown the more lusty.

6. Therefore there is yet a wonderful time near at hand, wherein all things
shall be altered: many great Mountains and Hills shall be made plain: and a
Fountain shall flow out of Zion, wherein the afflicted and distressed shall
drink and be refreshed.

7. And they shall be guided to the fresh pasture by one only Crook, and the
Shepherd shall rejoice with the sheep, that God is so gracious.

8. At that time Silver and Gold shall be as common as in Solomon's time; and
his Wisdom shall govern the whole Earth: this is a Wonder.

The fortieth Question. Whether is Paradise mutable, and what shall it be
afterward?
1. AS little as God is Mutable.
alterable, so little is Paradise Mutable.
alterable: for it is a part of the Deity: and when this outward Dominion shall
pass away; in the very place where the world now stands there will be mere
Paradise: for the Earth will be of an heavenly Essentiality, so that we shall
be able to dwell any where, and be able to pass through and through it.

2. At the last Day we shall not ascend above the Locus universi.
place of this world, but make our abode here in our own Native Country, and
go into our home, in another world, in another Principle, of another Or source.
Property.

3, For, there will be no cold, or heat any more, also no night: we shall be
able every where to pass quite through the heavenly Earth without
interruption, and then it will be Paradise, and the Tabernacle of God with Man:
for it is written, Behold I make all things New, a New Heaven, and a New Earth,
and the Old shall be no more remembered.

4. This Earth will be like a Crystaline Sea; and all the Wonders of the world
will be seen Or through and through transparently.
wholly perspicuously: and the Or Glance, or Luster.
brightness of God shall be the light thereof: and the Holy Jerusalem, the
Great City of God shall be therein, where they shall offer up the calves of
their lips; there shall the bright City of God with the Wonders and Wisdom be
established; and the Temple of God, the New Jerusalem shall be prepared upon
the New Earth, which is adorned from the Power and Wonders of God.

5. All what ever the Prophets have written shall be there fulfilled; for Gods
word and Wonders shall flourish afresh upon the New Earth, as grass.

6. There is no Death any more, also no fear, no sorrow, no sickness; no
Superior, but only Christ, who will dwell with us: we shall have one
Communion with the Angels, we shall have fruit grow according to our desire
and wish.

7. There will be no old Age: but one of a hundred years will be as a
newborn child; and we shall live in mere delightful Love.

8. All what ever is joyful will be sought after: and there the will of all
will be bent, to make one another rejoice.

9. We shall lead an Holy Priestly Life, and we shall all speak of Gods
wisdom and Eternal Wonders: for, the Divine Magia has infinite and
innumerable Wonders; the more that is sought, the more there is in it; and this
is the increasing of the will of God.

10. To this end God has made himself manifest, in [his] Images, viz. in
Angels and Men, that so he might have joy in himself, and eternally rejoice
with the essences of his Life.

Hallelu-jah.
11. Thus my beloved friend, we have set you down according to our gifts; a
round Answer to your Questions: and we exhort you as a brother not
contemptuously to despise us, in respect of our simple speech and Or
unlearnednesse.
incongruity.

12. For we are not borne of Art, but of simplicity, and we speak great things
in simple words: take this as a singular gift from God, you shall find more
in it then in the best Artificial Eloquent Orators.
Eloquence of the highest Art: except they also have their birth from this
School; and then we will prescribe nothing to such, but acknowledge them for
our loving Brethren in Christ, with whom we have assured hope to rejoice
eternally in the heavenly School: of which we here have attained a little
fore-taste.

13. Yet our knowledge here is but in part, when we shall attain Or the total.
perfection, then we will say what God is, and can do. AMEN.

A short Summary Appendix OF THE SOUL, The Image of the soul, and of the
TURBA, which is the Destroyer of the Image.
Written, by the same Author I. B.
In a Short Summary Appendix, of which in the other writings of this Author is
written fundamentally, and at large.
.1 THE soul is an Eye in the Eternal Abyss, a similitude of Eternity, a
perfect figure and Image of the first Principle: and resembles God the Father
in his Person, as to the Eternal Nature.

2. The Essence and substance of it, (merely and purely, as it is in it self)
is first, the wheel of Nature, as to the first four 1. Astringent. 2. Bitter.
3. Fire. 4. Anguish.

Forms.

3. For, the Word of the Lord, Or formed, or fashioned, or created.
comprised the soul, by the Eternal Fiat in the Eternal will of the Father,
in the Center of the Eternal Nature: and opened it with the Holy Ghost, or
blew it up like a fire (which lay hid in the Eternity, and wherein all forms
of the eternal Nature stood from Eternity:) and The soul, the forms.
is alone known in the wisdom, in the Divine Magia as a figure, or Image
without substance.

4. Yet that Or being.
thing has not been substantial, but Essential, and has been known in the
Principle, in the flash, where the fire arises; But the shadow of it has
(from Eternity in a figurative Image,) figured it self in the Desiring will of
God; and has stood Or in the presence of the Ternary.
before the Ternary of God in the Magia in the wisdom of God, as a similitude
of the Holy Trinity: in which, God has manifested himself as in a Glass.

5. The substance and Image of the soul, may be resembled to the Earth, having
a fair flower growing out of it, and also to the fire and Light: as we see
that Earth is a Ground, foundation, or soil, or the Mother of that which
grows upon it.
Center, but no Life; yet it is Essential: and a fair flower grows out of
it, which is not like Earth, neither has it the smell and taste of the Earth,
much less the figure of it: and yet the Earth is the Mother of the flower.

6. And so the soul also shone.
appeared out of the Eternal Center of Nature, out of the Eternal Essence,
with the word Fiat in the will of God; and was held in the Fiat, so that it
shone.
appeared as a fiery Eye, and similitude of the first Principle in a creaturely
form, and substance.

7. And from this Eye went the Glance of its Fire, as Light does from fire: and
in this Glance of its own Fire, the Eternal Image (which is in the wisdom of
God) was seen and conceived by the will of the Heart of God in the second
Principle: that is, by the word Fiat of the second Principle, in the Love and
Power of the Holy Trinity, whence the Holy Ghost proceeds.

8. And thus the soul was a whole similitude and Image of the Holy Trinity:
here we must take the soul for the Center of Nature, and its fiery Life for
the first Principle: but the sprout, or the Image of the soul, which is a
similitude of God, buddeth forth from the soul, as a flower from the Earth,
and is comprised by the Holy Ghost; for it is his Mansion.

9. Now if the soul put its Imagination out from it self, (we mean out from
its Or property.
source of fire) into the Light of God, then it receives the Light, as the
Moon does the glance of the Sun: and so its Image is in the Majesty of God,
and the soul, in the Light of God, and its fiery Property is changed into
meekness and fervent Love, and then it is know ne to be the child of God.

10. But seeing the soul is Essential, and its own substance a Desire; it is
plain that it consists in two Fiats, one of them is its corporeal propriety,
and the other is the second Principle, proceeding from Gods will which is in
the soul, in which God desires to have The soul.
it his Image and similitude.

11. To which End Gods desiring, is as a Fiat in the Center of the soul, and
continually draws the will of the soul toward the Heart of God: for the
Longing of God would have the soul: Lust, pleasure, will, or desire.
and on the contrary the Center in the power of the Fire would have it.

12. For, the life of the soul has its original in the Fire, and that makes
the striving for the Image of the soul: and which of these two Forms whether
it be the Fire, or meekness of Love that overcommeth, that will be the quality
of the soul, and as the quality of the will of the soul is: such an Image
will the soul have.

13. And we must know, that if the will of the soul change it self, then its
Form will be also changed: for if the Quality, or property.
source of the soul be fiery, then it has also a fiery Image.

14. But if the soul turn its Imagination into the Center, into the strong Or
harshnes.
Astringency and bitterness, then its fair Image is also captivated in the
dark astrengency; and infected with the Astringent wrath.

15. And then this wrath is a Turba, which possesses the Image, and destroys
the similitude of God: for in God there is Love, Light, and meekness: but in
this Image there is Darkness, astringency and bitterness, and the Essential
Quality, or property.
source is fire, proceeding from the Essences of wrath; and then this Image
belongs not to the Kingdom of God, so long as it continues in this Quality,
condition, or property.
source and form in the Darkness.

16. Fire is a further similitude of the soul: the soul is an Essential
Fire, and the flash of the Fire is the Life of it: The soul resembles a
Globe, or an Eye of Fire.

17. The burning Fire in the source signifies the first Principle, and the
Life, yet the Fire is not the Life: but the Spirit of the source which arises
from the Fire, and goes forth from the firelike Air, that is the true Spirit
of the source of the Life of the Fire, which continually blows the fire up
again, and makes it burn.

18. Now the fire shines, and gives Light out of the source, and dwells in
the source where it shines: and the source comprehends not the Light, and
this signifies the second Principle, wherein God dwells.

19. For we know that the Or Virtue.
Power is in the Light, and not in the Fire, the fire only gives Essences to
the Light, and the Life, or the Light produces meekness and substantiality,
viz. water.

20. Now we understand, that there is a Or amiable, Loving.
meek Life in the Light, without Or pain.
source, and yet it self is an insensible Or pain.
source, it is nothing but a Longing, or desire of Love.

21. Which Source we account a Tincture, in which the budding and blossoming
has its Original, yet the Fire is the cause of it, and the meekness is a
cause of the substantiality: for the Desire of Love in the Light attracteth it,
and keeps it, so that it becomes a substance, but the Desire of Fire
consumes the substantiality.

22. Also we must conceive that, (as the soul is purely and alone in the
Center) it is an Essential Fire in the Eye of Eternity, and yet that Eye
desires a figure and Image of the wisdom of God.

23. And the Image is in its desire, in its Imagination, for the Verbum fiat.
word Fiat has comprehended it, that it might be a similitude of the Eternal
wisdom of God, wherein he dwells, and wherein he may manifest himself by
his Spirit, and what ever has been in his Eternal Counsel.

24. Thus the Majesty of God flameth in the Image, in the Essential Fire, if
the Essential Fire puts its desire into the Majesty, but if not, then the
Image is Void, or empty.
raw and naked without God, and the Tincture is false.

25. For the Image is in the Tincture, and has its original in the Tincture,
in the Light, not in the source of the Fire: and as the Heart or word of God
has its Original in the Light of the Majesty, in the Eternal Tincture of the
fire of the Father, so has the Image of the soul,

26. Indeed the Image dwells in the fire of the soul, as Light dwells in
the Fire, but it has another Principle, as the Light is such a source as is
different from Fire.

27. And so the true Image of God dwells in the Light of the Fire of the
soul; which Light the fiery soul must create in the fountain of the Love of
God, in the Majesty, by putting and yiedling its Imagination into it.

28. And if the soul do not so, but puts its Imagination into it self,
into its wrathful form of the source of the fire, and not into the fountain
of Love, into the Light of God, then its own source of Sternesse, sharpness,
or eagerness.
fourcnesse, astringency, and bitterness rises up: and the Image of God
becomes a Turba, and swalloweth up the similitude of God in the wrath.

29. And then the Astringent Fiat in the fiery Essence of the soul, figureth
for the soul an Image, of the Imagination that is in its will: whatsoever the
Essential fire of the soul desires, that will be figured in the soul; viz.
Earthly Figures: that which the will of the Heart casts it self into, that
Image the Fiat of the soul will make: that is, as far as the third
Principle, and the Spirit of the Stars and Elements has power.

30. So that if the will of the soul do cast it self into the Kingdom of
this world, then the outward Kingdom has power to bring its Imagination into
the inward Principle, and if the inward Fiat perceive that in the fire of the
soul, then it becomes pregnant with it, and keeps it.

31. And then the soul has the Image of a Beast in the third Principle, and
that cannot be destroyed for ever, except the will of the soul return again
out of the earthly Lust, and pierce into the Love of God again, and then it
gets the Image of God again: which may be done only in this life, while
the soul is Essentially in its Ground, or soil, or bed of Earth.
Either, in the growing of its Tree: but after this Life it cannot be done.

32. Thus you may understand what the soul, Spirit, Image, and Turba are the
soul dwells in it self, and is an Essential Fire, and its Image stands
in it self, in the Imagination in the Light of the soul, if it cleave to God,
if not, then it is in Anxiety in the wrath of darkness, and is an Vizard, or
Monster.
abominable Image, or an Image of the Devil.

33. The Turba of the soul which destroys the Divine Image, is the
Essential wrathfulnesse, and it is caused by the Imagination, or false Love,
and Or Imaging.
Representation: and therefore all lies in the Imagination, the Image
consists in that which we suffer to come into our Desire.

34. It is very necessary for us to strive continually against the Earthly
Reason of flesh and blood; and to yield the Spirit of our wills into the mercy
and Love of God, and always cast our selves into the will of God, and not
count Earthly Or profit.
goods and pleasure our treasure, setting our desire upon it: which will
destroy the Image: for it is a Turba of the Image of God; and brings Earthly
properties into the Image.

35. Or to conclude.
To sum up all: Christ said, where your treasure is there will your Heart be
also, according to which God will judge the secrets of Mankind, and sever the
clean from the unclean; and give that which is false to the Turba of the Fire
to be devoured, and bring the Holy thing (which is entered into God) into his
Kingdom. AMEN.

THE CLAVIS, OR KEY OR, An Exposition of some principal Matters, and words in
the writings of JACOB BEHMEN.

Very useful for the better apprehending, and understanding of this Book.

Written in the Germane Language, in March, and April, ANNO. 1624.

BY JACOB BEHMEN.

Also called, Teutonicus Philosophus.

Printed in the year. 1647.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER Of these writings.
1. IT is written: the Natural man Understands, or receives not.
perceives not the things of the Spirit, nor the Mystery of the Kingdom of
God, they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them: therefore I
admonish and exhort the Christian Lover of Mysteries, if he will study these
High writings, and read, search, and understand them, that he do not read them
outwardly only, with sharp speculation and meditation: for in so doing, he
shall remain in the outward Imaginary Ground only, and obtain no more then a
Or feigned shadow of them.
counterfeited color of them.

2. For a man's own Reason without the Light of God, cannot come into the
Ground [of them,] it is impossible; let his wit be never so high and subtle,
it apprehends but as it were the shadow of it in a Glass.

3. For, Christ says, without me you can do nothing: and he is the Light of
the world: and the Life of men.

4. Now if any would search the Divine Ground, that is, the Divine Or
manifestation.
Revelation; he must first consider with himself, for what end he desires to
know such things; whether he desires to practice that which he might obtain;
and bestow it to the glory of God, and the welfare of his neighbor: also
whether he desires to die to Earthlinesse, and to his own will; and to live
in that which he seeks and desires, and to be one Spirit with it.

5. If he have not a purpose, that if God should reveal himself and his
mysteries to him; he would be one Spirit, and have one will with him, and
wholly resign and yield himself up to him; that Gods Spirit might do what he
pleases, with him, and by him, and that God might be his knowledge, will, and
Or working.
deed: he is not yet fit for such knowledge and understanding.

6. For, there are many that seek Mysteries and hidden knowledge, merely that
they might be respected, and highly esteemed by the world; and for their own
gain and profit: but they attain not this ground, where the Spirit searches
all things, even the deep things of God: as it is written.

7. It must be a totally resigned and yielded will, in which God himself
searches and works, and which continually pierces into God, in yiedling and
resigned Humility, seeking nothing but his Eternal Native Country, and to do
his neighbor service with it: and then it may be attained: and he must begin
with effectual Repentance and amendment, and with prayer that his
understanding might be opened from within; for, then the inward will bring it
self into the outward.

8. But when he reads such writings and yet cannot understand them, he must
not presently throw them away, and think it is impossible to understand them:
no, but he must turn his mind to God, beseeching him for Grace and
understanding, and read again, and then he shall see more and more in them,
till at length he be drawn by the Power of God into the very depth it self,
and so come into the supernatural and super-sensuall ground, viz. into the
Eternal unity of God; where he shall hear unspeakable and effectual words
of God which shall bring him back and outward again (by the Divine Effluence)
to the very grossest and meanest matter of the Earth, and then back and inwards
to God again: then the Spirit of God searches all things with him, and by
him, and so he is rightly taught and driven by God.

9. But since the Lovers desire a Clavis, or Key of my writings, I am ready and
willing to pleasure them in it, and will set down a short Description of the
Ground of those strange words, some of which are taken from Nature and Ex censu.
sense; and some are the words of strange Artists, or Mystical Authors.
Masters; which I have tried according to sense, and found them good and fit.

10. Reason will stumble, when it sees Heathenish terms, and words used in
the Explanation of Natural things, supposing we should use none but Scripture
phrase (or words borrowed from the Bible:) but such words will not always ply
and square themselves to the fundamental exposition of the Properties of
Nature, neither can a man express the ground with them: Also the wise Heathen,
and Jews have hidden the deep ground of Nature under such words, as having
well understood that the knowledge of Nature is not for every one, but it
belongs to those only, whom God Naturally inclined to it.
by Nature has chosen for it.

11. But none need stumble at it: for, when God reveals his Mysteries to any
man; he then also brings him into a Mind and faculty how to express them; as
God knows to be most necessary and profitable in every Or Seculum.
Age, for the setting of the confused Tongues, and Opinions upon the true
ground again; Men must not think that it comes by chance, and is done by
humane Reason.

12. The Or manifestations.
Revelations of Divine things are opened by the Inward ground of the Spiritual
world, and brought into visible forms; just as the Creator will manifest them.

13. I will write but a short description of the Divine Or Revelation.
Manifestation, yet as much as I can comprehend in brief, and expound the
strange words for the better understanding of our Books; and set down here
the sum of those writings, or a Moddell, or Epitome of them, for the
consideration and help of Beginners: The further Exposition of The Divine
Manifestation, or Revelation.
it is to be found in the other Books.

JACOB BEHMEN.

THE CLAVIS, OR KEY. OR, An Exposition of some principal Words, and Matters.
How God is to be considered, without Nature, and Creature.
14. MOSES says: the Lord our God is but one only God. In another place is
said; of him, through him, and in him are all things: in another, am not I he
that fills all things? And in another: through his Word are all things made,
that are made: therefore we may say that he is the Original of all things. He
is the Eternal unmeasurable unity.

15. For example: when I think what would be in the place of this world, if
the four Elements and the starry Firmament, and also Nature it self should
perish and cease to be; so that no Nature or Creature were to be found any
more: I find there would remain this Eternal Unity from which Nature and
Creature have received their Original.

16. So likewise, when I think with my self what is many hundred thousand miles
above the starry Firmament: Or what is in that place where no Creature is. I
find the Eternal unchangeable unity is there; which is that only good, which
has nothing either before or after it, that can add any thing to it, or take
any thing away from it, or from which this unity could have its Original:
There is neither ground, time, nor place, but there is the only Eternal God:
or that only Good, which a man cannot express.

A further Consideration, How this one God is Threefold.
17. The Holy Scripture shows us that this only God is Or Triune.
Three fold: viz. one only threefold Essence, having three manner of workings,
and yet is but one only Essence: as may be seen in the outflowne Power and
virtue which is in all things, if any do but observe it: but it is especially
represented to us in Fire, Light, and Air: which are three several subsistent
Forms.
sorts of workings, and yet but in one only ground and substance.

18. And as we see that Fire Light and Air arise from a Candle, (though the
Candle be none of the three but a cause of them) so likewise the Eternal unity
is the cause and ground of the Eternal Trinity, which manifests it self
from the unity, and brings forth it self in first Desire or will, 1. Father.
2. Son. 3. Holy Ghost.

Secondly, pleasure or Delight, Thirdly, proceeding or outgoing.

19. The Desire or will is the Father; that is, the stirring, or manifestation
of the unity, whereby the unity wills or desires it self.

20. The Pleasure or Delight is the Son; and is, that which the will wills
and desires, viz. his Love and pleasure, as may be seen, at the Baptism of
our Lord Jesus Christ, when the Father witnessed, saying: This is my Or Love.
beloved Son in whom I Have pleasure.
am well pleased hear ye him.

21. The Delight is the Or impressure of the will.
compressure in the will, whereby the will in the unity brings it self into
a place and working, wherewith the; will wills and works: and it is the Or
perception.
feelingnesse and virtue of the will.

22. The will is the Father; that is, the stirring desire: and the Delight is
the Son, that is, the virtue and the working in the will, with which the will
works: and the Holy Ghost is the proceeding will through the Delight of the
virtue; that is, a Life of the will, and of the virtue and delight.

23. Thus there are three sorts of workings in the Eternal Unity, viz. the
unity is the will and desire of it self; the Delight is the working substance
of the will, and an Eternal joy of feelingnesse in the will; and the Holy
Ghost is the proceeding of the Power: the similitude of which may be seen in a
Or herb.
Plant.

24. The Or Loadstone.
Magnet; viz. the Essential Desire of Nature, (that is, the will of the Desire
of Nature) Or forms.
compresseth it self into an Ens, or substance, to become a Plant, and in this
compression of the Desire becomes feeling, that is, working, and in that
working the Power and virtue arises, wherein the Magneticall Desire of Nature
( viz. the outflowne will of God) works in a Natural way.

25. In this working feelingnesse, the Magneticall desiring will is elevated
and made joyful, and goes forth from the working Power and virtue, and hence
comes the growing and smell of the Or forms.
Plant: and thus we see a representation of the Trinity of God in all
Vegetables, and animate things.
growing and living things.

26. If there were not such a desiring feelingnesse, and outgoing, working of
the Trinity in the Eternal unity, the unity were but an Eternal stillness; a
Nothing; and there would be no Nature, nor any Color shape or figure: likewise
there would be nothing in this world, without this threefold working, no, there
could be no world at all.

Of the Eternal word of God.
27. The Holy Scripture says: God has made all things by his Eternal word;
also it says: That word is God, John 1. which we understand thus.

28. The word is nothing else but the Or out-speaking.
out-breathing will, from the Power and virtue: a various dividing of the Power
into a multitude of Powers; a distributing and outflowing of the unity, whence
knowledge arises.

29. For in one only Substance, wherein there is no variation, or Division;
but is only one, there can be no knowledge; and if there were knowledge, it
could know but one thing, viz. it self: but if it part it self, then the
dividing will goes into multitude and variety, and each parting works in it
self.

30. Yet because Unity cannot be divided and parted asunder, therefore the
separating consists and remains in the out-breathing will in the unity; and
the separation of the breathing gives the different variety: whereby the
Eternal Father.
will, together with the Son.
Delight and Holy Ghost.
proceeding, enters into the Or Science.
knowledge, or understanding of infinite Forms, viz. into an Eternal
perceptible working sensual Or Science.
knowledge of the Powers: where always in the Division of the will in the
separation, one sense or form of the will sees, feels, tastes, smells,
and hears the other; and yet it is but one sensual working; viz. the great
joyous band of Love, and the most pleasant only Eternal Essence, or substance.
Being.

Of the Holy Name JEHOVA.
31. The Ancient Rabins among the Jews have partly understood it: for they
have said, that this Name is the Highest, and most Holy Name of God; Or Jehova
is the sensual Name of the working Deity.
by which they understand the working Deity in Sense: and it is true, for, in
this working sense, lies the true life of all things in time and Eternity, in
the ground and Abyss; and it is God himself; viz. the Divine working
perceivingnesse, feelingnesse, Finding, Knowledge.
Invention, Science, and Love; that is, the true understanding in the working
unity, from which the five senses of the true Life do spring.

32. Each Letter in this Name intimates to us, a peculiar virtue and working:
that is, a Difference, or d stinction.
Form in the working Power.

J.
33. For I. is the Effluence of the Eternal indivisible Unity; or, the sweet
gracefulness of the ground of the Divine I, I-hood, self, or selfenesse.
somethingnesse.

E.
34. E is a threefold I: where the Trinity shuts it self up in the Unity:
for the I goes into E and joyneth IE, which is an out-breathing of the Unity
in it self.

H.
35. H is the Word, or Or speaking.
breathing of the Trinity of God.

O.
36. O is the Circumference, or, the Son of God, through which the IE, and
the H or breathing, out-speaketh: from the compressed Delight of the Power and
virtue.

V.
37. V is the joyful Effluence from the Or speaking.
breathing; that is; the proceeding Spirit of God.

A.
38. A is that which is proceeded from the power and virtue, viz. the wisdom;
a Subject of the Trinity; wherein the Trinity works, and wherein the Trinity
is also manifest.

39. This Name is nothing else but an out-speaking, or expression of the
Threefold working of the Holy Trinity in the unity of God: Read further of this
in the Exposition of the Table of the three Principles of the Divine
Manifestation.

Of the Divine Wisdom.
40. The Holy Scripture says; the wisdom is the breathing of the Divine
Power; a ray and breath of the Almighty; also it says: God has made all
things by his wisdom; which we understand as follows.

41. The Wisdom is the outflowen word of the Divine Power, virtue, Knowledge
and holiness: a Subject and Resemblance of the infinite and unsearchable
Unity: a Substance wherein the Holy Ghost works, forms, and modelleth; I
mean, he forms, and modelleth the Divine understanding in the Wisdom: for
the Wisdom is the passive, and the Spirit of God is the Active, or Life in
her, as the soul in the Body.

42. The wisdom is the Great Mystery of the Divine Nature, for in her the
Powers, Colors and virtues are made manifest, in her is the variation of the
power and virtue: viz. the understanding: she is the Divine understanding: that
is the Divine Or Contemplation.
vision, wherein the Unity is manifest.

43. She is the true Divine Chaos, wherein all things lie; viz. a Divine
Imagination, in which the Forms, Or Images.
Idea's of Angels and souls have been seen from Eternity, in a Divine Type and
resemblance; yet not then as Creatures, but in a resemblance, as when a man
beholds his face in a Glass: therefore the Angelical and humane Idea did
flow forth from the wisdom, and was formed into an Image, as Moses says, God
created Man in his Image: that is, he created the body, and breathed into it
the breath of the Divine Effluence, of Divine Knowledge, from all the Three
Principles of the Divine Manifestation.

Of the Or Great Mystery.
Mysterium Magnum.
44. The Mysterium Magnum is a subject of the wisdom, where the breathing
word, or the working willing Power of the Divine understanding flows forth
through the wisdom: wherein also the unity of God together flows out, to its
manifestation.

45. For in the Mysterium Magnum the Eternal Nature arises; and two Essences,
or Beings.
substances and wills are always understood to be in the Mysterium Magnum: the
first c substance is the unity of God, that is, the Divine Power and virtue,
the outflowing wisdom.

46. The second substance is the separable will, which arises through the
breathing and outspeaking word; which will, has not its ground in the unity,
but in the Mobility of the Effluence, and out-breathing, which brings it
self into one will, and into a Desire to Nature: viz. into the Properties as
far as Fire and Light: in the Fire the Natural Life is understood, and in
the Light; the Holy Life, that is; a manifestation of the unity, whereby the
unity becomes a Love Fire, or Light.

47. And in this place or working; God calls himself a loving merciful God,
according to the sharpened fiery burning Love of the unity: Or zealous.
and an Angry d Jealous God, according to the fiery ground, according to the
Eternal Nature.

48. The Mysterium Magnum is that Chaos, out of which, Light and Darkness;
that is; the foundation of Heaven and Hell, is flowne from Eternity, and made
manifest: for, that foundation which we now call Hell, (being a Principle of
it self) is the ground and cause of the Fire in the Eternal Nature; which
fire, in God is only a burning Love: and where God is not manifested in a
thing, according to the unity: there is an Anguishing painful burning fire.

49. This burning Fire is but a manifestation of the Life, and of the Divine
Love: by which the Divine Love, ( viz. the unity) Or over inflameth.
kindles up, and sharpneth it self; for the fiery working, of the Power of
God.

50. This ground is called Mysterium Magnum, or a Chaos, because, good and
evil arises out of it: viz. Light and Darkness, Life and Death, Joy and
grief, Salvation and Damnation.

51. For it is the ground of souls and Angels, and of all Eternal Creatures,
as well evil as good; it is a ground of Heaven and Hell, also of the visible
world, and all that is therein: therein have lain all thing in one only
ground: as an Image lies hid in a piece of wood before the Artificer does
carve it out and fashion it.

52. Yet we cannot say, that the spiritual world has had any beginning, but
has been manifested from Eternity our of that Chaos: for, the Light has shone
from Eternity in the Darkness, and the Darkness has not comprehended it; as
Day and Night are in one another; and are two though in one.

53. I must write distinctly, as if it had had a beginning for the better
consideration and apprehension; of the Divine ground of the Divine
Manifestation: and the better to distinguish Nature from the Or Divinity.
Deity, also for the better understanding, from whence evil and good are come;
and what the Or Essence of all Essences is.
Being of all Beings is.

Of the Centrum.
Center of the Eternal Nature.
54. By the word Centrum.
Center, we understand the first beginning to Nature, viz. the most Inward
ground, wherein, the Or own arisen.
self raised will brings it self, by a reception, into Ihood, or I-nesse,
or owne-nesse.
somethingnesse: viz. into a Natural working; for Nature is but a Tool and
Instrument of God, which Gods Power and virtue works with; and yet it has
its own Or Mobility.
Motion, from the out-flowne will of God: thus the Center is the Point or
ground of the own receivingnesse to somethingnesse: from whence something
comes to be, and from thence the seven Properties proceed.

Of the Eternal Nature, and its seven Properties.
55. Nature is nothing but the Properties of the receivingnesse of the own
arisen Desire: which Desire arises in the Or separation.
variation of the Breathing Word, (that is, of the Breathing Power and virtue)
wherein the Properties bring themselves into substance: and this substance is
called a Natural substance, and is not God himself.

56. For, though God dwells Or thoroughly inhabiteth, or Totaliter.
through and through Nature, yet Nature comprehends him but so far, as the
unity of God yields it self into, and communicates it self with a Natural
Substance, and makes it self substantial, viz. a substance of Light; which
works by it self in Nature, and pierces and penetrateth Nature: or else the
unity of God is incomprehensible to Nature, that is, to the desirous
Receivingnesse.

57. Nature Or consists.
arises in the outflowne word of the Divine perception and knowledge: and it
is a continual framing and forming of Scienees and perception: whatsoever the
Word works by the Wisdom, that nature frames and forms into Properties:
Nature is like a Carpenter, who builds a House which the mind figured and
contrived before in it self; so it is here also to be understood.

58. Whatsoever the Eternal mind Or moddelleth.
figureth in the Eternal wisdom of God in the Divine Power; and brings into
an Idea, that, Nature frames into a Property.

59. Nature in its first ground consists in seven Properties: and these seven
divide themselves into infinite.

The first Property.
60. The first Property is the Desire which causes and makes Or Astringency.
harshnesse, sharpness, hardness, cold, and substance.

The second Property.
61. The second Property is the stirring, or Attraction of the Desire it makes
Or pricking.
stinging, breaking, and dividing of the hardness: it cutteth asunder the
attracted desire, and brings it into multiplicity and variety; It is a ground
of the bitter pain, and also the true Root of Life: it is the Faber, or Smith.
Vulcan that strikes fire.

The third Property.
62. The third Property is the perceivingnesse and feelingnesse in the breaking
of the harsh hardness: and it is the ground of Anguish, and of the Natural
will; wherein the Eternal will desires to be manifested; that is, it will be
a Fire or Light ( viz. a flash, or shining,) wherein the Powers, colors and
virtues of the wisdom, may appear: in these three first Properties consists
the Foundation of Anger, and of Hell, and of all that is Grimme, fierce,
cruel, odious, or evil.
wrathful.

The fourth Property.
63. The fourth Property is the Fire, in which the Unity appears, and is seen
in the Light, that is in a burning Love: and the wrath in the Operation, or
property.
Essence of Fire.

The fifth Property.
64. The fifth Property is the Light, with its virtue of Love, in, and with
which, the Unity works in a Natural substance.

The sixth Property.
65. The sixth Property is the sound voice, or Natural understanding, wherein
the five senses work spiritually, that is, in an understanding Natural Life.

The seventh Property.
66. The seventh Property is the Subject, or the Compass, conclusion,
comprising, or continent.
Contence of the other six Properties; in which they work, as the Life does in
the flesh: and this seventh Property is rightly and truly called the Ground or
place of Nature, wherein the Properties stand in one only Ground.

The first SUBSTANCE in the seven Properties.
67. We must always understand two Substances in the seven Properties: we
understand the first, according to the Abyss of these Properties, to be the
Divine Essence, or substance.
Being; that is, the Divine will with the outflowing Unity of God, which
together flows forth through Nature, and brings it self into
Receivingnesse to sharpness, that the Eternal Love may become working and
sensible thereby, and that it may have something which is passive, wherein it
may manifest it self, and be known, of which also it might be desired and
beloved again: viz. the Or painful.
Aching passive Nature, which in the Love is changed into an Eternal
Joyfulnesse: and when the Love in the Fire manifests it self in the Light,
then it over-flameth Nature, as the Sun a Plant, and the Fire A red hot Iron.
Iron.

The second SUBSTANCE.
68. The second Substance is Natures own Substance, which is painful.
Aching and Passive, and is the Tool and Instrument of the Agent: for where no
passivenesse is, there is also no desire of Deliverance, or something better;
and where there is no desire of something better, there a thing rests within
it self.

69. And therefore the Eternal unity brings it self by its Effluence and
separation into Nature, that it may have an object, in which it may manifest it
self, and that it may love something, and be again beloved by something; that
so there may be a perceiving, or sensible working and will.

^ An Explanation of * the seven Properties of Nature.
. The first Property.
70. THe first Property is a desirousnesse; like that of a Or Loadstone.
Magnet; viz. the Compression of the will; the will desires to be something,
and yet it has nothing of which it may make something to it self: and
therefore it brings it self into a Receivingnesse of it self, and
compresseth it self to something: and that something is nothing but a
Magneticall Hunger, a harshnesse, like a hardness, whence even hardness,
cold, and substance arises.

71. This compressure or Attraction overshadoweth it self, and makes it self
a Darkness: which is indeed the Ground of the Eternal and temporary
Darkness: At the beginning of the world, Salt, stones, and bones, and all such
things were produced by this sharpness.

. The second Property.
72. The second Property of the Eternal Nature arises from the first, and it
is the drawing or Motion in the sharpness: for, the Magnet makes hardness;
but the motion breaks the hardness again, and is a continual strife in it
self.

73. For, that which the Desire compresseth and makes something, the motion
cutteth asunder and divides, so that it comes into forms and Images:
between these two Properties arises the bitter Or pain.
woe: that is, the sting of perceivingnesse, and feelingnesse.

74. For when there is a Motion in the sharpness, then the property is Or
painful.
Aching, and this is also the cause of feelingnesse and pain: for, if there
were no sharpness and motion, there would be no feelingnesse: this motion is
also a ground of the Air in the visible world, which is manifested by the
Fire; as shall be mentioned hereafter.

75. Thus we understand that the Desire is the ground of somethingnesse, so
that something may come out of Nothing: and thus we may also conceive that the
Desire has been the Beginning of this world, by which God has brought all
things into substance and being: for the Desire is that by which God said Or
Fiat.
Let there be. The Desire is that Be it, which has made something, where
nothing was, but only a Spirit: it has made the Mysterium Magnum (which is
spiritual,) visible and substantial, as we may see by the Elements, Stars
and other Creatures.

76. The second Property, (that is the Or stirring.
Motion) was in the beginning of this world the Separator, or Divider in the
Powers and virtues, by which the Creator, viz. the will of God brought all
things out of the Mysterum Magnum into form: for it is the outflowne moveable
word, by which the supernatural God made all things and brought them into
form, figure, and Or Images.
shape.

The third Property.
77. The third Property of the Eternal Nature is the Anguish viz. that Or
Velle.
Will which has brought it self into the receivingnesse to Nature and
somethingnesse: when the own will stands in the sharp motion, then it
comes into Anguish, that is, into feelingnesse: for, without Nature it is not
Or feeling.
feelable, but in the moveable sharpness it becomes feeling.

78. And this feelingnesse is the cause of the Fire, and also of the mind and
Senses: for the own Natural will is made volatile by it, and seeks Rest:
and thus the separation of the will goes out from it self; and pierces
through the Properties, from whence the taste arises, so that one Property
tastes and feels the other.

79. It is also the ground and cause of the Senses, in that one property
penetrateth into the other, and kindles the other, so that the will knows
whence the passivenesse comes: for, if feelingnesse were not, the will could
know nothing of the Properties, for it were merely alone: and thus the Will
receives Nature into it by feeling the sharp motion in it self.

80. This motion is in it self like a turning wheel; not that there is such a
turning and winding; but it is so in the Properties; for, the Desire attracteth
into it self, and the Motion thrusts forwards out of it self; and so the
will being in this anguish, can neither get inwards nor outward, and yet is
drawn both out of it self, and into it self; and so it remains in such a
form, manner, or condition.
Posture, as will into it self and out of it self, (that is, over it self
and under it self;) and yet can go no whither, but is an Anguish: and the
true foundation of Hell, and of Gods Anger; for this Anguish stands in the
dark sharp Motion.

81. In the Creation of the world, the Sulphur-Spirit, with the matter of the
Sulphurious Or property.
Nature was produced out of this ground: which Sulphur-Spirit is the Natural
Life of the earthly and Elementary Creatures.

82. The wise Heathen have in some measure understood this ground, for they
say, that in {sulphur}
Sulphur,
Mercury, and tartar
Sal, all things in this world consist: wherein they have not looked upon the
Matter only but upon the Spirit, from which such matter proceeds: for the
ground of it consists not in Salt, Quicksilver, Spiritual corporality.
and Brimstone, they mean not so, but they mean the Spirit of such
Properties, in that every thing indeed consists, The word, or speaking.
whatsoever lives grows, and has being in this world, whether it be
spiritual, or material. The gross palpable corporality.


83. For they understand by Salt, the sharp Magneticall desire of Nature, and
by Mercury, they mean the Motion, and separation of Nature, by which every
thing is Or marked with its own Image, or shape.
figured with its own signature: and by Sulphur they mean the perceiving
[sensible] Desiring vegetable l fe.
willing, and growing Life.

84. For in the Sulphur-Spirit, wherein the fiery Life burns, the Oil lies,
and the Quintessence lies in the Oil viz. the fiery Mercury, which is the
true Life of Nature; and which is an Effluence from the word of the Divine
Power and motion, wherein the ground of Heaven is understood: and in the
Quintessence there lies the Tincture, viz. the Paradisicall ground, the
outflowne word of the Divine Power and virtue, wherein the Properties lie in
Temperature, or Harmony.
equality.

85. Thus, by the third Property of Nature which is the Anguish, we mean the
sharpness and painfulness of the fire, viz. the burning and consuming: for
when the will is put into such a sharpness, it will always consume the cause
of that sharpness; for it always Or throngeth after.
striveth to get to the unity of God again, which is the Rest; and the unity
thrusts it self with its Effluence to this Motion and sharpness: and so
there is a continual conjoyning for the manifestation of the Divine will: as
we always find in these three, ( viz. in Salt, Brimstone and Oil;) an
Heavenly in the Earthly: and whosoever does but truly understand it, and
considers the Spirit, shall find it so.

86. For the soul of a thing lies in the sharpness; and the true life of the
sensual Nature and property lies in the Motion; and the powerful Spirit
which arises from the Tincture, lies in the Oil of the Sulphur: Thus an
Heavenly always lies hidden in the Earthly: for the invisible Viz. the Light
and dark world: Gods Love and wrath.
spiritual world came forth with and in the Creation.

The fourth Property
87. The fourth Property of the Eternal Nature is the Spiritual Fire, wherein
the Light; that is, the unity, is made manifest: for the Shining, or Luster or
brightness.
Glance of the fire, arises and proceeds from the outflowne unity, which
has incorporated and united it self with the Natural Desire: and the burning
property of fire, viz. the Heat proceeds from the sharp devouringnesse of the
first three Properties, which comes to be so as follows.

88. The Eternal unity (which I also in some of my writings, call the Liberty)
is the soft and still tranquillity, being amiable, and as a soft comfortable
ease, and it cannot be expressed how soft a tranquillity there is without Nature
in the unity of God: But the three Properties (in order) to Nature are sharp,
painful, and horrible.

89. In these three painful Properties the outflowne will consists, and is
produced by the word or Divine Breathing; and the unity also is therein,
therefore the Will longs Earnestly for the unity, and the unity longs for
the feelingnesse, viz. for the fiery ground: thus the one longs to get into
the other; and when this Longing is, there is as it were a Scrashing.
cracking noise or flash of Lightning, as when we rub steel and a stone
together, or power water into fire; this we speak by way of similitude.

90. In that Flash the unity feels the feelingnesse, and the will receives
the soft tranquil unity: and so the unity becomes a shining Glance of Fire,
and the fire becomes a burning Love; for it receives Or Entity.
the Ens, and power from the soft unity: in this kindling, the darkness of the
Magneticall compressure is pierced through with the Light, so that it is no
more known or discerned, although it remains in it self Eternally in the
compressure.

91. Now two Eternal Princlples arise here, viz. the Darkness, harshnesse,
sharpness, and pain dwelling in it self: and the feeling power and virtue of
the unity in the Light: upon which the Scripture says, that God, (that is, the
Eternal unity) dwells in a Light to which none can Or approach.
come.

92. For so the Eternal uity of God manifests it self through the
Spiritual Fire, in the Light: and this Light is called Majesty; and God, (that
is the Supernatural unity) is the Power and virtue of it.

93. For the Spirit of this Fire receives Ens [or vertue] to shine, from the
unity, or else this fiery Or Spirit.
ground would be but a painful, horrible hunger, and pricking desire: and it
is so indeed, when the will breaks it self off from the unity, and will
live, after its own desire, as the Devils have done, and the false soul still
does.

94. And thus you may here perceive two Principles, the first, is the ground of
the burning of the Fire, viz. the sharp moving perceivable painful darkness
in it self: and the second is the Light of the Fire, wherein the unity comes
into mobility and Joy: for, the Fire is an object of the great Love of Gods
unity.

95. For, so the Eternal Delight becomes perceiveable, and this perceiving
of the unity is called Love, and is a Burning or Life, in the unity of God: and
according to this burning of Love, God calls himself a merciful loving God:
for the unity of God loves and pierces through the Akeing.
painful will of the Fire: (which at the beginning, arose in the breathing of
the word, or outgoing of the Divine Delight) and changes it into great Joy.

96. And in this fiery will of the Eternal Nature stands the soul of Man,
and also the Angels: this is their ground and Center: therefore, if any soul
break it self off from the Light and Love of God, and enters into its own
Natural Desire; then the ground of this darkness and painful Or source.
property will be manifest in it: and this is the hellish Fire, and the Anger
of God, when it is made manifest, as may be seen in Lucifer: and whatsoever
can be thought to have a Being Or every where.
any where in the Creature, the same is likewise without the Creature every
where: for, the Creature is nothing else but an Image and Figure of the
separable and various power, and virtue of the universal Being.

97 Now understand aright what the ground of Fire is, viz. Cold, from the
Compressure and heat from the Anguish, and the Motion is the Or striker of
fire.
Vulcan: in these three the Fire consists; but the shining of the Light
arises and proceeds from the conjunction of the unity in the ground of Fire;
and yet the whole ground is but the outflowne will.

98. Therefore in Fire and Light consists the Life of all things, ( viz. in
the will thereof) let them be Or inanimate, or dumb.
insensible, vegetable or rational things, every thing as the Fire has its
ground, either from the Eternal, as the soul, or from the temporary, as
Astrall Elementary things: for the Eternal is one Fire, and the Temporary is
an other: as shall be shown hereafter.

The fifth Property.
99. Now the fifth Property is the Fire of Love, or the The Power, and
Light-world.
world of Power and Light; which in the darkness dwells in it self, and the
darkness comprehends it not, as it is written John 1 chap. The Light shines
in the darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not: also, the word is in
the Light, and in the word is the true understanding Life of Man, viz. the true
Spirit.

100. But this Fire is the true soul of Man, viz. the true Spirit which God
breathed into Man for a creaturely Life.

101 You must understand, in the spiritual fire of the will the true desirous
soul out of the Eternal ground; and in the Power and virtue of the Light, the
true understanding Spirit, in which the unity of God dwells and is manifest:
as our Lord Christ says, the Kingdom of God is within you; and Paul says; Ye
are the Temple of the Holy Ghost, who dwells in you; This is the place of the
Divine inhabiting, and Revelation.

102. Also the soul comes to be damned thus, when the fiery will breaks it
self off from the Love and unity of God, and enters into its own Natural
Propriety, that is, into its evil properties: this ought further to be
considered.

103. O Zion, observe this ground, and thou art freed from Babell.

104. The second Principle ( viz. the Angelical world and the Thrones) is
meant by the fifth Property: for it is the motion of the unity, wherein all the
Properties of the fiery Nature burn in Love.

105 An Example or similitude of this Or thing.
ground, may be seen in a Candle that is Lighted, the Properties lie in one
another in the Candle, and none of them is more manifested then another till
the Candle be lighted, and then we find, Fire, Oil, Light, Air and water,
from the Air: all the four Elements become manifest in it, which lay hidden
before in one only Ground.

106. And so likewise it must be conceived to be in the Eternal Ground: for
the temporary substance is flowne forth from the Eternal: therefore they are
both of the same quality, but with this difference, that one is Eternal and
the other transitory, one Spiritual and the other corporeal.

107. When the Spiritual Fire and Light shall be kindled, (which has indeed
burned from Eternity [in it self,] then shall also the Mystery of the Divine
Power and knowledge be always made manifest therein: for all the Properties of
the Eternal Nature become spiritual in the Fire, and yet Nature remains as
it is, inwardly in it self; and the going forth of the will becomes
Spiritual.

108. For, in the sissing or noise.
crack or flash of the Fire the dark receivingnesse is consumed, and in that
consuming, the pure bright fire-Spirit, which is pierced through with the
Glance of the Light, goes forth: in which going forth, we find three several
Properties.

109. The first is the going upwards of the fiery will, the second is the going
downwards, or sinking, of the watery Spirit, viz. the Meekness; and the third
is the going out forwards, of the oily Spirit, in the midst, in the Center of
the fiery Spirit of the will; which oily Spirit, is the Ens of the unity of
God; which is become a substance in the desire of Nature: yet all is but Spirit
and Power; but so it appears in the figure of the Manifestation, not as if
there were any severing or division, but it appears so in the Manifestation.

110. This threefold manifestation is according to the Trinity; for the Center
wherein it is, is the only God according to his manifestation: the fiery
flaming Spirit of Love is that which goes upwards, and the meekness which
proceeds from the Love is that which goes downwards, and in the midst there
is the Center [ Or
of] the circumference, which is the Father, or whole God according to his
manifestation.

111. And as this is to be known in the Divine manifestation, so it is also in
the Eternal Nature, according to Natures property: for Nature is but a
Picture, representation, or shadow.
Resemblance of the Deity.

112. Nature may be further considered thus; the flash of the Original of
fire, is a crack, and salnitrous ground, whence Nature goes forth into
infinite divisions, that is, into multitudes or varieties of Powers and
virtues; from which the multitude of Angels and Spirits, and their colors and
operations proceeded, also the four Elements, in the Beginning of time.

113. For, the Temperament, or harmony.
temperature of fire and Light is the holy Element, viz. the motion in the
Light of the unity; and from this salnitrous ground (we mean spiritual not
earthly salnitre) the four Elements proceed, viz. in the Compressure, or
impressure, in every place where that word is used following.
compressure of the fiery Mercury, Earth and stones are produced; and in the
Quintessence of the fiery Mercury, the fire and Heaven; and in the Motion or
going forth, the Air; and in the disruption or rending of the Desire by the
fire, the water is produced.

114. The fiery Mercury is a dry water, that has brought forth Metals and
stones; but the broken or divided Mercury has brought forth wet water, by the
Mortification in the Fire: and the compressure has brought the gross rawnesse
into the Earth, which is a gross salnitrous Saturnine Mercury.

115. By the word Mercury, you must understand here in the Spirit, always the
outflowne Natural working word of God, which has been the Separator, Divider,
and former of every substance; and by the word Saturn we mean the compressure.

116. In the fifth Property, (that is, in the Light) the Eternal unity is
substantial; that is, an holy Spiritual Fire, an holy Light, an holy Air,
which is nothing else but Spirit, also an holy water which is the outflowing
Love of the unity of God, and an Ternarium Sanctum.
holy Earth which is all-powerfull virtue and working.

117 This fifth Property is the true spiritual Angelical world of the Divine
joy, which is hidden in this visible world.

The sixth Property.
118. The sixth Property of the Eternal Nature, is the sound, noise, voice, or
understanding: for when the Fire flasheth, all the Properties together sound:
the Fire is the mouth of the Essence, the Light is the Spirit, and the sound is
the understanding, wherein all the Properties understand one another.

119. According to the Manifestation of the holy Trinity, by the effluence of
the unity, this sound or voice, is the Divine working word, viz. the
understanding in the Eternal Nature, by which the supernatural knowledge
manifests it self: but according to Nature and Creature, this sound or voice
is the knowledge of God, wherein the Natural understanding knows God: for
the Natural understanding is a platform, Resemblance, and Effluence from the
Divine understanding.

120. The five Senses lie in the Natural understanding, in a Spiritual
manner, and in the second Property, ( viz. in the motion in the fiery Mercury)
they lie in a Natural manner.

121. The sixth Property gives understanding, in the voice or sound, viz. in
the Articulation.
speaking of the word: and the second property of Nature is the producer, and
also the House, Tool, or Instrument of the speech or voice: in the second
Property the Power and virtue is painful, but in the sixth Property it is
joyful and pleasant, and the difference between the second and sixth Property
is in Light and darkness, which are in one another, as fire and Light, there
is no more difference between them.

The seventh Property.
122. The seventh Property is the substance, that is, the subjectum or house of
the other six, in which they all are substantially as the soul in the body: by
this we understand especially, as to the Lightworld, the Paradise or budding of
the working Power.

123. For every Property, makes unto it self a Subject, or Or resemblance.
Object by its own Effluence, and in the seventh all the Properties are in a
temperature, as in one only Substance: and as they all did proceed from the
unity, so they all return again into one ground.

124. And though rhey work in different kinds and manners, yet here there is
but one only substance, whose power and virtue is called Tincture, that is an
holy penetrating, growing, or springing Bud.

125. Not that the seventh Property is the Tincture, but it is the Corpus, aut
Substantia.
Body of it: the Power and virtue of the Fire and Light is the Tincture Or with.
in the substantial Body: but the seventh Property is the substance which the
Tincture penetrateth and sanctifies: we mean that it is thus according to the
power and virtue of the Divine manifestation: but as it is a Property of
Nature, it is the substance of the attracted desire of all properties.

126. It is especially to be observed, that always, the First and the seventh
Property are accounted for one: and the second and sixth: also the third and
fifth: and the fourth is only the dividing Mark or Or Limit.
bound.

127. For, according to the manifestation of the Trinity of God there are but
three Properties of Nature: the first is the Desire which belongs to God the
Father, yet it is only a Spirit, but in the seventh Property the Desire is
substantial.

128. The second is the Divine power and virtue, and belongs to God the
Son; in the second Number it is only a Spirit, but in the sixth it is the
substantial Power and virtue.

129. The third belongs to the Holy Ghost, and in the beginning of the third
Property it is only a fiery Spirit, but in the fifth Property the great Love is
manifested therein.

130. Thus the Effluence of the Divine Manifestation, as to the three
Properties in the first Principle before the Light Appearet.
, is Natural; but in the second Principle in the Light it is spiritual.

131. Now these are the seven Properties in one only Ground: and all seven are
equally Eternal without beginning, none of them can be accounted the first,
second, third, foutth, fifth, sixth, or last; for they are equally Eternal
without beginning, and have also one Eternal beginning from the unity of God.

132. We must represent this in a typical way, that it may be understood how
the one is borne out of the other, the better to conceive what the Creator is,
and what the Life and Substance of this world is.

Of the third Principle: viz. The visible world, whence that proceeded: and
what The Creator is.
33. THis visible world is sprung from the Spiritual world before mentioned:
viz. from the outflowne Divine Power and virtue, and it is a Subject or Object
resembling the Spiritual world: the spiritual world is the Inward ground of
the visible world; the visible subsisteth in the Spiritual.

134. The visible world is only an Effluence of the seven Properties, for it
proceeded out of the six working Properties, but in the seventh, (that is in
Paradise,) it is in Rest: and that is the Eternal Sabbath of Rest, wherein the
Divine Power and virtue rests,

135. Moses says; God created Heaven and Earth, and all Creatures, in six
Days, and rested on the seventh Day, and also commanded Or to rest on it.
it to be kept for a Rest.

136. The understanding lies hidden and secret in those words: could not he
have made all his works in one Day? neither can we properly say there was any
day before the Sun was, for in the Or depth, or vast firmament above the Moon.
Deep there is but one Day [in all.]

137. But the understanding lies hidden in those words, he understands by
each days working: the Creation, or Manifestation of the seven Properties: for
he says, In the Beginning God created Heaven and Earth.

The first Day.
138. In the FIRST Motion; the Magneticall Desire compressed and compacted the
fiery and watery Mercury with the other Properties; and then the grossness
separated it self from the Spiritual Nature: and the fiery became Metals and
stones, and partly Salnitre, that is Earth: and the watery became water: then
the fiery Mercury of the working became clean, and Moses calls it Heaven;
and the Scripture says, God dwells in Heaven: for this fiery Mercury is the
Power and virtue of the Firmament, viz. an Image and resemblance of the
Spiritual world, in which God is manifested.

139. When this was done, God said, Let there be Light, then the Inward thrust
it self forth through the fiery Heaven, from which a shining power and virtue
arose in the fiery Mercury, and that was the Light of the outward Nature in the
Properties, wherein the Or growing.
vegetable Life consists.

The second Day.
140. In the SECOND Days work, God separated the watery and fiery Mercury
from one another, and called the fiery the Firmament The This Table belongs to
the Clavis, at the End of the 132. verse.
seven Forms of Spirits, mentioned, REVELA. cap. 1.
.. The First. form Harsh Desiring will. 1. Darke-world. a similitude of it is
a Candle... Second. Bitter or stinging... Third. Anguish, till the flash of
Fire.. Fourth. Fire Dark-fire. Light-fire.
2. Fire-world a similitude of it is the fire of a Candle... Fifth. Light or
Love, whence the watet of Eternal Life flows. 3. Light-world a similitude of
it is the Light of a Candle... Sixth. Noise, sound, or Mercury... Seventh.
Substance or Nature. The First Principle. Dark or Fire of Wrath Light or Fire
of Love The second Principle. The Dark-world; hence God the Father is called an
Angry, zealous, Jealous God and a Consuming Fire. The Light world; hence God
the Son, the word the Heart of God, is called a Loving and Merciful God.

The third Principle.
This world of four Elements, which is produced out of the two Inward Worlds,
and is a Glass of them; wherein L^ght and Darkness, Good and Evil are mixed,
it is not Eternal but has a beginning and an End.

of Heaven, which came out of the midst of the waters, viz. of Mercury, whence
arose the Male and Female b kind, Sex.
in the Spirit of the outward world: that is, the Male in the fiery Mercury,
and the Female in the watery.

141. This Separation was made all over in every thing, to the end that the
fiery Mercury should desire and long for the watery, and the watery for the
fiery; that so there might be a Desire of Love betwixt them in the Light of
Nature; from which the Conjunction arises: therefore the fiery Mercury, viz.
the outflowne word separated it self according both to the fiery and to the
watery nature of the Light, and thence comes both the Male and Female kind in
all things both Animals and vegetables.

The third Day.
142. In the THIRD Days work, the fiery and watery Mercury entered again into
Conjunction or mixture, and embraced on) another, wherein the Salnitre ( viz.
the Separator in the Earth-brought forth Grass, Plants, and Trees: and that
was the first Generation or production between Male and Female.

The fourth Day.
143. In the FOURTH Days work, the fiery Mercury brought forth its fruit,
viz. the fifth Essence, an higher power or virtue of Life, then the four
Elements: and yet it is in the Elements, of it the Stars are made.

144. For, as the compression of the Desire brought the Earth into a Or lamp.
Mass, the compression entering into it self; so the fiery Mercury thrust it
self outward by the Compressure, and has enclosed the place of this world
with the Or constellations.
Stars and starry Heaven.

The fifth Day.
145. In the FIFTH Days work the The Spirit of the world.
Spiritus Mundi, that is, the Anima Macrocosmi.
soul of the great world, opened it self in the fifth Essence, (we mean the
Life of the fiery and watery Mercury,) therein God created all Beasts, fishes,
fowls, and worms, every one from its peculiar property of the divided Mercury.

146. Were we see how the Eternal Principles have moved themselves according
to Evil and Good, as to all the seven Properties, and their Effluence and
mixture; for there are evil and good Creatures created, every thing as the
Mercury, (that is, the Seperator) has figured and Or Imaged.
framed himself into an Ens, as may be seen in the evil and good Creatures:
And yet every kind of Life has its Original in the Light of Nature; that is,
in the Love of Nature: from which it is that all Creatures in their kind or
Property, love one another according to this outflowne Love.

The sixth Day.
147. In the SIXTH Days work, God created Man; for in the sixth Day the
understanding of Life opened it self out of the fiery Mercury, that is, out of
the Inward Ground.

148. God created him in his likeness out of all the three Principles, and
made him an Image, and breathed into him the understanding fiery Mercury,
according to both the Inward and outward Ground, (that is, according to time
and Eternity,) and so he became a living understanding soul: and in this
Ground of the soul, the Manifestation of the Divine Holiness did move, ( viz.
the living outflowing word of God) together with the Eternal knowing Idea,
which was known from Eternity in the Divine Wisdom, as a Subject or form of
the Divine Imagination.

149. This Or Image.
Idea becomes Endued, or invested.
clothed with the Substance of the heavenly world, and so it becomes an
understanding Spirit and Temple of God; an Image of the Divine Or Contemplation.
vision, which Spirit is given to the soul for a Spouse: as fire and Light are
espoused together, so it is here also to be understood.

150. This Divine Ground budded and pierced through soul and body; and this
was the true Paradise in Man, which he lost by sin, when the ground of the
dark world with the false Desire gat the upper hand and Dominion in him.

The seventh Day.
151. In the SEVENTH Day God rested from all his works which he had made,
says Moses: yet God needs no Rest; for he has wrought from Eternity, and he
is a mere working Power and virtue; therefore the meaning and understanding
here lies hidden in the Word, for Moses says he has commanded [us] to Rest
on the seventh Day.

152. The seventh Day was the true Paradise, (understand it spiritually,) that
is, the Tincture of the Divine Power and virtue, which is a temperament: this
pierced through all the Properties, and wrought in the seventh, that is, in the
substance of all the other.

153. The Tincture pierced through the Earth, and through all Elements, and
tinctured All; and then Paradise was on Earth, and in Man: for evil was
hidden; as the Night is hidden in the Day, so the Or grim, fierceness.
wrath of Nature was also hidden in the first Principle, till the fall of Man,
and then the Divine working, with the Tincture, m fled into their own
Principle, viz. into the Inward Ground of the Light-world.

154. For, the Or retired.
wrath did rise aloft, and got the predominancy, and that is the Curse, (where
it is said) God cursed the Earth; for his cursing is to leave off and fly from
his working: as when Gods Power and virtue in a thing works with the Life and
Spirit of the thing, and afterward withdraws it self with its working; then
the thing is cursed, for it works in its own will and not in Gods will.

Of the Spiritus Mundi, and of the four Elements.
155. We may very well observe and consider the hidden spiritual world by the
visible world: for, we see that Fire Or Water.
Light and Air are continually begotten in the deep of this world, and that
there is no Rest or cessation from this begetting, and that it has been so
from the beginning of the world, and yet men can find no cause of it in the
outward world, or tell what the ground of it should be: but Reason says, God
has so created it, and therefore it continues so: which indeed is true in it
self; but Reason knows not the Creator which does thus create without
ceasing: that is, the true Distinguisher, or divider.
Archaeus or Seperator, which is an Efluence out of the Invisible world, viz.
the outflowne word of God; which I mean and understand by the word fiery
Mercury.

156. For what the invisible world is, in a spiritual working, where Light and
darkness are in one another, and yet the one not comprehending the other: that
the visible world is, in a substantial working; whatsoever powers and and
virtues in the outflowne word, are to be Or conceived.
understood in the Inward Spiritual world, the same we understand also in the
visible world, in the Stars and Elements, yet in another Principle of a more
holy Kind quality, or condition.
Nature.

157. The four Elements do flow from the Archaeus of the Inward ground; that
is, from the four properties of the Eternal Nature; and were in the beginning
of time so outbreathed from the Inward ground, and compressed and formed into a
working substance and Life: and therefore the outward world is called a
Principle, and is a subject of the Inward world, that is, a Tool and
Instrument of the Inward Artificer or workman.
Master, which Artificer or workman.
Master is the Word and Or virtue.
power of God.

158. And, as the Inward Divine world has in it an Or Intellectual.
understanding Life from the Effluence of the Divine knowledge; whereby the
Angels and souls are meant: so likewise the outward world has a Rational
Life in it, consisting in the outflowne powers and virtues of the Inward world;
which outward [Rationall] Life has no higher understanding, and can reach no
further then that thing wherein it dwells, viz. the Stars and four Elements.

159. The Spiritus Mundi is hidden in the four Elements, as the soul is in
the body; and is nothing else but an Effluence and working power proceeding
from the Sun and Stars; its dwelling wherein it works is spiritual
encompassed with the four Elements.



Species, kind or property.
form of the Eternal Nature, and consists in a fiery Nature, like a dry
kind of water source, which is understood to be the ground of all Metal and
stones, for they were created of that.

162. I call it the fiery Mercury in the Spirit of this world, for it is the
mover of all things, and the Separator of the Powers and virtues, a former of
all shapes, a ground of the outward Life, as to the Motion and sensibility.

viz. seeing, hearing, feeling, tasting, and smelling, and is the the true
Essential Life, whereby the fire, (that is, the fourth form) is made manifest.

164. The ancient wise men have called these three properties Sulphur Mercurius
and Sal, as to their Materials which were produced thereby in the four
Elements, into which this Spirit does coagulate or make it self Substantial.

165. The four Elements lie also in this ground, and are nothing different or
several from it: they are only the manifestation of this spiritual ground,
and are as a dwelling place of the Spirit in which this Spirit works.

166. The Earth is the grossest effluence from this subtle Spirit; after the
Earth the water is the second; after the water the Air is the third, and after
the Air the Fire is the fourth: all these proceed from one only Ground: viz.
from the Spiritus mundi, which has its root in the Inward world.

167. But Reason will say; to what End has the Creator made this
manifestation? I answer, there is no other cause, but that the spiritual world
might thereby bring it self into a visible form or Image, that the Inward
powers and virtues might have a form and Image: now that this might be, the
spiritual substance must needs bring it self into a material ground wherein
it may so figure and form it self, and there must be such a separation as that
this separated being might continually long for the first Ground again, viz.
the Inward for the outward, and the outward for the Inward.

168. So also the four Elements, which are nothing else Inwardly but one only
Ground, must one long for the other, and desire one another and seek the
inward Ground in one another.

169. For the Inward Element in them is divided, and the four Elements are but
the Properties of that divided Element; and that causes the great anxiety and
desire betwixt them, they will continually [to get] into the first ground
again, that is into that one Element, in which they may Rest; of which the
Scripture speaks, saying; Every Creature groaneth with us and earnestly
longs to be delivered from the vanity, which it is subject unto against its
will.

170. In this Anxiety and desire, the Effluence of the Divine power and virtue,
by the working of Nature is together also formed and brought into figures, to
the Eternal Glory and contemplation of Angels and Men, and all Eternal
Creatures: as we may see clearly, in all living things, and also in
vegetables; how the Divine power and virtue Fashioneth.
imprinteth and forms it self.

171. For there is not any thing substantial in this world wherein the Image
resemblance and form of the Inward spiritual world does not stand: whether it
be according to the Or grimnesse.
wrath of the Inward Ground, or according to the good virtue: and yet in the
most Or Poisonous.
venomous virtue or quality, in the Inward Ground, many times there lies the
greatest virtue out of the Inward world.

172. But where there is a dark Life; (that is, a Dark Oil) in a thing;
there is little to be expected from it; for it is the foundation of the wrath,
viz. a false, bad Poison, to be utterly rejected.

173. Yet where Life consists in Or pain.
venom, and has a Light or brightness shining in the Oil ( viz. in the fifth
Essence) therein Heaven is manifested in Hell, and a great virtue lies hidden
in it: this is understood by those that are ours.

174. The whole visible world is a mere spermaticall working Ground; Every Or
Substance.
thing has an Inclination and longing toward another, the uppermost toward
the undermost, and the undermost toward the uppermost, for they are separated
one from the other; and in this hunger, they embrace one another in the Desire.

175. As we may know by the Earth, which is so very hungry after the [influence
and virtue of the] Stars, and the Spiritus Mundi, (viz. after the Spirit from
whence it proceeded in the beginning) that it has no Rest, for hunger: and
this hunger of the Earth consumes Bodies, that the Spirit may be parted again
from the gross Elementary Or Property.
condition, and return into its Separator, Divider or salnitrous virtue.
Archaeus again.

176. Also we see in this hunger, the Impregnation of the Archaeus (that is, of
the Seperator) how the undermost Archaeus of the Earth attracteth the uttermost
subtle Archaeus from the Constellations above the Earth: where this compacted
ground from the uppermost Archaeus, longs for its ground again and puts
it self forth toward the uppermost: in which putting forth, the growing of
Metals, Plants and Trees, has its Original.

177. For, the Archaeus of the Earth becomes thereby exceeding joyful,
because it tastes and feels its first ground in it self again: and in this
Joy all things Or grow.
spring out of the Earth: yes, therein also the growing of Animals consists,
viz. in a continual Conjunction of the Heavenly and Earthly, in which the
Divine power and virtue also works as may be known by the Tincture of the
Vegetables in their Inward Ground.

178. Therefore Man, who is so noble an Image, having his ground in time and
Eternity; should well consider himself, and not run headlong in such
blindness, seeking his Native Country afar off from himself, when it is
within himself, though covered with the grossness of the Elements by their
strife.

179. Now when the strife of the Elements cease, by the Death of the gross
body, then the Spiritual Man will be made manifest whether he be borne in and
to Light or Darkness; which of these [two] bears the sway and has the
dominion in him, the Spiritual man has his being in it Eternally, whether it
be in the foundation of Gods Anger, or in his Love.

180. For, the outward visible Man is not now the Image of God, it is nothing
but an Image of the Archaeus; that is, a house [or huske] of the Spiritual
Man, in which the spiritual Man grows; as Gold does in the Or drossie stone
or Oar.
gross stone, and a Plant from the wild Earth: as the Scripture says; as we
have a Natural Body, so we have also a Spiritual Body: such as the Natural
is such is also the Spiritual.

181. The outward gross Body of the four Elements shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God, but that which is borne out of that one Element, viz. out of
the Divine Manifestation and working.

182. For, this of the Flesh and of the will of man is not it: but that which
is wrought by the heavenly Archaeus in this gross Body, unto which this gross
[body] is a house Tool and Instrument.

183. But when the Crust is taken away, then it shall appear wherefore we have
here been called Men; and yet some of us have scarce been beasts, nay some far
worse then Beasts.

184. For, we should rightly consider what the Spirit of the outward world is,
it is a house husk, and Instrument of the Inward Spiritual world which is
hidden therein, and works through it, and so brings it self into figures
and Images.

185. And thus humane Reason is but a Or dwelling.
house of the true understanding of the Divine knowledge: none should trust so
much in his Reason and sharp wit, for it is but the Constellation of the
outward Stars; and does rather seduce him then lead him to the unity of God.

186. Reason must wholly yield it self up to God, that the Inward Archaeus may
be revealed, and this shall work and bring forth a true Spiritual
understanding ground, uniforme with God, in which Gods Spirit will be revealed,
and will bring the understanding to God: and then, in this Ground, the Spirit
searches through all things, even the deep things of Or of the Deity.
God, as St. Paul says.

187. I thought good to set this down thus briefly for the Lovers, Of
Mysteries.
for their further consideration,

Now follows a short explication, or Formula, or Model.
Description of the Divine Manifestation.
188. God is the Eternal, Immense Incomprehensible unity which manifests it
self in it self from Eternity in Eternity by the Trinity; and is Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, in a threefold working, as is before mentioned.

189. The first Effluence and manifestation of this Trinity is the Eternal
word, or outspeaking of the Divine power and virtue.

190. The first outspoken Substance from that Power is the Divine wisdom;
which is a substance wherein the Power works.

191. Out of the wisdom flows the Power and virtue of out-breathing, and
goes into separability and forming; and therein the Divine Power is manifest
in its virtue.

102. These separable Powers and virtues bring themselves into receivingnesse,
to their own perceivingnesse; and out of the perceivingnesse arises own
self-will and Desire: this own Will is the Ground of the Eternal Nature, and
it brings it self, with the Desire into the Properties as far as Fire.

193. In the Desire is the Original of Darkness: and in the Fire the Eternal
unity is made manifest with the Light, in the fiery Nature.

194. Out of this fiery Property and the property of the Light, the Angels and
souls have their Original; which is a Divine Manifestation.

195. The Power and virtue of Fire and Light is called Tincture; and the Motion
of this virtue is called the holy and Pure Element.

196. The Darkness becomes substantial in it self: and the Light becomes
also substantial in the fiery Desire: these two make two Principles: viz. Gods
Anger in the Darkness, and Gods Love in the Light, each of them works in it
self, and there is only such a difference between them as between Day and
Night, and yet both of them have but one only Ground, and the one is always a
cause of the other, and that the other becomes manifest and known in it, as
Light from fire.

197. The visible world is the third Principle, that is, the third Ground and
beginning; this is outbreathed out of the Inward Ground, ( viz. out of both the
first Principles) and brought into the Nature and form of a Creature.

198. The Inward Eternal working is hidden in the visible world, and it is in
every thing and through every thing, yet not to be comprehened by any thing in
the things own Power; the outward Powers and virtues are but the passive and
the house, in which the Inward do work.

199. The common Creatures.
All the other worldly Creatures are but the Substance of the outward world;
but Man; who is created both out of Time and Eternity, out of the Being of all
Beings, and made an Image of the Divine Manifestation.

200. The Eternal Manifestation of the Divine Light is called the Kingdom of
Heaven, and the Habitation of the Holy Angels and Souls.

201. The fiery Darkness is called Hell, or Gods Anger, wherein the Devils
dwell, together with the damned souls.

202. In the place of this world Heaven and Hell are present every where; but
according to the Inward Ground.

203. Inwardly, the Divine working is manifest in Gods Children; But in the
wicked, the working of the painful darkness.

204. The place of the Eternal Paradise is hidden in this world, in the Inward
Ground: but manifest in the Inward man, in which Gods Power and virtue works.

205. There shall perish of this world only the four Elements together with
the Starry Heaven; and the Earthly Creatures; viz. the outward gross Life of
all things.

206. The Inward Power and virtue of every substance remains Eternally.

Another Exposition of The Great Mystery.
the Mysterium Magnum.
207. God has manifested the Mysterium Magnum out of the Power and virtue of
his word; in which Mysterium Magnum the whole Creation has lain essentially
without forming, in Temperamento; and by which he has outspoken the Spiritual
formings in Separability [or variety]: in which formings, the Sciences of the
Powers and virtues in the Desire, (that is, in the Fiat,) have stood: wherein
every Science in the Desire to Manifestation, has brought it self into a
Corporeal Substance.

208. Such a Mysterium Magnum lies also in Man, ( viz. in the Image of God:
and is the Essential word of the Power of God, according to Time and Eternity,
by which the Living word of God outspeaketh, or expresses it self either in
Love or Anger, or in Fancy; all things as the Mysterium stands in a moveable
Desire to Evil or Good: according to that saying: such as the people is, such
a God they also have.

209. For, in whatsoever properties the Mysterium in Man is awakened, such a
word also utters it self from his powers: as we plainly see that nothing
else but vanity is uttered by the wicked.

Praise the Lord all ye his works. Halelu-jah.
SCIENTZ.
OF THE WORD SCIENCE.
210. THe Word Science is not so taken by me as men understand the word
Scientia in the Latin Tongue, for I understand therein even the true Ground
according to Sense, which both in the Latin and all other Languages is misled
and neglected by Ignorance: for every word in its Impressure forming and
Expression, gives the true understanding, of what that thing is that is so
called.

211. You understand by Science some skill or knowledge: in which you say true,
but do not fully express the meaning.

212. Science is the Root to the understanding, as to the Cogitation,
consideration, or Reasoning.
Sensibility: it is the Root to the Center of the Or forming.
Impressure of Nothing into something: as when the will of the Abyss
attracteth it self into it self, to a Center of the Impressure ( viz. to the
word) then arises the true understanding.

213. The will is in the Separability of the Science, and there separateth it
self out from the Impressed Compaction; and men first of all understand the
Essence in that which is separated, in which the Separability impresseth it
self into a Substance.

214. For ESSENTZ.
Essence is a substantial power and virtue, but Science is a moving flitting
one, like the Senses; it is indeed the Root of the Senses.

215. Yet in the understanding, in which it is called Science, it is not the
sensing, but a cause of the sensing, in that manner as when the Understanding
impresseth it self in the Mind, there must first be a cause which must give
the Mind, from which the understanding flows forth into its Contemplation:
Now this Science is the Root to the fiery Mind, and it is in brief the Root of
all Spiritual beginnings, it is the true Root of Souls and proceeds through
every Life, for it is the Ground from whence Life comes.

216. I could not give it any other better Name, this does so wholly accord and
agree in the sense: for the Science is the cause that the Divine Abyssall Will
compacteth and impresseth it self into Nature, to the separable [various]
intelligible and perceivable Life of understanding and difference: for the
Impressure of the Science, (whereby the will attracteth it into it self) the
Natural Life arises and the word of every Life Originally.

217. The distinction or separation out of the Fire, is to be understood as
follows. The Eternal Science in the Will of the Father draws the Will
(which is called Father) into it self, and shuts it self into a Center of
the Divine Generation of the Trinity, and by the Science speaks it self
forth into a word of understanding; and in the speaking is the Separation in
the Science: and in every Separation there is the Desire to the Impressure of
the Or outspeaking.
Expression, the Impressure is Essential, and is called Divine Essence.

218. From this Essence the word Or outspeaking.
expresses it self in the second Separation (that is, of Nature) and in that
expression, (wherein the Natural will separateth it self in its Center, into
a sensing,) the Separation out of the fiery One Copy has Essence.
Science is understood; for thence comes the Soul and all Angelical Spirits.

219. The third Separation is according to the outward Nature of the expressed
formed word, wherein the Bestiall Science lies, as may be seen in the Treatise
of the Election of Grace, which has a Accute, or sublime.
sharp understanding, and is one of the Cleerest of our Writings.

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE OF THE BOOKS WRITTEN, By JACOB BEHMEN.
1. ANno 1612. He wrote the first Book called Aurora, the Rising of the Sun,
and he being accused as Author thereof, this Book was laid up by the
Magistrate at Gorlitz, at Court: and command given him that he should
henceforth (being a simple Layman) refrain writing of books, which did not
belong to his profession and condition. Whereupon he did refrain for seven
years, but afterward being stirred up again by the Holy Spirit of God, and
also being encouraged thereto by the entreaty and desires of some people that
feared God, he betook himself to his pen again, and proceeded in writing and
perfected, with good leisure and deliberation, the rest which follow, viz. 2.
Anno 1619. The second Book. Of the Three Principles, together with an appendix
of the Threefold life of Man. 3. Anno 1620. A Book of the Threefold life of
Man. 4. An Answer to the 40 Questions of the Soul, propounded by Doctor
Balthazar Walter, in the first chapter of it is an Exposition of the Turned
Eye, or Philosophic Globe, withal an addition concerning the Soul, the Image
of the Soul, and the Turba or destroyeresse of the Image. 5. Three Books. The
first, of the Incarnation of Jesus Christ. The second of the Suffering, Death,
and Resurrection of Christ. The third of the Tree of Faith. 6. A Book of Six
Points. 7. A Book of the Heavenly and Earthly Mysterium. 8. A Book of the Last
Times to P.K. 9. Anno 1621. A Book De Signatura Rerum, or the Signature of all
things. 10. A Consolatory Book of the four Complexions. 11. An Apology to
Balthazar Tilken in two parts. 12. A consideration upon Esaias Steefells Book.
13. Anno 1622. A Book of true Repentance. 14. A Book of true Resignation. 15.
A Book of Regeneration. 16. Anno 1623. A Book of Predestination and Election
of God, at the end of it is written this following Treatise, viz. 17. A short
Compendium of Repentance. 18. The Mysterium Magnum upon Genesis. 19. Anno 1624.
A Table of the Principles, or a Key of his writings to G. F. and I. H. 20. A
little Book of the Supersensuall Life. (21) A little Book of Divine
Contemplation. 22. A Book of the two Testaments of Christ, viz. Baptism and
the Supper of the Lord. 23. A Dialogue between the enlightened and the
unenlightned Soul. 24. An Apology upon the Book of true Repentance, directed
against a Pasquill of the principal Minister of Gorlitz, called Gregory
Rickter. (25) A Book of 177. Theosophick Questions. 26. An Epitome of the
Mysterium Magnum. (27.) The Holy Weeks, or the Prayer-Booke. 28. A Table of the
Divine Manifestation, or an Exposition of the Threefold World to I.S. V.S. and
A.V.F. In these two that follow, the date is not set down. 29. A Book of the
Errors of the Sects of Ezechiel Meths to A. P. A. or an Apology to Esaias
Steefell. 30. A Book of The last Judgment. Further. 31. Certain Letters to
Diverse Persons, written at diverse times with certain Key's for some hidden
words. The Books which the Author finished not, are marked with this sign.
The faults escaped in Printing.
PReface verse 9 line 4. read * Divine Essence, fol. 2. l. 23. for as r. viz.
l. 32. for how r. that, f. 3. l. 8. r. u transparent. l. 24. r. * Forms. f.
14. l. 27. r. but o not. f. 15. l. 18. r. the p Eternity, that q f. 16. l 29.
r. viz. the eye. l. marg. 18. r. viz. Turbae f. 17. l. 43. r. there for then:
f. 18. l. 30. for chimney r. furnace, f. 22. l. 9. for ye, r. we. f. 25. l. 11.
for where: r. there. f. 27. l. 11. for fire, r. fire. f. 33. l. 22. r. can g
find: l. 24. r. the * l Godhead: f. 34. l. 17. r. wisdom: for the Element
gives not Divine wit [Reason or understanding;] but, f. 45. marg. l. 19. r. t
appears or, f. 70. marg. l. 19. r. doake or hollow. f. 59. marg. l. 1. r.
that Spirit, f. 60. marg. l. 3. r. c workmaster, f. 63. l. 16. r. nothing; that
can give it any thing; but, f. 56. l. 31. r. (wherein, f. 68. marg. l. 12. r.
forth. f. 69. l. 24. r. Tree, Or as, f. 72. l. 5. unless. f. 80 l. 24. r. ^
desire, l. 25. r. o, l. 26. r. ^, f 83. l. 25. r. which holds, f. 89. l. for
s, r. ^, f. 90. l. 32. r. and i bitterness l. 33. r. k for i, l. 35. r. I for
k, l. 40. r m for l, l. 41. n for m, l. 42. o for n, and p for o f. 93. l. 16.
r. one thing has swallowed up another, f. 94. marg. l. 10. r. and works, f.
95. l. 1. r. without it, is, f. 99. l. 6. for them, r. then, f. 105. l. 17. r
Gift,) l. 43. r. soul, f. 106. marg. l. 7. r. m or Chist. l. 39. r. Spirit of,
f. 107. l. 3. r. whores wolves, f. 110. l. 21. r. soul, f. 114. l. 3. r. not
see them; f. 122 l. 1. r. the life, f. 124. l. 36. r. the a Calling, f. 127. l.
39. r. this world, f. 130. l. 2. r. of no, l. 20. be no more, f. 143. l. 25. r.
and there is, l. 36. r and t l. 38. r. u partiality, f. 146. l. 30 for those r.
these: f. 147. l. 20. r. to be done, f. 148. l. 7. r. an end, f 154. l. 39 r. l
sournesse. Preface to the Clavis, verse 9. marg. r. ex sensu, end shutz, f. 2.
l. 20. r. first in, f. 10. l. 1. for put.


