PARACELSVS HIS DISPENSATORY AND SURGERY.

THE DISPENSATORY Contains the choicest of his Physical Remedies.

And all that can be desired of his SURGERY, You have in the Treatises of
Wounds, Ulcers, and Aposthumes.

Faithfully Englished, by W. D.

LONDON: Printed by T.M. for Philip Chetwind, and are to be sold by Stationers.
1656.

To the Reader,
REader, Thou have here some of the best Physical pieces, of the best of
Physicians, who is so well known through the most part of the world, for his
excellent skill in the practice of Physic, for his singular knowledge of the
secrets of Nature; for his candor in communicating his Secrets and Experiments
faithfully to the World, that I need do no more to commend these following
Treatises to thee, but to tell thee, that they are Paracelsus's, who very well
deserves the Title of Princeps Medicorum, The chief Physician of the Microcosm,
and the best Anatomizer of the Macrocosm; for he has brought out of its Bowels
more of its hidden Secrets to the public view, then any Physician or
Philosopher before or since his time; as it plainly appears by these ensuing
Treatises, wherein you shall find many Secrets worthy your knowledge: Here you
have excellent Physical principles, whereby the Physician may be directed, both
in his practice of Physic, and how to find out Physical Secrets: Here also
you have rare and most useful Experiments for the benefit of the serious, and
very strange secrets for the satisfaction of the curious. But these secrets
have been much abused by many, who unjustly desiring to have the praise of them
from Paracelsus, have inserted them in their own writings, as secrets of their
own finding out: And to make the World believe this, they have set down those
secrets in their Writings so imperfectly, and so much varying from Paracelsus
mind, that they are altogether useless and false. Therefore those who desire
to have these secrets truly and fully, let them hear Paracelsus himself,
speaking his own mind in these ensuing Treatises, and other his Writings; let
them read them attentively and seriously, so as they may have his mind fully,
and they shall find these secrets true, which hitherto have been accounted
vain and frivolous, as they have been (falsely) set down by others in their
Writings.

In Chemistry, Paracelsus was excellent, and indeed, Posterity is much
beholding unto him for reviving an Art so useful; for by this Art are made
strong Waters, Oils, Spirits, and many excellent Medicines, the which how
useful they are, almost every one now knows: Yet this Art had been buried with
the ancient Philosophers, if it had not been for the great pains, and diligent
study of Paracelsus, who made it his chief care to bring this Art abroad into
the World, which formerly has been shut up in the Closets and secret Furnaces
of Princes and Philosophers; and has taken off the vail which was left upon it
by the Ancient Philosophers, and has discovered to us the many profitable uses
of it, and many worthy secrets of it, never before known. And this he did, not
for praise or gains, for he was a man free from ambition and covetousness, as
all who knew him do acknowledge; the only thing he aimed at in his actions
when he was alive, and in these his surviving Writings, was only the public
good; and because of this his candor and faithfulness, and the excellency of
his skill, he became an object of general envy; that both when he was alive,
and now since his death, he has been maliciously scandalized by many. And
those who knew not the truth of these things, taking upon trust from the
malicious, at first believed those falsehoods, and afterward they themselves
spoke them as truths: So that it is doubtful whether Paracelsus and his
writings have had more wrong from the malicious, or from the ignorant; for
those scandals put upon Paracelsus, which have been invented by the envious,
have been defended by the ignorant.

Reader, what is here spoken in vindication of Paracelsus, it is only to give
thee notice, that he is much wronged by many; and not that thou should think
him faultless, or his Writings infallible; for nullus sine crimine vivit, and
no doubt but he has had his faults and errors, as well as other men; and those
none should defend: but what is good in him, and fit for public use, let none
condemn. Many of his Philosophical Opinions are not to be approved, but his
Physical practice is certainly very good; and whereas the truth of Phylosophick
Opinions, which must be found out by reasoning (in abditis recessibus latet) is
hardly found out; therefore Paracelsus, as most part of Philosophers do, uses
a liberty and a latitude in such Opinions: But let the Reader use discretion in
reading, and be cautious in receiving such Opinions; as in some of the
following Treatises, viz. of Corals, Secrets of Vermin, and St. John's Wort,
where he says, That Coral and St. John's Wort will drive away Ghosts and evil
Spirits from the place where it is, or from the person who carries it about
them. And in the Treatise of the secrets of Vermin, he tells us of strange
things which may be done by the tongue, tail, and skin of the Adder, etc. These
things are in deed very strange, I cannot say much for the probability of them;
neither can I say, that they are impossible: I am not of that mind, as many
are, who conclude those things to be impossible, or that they must be done by
the Devil, which are extraordinary, and are such things which they cannot
understand. For I know, that God can do many things, and many things naturally,
which we cannot understand how they are done, we only can admire them; yea,
God has given understanding to some men how to use some natural things,
whereby wonderful effects are done: Now when we see strange things done, or
hear that such or such strange things may be done, shall we think that they
cannot be done naturally, nor by God, because we cannot understand how they are
done? is any man's reason so reaching, and so comprehensive, as to know all that
can be done by God and Nature? shall we say, that this or the other thing is
not done naturally, because it is not according to those Principles which we
only know? Is not this to bind God and Nature to our Principles, as if they
cannot do otherwise then according to our Prescriptions? O the vanity of weak
man to dote so much upon his own reason! Alas, how little is the greatest
knowledge that any man has? and how much of that little is very uncertain? how
many uncertain, how many contrary Opinions in Philosophy? in Divinity? in every
Art and Science? Quot homines, tot sententiae. I have a little digressed, but
to return again to Paracelsus. Paracelsus Opinion concerning Spirits and
Ghosts, and many other his Philosophic Opinions, which indeed are not
ordinary; I do not approve them, nor will I here refute them: his Physical
Practice I do approve, and doubtless, his cures and Physical Experiments which
he has left to us in his Writings (the best part of which are in the following
Treatises) are very good; as the experiences of many since his death, who have
tried them, do testify to us, (viz Crollius, Baptista Vanhelmont, Dorneus, and
many other famous Physicians, who have followed his way altogether; yea, those
that profess that they will not follow his way, do nevertheless use most of his
Medicines in their Practice, as their Writings, and Apothecaries can witness
it;) And Paracelsus in his life time gave proof thereof; for he did such cures,
which never any Physician has done the like: He commonly cured those Diseases,
which all other Doctors accounted incurable; the truth of which is well known
in all Germany, where he practiced; for he was Physician to the most part of
the Peers and Princes of Germany, and many other Nations, during his life; as
all who knew any thing of Paracelsus, yea, even his enemies do acknowledge it;
so that he cannot be defrauded of this praise. See Sennertus his Book, De
Consensu, and dissensu Peripateticorum, and Chymicorum; and therefore I do
admire, that any should put th^s scandal upon Paracelsus, to say, that he was a
Mountebank, since all, even his enemies, do confess that he did such great and
strange Cures. And certainly Basil, which is one of the most famous
Universities of the World, would never have chosen him to be their Public
Professor of Physic, if he had been a Mountebank or a weak man: He was chosen
to be their Professor, when he was but thirty years of age, and there taught
Physic publicly many years, and many came thither to hear his Physic
Lectures from all parts of Germany, from Spain, Italy, France, Hungaria,
Poland, Denmark, etc. See Sennertus in the aforesaid Book. We also see many
learned men approve of his way in the practice of Physic, and have followed
it; whereby it appears, that this man was no Mountebank, as some do enviously
and falsely scandalize him.

Reader, I thought it fitting to bint these things to thee, to prevent or
remove thy prejudicial thoughts of Paracelsus, which may be bred by those false
scandals, which are too common in the mouths of those who know not the truth
of these things, lest by thy prejudicial thoughts of him, thou be deprived of
the benefit of those things which thou may meet with for thy good, in these
ensuing Treatises. The Treatises of the Dispensatory, I have given you in
Paracelsus own words: I have only for thy benefit divided the Treatises into
Chapters; and to the Chapters I have added the Contents of them. But his
Surgery I have abreviated; giving you only the cures, with the marks of
those Ulcers and Aposthumes, for which he has appointed the Cures. Very few of
the remedies in the following Treatises are Chemical, but they are such, as any
may themselves easily make them. Paracelsus Chemical Medicines you shall have
also shortly in English altogether, with their Preparations fully and clearly
explained.

W. D.

The Table and Contents of this BOOK.
TREATISE I. OF the Medicinal Virtues and Preparations of Hellebore.
Chap. 1. There are two kinds of Hellebore, viz. Younger and Elder; the
younger is for young people, and the elder for old people. page 1 Chap. 2.
Hellebore a singular Medicine for prolonging life: How it was used by the
ancient Physicians. page 6 Chap. 3. The cure of the Falling Sickness with black
Hellebore, and the several ways of preparing it. page 10 Chap. 4. The cure of
the Gout with black Hellebore. page 17 Chap. 5. The cure of the Palsy and
Hydropsie, and other diseases, with black Hellebore. page 21
Treatise II. Of the strange virtues of Arsmart.
Chap. 1. How the Arsmart should be used for any Wound or Ulcer. page 26 Chap.
2. What other diseases are cured by Arsmart, viz Inflammations, Toothache, etc.
page 32
Treatise III. Of the virtues and preparations of CORALS.
Chap. 1. What kind of Coral is best: The virtue of it against Spirits,
Melancholy, vain Phansies, etc. page 39 Chap. 2. The virtues of Coral more
particularly, with their proofs; showing these operations of Coral to be true
and natural. page 44 Chap 3. The marks of the best Coral: How it should be
prepared and exalted: the virtues of its Essence. page 49
Treatise IV. Of the virtues and preparation of St. John's Wort.
Chap. 1. The virtues of St. John's Wort for fantastic Spirits, worms and
wounds. page 54 Chap. 2. When the St. John's Wort must be pulled out of the
ground, and how it must be used against Fantastic Spirits. page 59 Chap. 3.
How the St. John's Wort should be prepared for wounds, bruises, Fractures of the
bones, and Ulcers: and how it should be used when it is prepared. page 62
Treatise V. Of the virtues of the Lodestone.
Chap. 1. The virtues of the Lodestone, and how it should be used. page 69
Chap. 2. In this chapter you have the virtues of the Lodestone more
particularly for several diseases. page 76
Treatise VI. Of the Preparations and Medicinal Virtues of Turpentine, of
Ebbony, and of Mummy.
Chap. 1. The difference of the wild and the planted Larch-tree: and that the
natural place of the Larch-tree, makes much for the good of the Turpentine.
page 83 Chap. 2. That the right Turpentine is equal to the Indian Balsom in its
preserving Virtue: and how it has this virtue by the influence of the Stars,
and by the Elements, is fully explained. page 87 Chap. 3. The virtues of
Turpentine. page 94 Chap. 4. The preparations of Turpentine. page 98
Of Ebbony Wood.
Chap. 1. The preparations and virtues of Ebbony-wood page 104 Chap 2. The
virtues of Mummy. page 108
Treatise. VII. Of the secrets, and wonderful Medicinal virtues of Vermin.
Chap. 1. The Medicinal virtues of Serpents. p. 111 Chap. 2. The Medicinal
virtues of Serpents. page 114 Chap. 3. The medicinal vert es of Serpents page
116 Chap. 4. Preservatives to keep us from the harm of Serpents, Adders, and
Snakes. page 118 Chap. 5. The medicinal virtues of the Toad and Spider. page
121 Chap. 6. Paracelsus compared with other Physicicians. page 123 Chapter 7. The
Medicinal virtues of Earthworms. page 126 Chap. 8 The Medicinal virtues of the
Earth-worm, and of the Crab-fish Cancer. page 128 Chap. 9. The virtues of the
Crab-fish Cancer. page 131 Chap. 10. The cure of those marks in the body which
the patient has from the mothers womb. page 135
Treatise VIII.
Concerning common Salt and Brimstone, their medicinal Virtues and
Preparations. Chap. 1. page 139
Treatise IX. Of the Medicinal and Chemical Virtues and Preparations of Coperas.
Chap. 1. The kinds of Coperas, and the marks of the goodness of Coperas. page
161 Chap. 2. The Medicinal virtues of Coperas unprepared, and of Coperas
calcined. page 166 Chap. 3. Of the true Spirit, and true oil of Coperas, how
they are made; and what are their virtues. page 171 Chap. 4. Of the red oil of
Coperas, commonly called, The Spirit of Vitrial, and its virtues. page 180
Chap. 5. The Chemical virtues of Coperas, how it changes Iron into good
Copper, etc. page 184
A Treatise of Wounds: Containing the Cures of Wounds by cuts, Fractures,
Burnings and Scaldings; the Bitings of Venomous Beasts, etc.
Chap. 1. Potions, which being Drunk, Cure any Wound. page 189 Chap. 2.
Ointments for Wounds. page 194 Chap. 3. Oils and Balsoms for Wounds. page 197
Chap. 4. Medicines to keep Wounds clean. page 199 Chap. 5. Plasters for
wounds. page 201 Chap. 6. Powders by which Wounds and Ulcers are speedily
closed up page 206 Chap. 7. Remedies for the bleeding pain, inflammation, etc.
of wounds. page 209 Chapter 8. The cure of Fractures, or broken bones. page 213
Chap. 9. The cure of those who are bitten by a mad Dog, Viper or any other
venomous creature. page 216 Chap. 10. The cure of Burnings and scaldings. page
221
A Treatise of Ulcers.
Section 1. Describing the kinds of Ulcers, and their several Cures; under 12
Chapters. Section 2. Wherein are contained some rare experimented Remedies for
Ulcers, especially for the Ulcers of the French Pox. page 254 Section 3.
Wherein are described the Tinctures, which are Catholic Medicines for all
kind of Ulcers. page 822
A Treatise of Aposthumes.
With their Cures; under 55 Heads. page 298
A Treatise concerning long Life.
Chapter 1. All Medicines divided into three sorts, according to the threefold age
of man; showing that each age must have its own Medicines proper for it. page
369 Chap. 2. The division of Medicines, according to the difference of
diseases, and what is the chief use of Medicine. page 376 Chap. 3. What life
is? whether, and how it may be prolonged? page 380 Chap. 4. How the Life is
prolonged by virtue of the place where we live? by the four Elements? by the
Stars? and by the virtues of Herbs? page 383 Chapter 5. The life prolonging
Medicine described; how it should be used? to what use it is chiefly intended?
and to whom it is most effectual? page 391 Chap. 6 How we are preserved from
those diseases Which come from the Stars, or from Witchcraft, or from
Imagination, etc. page 398
PARACELSVS HIS DISPENSATORY.
TREATISE I. Of the Medicinal Virtues and Preparations of Hellebore.
CHAP. I. There are two kinds of Hellebore, viz. Younger and Elder: the younger
is for young people, and the elder for old people.
BEing to write of the two Hellebores; first, I affi^m, that whereas there are
two sorts of Hellebore, the one called Wh te, and the other Black; so
distinguished, not because of the variety of their colors, but because of the
difference of their properties. Therefore, to speak more truly and properly,
if we would give them names according to their natures, then the white
Hellebore should be called the younger, and the black Hellebore should be
called the elder: For howbeit these two are the same kind of herb, yet in this
they differ, that the younger Hellebore should be given only to young people,
til they come to be of fifty years of age: the elder Hellebore is to be used
only by those who exceed fifty years.

And what I have now said of Hellebore, is to be understood of all other herbs
and roots, which are of two kinds, viz male and female: Not that they are truly
male and female; but by this difference the Physician is to understand, that
the one kind should be given only to young people, and the other to old.

Indeed, it is an exceeding great oversight in Physicians, that they have never
taken notice of this, That Nature has built two Shops, the one for young
people, the other for old: so that the same Medicine and Method of Curing is
not for young people, which is for old. It is very inconvenient, that those who
are old should use the Medicines which are fit only for young people: or that
those who are young should use those Medicines which are most agreeable with
the constitution of old people.

To explain this further by an Example of the Moon, which is every month
renewed. The increase of the Moon from new Moon to full Moon, may be compared
to the age of young people, and the decrease of the Moon from the full Moon to
the new Moon, is like old age; so that in those changes of the Moon are well
represented unto us the several ages of man: and as the Moon has not the same
qualities in the increase, which she has in the decrease, so there is a great
difference betwixt old and young people. Therefore it concerns every Physician
to search thoroughly into the nature and condition of the Moon; and so he may
know the age of a man, of what kind it is, which is to be learned by the Moon.
She is the true and genuine book, and not that which is writ with ink. So that
one kind of the same herb should be used in the increase of the Moon, and
another kind in the decrease; and this is commonly called male and female, the
male is the younger, the female the elder.

That you may better understand this, Observe, that as of every thing there are
two sorts, which are as two parts of one whole thing: so there are two kinds of
Hellebore, the elder and younger: The elder Hellebore, what good can it do to
young people? And how unfit is the younger Hellibore for old people? But having
both kinds, we have a complete Medicine for old and young; viz. the younger
for young people, etc. But seeing youth and old age cannot consist together,
even as the Moon cannot be both old and young at the same time; therefore God
has divided this Medicine into two parts, according to these two ages: and
these parts are not tied to one another in their operations, they do their
work, the one without the other.

Again, we must observe the difference of diseases in old age and in young: an
Apoplexy is of one nature in young people, and of another in old; and
therefore there must be one Medicine used for this disease in those who are
young, and another for the same disease in those who are old. Now in the two
Hellebores there is a perfect cure of the Apoplexy; being used for the age to
which they are proper.

So the Gout is of two kinds, there is elder and younger: Younger, viz. the
Gout of young people; and elder, v^z. the Gout of old people. For both these
kinds of Gout there is a present Cure in Hellebore; but not in one and the
same root of Hellebore: therefore Nature has made a division: Now be ever
mindful of the difference of herbs, of the difference of ages, of the
difference of Medicines, of the difference of Diseases, of the alterations of
the Moon. This is a mystery and secret of Nature, which is evident to every
Physician, who is a son of Astronomy.

Now that I should satisfy Mounte-banks in every particular, there is no
necessity: Nevertheless, I will leave with you this serious Instruction; but I
intend it chiefly for true Physicians, That the differences of things do arise
out of Nature it self; so that every thing is appointed to its own place, where
it should be: the Virtues of Medicines are designed where they should have
their operations, and they cannot be forced to any other way. So that the
Medicine which is for young people, cannot be forced to do good to old people.

CHAP. II. Hellebore a singular Medicine for prolonging life: How it wa^ (...)
the ancient Physicians.
I Conceive it fit that now I should describe the black Hellebore, and the
benefit of it to old age: whereby you may also know the nature of the white
Hellebore.

And first to speak of the preparation of black Hellebore, which was used by
the Physicians in ancient times: it was thus; The Hellebore is to be pulled up
out of the ground when the Moon is in some of those Signs of Heaven which are
called Signs of Conservation; then take the herbs and dry them in the shade
with a dry East wind; afterward beat them to a fine powder with pure white
Sugar of equal weight with them. So you have the Powder as it was made by the
ancient Physicians, who used all the ways they could to get the true essence
of this herb; but they could never do it, and therefore they contented
themselves with this powder. Now the reason why they so much s^ught after the
essence of this herb, was this; because they found by experience a wonderful
nature and property in this herb: for those who were passed fifty years of age,
by the daily using of the aforesaid powder evening and morning; taking so much
at a time as they could take up with their three fingers, they became younger
and more vigorous, and so continued healthful and vigorous to the time of
their death. This Virtue Nature has mystically contracted from the whole frame
of the great world, for the conservation of the little world Man. In this herb
are comprehended the four Elements, and by it are expeld the impurities of the
four Elements: it may well be called the Defensive of old age.

But the aforesaid powder is not to be given to every one in a like quantity:
the persons who are to use this powder, must take only so much of it at a time
as is most agreeable to their strength, and as it shall be appointed by some
skilful Physician.

Indeed, they who sought so much after the true essence of this Herb, did it
not rashly; for what Herb is like to this? or what other herb can (as this)
give a firm, vigorous, and lasting life to old age? For it preserves us from
all external infections, or inward putrifactions; and will keep a man always
in a good temper, that he shall come to old age without any sickness. And
therefore it will be worth our pains, if we can separate the pure Essence from
the impurities of this herb. Who will not say, but that such a pure Essence is
an everlasting Balsome; which can so preserve a man till the time of his death,
and in the operations of it agrees with Balsom every way? Let not these things
seem incredible to you.

By this Essence of Hellebore the Causes of the Gout are removed, the Leprosy
quite rooted out; it will not suffer any such disease to be in the body. The
Stars have certain times, and they who are born at such times are not troubled
with any diseases: Again, the Stars have some other times, and they who are
born at such times are still sickly. Now, if according to Nature, Times can
make such impression, and such changes in man: Much more all Vegetables, which
are brought forth by Nature; they do agree with those times of the Stars, and
have a tincture from them; so that in some men, and in some Vegetables there is
the same nature, being, and stamp of Conservation: and so from such Vegetables
men may receive this tincture of Health.

And so much I have thought fit to speak concerning the leaves of black
Hellebore. This only I will add, That you must have a care to know how to
separate the pure Essence from the impurities of the Hellebore under a right
Constellation. How much more hurtful the disease is, so much more powerful the
Medicine must be.

CHAP. III. The Cure of the Falling Sickness with black Hellebore, and the
several ways of preparing it.
THe Root of this Hellebore cures four Diseases; viz. the Falling Sickness,
Gout, Palsy, Hydropsie. Here consider the difference of Diseases. Every
disease is twofold, viz. corporeal, or spiritual: For these two kinds of
diseases the Physician must use two kinds of Cures; one for bodily, another
for spiritual Diseases. Concerning spiritual Diseases, and their Cures, having
spoken of them elsewhere; now in this place I speak only of bodily diseases. As
for those diseases whose spirit is altogether in things bodily, and cannot
subsist without those bodies, their spirit dies with the body; But where there
is an impression from the Stars, there Art appears most of all in removing of
that.

But now to come to our business in hand, to show you how those four Diseases
mentioned before, are cured by this Root.

There is to be observed a difference amongst purging Medicines: Some of them
purge slimie humors; which by purging do remove the humors, but do not impair
the specificall disease; i. e. they do not touch the disease it self in the
root of it. Hence it is that the Humorists, who say, that all diseases come
from the humors of the body; their whole Art consists only in purging, and
they do no good by it; but often times miserably kill diseased persons by it. If
they knew the specifical purging Medicines, then they were in the right way of
purging.

Now concerning the Root of black Hellebore, Observe, that it purges two ways;
it purges specifically, and it purges gross humors; by these two ways it
cures the Falling Sickness.

Here observe, that we should be slow in purging gross humors, (otherwise the
sick person may be much wronged) so as the Epileptick humor may be purged out
with other humors. Therefore a Physician should be skillful in considering the
Time, Order, and Manner of giving Physic according to the condition of the
sick person. In former times, those who were troubled with the
Faling-sicknesse, were first to eat the Root it self; afterward they were to
take it in milk, and lastly they were to take it with other mixtures: but now
(in our times) the Disease is more violent, and the poison of it more
heightened; therefore of necessity the Physician must make his Physic stronger,
left it be not able to overcome the Disease.

Now I will give you my counsel, and show you how this disease may be cured, as
I have found by experience: Thus; Take the Root of Hellebore so soon as it is
pulled out of the earth, and put it in the spirit of wine, which will bring out
both the moisture and the Oil out of the Root; then the Spirit of wine being
separated from that Oil, there will remain the essence of the Root, sweet,
without any addition. This Essence does much differ from that way which was
used by the Physicians in ancient times: for this Essence does not purge out a
great deal of humors, but rather the Epileptick body it self; i. e. the humor
wherein the Disease, or poison of the Disease chiefly lurks, which is the root
of the Disease. Therefore this Essence is a safer and more effectual purge, and
a more certain cure, then that which was used in former times, against this
Disease.

Now this Essence will be more effectual against this disease, if you join with
it in the Spirit of wine, the Misteto of Oak, and Pellitorie, and the seeds of
Pionie, that the medicinal spirit of these three may be mixed with the Essence
of the Black Hellebore, and so to be given to the sick person, so much of it at
a time as the skilful Physician shall think fit. This disease must be driven
out slowly and by degrees, considering the Nature of the sick person, of the
Disease, and of the Country where they live etc.

Addit. The Root is to be pulled out of the earth in the decrease of the Moon,
the Moon being in the Sign of Libra, (which Sign is most agreeable to the
Falling Sickness) upon the Friday (or in an hour of Venus) and it must be
dried in the shade with a dry North wind. It was the custom of the Ancients to
use the Herbs as they are pulld out of the earth, without any addition; but my
way of using this Root is thus: Let the Patient who is troubled with the
Falling Sickness be purged three days before the fit comes upon him, if it
can be done, giving him for a purge two drams of the powder of this Root; to
young people in milk, to old people in wine.

Another Preparation of the Leaves and Root of Hellebore.
Its certain, that the virtue of this herb is great and admirable, not much
differing from a Balsome. He which can bring out the Balsome which lurks in
this herb, has a most precious treasure of Nature: The way to make of this
herb a Balsome is thus: This herb must be putrified in its own water, being
placed in warm dung, the glass being close stopped: afterward the water must be
separated from that which is putrified, and the putrified matter must be
separated from the grounds, the grounds must be kept by themselves; then you
have the Balsome with two degrees of moistness, and twenty two degrees of
putrefaction: The dose of that which is putrified according to degrees; and of
the water according to the quantity, is to be considered in the administration
of it, according to the first proceeding. This Balsome may be more exalted in
its essence, if the aforesaid work be done again by adding to this water and
putrified matter, new (or fresh) Hellebore; and if it be dry, especially the
Root, its so much the better.

The Root is thus corrected: Take of this Root cut in large slices two ounces,
of flesh a quarter of a pound cut very small, of the water of Nutmeg one ounce,
of the water of large Pepper one dram; put these together in a pot very well
stopped, and put your pot in boiling water three or four hours; then take out
your pot, and pour out the liquor, which you shall keep for your use; then
throw away the flesh and the herb. Of this liquor you are to give so much as
the disease, the sick person, and necessity requires.

Another Addition.
You have already heard that this Root cures four principal diseases, and that
it is a conservative of long life. But now I will show you how Hellebore can do
greater Cures then any I have yet mentioned: Take of this Balsome of black
Hellebore one ounce, of natural Balsome half a scruple; let them be so exactly
mixed, that there appear but only one and not two: For Balsom and Hellebore are
of the same nature in respect of Conservation. Natural Balsom is such a
Medicine which preserves us from all the infections of the Stars, from the
Plurisie, and from the Pestilence: Now we should provide Remedies not only
against our earthly infirmities and diseases; but also against those diseases
which come from the celestial influences: And against such diseases there is
no Medicine more powerful then Balsome.

If the Falling Sickness could be cured by purging, then this Root were a
sufficient remedy. Some Herbs are fit purges for the Falling Sickness, other
herbs for the Jaundies, etc. Every disease requires its own purge, which is
agreeable to it; yet a Purgation is not a full Cure, we must do something else
to perfect the Cure: therefore when the Patient is purged so as he should be;
then follows the Cure of the Falling Sickness, which consists in the Secret (or
Arcanum) of the Essence of Coperas. By this method both old and young may be
cured. Nevertheless, the Physician must observe, that this order of Purgations
and Essences is not to be learned by the Apothecaries Art, but by the natures
of things; which do teach us both the way how the Medicine is to be given, and
how much is to be given.

CHAP. III. The Cure of the Gout with black Hellebore.
THere are two kinds of Gout; one kind of it comes of blood, the other comes of
defluxions from the head. In the Bloud-Gout the blood does rage: and by
Astronomy it appears that the blood Gout is enraged by the influence of the
Dog-stars, as in another place I have fully proved. Now Hellebore cannot help
this kind of Gout: but it is good for that Gout which comes of saltish, sour,
sharp, corrosive defluxions: These qualities of the defluxions are the cause of
the Gout; and not heat or cold, or moistness or dryness: but if the diseased
person be much troubled with great heat or great coldness in his joints; it is
by reason of the contention betwixt nature and the disease, betwixt that which
is sound and that which is diseased.

The Ancient app^oved Physicians gave Hellebore to those who were troubled with
such defluxions, and with it purged them. For this Root is the best of all
purging Medicines which were known to the Ancients, both for preventing
Defluxions, and for expelling them out of the body. This Purge was made by the
Ancients, not according to the Rules of the Physicians of later times; but it
was judiciously without curiosity prepared: They regarded not such Medicines
which were made up of Syrups etc. and such other vain additions. They gave
this root alone, without any addition, to the patient, a little of it every
day, and not all at one time: For Purgations must be given moderately in long
Diseases; purging rather often and gently then violently. This Root of elder
Hellebore thus prepared, and given every day, as the Patient and Disease
requires, does so cure defluxions by its natural virtue, that no Root or Herb
can do he like.

As we commonly see, that after it has rained, the ways may be dried ^gain;
but thereafter it m^^ (...) rain again, as to fill (...) ^ennels and Rivers.
Thu^ (...) in the Gout: therefore we must add to this Root of Hellebore some
Correctives, for the preventing of new defluxions; and in this respect this
addition is very necessary. Unskilful Physicians do not consider this, who use
such correctives as do weaken the purging faculty of this herb; they add to it
Terra Sigillata, and other things which are contrary to the nature of this
Herb, and take away the strength of it; whereas it should not lose any of its
natural Virtues, but rather have them heightened. But the true Correction of
it, which best agrees with Physic Rules, is thus: After the humor is purged
out, you must do that which may prevent the collection of the humor again. And
that is done by two Roots; Avens or herb Bennet, and the Acorus of the shops,
as I have more fully showed elsewhere in their particular Treatises. It
oft-times falls out, that a great many other griefs do accompany the Gout,
which were not known to the Ancients; for daily they increase and grow more
vi^lent: and therefore in these our times there must b^ ^^culiar Treatises
concerning the Gout, in w^^^h we must set down remedies for the several (...)
which do accompany it.

What I speak of the Gout here, is only how to take away the Cause or the root
of it by the Hellebore, which is the most considerable part of the cure.
Therefore the purging power of this Root is not to be lessened, but rather
augmented. Then the best way of preparing it, is, as I have showed before by
the spirit of Wine: But use it what way you will, it is a profitable purge. The
patient must be often purged by the aforesaid root betwixt fits; for in so
doing, those defluxions which are the cause of the Gout, are purged out of the
whole body; so that in the time of the fit, the patient shall have but little
pain. The ancient Philosophers by purging often, cured every kind of Gout, even
an old, settled Gout. But the Humourists, when they had thrust themselves into
the number of Physicians, they presumed to do more in an hour, then nature can
do in a year, if they may be believed; and so this Medicine was cast aside and
forgot.

CHAP. IV. The Cure of the Palsy and Hydropsie, and other Diseases, with black
Hellebore.
THis Root of black Hellebore cures likewise the Palsy, and Hydropsie, but not
fully: it only purges out the causes or root of those diseases; there must be
some addition proper to these diseases, used with the Hellebore, as has been
said before of the Falli^^ sickness, and of the Gout: And the Hellebore with
those Additions, becomes a perfect Cure of those Diseases.

There must be a great quantity of this purge given at a time to those who have
the Palsy, so much as the strength of the Patient can bear: for this disease
is not easily driven out, we must deal with it violently. The Addition to be
used besides the Hellebore, for this disease, is set down in a peculiar
Treatise concerning the Palsy.

They who are troubled with the Hydropsie, must be purged slowly and gently;
taking once every week so much of this Root as a skilful Physician shall
prescribe; and so the humor shall be by degrees purged away: first that which
is upward, which is gathered about the breast, stomach, lungs, liver, melt;
afterward the humor which lies in the groins and hips is purged out; then
the swelling of the feet and legs does evanish; and lastly the swelling of the
belly falls low. The humor is purged away in some Patients by Vomit, in some
by Stool, in others by Sweat, in others by Urine. When the Patient is
sufficiently purged by the Hellebore; then follows the Addition, which takes
away the relics of the disease, and makes up the full cure.

The Addition is the Tincture of Steel: The Hellebore purges out the humor
already gathered; the Tincture of Steel hinders any such collection of humors
to be afterward.

Now to conclude this Treatise of Hellebore, which is a purge so excellent,
that there is no other like it; for it purges out whatsoever is in our bodies
hurtful to us. There is nothing better then this Root to bring down women's
monthly Courses: it purges the Mother, and drives out untimely Births, false
Conceptions, Worms, and every unnatural thing bred within the Womb.

Every purgative does not bring down women's monthly Courses, and expel Worms,
and untimely Births, etc. But this is above all others, a singular secret of
nature: and if it be rightly used, it is so agreeable to the bodies of men and
women, that whatsoever it meets with contrary and hurtful to us, it will root
it out.

That Doctor who knows the right use of this Herb and Root alone, without
addition, shall by this one herb have more infallible knowledge and skill in
curing diseases, then all the Empericks or Doctors whosoever, as experience
makes it appear abundantly.

Those who knew the right use of this Herb and Root in ancient times, lived to
a great age very healthfully: but when the Humorists began to be respected, who
contemn the secrets of Nature, and judge of every thing according to their own
ill-grounded theory, being without the true knowledge of the properties of
Nature, they found out their new way of Purgations, Clysters and Syrups, etc.
whereby they rashly thought to do as much in one day, as this Herb can do in
twenty or thirty years; and so they brought this Herb to be contemned and
forgotten: bringing their own Purgations and Clysters in the place of of it. I
remember in my time, I have known many who have been much troubled with Itch,
Catarrhs, etc. who using this Root after the way of the Ancients, were
perfectly restored to health, their nature being thereby thoroughly renewed. I
have known such diseases thus cured, which the Humorists could never cure,
neither know they how to cure them; they can talk much, but cannot perform any
thing. They took every morning half a dram, till they were three score years
of age: afterward, once in two days half an ounce till they were seventy
years of age; then afterward every sixth day to the end of their lives, one
dram.

Titulary Doctors need not admire, that Nature can do more then Art can do: He
has little Art who knows not what Nature can do. There is more to be found in
this one herb, then is to be found in all the writings of University Doctors,
for the prolonging of life. And I do delight in this Medicine of the Ancients,
more then in any other Herb or Vegetable whatsoever, for the preservation of
long life.

TREATISE II. Of the strange Virtues of Arsmart.
CHAP. I. How the Arsmart should be used for any Wound or Ulcer.
ARsmart cures all Sores both in man and in beasts; also Wounds which being
badly cured, are turned to Ulcers. There is no herb like this in curing Sores.
If your horse be extremely galled by the Saddle, whether it be swelled, or the
skin broke etc. if you apply this herb to the sore, it will certainly cure it;
and you may nevertheless use your horse either in riding, or etc. in the time
of curing it. So if any man be troubled with a hardness of the skin in hands
or feet; or if the skin of their hands be chapped by extraordinary labor, or
the skin of their feet chapt by extraordinary travel: So those who are in
prison, and tied with chains, if the chains do cut into their legs and arms,
and so desperate Ulcers do arise from these and such like causes; then this
herb is a certain remedy for them.

But now to show you the uses of this Herb: so soon as you have pulled the
Arsemart out of the ground, draw it through clean water; or draw it through the
streams of a River or a Spring, which is best of all; then lay it upon that
part which is to be cured, so long as you may be eating up half an egg, then
take it away and bury it in a most place, where it may rot, and as it
putrifies, the sore heales: some do sign the sore with the sign of the
Cross, and use a kind of a prayer for it: but such doings are very impertinent
and absurd; for the operation of the herb is natural, not superstitious or
magical. Therefore such vanities are to be rejected, and we ought to observe
the natural way, and so we shall find this herb to be of a wonderful virtue.

Many difficult sores have been oft-times cured both by me and by others, this
way.

Now the cold water is the correction of the herb; the colder the water is, so
much the better. The Arsmart being so cooled and wet, it should be laid upon
the sore; but if the sore be heated by the herb, and begin to burn and stink,
and to have more corrupt matter, then the herb must be taken off, and another
fresh one must be laid to the sore. This order and method must be kept till the
Cure be perfected. And certainly, that sore which cannot be cured by this
Remedy, will never yield to beyond sea Remedies.

Now this way of using this herb is confirmed by the light of nature: Nature it
self does operate so, and not Magic.

The second way of using this herb, is in applying every day a fresh herb to
the sore: That this way is natural, it is so evident, that it needs no proof.
As for the first way, of which ancient Writers have not said any thing to prove
it to be natural; I will show it by an example of the like operation, betwixt
the Loadstone, and the needle of the Compass. There is a power in the
Lodestone to draw Iron to it in a wonderful manner, without hand or foot. Now
if you would have the Lodestone to draw to it the needle of the Compass, then
the Lodestone must be rubbed to it; viz. the belly of the Lodestone must be
rubbed to the belly of the needle of the Compass; and the back of the
Lodestone must be rubbed to the back of the needle of the Compass; and so the
Lodestone will draw the belly of the needle of the Compass to its own belly.
This is commonly known, and this is a singular mystery and secret of Nature,
whereby God in the light of nature does admirably show his miracle.

Now I say, that there is the like agreement betwixt the Arsmart and unfound
flesh, as there is betwixt the Load stone and the needle of the Compass.
Observe then first, that there must be an union, i. e. an agreement betwixt the
ulcerated flesh and this herb; so that the flesh be touched and rubbed with this
herb, as you have in the former example of rubbing the needle of the Compass
to the Lodestone; and where the Lodestone is, there is also a powerful
magnetic operation. If therefore the sore of man or beast be rubbed in the
aforesaid manner, by this herb, and afterward the herb be buried in the ground,
then the sore shall be wonderfully cured by this herb.

If any do wonder at this, that the herb must be buried and covered over with a
stone: I will therefore give you the natural cause of it; which is this: While
the green herb is yet standing in the ground, it has no operation; for while
it is alive, it operates with the Stars, and the Stars operate with it; and
then it cannot be beneficial to man. But when it is plucked out of the ground,
then it is dead, and then the Stars do not operate with it, as living men
cannot have any dealings with dead men: and then its virtue is imparted to man,
for whose use it was created.

Now this herb has naturally this property, that while it is whole and not
broken, so long the operation of it lasts. As for example, Every man in this
world has his daily task which he must do; all the labor of man is only a
task: when his task is done, then he is dead, and death is the end of his daily
task: So it is with this herb; it has a task, and its task is to cure Sores:
it is still in doing this task till it be putrified, but when it is putrified,
the Sore is cured, and then its task is done: therefore if it be a long time in
putrefying, so the Sore will be a long time in curing; and if the herb be soon
putrified, the cure is soon done. The Herb must be putrified in such ground as
it grew in. But if you would hasten the Cure, you must then take some course
for a speedy putrefaction. As it is in riding, if we would soon come to our
journeys end, we must put spurs to our horse, so it is in this business: if
you would accelerate putrefaction, you must bury the herb in a moist fat
ground, and lay a great stone over it; and so you shall have also a speedy cure.

CHAP. II. What other Diseases are cured by Arsmart, viZ. Inflammations,
Toothach, etc.
THis Arsmart is good, not only against those Diseases already mentioned; but
likewise many other diseases may be helped by it. As, the Toothach, which comes
of a cold humor, is cured by this herb, if the herb be dipped in cold water, and
laid upon the aching tooth: you may also bury it; but because it is a long time
in putrefying, therefore the most common way of using it for the the Toothache,
is to lay it upon the aching tooth, so often as we are troubled with the pain.
Many such pains which come of cold humors or cold distempers, are by the
burying of this herb, quite taken away, and we are never afterward troubled
with them.

Arsmart has also a peculiar Narcotick or a benumming faculty; it is a
special Remedy for all Inflammations, and all pains of the head, madness
frenzy, and the like. And when the body is so inflamed by any disease, that
it cannot be in greater torture, the best thing we can use to take away this
heat and pain, is to eat Arsmart. Those of ancient times, when they used this
herb, they took away the biting of it by frying it with butter or oil, and so
did eat it; and being so eaten, it cured those diseases for which it was
intended.

And further, this Herb by its benumming faculty, is a Remedy for putrefaction;
it takes away the pains and diseases of the Lungs, Cough, pains of the belly,
and risings of the mother: being outwardly applied, it cures that extreme
inflammation called St. Anthonies fire, and all other inflamed Ulcers; but it
must be wet in Rose Water before it be laid on. It cures likewise all pains
which arise of corrosive humors, or those subtle Salts which are dissolved in
our bodies, which do cause most tormenting pains. Now where these corrosive or
saltish humors are, as in the teeth, they cause the Toothache: in the finger
they cause the Felon, etc. If you lay this herb upon the diseased part, using
it that way as has been showed before, then it will certainly perform the
Cure, when all other Narcotick remedies cannot do it.

An Addition, more fully explaining how this herb should be used for Wounds,
Ulcers, etc.
THat you may be fully instructed concerning the nature of this Herb, I have
thought fit to add something concerning that first way of using it, which I
have before declared to you by the example of the Lodestone. I told you
before, that this herb must be drawn through cold running water, and the fresh
herb being cold and wet, must be laid upon the Ulcer, Wound, etc. and then
presently it must be taken off again, and buried. Now the thing which I add
here, is this: If the disease or other griefs accompanying the disease, be so
violent and strong, that they will not easily yield to the Remedy, then do
thus: Lay to the sore every morning a fresh herb, after it has been drawn
through running water, then take it and bury it: and thus you must do three
mornings, and oftener, if need be: if you see the disease very hard to cure,
then you may do so twelve or fourteen mornings, yea every morning till the cure
be perfected.

If a man in his journey be hindered, because his horse has received some hurt,
or is extremely galled, then lay this herb to the sore, and do as I have now
showed you: if he be not well after the first, second, fourth etc. dressing,
yet you must continue this course till he be well. Troublesome or violent
diseases must have powerful remedies, and must be diligently looked to. And
seeing in some diseases the aforesaid way of using this herb does little good
at first; as one Purge, or if the quantity of the purge be too little, it does
little good in some diseases; therefore I have thought good here to show you
how the first way of using this herb may be made so effectual, that there is
not any sore whatsoever, but it may be thoroughly cured by it.

Again, you must remember, to keep Wounds and Ulcers clean: if you do it not,
you will much hinder the Cure.

And likewise remember, That it is good for the diseased person (who u^seth
this kind of Cure) to be in motion and exercise, so it be moderate: for how
much more he uses the part diseased; so much sooner and better he shall be
cured by the virtue of this Magnetic herb.

Again observe, That other Medicaments may be joined with this Herb, such as
are suitable to it, and are by nature ordained to such Cures; which being joined
with it, may further the magnetic virtue of it.

Again, there is one great secret in this herb which I will not hide from you;
viz. That the Cure which is performed by this Herb is a certain and lasting
Cure. You need not fear that an Ulcer, etc. cured by this Herb, will break out
again: and it is such a Cure as Nature requires. This magnetic Herb does not
close up that which Nature would have open; nor will it leave that open, which
Nature would have closed. As for example; Where there is a passage for the
effluxion of humors; especially if there be a great deal of humor which
purges out, so as if such a passage should be stopd, death would follow; now
this herb will not stop such a passage, which should not be stopped; it only
cures that which Nature would have cured: it will not do any thing contrary or
hurtful to Nature. Whereby it appears, that this way of cure done by this herb
is most natural.

If you would know how to use this herb for the Toothache; take some Arsmart,
and some of the bark of Henbane, boil them together in Rose-vinegar; when they
are boiled enough, take them out and bury them in the ground; but the liquor
you must take and wash your mouth with: you must take it as hot as possibly you
can, and hold it in your mouth till it be cooled; then put it out of your
mouth; and take some more of this liquor as hot as you did before, and hold it
in your mouth till it be cooled: and thus if you do many times together, you
have a certain cure for the toothach: or you may take the herb it self not
boiled, and rub it upon the tooth, and bury it, and when it is putrified, the
pain of the tooth will cease.

The Correction of this Herb for those inward Diseases, which I mentioned
before is thus: Let the Arsmart be boiled in the water of Nightshade, or in
the water of great Sengreen: the decoction is to be drunk, and the herb it self
must be buried, as has been said before. And you may do so likewise with it
for outward diseases, adding a little Camphire to it.

Besides all that we have yet spoken concerning Arsmart, there is yet remaining
a great and excellent secret. But I conceive it better to be silent, then to
speak any more now concerning this noble Jewel.

TREATISE III. Of the Virtues and Preparations of CORALS.
CHAP. I. What kind of Coral is best: The Virtue of it against Spirits,
Melancholy, vain Phansies, etc.
REd Corals are of two kinds: one kind of them is of a dark red color, or
toward a purple color: another kind of them is of a bright, shining red
color, And as they differ in colors, so they differ in properties. There is
another kind of a pale color, which has very little virtue in it. It is to be
observed concerning the red Coral, that how far short it is of a bright
reddish, it wants so much of its goodness and efficacy.

Experience teaches us, that those Corals which are of a clear, bright, shining
red color, full of boughs, and no where broken, are full of power and virtue:
But those Corals which have clefts, or want any part which they should have,
are of less virtue. As a tree which wants some of its boughs, brings forth the
less fruit; so Corals, whether purple, or bright red, if they want any of their
parts, they likewise want some of their virtue.

Now to speak of the several properties of those two kinds of Corals; viz. the
bright red, and the purple or dark red.

The bright red are pleasant and delectable; but the dark red are not pleasant
to the eye. Those who would carry about them Coral, if they be young men, or
old men, let them choose and love the bright Coral; and they must beware of the
dull, dark Coral. As joy differs from sorrow, and laughing from weeping; so
these two sorts of Corals differ the one from the other. A sick or weak man,
who would have his heart merry and joyful, if he carry about him the dark red
or purple Coral, it will increase his disease and sadness of heart.

Now to speak of the virtues of the shining, bright red Coral. It is good to
quicken Fancy, or imaginative faculty; its good against Phantasms, or
nocturnal spirits; Its good against vain visions, or vain sights, called
Spectra. Its good against Melancholy.

I will explain these a little to you, that you may thereby know better the
worth and use of these Corals.

That you may understand what Fancy is: Consider how some men are naturally
inclined to the study of Secrets, of Arts and Sciences, and new Inventions.
Now they cannot always find out these things so readily as they would, they
tire their minds and thoughts about it: the bright Coral will be very
helpful to us in this business; for it will not suffer the Devil, or any
thing else which will seduce a man in his Fantasy to infect his mind with
impurity, wickedness or vanity. But the dark red Coral does the contrary.

Phantasms, or nocturnal Spirits, proceeding from Nature, they have a little of
man's understanding in them; they seek after man, especially him who is joined
to them. They be of diverse sorts, some good, some bad; they are lovers of man,
but not visibly, and they converse with them as dogs: but there is nothing to
be got by these Spirits; they can do nothing, except it be to trouble a man:
they fly from these bright Corals as a dog from a staff; but they gather
together where the dark colored Coral is. They are much like to the
Night-mares, which are bred of Fancy.

A Spectrum or a Ghost is the Starry body of a dead man. Man has a twofold
body; one made of the Elements, the other made of the Firmament. The body made
of the Elements, when the life leaves it, it rots in the place where it is
buried: but that other body which man has from the Stars, flies up and down
in the air above the earth. Now these aetheriall or Starry bodies of dead men
we call Ghosts; which cannot endure to be where the bright Coral is; but the
dark colored Coral allures them to it.

Melancholy is a disease which makes a man sad whether he will or not; that he
grows weary of every thing, and become dull: and by his diverse thoughts and
speculations makes him grieve and weep. This Melancholy is driven away by the
bright red Coral, and it is increased by the dark red Coral.

It is evident then, by these four particulars now mentioned, that the
operation of the Coral is natural, and not superstitious or magical, as many
may think; for these four, of which we have now spoken, do proceed from Nature,
and not from the Devil, contrary to Nature. Now if they be natural, as
Astronomy, and the composition and putrefaction of man proves it, then Nature
has a secret prepared for them, as it has for all things natural, which
proceeds from Nature. Now Coral is one of those Secrets, of which there are
also some others, which Nature has prepared against these four. And so Nature
is contrary to nature; that is, contrary to nature in assisting Nature,

CHAP. II. The Virtues of Coral more particularly, with their proofs; showing
these operations of Coral to be true and natural.
BRight Coral restrains the great tempests of Lightning, Thunder and Hail, and
preserves from the hurt of them: if it be used in the right manner, and in the
right place.

The Proof of this. If we by our understanding can find out a way to build a
house over our heads to keep off the rain, or to make a shade to keep off the
heat of the Sun, etc. So Nature, as it can cause Tempests in the air;
doubtless it can also prepare a defensive to save from the harm of these
Tempests. As for example; as Nature causes diseases, so likewise it has
prepared Medicines against those diseases. So that there is not any natural
thing but has its contrary, that is, there is created some natural thing
which is contrary to it: and for this end God has created Coral, who
understands these things; and has likewise created other such things out of
the earth.

Other Virtues of Coral.
Bright red Coral does defend us from the cruelty of savage monsters, such as
are bred by the Heaven, that is, the Stars, contrary to the course of nature.
Sometimes the Stars pour out a seed, of which a Monster is begotten, which
should not be reckoned amongst the creatures, as a part of the Creation: and
these monsters we think sometimes to be Devils, sometimes we think they are
Ghosts, etc. they are great enemies to men, because they are not generated by a
natural way, but by an unnatural way. Now these Monsters cannot be where Corals
are.

The Proof. These Monsters, albeit they proceed from nature, viz. the Stars,
yet they are contrary to nature: therefore God has given to us in nature a
help against these Monsters, such a help which is natural, generated in a
natural way. Now that which is natural, produced by nature, will certainly
expel that which is contrary to Nature; and of this kind are these Monsters:
of which we have spoken more fully in our Treatise concerning the Generation of
things natural and of Monsters, which we will not repeat here.

Other Virtues of Coral.
Devils or Spirits which would possess men, they cannot do it where Coral is;
if the Coral be lying in the place, or be hid in a fit place, or if we carry
it about us. There be many such Spirits invisible with us, which seduce us, and
teach us to lie, and to deceive, etc. but by this Coral they may be driven
away from us.

The Proof. As the Devil flies from the Sun which he cannot endure; for he
hates the light, and loves darkness; so he flies from this Coral, which God
has singularly enriched, more then any other Vegetable; even as he has made
the Sun to excel all the rest of the Stars. The Devil can comply with any of
the Stars, except the Sun; he cannot agree with the Sun, so neither can he
agree with Coral. This bright red Coral in its secret, mysterious virtues, is
like the Sun; and the purple or dark colored Coral is like the Moon: and as
the Devil does comply with the Moon, so he does with ^his dark red Coral.

Other Virtues of Coral.
Where this Coral is, whether in the Fields or in Gardens, there all kinds of
fruits are multiplied and increased: it likewise drives away from those grounds
(where it lies) all such Birds, Vermin, Spirits, Ghosts, which are hurtful
to the grounds, or the fruits of the grounds, and so it increases the fruits.
For the corn, fruits etc. receive great damage in the night by Spirits and
Ghosts.

Further, if the Devil may possess man, much more he may possess beasts, as
Cows, Dogs, Hogs, Birds, etc. viz. such beasts in which men have most delight.
And the Devil is also in Tempests, in Lightning, Hail etc. Now if Nature may be
thus possessed by unclean Spirits; then certainly Nature by its own strength
can deliver it self from those unclean Spirits; that is, that natural thing
which is so possessed, howbeit, it cannot by its own strength deliver its self;
yet there is some other natural thing like it self which agrees with it, to
which God has given a peculiar power against such unclean Spirits: that as in
Nature there be Remedies against Diseases; so likewise in Nature there be
Remedies against such wicked Spirits, of which Remedies, Coral is one.

Other Virtues of Coral.
Women with child may reap great benefit by this Coral; and as they undergo
more casualties, troubles, temptations, griefs, etc. then men; so they should
not want this Coral; but they should always carry about them the most
pleasant, lightsome, shining, bright red Coral that they can have.

This Coral cures the whites in Women; and stops the extraordinary flowing
down of the monthly Courses, and brings them to their natural condition again.
It is also a great help to women in child birth, if they have it about them;
for by it they shall be delivered safely, speedily, and with little pain.

This Coral also cures loosnesse in the belly, and all kinds of fluxes both in
old and young people. It makes us be of a good complexion and cheerful; it
corrects the harshnesse and rudeness of our natures, and makes those civil,
which before were uncivil: It stops the blood of the veins, bleeding at the
nose, the bleeding of wounds, the Hemorrhoids.

It cures the Falling sickness by the rectifying of Nature; so that the
diseased person shall not fall. It is one of the chiefest things for the curing
of this disease either in young people, or in people of middle age.

CHAP. III. The marks of the best Coral; How it should be prepared and exalted:
the virtues of its Essence.
HEre I will add one notable ma^k whereby you may know the goodness of Coral,
and how it must be carried. This mark you shall find in the figure of the
Coral. Take notice especially of the stock of the Coral; in which you may
plainly discern a belly and the back: and so you must take notice of the right
side and the left side of the Coral; for accordingly it must be carried: that
is, he who carries the Coral, must set the belly of the Coral toward the same
place that his belly is toward; and the back of the Coral toward the same
place that his back is toward; the right side of the Coral as his right side,
and the left side of the Coral as his left side. And that Coral in which you
cannot discern this back and belly wants much of the virtue which it should
have; or if it wants any boughs which it should have, then its defective in
its virtue; for the more boughs and branches it has, it is so much the better.
And therefore if you would have the aforesaid benefits of the Coral, you must
carry about you the whole Coral; a broken piece of the Coral has but l^ttle
virtue.

Observe this distinction of the virtues of herbs: There is a twofold Virtue in
herbs and other Vegetables etc. viz a specifical virtue, that is a virtue
appropriated to some certain Diseases, which strikes at the root of that
disease, and roots it out: And there is an essential virtue, which is not
proper to any one disease, but is larger: by this virtue an Herb can help a
great many diseases, and may cure some. This essential virtue is like the beams
of the Sun diffused in the air; the specificall virtue is like the beams of the
Sun contracted in a burning glass: So that the specificall virtue is a great
deal more operative then the essential virtue.

The Exaltation of the Virtues of Coral.
I will not, neither indeed can I exalt the Specificall virtue of Corals: For
what God has already enlarged to its utmost bounds, that it can go no further,
such a thing can neither be increased nor diminished: It is only the essential
virtue which may be increased. And therefore now I give you the Preparation and
Exaltation only of the Essential virtue of Corals: which I cannot pass by,
because the mysteries and secrets of Corals are wonderful. Of which I w^ll now
treat not so slight^y as other Writers do.

It has been always the custom of Philosophers to separate the good from the
bad, the pure from the impure; that is, all things must die; only the soul
continues: and if the soul does not die, and the body must rot, hence then it
follows, that the seed must putrify before it can bring forth fruit.
Putrefaction is incident to the body: only the Essence, that which is good,
the soul, does not putrify. Now when that which is pure is separated from the
impurities of the Coral, then the Jewel is discovered in which all its virtues
dwell; which is of small quantity, in respect of a great deal of useless,
impure matter, which is separated from it. By the Virtue of this Jewel, viz by
this essence of Coral, are cured all sorts of vicious fluxes in women, without
any harm to the body; whereas such fluxes in women, if they be stopped in one
place, they break out worse in another place. Its otherwise with this Cure done
by the Essence of Coral; for this cure is perfect, and never does any harm.
This Essence likewise cures all sorts of fluxes of the belly: that albeit they
be most desperate, so that they cannot be cured by other remedies, yet this
Essence will help them. This Essence being taken inwardly, stops bleeding in
any part of the body. Ten or fifteen drops of this Essence taken inwardly,
cures all sorts of Falling Sickness in men, women or children if they take it
five weeks together.

I deny not, but some things may be added to this Essence of Coral, which may
better it; as the secret Essence of the stone Carneolus, which makes the
essence of Coral more efficacious in stopping of fluxes, as bleeding fluxes of
the belly, etc. Another thing which may be added to this Essence, is the glass
of Steel made liquid; which makes the essence very powerful in curing the
Falling Sickness. The essence with these additions may be rectified in a
Circulatory vessel; not the Circulatory vessel of the vulgar Alchimists, who
call themselves Alchimists, and can do nothing but prate.

TREATISE IV. Of the Virtues and Preparations of St. John's wort.
CHAP. I. The virtues of S. John's wort for fantastic Spirits, worms and
wounds.
I Have oft-times declared, how by the outward shapes and qualities of things
we may know their inward Virtues, which God has put in them for the good of
man. So in St. John's wort, we may take notice of the form of the leaves and
flowers, the porosity of the leaves, the Veins. 1. The porositie or holes in
the leaves, signify to us, that this herb helps both inward and outward holes
or cuts in the skin, and strengthens Nature in expelling that which should be
evacuated through the pores of the skin. 2. The flowers of Saint John's wort,
when they are putrified, they are like blood; which teaches us, that this herb
is good for wounds, to close them and fill them up. 3 The straikes in the
leaves like veins, show us, That this herb drives away from a man Ghosts and
night-spirits, and spirits begot by imagination, whether they be within a man
or without; and these fantastic Spirits, which are begot by Fancy, do beget
Ghosts, so that a man shall see spirits, visions, and hear such phansies: and
all these are natural effects; they are diseases which bring men to dotage and
madness, and make men sometimes to kill themselves. 4. By the whole herb we
may know this, that if there be any of the aforesaid evils in any part of man,
it shall be expelled by this herb; so that this herb is an universal medicine
for the whole man. Lastly, The taste of this herb is unpleasant to worms,
therefore the worms do hate it.

You may observe four virtues which are in St. John's wort; viz. for Wounds,
Worms, Spirits, and its Balsome-vertue. Concerning these Phantasms, or
fantastic spirits, which are without body or substance, they are a disease,
which in the spirit of contemplation beget another spirit, whereby the man is
governed. The which spirit begets in a man such thoughts and gestures as are
contrary to his nature. And for this disease there are no more remedies known
that are created by God, but only Coral and St. John's wort. Let the Physician
here take notice of this, that this Phantasm or fantastic Spirit is not a
disease proceeding of Melancholy; as the University Doctors fain: but it is a
spirit which cannot be driven away by those things which cure Melancholy; but
only by such Remedies in which there is a power and strength to drive them away
by force.

Such a virtue as this is not to be found in those compounded Receipts which
are made by the Apothecaries: but it is a Medicine made by God himself without
a Physician: it is compounded and made wholly by Nature. And therefore when we
would use it against these Phantasmes, we must take it alone without addition
or composition.

There be diverse sorts of Worms: there be some Worms to which Rue is an enemy;
there be others to which Angelica is an enemy etc. and others to which St.
John's wort is an enemy, not only because of the taste, but because of that
virtue of St. John's wort; which as it is an enemy to all fantastic Spirits;
so it is also contrary to the spirits of worms, and all vermin, which by their
natural instinct do hate and fly from this virtue of St. John's wort. As the
sunbeam pierces through glass; so this virtue pierces through the Spirits
of men and beasts, even as musk, which by its smell gets into the inmost part
of the brain. Therefore worms fly from this herb, and leave the place where it
is. This herb is also good for wounds, not as it is in it self, but if it be
rightly prepared. And let every Surgeon know, that there is not any herb in all
Germany, or in any other Nation, whose virtue by preparation can be so much
exalted for the curing of wounds as St. John's wort: and this virtue being so
exalted cannot be fully described. There is no other Medicine which can close
up a wound so soundly and perfectly, without any harm which may follow
thereupon, as St. John's wort. Indeed, there is not a more wholesome herb and
better for Wounds to be found upon the earth, then Saint John's wort.

All the Books that ever have been written concerning the cure of Wounds, being
compared with this herb, they are vain and useless, and have nothing in them
but vain talk. For the greatest virtue and foundation of a vulnerary Cure is to
be found in this herb; and by it there may be a Balsome made whose virtues may
contend with a natural Balsome: not that there is any natural Balsome
essentially in it; but by preparation, as it shall be afterward showed. Every
understanding Physician will take these things well which I speak here: for
there are more and greater things taught in this Chapter, then in all the
Surgery of Galen er Avicen, etc.

CHAP. II. When the St. John's wort must be pulled out of the ground, and how it
must be used against Fantastic Spirits.
WHen we would use Saint John's wort against these Phantasms, we must observe
the time of the heavenly Influences, which is most contrary to these Spirits;
and it is chiefly in Mars, or in Jupiter, or in Venus: it is to be done not
with the Moon, but against the Moon; not in the afternoon, or after Sunset;
but a little before Sunrising, or in the dawning of the day, in a place
looking toward the East, in a place where many other good herbs and flowers
grow; Saint John's wort growing in such a place is the best: and the longer it
is, and the more flowers it has, it is so much the better. It is to be pulled
up when it has flowers: and then carry it constantly about you as a Nosegay;
or you may carry it in your cap, or in your bosom: in the night time you may
lay it under your pillow: hang it about the chamber; and you may hang some of
it in every room of your house.

And let all Physicians be assured of this, that God has hid a great secret in
this herb; especially against Spirits and such Phantasms which make men mad,
and bring them to despair; which are not from the Devil, but from Nature. For
God has created for every disease a remedy proper to it; therefore it is the
duty of the Physician to learn and to search out where God has hid such
secrets.

When the St John's wort must be pulled out of the earth; and how it should be
used for Worms.
St. John's wort needs no correction for the worms; but we should use it as God
himself has made it for us. It should be pulled out of the earth the Moon
being in those Signs wherein she is when trees are lop'd or cut down, or when
Argoile is dig'd up; in which Signs no worms or moths can be bred.

Now this herb being thus pulled up, if you lay it to wounds in which there are
worms: as it sometimes falls out through negligence or the unskilfulness of the
Surgeon. It is sometimes the effect of nature it felf, especially in the
Summer time, in the dog-dayes; but oft-times impertinent remedies are the cause
of it. I have seen in the winter time worms breed for three weeks together in
wounds; so that in the evenings and mornings oft-times there has been an
handful of worms taken out of the wounds, because those wounds were choked:
but by St. John's wort wounds may be kept free from worms; for so soon as it is
laid to the wound, the worms fall out; so likewise if worms be bred by some
putrefaction in any other place of the body; then lay St. John's wort upon your
navell, and it will make these worms remove, and hinder the breeding of them.

But here observe, that St. John's wort can do no good against those worms which
are not bred by putrefaction (as there are some worms which are not so
engendered) and therefore a skillful Physician should observe, whether they are
from putrefaction or not. As for example, you see worms generated in cheese,
these are taken away by this herb; so also in flesh; and so it may have the
same operation in man. Therefore if there be Worms in any part of the body, lay
this herb upon the navell, or upon the skin over against the place where the
Worms are, and it will make them remove: and being removed once out of their
place, they may by a slight purge be quite purged out: For the chief thing to
be done against the Worms, is to make them remove out of their place; which is
done most powerfully by Saint John's wort.

CHAP. III. How the St. John's wort should be prepared for Wounds, Bruises,
Fractures of the bones and Ulcers: and how it should be used when it is
prepared.
THe most subtle and certain way of preparing Saint John's wort, so that its
virtue may be most exalted, whereby all Wounds etc. may be cured, is thus:
First you must have the oil of the seeds of St. John's wort; to which add a like
quantity of Turpentine, then boil these two together in good claret wine an
hour; afterward put to them half so much of good new sallet oil, and let them
boil all together another hour in claret wine: then put into them the leaves
of Saint John wort, so much of them till the liquor can hardly cover them: then
let all these boil together in the claret wine six hours, till all the wine be
consumed, and there remains only the leaves, the two Oils and the Turpentine;
which you shall take and set them in the Sun a month.

If you add to this Medicine the flowers of Centory, Mastick, Incense, Mirrh,
Mummie, and so repeat the former proceeding, boiling them all together in the
wine, and afterward to set them in the Sun, this medicine will so be made much
better.

Another way of proceeding worthy your observation, is thus: Take distilled
Turpentine, and put into it a good quantity of the flowers of Saint John's wort,
and let them stand in the Sun a month; then put the seeds of St. John's wort
into this Turpentine, and set them in the Sun a month; then put to this
distilled Turpentine, half so much of washed Turpentine, and let them stand in
the Sun a month; and so you have a Balsom which is a singular Remedy for the
wounds of veins and nerves; preserving them from decaying, and bringing
together again those parts of the nerves and veins which by the wound are
separated, that there is no need of sowing. And lastly, it prevents the
contracture and resolution of the nerves, which are sometimes effected by
wounds.

Sometimes men receive wounds when the Moon is in evil signs, which makes a
slight wound become deadly. Now when you are to deal with such wounds which are
not deadly because of the part wounded, or because of the greatness of the
wound; but because of the evil sign. You may cure them by this following
Balsome.

Take of the Oleum Lacarinum, and put into it the flowers of S. John's wort: Let
them stand in the Sun six days; then take out those flowers, and put in fresh
flowers, and so let it stand six days more in the Sun: thus you must renew the
flowers six or seven times, and every time the oil with the flowers must be set
in the Sun six days: so you shall have a Balsom far exceeding all others in
curing deadly wounds.

But there remains yet another kind, of a Balsome-nature, which may be drunk:
which is indeed the best vulnerary remedy, if it be taken for thrusts or
inward wounds of the body, whereby the principal parts are wounded. There
cannot be such another vulnerarie Potion made. The Potion is made thus:

Take of the white oil of Juniper, of the oil made of the seeds of St. John's
wort one quart. Put into these two oils the flowers of St. John's wort; let them
be set in the Sun: and proceed in the same manner as has been said before,
renewing the flowers, and then setting them in the Sun; the oftener you do this,
the better will the Potion be; and what this Potion cannot do, there is no
other remedy can do it in wounds.

These Receipts I have given you for this end, that you may know, that none of
the Physicians trouble themselves to find out such secrets: they sell fair words
and large promises to sick people; but how often do they make slight wounds
turn to be bad wounds, and bad wounds to become worse, and so miserably destroy
their patients. But that they may not do so any more hereafter, I therefore
have told them these my Remedies, hoping that if they use these my Remedies,
many untimely deaths may be prevented. Indeed, it is a sad thing that man who
is the image of God, should through the great rashness and unskilfulness of
Physicians be often deprived not only of their health, but also their life.
Whereas there are many perfect remedies created by God, which ought to be used
in stead of those miserable Remedies of theirs.

Now I will show you how the aforesaid Balsoms and Potion should be used. You
must lay soft lint, or the scrapings of linen in the wound, and lay it over
all the wound, if you can; then drop the Balsome warm into and over all the
wound. By this means the wound shall not become dry, but always be kept moist.

The Potion must be taken in the morning, at noon, and at night: and each time
you must take two spoonfuls of this potion in twenty spoonfuls of wine: and so
you must take every day six spoonfuls of this Potion, till the Cure be
perfected.

All the aforesaid Receipts partake of the nature of Balsom; for they will not
let any thing rot which has any life in it. Here mark the difference of
Balsoms: There are some Balsoms which preserve dead bodies from corruption; and
there are some Balsoms which do not preserve dead bodies, but preserve living
bodies from corruption, that they shall not be troubled with Ulcers or
Aposthems etc. Now where is there a Physician who has such a Remedy in
readiness, which can so preserve us from putrefaction, that no part of our
living body shall putrify; that can do as this herb of which I now speak?

Now I will teach you a way of Compounding, which is thus: Add to the first
Balsome described before, Treakle, and the best Mithridate, with some other
Diaphoreticks; then having put them into a glass close stopped, set the glass
in warm dung there to digest some time, viz. a month, and then use it.

Moreover know this, that you may distill a water from this Herb and the
flowers of it in Balneo Mariae, which distilled water can do the same things as
the St. John's wort it self. But this water is not so powerful; and it is to be
used only for such wounds which are not very dangerous or difficult. It may be
both taken inwardly, and applied outwardly.

But the former Balsoms of the S. John's wort can cure any broken bones, or any
bruise, or clotted blood in the body. Thus I have thought good to declare this
my experience of St. John's wort, that vain Receipts may be rejected, and true
Remedies may be used. But indeed, such is the madness of Bath keepers,
Surgeons etc. that they would rather destroy a whole Army of men, then to leave
their old mad Remedies.

TREATISE V. Of the Virtues of the Lodestone.
CHAP. I. The Virtues of the Lodestone, and how it should be used.
We see in the Lodestone an attractive power, whereby in a wonderful manner,
beyond humane understanding, it draws to it self Iron and Steel, and other
things. This operation of the Lodestone may be plainly seen, and it cannot be
unknown to any Physician: Why then does not the Physician consider this;
Whether or no there may not be other uses of the Lodestone. But Physicians are
so greedy of gain, that they neglect all such experiences: which they cannot
well excuse, seeing they have such an excellent subject as this in their hands,
and they clearly see the operation of it with their eyes, and yet should be so
dull and slow in knowing it, and in finding out the Virtues of it. And if I
should collect out of ancient Writers all that they have said of the virtues of
the Loadstone, yet I should do no great matter: for he who writes of the
Loadstone, must show what things should be added to the Loadstone, and what
things can correct it: so that I shall go beyond all those Physicians in this.

These Doctors and Apothecaries do often (even to my loathing) repeat to me,
that I reject the Authority of ancient Writers. But why should I follow those
who have no experience? for you see that what they write of the Lodestone, it
is nothing. Now see what I write, and weigh my writings with their writings in
even scales: If I had not been a guide to my self in getting experience, I
should have continued blind and without any knowledge in Physic, for all that I
can have out of these ancient Writers. And therefore I am not to be blamed, if
I leave them, seeing I seek after greater secrets then they did. Experience
has taught me this, that I should follow it, and not them.

I entreat the Reader to bear with this discourse, which (I confess) is not
pertinent to the subject in hand, viz. concerning the Lodestone. But I have
thought good to premise this admonition. The ancient Writers do tell us, that
the Loadstone draws iron to it, etc. This is indeed true, and it needs no
Writer, when every fool knows it. Now I ask, if it be enough to write such
things as every clown sees; or if it be not better to add that which the clown
sees not. Indeed I think it is lawful and fitting that I do so: for a sleepy,
sluggish foot is not to tread in this path. That is a shameful Philosophy
that has nothing in it but what is known already by every clown. But I speak
by experience (the Mistress of true knowledge) and according to that knowledge
which I have by experience, I affirm, not only that the Loadstone is a stone
in which there is an attractive power to draw to it iron and steel; for this is
manifest to every one: but I add, That In the Loadstone there is an attractive
power, whereby it can draw to it any material disease in the body of man. The
old humorists have fained many things concerning the four humors, whereby they
have brought many base errors into Physic. But I say, that we may know
diseases more readily by the planets, then by humors. Nevertheless, they
still sing the same song concerning humors.

Experience teaches, that the Lodestone draws all material diseases out of
their own places to it, with all the excrements which are joined to those
diseases. Now it must be explained, what those material diseases are. Those
diseases (I say) are material diseases, which the Loadstone draws to it, as it
draws iron or steel: and of this kind are these diseases following, viz. the
fluxes of women, as Whites, or extraordinary flowing down of the monthly
Courses etc. all fluxes of the belly; and every other disease which runs out of
its center into a circle, may be brought back again into its center, viz. by
the the Loadstone. And all the several streams of Fluxes, which come from the
same root or fountain, may be brought back again to their fountain by the
Loadstone. Now these are the virtues which I say are in the Loadstone, not
regarding the tales of other Writers, whether they be ancient or modern.

But to keep close to the matter in hand, I will show you now where the
Loadstone should be laid; and my counsel to you is this; that you lay the
Lodestone upon the center or root of the d^sease, where the disease has had
its first being: As for example, if the overflowing of the monthly courses or
the whites trouble a woman, then the Loadstone should be laid upon the root of
the disease, where the strength of the disease lurks, and whence the disease
had its beginning: and then the disease shall cease. If any flux of the belly
trouble you, then lay the Loadstone upon the place where the root of this flux
lurketh, so it shall be stopped; and so likewise in other diseases, which from
their root have spread themselves through the whole body. Now if the Loadstone
be laid upon their root, then by its virtue the disease shall be brought back
to its root again, and shall stay there. By the same virtue of the Loadstone
all excrements and superfluities in the body are restrained and kept within
their own place, whence they may easily be driven out by a fit medicine through
their natural passages, being thereto furthered by a good digestion; but this
stopping of a flux does not take away the disease wholly: the only advantage of
it is this, that excrements and superfluities are more perfectly digested in
the place of their root, and more ripened for evacuation. Thus if you use the
Lodestone for the Colic, you shall prevent the Cramp, which is oft-times
caused by the Colic. For that matter which is the cause of the disease, is
confined to the place of its root whence it is evacuated, and where it is fully
ripened according to Natures method; by which seasonable maturation and
evacuation both the Colic and the Cramp are carried away with it.

To give you much in few words, which you shall esteem of as a most precious
Treasure, it is this: Shut up the Disease within its center or root, that it go
not out thence, afterward digest it, and ripen it there. Now how you may shut
up the disease within its root, you have heard before, that it is done by the
Lodestone; but it is to be ripened by other Medicines: Thus the disease,
whether it be good or bad, is cured according to the course of Nature. It is a
shame for Physicians to endeavor to drive out d^seases, as fluxes etc. before
they be fully ripened. Thereby they show their ignorance, that they know not
how to stay diseases in their own places, and there to ripen them, and thence
to expel them when they are ripe. Indeed, such is the ignorance of the most
part of Physicians, that they can neither do the one nor the other: all their
skill is, to cure in one part, and to kill in another.

In the same manner the Hydropsie may be stayed within its Center, there to be
digested, and thence expelled. Indeed there are several ways of curing the
Hydropsie; one is by the Lodestone; another is according to the nature of the
Hydropsie etc. So that it holds true, that there may be several medicines for
one disease. Let us then observe what Nature can do, and how it does it; and
that not only in inward diseases, but also in outward diseases, which belong to
the Surgeon; as the Rupture, and the falling down of the fundament: So by the
same, old running sores are brought back to their root, and afterward may be
purged out by the right passages, being ripe, and not crude and unprepared.
Then a Physicians main work is this, to bring a disease into its center; and
afterward to use those Medicines which can do that which ought to be done;
that is, to ripen the disease, and then to expel it.

CHAP. II. In this Chapter you have the virtues of the Lodestone more
particularly for several diseases.
NOw, that you may rightly understand the use of the Loadstone, you must know
that in the Loadstone there is a belly and a back; by the one it draws things
to it; by the other it drives things from it. And first, to speak of the Fluxes
of women, how they are to be stopped and stayed in their center. The way is
thus:

The back of the Lodestone must be placed toward the end of the line, and the
belly of it toward the beginning of the line; both parts being so placed, that
their concavities may be right over against one another. And this is to be done
not only for the overflowing of monthly Courses, and for the Whites; but also
for all kinds of Fluxes of the belly, however they come. Now the Flux being
thus shut up in its center or root whence it flows, then you must use
medicines which will open the Flux. In case of a weak stomach which cannot
digest any thing, but sends down the meat indigested and crude; if you can but
bring the stomach to keep the meat till it come to a right digestion, then
there will follow a natural evacuation. Here observe, that that which is
natural cannot be restrained, but must have its course: only that which is
unnatural may be stopped and kept in its place till it becomes natural. And
as it has been said of the belly, so may we do in the diseases of the Mother;
and so all may be brought to a perfection of their natural digestion, and then
to the natural course of evacuation.

Mark this addition for the stomach, guts, and mother: To bring them to their
right digestion, you must use fit remedies, which are not to be mentioned here:
I have done it elsewhere abundantly.

So likewise for fits of the Mother; the Mother must be pulled downward from
that place to which it moves by the belly of the Loadstone, which must be
downwards, and the back of the Loadstone must be laid upwards; and this will
make the Mother to stay in the place of its root, that it shalnot move upwards.
Afterward we must use other medicines proper to the Mother, as the Pearl of
Corals and Mica nigra: so the fits do cease, and the cure is perfected.

And so for the Falling Sickness in all the kinds of it; you must consider
whence it arises, where it has its first movings, as it always moves upward
to the top of the head; therefore you must carry the Lodestone about you in
this manner, viz. with the belly of it downwards, and the back of it upwards;
and that not only in one place, but also for the four quarters of the body;
there must be a Loadstone laid in every quarter: So the disease shall be drawn
from the head to its center. But you must use Triagummatum -- outwardly to
comfort and strengthen the heart; and you must take inwardly Esse
essentisicatum, and other Cordials.

After the same manner the Cramp is cured: for when you have returned it to its
root, then you must anoint the part diseased with the oil of Salt.

The Ancient Physicians with their companions, have vainly spoken much
concerning the way of turning these defluxions which fall down into the eyes,
ears, mouth, nose, and other external parts of the body, making way to
themselves by Fistulaes, Ulcers, etc. but all their counsels and instructions
in that business are nothing worth; for they could never find out the true
ground of this mystery, of returning diseases to their root, where they have
their beginning; and so they trusted the whole business of Curing Diseases to
their Clysters and Purgations. But this Lodestone is the chiefest of all
Medicines for Turning of defluxions, returning them to their fountains. If
first the back of the Loadstone, and then the belly of it to be laid toward
the root of the disease, accordingly as the place will permit where the
Loadstone is to be applied; then every defluxion, wheresoever it is in any
passage to get out of the body, shall return back again to its first fountain
or root; and when it is in its fountain, then it is to be rectified, digested
and ripened there; and after it is so ripened, to be driven out thence. You
erroneous Physicians, consider what you do when you would turn defluxions yet
crude and not ripened; whereas no defluxion can be turned to any other place,
till first it be turned back to the place of its nativity; i. e. the root or
fountain where it had its beginning, and be ripened there. Now consider how you
can do this. What? can you do it by purging? That is impossible; for you do no
more by purging but drive out the disease crude, and not yet ripe, through the
guts, and thereby you multiply diseases. But the right way is this; to bring
back the defluxion to the fountain, and to keep it there till it be ripened;
then let nature cast it out afterward. Now the defluxion must be ripened by
Esse essentificatum made of the stands of Wine, in that way of preparation
which is discovered to us by the light of experience. Thus likewise are cured
ulcerous Legs, Cancers, Fistulaes and the like: but we must except Noli me
tangere, in whatsoever place of the body it is.

If you would stop bleedi^^ you must consider its center, and tow^rds it you
must turn the belly of the Loadstone to draw back the blood, and the back of
the Loadstone must be toward the place of bleeding, to stop bleeding there.

Addition.
There are some Potions, which being drunk, can draw back the blood to its
center, and can allay the fury and boiling of the blood, as cold water powered
into a boiling pot, cools it; so is the blood cooled by this Potion. Of this
sort are those Cordial waters which are made after my way of preparation. Let
others use their own Experiments: its free for every one to use that which he
finds best for him.

As it has been spoken of the use of the Loadstone for several Diseases, the
same way it is to be used for the Hemorrhoids: for these three concur to make
up the perfect cure of the Hemorrhoids; viz. the Loadstone, the ripening of the
Hemorrhoids, and cooling of them. To conclude: The Loadstone is not only useful
for the diseases before mentioned; but also in many others. It wonderfu^^
cures Ruptures both in old people and young; it draws out the Jaundise and
Hydropsie, if those other medicines be also used, which are proper and suitable
to such diseases: of which I will not speak more here, lest I be too large in
this discourse. Seeing the whole proceeding is only this, to draw the disease
back to its root, to digest it there, and to expel it thence etc. all which
may be better learned by practice; there is no need that chewed meat should be
put in the mouth of those who know nothing of this Art.

TREATISE VI. Of the Preparations and medicinal Virtues of Turpentine, of
Ebonie, and of Mummie.
CHAP. I. The difference of the wild and the planted Larch-tree: and that the
natural place of the Larch-tree makes much for the goodness of the Turpentine.
IT is the nature of the Larch-tree, or Turpentine tree, to delight in
mountainous ground, and such ground which is not manured. As there are Beasts,
some wild, and some tame; so Trees, some grow wild, some are planted. The
Turpentine-tree planted in domestic places, differs no otherwise from that
which grows wild, then a Do brought from the mountains differs from that
which is kept in a garden; but the Turpentine it self has great harm by this
transplantation: for when it is taken from its native place, viz. which is most
agreeable to it, then is it removed from its natural nourishment, whereby it
is increased, and has its being. And as manured ground is easily known by
sight from that which is not manured: so may the domestic Turpentine be known
from that which is wild: for the wild Turpentine grows not in good ground, but
the domestic grows in good ground; and when it is brought from mountainous
places and planted in plain ground, then is it deprived of that high air which
is upon the mountains, and must now stand in a different air, viz. the air of
low grounds, which is very much contrary to its nature.

There are also other reasons why the Larch-tree should not be transplanted:
But the chief reason is this; because that celestial influence which is in the
Turpentine from the Stars, comes down to the mountains, but not to the low
grounds; and if the Turpentine do not enjoy this influence daily, then it
cannot come to the perfection of a Balsom: but this influence cannot be
transplanted, it cannot be brought to the low grounds from the mountains, where
it uses to be.

I would have all observe this, but especially Physicians, That every thing
which grows should be taken in the place of its influence, where it grows
naturally of it self. Its true, that in the transplanted Turpentine are all the
same kinds of Virtues which are in the other true Turpentine; but weaker and
more imperfect: As for example; Common people say, that the fish called the
Wolf does thrive better in one water then in another: and the best fishes, if
they be put into some waters, they will become worse, and they will have the
taste of those waters: and those fishes which live in smooth waters differ much
from the same kind of fish which lives in rough waters: And as there is
difference of waters; so there is also difference of grounds; and so there must
be also a difference in plants growing in diverse grounds. We must remember
this, that the Turpentine has its old age, and the older it is, so much the
weaker it is: its first age is sixty years, its middle age is from sixty years
to one hundred and eighty; then begins its old age. When it grows old, it
becomes incapable to receive the celestial influence; for spiritual
impressions cannot be well received into decayed bodies. And what I have now
spoken of the Larch-tree, the same is to be understood of all other Trees or
Herbs of the like nature; viz. which have some special influence from the
Stars. I do not speak of that only which is outwardly seen; but I speak of that
which is inward, the life and soul of the herb, which preserves the herb,
dwelling in those Virtues which stream from it into the corporeal parts of the
herb.

I have spoken here the more plainly, that you may understand that virtue by
which every disease is cured.

CHAP. II. That the right Turpentine is equal to the Indian Balsom in its
preserving Virtue: and how it has this virtue by the influence of the Stars,
and by the Elements, is fully explained.
ANd truly, if we ought to write of the Virtues of any Tree then certainly of
the Larch-tree, rather then any other. For it has a true Balsome, which is to
be esteemed of as a Balsome; being of the same nature and goodness with the
beyond sea Indian Balsom For albeit the Indian Balsom, as it is a Balsome, has
some other properties which the Turpentine has not: yet the Balsome of the
Larch-tree has not only the nature of a Balsom, but it has also some other
virtues. Now a Balsom is that which preserves bodies from putrefaction, as is
evident by these two Balsoms. And concerning this German Balsom, or Balsom of
the Larch-tree, know this, that bodies prepared and embalmed with it, never
putrify, if it has been taken from the tree in its time when it should be:
for the celestial influence from which it has this balsome Virtue, requires
that it should be taken in the right time.

Many Sepulchers of the Ethnicks, especially of the Romans; have been found and
opened, where dead bodies lay embalmed in Alabaster and Marble chests: the
balsome wherewith they were embalmed, was thought to be the Indian Balsome: but
this was a mistake, for after it was tried by some who diligently searched into
the nature of it, it was found to be Turpentine. So that this Turpentine may
have two names; it should be called Balsom (and not Turpentine) if it be so
gathered, and in such a time as the Balsome influence of the Stars requires;
viz. when the Moon is in the Balsome signs; and if it be not then gathered, it
is not a Balsome, but it should be called Turpentine. Remember this, That every
thing which grows, as trees herbs, etc. they have naturally a kind of
Balsome in them: for if the tree be cut down when the Moon is in the
Balsome-signes, it will not have either clefts or worms in it: for its Balsome
nature is fully settled in it by its agreement with the celestial influence:
and how much a Balsome is increased in virtue, so much it operates.

But that you may not neglect the right time of gathering the Turpentine, or
this German Balsom from the tree, consider this example: they who keep milch
beasts must not neglect the time of milking: for that time is by Natures own
appointment; and if you do neglect it, then the milk may curdle in the beasts
udder, afterward dissolve, grow sowrish, and so grow more and more corrupt,
whereupon diseases follow. The like does also befall man: for if a man be
hindered when he would go to stool, or when he would evacuate urine, etc. then
follow diseases, as the Strangury, Dysury, the insatiable desire of going to
stool, called Tenasm. Now by these examples you may see, that there is a
certain time and hour when the Turpentine should be gathered from the tree;
viz. if it be gathered in the time of a Balsome-influence, then it is a Balsom:
but if it be gathered in any other time, then it is not a Balsom, but only a
Turpentine; for that time when it is taken from the tree, is the time of his
generation, which makes it to be a Balsom or a Turpentine: and therefore this
time ought to be much observed; it is in our power to choose it.

By this you see how much it concerns every Physician to know the motions of
the heavens, to have the knowledge of Astronomy. If the Turpentine be left too
long in the tree, then it is neither a Balsom nor a Turpentine; for it loses
its virtue, and changes its nature, and there is no goodness in it: and if it
be gathered from the tree too soon, before it be fully ripe, and it has all
that virtue which it should have, it causes the Colic, Dysurie, insatiable
desire of going to stool etc. and many other Diseases, through the
unskilfulnesse of Doctors and Apothecaries. These things I show you for this
end, that you may know how to proceed more exactly and groundedly to discover
and bring out those secret virtues and mysteries which lurk in the Turpentine.

To proceed concerning the Virtues of the Turpentine, whence they come:

I must tell you, that those things which I write here, do not agree with other
books and other Writers: But why do they thus differ from me? The cause of it
is their imprudency and small experience in those things which every one should
know.

First then, it has its Virtue from the Elements: the seed of it, which
grows out of the earth becomes a tree, and into that tree is this virtue
infused, which is for the good and benefit of man.

In the next place let us consider what brings the liquor of this tree to that
perfection, viz. of a Balsom. The first cause which brings the Turpentine to be
of a Balsom nature, it is the heavenly influence: even as Gold and Silver being
separated from the dross, are a pure metal.

If you would know why I do so much esteem of the hour of the birth, that is,
that hour when any thing comes first out of the place where it had its first
being; The reason why I so much regard this hour, is this; because when any
thing is born, it has in it self the representative of the whole world; so
that it has that which is impure, as well as that which is pure; it has that
which is deformed, as well as that which is beautiful; evil as well as good;
that which is fit and useful, and that which is superfluous and unusefull: and
when any thing comes into the world, then it goes through a furnace, an
invisible fire, and this fire is the Firmament: and as this fire is, so is the
thing born more or less purged from that which is evil in it, or useless, or
impure, etc. And how much more it has of Starry-influences concurring in it,
it becomes so much the more pure, good, beautiful, etc. And this that I now
speak is not only to be understood of Turpentine, but also of every thing
natural: in this manner Turpentine is changed into a Balsome by these heavenly
Artificers.

Secondly, It has its temperature from the Elements, viz. the Air, of whose
nature and property it is: which you must understand thus: The Air pierces
through all other Elements, and all bodies which are made of the Elements.
Every thing with all its substance is made up of those four Elements; and
whatsoever proceeds of the Air, it has an aeriall nature, and therefore it
must be hot and moist. As for those degrees, first, second, third, fourth,
which have been invented by some Physicians deluded with their own vain
imaginations: Esteem of them no otherwise, but that they are groundless and
foolish; for there is only one degree, not more nor fewer: in the Snow there
is but one degree of coldness; in the Fire one degree of heat. Howbeit, in
Alchimie there be degrees of heat observed: yet that which we chiefly look
upon, is the essence it self.

The Turpentine has a medicinal influence which God has created in it: for
Medicine (or medicinal virtue) in natural things, is an invisible spirit
infused into their bodies, as the spirit of man was breathed into man. In
Turpentine there are five things to be considered; viz An Elementary body, The
heavenly impressions of the Stars, The heavenly Vulcan, The complexion of the
Chaos, and a created Spirit: And according to these five things, I will show
you five several kinds of Virtues in Turpentine. That you may the better
understand the power and virtues of it severally, according to their natures;
and that you may lay your groundwork in Physic by Astronomy and Philosophy;
so your experience shall be daily more increased, and appear more in public.

CHAP. III. The virtues of Turpentine.
ANd seeing the Turpentine (as I have before told you) is changed into a
Balsom; therefore I will now show you the Balsom-vertues of it, which are not
inferior to the Indian Balsome, as it shall appear.

And first, to speak of the Imbalming of dead bodies. Embalming may be
understood two ways; either when dead bodies are embalmed under Balsome
Constellations; that is, when the Moon is in Balsom signs: There be 12 hours
of the day in which the spirits of the firmament in their motion pass over us,
and this must be daily. Again, observe, That the secret of Embalming consists
much in the removing of the excrements at the last breath of the person
deceased; this will make the Composure of the body to continue longest without
decay: But whether of these ways be used, thereby the body may be kept without
putrefaction.

What I have spoken concerning the conservation of dead bodies, it is to show
you the excellency of Balsom; and that the influence of the Stars may have its
operation in us who are alive, as well as in dead bodies; yea, the strength and
virtues of it appear more in the living, then in the dead.

Now whereas many great diseases (as none will deny) may be caused by infection
or poison in the bodies of men; nay there is not any disease but it may be
caused by poison; for that part of the body which has not any disposition to
putrefaction, will not yield to poison; and that which is most powerful against
putrefaction, is the best medicine against diseases. Hence it follows, that as
Balsom is from the Stars, so also is the Pestilence: therefore if you join like
to like, that is, if you give Balsom to them who are in danger to be infected
with the pestilence, the Balsome will keep out the Pestilence: as they who are
in possession of a Garrison, can easily keep out the enemy; so Balsome keeps out
the Pestilence; that where Balsom is, there the Pestilence which comes from the
Stars, can do no hurt. But if the Pestilence has already got into the body,
then the Balsom can do no good. So that the method to be observed in using this
Balsom, is this: The Physician should be careful to give this Balsom before
the infection or the disease be in the body, and this will keep the body that
it shall not be infected by poison or any disease. This a Physician should
know, and it is indeed an unfitting thing, that a Physician newly come from the
Universities should be ignorant of this, and now must learn it of me.

Balsome does also preserve us from Fevers and all Apostems, whether inward or
outward, if it be used before the Aposteme breaks out. So that the chief use
of this Balsom is to preserve from diseases, and not to cure diseases.

This Balsome is also an enemy to Worms; for where Balsome is, there cannot be
any worms or Beetle-flies, etc. or any other vermin, which are naturally the
offspring of excrements.

I cannot reckon all the Diseases which come of putrid causes, or
putrifactions: but whatsoever they are, you may use the same method for them
all. Doctors, I only tell you of this; and I hope you have learned so much in
the Universities, that you have a full knowledge of every thing. And truly I
think, that medicinal experience could not do you any harm. But I dissent from
you, because you dissent from me.

Remember this, which I told you before, that when any thing is in its birth,
i. e. when it first leaves the place where it was formed, then that which is
pure in it, is separated from that which is impure, by the influence of the
Stars. Now in the Turpentine there are some impure mixtures which come from the
impurities of Mars and Saturn; and these do very much hinder the good Virtues
of Turpentine, which comes from the influence of the good Stars. But the
influence of the Stars, like a lightning, consumes these impurities in the
birth of the Turpentine: and when it is thus purified, then the two last
virtues of it appear; viz. that which is from the Air, and that which is from
the infused spirit.

Concerning the air, learn this, as Astronomy teaches you; that as is the
natural generation of the Air, so is the alteration of the Air, when it is at
any time changed. You who are Physicians, should know the nature and properties
of the Air, and so you may better know how to preserve from those diseases
which come by the infection of the Air. Its better to prevent the violence of
the heaven, then to delay till it comes, its easier keeping it out, then
driving it out.

CHAP. IV. The Preparations of Turpentine.
ONe way of Preparing Turpentine is thus: Boil it in strong red wine; and
before the wine be all consumed, power upon it the water of sow-bread, -- and
with it wash the Turpentine when it is cooled; and thereafter keep it in a
close place. Saturnine wounds are cured by it, if it be dropped into them; and
afterward lay a Wound-plaister to them; or bind them up so as Wounds should be.

And if you put to the Turpentine half as much of the whites of eggs, it will
be a great deal better for the wound; but if superfluous flesh be bred in the
wound, then to the aforesaid plaster you must add burned allom prepared with
vinegar, so the rank flesh shall be consumed without any pain to the patient:
But such things you must learn by experience. Every one who has wine in his
hand cannot drink it decently.

There are other things which may be added to the Turpentine, but I will now
pass them over.

Alchimie, which brings the virtues of things to the light, and to be of a
wonderful efficacy; it has also taken Turpentine in hand for the good of man,
and has distilled it; and being distilled, it was afterward taken notice of
by experience. Now those who are unskilful in Physic, do think that this
worthy medicine was found out by those Mountebanks, only learned in their own
opion, who, ever since the beginning of the world, have been contemners of all
good Arts, spending all their time in decoctions; they cared for no more, but
to satisfy their eyes: they never searched into the nature of this Turpentine,
neither had they ever any experience of it; but they let their patients die,
when they might easily have been restored to health.

But in this our age experience has taught me, that distilled Turpentine is an
excellent medicine for any unnatural hardness in the body to take it away; but
observe, that there are several kinds of hardnesses in the body, viz. the
hardness of the spleen, the hardness of the liver, and the hardness of other
inward parts: as else the hardness of outward parts, as kernels, hardened skin
etc. Briefly, whatsoever unnatural thing is in the body, which is of the
nature of hair, or of a vein, or of a bone, or of a gristle, it is taken away
by this distilled Turpentine, adding to it such other medicines which are proper
to such diseases, and observing their quantities when you mix them. As for the
knotty Gout, take this distilled Turpentine with the essence of Mummy.

Having spoken concerning this Turpentine balsome, so much as is known to me by
experience. I will therefore now make an end of this discourse, hoping that
these experiences of Turpentine discovered by me, shall be found by others to
be true, to their great comfort. But I must not forget to tell you of one
thing, that if this destill'd Turpentine be dropped into the wounds of veins, it
preserves the veins from all inconveniences. Th^s distilled Turpentine
likewise asswageth the pains of the Gout.

If Turpentine be a little time set over the fire, when it is cold it becomes
hard like glass; take this glass, and dissolve it with Amber; and distill it
in the right way, and it will be a most subtle and excellent Varnish; if you
lay it upon any thing, and dry it speedily; if you mix the powder of tiles with
this glass over the fire, you may therewith make most firm and closs floors,
where you may keep a great quantity of quicksilver without decay etc.

I will now show you the way how the Balsome is to be separated from the
Turpentine.

When you have gathered the Turpentine from the tree in the right time; i. e.
in the time of the Balsome influence, as it has been before declared: the same
hour when it is taken from the tree, you must put it in your vessel, which
must stand in warm dung, one half of the vessel being within the dung; fill
your vessel with Turpentine, and so let it stand in the dung some time, and
there it will purge out its impurities. When its purified enough, you will find
that it has divided it self into two parts: the upper part of it will be
clear, but that which is under is not so clear: pour it out as it is heated by
the heat of the dung, into another vessel, which is already placed in the first
degree of heat. Here you must take notice, that this first degree of heat, is
the first of those twelve degrees which are in heat: and in this first degree
of heat it must stan^ sixty hours, and digest: and here it will divide it self
again into two parts; the upper part will be very clear and perspicuous; this
is the Balsom, so much of it as is thus clear: but the under part, which is not
so clear, is the pure Turpentine. These two, viz. the Turpentine and the
Balsome are separated the one from the other, as the iron from steel. In this
Balsom lurks many admirable Secrets, more then I can find out in my life time:
but doubtless, the rest of its Virtues may be found out by experience, if
Physicians were as desirous and careful how to cure diseases, as they are to
fill their purses; or if they were constrained by the Magistrate to be such as
they profess themselves to be. Now if every Tradesman ought to have skill and
experience in that Trade which he professes, much more ought the Physician to
have great skill and experience in so weighty a business as the health and life
of man.

CHAP. I. The preparations and virtues of Ebony wood.
WE have three sorts of medicines out of Ebony, viz. a liquor, a Gum, and a
Salt; the liquor is like the juice of Sloes: the Gum is like that balsome
which is got from the Larch-tree: the Salt is like that Salt which the
Apothecaries call sal gemmae: the liquor is the portion: the Gum is the
unguent: the salt is the purgative which purges and cleanses.

The liquor must be extracted out of the wood, by close distillation, as the
oil of Nutmeg is extracted out of the Nutmeg: one pound and a half of this
liquor is more efficacious then an hundred pound of that liquor in which the
wood only has been boiled.

When we have got out the liquor, then we must extract the Gum out of the
wood, thus; put the Ebony-wood in a close reverbatory, in the second degree of
fire, the space of twenty four hours, then you shall see the Gum come out
clammy, and sticking to your fingers like liquid Styrax of a savory,
delightsome savor, one pound and six ounces of this Gum is better, and more
efficacious then two hundred pound weight of that liquor in which the wood only
is boiled. Lastly, the Salt of it is made thus; you must burn the wood to
ashes, (for ashes is the mine of salt) then pour the water of Fumitory upon
these ashes, and this will bring the salt out of the ashes; then congeale the
salt according to the usual way, and you shall have a salt almost like these
salts, called Salt Entalls, or Salt Anatron: one pound and five drams of this
Salt is better then fifty pound weight of that liquor which is made after the
common way, which is only the boiling the wood in water, or some other liquor.

With this Salt you may make an excellent purge, thus; take of this Salt a half
scruple, of Alexandrine Treacle two drams, mix them together: of this give at a
time the quantity of a half scruple; and this is to be given not only once or
twice, but three or four times, or oftener, as the disease requires. There is
such a virtue in this salt to purge the Gout, the Palsy, and those humors
which are breaking out, as no other medicine whatsoever, whether it be
purgative, or laxative or expulsive: For this Salt is to such diseases as fire
to water. If you would use this Salt in any Cure to be done by Surgery, you
must proceed thus: If the sore be open, you must first cleanse it by the Salt;
then you must anoint it with the gumm twice every day, till the cure be
perfected, and the sore place well skinned.

If there be a great pain in any part of the body, and there is nothing to be
seen, then anoint the place with this gumm. By it also may be cured the Gout,
the Palsy, the French Pox etc. But remember, that if you do otherwise then I
have told you, then you will lose your time and pai^ with the Empericks.

A short and speedy way of curing a Rupture by this Medicine.
That Proverb, viz. The Cow draws the Chariot, when we signify any thing to be
done absurdly and preposterously, may be well applied to the common way of
curing Ruptures. Now what is more absurd or more unreasonable, then to leave a
Cure to the Surgeon, which belongs to the Doctor; as here, to bring a Rupture
from its own natural and most easy way of cure, to come under the horrible
tools of the Surgeon; and, as if it were an incurable Tumor, to use the most
difficult way of curing? And seeing we thus change certainties for
incertainties, what other can we expect, but that God and Nature may deny us
their assistance? But to leave this, and to come to show the most easy and
readiest way of curing a Rupture (without help of the hand) by this Medicine
thus. Take of the liquor of Ebony wood two ounces, of the liquor of Usifur one
ounce, of Incense and of Mace of each half a dram, of Turpentine two drachms,
of Hearts grease so much as you need to make it up into an Ointment: with this
you shall annoint the place of the Rupture twice every day the space of 3 weeks
or a month, the patient lying upon his back this time; and thus every Rupture
may be cured, if the place of the Rupture be not putrified.

CHAP. II. The Virtues of Mummy.
THis Mummy you may have at the Drugsters or Apothecaries, which is a singular
Medicine. For whereas many have been very industrious in trying experiments,
and compounded receipts, to find out some medicine, whereby they might bring
poison wholly out of the body; but their endeavors have been without success:
for amongst all experiments and receipts, only Mummy is the readiest, and most
certain remedy against all kinds of poison. You may preserve Mummy thus; put
your Mummy in Sal^et oil, in a glass close stopped; set your glass in warm dung
a month; that your Mummy may putrify in the oil, then separate the oil from
the grounds, by the distilling vessel called a Retort; then take this oil which
you have distilled from the grounds; and to one pound of it, add one dram of
Alexandrine Musk, and six ounces of Alexandrine Treacle; and when you have mixed
them all together, put them in a Circulatory vessel; and set your vessel in
Balneo Mariae, that is, in boiling water: and so it must be kept in warm water
a month, and then you have the Treacle of Mummy, or rather, the balsome of
Mummy.

Of this balsome of Mummy, you may give one ounce in the oil of Almonds to be
drunk by the persons who are infected with poison, who must be kept warm in
their beds, that the Medicine may do its work the better. You need not fear
that any poison, whither of beasts, or poison of minerals, or of herbs, can do
you harm, if you take this treacle of Mummy: and such is the efficacy of it,
that if you take this Treacle of Mummy before you receive the poison, then the
poison cannot do you any harm: and if in the morning you take but one dram
of it, then you may be sure that you cannot be infected with any poison that
day,

And likewise if you give one dram of this treakle of Mummie to any person
who has a Plurisie, Plague, Carbuncle, or any venomous Aposteme; if they live
six hours after they have taken this treacle of Mummie, they may be assured of
their recovery: and then these six hours being expired, take another dram of
this treakle of Mummie, and so continue to take of it till you be cured.

There are also very many other diseases which may be thoroughly cured by this
Treakle of Mummie.

TREATISE VII. Of the Secrets, and wonderful Medicinal Virtues of VERMIN.
CHAP. I. The Medicinal virtues of Serpents.
ALthough I never purposed to write concerning, these nor have I ever spoken
any thing of them in my other Books: yet I think it profitable and necessary,
that I should make a new plantation, not only of Physic, but also of other
Sciences and Secrets of Nature, which are buried in forgetfulness, and by the
ignorant are contemned and evil spoken of: which certainly is a punishment
from God upon us; because we will not acknowledge the great mysteries and gifts
of God to be divine, therefore God is angry with us, and is provoked to take
from us again those gifts and secrets, and to give them to others who will
receive them with greater thankfulness, and not slight them as we do.

I will first treat of Serpents, and show you the benefits which we may have by
the several parts of the Serpent; and first of the Tongue of it, which has a
wonderful power; and many do carry it about them as a holy thing to defend them
against weapons, and all enemies present or absent: this also has made many
victorious and successful, not only in battails and duels, but also in other
business: by this lovers have gained the affections of them whom they loved;
which I do not speak of that we should do the like; but that we may know how
great the power and operations of nature are; yet it cannot be denied but that
our imagination and believing may much increase or diminish the power of such
things accordingly, as they are used.

Some who have been troubled with, an inward imposthume near the heart have
laid the tongue of the Adder or Serpent upon their breast, over against their
heart, which has so powerfully drawn out the poison of the imposthume, that it
has stuck upon their breast in drops; then these drops being wiped away, and
the Adders tongue again laid upon the place, which was done thus so often until
there appeared no more drops upon their breast, and so the patient was cured.
The same use may be made of Toads, as I have showed in some other of my
writings: thrust a stick through the head of the Toad, and set the stick
upright in the ground, that the Toad may dry upon the top of the stick, when it
is well dried, then wrap it in a linen cloth, lay it so upon the imposthume or
part diseased, there leave it til it has drawn out all the poison; or if you
will, you may apply the Toad to the place without a cloth about it, and it has
the same effect. And as the patient and the disease requires: so the Toad must
be the oftener applied till the Toad swells no more: for when it swells no more,
it is a sign that all the poison is drawn out, and that the patient is
recovering. Howbeit, this creature strikes a terror into every one who sees it
near them; even by their looking upon it, they are stricken with horror: yet
it is not therefore to be rejected; but it is to be esteemed of, and to be used
as a great Secret of Nature. I could wish that this Remedy were preferred more,
then it has been hitherto, to all other attractive, maturative, or corrosive
Medicines.

CHAP. II. The medicinal virtues of Serpents.
THere be many other effects of the Adders tongue then those already mentioned,
which would be tedious to rehearse: But where I treat of Magic Cures, there I
speak largely, not only of this, but also of many other excellent natural
Virtues, and natural Things.

Those who lived in former times, carried about them many Sigils, which did
wonderful things; for by them they could cure such difficult diseases, for
which we cannot readily find any remedy in the earth: and only by carrying
these Sigils about them, they did partake of their Virtues, whereby they were
safe, and without danger of harm by weapons or enemies: thereby they also
became very prosperous, and had great victories: and many other strange effects
have been done by these Sigils, of which we will not speak now.

There have been found words written, and Characters, and Sigils, and strange
Images delineated upon Vergin-paper, or cut in Metals, or in Gamehen's, or in
precious Stones, as Saphires, etc. with strange shapes; in some the shape of a
man, in some the shape of a beast: And such were the unspeakable virtues of
those Characters, Sigils, etc. that they seemed to go beyond all the bounds of
Nature it self: and so Ptolomeus, Hermogenes, Balenius, Virgilius, Albertus
Magnus have declared: But the books of these Authors are foully corrupted with
those superstitious Ceremonies which are in them: so that we cannot safely
trust to every thing in those books: therefore we must make a separation, and
take the kernel, leaving the unprofitable shell in their writings.

CHAP. III. The medicinal virtues of Serpents.
I Will not counsel you to practice, or to trust to every thing in these books;
but I leave it to every man to do as he thinks best: and albeit Virgilius, and
Albertus Magnus deserve better to be believ^d then the rest of these Writers;
yet the best things, the greatest secrets which they know, these things they
would not set down in their books, but carried them with them to their graves.
And now there are no writings better and larger concerning this supernatural
Science, then those which Techellus the Jew has left to us: there is but
little of his writing now remaining; and these of his writings which are
extant, they are contemned, because he was a Jew, a famous master in Israel,
and a most subtle searcher of Nature.

But now I return to my present purpose concerning the Serpent or Adder: the
skin of the Adder has a singular faculty in curing wounds: if you make a
powder of this skin, and strew it upon the wound. Some, when they go to fight
bind this skin about that arm which holds the sword or other weapon wherewith
they fight, and so they fight happily, and get the victory.

If a woman with child, or in childbirth bind this skin about her neck, or
about her body, she thereby becomes victorious in this duel of nature, she
happily goes through with the business of childbirth.

Now you must remember this, that it is not every skin of the Serpent or Adder
has such a power, but only that skin which the adder casts. The same is to be
understood of the Adders tongue; it is not every tongue that has such virtue,
but only that which is plucked out of the Adder alive.

CHAP. IV. Preservatives to keep us from the harm of Serpents, Adders, and
Snakes.
BUt that I may hasten to make an end of this subject; know this, That in the
fat and flesh of a Serpent there is a singular faculty of healing both new
wounds, and all venomous bitings, and evil ulcers. The flesh of the Adder has
the like virtues, yea more; it has in it a singular secret, and great
medicinal virtues, if you cut off the head and tail, and let the blood run out,
in which is all the poison. But in this place I will be brief concerning these
things, because I have spoken of them largely elsewhere.

Now I will speak something of those who do consecrate Serpents: this is a
thing which they do not rightly understand; and in this they are contrary to
the ways of God and Nature. And although by these consecrations Serpents are
tamed and made tractable; nevertheless, such doings are not to be approved of,
as consecrations and other superstitions, whereby people are made sick or well.
For if according to the course of nature we may do such things by the power of
a strong faith, and by the strength of imagination; then why should we use
these superstitious Ceremonies? Yet it cannot be denied, but that there be some
words, which if they be pronounced against Serpents, it makes them tractable
and obedient.

There are also some Preservatives, which (if used) will keep us from the hurt
of any venomous creature. But we need not much fear this kind of Serpent of
which we speak in this Treatise, which is by nature less hurtful then any
other kind of Serpent: But we must be very cautious of starry Serpents which
are speckled over with Stars, Sirens, Crocodiles, Salamanders, Basilisks, which
be all several kinds of Serpents, most venomous and great enemies to man:
their venom is exceeding strong and violent. Albeit there be few of these
kinds of Serpents in Germany, yet I speak of them, that people should be wary
of them where they are.

I know not any preservative better, and more certain against the poison of
these Serpents, then Camphore dissolved in Rock-oyl, otherwise called oil
Petreole, wherewith you must anoint your hands, and your feet, and other naked
places of your body, and so thou may safely handle them: but because this
preservative can do no good, or is not efficacious enough against the most
fierce and most poisonous Serpents; as that kind of Serpent which leaps at a
man being a great way off: and the Crocodile which devours a whole man, albeit
he be dead: and the Basilisk which kills a man by its sight only: therefore
those who dwell in those places where these Serpents are, carried about them
Gameheu's, which were made in the shape of a man, with his left foot trampling
upon the neck of a Serpent; and they esteemed of this as a singular
preservative against these Serpents. Of this and other things, Techellus has
written, who has gone far beyond all other writers in this kind; but some
wicked deceivers have kept his works from (...), and have retained them to
themselves, and in their stead they give out to the world their own opinions
and vain fancies: and since now it is so done, the event of it we must leave to
God.

I conceive it not needful, that I should say any more of Serpents now, because
I will treat of them largely, and discover many more wonderful things of them
in that book which I will write concerning Sacraments, and things woncerful.

CHAP. V. The Medicinal virtues of the Toad and Spider.
THere lurks many great Secrets, not only in the Serpent, but also in other
abominable creatures, which strike terror into a man, even with the sight of
them; as the Toad, of which I have spoken before, it is a great help against
the plague, and the bitings of venomous creatures, if, after it is well dried
it be applied outwardly to the part infected; it speedily draws poison out of
the body; it has preserved the life of those who have despaired of help by any
other remedies. I have seen the Morphew cured by it thoroughly and speedily,
thus; the Toad must be boiled alive in oil till it dies, and with this oil
anoint the place where this disease is; this oil is also very good against
evil Ulcers. But false physicians, when they hear of these secrets, they cannot
be brought to believe that they are true.

The Spider is a hateful creature, yet it is of great virtue against Quotidian
Fevers: put the spider in a nut-shell, and shut it up close in it, and let the
diseased person carry it about him, but he must not know what it is; let him
carry it four days, and he shall be well.

The Salamander is useless in Physic: but the Alchimist has labored much in
it to extract out of it a tincture f r metalls, and thereby to make gold, and
for this it is indeed to be much regarded: but you cannot meddle with it
without great danger, for the poison of it is most deadly.

CHAP. VI. Paracelse compared with other Physicians.
HAving done with these hateful and poisonous creatures, now I will speak
concerning the other common, contemptible small creatures: and I hope I shall
not be blamed for this, nor shall these things I speak be esteemed as fained
tales, as false physicians do, who will not use any common medicines, such as
may be gotten cheaply, and easily, not remembering this, that God has created
nothing in vain, but that even the least and most contemptible things have
their peculiar virtues according to his divine pleasure.

And it is our fault that we know not these things, for we are careless and
incredulous, and soon wearied in the search of nature. Now if any do improve
the gifts of God in them, and are diligent in searching out the works of
nature, and do ingenuously declare their experiences publicly: these corrupt
Doctors will not be thankful to them for it; nay, they contemn such
experiences, they scoff at them, and one way or other they will find fault with
them.

Now I profess my self to be one of those who have found out the Secrets of
Nature; yea, and that I am not one of the least of the searchers of nature, and
truly whatsoever art or experience I have, I should have imparted it freely and
plainly to you; but your ambition and insolency has made me change my mind,
because you will have all the praise to your selves, and steal it from him who
is your teacher; therefore you are not worthy of my art, which would be very
advantageous to you, if you would become true Physicians and lovers of your
neighbors. But you prefer the profit of your prrse, and of your kitchen, to
the health of your patients: and in this you are learned indeed, and more
skillful then I. You accuse me, and blame me because I do not highly praise
you. It Is true, I do it, not because I find you to be only purse physicians,
such who are more able to cure the diseases of your purses, then the diseases
of your patients; if it were not so, how could you build such stately houses,
wear gold rings, walk in your silks? You reproach me because of my poverty
and mean clothes: but if I should take (as you do) shamelesly such great
rewards every where, then I should be richer then any of you: yet as I am, I am
richer then any of you; for my riches are surer to me, then your riches to you:
my skill is my great riches, which neither thief can steal, nor fire, or
water can devour, nor robber can take from me. They may take my life, but
they cannot get my Art that is hidden in me, and dies with me. You see then
what an excellent thing I enjoy, which is far better then your houses,
plantations, clothes, riches, gold, and silver, and all your skill. And if at
any time I spend my money largely amongst my pleasant companions, yet I do not
diminish (as the proverb is) the principal sum, that is, my Art, which through
Gods gooddesse to me, shall never leave me.

CHAP. VII. The Medicinal virtues of Earthworms.
NOw I will proceed to speak of that which I intended, viz. of some simple
medicines, and of some living creatures, and of some diseases, of which no
physicians before me, have ever spoken any thing. Truly, I believe that they
were ignorant of them; or if they knew them, then they slighted them, so that
these things were quite forgotten: the most common, and most inconsiderable
Vermin are Earthworms, which after a shower, creep out of the ground: and who
will believe, that in these worms is so much Virtue for the good of the body of
man? they are especially good against that disease and pain which is in the
fingers and toes, which causes extreme torment day and night: The Whit flaw,
which the Ancients called the gnawing worm, and indeed not without cause; for
they knew that this disease should be cured by the earthworm; the way is this;
Take an Earthworm bigger or lesser according to the patient, and the greatness
of the pain, if the patient be not very young, but is of a good age, and the
pain very great, then you must take a great earth-worm, it must be large, that
it may be sufficient for the disease, wrap this worm in a linen cloth, and so
lay it upon the part where the pain is, the space of twenty four hours, till it
dies, and when it is dead. the disease is cured, and (as it were) dies with
the worm; these things may seem to some to be superstitious, and fained tales;
but by this it appears, that God has made nothing in the world so base, and so
contemptible, which is not some way for the good of man.

CHAP. VIII. The Medicinal Virtues of the Earth-worme, and of the Crab fish
Cancer.
THE Earth-worm is not only good against the foresaid disease, but also against
all kinds of worms in the body of man, if it be dried, and made into a powder,
and so it is to be taken in some liquor; the best liquor is the whay of Goats
milk: for the powder of Earthworms taken in this whay purges by stool all
worms of the stomach, or that stick in the guts.

The Mouse, called the field Mouse, is a great Secret for the ptisick. And that
kind of Crab called the Cancer, has often cured the disease called the Canker,
viz. thus, bind a linen cloth about the fish Cancer, and about its toes: and
lay the toes of this fish, Cancer upon the place where the Ulcer, Canker is,
until the fish-Cancer, be dead: and when it is dead, the ulcer, Canker is also
killed; but if the Canker was broken out into a sore, then after it is
mortified with the fish-Cancer, you must apply the plaster which is used for
thrusts, or deep wounds.

By this fish-Cancer have been also cured Fevers; and Hydropsies, thus; first,
you must cut off all the nails of the patients fingers and toes, then you must
bind the fish Cancer to his back, afterward put it into a river, and let it
go; and so the patient shall be cured. Do not you think these to be vain,
superstitious, or Mountebank cures? I assure you they are the true operations
of nature* and wrought by God himself, who was pleased to give to creatures in
their creation such great Virtues.

But it may be objected, that some, who have used the fish Cancer for the
foresaid diseases, have been nothing better for it. I answer the fish-Cancer
cannot cure the foresaid diseases when the patient is near to the appointed
time of hi^ death, and that his present disease must lead him to his death.
False Physicians thought little of this, when they tried this remedy: and when
they did see, that it did not good to all alike: they then falsely conceived
that it was a thing superstitious; and that only believing did work here;
without which they thought the Cancer had no efficacy. It is true, that
imagination and believing are so powerful, that they can make people well or
sick. But such common remedies as I have spoken of, are not to be contemned. We
find in the holy Scriptures that Christ and the Prophets cured great diseases
by very common and ordinary things. So Christ gave sight to the blind by clay
mixed with his spittle. So the Prophet cured the plague by a plaster of figs:
but to gather together here all such examples, is not needful, I will rather go
on to speak of the Virtues of those things.

CHAP. IX. The Virtues of the Crab-fish Cancer.
IN the foresaid fish Cancer have been found many other Virtues; it has an
excellent cooling faculty, and it is good against St. Anthonies fire, if you
press the juice out of the toes of it, and anoint the place with this juice:
you may also make an ointment with this juice, very good against all sorts of
burnings or scaldings, viz. by fire, or water, or pitch, or fat things, etc.
The Ancients never found a better remedy then this against any burnings. This
ointment is also good against inflamed, eating sores; and if it be anointed
upon the temples of the head, it very much helps those extraordinary pains of
the head, which almost distracts people, It helps also that inflammation
called the Rose, and the heat of ulcers of women's breasts; in such cases it has
done very much good. The Cancer has also a faculty of expelling urine, sand,
and the stone in the bladder. which it does powerfully dissolve, and expel with
the urine, so that those who seed much upon these Cancers, they are free from
those diseases; so they are an excellent preservative.

I cannot pass by here the cruelty of physicians, who would cure the Canker by
cutting, burning, and eating Medicines; and they had no other reason for it,
but that they thought, such a disease could not be overcome but by corrosives;
but so they make the pain greater, not considering, that the Canker it self is
an eating sore, and therefore we should use such things to it, which will
pacify it, and allay the pain, and gently cure it; all they can say, is this;
that one evil should be driven out by another evil. But I say, that we should
begin the cure of every disease, with pain asswaging Medicines, which can quiet
the disease, and take away the raging of it, allaying those pains which
accompany it; as for example a man in a rage cannot be pacified by strokes or
wounds; so neither can a disease by exasperating medicines: and as those, who
are sad and melancholy should have cordials given to them, they should be
comforted and refreshed with mirth; so it is in curing any disease; that which
is evil, must be cured by that which is good, and not one evil to be cured by
another. Then hitherto your physicians have been far from the right way; and
therefore it falls out oft-times, when you think by your false receipts to cure
the Canker, or the whit-flaw that you fail of it, and kill your patient before
you can kill the Canker, or whit flaw: after this manner many have endeavored
to cure the Canker, and the whit-flaw, by eating medicines, by cutting or
burning the sore, and many other such torturing ways they have used they had
also great confidence to do this cure by Arsenick, orpment, and sublimed
Mercury. I do not deny but that many incredible cures have been done by
Calcinatum magnum, by sweet sublimed Mercury, by the oil of sweet Mercury, and
especially by the quintessence of Mercury, so that by these have been cured not
only the diseases mentioned, viz. Canker, and the whit-flaw, but also ma^y
other greater diseases, as Syrons, wolf etc. but you must remember that these
things, viz. quicksilver etc. must not be used crude and unprepared, as they
are taken out of the mountains: and seeing you do not know the way how they
should be prepared, therefore you should abstain from them, and learn of the
Alchymist how to prepare them, and to bring them to the utmost degree of their
perfection, then indeed you may use them, but not before, or else you will find
it fall out otherwise then you expect, as I have said before concerning the
mortification of the Cancer, and of the whitflaw; but if the feet, or hands, or
fingers, or nose, or ears, and other members be cut off, then certainly the
Cancer must be taken away; but ind^ed the magistrate should restrain such
errors by a singular punishment. One thing I might here add concerning the
disease called the wolf, to show you how it is cured by unguents and cataplasms
made of the flesh and fat of the beast called the Wolf; and to describe to you
some such remedies* but because I have spoken of the chiefest remedies,
therefore I ^ass over those inferior remedies, and I leave them to others to
find them out by their experience.

CHAP. X. The Cure of those Marks in the body which the patient has from the
mothers womb.
I Will now make an end of this Treatise: and in this last chapter I will give
you a great, and a most secret cure, which far excells all the other cures
mentioned in this Treatise; it is this; that by these Vermin are cured, not
only painful sores, v^z. Syrons, cankers, fistulaes, wolf, etc. but also by
those Vermin such marks may be taken away, which appear in us in their visible
shape and color without any pain, and were imprinted upon some part of our
body while we were yet in the womb, by the imagination of our mothers, they
being stirred up thereto by fears or strong desires.

Now how that the mother by her Imagination imprints a mark, not upon her self,
but upon the child in her womb; I have explained it in my book concerning
Imagination; but how these marks which we have from our mothers imagination may
be taken out of our bodies again, and cured, that I will show you here in this
chapter.

And first you must strictly observe these marks, of what shape and color they
are, if they be like a worm, or snake, or toad egg. You must also enquire of
the mother of the person who has that mark concerning the color of the
Vermin which st^rd up her imagination; and at what time, day, or hour; yea,
you must know if you can, the very moment of her imagination. You must also
know the cause of her imagination, and why she touched any part of her body at
that time: but because it is seldom, that the mother can fully enform you of
every particular, therefore you must have recourse to Astronomy, and by it you
may have a full information; according to which you must proceed. If the mark be
in the likeness of a worm, then you must take a worm such a one, with which the
mark agrees best, according to the information: and if that worm was alive
when the mother saw it, then you must lay the worm alive upon the mark, and so
keep it at the mark till it dies, and no longer.

But if it was dead before she saw it, then you must lay a dead worm upon the
mark, which you must keep at the mark till it be putrified. You must also
observe the time when the mothers Imagination was moved by the sight of this
worm; and in the same time you must bind the worm upon the mark: if it was
in the Summer, etc. then you must bind the worm upon the mark in the Summer
time.

If the Mothers Imagination was moved by a strong desire after any thing, then
her child which has such a mark must be satiated and filled with the thing
desired; but if the mothers Imagination was from fear of a worm, then the
party, who has the mark must be put in fear when the worm is laid to the
mark. So the mark shall be rooted out: howbeit it is not yet quite brought
out of the skin. But to do this, you must take Aqua fortis, and wash the
skin with it; and so in the space of eight or fourteen days the old skin
shall fall off, and a new fair skin shall come in its place after the same
manner. All marks not only of beasts or Vermin, but also of fruits, or of any
thing else in our bodies, may be taken away and cured by these things, which
caused those marks, being used in that manner, as has been now said of worms.

This is a most secret cure, which never any revealed before me: and I am not
ashamed to reveal it, for I am the first who by experience have found the truth
of it.

TREATISE VIII. Concerning Common Salt, and Brimstone, their Medicinal Virtues,
and Preparations.
CHAP. I.
GOD has created every thing needful for the use of man, and it is easily
gotten: that which is less useful, is not so plentiful: so God has appointed.
Now Medicine is a thing very useful to man, which he needs not fetch from
beyond seas, seeing he may have it at hand. Nor yet they who live beyond sea
need these medicines which grow here: and so I may say of Salt, that, as it is
of great use to man, so there is great quantity of it, sufficient to all men's
uses.

There be two uses of Salt, of which we will here especially take notice, viz.
it seasoneth meats, and cures diseases. That meat which a man eats without
Salt, is never well and perfectly digested; for it is the nature of Salt to
correct every thing in the digestion of it; it is the true Corrector of all
meats usual to be eaten. And whatsoever meat is not seasoned by Salt, is
unwholesome. Let your meat be moderately Salted, not too much, nor too
little; this will help digestion; but when meat is not Salted, or slightly
Salted, it turns to a thin, waterish, or slimy blood, and the flesh which is
bred of such meat, is subject to corruption, and to all diseases: those who
cannot endure any saltishness in any thing, but whatsoever they eat is very
fresh, most commonly they are weaker then others; their complexion is worse,
and they are easily infected with any disease. Our Nature would have nothing
but what is corrected and seasoned by Salt, and boiled or otherwise prepared by
the fire; unless we give way to appetire to eat somethings raw and unprepared,
as onions, Rhadishes, etc.

Salt is the earthly balsome of man, and of all things else: And where no Salt
is, there is the beginning of putrefaction. It is Salt only which preserves
both dead things and living from putrefaction. In things living, their Salt
which is in them preserves them; there is Salt in the blood of every living
creature, which preserves them that they do not putrify while they are
alive. There is a Salt not only in living creatures, but also in herbs,
metals, stones, and all Vegetables; there is not any thing, but it has in it
a Salt proper to it, as appears by those several kinds of Salts which are
extracted out of several things.

As Balsome preserves from putrefaction, so does Salt; in this it is like
balsome; nay, it is of a higher Nature, and more subtle then balsome:
Whatsoever wants Salt, it cannot continue, bu it decays and putrifieth: man,
beast, and every thing else must have this preserving power of Salt in it: we
see by experience many things, (as flesh and fish, etc.) preserved by Salt;
yea, there is not any thing, but it may be preserved by Salt, which is to be
done not by a sprinkling only, or mixing of the Salt with the thing to be
preserved: but the Salt, must be prepared: and if the Salt be made a breeding
or engendring Salt, it will preserve any thing a very long time, if wood or
clay be laid in it, they will become hard like stones. Whatsoever is sprinkled
with this breeding Salt, it does not decay, or alter, but in time it grows to
be of a stony nature. This breeding Salt, howbeit it dries, and at last
decays and perishes, yet it so congealeth, and becomes so firm and hard,
that it can endure in the air, water, or earth alike.

Moreover, Salt is wonderfully good for the preservation of health: it is of
great worth to us, not only in seasoning of meat; but it is also a singular
remedy for wounds; for if wounds be washed with water, in which this salt is
dissolved, they shall thereby be preserved a whole year from corruption, so
that if a wound in the Summer time, especially in the beginning of the
dog-dayes incline to corruption: the way to hinder it, is by this washing: this
will likewise hinder the breeding of worms in wounds, and if there be any worms
in the wounds, it will bring them out. This is a great secret in Surgery:
and let not Surgeons etc be ashamed to use such a water They do indeed use
other remedies, whereby corruption and worms are bred in wounds, which they can
no way afterward help: and thus by their remedies they oft-times undo their
patients. But let the true and faithful Physician use this washing in the cure
of wounds; for wounds being kept clean by this, nature it self will do the rest
of the cure. This washing cures wounds after the same manner, as a dog by
licking cures his soars or cuts

Where Salt is made, there is a kind of liquor like oil, so thick, that an egg
laid into it will not sink. Concerning this liquor, observe, that those who
have gross bodies full of blood, or humors, or they who are troubled with
defluxions, or are troubled with the Gout, or are troubled with a looseness, or
have swollen legs etc. if they wash themselves with this liquor, then all
superfluous, hurtful humors in the body shall be thereby dried up; and all
diseases which come of such humors shall be quite cured; so that you shall
never be troubled with these diseases again; by it also are cured all running
sores of the legs, if they be washed with it: and it cures also the itch and
scab. This liquor is better then any natural Bath; in a word, it is a powerful
and most perfect remedy of the superfluous humors of the body, and of all
diseases coming of those humors, it makes the body dry, sound, and nimble. Let
a Physician search into the natures of all Bathes, and compare them with the
Virtues of this liquor; he shall find that this liquor does far exceed them
all; this liquor never does any hurt to any part of the body; whereas we cannot
promise so much safety in any Bath.

Therefore when the physician has any patients troubled with such superfluous
humors, or defluxions, let him direct his patients to have recourse to this
liquor to wash themselves with it; and if there be any disease to which their
patient is inclined, this liquor will consume that disease in the conception of
it, that it shall never afterward trouble the patient: and if the disease be
already begun; this will drive it out of the body. But for Physicians to direct
their Patients to go to Baths, it is ridiculous: seeing they do not thoroughly
know the nature of those Baths. Let us always choose that which is best and
safest.

When you would use salt, use it alone as it is in it self, without altering
it, or adding any thing to it. There be many receipts in which they add several
things to salt to qualify it* as Cummin, Fennel, Cinnamon, etc. but such
additions are vain, they are not agreeable to the nature of salt, and thereby
the salt is turned out of the right course of its operation; therefore when you
would use salt to season meats, and to further concoction, take it alone as it
is in it self: but when you would use salt for diseases, you may first correct
it, and perfect it; the virtue of it must not be lessened, but rather augmented.

Salt, as we use it commonly in seasoning our meats, it is in the first degree.

Salt burned in a hot fire, sometime is more powerful by one degree, then the
former salt; and the liquor of salt is more powerful by two degres: thus the
strength of it may be increased from one degree to another; till it comes to
the twenty fourth degree; if you know the ways of preparing it and the
additions.

I have before spoken of the operations of Salt upon bodies which are full of
humors: now I will show you in what method you shall proceed, and how you
shall use it: First, the patient troubled with the abundance of hurtful humors
must be purged with black Hellebore prepared in that manner as is set down in
the Treatise of Hellebore: likewise he must take inwardly the Elixar of Tartar
for some time, until those obstructions and imposthumes which are in the body
be dissolved, and the corruption^ which are in the body be purged out, and then
he must use the liquor of Salt: he may use a Bath, made with the liquor of
Salt, which may be raised in strength to the sixteenth degree; that is, it may
be made as operative as if it were raised to sixteen degrees; but naturally it
rises not above the thirteenth degree.

The virtue of this liquor may be increased thus: If the juice of plantane, the
greater or the lesser, or of some such herbs be mixed with this Liquor of Salt,
and boiled together, so it shall become more powerful against the itch or scab,
and can do more in one day, then it could in four days without this addition.

This liquor of Salt is also good for running Sores, if you mix it with the
juices of Comfrey, or small sea-buckhorn, of which there be many kinds. This
mixture is wonderfully efficacions in curing old sores, so that it has twenty
degrees in curing: for as your addition is more exact, so its operation will be
more excellent.

If you would use this liquor of Salt for inward diseases, as defluxions etc.
then do thus; after you have boiled it in the juice of Plantane, you must mix
it with sublimed wine, and so you shall have a medicine exalted to the twenty
fourth degree of dryness, which will exceedingly dry up all defluxions, or any
superfluous humor in the body.

There is another way of preparing Salt, viz. by distilling a water from salt,
which is done thus; beat Salt and Rhadishes together, and let the Salt dissolve
with it, then distill a water from it, the which you shall mix with the juice
of Plantane, the juice of Celandine, and the juice of small sea buck-horn, and
the juice of Comfrey; of each alike much; this mixture does exceed the twenty
fourth degree in dryness; it can dry up the Haemorrodes, and all kinds of
loosnesse of the belly, albeit they be such as hardly can be cured by other
medicines. This liquor of Salt, with these additions, is of such virtue, that
it far exceeds all the syrups, or purges, or any other medicines of the
Apothecaries shops; for there is not any medicine in the Apothecaries shops
which exceeds the fourth degree: whereas these medicines of mine are raised
above 24 degrees, yea, above 32. degrees; by these medicines of mine the
disease is exceedingly over-powred, so that the patient who uses them needs
not doubt of his health; this mixture is also singularly good for wounds, and
all kinds of sores.

There be some other ways of preparing the liquor of salt, whereby the virtue
of it is hightned to 24 degrees as this; take of common salt, and of salt nitre
of each alike much, put them in a crucible, and set your crucible in a wind
furnace, t ll they run together like metal then take these two salts, and lay
them in a moist place till they dissolve to a liquor, the which liquor has 24
degrees of a drying virtue, which is so subtle, and so powerful in operation,
as there is nothing like it, and if you would have this drying faculty yet
greater, you shall add the same things to this liquor which are added to the
liquor of salt in the preparation of it, and you must proceed in the same
manner, as I have showed you before; and having added these things to this
liquor, if you distill it again, you shall thereby much more increase the drying
faculty of it, so that by such additions and preparations you may bring its
drying faculty to four and thirty degrees.

It will not be amiss if Salt be burned in hot fire sometime, and afterward it
be mixed with these juices before mentioned or any other which you find to be
best; and then if you dissolve it into a liquor and distill it etc.

There be several things which will much augment the drying faculty of Salt; if
you beat them together with Salt, and put them in a wind-furnace till the Salt
run like metal, viz. Bole Armoniack, the flower of brass, Terra sigillata,
Chimolea, Tutia, Lapis Calaminaris. -- Having taken them out of the furnace,
lay them in a moist place til the Salt dissolve to a liquor; this liquor keep
for your use.

If you mix common Salt with Salt niter, of each alike much, and put them
together in a wind furnace, till they run together like metal; after they
are cooled, lay them in a moist place, till they be dissolved to a liquor: take
this liquor and distill it; and that water which you distill from it, pour it
again upon the grounds which were left in the distilling; and if you do thus
three or four times, or oftener, viz. distilling, and pouring the water again
upon the grounds, you shall, so doing, have a water of a singular drying and
binding virtue: and if Crocus Martis, or Cerus, or the flower of brass be added
to it, they will exalt this drying faculty to the highest degree. Note, that if
you add the juice of unripe sloes to the liquor before it be distilled, and
then proceed as has been said: it will be made thereby very powerful in
binding and closing wounds or sores, searching to the bottom of any sore.

These things I have thought fit to show you concerning Salt, and the virtues
of it, and preparations of it: for others who have undertaken to write of the
natures of medicines have not written any thing of this, because they
themselves know not the Art, how to exalt the Virtue of a medicine from four
degrees, to twenty four, or thirty two degrees; this Art I have here showed
you; and it is a worthy and excellent Art thus to augment the Virtues of
Medicines; for when our natures meet with such medicines which are in
themselves powerful, they do more readily work with such medicines.

Many have taken great pains in writing of Herbals, and concerning the natures
and properties of meats and medicines: but if you take notice of it, you will
find that they writ nothing but what they have heard from others, and whether
these things be true or false, they know not: after them comes the later and
modern writers, who gathering together many things out of the writings of the
ancient physicians make up large volumus, not caring whether they writ truth or
lies. These books, certainly contain many lies; in which you find such
expressions often used, viz. the experiment of such a one etc. Probatum est,
etc. If you search further, when they have it, you will at last find it to be
some old woman's conceit; He who publishes books, should not write these things
which he has only by report, but what he knows by his own experience: but
indeed, the most part of writers have been too careless, trusting too much to
the tales and dreams of old women, and so have built their house upon the sand;
therefore every disease is stronger then any medicine which they describe. The
world is now full of such writings, and such scriblers, who spend all their
time in making up a bundle of lies; all they care for, is, to get themselves a
name and applause; and seeing the world would be deceived, they gather together
all the fine fables they can find in poesy or prose, that so they may seem to
be diligent: such are all their writings, which indeed are not worth the
reading,

The Medicinal and Chymecal virtues and preparations of Brimstone.
MAny have written much of Brimstone, but none have truly discovered the
Virtues of it, for they themselves knew it not; it was their ambition which
moved them to write such unprofitable vain books.

But I have found by experience these Virtues of Brimstone, which I here
describe. And I assure you, that so great are the virtues of Brimstone, that we
cannot admire them enough: that if God does not hinder, then it must be the
fault of the artist, when the effect of the Brimstone is not answerable to its
virtue; and indeed most Physicians and Chemists can do nothing but prate;
little of their knowledge or skill appears in public; there are not many
medicines which can excel brimstone, or can be compared to it for its Virtues,
both in Physic and Surgery, which are wonderful: but it is not to be used
either in Physic or Chimistry before it be prepared: and when it is rightly
prepared, it is an excellent medicine.

It may be prepared thus; let it be sublimated twice or thrice from Myrrh and
Aloe; then take of this sublimed brimstone ten ounces, of Roman Myrrh one ounce
and a half, of the best Aloepaticum one ounce, of Oriental Saffron half an
ounce; mix them together, and make them a powder which you shall keep for your
use. This is an excellent preservative against the pestilence, plurisie, all
imposthumes, and all putrefactions of the body: if you take some of it in a
morning, you need not fear that day the pestilence or plurisie, etc.

Another way of preparing brimstone is thus; let it be sublimated oft-times
from Coperas, (the oftener you do it* the better it will be) and so it draws
the spirit and essence of the Coperas into it self: being thus prepared, it is
a good preservative and remedy for all fevers, and all Coughs, whether new or
old; it is also a preservative for the falling sickness, and cures it in
children; if it be taken daily, it preserves health very much. It is also a
preserver of wine, it will keep wine a long time from decaying, it will correct
it, and make it found and wholesome: whatsoever impurity is in the wine, it
will purge it out; and the wine which is thus corrected by this brimstone, it
will not breed the stone or sand in kidneys or bladder, nor Apoplexy, nor any
kind of imposthume, nor defluxions, nor coughs, nor fevers, etc. When the
brimstone is well purged from its impurities, and poison, and that which is
useless in it, then it is a worthy Medicine, it is a precious jewel.

There are several sorts of brimstone, a yellow brimstone, a red brimstone, a
purple, a black, a white, and an ashie colored brimstone; but the yellowest
brimston is the best to be used in physic; the other kinds of brimstone have
much of Arsenick, and Realgare etc. in them, and therefore they are not fit to
be used in physic they are best for Alchimy: they are also good for the
outward diseases of the body, as tetters, etc. because of the arsenical spirits
which are in them, they are better for this purpose then the yellow brimstone,
so that if they be often sublimed from Coperas, or allom, or salt Gemme, they
will thereby become so subtle that they can root out tetters, or any kind of
scabs; for this one thing we may well esteem of brimstone as of a great
treasure that it can take away these outward faults of the body, which are
rooted within the body: even as the loadstone draws iron to it, and makes it
leave the place where it was; So there is in brimstone a magnetic power, which
cannot be fully described; such miracles of nature, are manifested by the
experiences of Alchimy. God has given to us sufficient medicines; but it is
our fault that we are not more diligent in preparing of them, in separating the
good from that which is bad and useless in them. Medicine now is not an Art, as
it was in former times: for in stead of physical practice, we have ntohing but
prating.

I will now show you the way how to prepare brimstone for some Chemical uses,
thus; melt your brimstone in some lin-seed oil, and the oil with the
brimstone, will become like a piece of liver; take this and distill it, and you
shall have come out first a l^quor like milk, afterward will come a red oil
like blood: it is to be observed that this white liquor, and the red oil are
not confounded in the distilling; but they come out severally; and when they
are distilled, they do not mix, but the white liquor goes to the bottom, and
the red oil swims in the top. Some have attempted to make silver with the white
l quor, and to make gold with the red oil but in vain. I know, that never any
thing would be effected with this white liquor, neither by the ancient, nor by
the modern Chemists; but in the red oil are secrets worthy to be known. I will
show you one or two secrets of this oil. If a Crystal or Beril after it is
well polished, be put into this oil, and lie in it three years, so it will
become a Jacinth; or if you put a pale colored Ruby in this oil, and let it
lie in it nine years; it will become so clear and bright, that it will sparkle
and shine in the dark like a live coal; this experience has taught. Some
Alchimists have tried to turn a Jacinth into a Carbuncle, leaving the Jacinth
in this oil some time, but my experience tells me that this cannot be done. If
you put a Saphir into this oil, and let it lie in it some time, it will make
the Saphir be of a bluish color, mixed with a green. Thus likewise other
precious stones may be colored; this is the only thing which can help the
color of precious stones; there was never any other way known how to give
colors to precious stones, or how to heighten their colors if they be low,
but only by the red oil of Brimstone: but glass cannot receive any color from
this oil.

You have heard what operation this oil has upon precious stones; now I will
show you what operation it has upon metals. Put beaten silver into this oil,
and when it has lien in it some time, it will be turned into a blackish golden
powder, you must let this powder lie in the oil till it be fixed; for if you
take it out before its time, you will find it to be an unripe thing, which will
not endure the fire, because it is not yet fixed: but of this I will say no
more. Observe this of the Brimstone, that the more it is purified and exalted,
so its operation will be quicker and more powerful, and by it metals or stones
may be fixed; any who will try it, may assure themselves that they shall do it.
It is true, that the labor of Alchimy is the most dangerous of any: in Chymick
operations is great danger and difficulty, and therefore it requires a man of
long practice, and great experience, who must have his knowledge not by
reading, or by the report of others, but by his own experience.

You may take notice of one thing more concerning this oil: you have heard that
it gives colors in the highest degree both to stones and to met^^^^ but
whether it can give them the Virtues with the Colors, or if it can heighten
their Virtues; this is to be doubted; I can say nothing to it.

Again observe, that there is a balsom in brimstone, which will not suffer
either a living, or a dead body to putrify or decay; yea, it so preserves the
body, that neither any influence of the stars, nor corruption can touch the
body. If you take circulated Coperas, that is, that Coperas whose water is so
long circulated upon its own body, till it stays fixed in its body, so that
the force of fire cannot make it leave its body any more: your circulating
vessel wherein your Coperas is, must be set in warm dung, or warm water, then
will the moisture of the Coperas vapor up in the glass, and fall back again
to the Coperas, and thus you must keep your circulating vessel in the warm
dung, or hot water, until the moisture of the Coperas will not rise up any
more in the glass, and then you have circulated Coperas; mix your brimstone
made into a powder with this circulated Coperas, and sublime the brimstone so
often from the Coperas, till it stays with the Coperas, and will ascend no
more, and th^^ you have a fixed spirit, which is the ^^^some of the earth, and
is the chief of all balsoms.

TREATISE IX. Of the Medicinal and Chymicall Virtues and Preparations of
COPERAS.
CHAP. I. The kinds of Coperas, and the marks of the goodness of Coperas.
IN Coperas there is a perfect cure for the Jaundice, for the stone, and sand
in the kidneys or bladder, for all fevers, for worms, for the falling sickness
etc. if we be bound in our body, Coperas will loosen excellently.

In this discourse concerning Coperas, I will observe this Order; first, I will
speak of its Virtues before it be prepared: then I will show you the Virtues of
it prepared. I will show you what virtues it has in medicine, and what virtues
it has in Alchimy. In medicine it is good, both for inward diseases, and
outward diseases; it is good for an hereditary leprosy, for tetters, or wild
scabs etc. and for many other diseases, where other medicines fail, and can do
no good; the powerful medicines which are made of Coperas searches till it
find the root of the disease which it consumes, and so cures the disease
thoroughly; and therefore the preparations of Coperas should be well known to
every physician. The Coperas dissolved in water, and the Coperas calcined or
burned, the green oil of Coperas, the red and white oil of Coperas, each of
these have their several virtues, and how many ways it is changed, so often it
gets some new virtue. This one thing, viz. Coperas, does confound all the
Apothecaries and Writers both of Italy and Germany: this alone can fill the
fourth part of their shops, and cure the fourth part of diseases: if they knew
how to prepare this rightly, they needed not so many boxes, pots, glasses, etc.
in which there is nothing but cheats. What needs a physician gather together so
many boxes, and so many beyond sea medicines? if he be provident and wise, he
needs not go far, or trouble himself much to find out medicines for all
diseases as good as India, or Egypt, or Barbary, or Greece can give.

There are many kinds of Coperas, they differ according to the pits whence they
are taken. If you would know the goodness of the Coperas in Physic, dissolve
the coperas in some liquor, and give it to them who are troubled with the
worms, and let them drink it: and as it drives out the worms, so also it is
good for other physical uses. But the goodness of Coperas for Chimick uses,
appears by this; viz. if it turn Iron into a deep colored, and malleable
Copper: for there is great affinity betwixt iron an Coperas, and the best
Coperas makes the best Copper out of iron. This is not a thing to be much
admired, there are many such things done by nature: we see lead turned into
quick silver by the water of salt-borace, and so also other metals are changed
one into another by minerals; -- so that not only Coperas, but there are also
other things which can change metals. The reason why these things are not
known, is this; because when cheaters get the knowledge of such things, they
keep them secret for their own gains, for the maintenance of their purses and
kitchins. In Hungaria there is a River which comes from a Coperas Mine, or runs
through some Coperas Mine, if iron be laid in the water of this river some
time, it will be changed to be as it were, all rust, take this lump of rust,
and put it in a wind-furnace, and you shall have good Copper, which cannot be
again turned into iron.

There is another way to try the goodness of Coperas for Chemistry, thus; put
your Coperas in a pot, and set the pot in the fire till your Coperas be turned
into a red powder, then melt it, and if it yield Copper, it is good for
Chemistry, but not so good for physic. There is another way to know the
goodness of the coperas by the color; that coperas which is of a sea green,
and is thoroughly green without any other color mixed with it, it is not so
good for physic, as that which has red and vellow streaks in it, and that
which being laid in the open air turns whitish, it is the best to make the
green and white oil of it: but that which turns ruddish or yellowish, from it
we draw the red oil: and by these marks the Physician or Alchymist may know
whar coperas he should choose for his purpose.

There is one trial more which I will add, to know the goodness of coperas,
it is this, if your coperas with galls make good ink, then the coperas is good;
but if it make a waterish ink, and not a good black ink, then it is not good
coperas.

CHAP. II. The Medicinal Virtues of Coperas unprepared, and of Coperas calcined.
HAving given you the marks to know good Coperas, I will now show you the
physical virtues of it. And first, of unprepared Coperas, and of calcined
Coperas. Observe this, that Coperas is an excellent purge fit to be used for
great and difficult diseases of the stomach; it falls out sometimes that by
hurtful meats and drinks, or bad diet, the stomach is weakened, and the patient
falls into some long and tedious disease, which may continue with him till his
death, or after a long disease he may be troubled with the cramp, etc.

Likewise by intemperancy oft-times comes fevers, or loosnesse etc. Now there
is nothing better for all such diseases then to be purged with Coperas, which
some do Allegorically call Gryllum; you must take so much of it at a time, as
you can take up upon the point of a knife six times: if it does not work, then
take the same quantity of it again; if it does not yet work, take the same
quantity of it the third time, and that will be enough: to those who are weak,
you must give it in wine, or water; but to those who are strong, and are bound
in their body, give it in the spirit of wine, and so it will thoroughly purge
upwards and downwards. There are many other strong purgatives, as Hellebore,
Spurge, Coloquintida, etc. but none do purge so well as Coperas; the reason of
it is this, because in the Coperas there is a sowrnesse, sharpness, and a
cleansing faculty (which is not in Hellebore, Coloquintida etc.) whereby it
has a full and perfect operation in purging; the Hellebore, Coloquintida etc.
have only a laxative faculty; but the Coperas, besides its laxative faculty,
has also a saltishnesse, which is of such a nature, that wheresoever it meets
with any worms in the body, it kills them: none of the other purgatives can do
this. Doubtless that purgative which has sowrnesse and saltishnesse joined
with its laxative virtue; it must needs cleanse and purge singularly well:
wherefore (I do think) that Coperas is for the inward diseases of the body a
more excellent purge then any other. I need not name all those inward diseases
for which it is good, seeing I have so largely described to you the Nature and
Virtues of it; only this I would have you observe, that it is the safest, the
most powerful; and most profitable purge that can be taken for all diseases of
the stomach, for the falling sickness, and for worms: if it be given in a
right time, and in a right manner, the person being also considered to whom it
is to be given etc. As for calcined Coperas, that is, Coperas burned in the
fire till it comes to be a red powder; you must know, that it is not to be
taken inwardly; it is to be used only in Chirurgy; it is good for rotten old
sores, which will not yield to remedies, it prepares the sore, and makes way
for the cure. You shall use it thus; take the calcined Coperas very hot, and
quench it in vinegar, and thus do several times; then dry it, strew it upon the
plaster which should be applied to the sore; this will bring a hard scurfe
upon the sore; this scurfe you must loosen from the sore, and get it off with
oil or fresh butter; afterward the cure will be easy: but if the sore will
not yet yield to the remedy, then you may think, that there is yet some poison
in the sore, which must be brought out by the oil of Coperas; for if it be a
very malignant stubborn sore, then the calcined Coperas is not subtle enough to
search to the bottom of it. But if you would have this calcined Coperas more
piercing, you may do it thus; sprink^e this calcined Coperas with vinegar in
which Coperas is dissolved, let it dry, and sprinkle it again, and thus do
four or five times; when it is thus prepared, it will search to the bottom of
the sore. But the best way of preparing this calcined Coperas, is thus; distill
the water off from the Coperas, the grounds remaining is calcined Coperas: put
the water distilled to the said grounds, distill it again; do thus so often
till no water will come from the grounds. If you use this for any sore, you
will find it to be very subtle and piercing. In curing sores you must consider
well the degrees of sores, and that which will not yield to the calcined
Coperas, must be cured by the oil or water of Coperas. So that if we can do
no good by the calcined Coperas, we must not therefore despair, but we must
prepare it further by distillation; and in so doing we may bring this medicine
to that height that it can cure all kinds of sores, as Canker, wolf, fistuls,
etc.

CHAP. III. Of the true Spirit and true oil of Coperas, how they are made; and
what are their Virtues.
ALchimy has discovered many excellent secrets to physicians, whereby great
cures have been done, and therefore physicians formerly when they entered upon
the study of medicine: they also studied Alchimy, because it is the mother of
many worthy physical secrets. These two Arts, viz. Medicine and Alchimy, as
companions, were studied together till those talkative cheaters, the humorists
poisoned Medicine, and made that virgin to be a strumpet, and so must remain,
so long as they prevail; for when ignorant men take upon them the profession of
an art which they know not; that Art certainly does suffer violence, and must
be wronged. Thus Alchymy has been wronged in many things, especially in
Coperas, how many deceitful oils and spirits of Coperas have we in stead of
that true oil, and true spirit of Coperas which the ancient physicians used;
they had the true spirit of Coperas, and they exalted it to the highest degree,
whereby they perfectly cured any falling sickness in men, women, or children:
but others since, who were unskilful in Alchymy, thinking to take a better
way, have endeavored to draw out the spirit, and to exalt the virtues of the
Coperas otherwise, and so leaving the first secret way of the Ancients, which
they lost; they labored to draw the oil out of the calcined Coperas, but in
vain; for what they draw out of it is of no use, for that which cures the
falling sickness must have a subtle, piercing spirit.

The true spirit, or true oil of Coperas has such a piercing, searching
nature, that it goes through the whole body, and nothing can escape it, and
when it meets with the disease, it resists it, and overcomes it in its own
place: now a physician cannot certainly know the seat and center of the
disease, and therefore he has need to have such remedies as will search
through the whole body, and find out the disease, and this is the reason why
Humorist-doctors can never cure this disease, and so they shame their
profession; because they have not the right remedies which can do it. I can
certify this, that the oil which the common Alchymists draw out of the
calcined Coperas (which the Apothecaries call the spirit of Vitrial) it has
nothing of a subtle, or piercing nature in it: it is a mere earthly, dead
thing, which has no profitable operation.

It is much to be lamented, that through unskilfulness the true way should be
suppressed, and the false should be thus received in its stead; I am persuaded
that the devil does this, for this end, that the sect of the Humorist-Doctors
may be prevalent, and that the diseased may not re-enjoy their health.

But to return to my purpose; I will now show you how you may get the true oil,
and the true spirit of Coperas, and how the Ancients found out the spirit:
first, they distilled a water from the Coperas: this water they distilled
alone, and circulated it till it was fully corrected, as their way teaches;
and this water they used for many diseases, both inward diseases, as falling
sickness etc. and outward diseases, and thereby they performed wonderful
cures: then they took this water so corrected, and they powered it upon the
grounds which remained in the first distillation; and they distilled it again
from the grounds; thus they did eight or ten times with a strong fire, whereby
the wet spirits were united to the dry spirits so firmly that by continual
distilling, the dry spirits at last came out with the wet spirits: then they
took these two spirits thus firmly united, and put them in a glass vessel,
where they exalted them to the highest degree: these two spirits, together thus
exalted, the Ancients found them to have greater operation then the foresaid
water alone. and with this one medicine they could do more then the
Humorist-Doctors can do with all the medicines they have. Artists do add to
this medicine sublimed wine, to make it more piercing.

Now I will show you my way which I use, and commend it to all physicians;
especially for the falling sickness, which is cured only by this spirit of
Coperas: my way is thus; I put so much spirit of wine to the Coperas, as the
Coperas will drink in; then I distill a water from the Coperas, and so I proceed
in the same manner as is said before: when the medicine is perfected, I add to
it these things following, viz. to one ounce of the spirit of Coperas, I add
two ounces of the corrected spirit of Tartar, and two drams of the warer of
Treakle camphorated. The patient who is troubled with the falling sickness,
should take this medicine before his fit come upon him, he may take it twice or
thrice a day so much of it as the physician shall appoint. Nature cannot afford
a better medicine then this for the falling sickness. My way of preparing this
medicine is the same which was used by the Ancients; I only add^ the spirit of
wine before I distill it: and I add to the medicine when it is perfected,
these things which I have named.

This precious spirit of Coperas is not only good for the falling sickness,
but also for all diseases of the like nature, as sounding, ecstasy, etc. It is
also good for all obstructions and inward imposthumes for fits of the mother,
and falling down of the mother. Physicians might find out many other excellent
virtues in this spirit of Coperas if they were diligent in searching them; and
if they would show themselves good and faithful physicians and careful of the
health of their patients: cursed be all those physicians who regard only their
own gain, and not the health of their patients, especially those patients who
are afflicted with that sad disease, the falling sickness. I hope all good
people will approve of what I have done here: and truly I have described the
way of preparing this spirit of Coperas as clearly as I can. The main business
is this; that the spirit be well extracted and exalted as much as may be, and
that it be made of a most piercing Nature, by the addition of those things
which I have named before, that it may reach the root of the disease. Besides
the former, there is another way of preparing it, thus; put the Coperas in a
circulatory vessel, which you must set in warm dung, or boiling water, until
no moisture rise up within the circulating vessel: and so you need not distill
of the water, and return it; then put some spirit of wine to it, and circulate
them together to the grounds, as the way of the Ancients teaches you, for when
the moisture will not vapor up any more from the Coperas, then the wet and dry
spirit of the Coperas are firmly united: and this is the true spirit of
Coperas. I conceive I have said enough concerning the spirit of Coperas; now I
will teach you how to make the oil of Coperas; it is done thus; put your
Coperas in a distilling vessel, which distills by descent; and so let it be
distilled, and you shall have an oil white or green, according to the nature of
the Coperas, for some Coperas yields a white oil, and some Coperas yields a
green oil; the green oil is the best; it is indeed a most precious oil, and it
has the same virtues which the spirit of Coperas has; for in this oil is the
spirit of the Coperas. If this oil be circulated, and mixed with the spirit of
Coperas before described; then you may assure your self, that you have a
certain remedy for the like nature. But here you must observe, that there is
no disease alone, every disease has several symptoms joined with it, and
oft-times there are many diseases joined together: so likewise the falling
sickness has many grievous symptoms joined with it, which must have their
proper remedies, of which I have spoken largely in my treatise of the falling
sickness: but the chief remedy for the disease it self, is this oil and
spirit of Coperas.

This green oil of Coperas may be exalted to the highest degree, thus; let it
be separated from its earthlinesse and dregs, in Balneo Mariae, and afterward
by the fire: by Balneum Mariae is separated from it its superfluous moisture,
and by the fire it is separated from its earthliness: so you have the pure Oil
separated from all its superfluities and impurities, which you must circulate
alone some time; then mix it with some spirit of wine.

You need not add any other thing to it, when you take it only for the disease
it self: but if you would take something also against the symptoms which
accompany the disease; then you must add to this oil of Coperas such things as
are proper for those symptoms: the patient who is troubled with the
falling sickness, must take this oil in the water of Piony before his fit
comes upon him; we must consider the fits, how they come; if they come often,
or if they stay long, or if they be very fierce and violent; then before every
such fit you must take some of the oil, and so soon as the spirit of this oil
comes to the root of the disease, then the fit is presently abated, and
decreaseth by degrees: and the disease it self is daily more and more lessened:
at the first taking of this oil, all the violence of the disease is taken away,
so that the patient shall not afterward fall nor froth at the mouth, nor beat
himself etc. he shall only have a swimming in the head, and then fall into a
short slumber: at last this swimming in the head, and slumbring does also leave
him: nevertheless, the patient must use still the oil, viz. so long as the
nature of the disease, and condition of the patient requires; this the
discretion of the physician will determine; and so I have done with the
description of the true oil, and true spirit of Coperas.

CHAP. IV. Of the red Oil of Coperas, commonly called, The Spirit of Vitrial,
and its Virtues.
I Will speak a little concerning the Common Red Oil of Coperas, which is
Distilled (according to the common way of Alchymists) from the calcined Coperas
by a Retort. Some think this Oil better than the other true Oil and the true
Spirit of Coperas; but they are deceived. This Red Oil is of a sour, sharp,
corrosive nature; and therefore it must be used very warily: it must not be
taken alone, but with other things in a Composition; and if it be so taken as
it should be, it is good for all Fevers or queasiness of the stomach: it is
good for the stomach, because of its sharpness and sourness: if the stomach be
free from Aposthumes, or Choler. But if there be any Aposthumes, or Choler in
the stomach, then this Oil, if it be taken inwardly, it will be very hurtful to
the stomach; for by its sharpness and sourness, it will enrage the Aposthume:
and if it meet with Choler, they will contend and boil together mightily. Many
do speak much of the Virtues of this Oil; but I could never find these Virtues
in it by experience which they boast of. I have met with many, who have
boasted, that they could do wonderful things by this Oil: but I know, That they
lied shamefully. The greatest use of this Oil is for the Stone, or Sand in the
Kidneys, or Bladder: it can do much good in this, it will moulder the Stone
very much, and expel the Sand: yet I never knew any perfectly Cured by it, as
it is commonly used; for what it does, it is by its corrosive, or eating
Faculty; which certainly it cannot do much, and it must be with great
difficulty. Therefore there must be some other way found out (than has been
hitherto used) to make it effectual. In my practice concerning the Cure of the
Stone and Sand, I have there set down a good Composition made up of this Red
Oil of Coperas with other things; which is very good and effectual both for the
Stone, and for other Diseases. This Oil is not to be used but in this, or some
such Composition. Use such compositions which by experience you find to be
best; it is a new medicine, and therefore to find out its severrl virtues, we
ought to use it in several compositions: so much for its Virtues in Physic.
Now concerning its virtues in Surgery, it is a a present help for many
difficult outward diseases, but it makes great pain; it cures the hereditary
scab of the head called Achores: if you dip a feather in it, and anoint the
scab with it, it will bring off all the scab in one whole piece: but if the
first anointing does it not, then you must anoint again, so often till the
scab come off* or you may put some of the oil in the water of Celendine, and
mix them well together, and therewith wash the scab. This oil cures all
scabs, itches, wolf, Canker, etc. Yea, all outward sores whatsoever, if the
sore be therewith anointed; but it causes great pain: and this you must
carefully consider, if the sore be very malignant and venomous, so that the
poison of it lies deep, and has infected the sound flesh; therefore that you
may preserve the sound flesh, that it be not corrupted, you shall use with this
oil, our Oppodeltoch plaster, described in my great Chirurgie. This medicine
is so powerful and operative, that it can help many such sores, for which other
remedies are too weak: it will not be unfitting if you mix this oil with some
good ointment, so it will be much milder, but duller in operation; it will not
cause so great pain, but it cannot be used without some pain. This red oil of
Coperas will be much better, and more powerful, if by distilling it you bring
it to be a spirit, and so it will cure the aforementioned diseases in lesser
quantity, and better. What I have here told you concerning this red oil of
Coperas, I have had the experience of it.

CHAP. V. The Chemical virtues of Coperas, how it changes Iron into good
Copper, etc.
I Have spoken largely, and enough of the medicinal virtues of Coperas, and how
it should be prepared. I will now show you what may be done with Coperas in
Chemistry. Coperas can change Iron into good Copper, whereby we may see much of
the power of Nature; for it is not the Chemist who does this, but it is Nature
with the diligent labor of the Chemist; and it is to be admired, that a metal
should leave its own nature, and become another metal; by this we see what
privileges God has bestowed upon Nature for man's use; whence we may
conclude, that there may be greater changes wrought in metals, which are
unknown to us. It cannot be denied, but that there are many secrets unknown to
us, which God will not reveal, because we are unworthy of them. Now to change
Iron into Copper is not so much as to turn iron into gold; God has made known
to us the lesser, but the other greater shall not be revealed till the time
comes of the full knowledge of all secrets of Arts and Sciences, viz. when
Helias shall come. But to come to our purpose in hand, to show you how you may
turn Iron into Copper by Coperas, it is thus; Take a thin plate of pure Iron
which has no other metal mixed with it, one pound; of quicksilver half a
pound, of Coperas a quarter of a pound, of salt Armoniack one ounce and a
half, put them all together in an iron pot, and put to them a good quantity of
vinegar* set your pot upon the fire, and let it boil, and be always stirring
the things which are in the pot with a stick; when the vinegar is consumed, you
must put to them more vinegar, and more Coperas; you must keep the pot upon the
fire boiling ten or twelve hours, and then you shall find all your iron gone
into the quicksilver; then take a bag made of thin leather, or cotton -- and
put the quicksilver with the iron into the bag, and press the quicksilver
through the bag; the iron which remains in the bag, put in a melting pot, and
melt it, and you shall have good Copper. Take of this Copper, and of silver, of
each alike much, and melt them together, and the silver will have sixteen
degrees of whiteness; this is the trial whereby we know such Copper to be made
of iron; this whiteness is not firm and fixed; but he who has skill to work
in Regals, he shall have by it a sufficient recompense for his pains. The main
business is in the skilful handling of it, in which many do fail: but to turn
the iron into Copper you cannot fail, if you observe the way which I have told
you, which I have described here for this end, to confirm that truth, That one
metal may be changed into another metal.

There is a very great neernesse of nature betwixt Coperas, and Copper. If you
put Coperas in a pot, and set it in a hot fire till it becomes to be a Red
powder; then take this Red powder, and melt it upon iron, and you will find
upon the iron Copper melted out of the Coperas: so likewise if Copper be
dissolved in Aqua fortis, and granulated, it will be turned into Coperas, and
that which is called Viride aeris, if it be well prepared and exalted, it will
come to be Saphir-coloured Coperas; howbeit it may seem ridiculous for me to
discourse of such things; yet it cannot be denied, but that there lurks a
tincture in Coperas, which can do more, then many will believe: he is a happy
man who knows it. I will tell you one Chemical secret of the oil of Coperas;
Take the oil of Coperas, and the oil of quicksilver, mix them together, and
coagulate them, and you shall have a Saphir of a strange nature; not a Saphir
stone, but it is like a Saphir, having a wonderful tincture in it, of which I
will say no more here: whence it is evident, that God has hid wonderful
secrets in Nature, which we should search out by diligent study, rather then to
spend our time in whoring, and drinking etc. but in these times whoring, and
other ways of intemperancy will be predominant till one third part of men be
killed by the Sword, and another third part destroyed by the pestilence; the
world cannot continue long in this wickedness: arts and sciences cannot
flourish now. We cannot expect any good to be done, till wickedness be rooted
out; of necessity wicked men of every condition and degree shall perish: then
shall come the golden age, when men shall be rational, and use their
understanding, and live like men, not like beasts etc.

These things I have freely communicated from my good affection to you,
entreating all, who know the misery of those persons who are afflicted with
that sad and grievous disease the falling sickness; that they seriously
consider what God their Creator, their own conscience and charity toward their
neighbor requires of them in this business, that they do not contemn or
neglect these virtues which God has created in Coperas; but let Charity move
you to it, to be diligent night and day, about this and such things whereby you
may do good to your neighbor.

A Treatise of Wounds: Containing the Cures of Wounds by Cuts, Fractures,
Burnings, and Scaldings; the Bitings of Venomous Beasts, etc.
CHAP. I. Potions, which being Drunk, Cure any Wound.
The first Potion.
TAke of Sanicle, Periwincle, Centory, Betony, of each on handful: of
Larks-spur, half a handful: of Agrimony, two handfuls: Put them in a gallon of
Water, and boil it to three quarts.

Another Potion.
Take of Adders Tongue, three handfuls: of Ladies Mantle, two handfuls: of
Periwincle the lesser, one handful: of Hony-suckle, one handful and an half: of
Rheubarbe, one ounce: of Rhapontick, three ounces: Put them in two gallons of
water; boil it to six quarts. Or, put them in new Ale or new Beer four or five
days; then let the Patient drink of it.

Another Potion.
Take of Angelica, half an ounce: of Mummy, one ounce: of Parmacity, two drams:
of the kernels of Walnuts, two ounces: of Orpine, two handfuls: of Sowbread,
two ounces: of the greater and lesser Sea-marsh Bugloss, of each three
handfuls: Put them in a sufficient quantity of Water, or etc. and boil them.

There is another Way of Preparing Wound-Drinks, viz. thus,
Let your Herbs ly in distilled Water some time; then set them to a slow fire
in a vessel well stopped, six or eight hours; then strain it, and drink it.

The Potion.
Take of the Water of Marsh Bugloss twenty ounces: of the greater and lesser
Sea-marsh Bugloss, one handful: of Sanicle, half a handful: of Periwincle, half
an handful: set them over a very slow fire, in a Pot well stopped, six or eight
hours: then strain it, and keep it for your use.

Another Potion.
Take of Juniper Berries, two pounds, and bruise them: of the greater and
lesser Sea-marsh Bugloss: of Hony-suckle, and the Root of white Sanicle, of
each half a handful: of Adders Tongue, a handful and an half: of great Comfrey,
and Birth-wort, of each five ounces: of Arsmart, four ounces: put them in a
distilling Vessel, and distill a Water from them: then put into the Water
distilled fresh Herbs, viz. These already named, and fresh Juniper Berries, and
let them ly in the Water some time: or set them over a slow fire in a Pot well
stopped, four or five hours.

Observe, That Juniper Berries have a singular Secret Virtue for Wounds.

Another Potion.
Take the Roots of great Comfre, two ounces: of Birth-wort, three ounces: of
sweet Flagg, one ounce: of Flower-deluce, half an ounce: of Periwincle, four
handfuls* of white Sanicle half a handful: of Myrrh, Mastich, Frankincense,
Mummy, of each half an ounce: of Rheubarb, six drams: boil them in Wine or
Distilled Water, or common Water, with some of the juice of Marsh-Bugloss, in
that manner as has been already described.

How much of these Potions a Patient should take at a time, must be considered
by the skilful Physician according to the strength of the Patient, and nature
of the Potion.

These Wound-Drinks do keep the Body in good temper, and do prevent many Evils
which use to accompany Wounds: They feed and strengthen Nature very much; which
cannot be done by outward Medicines. And there is no way so good as by
Wound-Drinks to cure wounds made by thrust: Therefore Surgeons should not
neglect these wound-potions so much as they do.

There are many good Herbs with which you may make wound drinks, as these; viz.
white Sanicle, wood Sanicle, middle Comfrey, Parsnep, Arsmart, both Beets,
golden Maidenhair, Lilies, etc. and many others there are. But observe, that
amongst those Herbs mentioned in the Potions and here, there are three, whose
juice being drunk, cures any Wound made by cut or thrust: and there are two
herbs mentioned, which if you take any of them whole and dip it in running
water, and lay it to the wound; take it presently off again from the wound, and
bury it in some place, and as it putrifieth, so the wound grows well. There
is also one herb named amongst these, whose juice or decoction being drunk
thrice, cures any wound, and all those evils which accompany a Wound; But such
great secrets of Nature should not be put in print, but every one should
diligently search after them. There are also some herbs amongst these already
named, which being drunk, cure the wounds of the Gout, as easily as the Wounds
of fleshy parts.

CHAP. II. Ointments for Wounds.
TAke of fresh May butter one pound, of Ribwort, and the greater and lesser
sea-marsh Buglosse, and Beers with their roots of each, one handful, of Adders
tongue three handful, Beat the Herbs with the Roots, and mix them with the
Butter, put them in a glass and set them in the Sun two or three months, then
strain them, and keep them for your use.

Another.
Take of May butter three pounds, the Roots of great Comfrey one pound, of
Adders tongue one pound and a half, of Birth-wort a quarter of a pound, beat
them, and mix them with the Butter, put them in a glass, and set the glass in
the Sun some time, or put it in warm dung a month, then strain them through a
linen cloth, and what you press out of them, keep it for your use. That your
Ointment may keep the better, wash it with salt water, or put a little salt to
it.

You may also make an Ointment with one Herb; as with Butter and Birth-wort, or
great Comfrey; or with Honey and Adders tongue, or the flowers of Saint
John's Wort, and such like. Many such Ointments may be made; but the two former
Ointments are sufficient to cure any Wound: This way of making Ointments is
commonly used, and was used by the Ancient Physicians. But now I will give you
a more excellent way of making Ointments, first found out and used by my self.

Take Comfrey, Birth-wort, Adders tongue, ma^sh Buglosse, all of them, or which
of them you will; take them green with their Roots; then pour so much wine upon
them as the wine may be above them; then take two pots which are of the same
bigness; put your Herbs and the wine in the one pot, and over this pot set your
other pot, mouth to mouth; lay clay about the mouths of your pots, that no
vapor can come out; and set them over a slow fire ten hours, then take them
out, strain and press all the liquor well out of the Herbs; to this liquor put
some honey or fresh butter, and boil it again to a consistence; and then you
have an Ointment which you may trust to in the most difficult Cures.

There is yet another way to make Ointments with Rosins, thus.

Take the Rosin of the Larch-tree, or Pine Rosin one pound, make it into
powder, and mix it with the whites of twenty eggs, and beat them well together;
then add to them the powder of the roots of great Comfrey half an ounce, the
powder of round Birth-wort one ounce, of barley meal six drams. Mix them all
well together, and then you have a very good Ointment for any Wound.

Another.
Take of the Rosin of the Fir Tree, or common Rosin one pound, melt it with
some of the marrow of a Calf, then put to them so much of the powder of the
root of Great Comfrey as you shall see fit, and mix them well together in a warm
mortar.

CHAP. III. Oils and Balsoms for Wounds.
TAke of Sallet oil or Turpentine one pound, of Camomile, red Roses, and
Self-heal of each one handful, of the flowers of St. John's wort two handful;
of the flowers of Centory, and the flowers of Celendine of each half an
handful; Mix them well with the Oil of Turpentine, put them in a glass, and
set them in the Sun two months: By this Oil or Balsom great and strange Cures
may be done without any pain. You may the year after put into this Oil again
fresh flowers of the same kind which were in it before, and let them stand in
the Sun as it did before, two months, then strain the Oil from the Flowers:
Then you have an Oil for Wounds which cannot be praised enough.

Another.
Take of Adders tongue, the lesser marsh Buglosse, Agrimony and Sanicle of each
one handful, of the flowers of St. John's Wort two handful, of the root of
Comfrey half a handful, of Earthworms an hundred, of Oil or Turpentine one
pound, set them in the Sun two months: You may likewise put some Mummie,
Mastick, Frankincense and Mirrh, but sparingly. Amongst all these Flowers, the
Flowers of St. John's Wort has most virtue for a Wound.

Obs. If you take the seeds of the same Herbs whose flowers you did put into
the Oil, and bruise them, and put them into the same Oil all the Winter, being
set in some warm place; then strain your Oil from those seeds, and then your
Oil will be far more efficacious for Wounds then it was before.

A Balsome for Wounds.
Take of Sallet Oil half a pound, of Turpentine a quarter of a pound, of the
flowers of Saint John's Wort so much as you can conveniently put into the Oil
and Turpentine; of the flowers of Mullein so much as the third part of the
flowers of St. John's Wort, put to them thirty ounces of Wine, and boil them
until the Wine be boiled away. Then let them stand in the Sun some time, and
assure your self that you shall never use this Balsom without wonderful success.

Physicians who have not been content with these Oils and Balsoms, have found
out other ways which have been good and successful; viz. mixing the Herbs and
Flowers before named, with Marrow, or Fat. Of Marrows, the marrow of Man is
best, next to this is Hearts marrow, and next to it is Calves marraw: And so
also Man's Fat is best, next to it is the Fat of a Capon or Pullet: Then having
mixed the Herbs with the Marrow or Fat, they put them in a glass and set them
in the Sun until the Marrow or Fat is turned to be like an Oil.

CHAP. IV. Medicines to keep Wounds clean.
WHen you are to lay on a new Plaster, or to anoint the Wound, then wash it
with Wine; but if the Wound be very foul, wash it with salt water, or water in
which salt is dissolved; or boil some of the Wound-herbs (before mentioned) in
wine, and with this wine wash the wound, and put a little salt in the wine; and
in stead of a Plaster, some applied a Honeycomb beaten.

Others use to wash Wounds with Allome-water, in which there is some Coperas
dissolved. Others do take the juice of Plantain and Celendine, and they put a
little salt in them, and so apply them to the Wound; which both keeps the
Wound clean, and cures it. The common people of the Arabians use nothing else
for Wounds, but Honey with some salt in it. Such Medicines, howbeit they cure
slowly, yet they are safe, and therefore better liked of by the common people,
then the couzening Receipts of Mountebank Physicians.

There are some other Medicines which by a more secret way do keep Wounds
clean, and cure them: as Arsmart, which being dipped in running water and laid
once upon the wound, and then buried in the ground, cures the wound. These
Medicines may seem contemptible, but they have not contemptible operations: and
you may do more with them sometimes, then you can do with the long Receipts of
these titulary Doctors. But you must remember, that the remedies mentioned in
this Chapter are only for such Wounds which are not very dangerous, or have
not very bad symptoms accompanying them; unless the patient be of a strong
constitution of body.

CHAP. V. Plasters for Wounds.
TAke of Wax one pound, of Pitch a quarter of a pound, melt them together, and
put into them the powder of the stone Carneolus, the powder of the white and
red Coral, the powder of the Loadstone, and the powder of Dittander of each
half an ounce; of Amber, Mastick, Frankincense, of each six drams; of Mirrhe,
Mummie, of each half an ounce; of Turpentine an ounce, mix them well together,
and when they are cooled, make them into a plaster with the juice of a
Lobster, then keep it for your use.

This Plaster is good not only for Wounds, but also for all malignant Ulcers.

Another.
Take of Vergin Wax and Pitch, of each one pound, of Turpentine a quarter of a
pound, set them over the fire and melt them; then put to them the powder of
Mastick three ounces, the powder of Amber half an ounce, mix them together, and
keep them so over a slow fire a quarter of an hour: then put into them the
powder of Mirrh and Frankincense of each half an ounce, of Mummie two ounces,
of Aloepaticum an ounce and a half, of Camphire half an ounce; mix them well
together, stirring them; and when they are cooled, make them into a plaster
with the juice of a Lobster. This Plaster is good for such Wounds which are
made by a thrust.

Another Plaster, good to bring out of the flesh, pieces of iron; as of broken
arm, or ends of arrows or darts, etc.
Take of Wax one pound, of Colophonie and Shoomakers wax of each a quarter of a
pound, set them over the fire and melt them together; then put to them, while
they are melting of Gum armoniack two ounces, Gum bdelium one ounce, of the
Loadstone made into powder five ounces, of Amber made into powder three ounces;
mix them together, and when they are cooled, make them into a Plaster with the
oil of Eggs. This Plaster you may use in the hardest Cures, and with this you
may perfect the cure of wounds which have been badly cured.

Another Plaster.
Take of Wax, Lithagire, and Sallet oil of each one pound, of Gum armoniack and
Gum bdelium of each half an ounce, of Gum galbanum and Opponax of each six
drams; but you must first dissolve these Gums in Vinegar, then strain the
vinegar through a linen cloth, and boil it until it be boiled away, and the
Gums are almost dry; then put to them the Wax, the Lithargire and Sallet oil,
with Dittander, red and white Coral, the Loadstone, being all made into
powder, of each one ounce and a half; of Frankincense and Mastick of each one
once: of Turpentine three ounces, of the oil of Dill half an ounce; mix them
together, and make them into a Plaster.

Another Plaster.
Take of Oppoponax a quarter of a pound, dissolve it in vinegar, strain the
vinegar, and boil it away; of Mummie three ounces, of Birth-wort two ounces, of
Mastick, Frankincense Mirrhe of each half an ounce, of Turpentine a quarter of
a pound, the oil of Bays one ounce, of Camphire two drams: make them into a
Plaster with the oil of Camomile.

Another.
Take of Gum Ammoniack dissolved in vinegar, etc. as has been said before of
Oppoponax. Take of this purged Ammoniack five ounces, of the Gum of Dragon tree
two ounces, of Colophony three ounces, of pitch an ounce, of Frankincense and
Mastick of each six drams, of Myrrh one ounce, of Turpentine four ounces; mix
them, and make them into a Plaster with the oil of Bays.

But I have by long experience found this following Plaster to be best of all.

Take of Virgin wax one pound and a half, and of some of the Wound oils
(before described in the third Chapter) one pound and a half; of golden
Lithargire one pound, of washed lead a half pound, of turpentine a quarter of a
pound, of varnish, in which some wound herbs, or their flowers, has layen a
month or two, being set in the Sun all that time: of this varn^sh take half a
pound, with some of the powders and gums set down in the p^aisters described
before: M^x them all well together, and make them into a plaster, with some of
the wound-Oyls or wound-Balsoms described in the third Chapter.

Take one thing more of my practice, which is this, viz. When I make a
plaster, first, I boil a good quantity of Lythargire, in so much varnish as I
conceive sufficient, the space of ten hours; and when it is cooled, I make it
into powder: and of this Lythargire I put into my plasters, as much as is
agreeable to the quantity of the rest of the ingredients.

These plasters I call stictick plasters, of which there is great use in the
cure of Ulcers; as you may see in my Treatise concerning Ulcers. And the
Physician who uses these Plasters, shall never fail to do good by them; for
what can be done in Wounds or Ulcers by any plasters, may be done by these,
which I have described in this Chapter.

CHAP. VI. Powders by which Wounds and Ulcers are speedily closed up.
THese powders do close up wounds and ulcers, either by their drying faculty,
as the powder of Bolus-armenus, or by their gluing faculty, or by their
constringent faculty, as the powder of sloes.

The Powder of Bolus Armenus is made thus. Take of the true Bolus Armenus a
quarter of a pound, dissolve it in allom water, and distill the water off from
it again; then pour some more new allom water upon the Bolus, and distill off
that water again; do thus so often, until the Bolus be turned into an oil: Take
this oil and set it in some place where the heat of the Sun may come much upon
it and dry it, then make it into powder, with an ounce of Frankincense; of the
stone Carnealus a half ounce, of Mummy two drams; all these must be made into a
powder and mixed together; strew this powder into the wound or ulcer twice a
day, then apply some stictick Plaster described in the aforegoing Chapter.

This powder is good, not only to close up a wound and cure it, but also it
preserves the wounds from these evils, those bad Symtomes which accompany a
wound.

This oil of Bolus Armenus, and the oil of Lead, and the oil of the Crocus of
Steel, and the oil of as ustum, they are so powerful (as I cannot sufficiently
express it) not only to close up wounds, but also to keep away the bad
companions of wounds, as inflammations, humors etc.

The powder of Sloes is made thus: Take of the juice of unripe Sloes, the juice
of unripe gales, of each alike, boil them to the thickness of an Electuary;
then put to them the root of great Comfrey made into powder, so much as the
eighth part of the two juices, boil them together in alum water, then dry them
in the Sun and make them into powder: But this powder you must not use without
a stictick plaster, because of those bad Symptoms which may get into the
wound.

Powders which by their gluing faculculty close up wounds, are these following.
Take of Frankincense, Myrrh, and Mastick, of each a half ounce: of red Corals
two drams, of Aloepatick two ounces: Make them into powder.

Another.
Take the juice of Sloes not ripe, the juice of unripe Galls, the juice of
Sanicle, the juice of the herb Clymer, the juice of Adders-tongue, of each five
ounces; dry them in the fire, and while they are drying, put to them two ounces
of gum Ammoniak purged, viz. dissolved in vinegar, etc. and when they are all
dry enough, make them into a powder.

When these powders are used, the patients diet must be drying, his meats must
be of a drying nature, and he must take but little drink: If there are any bad
Symptoms joined with the wound, as inflammations, etc. then you must first
take away all those bad Symptoms from the wound, before you use this powder.

CHAP. VII. Remedies for the bleeding, pain, inflammation, etc. of wounds.
TO stench the bleeding of a wound, these simples are good, viz. The crocus of
Steel reverberated, as ustum prepared as the crocus of Steel, the hairs which
grow under the tail of a Hare, the moss which grows in dead men's sculls, the
stone Carneolus hung about the neck, or held in the hand, the ashes of a frog
burned, the stone Haematites. The remedies which are for the looseness of the
belly, are a nutshel tied to the wound, in which there is a piece of wood or
wool: And if you cannot stench the bleding with some of these remedies,
especially the two first, viz. the crocus of steel, or aes ustum; yo can hardly
do it with any other, unless by some good stictick plaster, which is indeed
the best of all.

For the inflammation and pain of the wound.
Take the root of Henbane, put it in rose-vinegar, and set it in the Sun for
some time; then dip a linen cloth in this vinegar, and lay it warm to the
wound: Let it lie at the wound until it be dried, then dip it again in the
vinegar and lay it to the wound; do thus so often until the pain and
inflammation of the wound be gone. The virtues of the Henbane are well known to
me by experience, and I know it to be excellent for this.

For the Cramp in any member, caused by a wound.
We must use these remedies which refresh and strengthen the nerves, the
chiefest of which, is the first oil of Turpentine, viz. That oil which comes
first in distilling: if with this oil you anoint the place where the cramp is,
and the parts next to it; Sallet oil is also good to anoint the place with it.

For congealed and hardened blood within the body, or in the joints, which
comes of bruises or broken veins, etc.
If there be blood congealed within the body, let the patient have boiled in
his drink and broths, some Rhapontick, or Rhenbarb, or the roots of
Swallow-wort, or the leaves of Seny. etc. whereby the blood may be purged, and
the congealed blood within must be dissolved with this powder.

Take of choice Rhenbarb two drams, of mummy a half dram, of red Lacca and
Parmacity, of each one dram, of Bolearmene and Terra-sygillata, of each a half
dram, of the root of Swallow-wort three drams; make them into powder, and take
a dram of this powder at a time in the water of the flowers of Teil-tree: this
will dissolve congealed blood, whether it be inwardly or outwardly.

But for congealed blood in the joints, you may also use this oil: Take the
flowers of Mullen one handful, of the flowers of S. John's Wort three handful,
of the roots of Swallow-wort half a handful, of good new Sallet oil two pound,
of Turpentine one pound, of good Claret wine two quarts and a pint, boil them
all together in the Wine seven hours, in a pot close stopped, over a slow fire;
and when they are cooled, put them in a glass well stopped, and set them in the
Sun for some time; then take them out, and strain them through a cloth, and
press the liquor well out, which keep for your use: It is an incomparable
liquor for dissolving congealed blood in the joints; you must anoint the place
where this congealed blood is, with this Liquor morning and evening.

Observe. If this congealed blood within the body, be not timously dissolved
and brought out, it will cause infl^mmations, putrefactions, etc. and at last
dangerous Ulcers will follow.

CHAP. VIII. The cure of Fractures or broken bones.
IF the bone is broken, without any wound in the flesh, then we have no more to
do but to set the bone right, and to apply such Medicines, which will join the
bone together again; but if besides the fracture of the bone, there is also a
wound in the flesh, then we must join wound oils, and wound-plaisters before
described, with fracture Medicines.

We must be careful to bind up the Fracture twice every day, whether it has a
wound joined with it or not, and that the bone be not moved out of its right
place; for if this be neglected, there will follow many evils upon it, viz.
Inflammation and Putrefaction in the place, a Gangrene, etc. and ofttimes
death, if the fracture be dangerous, either in respect of the place where it
is, or, etc. And therefore me must not delay the binding up of the fracture to
the second ^^ third day, as Chyrurgions commonly do: If we would prevent these
distempers, which will cause Fistula's, deep and stinking Ulcers; howbeit some
may be so neglected, and yet be cured; yet certainly my way is safer and
better, and by it we prevent many evils, which otherwise may follow.

I likewise advise you not to u^e splents, which are commonly used by the
Chyrurgions in binding up fractures, for these Reasons. First, because we
cannot use splents, without moving the bone out of its right place. Secondly,
because splents require strong binding, which of necessity must cause
inflammation in the place. Thirdly, because oft-times it falls out, that a
swelling, caused by inflammation over night, may be lessened before morning; so
the binding slacks, and the Bone turns out of its right place.

Now to come to the cure: If you carefully observe to do as has been said, it
will be no hard matter to cure a fracture, especially in those who are young:
the root of great Comfrey alone, bruised and boiled in W^ne, and applied to the
fracture, will cure it; or Birth-wort, or Snake-weed, etc. The herb Flixweed,
if it be bruised and laid to the fracture, or if it be boiled in W^^e and laid
to the fracture, it will cure it: You may also cure fractures with the
wound-oyles, Ointments and Plasters described before. Nature it self does
much, having a little help.

There are two things which must be carefully done in the cure of fractures.
First, If there be any congealed blood within, it must be dissolved and brought
out. Secondly, If there be a wound with the fracture; then after we have set
the bone right, we must begin with the cure of the wound, and afterward cure
the fracture.

The swelling, inflammation, and pain which accompany Fractures (if not
timously helped, may cause putrefaction and Ulcers) they may be taken away by
the oil of St. John's wort, or the oil of the flowers of Mullein, or some of the
wound-oyles described in the third Chapter. But if by the mis-skilfulness or
negligence of the Chyrurgion, there is a Fistula, or some other dangerous Ulcer
bred in the place of the Fracture, then there is no other way but to cut off
the part infected.

CHAP. IX. The cure of those who are bitten by a mad Dog, Viper, or any other
Venomous Creature.
THose who are bitten by a mad Dog, must abstain from all heating things as
Wine, Spices, etc. they must drink much cold water, so as to cast it up again;
all their drink must be cooling, as Cydar, etc. and sharp things: Let them feed
much upon Coleworts, and cooling things, and eat so much at a time, as to cast
it up again.

Let them drink cold Whay, in which there is Seny and Roses boiled, and put
into it some Benedicta Laxativa: If they begin to be Feverish and mad, give
them in their drink some Rose-vinegar, with some of the conserve of Roses
dissolved in it, and some of the juice of Barberries, and a great deal of
Sallet-oyl.

They must be well purged upward and downward, by these Medicines which purge
cholar; as Rheubarb, Coloquintida, Agarick, the juice of the Bark of Elder, and
Spurge, etc. and there must be laid to the place bitten, some Medicine to take
away the pain, as the oil of Mandrake, or Sperniolum, which is thus; Take
Frog-Spawn, Parmacity, Chervil, Juniper Berries, of each alike; put them in a
glass, and let them stand in the Sun for some time, and if this Sperniolum be
applied to the place bitten, it will take away the pain and raging of it; and
when the pain is gone, then apply a stictick plaster, until the cure be done:
but if the Patient be so much infected, that none of these Medicines will do
him good, then you must give him Brimstone prepared by Coperas: The way of it I
have set down in my Treatise of Brimstone.

For those who are bitten or stung by a Serpent, Newt, Viper, Toad, etc. you
must give them inwardly these Medicines, which will defend and strengthen the
heart, stomach, and other principal pa^ts; and you must apply outwardly to the
place bitten or stung, these Medicines, which will bring out the Poison.
Inflammation and Pain.

The Medicine to be taken inwardly.
Take of Mithridate two ounces, of the best Treacle one ounce, of red Corals
made into powder, one ounce and a half; give so much of it at a time, as
necessity requires: If this do no good, you must give them Diaphoretick gold,
or the quintessence of pearls; these are infallible remedies.

The Medicine to be applied outwardly to the place bitten.
Take a stictick plaster, made of Lethargire and Mummy, of each a quarter of a
pound, of the gums Ammoniacum, Bdellium, Galbanum, Oppopanax, of each two
ounces, make them into a plaster.

A defensive Medicine.
Take of the flowers of Mulleny, the flowers of St. John's Wort, Rue and Roses,
put them in Vinegar, and set them in the Sun for some time; dip a linen cloth
in this vinegar, and lay it over all that member which is bitten; this do so
often, until the inflammation and distempers of the place be quite gone: If you
perceive by any signs, that the poison comes to the heart, then take a pound of
Sallet oil, in which you shall quench steel made red in the fire several times;
and put into this Oil two ounces of red Coral made into powder, and of the
Electuarium de gemmis, a half ounce: Mix them well with the Oil; let the
Patient take some of this five times a day, the first warm, and the next cold.

The Patients drink must be Claret wine, in which steel has been oft-times
quenched, and some Treacle dissolved in it; and whenever the Patient takes a
draught of this wine, there must be a half dram of red Coral made into powder
put into it: But if the Patient be troubled with an extraordinary thirst, while
he takes the oil, then he must drink milk with the powder of red Coral in it;
or let him drink of the decoction of Philonium -- which marvellously
strengthens the head, and other principal parts; when there is an
extraordinary thirst, it is a sign that the poison goes to the heart: And if
this thirst cannot be allayed by these things taken inwardly, then you must
boil Saunders in Rose-vinegar, and when it is cooled, dissolve some Camphire in
it: dip a Linen cloth in this Vinegar, and lay it upon the Stomach and the
lower part of the breast. The Patient must observe a sparing diet.

A cure for the poison of a Spider.
Lay the true Terra Sigillata, made into clay with spittle, upon the place
poisoned, and it will cure it. Yea, this Terra Sigillata will cure the biting
or stinging of any venomous Creature, if it be applied timously.

CHAP. X. The cure of Burnings and Scaldings.
THere is great difference in Burnings and Scaldings, and as the matter is
diverse wherewith we are burned or scalded, accordingly we must use different
cures.

And first for Burnings by the flame of Wood; and for scaldings by Milk, Oil,
Butter, or melted Rosin, etc.
Take of fresh butter a good quantity, melt it, and pour it into cold water,
and stir it well about in the water; then melt it again, and pour it into the
water, etc. do this so often until the butter is as white as snow; with this
Butter anoint the place burned or scalded, and keep the place always moist with
the Butter, until the heat be gone; then apply a stictick plaster unto the
place until it be cured: And if there be blisters risen in the place scalded,
then so soon as it is anointed, we must apply the stictick plaster to it;
likewise the stictick plaster must be much used when a scalding is by Oil, or
any fat thing.

The cure of Burnings by Metals, Minerals, Salts, and of Scaldings by Mineral
waters, etc.
Metals and Minerals, they do poison the part which they burn, and therefore we
must not only have a cure for the burning, but also for the poison. Burnings
by Alum, Coperas, Salt, Brass, etc. if not well cured, will cause a dangerous
Ulcer, sometimes they bring a kind of Leprosy: For these burnings take Hogs
grease, melt it, and pour it into the water of Nightshade, and stir it well
about until it be cooled; melt it again, and pour it into the same water, etc.
This do so often until it become an Ointment, with which anoint the place
burned.

To cure a Burning by hot Quicksilver.
Lay upon the place burned a double linen cloth dipped in scalding milk, and
this do twenty times, or oftener; then you must bring out the heat, by anointing
the place with Butter, prepared as you have heard before, and then apply the
stictick plaster of Colophony.

This kind of Burning befalls them oft-times who work in metals with fire; as
those who separate Metals, or makes Cinnabaris, or prepare Mercury by descent,
or work in Amalgamaes, etc.

Scaldings by such waters which come from Mineral mines, and Salt mines (as
Coperas water, or Alum water, etc.) are very dangerous: For if the heat be not
well brought out of the place scalded, it will cause most difficult and
dangerous sores in the place.

For these Scaldings, take this remedy which you must trust too, viz. Take of
the oil of Nuts a half pound, of Hearts grease one pound, of Butter prepared (as
I have showed you before) one pound and a half; mix them, and therewith anoint
the place scalded evening and morning, until the inflammation and pain be gone:
You may also apply some Wound-oyntment, or Wound-balsom to perfect the cure.

The same remedies are also good for the scaldings of Dyers.

The cure of Burnings by Gunpowder, Brimstone, Saltpeter, etc. and of
Scaldings by scalding Aquafortis, which are the most dangerous of any, except
the burning by Lightning.
Take of the prepared Butter one pound, of the oil of Nuts and Hearts grease, of
each a half pound, of the marrow of a Bull a quarter of a pound; melt them
together, and pour them into the water of Water-lilies, stir them well in the
water; melt them again, and pour them into the same water: do thus three or
four times, then anoint the burned place with this Ointment; and when you have
brought out the pain and heat, apply a stictick plaster.

But for scaldings by Aquafortis, you must apply a stictick plaster to the
place scalded, as soon as you have anointed it.

The cure of burning by Lightning.
I will give you these remedies, which I have used my self with success five
times, oftener I have not met with such a case: I used two Medicines, the one to
stop the burning, which would (if not stopped) burn the whole body to a cinder;
the other, to take away that which is already burned like a cinder, from that
which is sound.

The Medicine to stop the Burning.
Take of Frogs Spawn, the juice of Water-lilies, the juice of a Cancers toes,
of each alike; of Myrrh and Coperas, a little made into powder; mix them, and
lay them to the place where the burning is, till the burning be quenched; then
anoint the place with the Ointment described before for burning by Gunpowder,
and apply a stictick plaster until the cure be done.

The other Medicine to take away that which is already burned from that which
is sound, is this.
Take of Colophony one pound, of Pitch, half a pound, of Wax, and Turpentine,
and Sallet oil, of each a quarter of a pound; melt them together, and make a
plaster; apply it to the place burned, and it will separate that which is
burned, from that which is sound; then the burned part being removed, apply a
stictick plaster to perfect the cure.

The cure of burning by a Bullet shot into the body.
You must with a Syringe squirt into the wound Rose vinegar, mixed with the
juice of Nightshade, or the juice of Water-lilies, or the juice of Housleek, or
Frog-spawn; but the best of all is the juice of a Cancers toes mixed with the
vinegar; squirt this into the wound until the heat is allayed; afterward cure
the wound with Wound-oyls, or Wound-balsomes, described before in the third
Chapter.

Observe. If this burning go to the head, or any principal member, it is deadly.

The cure of a member deadned by extraordinary cold.
Any part which is thus deadned, it cannot be recovered again, but it becomes
Leprous, and it rotteth; and therefore we must not seek to cure it, but to take
it away from the sound part, that the sound part be not infected by it, which
may be done by this Medicine.

Take of long Pepper, and Ginny grains, and Cardamome, of each an ounce, of
Ephorbium two ounces, of Mastick an ounce and a half, beat them into powder,
and boil them in two quarts and a pint of childs urine, or the urine of a
red-haird man, until one pint be boiled away: Then strain the Liquor through a
cloth, and dip a linen cloth in it, which you must lay upon the part deadned;
do this thrice a day, until you have separated the deadned part from the sound
part; and when you have taken away the dead part, do the rest of the cure with
Wound-oyntments: There is a great heating-faculty in this Liquor, for if any
part of the body be wet wi h a little of it, its a wonder if that part be cold
again that day.

For those who are almost dead with extraordinary cold, give them to drink some
strong water, in which there is some Saffron, Treacle, and Camphire, dissolved
in it; or boil some Zinger and sweet Reed in Wine, and give it them to drink.

A Treatise of Ulcers: SECTION I. Describing the kinds of Ulcers, and their
several Cures.
CHAP. I.
IF the Patient complain of an Ulcer or Ulcers, which began thus, viz. He was
first troubled with a chilness, and after the chilness came a great heat, and
so at several times; and in the part Ulcerated, appeared first a great redness,
sometimes in one place, and sometimes in another place; at last, this redness
settled with an Inflammation and hardness in this place where now the Ulcer is:
This you shall call a tempestuous Ulcer.

Cure.
In the curing of this Ulcer, observe this method: When first the coldness or
chilness comes, which is not unlike a Pestilential chilness; do not meddle with
it until the heat come, and you see in what place the Inflammation and swelling
settles: then if you would prevent it that it break not out into an Ulcer, or
running Sore, apply to it this following Receipt.

Take of red Myrrh half an ounce, and of the whitest Incense half an ounce;
make them into a fine powder, and put the Myrrh into one bag, and the Incense
into another bag, and boil them in a pint of the best white Wine, and half a
pint of good vinegar; then dip pieces of linen cloth into this Liquor, and lay
them upon the part inflamed, till the inflammation be quite gone.

But if the swelling is turned into an Ulcer, then you must first take out all
the heat with the former remedy; afterward, if the Ulcer is sowl, cleanse it
with this following Receipt.

Take of Alum burned, and quenched in Vinegar, one ounce and a half, of
Aloehepatick one ounce, make them into a powder, and mix them with five ounces
of honey: Make a Plaster; this plaster must be applied to the Ulcer morning
and evening, till it be well cleansed: but if it be an old Ulcer, put into the
plaster some burned Coperas; when the Ulcer is sufficiently cleansed, and fit
to be cloased up, then apply to it this stictick plaster.

Take of golden Lithargirie one pound, boil it with a good quantity of varnish
a long time; to which add Virgin wax and Sallet oil, of each one pound, and so
make a Cerote: then take the Gum Oppoponax, a quarter of a pound, which you
shall dissolve in Vinegar; when it is dissolved, strain the Vinegar, and boil
it till it begin to be thick: To this add the former Cerote, and when they be
well mixed together, add to them a quarter of a pound of Turpentine, and of
Laurel oil one ounce; with these powders, viz. The powder of Mastick, of
Incense, and of Myrrh, of each alike, half an ounce: of Camphire two drams;
and when you have mixed them well altogether, make them up into a plaster with
the oil of Camomile. Take of this stictick Plaster one pound, and mix into it
half an ounce of burnt Coperas, and of Crocus of Steel an ounce and a half; and
when you have thus made up your plaster, apply some of it morning and evening
to the Ulcer, until it be fully cured: And for your preservation, that the
Ulcer return not again, after it is cured, you must every year let blood in the
great Veins of the legs or ankles; yea, and in the time of the cure you should
let blood in those Veins which come to the Ulcerated place, if they appear
putrid or Leprous.

CHAP. II.
IF the patient complain of a Sore which continually issues forth water at a
small hole, being very hallow within, which you may find, by searching it with
a quill; and if this sore did break out without any redness or inflammation, or
any great swelling, then judge this sore to be a Fistula, which of it self will
never be well, nor dry up, it requires excellent Medicines to cure it.

Cure.
In the curing of this Ulcer, we must use inward Remedies and outward Remedies,
viz. Waters, Plasters, etc. There needs not be any diet observed.

A potion for the Fistula.
Take of Sowbread two handfulls, of white Sanicle one handful, of middle
Consound half a handful; boil them in white Wine, in a vessel close stopped; then
strain it, and put to it an ounce and a half of the distilled oil of Cloves,
and mix them well together: Let the Patient drink of this thrice a day, and by
this drink alone new Fistula's may be perfectly cured; but if it be an old
Fistula, you must use this following Receipt.

Take of Oleum Laterinum, or oil of Bricks, three ounces, of Turpentine half a
pound, of the oil of Cloves one ounce and a half, of Incense, of Mastick, of
Myrrh, of each an ounce and a half, of Mummy three ounces; distill an Oil from
them with a strong fire, the which Oil you must use thus: After you have
cleansed the Fistula within, then you must put some of this Oil into it; it is
cleansed with Wine, or saltish Water, being squirted into it by a Syringe;
afterward the Oil must be also squirted into it by the Syringe, and then lay
upon it outwardly, the stictick Plaster mentioned in the former Chapter. There
are also other excellent remedies for a Fistula, as the oil of Lead, the oil of
Quicksilver, and Mercury water, etc. But if the Fistula be in such a place (as
the eyes or ears, etc. where you cannot use a Plaster, then you must be
contented with the Potion and the Oil; neither need you trouble your selves for
any other Medicine then what is here set down.

CHAP. III.
IF the Patient complain of an Ulcer, which has a great many deep holes
together, which at first were small pushes, afterward grew to be big hard
lumps, then breaks out, and at last comes to be large deep holes; these holes
are dry, there comes very little matter out of them.

Cure.
We must use such a Medicine for this U cer, which can at once both cleanse and
fill up these holes; but we must not at all meddle with the hard swellings, to
take them away by ripening Medicines, or Corrosive Medicines, we must let
Nature it self concoct them and dissolve them in the U^cer, and then we may
apply this Medicine to the Ulcer, viz.

Take of yolks of eggs three ounces, of the oil of Mercury one dram, mix them
together, apply some of this to the sore once in twelve hours; or if you will,
instead of this, you may use the stictick plaster described in the first
Chapter: This Ulcer may have several shapes, and may be in several places of
the body, viz in the Arms, Legs, etc. yea, sometimes it will surround the body
like a girdle, etc. But wheresoever it is, or whatsoever shape it has, yet it
is to be cured by the foresaid remedy, if it was at first hard swellings, which
afterward broke out, etc.

CHAP. IV.
IF the Patient complain of an Ulcer, and say, That he never had any pain in
that Ulcer.

Cure.
For curing this Ulcer, you must first cleanse it, then fill it up with flesh,
and lastly close it: Cleanse it with this, take honey, and mix with it some
burned Coperas; this apply to the Ulcer so often, till it has no stinch or
corruption, which will be about the sixth day; afterward to fill it up with
flesh, you must use the stictick plaster; but while you do fill it with flesh,
if it gather corruption, then you must use again the former cleansing Medicine,
till it yields no corruption, and then you may proceed again with the stictick
plaster, till it be fit to be closed up: You must close it up with the Crocus
of Steel, which must be strawed into the sores twice a day: But you must wash
the sores at the second time when you straw this Crocus upon them, with this
water, viz. Take of Spring Water an ounce, of Alum one ounce, of common Salt
half an ounce, which you must dissolve in the water, and with this water wash
the sores; then strew your Crocus upon the sores, and so do twice every day,
until the Ulcer be skinned and thoroughly whole. In the time of the cure, the
Patient must use a very good diet; he must let Blood, and he must take the
benefit of some good natural Bath.

CHAP. V.
IF the Patient complain that there is abundance of humors gathered together in
his legs, to a great hard swelling, which is full of holes, and these holes are
soul, hallow, and eating sores; the beginning of them was this, A great many
small Blisters came out together, which grew bigger, and then came out into
putrid holes.

Cure.
In this cure, five things are to be done, First, the Ulcerated part must be
kept over the vapor of some Herbs: then the swelling must be taken away.
Thirdly, The sores must be cleansed. Fourthly, They must be filled with flesh.
And lastly, Skinned.

For the first, Take of the Root of Swallow-wort two ounces, of Sanicle, of
Pond-weed and Stone-moss, of the Flowers of Elder, of each a handful, of
Camomile Flowers two handfuls, of Doves dung three handful, of Hens dung half a
handful; boil them altogether in water, and let the Patient keep his leg over
the vapor; this he must do morning and evening, when he renews his Plaster.

Secondly, To take away the swelling, Take the flowers of Mullein, of St. John's
wort, of each two handfuls, the Flowers of Elder three handfuls, of the Flowers
of Camomile two handfuls; boil them in Wine and Vinegar, of each alike, then
pour off the liquor, and take the Herbs and lay them warm to the swelling, and
so keep them at it, till the swelling be gone.

Thirdly, To cleanse it, Take the unguent of the yolks of Eggs, and mix with it
some burnt Alum; this must be applied twice a day to the sore, till it be well
purged from all corruption and filthiness, so as the sound flesh appears in the
bottom of the sore.

Fourthly, To consolidate the sore, or to fill the holes up with flesh, Take of
the Stictick plaster of Colophony, a quarter of a pound, of Lithargirium half
a pound, of clean Rosin an ounce and a half; set them over a slow fire, and
add to them some Crocus of Steel, and so mix them together: You may also put
to them some burnt Alum; this Plaster must be applied to the sores twice a
day, until they be filled up with flesh.

The Stictick Plaster of Colophony is made thus.
Take of wax a pound, of Colophony and Shoo-makers wax, of each a quarter of a
pound, melt them together, and then add to them gum Ammoniact two ounces, of
gum Bdelium one ounce, of the Lodestone made into a fine powder, five ounces,
of Amber three ounces; which being all mixed together, make them into plaster
with the oil of eggs, and so keep it for your use.

Fifthly, To close it up and skin it, Take the burned shells of eggs half an
ounce, of burnt Alum quenched in vinegar one dram, of the Crocus of steel one
ounce and a half, of Incense, Myrrh, Mastick, of each half a dram; make them
into a fine powder, and strew this powder upon the sore every day till it be
skinned. It falls out oft-times, that the swelling cannot be taken away by any
Medicine, if the disease be of continuance; and when it is so, the Patient must
remember to let blood at convenient times.

CHAP. VI.
IF the Patient complain of a swelling in his Leg or Foot, with great
inflammation, stench, and corrupt matter which comes from it, without eating or
consuming the flesh; and that formerly he has had a wound, prick or bruise
badly cured in this place, which may be the cause of this Ulcer.

Cure.
First you must cleanse the Ulcer with this following Receipt; Take the green
fruit of the Fir Tree gathered in May, when they are full of moisture, thirty
of them, boil them in water, until you have boiled all the Rosin out of them,
then take them out; and the Rosin which is yet in them, press it out of them
into the water: throw them away, and take the water with the Rosin, and boil it
again till the water be consumed; then take out the Rosin, and make of it an
Ointment, with the yolks of eggs, adding to it a little Calcinatum, or the red
powder of burned Coperas; and when you have cleansed the Ulcer well with this
Unguent, then to perfect the cure, anoint it with this following ointment.

Take of Wax one pound, of Colophony half a pound, of pitch a quarter of a
pound, set them over the fire and melt them, and put to them two ounces of
Varnish, with these powders, viz. The powder of Birth-wort, of great Comfrey,
of each half an ounce, the powder of Mastick two drams, of Myrthe six drams, of
Amber one ounce and a half, with this ointment anoint the sore twice a day,
until it be well cured; but if the sore be foul again while you are using this
Ointment, then you must leave this Ointment, and anoint the sore with the
former ointment, until you have taken away all its corruption; afterward use
the second Ointment.

If there be any other kind of Ulcers joined with this, you must use such
Medicines for them as are proper to them; when you have done the cure, it will
be good for the Patient to go to the Bath of Salin in Italy, or to use some
other good Bath, to take away the remainders of the corruption.

CHAP. VII.
IF the Patient complain, that he has an Ulcer which extremely tormenteth him;
before you can cure such an U^cer, you must use such Medicines as will assuage
the pain: These painful Ulcers will not receive any cure, so long as the pain
continues, and therefor unskilful Physicians, not taking the right way in
curing, conceive these Ulcers incurable; and to excuse their ignorance, they
say, That the Art of Medicine is defective in this: But to leave them, and to
give you the Receipt which can assuage the pain of any Ulcer.

Cure.
Take of Cloves a quarter of a pound, of Juniper Berries two ounces, of
Brimstone which has been sublimed from Coperas one ounce and a half; distill an
oil from them in a close Vessel; to this oil add half so much of Oleum
Laterinum, or the oil of Bricks, and of the three great Mitigatives, of each an
ounce, put them altogether in a destilling vessel and distill them, and you
shall have an excellent Oil to assuage the pain of any Ulcer.

When you have taken away the pain, then cleanse the Ulcer with this Receipt:
Take the Oil of fixed Arsenick five ounces, of the Oil of Cloves four ounces,
of clear Crystalline Realgare one dram; mix them together, and dip pieces of
linen cloth in it, which you shall lay upon the sore once in twelve hours; and
when you have done so thrice, you shall have a scurf come off all the sore, and
the sound flesh shall appear; and when this appears, then apply three or four
times to the sore some of these cleansing Medicines before described, that the
Ulcer may be very well cleansed: afterward apply to the sore the last Stictick
Plaster described in the first Chapter of the Treatise of wounds, until the
cure be perfected.

Observe. That oft-times great evils accompany these painful Ulcers. viz. The
Veins and Nerves are eaten through the bones are infected, and rot, etc. and if
you find the bones so infected and decayed, yet you must not cut them, nor
scrape them, as Chyrurgeons commonly do; but if they be inflamed, you must cool
them; if they be soul, you must cleanse them; and then it will be an easy
matter to bring flesh upon them again: I see no necessity, that Patients should
be so tortured by Chyrurgions, as commonly they are.

Now my remedy which I have always used with great success in curing bones
inflamed, or bones decaying, is this.

Take the oil of Camphire, prepared with the white of an egg, and of the oil
of Cloves, of each half an ounce, mix them together, and drop them into the
sore, or squirt them into it with a Syrenge.

CHAP. VIII.
IF the Patient complain of an Ulcer in his face, or breast, or shoulders, or
sides, or some other part of the Body, which eats all the flesh round even to
the bone; this is the worst kind of Ulcer.

Cure.
This Ulcer is cured chiefly by two kind of remedies; viz: by the Oils of
Metals, and by sweet Mercury: If the Ulcer be anointed twice a day with any of
these, they will cure it: the best Oil for it, is the oil of Lead; next to it
is the oil of silver, and next to it the oil of Steel, then the oil of Copper,
and then the oil of Tin; but sweet Mercu^y, which is like an oil, is best of
all.

CHAP. IX.
IF the Patient complain of an Ulcer, which was first of one fashion, then of
another, and then of another, so as it is never the same.

Cure.
This Ulcer you must cure as you find it, not as it was at first; and it is
cured With Mercury, Colophonia, Lithargirium; and gums, viz. Bdellium,
Oppoponax, Galbanium, etc. these will close up the Ulcer; but the Mercury
cleanses it, and fits it to be closed up: The Mercury is prepared thus, Take
Quicksilver, and harden it with Allum-water, then make it into powder, and mix
it with the yolks of eggs, wherewith you shall anoint the sore, until sound
flesh appears every where in the sore: Then take the plaster of Lithargirium
one pound, of Saliet oil and of wax, of each one pound of Colophonia a pound,
of varnish two ounces and a half; melt them together, and put to them the
powder of white Frankincense and when they are cooled, make a Plaster of them,
and lay it to the sore twice a day, till the cure be perfected: This kind of
Ulcer is easily cured, but if it be not prevented, it will turn to a Leprosy.

CHAP. X:
IF Ulcers be caused by the influence of the Stars, you may know it thus:
Enquire of the Patient when the Ulcer did begin, viz. what month, day and
hour, and according to that time let the Astrologer make a Celestial Scheam,
and thereby you shall know, whether the Ulcer be from the influence of the
stars, or not; if it be, then you must consider, if that influence, be past, or
if it does yet continue; if the influence be past, then the Ulcer may be cured
by these ordinary remedies wherewith other Ulcers are cured; but if the
influence yet continues upon the Ulcer,

Cure.
Then you must use such Medicines which by a secret property can cure it, as
Arsmart and Self-heal.

They must be used thus; dip the herb in cold running water, and lay it upon
the sore, then bury the herb in dung, or in some fat ground, and cover it with
a stone, that it may quickly rot; for when the herb begins to putrify, then
the Ulcer begins to be well; and when the Herb is thoroughly putrified, then the
Ulcer will be thoroughly cured; which is not by enchantment, as ignorant people
may think, but by that extraordinary virtue which almighty God has granted to
these herbs.

CHAP. XI.
IF an Ulcer be caused by a defluxion, which sometimes is hereditary, and
sometimes it is from the moist, Phlegmatic constitution of the body, so
accordingly the Ulcer may be easier or harder to be cured: For first, the
Defluxion must be dried up before the Ulcer can be cured; its true, the
Defluxion may be turned another way, but not without danger of some great evil,
and oft-times it returns again to the old passage.

The Medicine which dries this Defluxion, and cures the Ulcer, is the Crocus
of Steel; but you must join to this Crocus some cleansing Ointment before
described, that the sore may be kept clean until it be cured.

When Ulcers come of wounds badly cured; the way how these Ulcers should be
cured, I have set it down in my Book concerning the cure of Wounds.

CHAP. XII.
WHen Ulcers are from the influence of the stars, you may know it by this, That
they will not yield as other Ulcers, to any natural Medicines, viz. Mummy,
Comfrey, Plasters or Ointments, etc. but they must have such Medicines, which
are governed by some influence, as Celandine, Oak-leaves, Plantane, etc. these
do the cure certainly and safely; if they do not cure without preparation, then
prepare them thus; Take Celandine three handfuls of Oak-leaves two handfuls,
bruise them together, and put them in a glass close stopped; put the glass in
warm dung some time, then take them out, put them in a distilling Vessel, and
distill an oil from them; with this oil anoint the sore, and strew the powder of
the same herbs upon the sore, until the cure be perfected.

To conclude, observe this, that in the curing of any Ulcer, there are chiefly
four things to be done, viz. First, we must assuage the pain: Next we must
cleanse the sore: And in the third place, We must consolidate the sore. And
lastly, We must close it up and skin it. If Chyrurgions would observe this
method, they might cure all Ulcers, unless they be such Ulcers which are
inflicted by God upon us as punishments: But because of their pride, avarice,
envy, etc. I do not write these things for them, but for the sick.

A Treatise of Ulcers: SECT. II. Wherein are contained some rare Experimented
Remedies for Ulcers, especially for the Ulcers of the French Pox.
A Medicine to cleanse Ulcers.
TAke of Turpentine one pound the yolks of twenty Eggs; mix them well together
and put to them as much of honey as is of them, and set them over the fire half
a quarter of an hour: Apply this to the Ulcer morning and evening, until the
Ulcer be cleansed; to these you may add an ounce of the ashes of burned
Fetherfew.

A Medicine to fill up any Ulcer with flesh after it is cleans^d.
Take of the former Ointment one pound, of Turpentine washed with Rosewater, or
Comfrey water, etc. put them together over the fire, and stir them together,
then put to them these Gums, viz Galbanum, Oppoponax, Bdelium, (being dissolved
in vinegar, and the vinegar strained and boiled away from them) of each an
ounce; the Powder of Birth wort one ounce and a half: mix them, and make a
Plaster.

A Medicine to take away dead flesh, or rotten bottom of an Ulcer.
If you know not how much there is of the rotten bottom, then you must first
apply this; Take of the former cleansing Medicine half a pound, with which you
shall mix half an ounce of burned Alum, and quenched in Vinegar; and if in
four days the Ulcer be not better, then take this ointment, viz. of burned
Alum quenched in vinegar, and of the oil of Arsnick, of each alike; and if the
Ulcer yields not to this neither, then instead of burned Alum, take burned
Coperas; when there comes a scurf upon the bottom of the sore, it must be taken
off with the oil of Bricks, afterward anoint the place with Butter.

But I commend to you this following way, as better to take away the rotten
bottom of an Ulcer without a scurf, by this following Receipt, viz. Take of
Alum burned and quenched in vinegar, one ounce and a half, of salt Armoniack
one dram, the yolks of four eggs, a spoonful of honey, of Bean-meal a half
ounce, mix them together; with this make a tent to be put into the Ulcer, if it
be deep; but if the Ulcer be not deep, you may apply it as a plaster once a
day, until you come to a sound bottom, cleared of all putrefaction.

But if there be any venomous matter in the bottom of the Ulcer, you must draw
it out with this following Medicine.

Take of Amber made into powder, put it in a small pot well stopped set it over
the fire to melt, and when it is melted, put to it so much of Turpentine, as is
the third part of the Amber; and when they are mixed together, put to them as
much more Turpentine; and this do so often, until you have put to one ounce of
Amber, four ounces of Turpentine; if it be too thick, you may put to it some
Lin-seed oil, then dip pieces of linen cloth in it, to be laid into the Ulcer,
and lay a Stictick Plaster upon the Ulcer.

The Balsom or Oil of Tartar is made thus.
Take of Saltpeter one pound, of Arsnick or Rats-bane one ounce, of unslaked
Lime three ounces, of Tartar twelve ounces; make them into a powder, put them
into an earthen vessel which is not glased within, and burn them in a hot fire
six or eight hours; then dissolve them in a sufficient quantity of water,
strain the water, and boil it until it be boiled away, and to that which
remains, add some Saltpeter, of each a like quantity, beat them together
into a powder, and mix them well, and keep them in a hot fire four or five
hours, then desolve them in water, and do as you did before; thus do three
times, and when they are burned the third time, then pour upon them a
sufficient quantity of vinegar, let them dissolve in the vinegar, and distill
the Vinegar from them until you have an oil: Take some of this Oil, and some
burned Alum quenched in Vinegar, and mix them, so as the mixture be thicker
then honey; dip pieces of linen cloth in this, to be laid into the Ulcer, and
when it has lain in the Ulcer twelve hours, look upon the Ulcer, and if the
U^cer and about the Ulcer be very red, then you must apply this Medicine but
once in twenty four hours, and continue it so until the redness and
inflammation be gone.

Then take of the former oil of Tartare two pounds, of Tragacanthum dissolved
in Rose Water two ounces, of Camphire half an ounce, mix them together; in this
mixture dip pieces of linen cloth, and lay them into the Ulcer, and it will
without pain or danger, dry up and cure the Ulcer.

But if the Ulcer be hollow, and must be filled up with flesh, then take of the
common oil of Tartar five ounces, of Mummy one ounce, of the Crocus of steel
one ounce and a half, of the oil of the yolks of Eggs ten drams; mix them, and
apply them to the Ulcer, until it be filled up with flesh; and when it is
filled with flesh, you shall anoint the place with the former oil alone ten
days.

This oil of Tartar is excellent to consume any superfluous moisture, and to
take away any inflammation or superfluous flesh, etc. but it is especially good
for the putrid and running sores of the feet and legs: Whatsoever Ulcers they
be, albeit they be putrid, old, swelling or hollow, or eating Ulcers, etc. yet
if they be anointed with this oil, it will cure them thoroughly, it is of a
wonderful drying faculty.

A good Plaster Oppodeltoch to fill an Ulcer with flesh, especially a Fistula,
or Cancer, or Syrone.
Take of common Rosin, Colophony, Turpentine, of each a half pound, of Virgin
Wax a pound and a half, of gum Amoniacum and Myrrh, of each two ounces, of
Realgare fixed, three drams; mix them, and make a Plaster, which must be laid
to the Ulcer when it is well cleansed, twice a day, until the cure be done.

For a Sphacelus, to separate the dead putrified part, from the sound part.
Take of Colophony three pound, the oil of Myrrh six ounces, of the gums
Bdelium, Ammoniacum, Oppopanax, Galbanum, of each half a pound; make a plaster
to be applied to the putrified part, and after the dead and putrified part is
taken away from the sound part by this plaster; then apply to the place this
following Receipt.

Take of the water of the salt of Radish one ounce, of the juice of Plaintan
eight ounces, mix them, and anoint the part with them Morning and Evening.

Then apply this Plaster, Take of the oil of Eggs two drams and a half, the
oil of Walnuts five ounces, of Wax and Pitch, of each five ounces: make a
Plaster.

Experiments for Ulcers, especially for the Ulcers of the French Pox; And the
first kind of Experiments are Baths.
A good Bath to cure any Scab or Itch, especially the Scab of the French Pox.
TAke of Alum ten pounds, of Coperas one pound, of burned Tartar half a pound,
of Brine, or the Liquor of Salt three pounds, put them in a good quantity of
Scalding hot water, in which some hops have been boiled; and when they are
dissolved in the water, let the Patient Bath himself in this water: but if it
be an old stubborn Scab, which will not yield to this Bath; then take
Quicksilver and make it very hot, and quench it in this water; do so several
times, and then it will cure any Scab of the French Pox.

Another.
Take of burned A^lum, and of Plum-Allum, of each an ounce, of burned Tartar
and burned Coperas, of each four ounces, of Roch Alum, salt Nitre and Coperas,
of each one pound, and take old blew cheese, and wash from it the blew with
water; take of this blew as much as all the rest, and mix it with the rest;
then set them in some dry place, and it will grow hard as horn, when you would
use it, put some of it in hot water, and it will dissolve in it; then let the
Patient Bath himself in this water for any Scab or itch* etc. Nay, some have so
highly esteemed of this Receipt, that they have endeavored to cure the Leprosy
with it.

If the salt of Feverfew or Snakewood be put into the former composition, it
will be much better.

The juice of Nettles, and a little of the Liquor of Salt, cures the running
sores of the feet, if they be anointed therewith. Some who got this Receipt
from me, have foolishly thought it a sufficient cure for all Sores.

The second kind of Experiments are Ointments.
An Ointment for those Ulcers of the French Pox, which begin to be dry.
Take of Lethargire and Red-lead, of each half an ounce, of the oil of Mirtles
three ounces; of Aloepatick one ounce and a half, the flower of prepared Copper
three drams, of Turpentine two ounces, mix them: with this Ointment I have seen
these Ulcers happily cured.

The chief Ingredients in this and such other Ointments, are Aloepatick and the
flower of Coperas.

Another Ointment.
Take of the Oil of Mummy three ounces, of the flower of Copper half a dram, of
Mastick, Myrrh, Frankincense, Mummy, of each two drams and a half, of
Aloepatick half an ounce, of washed Turpentine three drams and a half; Mix them.

There are some ointments in which Quicksilver is the chief ingredient, which
common people do ordinarily use for the Itch, Scab, and other faults of the
skin; but you must know, that Quicksilver should not be used unless it be
rightly prepared: If you can bring it to be an oil with salt Nitre, then mix
this oil with any of the ointments for Ulcers, and you have a singular good
remedy for all diseases of the skin (except the Leprosy) for Scabs, Ulcers,
etc. If you anoint therewith the lips of an old sore, it will cure it speedily,
but especially if it be an Ulcer of the French Pox, then it will be so much the
sooner cured by this Ointment.

Precipitate Mercury is an excellent remedy for all the hollow U^cers of the
French Pox, except eating Ulcers: It is made thus, Put Quicksilver in a pot,
set it over the fire until it be very hot, then quench it in the water which is
distilled from Eggs, and distill this water oft-times from the Quicksilver,
until the Quicksilver is turned into a red powder; mix this red powder with
some of the Ointments for Ulcers, and anoint the Ulcer with it.

A good Plaster.
Take of both kinds of Snake-weed, of each seven, of Consound, and bushy
rooted Birth-wort, of each a half pound, bruise them and mix them, with washed
Turpentine one pound and a half, and with Sallet oil four ounces; make them
into a plaster, and whatsoever sore cannot be cured by this plaster, it is
hardly cured by any other.

The oil of Mummy, the oil of the yolks of Eggs, the oil of Mastick, Oleum
Laterinum, or the oil of Bricks; these oils are of great virtue to further the
cure of any Ulcer, or to assuage pain, etc. but they are not sufficient to
perfect the cure alone.

Another.
B^uise Snake-weed, and put to it a little Petroleum, it is a very good remedy
for Ulcers.

Another.
Take Mummy, beat it to powder, and mix it with Man's fat, it is good for
asswaging the pain of Ulcers, etc.

Another.
Aloepatick made into powder and mixed with honey, is good for dry sores, and
such sores which are near the bone

Rosin is good for Syron's to further their cure, but it cannot do the cure
alone, without some of the aforesaid Herbs, or etc. to be mixed with it.

Many have endeavored to imitate my Compositions and have said that they were
mine; but with what success they used these compositions, they can tell who were
their Patients; and how could they imagine to do any good with these
Compositions, when they knew nor the nature of the Ingredients; but when they
read these my Writings, they will see their error and ignorance.

The third kind of Experiments, viz. Wax Plasters.
Plasters were formerly made with wax and Turpentine, to which were added,
several Simples for diverse kinds of Ulcers: Wax may be used for any sore, but
Turpentine is to be used only for moist sores; diverse kinds of sores, must
have diverse kinds of remedies: It is most rashly done by those, who when they
find a Medicine good for one sore, they will use it for every sore. I advise
Physicians that they use not these my experiments, any other ways then I have
expressed here.

A Plaster.
Take of the oil of Myrtle, of Wax, and of red Lead, of each one pound and a
half, of the flower of Copper and Mummy, of each one ounce, of Aloepatick one
ounce and a half, of Oppopanax two ounces, of Turpentine half a pound, mix
them, and make them into a Plaster.

Another.
Take of the flower of Copper one pound, the oil of Dill, and Wax, of each one
pound and a half, of Colophony four ounces, the oil of Bays two ounces, of
Turpentine half a pound of Mummy, Mastick, Frankincense, of each two ounces, of
Sagapenum and Galbanum, of each one ounce and a half; make them into a Plaster.

Another.
Take of Wax and Sallet oil, of each three pounds, of Celandine, Buck-horn, of
each half an ounce, of Mastick, Oppopanax, Myrrh, Mummy, Galbanum, of each one
ounce, of round Birthwort, Frankincense, Ammoniacum, of each one ounce and a
half, of Turpentine six ounces; melt your Wax, then put to it the Mastick,
Frankincense, the gums, Oil and Turpentine then mix with them, the herbs made
into powder, to which you may add some Oil of Spike, or of Earthworms.

Another.
Take of Wax one pound, of Colophony four ounces, of red and white Corals, of
the Lodestone, of the Lapis Calaminaris, of Amber, of Antimony, of each of
them made into powder, one ounce; of Mummy, Frankincense, Myrrh, Mastick, of
each one ounce and a half; first melt your wax, and when it is melted, put the
rest to it.

The fourth kind of Experiments are Powders.
Mummy is excellent to fill an Ulcer with Flesh.
Take Mummy, put it in a glass which can endure the fire, or in a pot well
clos^d, and set it in a fire which has three degrees of heat, four days; then
take your glass or pot out of the fire, open it, let the vapor go out of it,
and when the Mummy is cooled, take it out and make it into a powder.

Another.
Take of Mummy and Lin-seed oil, of each alike, mix them together, and let them
stand two days; then pour to them as much of the Spirit of wine as they both,
and let them stand two days, then set them over a slow fire, till the Wine be
consumed, and the Mummy is dry; when it is cooled, make it into powder.

Another.
Take Mummy and burn it, until the ashes of it begins to change their color,
then pour water upon it, and let it stand a day, then pour off the water
carefully, so that the grounds do not mix with it; take this water and boil it
away, that which remains in the bottom, make it into powder, and keep it for
your use.

There are two Experiments of Amber observed by the ancient Physicians; the one
is to fill up hollow sores, the other is to cure eating sores.
The first is this, Take Amber, and dissolve it in some Petroleum; afterward
dry them, and make them into powder. The other is this, Distill an oil from
Amber, pour some of this oil upon the grounds remaining in the Distillation, or
upon some fresh Amber, and let it dry again; then pour some more Oil, and let
it dry again; and so do oft-times; then make it into powder.

There are also two Experiments of Myrrh for curing foul Ulcers.
Take Myrrh, and d^ssolve it in the oil of the yolks of eggs, then put to them
five times so much Wine, and let them stand five days, then set them over the
fire until the Wine be consumed, and take the Myrrh which remains dry, and
make it to powder. Or thus, Distill an Oil from Myrrh, with Tragacanth by
descent, then coagulate it, dry it, and make it into powder.

There is great virtue in Coperas to cure Ulcers, if you take from it the
corosive faculty; which may be done thus.
Take Coperas burned to a red powder, pour upon it Rainwater, let it stand two
or three hours, then pour off the water, and set the burnt Coperas over the
fire till it be well dried, then pour some more Rainwater upon it, and do as
before; do so five or six times, till the burnt Coperas become hard and firm
like a stone, and is sweet to the taste: if you make this into a powder, and
mix it with some of the Ointments for Ulcers, you may cure therewith Syrons and
other Ulcers.

The Use and several Prepararations of Quicksilver, for the French Pox.
Quicksilver made into a red powder by the distilled water of eggs, being
oft-times distilled from the Quicksilver, is good both for wounds and Ulcers,
especially of the bladder, which are hardly cured by any other Medicines; it
cures also the deep Ulcers of the throat.

That which is commonly called Precipitate Mercury, which is done with aqua
fortis, cannot cure Ulcers, because of its eating faculty which it has by the
aqua fortis.

But this Precipitate Mercury which is done with the water of Eggs, is a
singular Medicine for Ulcers, especially the Ulcers of the French Pox.

The oil of Quicksilver is an infallible remedy, and the only remedy of the
French Pox, and of all those Ulcers which accompany the French Pox; but because
this is hardly attained to, therefore in its stead, use the red powder of
Quicksilver, which is next to it in this cure.

The Oil is made thus.
Take of the Quick silver Mine (in which the Quicksilver is not yet come to be
a perfect Quicksilver) twenty pounds; beat it, and boil it in rainwater,
until no dross or soil comes to the top; then strain it, and put the Liquor in
a distilling Vessel, distill it with a strong fire, and you shall have at last
come out a most clear Liquor, which you shall distill again in Balneo Mariae, to
take from it all waterishness; and you shall have in the bottom of the
distilling Vessel an oil as heavy as Quicksilver: Let the Patient take two
grains of it at a time, with six grains of the oil of Spike.

Another way to make the Oil of Quicksilver.
Take of Quicksilver and of Tin, of each alike, melt the Tin, and put the
Quicksilver to it, and work them well together, till the Tin become like
Quicksilver; then put to them as much Sulphur vivum, as there is of the Tin
and Quicksilver; beat it into powder, and mix it well with the Tin and Quick
silver; put them altogether in a disti ling Vessel, and distill from them an Oil
as white as milk, and as heavy as Quicksilver, which is not sharp nor
corroding; let the Patient take of this two grains at a time, with six grains
of the Oil of Spike.

Observe. That when you have taken from the Quicksilver its sharp, piercing
and eating ^aculty, and its moving or running nature, then it is fit to be
used, but not before.

Howbeit, Quicksilver as it is commonly used in suffumigations for the French
Pox* seems sometimes to do good, yet it cannoot be so used without great
danger; for the nature of the Quicksilver is so subtle, that the vapor of it
has the same operation upon our bodies, as the Quicksilver it self has.
There is nothing can be used so many ways as the Quicksilver, yet it is not
therefore the safer, as many do think.

If y^u would use the Quicksilver profi^ably in Suffumigations, you must
prepare it so, that it may have an attractive virtue. Remember this, That Quick
silver has such a nature, which may by Art be brought to have any operation,
viz to bind, to purge, to cleanse a sore, to fill it with flesh, to consume or
eat, etc. Therefore it is needful that you know how you should prepare the
Quicksilver for each kind of the French Pox.

Some Ulcers of the French Pox may be cured by sweating, some Ulcers must be
cleansed and filled with flesh, some must be, etc. Accordingly the Quick silver
must have its several preparations, for these several Operations; and if it be
not rightly prepared, it is dangerous: So when it is used in Suffumigations, if
it be not rightly prepared before, it is of the nature of Sublimats, which do
very great harm to the Body, and oft-times they do pierce to the heart, and are
deadly: Therefore if you would use it in suffumigations safely and profitably,
prepare it thus.

Take Sulphur vivum, make it into powder, and take Quicksilver and mix with
it, sublime them, and so proceed as they do in making Cinabrium; then take of
this, and of Saltpeter, of each alike, beat them together into powder, then
put a live coal into them, and fire them; then take out your Quicksilver, put
it into a long glass, which has a broad bottom and narrow top.

Set the mouth of your glass or vessel to the place where the humor makes its
passage out of the body, or where we may bring the humor out of the body most
conveniently, and hold some firecoals under the glass or vessel to heat the
Quicksilver a little, so that the vapor of it may come to that place of the
body, where we set the mouth of the glass, but you must have a care that it do
not vapor out.

In the Lotions or washings with Quicksilver used for the Ulcers of the French
Pox, Mountebanks add to it Pepper, Cardamome, Dittander, which increase the
evil qualities of the Quicksilver; they add to it also aqua vitae, or strong
water, which carries the Quicksilver to the heart, whence are Fevers and
fluxes of the Belly; whereas we use these washings with Quicksilver for this
end, viz. That the Ulcers do not increase, and therefore the venomous qualities
of the Quick silver should be taken from it, that it go no further then the
sore: which is done thus: Take Quicksilver and sublime it alone three or four
times; then mix it with the Liquor of Salt, and sublime it again three or four
times; then take the Quicksilver so sublimed, and pour a good quantity of the
Spirit of Wine upon it, and distill the Spirit of Wine off from it again; then
pour upon it more Spirit of Wine, and distill it; and thus do several times,
until you have taken from the Quick silver all its corroding or consuming
faculty: Then take this Quicksilver thus prepared, and boil it in the water of
Celandine half an hour; pour off the water from the Quicksilver, and with this
water wash the Ulcer. Having showed you the several ways of preparing
Quicksilver for the French Pox, I will conclude with this admonition: That
they who use Quicksilver in Ointments, Lotions, Suffumigations, etc. Let them
carefully consider the right time when the Patient should use it: for diseases
alter according to the times, sometimes a disease may be more easily cured then
at other times: diseases suffer no delay, and Medicines must be used in time.
Again, the Physician must have a care, that these Ointments, Washings or
Suffumigations with Quick si^ver, do not touch any sound part, but only the
place diseased, left they thereby do more harm then good.

A Plaster to cleanse Ulcers.
Whereas Physicians do oftentimes burn ulcerated places with hot Irons,
sometimes they cut off members which they think helpless, sometimes they use
eating Medicines to take away dead flesh, and the corrupt bottoms of Ulcers; in
stead of those practices, I advise you to use this one cleansing Medicine.

Take of honey one pound, of Aloepatick made into powder, a quarter of a pound,
of burned Alum quenched in Vinegar one ounce, the yolks of twenty eggs, of
Turpentine half a pound, mix them well together, and keep it for your use.

Observe. That without honey, gums, eggs, Turpentine, Lithargire, Wax, Oil, I
say* without some of those no Ulcer can be cleansed.

A plaster to be applied to a place cauterized.
When you would draw out an humor at any place, you must lay some Caust^ck
Medicine to the place, and when there are Blisters raised in the place and
broken, then apply this following attractive Medicine, viz.

Take of the apples of the Fir Tree twenty, boil them in water, until you have
boiled the gum out of them, then boil away the watet from the gum; and put to
this gum Rosin and Turpentine let them together over the fire, until they be
well mixed together.

Another.
Take of Oppopanax a half ounce, of Sagapenum, Galbanum, Ammoniacum, of each
two drams, of Bdelium six drams, dissolve these Gums in Vinegar, then strain
the Vinegar, and boil it away until the gums be almost dry; then mix with them
Rheubarb made into powder two drams, of Amber made into powder half an ounce,
and when they are all well mixed, make them into a Plaster.

This Plaster apply to the place where the skin is broken, which was raised by
the Caustic Plaster.

A sweating Medicine for the French Pox.
For those kinds of the French Pox which are cured by sweating, use this
following sweating Medicine, which is the best of any for the French Pox, Take
of Tin and Quicksilver, of each alike, melt your Tin, and when it begins to
cool and harde^, pour your Quick silver upon it, that they may be mixed; or put
Quicksilver to thin plates of Tin, let them stand together two or three days,
till the Tin have drank in as much of the Quicksilver as it can, then let the
Tin stand till the Quicksilver be dried in it, then let it drink in some more
Quicksilver, and let it dry; do thus three or four times, then beat it into
fine powder: If there be an ounce of this powder, put it in a Gold Poringer,
set the Poringer in good Wine-vinegar up almost to the brims; then fill the
Poringer with the Spirit of Wine, let it stand so four or five days, then
kindle the Spirit of Wine with a piece of burning Paper, and keep it burning
so, until the Quicksilver and Tin are changed to an oil in the Spirit of Wine;
of this oil let the Patient take one grain at a time, in a draught of the best
wine warmed, and let him keep himself well covered in his bed until he sweat.

A Treatise of Ulcers: SECTION III. Wherein are described the Tinctures, which
are Catholic Medicines for all kind of Ulcers.
THe diligence of wise men in former times, was great, in searching out the
causes and preservatives of long Life, the natures and uses of all kinds of
remedies, therefore they were called, The students of Wisdom; but they knew not
the right way of preparing Medicines, they learned this from the Alchymist: So
they and the Alchymist together, have discovered many excellent Medicines, the
chief of which are the Tinctures; but these Tinctures have been much abused by
Gold Smiths, and those who thought to change Metals into Gold with them: and I
have showed in some other of my writings how much may be done by them,
therefore I will not here speak any thing of it.

In former times they made Tinctures, whereby they colored Metals and purged
them; and afterward they used these Tinctures as Medicines for the bodies of
men: what great virtues are in these Tinctures, are declared in the Books of
Ancient Writers, which have long time been kept hidden by false Physicians, but
I will publish them; for I have had the experience of them, and I know they
have a wonderful faculty in cleansing the blood.

And because I now write concerning the cure of Ulcers, I conceive it fitting
that I show you whence I have had these my remedies; and I confess, that I have
learned them in the School of Chemistry. But because many errors have crept
into this Art of Chemistry, partly through ignorance, and partly through the
envy of Chemists; whereby those who followed the practice of Chemistry, being
much seduced, they were forced to seek new ways, and so of themselves they
found out many things, some profitable, and some hurtful: Therefore I have
endeavored to reform this Art of Chemistry, and leaving those things which are
hurtful or unprofitable, I discover only such things which are useful and good
for the Body of Man.

This task I am able to perform so much the more happily, in regard my first
studies were in this way of Chemistry, in which I took great delight, and
followed it with great diligence under excellent Masters, who were most skilful
in secret Philosophy: My Masters were first, William of Hohenheim, my careful
and loving Father, and many others, who hid nothing from me which they knew;
and besides, I was much helped by the Books of learned men, viz. Bishop
Setgaius, Erhradus Laventalius, Bishop Nicolaus Hipponensis, Trithemius, Abbot
of Spanheim, and other most learned and experienced Chemists.

I have had also many Experiments from several Chemists, and of those I will
now name only the most noble Sigismundus, Fueger, Schwatzensis, who
maintains many servants in the practice of Chemistry, at great charges, and
has enriched the Art of Chemistry with many Experiments.

To conclude, I conceive that I may very well undertake this talk, Of reforming
Chemistry and Physic; considering my knowledge in Philosophy, and my skill of
Chemistry and Physic: And here I will give you some taste of my skill in the
following Tinctures.

The Simples out of which the Tinctures are extracted are these, viz. Gold,
Quicksilver, Antimony, the Philosophers Salt, Balsom, red Corals, Mummy,
Baulm, Celandine, Valerian, Germander, Succory, Swallow wort. And beginning
with Gold, I will briefly and Methodically teach you the way to extract the
Tinctures out of these Simples. The Ancient Chemists who writ Fables more then
serious matters; if they had eased us of this labor, we should have been very
thankful to them; but seeing they have failed us, I will make up this defect.

The Tincture of Gold.
The Tincture of Gold, is the purest part of the Gold, wherein all its color
is contained, and this being extracted, there remains the white body of Gold;
this colored part of the Gold differs much from the white Body, as the pure
from the impure, and therefore they must be separated; or else you do nothing.

When you have extracted the colored part, you must exalt it to the highest
degree; and whereas the color in Gold may be exalted to the twenty fourth
degree, the Tincture extracted must be exalted ten times more, and no further.

This Tincture has a wonderful virtue in cleansing, renewing and restoring the
Blood, not only in the part disea^ed, but also throughout the whole Body; how
much of this Tincture you must take at a time, you shall hear afterward: I
will now show you how you must extract it.

First, melt your Gold with Antimony, that it may be well purged by the
Antimony, according to the usual way: Take this Gold, and dissolve it in the
distilled water of common Salt, this water of Salt must be made thus.

Take of the best white Salt made by the Sun, and melt it in a very hot fire
(as Brass or Silver, etc. is melted) several times: Then make it into powder,
and mix it with the juice of Radishes; and when the Salt is dissolved in the
juice, distill them together; then take the water which you have distilled off
from them, and mix it with the juice of Bloodwort, of each alike, and distill
them together; take the water which you have distilled off from them, and pour
it again to the grounds remaining, distill it again, and so you must do five
times. Then take of the water of the first distillation, and in this dissolve
your Gold; when your Gold is dissolved, put a little of the Spirit of Tartar
into this water of Salt, to make the Gold powder fall to the bottom, then pour
off this water of Salt from the Gold powder, and wash your Gold powder with
common Water distilled, until all the Spirit of Salt be well washed from it.
Then take this Gold powder, and put it in the Spirit of Wine, which must be
made thus.

Take of the best wine, and put it in a Circulatory Vessel, which must be very
well closed up, so that no vapor can get out; fill the third part of your
circulatory vessel with the Wine, and leave two parts empty; and how much of
the circulatory vessel is filled with the Wine, so much of it must be set in
Balneo Maria, the space of ten days; then put it in a distilling vessel and
distill it, and that which comes out first is the Spirit of Wine, the rest is
only sublimed Wine: Put your Gold powder, after it is washed, with the
distilled common water, into this Spirit of Wine, so much of it, as that it may
be a hands breadth above the Gold powder; put them together in a circulatory
Vessel, which must be set in Balneo Maria the space of a Month; then you will
find the Tincture of the Gold mixed with the Spirit of Wine, and the Gold
powder in the bottom white as silver; take out this powder when it is melted,
it is like Silver: separate the Spirit of Wine from the Tincture, in Balneo
Mariae, you shall have the gold Tincture in the bottom of this distilling
Vessel. This Tincture you must put in a Circulatory Vessel, and circulate it
alone some time.

The Tincture of Red Coral^
The Tincture of red Corals, which is the purest part of the Corals, containing
all the red color of the Corals in it: It has such a secret faculty in
purging the Blood, that he who knows the right use of it, has a great secret
for the preventing and curing of the Leprosy; it will not suffer any Ulcer to
breed in the body, and it purges all the Blood in the Veins most excellently.

Let the Physician remember this, that he should extract Tinctures out of such
things which excel in color, for they have the greatest virtue for cleansing
the Blood.

In extracting the Tincture of Corals, you must proceed in the same manner, as
you extract the Tincture of Gold; and when you have drawn off the Spirit of
Wine from the Tincture, then you must distill the Tincture alone sixteen times
in the open fire; And lastly, you must distill it in Balneo Mariae six times,
that the Tincture may be well purged from all impurities. When you use this
Tincture, take a scruple of it in a dram of Treacle water.

The Treacle water is made thus: Take of the Spirit of Wine five ounces, of
good Treacle two ounces and a half, of red Roman Myrrh, one ounce and two
drams, of Oriental Saffron two drams; put them altogether in a distilling
Vessel, and distill them.

The Tincture of the Corals being taken with this water, will thoroughly cure
all Fistula's, Cancers, etc. or any Ulcer whatsoever.

The Tincture of Balsom.
It falls out oft-times, that Ulcers which have continued a long time, or
have been badly cured, they come to be of the nature of a Leprosy, so that
they cannot be helped by any Medicine, because of their great putrefaction; in
such a case only the Tincture of Balsom can do good, which only can cure such
kind of Ulcers, and it is the best for all eating of Ulcers.

The Tincture is extracted thus.
Take of Balsom an ounce and a half, of the Spirit of Wine one pound and a
half, and two ounces, put them into a circulatory Vessel, and circulate them
the space of a Month, then put them in a distilling Vessel and distill them:
Take that which you have distilled, and mix with it another half ounce of
Balsom, and circulate them together some time; distill them again, then add
another half ounce of Balsom to that which you have distilled, and thus you
must do four times.

This Tincture of Balsom has such a piercing faculty, that there is not any
part of the body but it will search into it; there is not any disease or
corruption of the body, but it will cure it.

The Tincture of Antimony.
Antimony destroys all other Metals except Gold: It purges Gold perfectly
and takes away all its Impurities: after the same manner it purges the body of
man, and consumes all impurities and corruptions in the body, being rightly
prepared; therefore the greatest Chemists and Physicians have labored much in
Antimony, but in vain before our times; and now by my industry it is rightly
and fully prepared.

The Tincture is extracted thus: Take Antimony made into fine powder, put it in
a close Reverberatory the space of a Month, until it become volatile, and it
will be first white, then clay-coloured, then red, and at last Purple-coloured;
then take it out, and put it in the Spirit of W^ne, so much, as it be twenty
fingers breadth above the Antimony, circulate them together the space of a
mon^th; then separate the Spirit of Wine from the Tincture, and so you have the
precious Tincture of Antimony.

The Philosophers Salt.
The Philosophers salt. Take of the Salt of Gold, the salt of Antimony, the
salt of Balm, of each half an ounce; of common salt eight ounces; make them
into a powder, and mix them together. The Patient must take a little of these
Salts strowed upon a piece of tosted bread every morning.

Another.
Take of the Salt of Germander, the Salt of Succory, the salt of Valerian, of
each one ounce, of the salt of Wormwood two drams, of the salt of Coperas one
dram, of common salt one pound, make them into a powder and mix them.

These Salts the Patient may take with his meat, and howbeit the operation of
these salts is not so quick, as the operation of the Tinctures; yet they will
undoubtedly root out any Ulcer in the Body, whether Cancer, Fistula, etc.

The Use of the Tinctures.
The use of the Tincture of gold.
Take a dram of this Tincture of Gold, and mix it with an ounce of the best
Treacle; of this mixture let the Patient take one scruple fasting; then keep
himself warm in his bed till he sweat; this will drive out the hurtful humors
of the body at the Ulcer, by sweating and otherwise, so as you may plainly see
the operation of this Tincture in the Ulcer it self: And when the Ulcer grows
dry, so that no more humor comes out of the Ulcer, which uses to be at the
tenth or twelfth day, then you may easily perfect the cure, if you keep at the
Ulcer a stictick Plaster.

The use of the Tincture of Corals.
Take of the Tincture of Corals one ounce and a half, and mix it with ten
ounces of the water of Germander, or the water of Succory: Let the Patient take
two drams of this mixture five hours before dinner, or five hours after Supper,
the space of six or seven days: in the mean time he must use meats of easy
digestion, and he must drink very little; he must take no other drink but the
water of Succory, or the water of Fumitory, so long as he takes of the
Tincture: And when the humor has flowed abundantly out of the Ulcer, and the
Ulcer dries and has no pain, then the patient must take no more of the
Tincture.

The use of the Tincture of Balsom.
The Patient may take the Tincture of Balsom alone, five grains of it at a
time, or he may take it in good old white Wine twice a day, after meat, and
continue it so until the Ulcer be quite dried up.

Apply outwardly upon the Ulcer some ordinary stictick Plaster, until the cure
be perfected.

The use of the Tincture of Antimony.
In Vintage time take new Wine, and put half an ounce of the Tincture of
Antimony to twenty quarts of it; and when the Wine is well settled, then use it.

Let the Patient drink of this, and no other, the space of a month, and he
shall find wonderful virtue in this drink for cleansing or closing up of
Ulcers or Wounds; and let some ordinary Stictick plaster be applied to the
sore.

This one Potion is better then all the Receipts, Compositions, Potions, etc.
which are used for Ulcers or Wounds.

I will now conclude this Treatise of Tinctures, giving this counsel in two
words, for the preserving of those from Ulcers, who are or have been much
inclined to them.

Once every year, in the Spring time, when the Sun enters into the first degree
of Aries (which falls upon the the eleventh day of March) let them take one of
these Tinctures, in that manner which has been showed in the use of the
Tinctures.

A Treatise of Aposthumes, with their Cures.
I.
IF any of the large veins be swelled, and the swelling is of a blew or
Lead-colour, with a burning heat in it, and much redness round it, and a white
head in the middle of it; the Patient in the beginning of the swelling was
aguish, having sometimes a great heat, sometimes a chilness over his body; he
cannot sleep, and when he sleeps he is very disquiet, and much troubled with
terrible dreams.

At last, this swelling seems to strike inward, divides it self into two
swellings, then follows great inflammation, and stitches in the sides; the lips
are chopped, the Patient has a great thirst, yet he cannot drink much; These
are certain signs of death.

Cure.
The Patient must first be sweated with this Potion: Take of the corrected
Spirit of wine ten ounces, of Treacle half an ounce, of red Myrrh, and of
Saffron, of each an ounce, of the liquor of Ginger, and of Pepper, of each half
a dram, mix them together; of this mixture let the Patient take half an ounce
in a draught of good wine, and keep himself warm till he be well sweated: then
you must take a Saphyre stone, and draw it round the swelling; this will make a
scurf to come upon the swelling, which you may take off with Saller oil or
f^esh Butter; then apply some consolidating plaster, as the stictick plaster,
etc. until the cure be perfected.

Observe. The Chyrurgion must not cut this Apostume, he must not lay Realgare,
or any other Cautery to it.

II.
The Cancer is a red swelling, which is in the breasts of Women; but in men it
is betwixt their shoulders: When it comes to be ripe, it breaks out into a
stinking Ulcer, which has great redness round it, with a burning heat and
continual pain, and oft-times brings the Patient into aguish fits.

At last, It eats into the heart, and causes sudden death.

Cure.
Whereas the cause of the Cancer in men, is the Haemorrhoide humors; in women
it is their Monthly courses, which leaving their right course, they flow to
this place, where they cause the Cancer; therefore we must begin the cure of
the Cancer, with changing the course of the humor, turning it to its proper
passage, viz. thus; To bring down the Haemorrhoide humor in men to the
Fundament, and to bring down the monthly courses in women.

Then you must mortify the Ulcer with this, viz. Take Frog-spawn, and of the
juice of Nightshade, of each an ounce, of varnish half an ounce, and make them
into an Ointment; if you anoint the sore with this three or four times, it will
take away the pain.

Or take of Fish-spawn a pound, after you have turned it into water, of the red
powder of burned Coperas and of the flower of Brass, of each one ounce, and a
half; mix them, and apply them to the Soar until it putrify, which will be in
four days space: Then take this from the Soar, and apply a cleansing Medicine
to it, viz. this: Take of Pitch, of Pine-Rosin, of common Rosin, of each a
pound, of the best Turpentine one pound and a half, of the common Turpentine a
quarter of a pound; melt them together, and put to them so much of Wax and
Sallet oil, as will make them up into a Plaster. This Plaster you must lay to
the Ulcer so often, until their comes no corruption out of it: Afterward strew
this powder upon the Ulcer, viz. Take the powder of the dried juice of
Celandine, of the dried juice of Feverfew, and of Centory, of each half an
ounce, of Mummy one ounce. These powders mixed together, must be strowed upon
the Soar morning and evening.

III.
The noli me Tangere begins in the sace with small pointed Pustuls, which break
out into a waterish scab, afterward it comes to be an eating stinking Sore, it
eats up the flesh of the face, viz. the Cheeks, and Lips, and eats into the
nose.

At last, If it be not cured, it eats nose, ears, etc. it quite deforms the
face; then it eats into the throat, and goes downwards to the neck; and when
it is past the face, it is deadly.

Cure.
If the Noli me tangere be not far gone, it may be cured by this Plaster: Take
of Rosin one pound, of Barley-meal six ounces, of Pine-Rosin eight ounces, mix
them, and make them into a Plaster; but if it be old and far gone, then we
must use first a mortifying Medicine, then a cleansing Medicine, then a
consolidating Medicine, or a Medicine to fill up with flesh.

The mortifying Medicine
Take of Crystalline Realgare one ounce, boil it vinegar two hours, until the
vinegar be consumed; then add to it three ounces of the oil of Marjoram, of
Firr-tree-Rosin half a pound, viz. That Rosin which is boiled out of the green
Fruit of the Firr-tree in water: Mix them together over the fire, and apply
them to the soar; you must often wet it outwardly with the oil, lest it grow
dry and hard, let it lie at the soar two days, then take it off, and apply to
the soar the cleansing Medicine described before in the cure of the Cancer.

And when it is cleansed, then apply this consolidating or fleshing Medicine.
viz. Take of Wax and Pitch, of each half a pound, of the powder of Birth-wort
three ounces, the powder of Mummy two ounces, the powder of Antimony four
ounces; melt your Wax and Pitch together, and put into them your powders; make
a Plaster, which you must lay to the Soar morning and evening.

Another consolidating Medicine.
Take of Rosin half a pound, of the dried juice of Comfrey a quarter of a
pound, of the dried juice of Celandine a quarter of a pound; mix them over the
fire, and make a plaster: But the cure of Noli me Tangere, depends chiefly
upon the mortifying and cleansing the soar.

IV.
When there is a redness; and an exceeding pain and burning heat in the leg;
afterward it swells, and breaks out into many foul corrupt holes, sometimes
dry, and sometimes issuing forth a yellow or clear waterish humor, like the
Cancer, or Noli me tangere.

At last, It weakens the principal parts, viz. Head, Heart, Stomach, Liver,
etc. the face comes to be discolored, and then death approaches.

Cure.
First, we must apply a defensive above the knee, to keep back the humors that
they fall not down to the soar; then we must mortify the Soar. Lastly, we must
consolidate it, or fill it up with flesh.

The defensive.
Take of salt Anatron one ounce, of an Anodine half an ounce; make them into an
Ointment with the Oil of Spike. The Anodyne is made thus: Take of Frog-spawn,
and of the juice of Nightshade, of each an ounce, of Varnish half an ounce, mix
them together.

Then apply to the soar this mortifying Medicine, viz. Take Parmacity,
Frog-spawn, of Cherv^l, of Juniper Berries, of each alike, let them stand in
the Sun some time; then use them: This must be applied once a day the space of
three weeks; afterward wash the soar oft-times with the water of Oak leaves,
or Salt Water: By this Medicine the soar is mortifyed, and the pain is taken
away, and now you must apply the Oppodeltoch Plaster, or Stictick Plaster
(described in the Treatise of Wounds, in the first Chapter) until the cure be
perfected,

V.
A Fistula is an Ulcer which has one or more small holes outwardly, but within
it is hollow and deep; it uses to be near the joints, or places of evacuation,
or where some wound thrust or bruise etc. has been badly cured: This Soar
issues forth a water or froth at the small holes, and purges twelve hours;
this kind of soar is not painful.

If it be not cured by Medicines, it will never be well of it self, yet it does
not cause death, but continues still the same so long as the Patient lives.

Cure.
First, let the Patient take this Potion: Take of the water of Sow-bread, and
of the water of the leaves of small Sea-Buck-horn, of the water of middle
Consound, of each four ounces; mix them, and take four ounces of this at a
draught morning and evening, until the cure be done.

Another Potion.
Take of the water of Hartshorn one pound, of Centory, golden Consound,
Feverfew, of each six ounces, of Rheubarb, choice Manna, Parmacity, of each an
ounce; Mix them well, and of this mixture take one spoonful every Morning, and
after it take three spoonfuls of Wine: By this Potion the Fistula shall be
cleansed inwardly; yea, this Potion alone will cure it, that you need not apply
any Medicine outwardly to the Soar, yet you may apply this following Plaster.

Take of these four Gums, viz. Oppoponax, Bdelium, Ammoniacum, Galbanum, of
each two ounces, of Wax six ounces; melt them together, and add to them three
ounces of Turpentine: Make a Plaster.

VI.
When there is a firm hard tumor which lies amongst the Muscles, and has a
burning heat which strikes into the bone, and it breeds many hard knotty lumps
within the flesh; its never changed into an Ulcer, neither does it consume the
flesh, but continues in one manner thirty or forty years, yea, so long as the
Patient lives.

But if the Patient falls into some accute disease, or shall have a
Carbuncle, then the Wolf becomes deadly.

Cure.
First, you must use cooling Medicines, then Mucilaginous Medicines, to
dissolve the hard knotty lumps; then apply the Plaster Oppodeltoch.

To cool it, you may use the Anodyne, or mortifying Medicine, before described
in the cure of Herysipelas.

The Mucilaginous Medicine.
Take the liquor of Mummy, of Mastick, and Camphire, of each half an ounce, the
Mucilage of Fenugreek, the Mucilage of Flea-wort, and the Mucilage of Quinces,
of each alike, so much as you think fit to make the Plaster; this Plaster you
may use in stead of the Oppodeltoch Plaster.

There are also other remedies whereby the Wolf may be cured, as these
following.

Take of Crystaline Realgare one ounce, of burning oil two ounces, of white
lead two drams; make an Ointment, with this anoint round the Wolf, but not upon
it, once in twelve hours; do so six or eight days, then leave, and that about
which you anointed, will fall off: Afterward you must wash the place evening
and morning, with this following water, viz. Rose water, the water of
Fishspawn, of each six ounces, the water of Feverfew five ounces, mix them.

Then apply this Plaster, viz. Take of Lin-seed oil half a pound, of viride
ae^is, and wax, of each a quarter of a pound, of Bdelium two ounces: make a
Plaster.

VII.
The Malum mortuum, or dead evil, begins at the feet, and goes upward, it
makes the skin to be without feeling.

And at last, It comes to be a running soar, and so continues twenty years,
afterward it turns to a Leprosy.

Cure.
We must begin the cure with a Cautery, to take away the dead skin; then we
must anoint the place where this evil has spread it self, the space of three
months, with the oil of Pepper.

The Cautery is made thus.
Take of Brimstone four ounces, melt it, put to it three ounces of
Frankincense, and of Rosin seven ounces, the oil of Colophonia, and the oil of
Amber, of each four ounces; set them over the fire, that they may mix together;
and with this, being warm, anoint the place twelve times in a day, and in three
days the dead skin will break and come off.

VIII.
When certain spots appear in the skin, sometimes removing from place to place,
sometimes they are fixed in one place; some are of a reddish color, some of a
clay color, sometimes they are of a yellow color.

At last, It spreads it self over the whole body, and breaks out into small
blisters, which grow hard and crusty, then they chop, and at last they turn to
Ulcers.

Cure.
First, The Blood must be purged, then we must use the Cautery described before
in the cure of the Malum Mortuum. Lastly, the cure must be perfected with
Plantain.

The Medicine to purge the Blood.
Take the juice of Succory, the juice of Germander, of each one pound, of the
juice of Maidenhair half a pound, of Manna two ounces, of the true Spirit of
Coperas (described in the Treatise of Coperas) one dram* Mix them, and distill
an oil from them, of this oil take at a time in a draught of Wine, one or two,
or three drams, as the Physician shall appoint.

IX.
When the face is first of a yellow color, then turns to be of a red color,
and every day grows more and more red, without Pimples or Itch, so that both
skin and flesh come to be of a Scarlet color.

At last, the skin and flesh do putrify with a sharp smart humor.

Cure.
Take the whites of ten boiled Eggs, and of the burned shells of Eggs six
ounces; distill a water from them, then take Silver, Tin, Lead, Copper, beaten
into very thin leaves, of each one dram; the leaves of Gold, Silver Marchasite,
and Gold Marchasite, of each two drams; put them in a Glass, and set the Glass
in warm dung a month; then distill an oil from them, with this oil anoint the
place.

X.
When the face has had a very red color, or has had the gu^ta r^sacea, and
changes from that to another color, viz. a blackish or lead color, with a
little swelling, and breaks out into waterish Blisters and Wens.

At last, The face begins to putrify, and to have a black scurf over it; then
the Morphew is incurable.

Cure.
We must use first one of the Tinctures for cleansing the blood; then use one
of the cleansing Medicines before described; and then some consolidating
Medicine of Glandules.

XI.
When there are Flesh-kernels within the flesh, be they fixed or moveable, soft
or hard, painful or without pain; in time they grow so big, that they draw to
them the strength and substance of the member where they are.

And at last, they putrify.

Cure.
A thread of Plum-allum, dipped in the oil of Gilla applied to it, does take it
away, afterward anoint the place with the Oil of Gilla, and this will
consolidate it.

XII.
When a blister rises in any part of the body, as big as a Gall-nut (like
those Blisters which are raised by Caust^cks) and is of a blew or lead color,
hard to the touch.

At last, It putrifieth; and if it be near the eye, it begets a Fistula, it
daily grows more and more deformed, and multiplyeth; it makes the Patient
hoarse, and takes away the natural color of the Body, and so it comes to be a
Leprosy.

Cure.
First, Nature must be corrected and strengthened by the Liquor or Tincture of
Gold, then the Blisters must be dried up with this following ointment.

Take of Aqua fortis, in which there is some salt Armoniack dissolved, one
ounce, the oil of Realgare half an ounce, the oil of Euphorbium one ounce; mix
them, and anoint the Blisters with them.

XIII.
If the head being rubbed, bleedeth, and this breeds a hard crusty scab, out
of which comes a yellow water; if it be not timously cured, it spreads over
all the head: Then there will be daily a bleeding, with a sharp and great pain;
this scab never has holes in it, it continues with the Patient, if he be not
cured of it, until death.

Cure.
There are three kinds of remedies used for this Scab, viz. a Pitch plaster,
a Corrosive or eating Water, and the Oil of Gilia.

The Pitch Plaster.
Take of Pitch dr Shoo-makers Wax a pound, of Colophony half a pound, of
prepared Cheese, half a pound, that is, dried and made into powder; mix them:
First, melt the Pitch and Colophony together, then put the rest to them; when
they are cold; make them into a plaster, some do add to them a pound of Wax;
this Plaster will bring off the Scab and Skin together: Afterward anoint the
head with the Ointment of white Lead, and this will bring a fair skin upon the
head again; some take old Cheese which is very blew, and they wash off the
blewness with water: Then they take this blewness which was washed from the
Cheese, and lies in the bottom of the water, and they lay it upon the Scab:
This will cure the scab for the present, but it is not a perfect cure; for I
have seen this scab thus cured, return within two or three years after.

Some do use for this Scab, eating corrosive waters and burned Tartare, but I
do not approve Of this, for these Corrosives do eat into the skull, and cause
madness, and oft-times death.

They who use the Oil of Gilla for this Scab, do thus: After they have
anointed the Scab, with this oil, then they anoint it with Sallet oil
oft-times together; because the oil of Gilla burns exceedingly, and is very
painful to the Patient; and the Sallet oil does assuage the pain, for it
abateth the burning heat of the Gilla.

They anoint the Scab with this oil of Gilla nine days together, and after the
ninth day the Scab comes off; and under the Scab the head is already well
skinned.

XIV.
When in the Lips of the mouth there is a small excrescency, which is at first
like a Wart: This, if it bleed of it self, or if it be cut, then there grows
out thence a spungious flesh which grows daily bigger And at last, it becomes
so big, that it stops up the mouth, that the Patient cannot eat, afterward it
causes madness.

Cure.
We must stop the end of the Vein whih brings blood to this Excrescency, or
we must turn the course of the Vein; then we must anoint about this Excrescency
with this Ointment: Take prepared Realgate, and mix it with the juice of
Celandine, and make a Plaster.

XV.
When there is a continual pain in the Leg, with a shining redness over all the
Leg, this is a Gangrene; it continues thus thirty, years, before it break out
into an Ulcer. At last, when nature decays it turns to an Ulcer a little
before death.

Cure.
Take the juice of Water-lilies, the juice of Nightshade, the juice of Darnel,
of each two ounces, Wheat-Poppy three ounces, of Opium fifteen ounces, of
Mandrake three drams, the juice of the outward part of the root of Henbane,
five ounces; mix them, and make them into an Ointment with the oil of
Lithargire.

With this anoint the soar; you must also apply the Anodyne, or pain-asswaging
Medicine, which you have described in the cure of the Cancer.

You may also use that Medicine which I have described for the cure of the Noli
me Tangere, viz. Of Rosm a pound, of Barley meal six ounces; of common
Frankincense eight ounces; make a plaster, and to one pound of this plaster
add half an ounce of Scammony, for Scammony has a peculiar virtue very
helpful for open burning Soars.

XVI.
When at the roots of the nails of the fingers there is a great pain, with a
swelling and burning heat, like the burning of fire, and a pain like the
gnawing of a Worm; this is a Whitflaw, which if it be not cured, it will at
last perish the whole Finger, with great and long pain.

Cure.
Some do cure it with certain Words and Characters, which I do not approve: The
remedy which I use for to cure it, is that Anodyne or Pain-asswaging Medicine,
described in the cure of the Cancer, or that described in the cure of
Herysipeles; viz. Take Parmacity, of Frogspawn, Chervil, Juniper Berries, of
each alike; apply this to the finger, and it will take away the pain.

Or take Hogs dung and boil it in Vinegar, and apply to the soar.

XVII.
When there is great redness and swelling in the heel, or about the ancle,
which turns to a broad soar, with many holes in it, and spreads it self
upwards toward the knee; it does not go deep, but stays in the upper part of
the flesh, it stays under the knee; it continues twenty years much after
one, without any great change.

Cure.
First, we must apply the pain-asswaging Medicine, which we use for the
Whitflaw; then apply this following Plaster of Myrrh.

Take the Oil of the yolks of Eggs two ounces, of Wax half an ounce, of
Colophony three ounces, of red Myrrh five ounces and a half; mix them, and
make a Plaster.

XVIII.
When there are knotty hard tumors in the neck, lying within the flesh; this is
the Kings Evil, which continues with the Patient until death, still in the
same manner without any change; unless the tumor has been big, and it begins
to lessen, then death approaches, this is a sign of it.

Cure.
The cure is twofold, viz. Physical and Chyrurgical: The Physical cure is done
with Powders and Potions: The Chyrurgical cure is done by actual Cauteries, etc.

XIX.
This Polypus is superfluous flesh growing out of the Nose, which when it is
grown big, and great abundance of Blood flows out of the Veins into it; then
this superfluous flesh breaks out into an Ulcer, it turns to a Noli me
Tangere.

Cure.
It must be cured after the same manner as the Alcola; an when you have taken
away the superfluous flesh then you must apply the Plaster Oppodeltoch.

XX.
The Pyles come out about the Fundament of a red color, but if the Blood come
out with the Excrements, always when we go to stool, and the Excrements come
out with great difficulty and trouble to us, and we are much pained within,
then the Haemorrhoids are within.

If the Haemorrhoides continue twenty years, then they commonly turn to a
Cancer; and if they do not turn to a Cancer, but the Piles multiply and grow
bigger, then they close up the Fundament at last.

Cure.
The cure is done by two kinds of Medicine, viz. Dung-Medicine, and a
Sweet-Corrosive.

The Swet-Corrosive.
Take of Oleum laterinum, or Brick oil, one ounce, the oil of Juniper half an
ounce, the oil of Myrrh two ounces, mix them.

The Dung Medicine.
Take the Patients own Excrements, and mix them with the oil of the yolks of
Eggs; first, let the Patient press the Piles as much as he can, and then apply
to them this Excrementitious Medicine.

XXI.
There is a dry scab of the Head, out of which comes very little moisture,
when it is rubbed there falls from it like Scabs; it causes the hair of the
head to come out: If it continue sixteen, or twenty four years, then it
spreads over all the Body.

At last, this scaly Scab falls off, and then follows a Leprosy.

Cure.
Take Succory, Germander, Maidenhair, of each two ounces, of the Pulpe of
Cassia half an ounce, of the best Manna one ounce and a half, put them into a
pint and a half of the water of Mugwort, let them ly in it a day; then set them
over a slow fire, until you bring it to a pint, then strain it and drink it
warm.

XXII.
If there be a swelling in the Groine near the privities with redness, the
Patient faints, and begins to lose his strength, and is troubled with
Aguish fits; sometimes with great heat, sometimes with chilness: By this you
may know it to be a Pestilential Aposthume.

Cure.
First, This Aposthume must be opened with a ripening Medicine proper for it;
afterward apply to it the Oppodeltoch Plaster.

The Ripening Medicine.
Take of the four Gums, viz. Galbanum, Ammoniacum, Oppoponax, Bdelium, of each
a half ounce; of the juice of Marshmallows, of each three ounces, mix them,
and make a Plaster.

The Oppodeltoch Plaster.
Take of the four incarnative Seeds, viz. of Birth-wort, Comfrey, Adders-Tongue
and Sea-marsh Bugloss, of each half an ounce; Wax and Colophony, of each two
ounces, of Pitch three ounces; mix them, and make a Plaster.

XXIII.
If after the act of Venery there follows a swelling in the Grine, with great
heat; afterward this swelling breaks out into foul corrupt holes, and with the
Urine also corrupt matter is evacuated.

At last, this Ulcer comes to be an eating Ulcer, that whereas there were many
holes before, now they all become one hole, and so it eats all the flesh round.

Cure.
This Ulcer is cured with these two, viz. the Camphorated Ointment, and the
Plaster of Mummy.

The Camphorated Ointment.
Take of Camphire two drams, of the yolks of Eggs four ounces; mix them, and
set them in some moist place, or low Cellar, etc. and they will turn to an Oil,
with this Oil anoint the Soar.

The Plaster of Mummy.
Take of Mummy half an ounce, of the best Turpentine (washed with Rosewater) so
much as is requisite to make a Plaster; Mix them, and make a Plaster.

XXIV.
When the Veins of the Legs swell, and become as it were knotty, having many
small hard lumps like small Bullets in them; they lose their natural color,
and are of blew or lead color, or of a dark green color; the skin of the Leg
appears as if it were blowed up with wind, yet the flesh under it is firm and
sound.

At last, The skin breaks out into a most filthy, stinking soar; and if then
the Patient be troubled with stitches in his side, this is a sign of death.

Cure.
You must not use any Corrosive Waters, or Baths, or Purgations, or Mercury
Ointments, such as are used for the Pox, etc. but open a Vein, first one, and
then another at another time; once a year, if the swelling comes but once a
year; and if the swelling comes twice a year, then the Veins must be opened
twice a year, at the same time when the swelling uses to come; and when you
open a Vein, you must lay to the place the gums of a Hare, or the fat of a man
the space of three weeks.

XXV.
When there is a swelling under the tongue, with a blew or Lead-colour, and it
grows to be an Imposthume, it is deadly in Infants; or if do not come to be
an Aposthume, yet it will cause a great impediment in the speech of the Infant.

Cure.
Let blood in these Veins, then wash the childs mouth often with the Waters of
Agrimony, Ladies-Mantle, Sanicle; or anoint the Veins under the Tongue with the
Oil of St. John's Wort, or the Oil of the Flowers of Centory: If after the cure
the swelling comes again, you must do the ^ame as you did before.

XXVI.
If a Woman with Child, or after Childe-birth, complain of a pain, swelling,
redness, and hardness in her Breasts, which afterward turns to an Ulcer and
Putrefaction.

Cure.
Take Gum Oppopanax, and Gum Bdelium, of each one ounce, of gum Serapinam two
ounces, dissolve them in so much vinegar, as being dissolved, they may be of
the thickness of honey; then add to them one dram of Mummy, and of Birth-wort
three drams, of the Liquor of Chachymia four ounces and a hall; mix them, and
make a plaster.

XXVII.
If in a fleshy place there are Risings with a yellow head, and a burning heat,
and a swelling, and then suddenly they grow exceeding red, and breaks into
several holes; which after three or four years turn to a blue color, mixed
with a black, with a vehement burning heat, and under the skin it is hollow,
and so it continues until death.

Cure.
We must first use an eating Medicine, and afterward a Consolidating or
fleshing Medicine.

The Eating Medicine.
Take of white Coper as one ounce, of Rose Water three ounces, of Lithargire
half an ounce; Mix them with the oil of Roses; in this mixture dip a linen
cloth, which you must lay upon the holes.

The consolidating Medicine.
Take of Royal Consound half a pound, of long Birth wort three ounces, of
Myrrh half an ounce, of Mummy two ounces; make them into a powder, and mix
them with so much of the oil of Roses, as is sufficient to make them into a
Plaster.

A Caveat.
You must not apply to this Soar, Pitch, hot Oils, Birth-wort, Viride aris,
Arsnick, salt Armoniack, precipitated Mercury, Orpment, burnt Alum, or any
drawing herb.

XXVIII.
Swelling of the Veins.
If a Vein be swelled, and this Vein breaks into stinking holes, with a
putrefaction of the skin and flesh, this is a hollow Ulcer.

At last, If not cured, it turns to a Saint Antonies fire.

Cure.
We must not cure this Aposthume in the same manner, as has been said before in
the cure of the swelling of a Vein, viz. You must open a Vein, etc. and when
you open the Vein, apply this following Plaster.

Take of Lithargire, and red Lead, of each half a pound, of Sallet Oil one
pound, of Wax half a pound, add to them these powders, viz. of Orange-skins,
of Celandine, round Birth-wort, of each three ounces; being all mixed together,
make them into a Plaster.

A Caveat.
You must not apply to this Soar any Corrosive Water, or Canteries, or drawing
Medicines made of Gums; for if they be used, they will change it to a St.
Anthonys Fire.

XXIX.
If in men there be Pustules betwixt the shoulders; or in the breasts of Women,
which become hard like Warts, they come from the stopping of the Haemorrhoides
in men, and from the stopping of the Monthly courses in women; they grow big
sometimes within the skin, sometimes without the skin, accordingly as the humor
flows to them.

At last, they break out into a running soar, which draws to it the substance
of the Body, and continues during lifetime.

Cure.
First, If it be in a man, you must bring out the Piles; if it be in a Woman,
you must bring down their courses, then you must proceed in the rest of the
cure the same way as in Noli me Tangere.

A Medicine to bring down the Monthly courses in women.
Take the Liquor of Pennyroyal, and of Mugwort, of each three ounces, of the
corrected Spirit of Wine, seven ounces, the liquor of the milt of an Ox one
ounce; mix them, and take half an ounce of them in a draught of Wine or Beer,
every morning and evening.

You may add to this Composition some Saven-water, and some of the oil made of
the grains of Saven.

A Medicine to bring out the Haemorrhoides.
Take of clean gum Sagapenum half an ounce, of Bdelium and Mastick, of each one
ounce; make them into a Plaster, which you must apply to the place of the
Haemorrhoides.

XXX.
When there is in any place a great pain, with redness and a burning heat, and
afterward a swelling which breaks into holes; and about these holes are small
yellow risings, shining and burning, and it continues so three or six years:
but when there is a burning heat, with yellow risings, and afterward they turn
to a blew or lead color, this shows it to be a most vehement inflammation.

A Caveat.
Beware of such Medicines which drive the humor inwards, and beware of the
Guaick-wood, and all such Ointments and Suffumigations which are used for the
Pox.

Cure.
I will first show you how to cure it, when it is beginning, before it come to
be an Ulcer; then I will show you how to cure it when it is an old Soar, when
it has continued twenty years.

For the first cure.
Take of Frog-spawn half a pound, of Camphire three ounces, of Myrrh and
Frankincense, of each an ounce; put them in a Glass close stopped, and set them
in the Sun until they turn to be a Liquor; in this Liquor dip a linen cloth,
which you shall apply to the part pained: And when the cloth is dry, dip it
again in the said Liquor, and apply it; and do thus so often until the pain be
gone.

For the second cure.
Take of Turpentine, two pounds, set it over the fire and boil it a little,
take it off and let it cool, and it will be hard and brittle as glass; then
take of Oppopanax half a pound, dissolve it in a quart of Vinegar, then strain
the vinegar through a cloth, and boil it until it be consumed, and only the
Oppopanax remains; to which you must add the Turpentine which you have
hardened, being beat into powder, and three ounces of the red powder of burned
Coperas; then take so much honey as is necessary to make a Plaster, boil it
and skim it, and mix it with the rest of your Ingredients, and so make them
into a Plaster, which you shall apply to an old Saint Anthonies Fire.

XXXI.
When below the Breast there is circle round the body of reddish color, which
afterward breaks out into yellow risings, and these in a long time after turn
to holes, with redness, burning and pain.

And at last, it inflameth the Diaphragma, then death follows.

A Caveat.
Abstain from eating Medicines, Gums, Pitch, fat things, and those Ointments
which are used for the Pox.

Cure.
First, we must cleanse the Diaphragma with Larks-spur, and then apply to the
Soar this Plaster.

Take of Colophony one pound, the powder of Celandine, and the powder of Orange
skins, of each four ounces, of the best Turpentine so much as is sufficient to
make the Plaster.

XXXII.
When in the hand there breaks out first Pustles, which afterward turn to a
crusty substance, and then there follows deep clefts in the flesh.

At last, it spreads over all the body; thereafter the crusty substance falls
off, and then it cease.

Caution.
Abstain from Corrosive or eating Medicines, Cantharides, Purgations,
Ointments, Fumigations, and the Guaickwood.

Cure.
Take of the four Gums, viz. Oppopanax, Segapenum, Galbanum, Bdelium, of each
one ounce, of Colophony two ounces, of washed Turpentine four drams; set them
over the fire, that they may be mixed, then make a Plaster which must be
applied warm to the chopped hands; and let it lie at the hands twelve hours, then
take it off, and wash your hands with clean warm water; then apply the Plaster
unto it again, and let it lie other twelve hours, then take off and wash your
hands; and thus you must do so often, until the humor be quite dried up, which
uses to be in fifteen days, or thereabouts; for the four Gums have a peculiar
and and admirable cleansing and drying virtue.

XXXIII.
The Itch and Scab are so commonly known, that I need not describe it.

Cure.
Take of Roch Alum one pound, of Plum Alum half a pound; mix them.

Another.
Take of Plum Alum, and salt Entals, of each alike; mix them for the Itch.

Another.
Take Coperas, and Alum, of each alike; mix them.

XXXIV.
When many Pustules break out together, and being rubbed, they issue out a
yellowish water, then there comes on a hard crusty Scab, which falls off again,
and in its stead comes another.

And at last, it turns to an Ulcer.

Cure.
You must not use any Medicines, but such as are cooling: Take of washed
Lithargire one ounce, of Frog-spawn an ounce and a half, the juice of Housleek,
and the juice of Water Lillies, of each three ounces; mix them, and apply them
in the night time.

Another.
Take of Rose Water two ounces, in this dissolve a dram of Camphire, and anoint
the Soar with it.

XXXV.
When the Nose burns exceedingly, and being rubbed, there comes a hard scurf
upon the place, which continues so a year.

And at last, it turns to a Fistula.

Cure.
We must not use any of those things for this, which are used in the cure of a
Fistula: But use this Ointment following.

Take the juice of Agrimony an ounce, the juice of Onyons half an ounce, the
Oil of Dill an ounce and a half; Mix them, and in this mixture dip a linen
cloth which you shall apply to the Soar, until the cure be done.

XXXVI.
If there be a swelling in the Throat, with a pain in the Head, it turns to a
Squinancy, and afterward to an Ulcer.

Cure.
It is cured with the water of Self-heal.

A Gargarism to wash the Mouth and Throat.
Take of Pellitory one ounce, the juice of Saint John's Wort two ounces, the
juice of Ars-smart three ounces, of Oximel Scylliticum six ounces; mix them.

Another.
Take the Liquor of Mmmmy one ounce, the juice of Ars-smart two ounces, of
Vinegar three ounces: Mix them, and therewith wash your mouth and throat.

The cure of the Squinancy.
There are three Medicines which we must use in this Cure, viz. a Gargarism, a
Plaster to be applied outwardly, and a remedy for the pain and heat of the
head.

The Gargarism.
Take the honey of Roses four ounces, round Birth-wort, and Winter-green, of
each half an ounce, the water of Prunes, and the water of Self-heal, of each
seven ounces; mix them, with this wash your mouth, letting it fall down to your
throat three or four times a day; this Gargarism does good, if the Aposthume be
broken, but not else: And if there be a very great swelling, then apply
outwardly this following Plaster.

Take the Mucilage of Faenugreek ten ounces, white Lead two ounces, of Camphire
made into powder, half an ounce; make them into a Plaster, this Plaster will
take away both the swelling and pain: In the mean time you must also use this
following remedy for the pain and heat of the head.

Take red Rose Water, the water of Shepherds-purse, the water of Nightshade,
the water of Housleek, of each alike; mix them, in this dip a linen cloth,
which you shall lay over all the head.

XXXVII.
When any have from the Womb some spot in their body, blew or black, or clay
colored.

Cure.
Take the flowers of Beans half an ounce, the burned shells of Eggs two ounces,
Sal Peregrinorum one pound, the water of Comfrey, and spirit of Wine, of each
fifteen ounces; distill them, and in the water distilled dip a linen cloth, and
apply it to the spot.

Another.
Take Plum-allum and Roch-allum, of each one pound, and distill a water from
them, to which add Camphire half an ounce, Salomons-Seal two ounces, distill
them again, and dip a linen cloth in the water distilled, and apply it to the
spot.

XXXVIII.
When there are dry clefts or chops in the hands or soles of the feet, without
Scabs.

Cure.
Take the meal of Barley and of wheat, of each one ounce, of Winter-green,
Agrimony, Centory, Self-heal, of each half an ounce, boil them in water, and
set your chopped hands or feet over the water, to receive the vapor of the
decoction; this you must do every day four or five times.

Then purge the blood with this: Take Germander and Succory, of each alike;
boil them in wine, and drink it; this Potion will purge and rectify the blood.

Then anoint the chops or clefts with this ointment: Take Petroleum, the fat of
a wild Cat, Hearts grease, Hogs grease, of each half an ounce, set them over
the fire, and mix them, with this anoint the chops morning and evening.

XXXIX.
The cure of Warts.
Take the Oil of Juniper Berries one once, the oil of Spike two drams, Oleum
Laterinum or Brick oil, seven drams; mix them, and with this anoint the Warts.

You may also drink the decoction of Germander and Succory to cleanse the Blood.

XL.
If there be chops in the entrance of the Fundament or Matrix, which burn, and
are very troublesome to the Patient, when the Excrements or Urine are evacuated.
At last, they turn to be a running soar inwardly.

Cure.
For the chops of the Womb: Take Aloe Succotrine one ounce, the root of round
Birth-wort three ounces, of washed Turpentine, so much as is enough to make a
Pessary, with the Aloe and Birthwort, which must be put up into the Womb.

Another.
Take the Mucilage of Flea-wort one ounce, the oil of bitter Almonds three
ounces, the juice of the Flowers of Vervain six ounces: Mix them, and dip a
linen cloth in this mixture, which you must apply to the place where the chops
are, every third hour.

Another.
Take the juice of Winter-green, the juice of Comfrey, of each four ounces, the
flowers of St. John's Wort, of the Flowers of Self-heal, and the Flowers of
Centory, of each one ounce, of Betony seven ounces, the oil of Dill four
ounces; mix them.

Another.
For the chops of the Womb and the Haemorrhoides: Take of Mummy one ounce, of
red Lacca half an ounce, the powder of Oranges, and the powder of Antimony, of
each two ounces; make them into powder, and mix them.

XLI.
There are some swellings, in which are bred small worms like Lice, which grow
broad, and they make a reddish scaly scurf, like the scales of Fishes.

Those who dig salt Mines, as Coperas Mines, or boil Salt, or dig Copper, etc.
are troubled with such Tumors.

Cure.
This Tumor requires outward Medicines, not inward; let it be anointed with
this ointment.

Take the oil of Juniper Berries half a pound, the oil of sweet Almonds one
pound, the oil of Beach-wood eight ounces; mix them, and anoint the Tumor
therewith.

Another Ointment.
Take of the oil of Spike half an ounce, the oil of Oak three pound, Cats
grease a pound; mix them over a fire, and anoint the T^mor therewith: It is a
good Preservative to keep us from the hurt of these Mineral Vapors.

XLII.
A swelling without pain, retaining the natural color of the skin, and being
pressed, it retains a dimple after the pressure.

At last, it putrifieth first inwardly, and then breaks out into a hollow
Ulcer.

A Caution.
This Tumor must be cured by outward Medicines, and not by inward Medicines.

Cure.
We must first open the Tumor, then cleanse it; lastly, fill it with flesh.

A Medicine to open the Tumor.
Take Realgare one dram, Talce three drams, of Misselto so much as is
sufficient to make the Plaster, which you must apply to the Tumor, until it be
opened.

The cleansing Medicine.
Take of Colophony an ounce, of Wax four ounces, of Turpentine so much as to
make the Plaster, with this Plaster cleanse the Soar.

The Consolidating Medicine.
Take the juice of great Comfrey, the juice of round Birth-wort, of each two
drams, of the yolks of Eggs and Turpentine of each alike, so much as to make
the plaster; keep this Plaster at the soar until the cure be done.

XLIII.
A hard swelling which will not be soft, nor will not break, but continues
firm and hard, you may soften it and ripen it with this Medicine.

Take of Varnish half an ounce, the Mucillage of Faenugreek four ounces, the
water of Sea-holly, and the water of sharp pointed Dock, of each two ounces,
the juice of Marshmallows three ounces; mix them, and apply them to the
swelling.

Another.
Take the Oil of Lithargire, Colophony, Mummy, the oil of the yolks of Eggs, of
each one ounce; mix them, and apply them.

The oil of Lithargire is made thus.
Take Alum, Vinegar, and Lithargire, and boil them together, until the Vinegar
be almost consumed; then add more Vinegar and more Alum, and boil it again,
and thus you must do until the Lithargire be turned into an Oil.

XLIV.
If there be risings under the ears, and about the ears, with a swelling, and
the third day after they grow red; then the Patient is troubled with a pain and
heat in his head, and a swelling in his throat.

At last, It turns to a putrefaction, and goes inward.

Cure.
We must first ripen and break the Aposthume, then cleanse it, and lastly
consolidate it, or fill it with flesh.

The maturative or ripening Medicine.
Take Oleum Laterinum, or oil of Bricks one ounce, Oppopanax half an ounce,
dissolve the Oppopanax in Vinegar, then strain the Vinegar through a cloth, and
boil it, until it be boiled away, and the Oppopanax remains dry; then put to
it the oil of Bricks, and make them into a Plaster.

The cleansing Medicine.
Take Honey and Self-heal, of each an ounce, of round Birthwort and Aloepatick,
of each one dram; make them into a Plaster; this Plaster you must apply to
the Aposthume, after it is opened.

The consolidating or fleshing Medicine.
Take the yolks of four Eggs, of the best Turpentine three ounces, of Wheat
meal and Barley meal, so much as will make a good mixture for a Plaster.

XLV.
If any part of the Body exceeds its proportion, and is bigger then it should
be; not through any disease, but by a natural growth, without any pain in that
part, or in the Stomach; For if there be any pain in the Stomach or Breast, it
is a sign of a Ptisick.

Cure.
Take of the Lees of Wine ten ounces, of the Spirit of Wine four ounces, the
fat of a Fox five ounces, of the Oil of Dill nineteen ounces; Mix them, and
make an Ointment, wherewith you must anoint the part so grown.

XLVI.
The swelling in the Cods, and betwixt the Groin and Privities, commonly called
a Rupture; there be three kinds of it: There is a waterish swelling, a windy
swelling, and a fleshy swelling.

You may know the waterish swelling by this, If you press it with your finger,
it will leave a dimple in it; this waterish swelling, if it be not cured, it
will at last putrify the Testicles and the Cod, and turn to a Bubo; if it
continue three weeks or a month, it is incurable.

Caution.
Before the Physician enters upon the cure, let him well consider which of
the three kinds of swelling it is; for if he should mistake, and apply unfit
Medicines, it would be very dangerous.

Obs. That cleansing Medicines or drying Medicines are not fit; this Tumor must
not be opened.

Cure.
Take of Figs one pound, the Oil of Juniper Berries four ounces, Bean-meal six
ounces; mix them together over the fire, and apply them to the swelling as warm
as the Patient can endure it, thrice a day, viz. Morning, at Noon, and Evening.

Another.
Take Bean meal one pound, the seed of Flea-wort, and the seed of Quinces, of
each an ounce, of great Comfrey four ounces, Wine and Vinegar, of each so much
as is requisite to make a Poultis.

XLVII.
The second kind of Tumor of the Cods is a windy Tumor, which you may know by
the hardness of it, and stretching of the skin; it makes the Cod to be without
feeling.

Caution.
We must not open this Tumor, and we must beware of drying things.

Cure.
Take the oil of sweet Almonds two ounces, Bean meal half an ounce, Pigeons
dung and Goats dung, of each three ounces, of Vinegar so much as is sufficient
to make a Poultis, which must be applied very warm, morning, evening, and at
noon.

Another.
Take of common Rosin six ounces, of Mummy five ounces, of Elder buds one
ounce; mix them.

Another.
Take of Turpentine half a pound, Cummin-seed four ounces, of Lettuce-seed six
drams, of Wax so much as to make them into a Plaster.

XLVIII.
The third kind of Rupture or Tumor of the Cods, is a fleshy Tumor, which may
be disearned by the touch, it is firmer then the waterish swelling, and not so
hard as the windy swelling; it is a superfluous flesh, sometimes within the
skin, sometimes growing without the skin.

If it does not ripen in five weeks, it is incurable.

At last, it putrifieth, and turns to a Fistula.

Caution.
You must not take Potions for this Tumor, or any inward Medicine; and you must
not apply to the Tumor any fat thing, or any drying thing.

And remember this, that we do not reckon distilled oils among fat things.

Cure.
In this cure we must use Plasters, and Chyrurgical Instruments.

The Plaster is made thus.
Take of Oleum Laterinum, or Brick oil, seven ounces, Oppopanax, Galbanum,
Bdelium, of each three drams, of Bean-meal three drams, four Figs, of Camphire
and Ruc, of each one dram: Mix them together over the fire, and make them into
a Plaster, this softneth, ripeneth, and putrifieth the Tumor, and keeps the
Tumor that it shall not be bigger, nor be any more painful.

This Tumor, as also any superfluous flesh, or any hard Tumor, as Warts, Corns,
etc. may be dissolved by these following Medicines, viz. Distilled oil of Bays,
the oil of Nuts, the oil of black Poppy seed, the oil of Dill, the distilled
oil of the fat of a Cat, the Spirit of Wine distilled with Beans, or with the
seed of Flea-wort, the water of Pepper-wort, the water of Swallow-wort, the
water of red Ars-smart, the water of Sea-holly, the juice of sharp pointed
Dock, etc.

XLIX.
When a woman's Monthly Courses do not keep their right time, but sometimes
comes sooner, and sometimes later, and much water comes down with the Courses;
likewise when the Urine is evacuated, there comes out corrupt matter with it,
and there is pain in the Matrix and in the Belly; and in the time of the act of
Venery, this pain of the Womb and Belly is greater: If it continues so a
Month, there comes forth Blood; and if it continues a year, it then comes to
be an incurable Ulcer.

Caution.
Abstain from Purgations, cleansing Medicines, and consolidating Medicines.

Cure.
In this cure we must use three kind of Medicines, viz. Potions, Ointments,
and Pessaries.

A Potion.
Take of Agrimony, Sanicle, Wintergreen, and both kinds of Periwincle, of each
one Scruple, of round Birth-wort one ounce, of Parsnap, and of small yellow
Rapes, one ounce; put your Herbs in new Claret wine, or new Ale or Beer, and
let them lie in it four or five days; then drink of it every morning a draught:
You must use this kind of drink half a year.

Another Potion.
Take of Larks-Spurre half a pound, of round Birth-wort six ounces, Ladies
mantle and Sanicle, of each ten ounces, of small Sea-Buck-horn one pound and a
half; put them in Beer, or Ale, or Wine, four or five days, then take a draught
of it every morning.

Let the patient use this following Salt with her meat: Take Frankincense,
Mummy, the Stone Haemmatites, of each two ounces: Make them into powder, and
mix them with half a pound of common salt made into fine powder, let every
thing be seasoned with this salt which the Patient eats.

Then she must put up into the Womb this Pessary: Take the water of Plantain,
the water of small Sea-Buck-horn, the water of Ars-smart the water of St. John's
wort, of each half a pound, of Earthworms six ounces, of Iragacanthum one dram,
of Comfrey, the leaves of long Birthwort, of each three ounces, and mix them
with the best white Sugar, and make them into Pessaries of that bigness as is
fit, to be put up into the Womb once a day, and there to continue four or five
hours at a time.

Another.
Take the juice of St. John's Wort, the juice of Ars-smart, of each half a
pound, of Prune-water, and Cherry-water, of each one pound, of Turpentine
washed with Rose Water seven ounces: Mix them, and make a Pessary to be put up
into the Womb twice a day, or oftener, as necessity requires.

Another Pessary.
Take the Oil of St. John's Wort, the oil of Ars smart the oil of round
Birth-wort, of each one pound; the oil of Frogs, the oil of Earthworms, of
each twelve ounces, the oil of the yolks of Eggs one pound and twelve ounces:
Mix them, and dip a linen cloth in the mixture, which must be put up into the
Womb.

An Ointment for the Patients back.
Take of Mercury, purged from its cold substance and eating biting faculty,
half an ounce, of Bolus Scissus three ounces, of Hearts grease half a pound, the
oil of Dill, and the oil of the yolks of Eggs, of each six ounces: M x them
together over the fire, and anoint the back therewith twice or thrice in a day,
or you may put so much Wax to them as to make them into a Plaster, to be
applied to the back.

L.
If a Woman's belly be big, as if she were with child, nevertheless she has
her Monthly Courses; and sometimes her Belly is big, sometimes it lesseneth;
but in some women their Belly continues in the same bigness, and hard, and
some women have pain with it, and some are without pain: This is a false
Conception, which continues with a Woman during her life.

Cure.
I will first show you how to drive out a false Conception, then I will give
you a Preservative to keep you from a false Conception.

A Medicine to drive out a false Conception.
Take of Oriental Saffron four ounces, of salt Borax half an ounce, of Amber
half an ounce, of Scammony six drams, of the Azure stone one dram, Oppopanax
boiled in Vinegar, and the Vinegar boiled away, until the Oppopanax be almost
dry; then take so much of this Oppopanax as is sufficient to make Pessaries,
with the former Ingredients, to be put up into the Womb.

Caution.
But remember this, that this Medicine cannot be safely used, if the Patient
has carried this false Conception as long as she should have carried a child,
and that it is grown so big, that the passage will be too narrow for it to come
out, for then it would endanger the Patients life.

A Medicine to preserve a Woman from false Conception.
Take of Agarick Torchiscate one ounce, of Euphorbium half an ounce, of
Oppopanax an ounce and a half, let the Oppopanax be dissolved in Vinegar, then
strain the Vinegar, and boil it away, until the Oppopanax be almost dry; then
mix the Agarick and Euphorbium with it, and make them into Pessaries; put up
one of the Pessaries into the Patients Womb, before the false Conception be
big, and in one night if it make not the swelling fall, then she is with child.

LI.
When there comes out of the nose yellow stinking corrupt matter, with pain in
the head, or without pain; or if there comes out of the ears putrid stinking
matter; or if the Patient spit loathsome stinking matter; or if he evacuate
corrupt matter with his Urine; or if his dung excrement has changed its
natural color; or if his sweat stinketh; or if the Monthly courses of Women
change their color without pain in the back or thighs.

If any of these continue with the Patient four years, sometimes ceasing, and
then returning, it is a sign that it will continue with the Patient all his
life time.

Cure.
For the corrupt Excrements of the Nose: Take of Darnel, the seed of Gith,
black Hellebore, of each one scruple, of Marjoram and Sage, of each half a
dram, of Musk two grains; make them into a sneezing powder, take a little of
this into the Nose every morning.

For the corrupt Excrements of the ears.
Take of Scammony one scruple, of Bdelium one dram, of Wax one scruple and a
half; make them into a plaster, which must be made into long small pieces to
be thrust into the ears, when the ears begin to purge out this corrupt matter.

For corrupt Matter voided in the Urine.
Take of Oriental Saffron half a dram, of the hairs which grow under the tail
of a Hare, half an ounce, five Cantharides: Make them into a powder, and mix
them; put them in a little linen bag, which you must lay under the Yard, near
to the Fundament, right under the Bladder, and let it lie at the place a day or
two, until no more corrupt Matter is voided with the Urine.

A Medicine to rectify the Dung-Excrement.
Take of Scammony one scruple, of Haermodactils, and Turbith, of each one dram,
of Honey, so much as to make them into Suppositaries.

For the stink of the Sweat.
Take of Treacle two drams, of the Spirit of Wine two ounces, of Euphorbium
seven grains: The Patient must go into a Bath when he takes this, afterward
let him keep himself warm in his Bed, and sweat: Thus he must do three or four
times, or oftener, until the stink of the Sweat be quite gone.

LII.
If after rubbing of any place there follows a red swelling, which afterward
turns into an Ulcer.

Cure.
For the swelling before it be turned into an Ulcer: Take the oil of Roses six
ounces, of slacked Lime three ounces, of Camphire five drams; mix them, and lay
them upon the swelling.

But if the swelling be changed into an Ulcer, then take of Frog spawn one
ounce, the oil of Camphire two drams, of the juice of Poppy, and the juice of
Henbane, of each one ounce; mix them, and lay them to the Ulcer, to take away
the heat of it.

Then take of the Apostolorum Plaster, and the Diaquilon Plaster, of each
half an ounce, of Mummy three ounces, of Cerusse, or white Lead, two drams, of
Camphire one dram: Mix them over the fire, and make them into a Plaster, which
must be applied to the soar, until the Cure be done.

LIII.
For Corns in Feet or Hands. Caution.
You must not cut Corns so deep, as to cut the quick flesh; and you must not
use Corrosive Waters to them; for in so doing, you may cause a dangerous Ulcer
to follow.

Cure.
Take the Oil of Juniper Berries, and Agarick, of each one dram, of Ox Gall two
drams; mix them, and lay them to the Corn, until the Corn grows dry and
black, and begins to moulder away: then apply to it the Plaster Oppodeltoch
some four or five weeks, until the cure be done.

Another.
Take Realgare one scruple, of the Oil of the yolks of Eggs half a dram, of
slacked Lime half a dram; mix them, and lay them to the Corn, and they will
make the Corn black, and consume it.

The Oppodeltoch Plaster.
Take of Colophony two ounces, the powder of Celendine, and the powder of
Orange skins, of each half an ounce, of the best Turpentine so much as to make
them into a plaster.

LIVE.
When in any part of the body there is a hard immovable tumor or Excrescency of
flesh, growing to the Muscles, which grows still bigger, and at last makes
the member crooked where it is; it also weakens the guts, causing great
windiness in them.

Caution.
You must not use the Chyrurgions Instruments to this, nor any such Medicines
which are used for Aposthumes.

Cure.
You must do no more to such tumors or Excrescencies, but to hinder their
increasing, which is done by this Ointment.

Take of the Oil of Myrtles two ounces, of the oil of Nutmeg half an ounce, of
the marrow of an Ox two drams, of Petroleum two ounces and a half: Mix them.
Herewith you shall anoint those places where the Spermatick vessels lie most
outwardly, the back and thighs once a month.

LV.
When there are spots in the skin of the face, or elsewhere, of a yellow or
clay color, etc. If they stay constantly in the place, or if sometimes they
evanish and return again.

Cure.
Take of Turnsole and Germander, of each three ounces, of the best Manna half
an ounce, of Parmacity, and Bay Berries, of each ten drams, the water of Baulm,
the water of Vervain, the water of Valerian, of each five ounces: Put your
Herbs into the Waters, and let them lie in the waters two or three days, and
when the spots begin to come out upon the skin, take three or four ounces of
those Waters at a time.

Observe. That Turnsole is a singular good Herb, it wonderfully renews the
blood and flesh.

A Treatise concerning long Life.
CHAP. I. All Medicines divided into three sorts, according to the threefold
Age of Man; showing, that each Age must have its own Medicines proper for it.
SEeing there are Medicines which can preserve the Body of Man for many Ages
from Diseases, Corruptions, and Superfluities; or if there be any infirmity or
corruption in the Body, they can cure it: It ought to be the care of every
Physician to know them, and to know them thoroughly; for there are very many
tedious Diseases, and many Maladies incident to the Body of Man, which are
rooted out by these Medicines, which prolong life.

In this discourse of long Life, I will first give you the Theory of it, and
then the practice, that you may fully know all that concerns long Life.

I would not have any to doubt of this, that life may be prolonged, for these
two Reasons. 1. Because it does not appear that there is any certain day or
hour of any man's death. 2 Because we have Medicine prepared for us, by him who
has created us, both to preserve us from Diseases, and to drive out Diseases.

Hence we may conclude, that neither Diseases bring Death, neither is Death the
cause of Diseases; nay, Death and Diseases agree no better then fire and water:
A natural Disease hates Death, as every part of the living Body hates Death.

I intend in this discourse to speak to those of my own way, who by great
skill, and daily experience have searched into, and do know the propertie^ and
natures of things, which are hid and unknown to presumptuous and titular
Doctors: And I do affirm this as a most certain truth, That the Body may be
restored, changed to the better, yea wholly renewed: As it is to be plainly
seen in Metals, which may be so purified, that they shall be afterward free
from any rust; so likewise dead Bod^es, if they be embalmed, do not putrify
afterward.

Some perhaps may dislike my Writings, because they are short, and because of
those Examples which I use; but my Writings are not therefore to be slighted,
seeing I use only the examples of such things which are or may be done by
Nature; as in this comparison of Metals with the Body of Man: I know that
there is great difference betwixt these two, yet they are both preserved one
way, as experience teaches.

If a dead Body can be preserved by Balsom from putrefaction or decay, how much
more may a living Body be so preserved.

Now there are three parts of Man's Age, viz. young Age, middle Age, and old Age;
and each of these must have such Medicines for prolonging life, as are proper
and suitable to them; therefore there must be also three kinds of Medicines
for the conservation of Life, according to these three Ages. We may likewise
say that there are three parts in long life, according to those three parts of
man's Age: for many might die in their Infancy, many in their middle age, etc.
if their life were not prolonged by the help of Medicines.

We cannot have any certainty, that an Infant, or a strong young man shall
outlive a weak old man: No part of man's age has any certain time of death
appointed to it; the Infant in the Mothers Womb may have many things befall it,
which may be the cause of great weakness in the child, or incline the child
to diseases; and that Infant which is very weak when it is born, the strength
of Nature is abated and lessened in it, as it is in old age: And therefore
those Medicines which are the helps of long life, must be given to this Infant,
anointing the Nurses breast therewith, which the child does suck, etc. as you
shall hear more at large afterward in the practice of long life: For by these
Medicines of long life, the strength of Nature is increased, and life
prolonged, after the same manner in an Infant as it is in old age.

Or if a young man runs into so great excess of Drinking or Venery, etc. that
thereby his body wastes away, and Nature decays, etc. we must use the same
Method of curing him, which is used for prolonging life in old age; viz. by
restoring the decayed strength of Nature, and preserving nature afterward in
its strength.

Old age begins with gray hairs, which if it be subject (as oft-times it is) to
weakness and sickness, it must be timously helped, and the Medicines of long
life are to be used; but those old people who are free from sickness, and have
much of the strength of Nature, they are only to use these Medicines
accordingly as their necessity requires.

Remember then this threefold partition of the age of man, viz. Young age, which
begins with Infancy, and continues to the full growth of the Body; middle age,
which begins when the Body is come to its full growth, and continues to the
time of gray hairs; and afterward comes old age: Remember likewise, that each
of these ages require such Medicines of long life, which are proper, and most
agreeable to them, as was said before.

It may be, this will be objected to me by the Emperick Physicians, that if we
may have such Medicines for preventing death, for curing diseases, and
prolonging life; how then comes it to pass, that great men, as Princes, Kings,
Emperors, Noblemen, etc. ordinarily live not so long as others? they are more
subject to infirmities and diseases then others, so that they live not out the
half of their days. Certainly if there were any such Medicines, these great men
would have them.

I answer, the causes of this are well known to me and to those of my way; we
little regard such vain, foolish, unlearned objections; yet I will answer it,
that I may give satisfaction to all who desire to be resolved in it.

And we say, that we know not any King or Prince in our times, neither have
heard nor read of any in former times, who have used these Medicines of long
life, except only Hermes Trismegistus; or if there have been others, they are
not known to earthly men: This I do not speak as in answer to the Objection,
but my answer is this, That the Physicians of Kings, Princes, Emperors, etc. do
know less in Physic they the Country people, and this is the cause why they
cannot bring health, but death to their Princes; and while Princes use the
counsel of such Physicians, it is impossible they should enjoy health and long
life: And this answer concerns those ignorant Doctors, who have nothing of a
Physician but the name.

I give another answer to the Objection, which is this, That the intemperance
of great men is most often the cause of their short lives; and this they have
as part of the reward of their wickedness: And this I think sufficient for
answer to this Objection.

CHAP. II. The Division of Medicines according to the difference of diseases,
and what is the chief use of Medicine.
YOu have heard, that as there is a threefold difference of man's Age, so there
must be three kinds of Medicines, for each age has its Medicines proper to
it. Now I will show you the several kinds of diseases, and the several ways of
curing those diseases.

And first, Some diseases come of intemperate, disorderly living, as Hydropsie,
Jaundise, Gout, Falling Sickness, Plurisie, etc. and some diseases come from
the Times and Seasons, and other accidents concurring with disorderly living,
as Pestilence, Madness, etc. These kinds of diseases are cured by the Medicines
of long life.

Secondly, Some diseases are natural, which proceed of natural external causes,
and those diseases are to be cured by natural Medicines.

Some diseases are unnatural, viz. such as come by Enchantments, Superstitions,
etc. I wish our Physicians not to meddle with such diseases, for they seem to
me to come upon people by Gods permission as punishments; and if so, they are
not curable.

I know much may be done in this case by Images Rings, etc. which are
preservatives of life of which I will not speak here: I have spoken of them
elsewhere, for it belongs to Astronomy to treat of them.

Thirdly, Diseases which proceed not from the nature of the Body, or from
weakness, but otherwise, they must be cured before you use the preserving
Medicine; if the disease be hidden and unknown, you ought not to meddle with
it; but if it be such a disease as the Gout, Falling sickness, etc. it may be
cured by using only the preserving Medicine.

Not to pass over altogether those diseases which are from imagination, or by
Superstition, or by Enchantment, etc. I will here briefly show you the cure of
them, and how you may be preserved from them. 1. Mental diseases must be cured
in a mental way. 2. Diseases which are from our own imagination, must be cured
by Objects. 3. Diseases which are from the imagination of others, must be cured
by imagination. 4. Diseases which come by Enchantments, must be cured by
contrary Enchantments. 5. Diseases which are caused by superstitious Charms,
etc. must be cured by contrary Superstitions.

Now the ways how we may be preserved from those diseases, are these: First, Is
to preserve natural strength. 2. To preserve us from accidental diseases. 3.
From mental diseases. 4. From Enchantments. 5. From Imaginations of others. 6.
From our own Imaginations. 7. From Superstitions.

You see, I make no mention of the four humors of the body in this business of
long life, because I find, that the conservation of the body and prolongation
of life, is only from the strength of Nature, and not from the good
temperature of the four humors: Nay, in any cure the four humors are not to be
regarded, but only the strength of nature; which renews and cherishes those
humors; and therefore that Physician who thinks by rectifying the humors; to
make up the defects of the strength of Nature; he is like that man, who having
suppressed the flame, thinks he has quenched the fire, and leaves the live
Coals. He who would preserve a Tree, must be more careful of the root then the
branches, because the branches have all their nourishment and virtue from the
root; and if we do any thing to the Branches when they are faulty, our
principal aim therein, is to cherish the life and strength of the root, for
hence the branches have their life and virtue.

Now as the root of the Tree is to the branches, so is the strength of nature
to the humors of the body; so that if the humors of the body be distempered, we
do not therefore lose our health, unless by this distemper the root of life,
etc. the strength of nature be wronged; and therefore what we do in rectifying
the distemper of humors, we do it for the conservation and cherishing the
strength of Nature: This is the chief thing we aim at in the use of Medicine.

CHAP. III. What Life is? whether, and how it may be prolonged?
THat we may the better understand the nature of short life and long life, it
is necessary that we consider, first, what life is; secondly, which is the
chief seat of life; thirdly, by what things life is shortened or lengthened.

L^fe is not a body, but a thing spiritual, like hearing, seeing, smelling,
etc. Now that which is a body, we may easily find it out by the course of
Nature, whence it is; but we cannot find out by the course of Nature, what
sight is, or what is the cause of sight, or how it is effected; so neither can
we find out what life is, or how it is produced; for life comes not of natural
seed, according to the ordinary course of nature, as the most part of natural
things do, but it comes from a natural beginning, in a Spiritual and
extraordinary manner: As for example, we strike fire with a steel and a flint,
and yet there is no fire either in the steel or flint, neither are they of a
fiery nature, either by their predominant Element or their complexion; they are
bodies which will not yield to fire, they are not easily consumed by fire; they
seem to r^sist fire, and yet we can bring fire from them: After the same manner
life comes from these things, in which there is no life, viz. seed, root, etc.
even as the fiery sparks comes from the flint, in which there is no fire.

Now let us consider, whether or not the life can be lengthned, amended or
strengthened, seeing it is incorporal: It is like fire, which having more wood,
burns more vehemently: So life, the more it has of the humor of life, so much
the more the Spirit of life abounds.

But that fire should come from that, in which there is no fire, the reason of
this we cannot know: Many do think that the hardness of the flint and steel, is
the cause of these fiery sparks which comes from them, and so they rest
satisfied: But by this answer they do not yet satisfy our question, viz. How
any thing can come from that in which it never was.

The life (as I said before) is like a flame, which feeding upon Wood or Oil,
and fat substances, etc. as it were living in them, visibly represents life to
us; and as a flame decaying is renewed again by adding more wood, etc. yea,
when the flame is gone, and there is only live coals, yet by larger additions
of suitable matter, the flame shall become greater then it was before: So the
life is stronger or weaker, according to the goodness or badness of that
whereby the life is continued; so that according to nature we may refresh and
cherish life, by supplying it with those things, which are agreeable and
delightsom to it, whereby it is made stronger, and of longer continuance. We
ought not then to think the time of man's life is so determined, that every man
must needs die such a day and such an hour; nor is it suitable to Christianity,
to think this, that the life cannot be prolonged by these Medicines which God
has created to this purpose: God has created these Medicines for our use, and
he has granted us a liberty to use them; the defect is only in us, that we do
not know those Medicines.

Man's reason is very weak, it fails in most things; we are much short in
discerning of things good or hurtful to us; how few men know the largeness of
that power which God has granted to man? Adam knew all those things perfectly,
he was the wisest of Mortal men, and he had continued immortal, if he had not
been deprived of the Tree of Life; the which Tree of Life has its place in
Medicine, as well as in Divinity; for howbeit it was the Tree of Life, yet it
was a natural Tree.

CHAP. IV. How the Life is prolonged by virtue of the place where we live? by
the four Elements? by the Stars? and by the virtues of Herbs?
THe third thing I promised to speak of, is this, viz. To show you those things
by which life in lengthned or shortened.

And first, The Place where we live, makes much for the prolonging or shortning
of our life: There is great difference in Countries, Climates, Cities,
Mountains, Valleys, etc. Some are far more agreeable to long life then others;
in some places there is better Air, they yield more delight, the vapors which
rise out of the ground more wholesome, etc. then in other places.

Secondly the Elements, viz. Earth, Air, Water, and Fire, work great changes in
life, sometimes to the better, sometimes to the worse. Out of the Earth grows
every thing which nourishes our Bodies, and that also which destroys our
Bodies: We have from the earth not only that which is hurtful to us, as
poison, etc. but we have also that which can cure us, and keep us from the harm
of such things, as Gold, Balm, etc.

Do not think, that we have Medicines created only to cure diseases; for if
so, then Medicines could have no operation in Bodies which are sound and whole,
but experience proves this to be false: You must know this, that the Earth
brings forth not only such things which can destroy us, or take away our
health, but also gives us Medicines, which not only can cure our diseases, but
also can preserve our life and health: Meat and drink, if rightly used, they
are the means to preserve our life, but if abused, they destroy life, as it
appears oft-times by the effects of Drunkenness and gluttony; for whatsoever we
have from any of the Elements may be good or hurtful to us, accordingly as it
is used.

Again observe, That what damage we receive by one Element, it is recompensed
by another Element: Water does resist fire, and by this resistance it
preserves things that they are not destroyed by the consuming heat of fire;
and if there be any damage by fire or water, the Air will make amends; the Air
will not forsake us, nor leave life, if we do not first forsake it: Sometimes
the Air is infected, and by its infection may kill us; but we may easily know
when it is infected, and so we may preserve our selves from it, if we leave it
and go where there is a better Air.

Here observe this difference in Air, and the rest of the Elements; there is a
general Air, and a particular Air; a general water, etc. Now of particular
Airs, one may be good and another bad, also one piece of earth is better then
another, and some water better then other water; so also fire, some is useful,
and some is hurtful, as Lightning, etc.

Thirdly, the Stars have a great and powerful influence upon the life and
health of Man, they can make sick, they can restore health, they can preserve
health, they can bring death, or prolong life: There is no kind of thing in
the world, but there are some good and some evil of that kind: Then here lies
the main business, how to get the good, and eschew the evil; we cannot have
always that which we would, as if we would appropriate the influence of Jupiter
to our selves; or if we would turn away from us the influence of Mars; or if we
would draw to our selves the influences of such other Stars which are good: Now
this we cannot do, as we can choose one herb and leave another. I say, we
cannot do thus with the stars, to keep off the influence of one, and choose the
influence of another, as we please: But thus much we may do, if we observe the
Sar before it put out its influence, what is the most likely way of that
influence, viz. to what work, business, etc. it enclines most; and if it
enclines to a business, etc. of that nature as ours is, then we may by certain
helps (as those Images, Rings, etc. which are made for the Planets) draw the
influence of that Star to work with us and assist us; but these things I
declare more fully elsewhere.

Fourthly, many Herbs have somewhat lurking in them, which can keep the life of
man vigorous and flourishing for many ages; for Herbs have an incorruptible
essence, the which when the Body of the Herb perishes, it enters into some
other Herb of the same k^nde, or it remains incorruptible in the earth: If we
receive the essence of an Herb into our Bodies, it stays with us till our
Bodies perish and be putrified, and then it enters into the earth: So likew^se
^he essence and properties of Man's body, leaves the body when it putrifieth.
Here we must remember the difference which is betwixt the property of the Herb,
and the essence of the Herb; as for example, the property of Hellebore makes
Hellebore to be such an Herb, differing from all other Herbs, to have such and
such virtues, as Laxative, etc. So that the property of Hellebore can be in no
other thing then Hellebore; and when we receive the Hellebore, or ess^nce of
the Hellebore into our body, yet we do not receive the property of Hellebore.
The essence of Hellebore is the purest material substance of it, containing the
life, and all the virtues of the Hellibore in the highest degree: Now when we
take this essence inwardly, it mixeth it self inseparably with that humor which
is the chief seat of our life, and preserves this humor from destructive
alterations; and so long as this essence lasts in us, it does us good; it is
of it self durable, yet by the infection of our corruptible humors wherewith it
is mixed, it grows weaker, and wastes in time; as Talce, which cannot be
consumed by fire, yet it may be consumed otherwise in length of time.

I will here add one thing further concerning the virtue of the place where we
live, viz. That there are some places which do so agree with the humor of life,
and do so preserve it, that those who live there, enjoy a wonderful long life;
and there are some other places which makes them immortal who live there. The
World may be divided into two parts, the one part is the place of Mortality,
where we Mortals live in hope of Immortality by Grace; the other part of the
World is Paradise, where death cannot be; for whatsoever is there, it is
incorruptible naturally, and not by a Miracle: As our Phylosophick gold
preserves from Leprosy, etc. so it is the nature of Paradise to preserve from
death, that whatsoever has its first being there, it is thoroughly undecayable
in all its substance.

But we who live in this place of Mortality, we have an incorruptible essence;
and we have a corruptible Body, which can both be preserved without decaying in
Paradise. I will not write much of this, because I have but little experience
of it, for the essence of Earth is the center of our experience, and Paradise
is far beyond our Travels; so that what I speak of it, I speak spiritually, as
in a dream, rather then waking, signifying to you, that life is there
perpetual, continuing to the end of the world; or if longer, that is unknown to
us.

But that you may more fully know how health and long life may be preserved,
you must consider the causes of health, and the causes of diseases; now health,
and all diseases are either from the mind or from the body. The mind is the
cause of such diseases which come by Witchcraft, or our own imagination, or the
imagination of another, or the influence of the Stars: For when Imagination or
Enchantment take hold of the mind, and make an impression upon it, so as the
mind is disturbed, and thoughts multiply and grow so strong, that they
overcome reason; then at last, by the power of that Imagination or Enchantment,
Reason is quite overthrown, and so the evil operation of the Enchantment or
Imagination prevails, and thereby diseases are bred. Thus also the influence of
the Stars may overcome the mind, and command it, howbeit it be not bred in the
mind, nor depend of the mind, as the former, viz. Enchantment and
Imagination; yet it may powerfully incline the mind to good and bad
operations; as the Sun which pierces through the glass, and changes that
which is in the glass according to its own nature. The other cause of health
and diseases is the Body, viz. The humors or complexions of the Body, or some
predominant quality, or some principal member of the Body; the Complexions are
from the Body, and are seated in those humors whereby the Body is sustained.

I will not here describe those diseases, I conceive it not necessary, neither
will I here stay to discover to you the nature and causes of the mind and
body, or to tell you what choler is, or what blood is, or what Phlegm is, or
what Melancholy is, but I will only give you a hint of those things in general.

CHAP. V. The Life prolonging Medicine described; how it should be used? to
what use it is chiefly intended? and to whom it is most effectual?
I Now come to the Practice, and first I will speak of natural remedies which
are for those diseases, whereof the Body is the cause; and afterward I will
show you how these diseases which come from the mind, are to be cured; which
are not to be cured by natural remedies, but they must be cured in such a way
as is proper to them.

First then, to preserve us from bodily diseases, we must have respect chiefly
to the humor of life, which upholds the body, and governs the complexions of
the body, etc. and if it be kept in good case, the Body is thereby preserved:
We need not be careful how we may renew the Complexions and Qualities of the
Body, or how to purge out hurtful or superfluous humors, or how to cure the
diseases of the Liver, or Milt, etc. for these preservative Medicines which we
use for long Life, can do all this; yea, whatsoever defect or disease is in the
Body, they can thoroughly cure it, and this they do, not by that great virtue
they have which is proper to the preservation of the humor of life, and
prolonging of life, but by their incorruptible essence.

In this practice of preserving the Body, three things are to be observed, viz.
The government of the Body, the disposition of the Body, the Medicine it self
whereby the Body is preserved: As for the Government of the Body in respect of
the Country or place where we live, it is not so much considerable as the other
two; indeed the chief thing that we are here to consider, is the Medicine, and
the right ordering of it: All our confidence is in this Medicine, for this
preserves both man and beast; this preserves man however it finds him, young or
old, etc. it will not suffer any superfluity or corruption to be in the Body,
and it does so guard the body, that no outward disease which comes by
Witchcraft, or from the influence of the Stars, or the Imagination of another,
can enter into the Body; neither will it suffer any Tartar to stick to any part
of the Body, or to stop any passage in the Body; and if there be any Tartar any
where, it takes it away.

But I must tell you, that he who has but a vulgar understanding, cannot
understand these remedies of long Life, which I set down here: They only can
understand them who know the art, or to whom I declare my meaning.

This following preservative Medicine, which I will now describe to you, it is
to be used thus: Take a dram of this Medicine in a draught of good Wine once a
Month, if nature be not too much weakened by age; but if nature be much
decayed, you must take a dram of this Medicine once a week; and when a man
comes to fourscore years and ten, or a hundred years of age, then he must take
a dram of this Medicine every third day: This is to be well remembered, that you
must use more or less of this Medicine, accordingly as you have more or less of
the strength of Nature; for amongst those men who are come to the vigorous part
of their age, we see the strength of Nature greater in some then in others,
some of them more able then others to endure, etc. therefore this preservative
Medicine must be used accordingly, as I have said already. Nature is so weak in
some that it cannot be preserved, as those who bring this weakness with them
from the Womb, in whom the Foundation of Nature was never sound nor sure; and
therefore this preservative Medicine cannot be so effectual to such, as to
those who have a firm foundation, because of that defect which is in them,
which makes them incapable of the benefit of this Medicine; as we see in Stone
and Wood in taking fire, the stone cannot take fire so well as Wood, etc.

If a Woman use this Cordial Preservative, it will make her Courses continue
with her even in old age, yea, and make her fit to conceive and bare children,
unless she be naturally barren; for their Spirit of life being strengthened by
this Medicine, drives out of their Body whatsoever is contrary to it, and makes
every thing in the body be as it should be.

If a woman use this Medicine when she is with child, that child shall have
thereby a very sound and good Complexion.

Seeing long life depends upon the Spirit of life which preserves life, and
upon the humors of life, whence arise the Complexions and Qualities, as several
Branches from one root; therefore we have framed our preservative Medicine
according to this, viz. to rectify the Spirit of Life and the humors of Life,
and so the mind is also defended from hose troublers of Reason which arise
from the Complexions, as sadness, or exsessive joy, etc. we need not then use
several remedies for several humors; this one is sufficient to keep those
humors from distemper, or any unnatural alteration, to keep the body sound and
well, and to keep the mind free from all disturbances.

I will now describe to you our preservative Medicine for long Life, so often
mentioned; it consists of two parts, viz. of Simples, and of Arcana or
Quintessences; we would not have the Simples and the Quintessences to be used
severally, but we join them together in one Receipt; for the Simples have
wonderful virtues, yea almost equal to the Quintessences in prolonging of life;
there are some simples which can preserve the Life forty years, and some
Simples can preserve the Life an hundred years.

As the leaves of Hellebore, which can preserve the life an hundred and twenty
years: I have declared the virtues of it in that Book which I have written
concerning the nature of things: here I will not write much of it, because of
peoples unbelief, for whatsoever is not ordinary, it can hardly be believed.

Likewise flowers of Secta Croa can preserve the life an hundred years; there
be many more no less admirable Virtues in those Herbs, which I will not mention
in this place; but the Quintessences in our Receipt have a greater faculty in
preserving, then those Herbs, for they can strengthen, comfort and nourish the
Radical humor, or the humor of life, more then the herbs; even as flesh and
herbs do both nourish a man, but not alike, for the one yields more nourishment
and strength then the other; Nature does more delight in it, and receives it
with greater benefit: Now my preservative Medicine or Receipt of prolonging
life in men or women for two or three ages, it is this, viz. Take of the
Quintessence of Gold, and the Quintessence of Pearls, of each half an ounce, of
the Quintessence of Saffron, of the Quintessence of Celandine, and of the
Quintessence of Balm, of each five drams, of the leaves of the herb Hellebore,
and of the flowers of the Herb Secta Croa; let them be mixed together according
to art, then put them in a glass bottle for your use, keeping them close from
the air.

CHAP. VI. How we are preserved from those Diseases which come from the Stars,
or from Witchcraft, or from Imagination, etc.
HAving in the former Chapter desribed our preservative Medicine, which is for
the preservation of our Body, and to preserve us from those diseases whereof
the Body is the cause: I will in this last Chapter show you how to cure the
diseases of the mind, viz. Those diseases which proceed from the mind, as
also those diseases whereby the mind it self is infected, which are all
comprehended under one of these five. 1. The diseases which come from the
influence of the Stars. 2. Diseases which are from Witchcraft or Enchantment. 3
Diseases effected by the power of Imagination. 4. Diseases which are produced
by our own Thoughts. 5. Diseases which are caused by Superstition.

And first, to show you how those diseases which come from the influence of the
Stars are to be cured; howbeit we cannot know the nature, or causes, or power
of the Stars, and therefore we cannot say any thing of it; yet we speak of
those effects which are visible, produced by the influence of the Stars, and we
say, that the Stars have a prevailing power upon the mind of Man, and their
operations are so strong that they overturn the mind, oppress it, etc. We
cannot hinder the motions of the Stars, nor can we hinder them to put forth
their Influence, yet we may preserve our selves from that influence: As those
who are in a Town besieged, howbeit they cannot hinder the Enemy to fire his
Guns upon them, yet they may preserve themselves from the harm of the shot, by
keeping themselves within the Walls: So we may keep off the evil influences of
the Stars, by those preservatives which may be prepared for that purpose: Now
you must remember, that there are two kinds of Influences; there is one kind
of influence which is good and necessary to us; that as the body is sustained
by nourishment, even so we are sustained, strengthened, and preserved by this
good influence; there is another kind of influence which is hurtful to us,
this hinders the former good influence, that it cannot have any operation upon
us to do us good; and against those hurtful influences, we must provide
defensives to preserve us from their harm: Those defensives are the Rings and
Images of the Planets, which are made according to the influence, i. e. they
are made in the time of a good influence, I do not deny, but that the Rings of
the Planets (as I have showed elsewhere, treating of Imagination) have a power
to preserve us, and are helpful to the prolonging of life; yet I do not approve
of them for many reasons, which I will not mention now.

The best way how we may preserve our selves from the evil influences of the
Stars, I conceive it is this, To turn off the influence from our selves, to
another thing which will easily yield to the Influence: as for example, If some
evil Star, as Mars, etc. be inclined to ruin me, and this inclination has
made some Impression upon my mind, and begins to infect it, whereby I may fall
into some disease of the mind; then I must make an Image like a man, upon
which the evil influence may have its operation, and so I my self may be saved
from the harm of that influence: For a Star being inclined to ruin me, and
finding some agreement betwixt me and this Image, and that it has a readier
way to fall upon this Image, and has less resistance in this Image then it
should have in me; therefore it leaves me who am more difficult to work upon,
and chooses the Image which is more easy, where it fulfils its operation with
delight: There may be many other reasons given why the influence removes thus
from the person against whom it was intended, to the Image; but I will not now
express them, for they are not pertinent to the purpose in hand.

The second thing of which I am to speak, is to show you how we may be
preserved from the harm of Witchcraft, that our life be not shortened by it: I
have in many other of my writings showed remedies for Witchcraft; but you
shall use the same way here for Witchcraft and Enchantment, as you have been
taught before for the evil influences of the Stars; for Witchcraft or
Enchantment has the same way of working upon our mind or Body, as the evil
influence of the Stars: But here we must use another kind of Object, upon
which the operat^on of Witchcraft must be turned, then that which is used for
the influences of the Stars: Thus I do, I make an Image of Wax like a Man,
which I set in its own place; and whatsoever evil is intended against me by
Witchcraft, it shall be removed from me to that Image, and there it will be
accomplished; for the Enchantment proceeding from the mind of the Witch
against me, my mind keeps it strongly off, and turns it upon the Image,
whereby there can be no harm done on either side.

The third thing is, how we may save our selves from the harm of the
Imaginations of others; I may be killed by an others Imagination, if it be
accomplished in me, if it be not turned some other way from me: I will explain
this to you by an example; Suppose I have an enemy who has an extreme hatred
against me, so that he exceedingly desires my death daily, he is no Witch, but
only a violent enemy; and this I do not know, that he has any such malice
against me: Now what must I do, that this imagination wrong me not: Certainly
the best course that I can take for this, is thus, to settle my mind and to
keep it in quiet, free from all passions or disturbance as much as possibly I
can, not desiring any revenge, or to do any wrong to any, and by this good
temper of my mind, the others malicious imagination against me shall be thus
overcome, that it cannot do any harm to me.

Fourthly, whereas our own thoughts do oft-times wrong us, as when I think my
judgment too weak for such a thing, etc. by this thought my reason is quite
overcome, and I lose my reason with it, as I have showed more largely
elsewhere: Now the best help for such thoughts, is this, Not to put more upon
our reason, then it can easily perform; and so we shall not be troubled with
such thoughts.

Another way to help these thoughts, is thus, If we conceive any thing to be
much without the reach of our Judgment, etc. for this we may use the same
Image, which we use for the influences of the Stars; and the Image standing in
our stead, and is as it were the same with us; then those thoughts which would
have wronged us, will vanish, and they will pass from us to the Image, for the
Image cannot make any resistance against these thoughts, and there they may be
fulfilled without any harm.

Fifthly, By the thoughts and imaginations many Superstitions are made
effectual, which differ much from Enchantment or imagination: As for example,
When I hear a Raven upon the top of my house, then I have a Superstitious
thought, that this must be a sign of death in my house; now this Superstitious
thought growing strong, may either cause sickness, or the death of one who is
sick in my house; the truth of this appears oft-times by experience, and I have
given the reasons of this in my Treatise of Superstitions. The way to prevent
the harm of such Superstitions, is thus, I must persuade my judgment, that
such superstitious thoughts are vain and foolish; and what I esteem to be a
certain sign of such or such a thing to come to pass, that this is my error, I
must endeavor to convince my Judgment of it, and I must be always careful to
exalt my Reason above groundless conceits, and not to entertain thoughts upon
the report or phansies of others, nor to conform my thoughts to vulgar
opinions; as when I hear the croaking of a Raven upon my house, I must think no
otherwise of this, but that it is only the natural act of the Raven, which
signifies no more to me upon my house, then in any other place; and thus this
superstitious thought is overcome and made ineffectual.

A strong conceit of the truth and certainty of superstitious thoughts, is the
cause which oft-times makes them have their effect; but if I examine these
thoughts by reason, and so come to see their groundlesness, vanity and folly,
this will quite destroy them, and prevent that evil which they might effect.

This I conceive is enough for those cures of the diseases of the mind: If any
do not understand these things which I have written here concerning long Life,
it is because they can neither perceive what I say, nor what Nature does: I do
not intend to make those things plainer to them; for what I have written here,
I have written it only for those who are grounded in the knowledge of such
things, and it is my desire that they may fully understand me.

If you would know what Diet is best for long life, observe these rules
following. 1. Let your meats and drinks be prepared with the preservative
Medicine, and this will drive out all superfluous humors which lurk in the
Body. 2. If you have any inward diseases, then you must speedily use fit
Medicines, as Quintessences, etc. to ripen them: Concerning the causes of
diseases, and their proper remedies I will not write any thing here, for that I
have done in many other of my Physical Treatises. 3. The best Diet for long
life, is a moderate diet, which I need not describe here, seeing it is so well
known to every Physician. 4. Let your meats and drinks be rightly prepared,
that is, They must be purged from all superfluities, impurities, and whatsoever
is hurtful in them; and this is to be done the same way, which is used in the
separation of the Elements, as I have described in my Book concerning
Restoration and Renovation: Such purified meats and drinks, with a moderate
diet, are wonderfully helpful to the prolonging of life; they nourish well, and
they never cause any disease in the Body; this cannot be said of other meats
and drinks.

To conclude, Observe, That those purified meats and drinks yield better
nourishment to our Bodies, then any other; they do increase flesh and good
blood very much, this is their use; and the use of their preservative Medicine
is to preserve the spirit of Life and the humor of life.

FINIS.

