JACOB BEHME'S Table, Of the Divine Manifestation. Or An EXPOSITION Of The
Threefold World.

Showing What God is in Himself, without Nature and Creature: and how he is to
be considered in Nature according to the Three Principles.

Also What Heaven, Hell, the World, Time and Eternity; as also all Creatures
both Visible and Invisible, are; and out of what all things are proceeded and
sprung forth.

This Table is here Expounded in brief according to the Numbers; but in the
Treatise of Predestination the Matters are handled more at Large, especially in
the first Five Chapters.

And Is as it were the Sum of all the Authors Writings; and as an A. B. C.
to Beginners.

London, Printed in the Year, 1655.

What God is, considered as without and beyond Nature and Creature; and what
the Great Mystery, Mysterium Magnum, is; showing, how GOD has, by his
Breathing forth or Speaking, introduced himself into Nature and Creature.

What GOD is, viz. without or beyond NATURE and CREATURE. 1 Abyss Nothing and
Allthings. FATHER. 2 Will of the Abyss. I. E. SON. 3 Longing delight, or the
impression of the will. H.O. SPIRIT. 4 Science, Root, or Mobility. V.A. 5 GOD
in Trinity. Thus is God considered without Nature and Creature. 6 WORD in GOD.
7 Wisdom.

Here begins the Great Mystery, Mysterium Magnum; viz. the Distinction in
the Speaking of the WORD: wherein the WORD, through the Wisdom becomes
distinct, also Natural, Sensible, Perceptible, and Palpable or Inventible,
whereby, the two Eternal Principles, of Gods Love and Anger, in Light and
Darkness, are understood.

The Beginning of the Mysterium Magnum, or Eternal NATURE. GOD in LOVE. GOD in
WRATH 8. The Second Principle. 9. The First Prin- ciple. Spiri- 10. Tincture;
or the Trinities Speaking. Moving Sense -tual. Dark feeling Mind NATURE. V. Love
fire. I. Desire. II. Sting. Science III Anguish IV. Fire. 11. Angel. Light. VI.
Sound or Distinction. Harsh. cause of Enmity. fiery hot-Root Angelical World.
Root of the 4. Elements. VII. Substance or the Substantial Wisdom. Hard.
Hellish life. Hell Sub- 12. Pure Element. Sharp cold fire. Root Devil -stan-
The Growing or Springing in the Spiritual World. 13. Paradise. Sal. Mercurius.
Sulphur -tial.

Here begins the Outward visible World, viz. the Outspoken visible WORD.
Wherein, 1. Is understood the Good Life of the Creature which stands in the
Quintessence. 2. The Poison and Grossness of the Earth and Earthly Life.


14. The Beginning of the Outward World. The Third Principle. 15. Heaven.
Stars. 16. Quinta Essentia. Good powers. The 17. The 4. Elements. the Devils
poison introduced. Outspoken WORD. 18. Earthly Creatures.

Now, If the Reader understands these things; all Doubts and Questions cease
in him; and Babel is left in Ignominy and Scorn.

A Short Exposition of the foregoing Table concerning God Revealed or
Manifested; showing how he perpetually generateth and breaths forth Himself
from Himself: and how this Table is to be understood.
ABYSS. 1. NOTHING and ALL THINGS.
AT Number 1. stands the Abyss, the Nothing and All things; and there we
must begin, to Consider, what God is, in himself, without and beyond Nature and
Creature; and that Consideration of the hidden God goes on to Number 7.
Wisdom; whereby is understood, how God dwells through and through all things,
and how all existeth from him, and yet himself is incomprehensible and as a
Nothing to All things; and yet makes himself visible perceptible palpable and
inventible by and through All things.

2. Will of the Abyss.
At Number 2. stands the Will of the Abyss; and right before it, stands
FATHER, and on the other side stands I.E. this signifies that the Will of
the Abyss is the Father of Every being, or of all Substances; and the I.E.
signifies the Eternal One, viz. the Name JESUS proceeding from the Eternal One.

3. Longing Delight or Impression.
At Number 3. the Longing Delight, or the Impression or Contraction of the Will
stands; right before which words stands SON; and after them stands H.
O. which signifies, how the Own will impresseth or frames it self into a
place for its possession: that place is the Generating forth from it self,
wherein God Generateth God, viz. a longing delight or Well pleasingnesse to
himself: The H. O. is the breathing of the Will whereby the Longing goes forth.

4. Science, Root, or Mobility.
At Number 4. stands Science, Root, or Mobility: and right before it stands
SPIRIT. and after it stands V.A. The Science or Root, is the Wills drawing in
to be a place for God; wherein the Will impresseth the outgone Longing or
Delight, to be the Son, or Breathing; by the breathing forth of which, is
understood the Spirit of God. And here the Great Name JEHOVA, viz. the Tri-Une
Substance is understood; viz. how the Father generateth his Son out of
himself, and how the Holy Spirit goes forth from them both, and yet they are
but One only Substance which has nothing before it. For the Science, in the
Impression is understood as a Root of the Eternal Skill Knowledge or Mobility.

5. God in Trinity.
At Number 5. stands God in Trinity; signifying, the Tri-une Substance,
whereof a Similitude may be given in the Will, Mind, and Senses or Thoughts;
wherein the Eternal Understanding Lies: for that is the Trinity of the One
Eternal Understanding, and Cause of Every Being.

6. WORD.
At Number 6, stands WORD, signifying the Distinction or Separability in the
Understanding, viz. the Speaking or Expressing the perceptibility of it self:
which Word continues Eternally in God; and God, viz. the Power or Virtue of
the Perceptibility, is the Eternal Goodness.
Good.

7. Wisdom.
At Number 7. stands Wisdom, signifying the outspoken Word, viz. the Power of
the Divine Vision, wherein God himself is understandingly and perceptibly
Revealed and Manifested. And thus far, God is Invisible and Incomprehensible to
the Creature, and not Natural, also not Creatural.

The Beginning of the Mysterium Magnum, or Eternal NATURE.
Under the line stands these words; The beginning of the Great Mystery,
Mysterium Magnum, or Eternal Nature; viz. the distinction or Separability,
percepribility and inventibility of properties; whereby is understood, the
Divine Explication or Revelation; showing, how God introduces himself into
Love and Anger, in the Eternal Nature, and not in himself; for he is himself
the Eternal One only Good, which yet without distinction or separability could
not be perceptible or Manifested.

But here we are to note, that the Seven chief Forms of Nature are marked with
Number I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII. to difference them from the other Numbers,
used in this Table.

8. The Second Principle.


9. The First Principle.
On the first side at Number 8. The Second Principle stands; and on the other
side at Number 9. The First Principle stands: The words at Number 9. signify
the Fathers property, through the Speaking of the Word in Wrath; and those at
Number 8. signify the Sons property in the Love, wherein Gods Love is
Manifested through the outspeaking or expressing of the Word: viz. that in the
Love, Number 8, signifies, the Angelical powers World; and that in the Wrath,
Number 9. signifies the Dark powers World, of Pain Woe and Torment, wherein
God is an Angry God.

10. Tincture.
At Number 10. stands Tincture, which signifies the Temperature or Harmony
of all Substances or things, showing, how they therein, through the Word go
forth into distinction and forms, viz. into seven chief Forms: as into, I.
Desire. II. Science or Root. III. Anguish, IV. Fire, V. Lovefire, VI. Sound,
and VII. Substances: and further, there stands by every chief form, what
properties go forth and are generated out of them: for if Speaking must be,
then must the power first draw together, that it may breath forth it self, and
then that drawing together, or Magnetic Impression, generateth the somewhat
which is the beginning, wherein is understood the Fiat, which has attracted
the powers.

I. Desire.
And it is the First chief Form of the Spiritual Nature, standing at Number I.
viz. Desire; which Desire sharpneth it self so, that out of it Harsh, Hard, and
the Cause of Cold existeth; and is a Ground of all Saltish properties, in the
Spiritual World, Spiritual, and in the outward World Substantial. And thus the
Desire of the Impression, is ac^use of the Overshadowing of it self, or of the
Darkness in the Abyss, as we see all these forms belong to Number I. viz. to
the Desire of Impression.

II. Sting or Science.
Close by stands the Second chief form Number II. which is the Sting or
Science, viz. the root, which signifies the indrawing of the desire, whence
the first Enmity or Contrary will existeth; for hardness and moving, are
unlike things, in this form now existeth the moving and feeling, as a root of
painfulnesse; wherein is understood the Mercurial poisonous Life, both
spiritually and in substance; and in the Darkness, the Torment, or the
painfulnesse of the Evil Life; neither would the Good Life be manifested
without this root of Evil; and it is the root of Gods wrath, according to the
Eternal Nature of the perceptibility.

III. Anguish.
The Third chief form Number III. is Anguish, which existeth out of the Desire
of the Impression, and out of the Enmity of the S^ing, whence the Will stands
in the source or pain, and is a Cause of the Or perception in the Mind and
Thoughts.
feeling, and of the five Senses, therein, and because in the Anguish all forms
are pained, that makes them that they find one another; and herein the WORD
becomes distinct, and is a root of Sulphur, both spiritual and Substantial,
wherein is rightly understood in the Darkness in the painful Life, the Hellish
fire, as is noted in the Table downwards.

IV. Fire.
The Fourth chief Form Number IV. is called Fire; wherein is understood the
Kindling of the fire, from the painful Sulphurey root; for the Will goes from
the Anguish into the Liberty again, and the liberty goes into the Anguish to
its manifestation,

In this Conjunction the Crack or Lightening Flash is effected, wherein the
Abyss, viz. the Eternal Good becomes manifested, and is, in the Forms of
NATURE, the Understanding and Life; in the Darkness painful woe and Torment;
and in the Liberty it is the Root of Joy, or the awakening of the powers, and
is the fires Kindling; in which Kindling, the Abyss becomes a shining Light,
viz. Material.

V. Lovefire.
The Fifth Form Number V. is called the Lovefire, wherein is understood, how
the Eternal Good, through the Kindling of the painful fire, introduces it self
into an exulting burning Lovefire, which fire is indeed in God before, but thus
now it unfoldeth it self forth, so that it is perceptible and moveable, wherein
the good powers become working.

11. Angel.
VI. Sound.
At Number VI. stands Sound, or Distinction, viz. the Sixth chief Form,
signifying, the Natural clear life, wherein the Eternal Divine Word, has
through the forms of Nature, unfolded it self forth, wherein all the powers of
the Wisdom stand in the Sound; and in this now consists the understanding
Life, in the Light it is Angelical and Divine, and in the darkness it is
Diabolical; as right before it Number 11. Angel stands.

VII. Substance.
At Number VII stands Substance, or the Substantial Wisdom of the outbreathed
Word, wherein all other forms are manifested; and it is even the Substance of
All forms, viz. Read the 6o. Epistle printed, of the true and false Light.
in the Light Good, in the Darkness Evil and Painful: And especially the Great
Mystery Mysterium Magnum is understood therein; also the Angelical World is
understood therein, as also the Inward In Adam we lost Our Angelical heavenly
Body, but through the regeneration and Faith in Christ, we attain it again, and
that is kept by Christ with his heavenly flesh and blood in us, unto Eternal
life, and nor the outward beastial Man.
Spiritual Body of Man, which faded or disappeared in Adam; when the Soul's
will went forth from Gods Will; but the same is made alive again in Christ, who
gives to it this powerful worlds substance, for food, which is that heavenly
flesh, John 6.51. and is the dry Rod of Aaron, which in Christ's Spirit buddeth
and springs fresh up in Man, again.

12. Pure Element.
At Number 12. stands Pure Element, signifying, the Motion in the Angelical
world into Substance, and it is the One only Holy pure Element, wherein the
four Elements lie in the Temperature or Harmony, and is a root of the four
Elements.

13. Paradise.
At Number 13. stands Paradise, signifying the Eternal springing up or
budding, or the spiritual growing or vegetation in the Spiritual World, out of
which, the Outward visible World out of Good and Evil, viz. out of both the
Eternal Principles, has been breathed forth; In which Source Quality and
Regiment, Adam in his Innocence stood: viz. the four Elements in him stood yet
all in the Temperature, viz. in the Holy Pure Element.

14. The Beginning of the Outward World.
At Number 14. stands The Beginning of the Outward World: signifying, how God
through his Word, has breathed forth the Spiritual Mysterium Magnum, Great
Mystery, viz. the Eternal Nature of all Spiritual Properties, into a Visible
outward formed substance, and through the Fiat, viz. the Spiritual Desire,
formed it into Creatures; near which stands, The Third Principle; wherein is
to be understood 3. Worlds one in another, viz. the Dark world in Gods Wrath,
and the Eternal Light World of Divine Love; and this beginning, fading or
transitory world.

15. Heaven.
At Number 15. stands Heaven, signifying the limit of distinction or
separation between the Inward and Outward World, viz. between the visible and
invisible Substance; which Heaven, consists in the Substance of the Spiritual
fires Water.

16. Quinta Essentia.
At Number 16. stands Quinta Essentia; the Quintessence: signifying the
Spiritual Powers, viz. the Paradisical Ground in the 4 Elements, as also the
Stars or Constellations which were breathed forth out of the inward powers
when Time began; and it is the Good in the four Elements, wherein the Light of
Nature shines, as an outbreathed Lightening or Luster from the Eternal Light,

17. Four Elements.
At Number 17. stands Four Elements; that is, 1 Fire, 2 Air, 3 Water, and 4
Earth; viz. the Created World, out of the Dark-and Light-World: which is the
Outspoken formed WORD, out of the Eternal Natures powerful Substance, into
which the Devil had shed his poison, which after Man's Fall, was Cursed of God.

18. Earthly Creatures.
At Number 18. stands Earthly Creatures; signifying, that out of the Quinta
Essentia, or Quintessence, and out of the 4. Elements, all Creatures of this
visible World have been created, and have their Life only from thence. But the
Soulish or Psuchicall Man having 2. Eternal worlds in him, is capable of being
Saved, or Damned.
Man, has also both the Inward Spiritual Worlds in him as to the Inward
Soulish Man. Therefore may both Gods Love and Anger be Manifested in him; for,
into which of them the will frames fashions comprehends or kindles it self,
of the substance thereof it comes to be, and to manifest the self same
therein, as is to be seen in Lucifer.

This is a brief Explication of the Table, which is the Sum of all the
Authors Writings, set forth for his Loving Friends sakes, and from a good
Christian intent very faithfully, and for an A.B.C. to Beginners, 1623.
FINIS.
The Reader is desired to mend these faults with his Pen before he read the
Book.
FIrst Preface, Page 3. (a) Margin, for. read. Page 1. (b) l. 8. blot out by.

Behm's Preface, page 2. line 1. read highest Good)

The Book, Page 3 line 12 for sound. read found. p. 4 l. 35 for on. r. an. p. 8
l. 16 for Image. r. Imaged. p. 10 l. 36 for End. r. Ens. p. 12 l. 46 for salt.
r. fatt. p. 16 l. 22 read Tongue. p. 17 l. 13 read Love-fire. p. 19 l. 3 for
of. r. or. p. 21 l. 1 and 2 r. lights Love-fire. p. 22 l. 3 r. and Metals, the.
for were. r. was. p. 26 l. 2 for incorrupting. r. incorporating qualifying Life
of. p. 28 l. 11 for first. r. fifth. p. 35 l. 29 for transmitted. r. transmuted.
p. 36 l. 5 read forms of dispositions. p. 42 l. 8 r. the Men's or Mind. p. 47.
l. 18 r. of Nat^re. l. 20 r. 72. For, in. p. 49 l. 9 for into. r. in. for Ens,
or Being. r. Essence. p. 53 l. 17 for its. ^. into. p. 56 Margin. l. 11 r. of
The. p. 78 l. 20 r. Life that. p. 79 l. 3 for was. r. were. p. 111 l 45 r.
Glauben. p. 117 l. 5 r. property; l. 37 for with. r. without. p. 120 l. 4 r.
which was. p. 136 l. 10 r. the Grace and. p. 148 l. 32 r. so very great. p. 164
l. 19 for whole. r. good. p. 187 l. 38 r. who without. p. 188 l. 22 r. no
other. p. 196 l. 41 r. and sharp.

Table. Page 4. line 32. read Sting. p. 8. l. 4. r. Substance.

FINIS.

