What kind of PARLIAMENT Will please THE KING; AND HOW WELL HE Is affected to
this present PARLIAMENT.

Gathered out of his own Papers, By A. J. B.

London Printed, 1642.

THE KIND OF Parliament which the King likes.
SUch as consists of such persons in the House of Peers as he shall think good
to honor; wherein Answ. to the 19. Prop. p. 24.
the Votes of Popish Lords shall be of force, though they be absent (for their
ease and security) some such Lords may have their Votes, as they shall choose:
Who it may be will do more with them, then if they themselves should give them.

Such as may not interpret or declare Laws, Page 2.
without himself (which yet the Judges and inferior Courts may do) whose
Orders and Ordinances bind not to obedience. Who may not command the people to
defend themselves and Kingdom.

But he himself may raise extraordinary Page 16.
forces, though there be neither actual rebellion, nor invasion.

Such a one, wherein he has a negative Page 3.
voice to grant or deny.

They must not meddle with matters of other Answ. to the Petit. June 17. Page
7. 11.
Courts. Not place Preachers, unless the Bishops will, nay every Parson.

They must not nominate fit Counselors to Him when they sit not, though they
leave Him to choose such a Council as he pleases for his own private
affairs.

They may not retain the Members of their Page 3
Houses, who are his Household servants, or employed, or sent for by him.
Though if they do not, then because the Houses will be but thin, and not
numerous* they are not to be esteemed as Parliament, but a faction; and Answ.
to the Decla. May 2^. Page ^.
those with him are to be listened to, rather then They.

They must punish such as meet together to Page 11.
Petition Them for such a meeting is a Riot, as those are called who met in
Southwarke, and would not let the Constable take away their Petition) but must
not punish those, who either force the people through fear, or suppress them
by cunning, (as it was in London, Cornwall, etc.) or gather together
tumultuously to seek the abolition of what Laws are newly made, and to bring
this to his own desire, as in Kent.

Such a one as may not (though a Constable, Sheriff, etc. may* raise any
forces to put their Orders or Decrees in execution, and subdue Answ. to the
D^c^* May 26. Page 20.
those that resist them, (for in his Proclamation that is Treason.

Or whom he has Authority to call them together, so to tell them what they are
to do. Answ. to the Declar. May 19. page 4. to May 26. Page 3.


They are but Usurpers of the name of Parliament, in their Votes and
resolutions, unless the King consent.

Who can imagine the King will raise
Arms against such a Parliament.
The Kings Judgment of those who sit in both Houses of Parliament.
REmovers of the Law as a rub in their way. Answ. to 19. Prop. page 2.
Underminers of the very Foundations of the Law.

Assumers of a new Power to Themselves.

Tending to a pure Arbitrary Power.

Erecters of an upstart Authority.

They have wrested from Us our Magazine, and Town of Hull, and bestrid Sir
John Hotham in his boldfaced Treason.

VVeakeners of our just Authority, and due esteem of strange shamelessness.
Page 3.


Such to whom our good Subjects dare not offer to pre(...) (...) (...)ne just
grievances, our Sufferings, and then ^^nse of the violation of the Law.

Who have seized on the money the King had borrowed to buy him bread.

The Actions of both Houses have a strong Page 5.
influence from the subtle Informations, mischievous practices, and evil
Counsels of Ambitious turbulent spirits, disaffected to Gods true Religion,
Our Honor and safety, the public peace and prosperity of the people.

Who would have Us divert Our selves of Page 6.
Our Power, and assume them unto it.

Who take care to dishonor Us in other Page 7.
Nations.

They endeavor to transform this Kingdom Page 8.
into a new Utopia of Religion and Government.

Indeavourers to fetch down to the ground Page 9.
our just, ancient, Regal power.

Who demand in effect at once to depose our Page 10.
Self and our Power.

Disturbers of the course of Law, countenancers Page 11.
of Riots, discountenancers of Law.

They mean Us no more power then one of Page 15.
Our Counselors.

Who neither take care for Our Right, Honor, Page 16.
Safety, as a Prince, nor as a private person. That we may not only be in a
more despicable way then any of Our Predecessors, but in a meaner and viler
condition then the lowest of Our Subjects.

Encouraged and enabled by a Malignant party, Page 20.
to countenance injustice and indignities offered to Us.

Beginners of a War against Us. Page 30.


Desirers of a general combustion.

The now Major part of both Houses are infected Answ. to the Decla. May 19.
Page 1.
by a few Malignant spirits.

Blasters of his Declaration, with a bold and senseless imputation. Page 10.


Their Petitions bold, threatening, reproachful. Page 11.
Before whose eyes a strange mist of error is cast by a few impudent, malicious
men, to give them no worse term.

Their odious Votes, and the greatest violation Page 12. Answ. to the Decla.
May 26. Page 3.
of our Privileges, the Law of the Land, Liberty of the Subject, and the Right
of Parliament. One of which is such, as there needs no other to destroy King
and People, and that Vote is, That when the Lords and Commons declare what the
Law of the Land is, it must be assented to, and obeyed.

Who have not dispatched one Act, which Page 15.
has given the least evidence of their particular affection and kindness to
Us, but have discountenanced and hindered other Men's.

Their Declaration, the contrivance of a few factious, seditious persons, a
Malignant party, who would sacrifice the Commonwealth to their own fury and
ambition.

They endeavor by all possible means to Answ. to the Decla. May 26. Page 1.
Page 2.
render Us odious to our good Subjects, and contemptible to all foreign
Princes. Whose design is, and always has been to alter the government of
Church and State, and to subject King and People to their own lawless
arbitrary power and government. Though they Page 5.
have no mind to be Slaves, they are not unwilling to be Tyrants.

Ungrateful men, without modesty and duty. Page 6.


We are in a miserable condition in their security, as all persons will be who
depend on them.

Alterers of the government of Church and Page 11.
State.

They make themselves perpetual Dictators over the King and People.

They have endeavored to render Us odious Page 19.
to Our Subjects, and Them disloyal to Us.

The fury and malice of these men will bring misery and burden upon the people.

From whom we expect the worst Actions, Page 29.
these men have power to commit against Us. worse words they cannot give. They
design the ruin of Our Person, and of Monarchy.

Their position is, They may depose Us Page 28.
when they will, and are not to be blamed for doing so.

Concerning those.
The King will never, and he hopes the people Answ. to the Decl. May 19. Page
15.
will never account their contrivance, the wisdom of a Parliament, nor
justify and defend them.

He doubts not but that all our good Answ. to the Decla. May 26. Page 2.
Subjects, do discern through the Mask and Vizard of their hypocrisy, and
will look no more on the Framers and Contrivers of that Declaration as Houses
of Parliament, but as a Faction of Malignant, Schismatic and Ambitious
Spirits.

He believes good Subjects will find some Page 29.
way to let them and the world know, how suitable their demands are to the
Affection of loving Subjects

Who can but think that he will seek the subduing and subversion of these.


