A BLOODY PLOT Discovered To surprise the Tower, and the Parliament, as it was
Reported by one of the Actors own confession, who is in custody to the
Sergeant at Arms of the House of Commons.

Also how a party of Cavaliers have listed themselves under the Lord
Cleaveland, their designed General of Horse, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale, their
Lieutenant General of Foot.

AND Forty Colonels and other Officers 1800 Horse, and many Foot said to be
Listed.

And the grounds of Reporting the Army to be coming to London; And the Reports
of His Majesty to be gone from the Isle of Wight.

Collonell Hudson committed to the Tower, and others apprehended.

And a Committee of the House of Commons appointed to examine the business,
and double Guards set about the Tower, and the prisoners kept up close.

And an Order of the House of Lords for examining Collonell Wiltshire and
others.

Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson, in Smithfield, near the Queenes-head
Tavern, 1647.

THE Manner of the Plot, (so far as it is Reported) to have surprised the
Tower, and the Parliament, this present Tuesday, December 14. 1647. with other
dangerous practices of Malignants, about the City of LONDON.
WHen Julius Caesar was stain, a paper was found in his pocket, (which it
seems had been put into his hands by some body) that that day he should be
murdered in the Senate House; therefore it is discretion, not to flight
warnings, the old proverb is, Fore-warned fore-arm'd.

There has lately been several actions of Malignants about London, whereby
the Parliaments friends are troubled to see them so high. One meeting which
they had in the Strand, was taken notice of by a Peer of the Realem, and
reported to the House of Lords, whereupon their Lordships passed this Order
following.

Whereas this House has been certainly informed, that some misdemeanors have
been committed by Colonel Wiltshire, Mr. Pope, and others, in or near the
three Cranes Tavern, and one Berks House, keeping a Cooks shop, near the
Savoy in the Strand.

It is Ordered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, that Mr. Edwards, and Mr,
Carter, two of His Majesty's Justices of peace, shall send for the said
parties, and such others as they shall think fit, and examine the said
business: And afterward make certificate thereof in writing to this House,
that such further directions may be given therein, as shall be meet.

John Brown Clear. Par.
Vera Copia December 13. 1647.
On Monday the 13. of December, 1647. at night a Gentleman came to the Speaker
of the House of Commons, and told him that there were a great design on foot
to raise a new Army on the sudden to surprise the Parliament and the Tower,
And that the Lord Cleaveland, was to be General of the horse, And Sir
Marmaduke Langdale to be Leiuet Genesis of the Foot, and that some 40. Colonels
and other Officers were listing of forces, about London, and that he himself
was listed, and had received advance moneys. That these Officers met at a place
in Smithfeild, and at another place near Aldersgate, and other places about
London, and had listed diverse horse (it is said about 1800. are listed) and
many Foot, (I omit diverse particular things of what is discovered, because the
business is under examination of a Committee of the House of Commons, and
therefore I shall omit to speak of further particulars in it then what is
publicly spoken abroad, out of the House, or that Committee.)

He has both named diverse of the Officers and the places where they lifted,
and of giving out Arms, advancemonies, and of the design that on this present
Tuesday, December 14. 1647. was the time appointed to fall upon the Parliament,
and the Tower (and if such a thing should have been done) God knows what blood
might have been spilt, and where it would end.

The Militia received advertisement thereof from the Speaker that night, ( viz.
monday night) immediately after this Gentleman had discovered it to him, (whose
name, I omit because it may give offense, he being still under examination;)
And he delivered himself to custody, and has ever since been in the custody of
the Sarieant of Arms, to the house of Commons.

The Lieutenant of the Tower, Col. Titchburne, received also advertisement from
Mr. Speaker hereof, and that he had received intimation, from the aforesaid
Gentleman, that one Hodskin or Hudson, a Collonell, or some other considerable
Officer, who had formerly served the King in the late wars, would come to the
Tower this present Tuesday morning, to confer with some of the Kings
Officers, and other Malignants, that are now prisoners in the Tower about it,

Upon the receipt of a Letter from the Speaker, giving notice to the Lieutenant
of things to this purpose, This morning the guards were ordered to be doubled,
and strict guards set about the Tower for security thereof.

And before noone one Hudson, a Colonel, or other considerable Officer, who
has him in Arms against the Parliament, and another of his of the same name (
Hudson also) came along with him, as the foresaid Gentleman had informed the
Speaker.

The said Hudson and his brother being brought before the Lieutenant, (for whom
he had laid wait) and after examination he was committed prisoner: and
forthwith the said Lieutenant of the Tower sent a Letter to Mr. Speaker (the
House of Commons then siting.)

There is a Committee of the House of Commons appointed by the House to examine
the whole business, which Committee sat all this afternoon about it.

Many Cavaliers were observed to ride out of London this day, insomuch that
their numbers were much taken notice of upon the highways.

It is conjectured from what is discovered, that the sign was thus to have
been.

The Cavaliers engaged in it, to rumor abroad Tuesday, December. and
Wednesday, viz. to morrow that the Arrow under Sir Thomas Fairfax is coming to
London, to quarter in the City.

When the City should be in a distraction as they supposed, at this news, if it
did work any divisions on Tuesday, then on Wednesday to rise and declare
themselves for the King.

And on Tuesday to raise also a Report about the City, that his Majesty is gone
from the Isle of Wight, that so they might the better report his Majesty to be
with them on Wednesday, when they begin to act their design. Though for my
part, if there were such a real design by them, as carries too probable a
face with it, yet, for my part, I do believe that his Majesty is so far from
ingageing in it, that he himself will judge it to be some Jesuited design
against himself and the Parliament, rather then He would countenance it,
especially at this time, when things are in so fair a way of composure.

December. 13. 1647.
Imprimatur

Gilb. Mabbot.

FINIS.

