A Wise and Moderate Discourse, Concerning Church-Affaires. As it was written,
long since, by the famous Author of those Considerations, which seem to have
some reference to this. Now published for the common good.

Imprinted in the year 1641.

IT is but ignorance, if any man find it strange that the state of Religion
(especially in the days of peace) should be exercised and troubled with
controversies: for as it is the condition of the Church militant to be ever
under trialls, so it comes to pass that when the fiery trial of persecution
cease, there succeeds another trial, which as it were by contrary blastes
of doctrine, does sift and winow men's faith, and proves them whether they know
God aright, even as the other of afflictions discovers whether they love him
better then the world. Accordingly was it foretold by Christ, saying: That in
the latter times it should be said, Lo here, lo there is Christ; which is to
be understood, not as if the very person of Christ should be assumed and
counterfeited, but his authority and pre-eminence (which ought to be truth it
self) that should be challenged and pretended. Thus have we read and seen to
be fulfilled that which follows: Ecce in deserto, ecce in penetratio: while
some have sought the truth in the conventicles and conciliables of Heretics
and Sectaries: others in the externe face and representation of the Church, and
both sorts been seduced. Were it then that the controversies of the Church of
England were such as did divide the unity of the Spirit, and not such as do
unswaddle her of her bands (the bands of peace) yet could it be no occasion for
any pretended Catholic to judge us, or for any irreligious person to despise
us: or if it be, it shall but happen to us all as it has used to do; to them
to be hardened, and to us to endure the good pleasure of God. But now that our
contentions are such, as we need not so much that general Canon and sentence
of Christ: Erratis nescientes Scripturas, etc. as we need the admonition of
Saint James: Let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath:
And that the wound is no way dangerous, except we poison it with our own
remedies. As the former sort of men have less reason to make themselves
music in our cord: so I have good hope that nothing shall displease our
selves which shall be sincerely and modestly propounded for the appeasing of
these dissentions. For if any shall be offended at this voice: Vos estis
fratres, ye are brethren, why strive ye? he shall give great presumption
against himself, that he is the party that does his brother wrong. The
controversies themselves I will not enter into, as judging that disease
requires rather rest then any other cure. Thus much we all know and confess,
that they be not of the highest nature: for they are not touching the high
mysteries of faith: such as detained the Churches after their first peace for
many years, what time the heretics moved curious questions, and made strange
anatomies of the nature and person of Christ; and the Catholic Fathers were
compelled to follow them with all subtillity of disputations and
determinations, to exclude them from their evasions, and to take them in their
own Labyrinths; so as it is rightly said: Illis temporibus ingeniosa res fuit
esse Christianum: In those days it was an ingenious and subtle matter to be
a Christian: Neither are they concerning the great parts of the worship of God;
of which it is true, that Non servatur unitas in credendo, nisi eadem adsit in
colendo: There will be kept no unity in believing, except it be entire in
worshipping: such as were the controversies in the East and West Churches
touching Images, and such as are many of those which are between the Church of
Rome and us, as about the adoration of the Sacrament, and the like. But we
contend about Ceremonies, and things indifferent, about the externe policy and
government of the Church: In which kind, if we would but remember, that the
ancient and true bonds of unity, are one Faith, one Baptism, and not one
Ceremony, one Policy. If we would observe the league among Christians, that
is penned by our Savior Christ (He that is not against us, is with us) if we
could but comprehend that saying, Differentia rituum commendat unitatem
doctrinae: and that, Habet religio quae sunt aeternitatis, habet quae sunt
temporis: Religion has parts which belong to eternity, and parts which belong
to time.

And if we did but know the virtue of silence, and slownesse to speak,
commended by Saint James, our controversies would (of themselves) close up and
grow together. But most especially, if we would leave the overweening and
turbulent humors of these times, and renew the blessed proceedings of the
Apostles and Fathers of the Primitive Church; which was in the like and greater
cases, not to enter into assertions and positions, but to d^liver counsels and
advices, we should need no other remedy at all. Si cadem con^ulis frater, qua
affirmas, debetur consulenti reverentia, cum non debetur fides affirmanti:
Brother, if that which you set down by way of assertion, you would deliver by
way of advice, there were reverence due to your counsel, where credit is not
due to your affirmation. Saint Paul was content to speak thus: Ego, non
Dominus; I, and not the Lord: and secundum consilium meum, ^ording to my
counsel. But now men do so lightly say, Not I, but the Lord; yea, and bind it
with heavy denunciations of his judgments, to terrify the simple, which have
not sufficiently understood out of Solomon, that the causlesse curse shall not
come: Therefore seeing the accidents are they which breed the peril, and not
the things themselves in their own nature, it is meet the remedies be applied
unto them by opening what it is on either part that keeps the wound green,
and formaliseth both sides to a further opposition, and works an
indisposition in men's minds to be reunited; wherein no accusation is
pretended. But I find in reason, that it is best built by repetition of
wrongs, and in example that the speeches which have been by the wisest men, De
concordia ordinum, have not abstained from reducing to memory the extremities
used on both parts. So as it is true which was said, Qui pacem tractat non
repetitis conditionis: dissidii, is magis animos dulcedine pacis fallit quam
aequitate componit. And first of all, it is more then time that an end were
made of this unmodest and deformed kind of writing lately entertained, whereby
matters of religion are handled in the style of the stage. Indeed bitter and
earnest writing is not hastily to be condemned: for men cannot contend coldly
and without affection about things they hold dear and precious. A politic
man may write from his brain without touch or sense of his heart, as in a
speculation that pertains not unto him; but a feeling Christian will express
in his words a character either of zeal or love: the latter of which as I
would wish ratherto be embraced, as being more fit for the times; yet is the
former warranted also by great examples. But to leave all reverend and
religious compassions toward evils, or indignation toward faults, to turn
religion into a Comedy or Satyr, to search and rip up wounds with a laughing
countenance, to intermix Scripture and Scurrilility sometime in one sentence,
is a thing far from the devour reverence of a Christian, and scant beseeming
the honest regard of a sober man. Non est major confusio quam serii and joci:
there is no greater confusion then the confounding of jest and earnest. The
majesty of religion, and the contempt and deformity of things ridiculous, are
things as distant as things may be. Two principal causes have I ever known of
Atheism, curious controversies and profane scoffing. Now that these two are
joined in one, no doubt that Sect will make no small progression. And here I do
much esteem the wisdom and religion of that Bishop, which replied to the
first pamphlet of this kind, who remembered that a fool was to be answered,
but not by becoming like unto him, and considered the matter he handled, and
not the person with whom he dealt. Job speaking of the majesty and gravity of a
Judge in himself, says: If I did smile, they believed me not; as if he should
have said: If I diverted or glanced unto conceit of mirth, yet men's minds were
so possessed with a reverence of the action in hand, as they could not receive
it. Much more ought this to be amongst Bishops and Divines disputing about holy
things: and therefore as much do I mislike of him, who as it seemed, pleased
himself with it, as no mean policy. That these men are to be dealt withal at
their own weapons, and pledged in their own cup. This (no doubt) seemed to him
as profound, as when the Cardinal counseled Julius the second to encounter
the Council of Nice with the Council of Lateran; or as lawful a challenge as
M. Jewel made to confute the pretended Catholics by the Fathers.

But these things will not excuse the imitation of evil in another: It should
contrariwise be with us as Caesar said: Nil malo quam eos similes cum sui, and
me mei. But now, dum de bonis contendimus, in malis consentimus; while we
differ in good things, we resemble in evil. Surely if I were asked of these
men, who were the more to be blamed, I should perhaps remember the proverb,
That the second blow makes the fray; and the saying of an obscure fellow, Qui
replicat multiplicat, he that replieth multiplieth. But I would determine the
question with this stutterer: Alter principium malo dedit, alter modum
abstulit: by the one means we have a beginning, by the other we shall have none
end.

And truly, as I do marvel that some of those preachers which do call for
reformation (whom I am far from wronging, so far as to join them with
these scoffers) do not publish some declaration, whereby they may satisfy the
world, that they dislike, their cause should be so solicited: so I hope
assuredly, that my Lords of the Clergy have no intelligence with these other
libellers; but do altogether disallow that their dealing should be thus
defended: For though I observe in him many glozes, whereby the man would
insinuate himself into their favor; yet I find too ordinary, that many
pressing and fawning persons, do misconjecture of the humors of men in
authority, and many times veneri immolant suem, they seek to gratify them
with that they most dislike. For I have great reason to satisfy my self
touching the judgment of my Lords the Bishops in this matter, by that which
was written by one of them, whom I mentioned before with honor. Nevertheless,
I note, there is not an indifferent hand carried toward these pamphlets as they
deserve. For the one sort flies in darkness, and the other is uttered openly.
Wherein I might advise that side out of a wise writer, who has set it down,
that punitis ingeniis gliscit authoritas; and indeed we ever see it falls
out, that the forbidden writing is thought to be a certain spark of truth
that flies up in the faces of them that feeke to choke and tread it out;
whereas a book authorized, is thought to be but temporis voces, the language
of the time. But in plain truth I do find to my understanding, these
pamphlets as meet to be suppressed as the others. First, as the former do
seek to deface the government of the Church in the persons of the Bishops and
Prelates: so the other does lead into contempt the exercise of religion in the
persons of sundry Preachers; so as it disgraceth the higher matter, though in
the meaner person. Next, I find certain indiscreet and dangerous
amplifications, as if the civil government if self of this estate, had near
lost the force of its sinews, and were ready to enter into some convulsion,
all things being full of faction and disorder; which is as unwisely
acknowledged as untruly affirmed. I know his meaning is to enforce this
unreverent and violent impugning of the government of the Bishops, to be a
suspected forerunner of a more general contempt.

And I grant there is a sympathy between both the estates: but no such matter
in the civil policy as deserves a taxation so dishonorable. To conclude
this point: As it were to be wished that these writings had been abortive, and
never seen the Sun; so the next is, that seeing they be common abroad, that
they be censured of all that have understanding and conscience, as the
untemperate extravagants of some light person: yea further, they may beware
(except they mean to deprive themselves of all sense of religion, and to pave
their own hearts, and to make them as the high way) how they be conversant in
them, and much more how they delight themselves in that vein, but rather to
turn their laughing into blushing, and to be amazed as at a short madness,
that they have in matters of religion, taken their disport and solace. But this
perchance is one of those faults which will be soonest acknowledged, though I
perceive nevertheless, there wants not some which seek to blanch and excuse
it. But to descend to a more narrow view and consideration of the accidents and
circumstances of these controversies, wherein either part deserves blame and
imputation: I find generally in causes of Churchcontroversies, that men do
offend in some or all of these five points:

1. The first, the giving of occasion unto controversies, and also the
inconsiderate and ungrounded taking of the occasion.

2. The next is the extending and multiplying of controversies to a more
general opposition and contradiction then appears at the first propounding
of them, when men's judgments are least partial.

3. The third is the passionate and unbrotherly practices and proceedings on
both parts toward the persons each of others for their discredit and
suppression.

4. The fourth, is the courses holden and and entertained on either side, for
the drawing of the practizants to a more straight union within themselves,
which ever imports a further destruction of the entire body.

5. The last, is the undue and inconvenient propounding, publishing, and
debating of the controversies. In which point the most palpable error has been
already spoken of, as that which through the strangeness and freshness of the
abuse first offers it self to the conceits of all men.

Now concerning the occasion of controversies, it cannot be denied but that the
imperfection in the conversation and government of those which have chief
place in the Church, have ever been principal causes and motives of schisms
and divisions: For whilst the Bishops and governors of the Church continue
full of knowledge and good works, whilst they feed their flock indeed, while
they deal with the secular estates in all liberty and resolution, according to
the majesty of their calling, and the precious care of souls imposed upon
them; so long the Church is situate, as it were, upon an hill, no man makes
question of it, or seeks to depart from it: But when these virtues in the
Fathers and Elders of the Church have lost their light, and that they wax
wordly, lovers of themselves, and pleasers of men: then men begin to grope for
the Church as in the dark, they be in doubt whether they be the successors
of the Apostles, or of the Pharisees; yea, howsoever they sit in Moses Chair,
yet they can never speak, tanquam authoritatem habentes, as having authority,
because they lost their reputation in the consciences of men, by declining
their steps from the way which they trace out to others; so as men have need
continually sounding in their ears, this saying, Nolite exire, go not out, so
ready are they to depart from the Church upon every voice: And therefore it is
truly noted by one who writes as a natural man, that the hypocrisy of
Friars did for a great time, maintain and bear out the irreligion of Bishops
and Prelates. For this is that double policy of the spiritual enemy, either by
counterfeit holiness of life to authorize and establish errors, or by the
corruption of manners to discredit and call into question truth and lawful
things.

This concerns my Lords the Bishops, unto whom I am witness to my self,
that I stand affected as I ought: no contradiction has supplanted in me the
reverence I owe to their calling: neither has any detraction or calumny
embased my opinion of their persons; I know some of them, whose names are most
pierced with these accusations, to be men of great virtues, although
indisposition of the time, and the want of correspondence many ways, is enough
to frustrate the best indevours in the Church. And for the rest generally, I
can condemn none, I am no judge of them that belong to so high a master,
neither have I two witnesses: and I know it is truly said of Fame, Pariter
facta atque infecta canebat. Their taxations arise nor all from one coast: They
have indifferent enemies, and ready to invent slander, more ready to amplify,
and most ready to believe it, and magnes mendacii credulitas, credulity is the
allurement of lies. But if any be who have against the supreme Bishops not a
few things, but many: if any have lost his first love, if any be neither hot
nor cold, if any have stumbled to folly at the threshold, in such sort that he
cannot sit well that entered ill; it is time they return whence they are
fallen, and confirm the things which remain. Great is the weight of this
fault, Et eorum causa abhorrebant homines a sacrificiis Domini: and for their
cause did men abhor the worship of God. But howsoever it be, that those have
sought to defame them, and cast contempt upon them, are not to beexcused. It is
the precept of Solomon, That the Rulers be not reproched, no not in thought,
but that we draw our conceit into a modest interpretation of their doings. The
holy Angel would give no sentence of blasphemy against the common slanderer,
but said, Increpet te Dominus, the Lord rebuke thee. The Apostle Saint Paul,
thought against him that did polute sacred justice with tyrannous violence, he
did justly denounce the judgment of God in faying, Percuciet te Dominus, the
Lord shall strike thee, yet in saying, Paries dealbate, he though the had gone
too far, and retracted it: whereupon a learned Father said: Ipsum, quam vis
inane, nomen and umbram sacerdotis cogitans expavit. The ancient Councels and
Synods, as it is noted by the Ecclesiastical story, when they deprived any
Bishop, never recorded the offense, but buried it in perpetual silence. Only
Cham purchased his fathers curse with revealing his fathers disgrace: and yet a
much greater fault is it, to ascend from the person to the calling, and to draw
that in question. Many good Fathers rigorously compiained of the unworthiness
of Bishops, as if it did presently forfeit and cease their office. One says:
Sacerdotes nominamur and non sumus, we are called Priests, and are not. Another
says: nisi bonum opus amplectaris Episcopus esse non potes, except thou
undertake the good work, thou can not be a Bishop; yet they meant nothing
less then to move doubt of their calling or ordination?

The second occasion of controversies, is, the nature and humor of some men.
The Church never wants a kind of persons that love the salutation of Rabbi,
not in ceremony or complement, but in an inward authority which they seek over
men's minds, in drawing them to depend upon their opinion, and so seek
knowledge at their lips: these men are the true successors of Diotrephes,
the lovers of pre-eminence, and not Lord Bishops; such spirits do light upon
another sort of natures which do adhere to these men, Quorum gloria in
obsequio, stiff fellows, and such as zeal marvellously for those whom they
have chosen to be their masters. This latter sort of men for the most part,
are men of young years, and superficial understanding, carried away with
partial respect of persons, or with the enticing appearance of godly names and
pretenses. Pauci res ipsas sequuntur, plures nomina rerum; plurima nomina
magistrorum: few follow the things themselves, more the names of the things,
most the names of their masters. About these general affections are wretched
accidental and private emulations and discontentments. All which break forth
together into contentions, such as either violate truth, sobriety, or peace.
These generalities apply themselves. The Universities are the seats and
continent of this disease, whence it has been, and is derived into other parts
of the realm. There some will be no longer e numero, of the number: there some
others side themselves before they know the right hand from the left. So as it
is truly said Transeunt ab ignorantia ad prejudicium: They leap from ignorance
to a prejudicate opinion, and never take a good judgment in their way. But as
it is well noted: Inter juvenile judicium, and senile prejudicium omnis veritas
corrumpitur: When men are indifferent and not partial, then their judgment is
weak and unripe, through want of years; and when it grows to strength, and
ripeness, by that time it is forestalled with such a number of prejudicate
opinions, as it is made unprofitable, so as between these two all truth is
corrupted; while the honorable names of sincerity, and reformation, and
discipline, are put in the forward, so as contentions and evil zeales cannot
be touched, except these holy things are first thought to be violated. But
howsoever they shall infer the solicitation for the peace of the Church: not
to proceed from carnal sins: yet will I ever conclude with the Apostle Paul:
Cum sit inter vos zelus and contentio, nonne carnales estis? While there is
amongst you zeal and contention, are ye not carnal? And howsoever they esteem
the compounding of controversies, to savor of men's wisdom and humane
policy, I think themselves led with the wisdom which is from above; yet I
say with Saint James, Non est ista sapientia de sursum descendens, sed terrena,
animalis, diabolica. Ibi zelus and contentio, ibi inconstantia and omne opus
pravum. Of this inconstancy it is said by a learned Father: Procedere non ad
perfectionem, sed ad permutationem. They seek to go forward still, not to
perfection, but to change.

The third occasion of controversies, I observe to be an extreme and unlimited
detestation of some former heresy or corruption of the Church acknowledged and
convicted. This was the cause that produced the heresy of Arrius, grounded
chiefly upon detestation of Gentilisme; lest the Christians should seem by
assertion of the coequall divinity of our Savior Christ to approach to the
acknowledgement of more Gods then one. The detestation of Arrius heresy
produced that of Sabellius, who holding for execrable the dissimilitude which
Arri us pretended in the trinity, fled so far from him, that he fell into the
other extreme, to deny the distinction of persons, and to say they were but
only names of several offices and dispensations; yea, most of the heresies of
the Church have sprung up of this root, while men have made it their scale to
measure the bounds of their religion, taking it by the farthest distance from
the error last condemned. These be Posthumi haeresium filii, heresies that
arise of the ashes of other heresies that are extinct and amortised. This
manner of apprehension does in some degree possess many of our time: they
think it the true touch stone to try what is good and holy, by measuring what
is more and less opposite to the institutions of the Church of Rome, be it
ceremony, be it policy or government; yea be it other institution of greater
weight, that is ever most perfect which is removed most degrees from that
Church; and that is ever polluted and blemished which participateth in any
appearance with it: this is a subtle and dangerous conceit for men to
entertain, apt to delude themselves, more apt to delude the people, and most
apt of all to calumniate their adversaries. This surely, but that a notorious
condemnation of that position was laid before our eyes, had long since brought
us to the rebaptizing of children baptized according to the pretended
Catholic religion. For I see that which is a matter of much like reason,
which is the reordaining of Priests, is a matter very resolutely maintained. It
is very meet that men beware how they be abused by this opinion, and that they
know it is a consideration of much greater wisdom to be well advised: whether
in the general demolition of the institutions of the Church of Rome, there
were not (as men's actions are unperfect) some good purged with the bad, rather
then to purge the Church as they pretend, every day anew, which is the way to
make a wound in her bowels, as it is already begun.

The fourth and last occasion of these controversies (a thing which did also
trouble the Church in former time) is the partial affectation and imitation of
foreign Churches: for many of our men, during the time of persecution, and
since, having been conversant in Churches abroad, and received a great
impression of the government there ordained, have violently sought to intrude
the same upon our Church. But I answer, Conveniamus in eo quod convenit non in
eo quod receptum est: let us agree in this with every Church, to do that which
is convenient for the estate of it self, and not in particular customs.
Although their Churches had received the better form, yet many times it is to
be sought. Non quid optimum, sed e bonis quid proximum: Not what is best, but
of good things what is next and readiest to be had. Our Church is not now to
place, it is settled and established. It may be in civil States a republique is
better then a kingdom: yet God forbid that lawful kingdoms should be tied to
inovate and make alterations: Qui mala introducit, voluntatem Dei oppugnat
revelatam in verbo: Qui nova introducit, voluntatem Dei oppugnat revelatam in
rebus: He that brings in ill customs, resists the will of God revealed in
his word: He that brings in new things, resists the will of God revealed in
the things themselves. Consule providentiam Dei cum verbo Dei: Take counsel
of the providence of God, as well as of his word. Neither yet do I admit that
their form (although it were possible and convenient) is better then ours, if
some abuses were taken away. The party and equality, is a thing of wonderful
great confusion, and so is an ordinary government by Synods, which do
necessarily ensue upon the other. It is hard in all causes, especially in
matters of religion, when voices shall be numbered and not weighed. Equidem
(says a wise Father) ut vere quod res est scribam, prorsus decrevi fugere
omnem conventum Episcoporu^: nullius enim consilii bonum exitum unqua^ vidi:
consilia enim non minuunt mala, sed augent potius. To say the truth, I am
utterly determined never to come to any Council of Bishops: for I never yet
saw good end of any Council: for Councels abate not ill things, but rather
increase them: which is not so much to be understood of general Councels, as
for Synods gathered for the ordinary government of the Church, as for
deprivation of Bishops, or such like cases, which mischief has taught us the
use of Archbishops and Patriarchs, and Primates, as the abuse of them since
has caused men to mislike them. But it will be said, Look to the fruits of
the Churches abroad and ours. To which I say, I beseech the Lord to multiply
his blessings and graces upon these an hundred fold. But yet it is not good we
fall a numbering them. It may be our peace has made us wanton. It may be also
(though I would be loath to derogate from the honor of those Churches, were it
not to remove scandals) that their fruits are as torches in the dark, which
appear greatest a far off. I know they may have some more strict order for
the repressing of sundry excesses. But when I consider of the censures of some
persons, as well upon particular men as upon Churches, I think of the saying of
a Platonist, who says: Certe vitia irascibilis partis animae sunt gradu
praviora quam concupiscibilis tametsi occultiora. A matter that appeared well
by the ancient contentions of Bishops: God grant we may contend with other
Churches as the Vine with the Olive, which of us bears best fruits: and not
as the Brier with the Thistle, which of us is most unprofitable. And thus much
touching the occasion of controversies.

Now briefly to set down the growth and progression of these controversies,
whereby will be verified the wise counsel of Solomon, that the course of
contention is to be stopped at the first, being else as the waters, which if
they get a breach, will hardly ever be recovered. It may be remembered, how that
on their part who call for reformation, was first propounded some dislike of
certain ceremonies, supposed to be superstitious: some complained of dumb
Ministers, who possessed rich Benefices: some made invectives against the idle
and monastical continuance within the Universities, by those who had livings
to be resident upon, and such like causes. Thence they went on to condemn the
government of Bishops, as an Hierarchy remaining to us of the corruptions of
the Roman Church, and to except to sundry institutions, as not sufficiently
delivered from the pollutions of former times. And lastly, they are advanced to
define of an only and perpetual form of policy in the Church, which
(without consideration of the possibility, or foresight of peril, or
perturbation of the Church and State) must be erected and planted by the
Magistrate. Here they stay. Others not able to keep footing on so steep a
ground, descend further, that the same must be entered into, and accepted by
the people at their peril, without attending the establishment of authority;
and so in the mean time they refuse to communicate with us, reputing us to have
no Church. This has been the progression of that side, I mean of the
generality. For I know that some persons (being of the nature not only to love
extremities, but to fall to them without degrees) were at the highest stream
at the first: the other part that maintains the present government of the
Church, has not kept one tenor neither. First, those ceremonies which they
pretended to be corrupt, they maintained to be things indifferent, and opposed
the examples of the good times of the Church, to that challenge that was made
unto them, because they were used in the latter superstitious times: then were
they also content mildly to acknowledge many imperfections in the Church, as
Tares came up amongst the Corn, which were not as yet according to the
wisdom of our Savior Christ, to be without strife pulled up, lest it might
spoil and supplant the good corn, but to grow on together till the harvest.
After this they grew to a more absolute defense and maintenance of orders of
the Church: and stiffly to hold that nothing was to be innovated, partly because
it needed not, and partly because it would make a breach upon the rest. Thence
(exasperate through contention) they are fallen to a direct condemnation of the
contrary part, as of a sect: yea and some indiscreet persons have been bold in
open preaching to use dishonorable and derogative speech, and censure of the
Churches abroad: and that so far, as that some of our men (as I have heard)
ordained in foreign parts have been pronounced to be no lawful Ministers.
Thus we see the beginnings were modest, but the extremes violent: so as there
is now almost as great a distance of either part from it self, as was at the
first of one from the other. And surely (though my meaning and scope be not (as
I said before) to enter into the controversies themselves) yet I do admonish
the maintainers of the above named discipline, to weigh and consider seriously,
and attentively, how near they are unto those with whom I know they will not
join. It is hard to say that the discipline which they say we want, is one of
the Essential parts of the worship of God: and not to affirm, that the people
upon peril of their salvation without staying for the Magistrate are to gather
themselves unto it. I demand if a civil State should receive the preaching and
baptism, and exclude the sacrament of the supper: were not men bound upon
danger of their souls, to draw themselves to congregations, where they might
celebrate that Ministry, and not content themselves with that part of worship
which the Magistrate has authorized? This I speak not to draw them into
mislike of others, but into a more deep consideration of themselves. Fortasse
non redeunt, quia progressuum suum non intelligunt, Again I say, to my Lords
the Bishops that it is heard for them to avoid blame in the opinion of an
indifferent person, in standing so precisely, in altering nothing. Leges novis
legibus non recreate descunt, Laws being not refreshed with new laws, wax
sour. Qui mala non permutat, in bonis non perseverat, without change of ill, a
man can not continue the good: to take away abuses, supplanteth not good
orders, but establishes them. Morosa moris retentio res turbulenta aque ac
novitas est, A contentious retaining of custom is a turbulent thing as well as
innovation. A good husbandman is ever pruning and stirring in his vineyard, or
field; not unreasonable indeed, nor unskilfully, for he lightly ever finds
somewhat to do. We have heard of no offers of the Bishops of bills in
Parliament, which no doubt proceeding from them to whom it properly
appertains, would have every where received acceptance, their own
constitutions, and orders have reformed little. Is nothing amiss? can any man
defend the use of excommunication, as a bare process to lackey up and down,
for duties and for fees, it being the greatest judgment next unto that
general judgment at the last day? Is there no means to nurse and train up
Ministers? (for the yield of the Universities will not serve, though they were
never so well governed) to train them I say not to preach (for that every man
adventureth confidently to do) but to preach soundly and handle the Scriptures
with wisdom and judgment. I know Prophesying was subject to great abuses;
and would be more abused now, because the lease of persecution is increased.
But I say, the only reason of the abuse was, because there were admitted to it
a popular auditory, and it was contained with a private conference of
Ministers. Other things might be spoken of. I pray God inspire the Bishops,
with a fervent love, and care of the people, and that they may not so much urge
things in controversy, which all men confess to be gracious, and good. And
thus much for the second part.

Now as to the third part of unbrotherly proceeding on either part, it is
directly contrary to my purpose to amplify wrongs, it is enough to note and
number them: which I do also to move compassion and remorse on the offending
side, and not to animate chalenges and complaints on the other. And this point
(as reason is) does chiefly touch that side which do most: Injuriae
potentiorum sunt, injuries come from them that have the upper hand; The wrongs
of them that are oppressed, of the government of the Church toward the other,
may hardly be dissembled or excused: they have charged them as though they
denied to pay tribute to Caesar, and withdraw from the civil magistrate their
obedience, which they ever performed and taught: They have sorted and coupled
them with the family of Love, whose heresies they have labored to descry and
confute: they have been swift of credit to receive accusations against them
from those that have quarrelled with them. But for speaking against sin and
vice, their examinations and inquisitions have been straight, swearing them to
blanks and generalities (not included within the compass of matter certain,
which the party that takes the oath is able to comprehend) which is a thing
captious and strainable. Their urging of subscription to their own Articles,
is but lacescere and irritare morbos Ecclesiae, which otherwise would spend and
crush themselves, Non consensum quaerit, sed dissidium auget, qui quod factis
praestatur, verbis exigit: he seeks not union but division, which exacteth
inwardly that, which men are content to yield in outward action. And it is
true, there are some, which (as I am persuaded) will not easily offend by
inconformity, who notwithstanding make some conscience to subscribe. For they
know this note of inconstancy and defection from that which they have long
held, shall disable that good which otherwise they would do. For such is the
weakness of many, that they think their Ministeries should thereby be
discredited. As for their easy silencing of them, in such great scarcity of
Preachers, is to punish the people and not them. Ought they not (I mean the
Bishops) to keep one eye open to look upon the good that those men do; not to
fix them both upon the hurt that they suppose comes by them. Indeed such as
are intemperate and incorrigible God forbid they should be permitted to teach.
But shall every inconsiderate word, sometimes captiously watched, and for the
most part hardly enforced, be as it were a forfeiture of their voice and gift
in teaching? As for particular molestatio^s, I take no pleasure to recite the^.
If a minister shall be troubled for saying in Baptism, Do you believe? or, do
thou believe? If another shall be troubled for praying for her Majesty without
addition of her styles, whereas the very form of prayer in the book of Common
prayer has (thy servant Elizabeth) and no more. If a third shall be accused
upon these words uttered touching the controversies, Tollatur lex and fiat
certamen, whereby was meant, that the prejudice of the law removed, other
reasons should be equally compared of calling for mutiny and sedition: as if
he had said, Away with the Law, and try it out by force. If these and other
like particulars be true, which I have but by rumor, and cannot affirm, it is
to be lamented that they should labor amongst us with so little comfort. I
know restrained government is better then remiss. And I am of his opinion that
said: Better it is to live where nothing is lawful, then where all things are
lawful: I dislike that laws be contemned, or disturbers unpunished. But
laws are compared to the grape, which being too much pressed, yields an hard
and unwholesome wine. Of these things I may say, Iram viri non operatur
justitiam Dei: the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God. As for
the injuries on the other part, they are, Ictus vermium, as it were headless
arrows, they are fity and eager invectives: and in some fond men, uncivil and
unreverent behavior toward their persons. This last invention also which
exposes them to derision and obloquie by libels, charge (as I am persuaded)
the whole side; neither does that other, which is yet more odious, practiced by
the most sort of the^, which is calling in as it were to their aid, certain
mercenary bands, which impugned Bishops and other Ecclesiastical dignities, to
have the spoil of their endowments and livings.

Of this I cannot speak too hardly: It is an intelligence between incendiaries
and robbers, the one to rob or fire the house, the other to rifle it. And thus
much touching the third part.

The fourth part wholly pertains to them which repugne the present
Ecclesiastical government, who although they have not cut themselves from the
body and communion of the Church: yet they effect certain cognisants and
differences, wherein they seek to correspond amongst themselves, and to differ
from other: and it is truly said, Tam sunt mores Schismatici, quam dogmata
Schismatica: There be as well Schismatic factions as opinions. First, they
have impropered to themselves the names of zealous, sincere, and reformed, as
if all other were cold, minglers of holy things, and profane, and friends of
abuses. Yea to be a man endued with great virtues, and fruitful in good
works, yet if he concur not fully with them, they term (inderogation) a
civil and moral man, and compare him to Socrates or some heathen Philosopher:
whereas the wisdom of the Scripture teaches us contrariwise to denominate
him religious according to the works of the second table: because they of the
first are often counterfeited and practiced in hypocrisy. So says Saint John,
that a man does mainly boast of loving God whom he has not seen, if he loves
not his neighbor whom he has seen. And Saint James says, This is true
religion to visit the fatherless and widow; and so that which is but
Phylosophicall with them, is in the phrase of the Apostle, true religion and
Christianity. As in affection they challenge to themselves the said virtues of
zeal, and the rest, so in knowledge they attribute to themselves light, and
perfection. They say the Church of England in King Edwards time, and the
beginning of her Majesty's, was but in the cradle: and that the Bishops of
those days did somewhat for day-breake, but the maturity and fullness of light
proceeded from themselves. So Sabinus Bishop of Heraclea of Macedonia, said,
that the Fathers in the council of Nice were but infants, and ignorant men:
that the Church was not so to persist in their decrees, as to refuse that
farther ripnesse of knowledge which the time had revealed. And as they censure
virtuous men by the names of civil and moral, so do they censure men truly,
and godly-wise who see the vanity of their assertion) by the names of
Politic, saying that their wisdom is but carnal, and savouring of man's
brain. So likewise if a Preacher preach with care and meditation (I speak not
of the vain Scholasticall form and manner of preaching) but soundly indeed,
ordering the matter he handles distinctly, and draws it down from
authorizing of it by strong proofs and warrents: they censure it as a form of
preaching, not becoming the simplicity of the Gospel, and refer it to the
reprehension of Saint Paul speaking of the intising speech of man's wisdom.
Now for their own manner of preaching, what is it? Surely they exhort well,
and work compuction of mind, and bring men well to the question, Viri fratres
quid agem us? but that is not enough, except they resolve this question. They
handle matters of controversies weakly and obiter, and as before a people that
will accept of any thing in doctrine or manners: there is little but generality
and repetition. They move the bread of life, and toss it up and down, they
break it not: They draw not their directions down ad casus conscientiae, that
a man may be warranted in his particular actions whether they be lawful or
not; neither indeed are they able to do it, what through want of grounded
knowledge, what through want of study and time. It is an easy thing to call
for observation of the Sabbath day, and to speak against unlawful gain: but
what actions and works may be done upon the Sabbath day, and in what cases;
and what courses of gain are lawful, and what not: to set this down, and to
clear so the whole matter with good distinctions and decisions, is a matter of
great knowledge and labor, and asks much meditation and conversation in the
Scriptures and other helps which God has provided and preserved for
instruction. They carry not equal hand in teaching the people their lawful
liberties as well as their restraints and prohibitions. But they think a man
cannot go too far in keeping a commandment; they forget that there are
sins on the right hand as well as on the left, and that the sword is double
edged, and cutteth on both sides, as well the superstitious observances, as the
profane transgressions. Who doubts but it is as unlawful to shut where God
has opened, as to open where God has shut? to bind where God has loosed,
and to loose where God has bound? Amongst men it is as ill taken to turn
back favors, as to disobey commandments. In this kind of zeal (for
example) they have pronounced generally and without difference all untruth is
unlawful, notwithstanding that the Midwives have been reported to have been
blessed in their excuse, and Rahab is said by faith to have concealed the
spies. Farther, I heard some Sermons of mortification, which (I think) with
very good meaning they have preached out of their own experience and exercise:
and things in private counsel not unmeet, but surely no sound conceits: much
like to Parsons his Resolutions, or not so good, rather apt to breed in men
weak opinions, and perplexed despaires, then filial and true repentance which
is sought. Another point of great inconvenience and peril, is to entice the
people to hear controversies, and all manner of doctrine: they say no part of
the counsel of God is to be suppressed, nor the people defrauded. So as the
difference which the Apostle makes between milk and strong meats, is
confounded; and his precept that the weak be not admitted to questions and
controversies, takes no place: But most of all it is to be suspected as a seed
of further inconvenience for manner of handling the Scriptures: for while they
seek express Scripture for every thing; and that they have in a manner
deprived themselves and the Church of a special help, and support by
embracing the authority of Fathers, they resort to naked examples, conceited
inferences and forced allusions, such as do bring ruin to all certainty of
Religion.

Another extremity is that excessve magnifying of that, which though it be a
principal and holy institution, yet has limits as all things else have. We
see (in a manner) wheresoever they find in the Scriptures the word spoken of,
they expound it of preaching. They have made it almost of the Essence of the
sacrament of the Lords supper to have a sermon precedent. They have (in manner)
annihilated liturgies and forms of divine service. As for the life of the good
Monks and eremites of the Primitive Church, I know they will condemn a man as
half a Papist, if he should maintain them as other, then profane, because
they heard no preaching. In the mean time, what preaching is, and who may be
said to preach, they make no question. But as far as I see every man that
speaks in chair is counted a preacher. But I am assured, that not a few that
call wholly for a preaching ministry, deserve to be of the first themselves,
that should be expelled. These and some other errors and misproceedings, they
do fortify and increase by being so greatly addicted to their opinions, and
impatient to hear contradiction or argument. Yea I know some of them, that
would think is a tempting of God to hear or read what may be said against
them. As if there could be a Quod bonum e tenete, without an Omne probate going
before. This may suffice to offer unto themselves a view and consideration
whether they do well or no, and to correct and assuage the partiallity of their
followers and dependents. For as for any man that shall hereby enter into a
contempt of their Ministry, it is but his own hardness of heart. I know the
word of exhortation does chiefly rest upon these men, and they have zeal and
hate of sin. But again let them take heed that it be not true which one of
their adversaries says against them, that they have but two small wants,
knowledge, and love. And so I conclude the fourth part.

The last point teaching the due publishing, and debating of these
controversies, needs no long speech. this strange abuse of Antiques and
Pasquils has been touched before. So likewise I repent not that which I said
before, that a character of love is more proper for debates of this nature,
then that of zeal. As for all direct and direct glaunces or levels of men's
persons, they were ever in these cases disallowed. Lastly, whatsoever is
pretended, the people is no meet judge or arbitrator; but rather the moderate,
quiet, and private assemblies of the learned. Qui apud in capace loquitur non
disceptat, sed calumniatur. The Press and Pulpit would be morefreed and
discharged: neither promotion on the one side, nor glory and heat on the other,
ought to continue these chalenges at the Gross, and such places. But rather
all Preachers especially such as are of a good temper, and have wisdom, with
conscience ought to inculcate and beat upon a place, peace, silence, and
sufferance. Neither let them fear Solons law which compelled in factions,
every particular person to range himself on the one side, or the other: nor
the fond calumny of neutrality. But let them know that it was true which was
said by a wise man, that neuters in contention were better or worse, then
either side.

These things have I in all syncerity and simplicity, set down touching the
controversies which now trouble the Church of England, and that without all art
or insinuation: and therefore not likely to be grateful to either part.
Notwithstanding I trust what has been said, shall find a correspondence in
their mind, who are not embarked with partiality, and which love the whole
better then the part. Whereby I am not out of hope that it may do good. At
least I shall not repent my self of the meditation.

FINIS.

