engraved portrait of Nathaniel Bacon dated 1795, after an original
self-portrait SR. NATHANIEL BACON.

From an Original at the Lord Viscount, Grimslon's at Gorhambury.

Pubd. Augt. 10. 1795. by W. Richardson Castle St. Leicester Square.





AN HISTORICAL DISCOURSE OF THE UNIFORMITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF ENGLAND. THE
FIRST PART. From the first Times till the Reign of Edward the third.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Walbancke at Grayes-Inne-Gate. 1647.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDWARD Earl of Manchester, Speaker of the House of
Peers: AND THE HONORABLE WILLIAM LENTHALL, Esqu. Speaker of the House of
Commons In PARLIAMENT.
MAy it please You to accept of this Sacrifice which I offer before Your
Supreme Judicatory to the service of the times. The fire is that of loyalty,
neither wild nor common; nor is the thing altogether forbidden and unclean. I
confess its maimed and unworthy, yet its the best that I have; and in that
regard whiles I now stand at Your Bar, if You shall please to dismiss me
without kneeling, I shall in that posture do the Houses the best service that
I can elsewhere.

NATH. BACON.

To Consideration.
A Private debate concerning the right of an English King to Arbitrary rule
over English Subjects as Successor to the Norman Conqueror, (so called) first
occasioned this Discourse. Herein I have necessarily fallen upon the Antiquity
and Uniformity of the Government of this Nation: It being cleared may also
serve as an Idea for them to consider, who do mind the restitution of this
shattered frame of policy. For as in all orher cures, so in that of a
distempered government the original constitution of the body is not lightly to
be regarded; and the contemplation of the proportion of the Manner of the
Nation in a small model brings no less furtherance to the right apprehension
of the true nature thereof (besides the delight) then the perusing of a Map
does to the travailer after a long and tedious travail.

I propound not this Discourse as a pattern drawn up to the life of the thing,
nor the thing it self as a Masterpiece for future ages; for well I do know,
that Commonweals in their minority do want not only perfection of strength
and beauty, but also of parts and proportion; especially seeing that their full
age attaineth no further growth then to a mixture of diverse forms in one.
Ambition has done much by discourse and action to bring forth Monarchy out of
the womb of notion, but yet like that of the Philosophers stone the issue is
but wind, and the end misery to the undertakers: and therefore more then
probable it is, that the utmost perfection of this nether worlds best
government consists in the upholding of a due proportion of several interests
compounded into one temperature.

He that knows the secrets of all men's hearts, does know that my aim in this
Discourse is neither at Scepter or Crosier, nor after popular dotage, but that
Justice and Truth may moderate in all. This is a Vessel I confess ill and
weakly built, yet does it adventure into the vast Ocean of your censures,
Gentlemen, who are Antiquaries, Lawyers, and Historians, any one of whom might
have steered in this course much better then my self. Had my own credit been
the fraite, I must have expected nothing less then wrack and loss of all;
but the maine propose of this voyage being for discovery of the true nature of
this government to common view; I shall ever account your just censures, and
contradictions (especially published with their grounds) to be my most happy
return, and as a Crown to this work. And that my labor has its full reward,
if others taking advantage by mine imperfections shall beautify England with a
more perfect and lively caracter.

The Contents.
CHap. 1. Of the Britons, and their government p. 1 Chap. 2 Concerning the
conversion of the Britons unto the faith p. 3 Chap. 3. Of the entry of the
Romans into Britain, and the state thereof during their continuance p. 5 Chap.
4. Of the entry of the Saxons, and their manner of government p. 12 Chap. 5. Of
Austins coming to the Saxons in England, his entertainment and work p. 17
Chap. 6. Of the imbodying of Prelacy into the government of this Kingdom p. 21
Chap. 7. Of Metropolitans in the Saxons time p. 23 Chap. 8. Of the Saxon
Bishops p. 25 Chap. 9. Of the Saxon Presbyters p. 27 Chap. 10. Of inferior
Church Officers amongst the Saxons p. 28 Chap. 11. Of Church-mens maintenance
amongst the Saxons p 29 Chap. 12. Of the several precincts or jurisdictions of
Church Governors amongst the Saxons p. 35 Chap. 13. Of the manner of the
Prelates government of the Saxon Church p. 36 Chap. 14. Of causes
Ecclesiastical p. 39 Cha. 15. A brief censure of the Saxon Prelaticall Church
government p. 43 Chap. 16. Of the Saxons Commonweal, and the government
thereof, and first of the King p. 46 Chap. 17. Of the Saxon Nobility p. 53
Chap. 18. Of the Freemen amongst the Saxons p. 55 Chap. 19. Of the villains
amongst the Saxons p. 56 Chap. 20. Of the grand Council amongst the Saxons
called the Micklemote p. 57 Chap. 21. Of the Council of Lords p. 62 Chap. 22.
Of the manner of the Saxon government in the time of war p. 63 Chap. 23. Of
the government of the Saxon Kingdom in the times of peace, and first of the
division of the Kingdom into shires, and their officers p. 65 Chap. 24. Of the
County court, and Sheriffs Torn p. 66 Chap. 25. Of the division of the County
into Hundreds, and the Officers and Court thereto belonging p. 68 Chap. 26. Of
the division of the Hundreds into Decennaries p. 70 Chap. 27. Of Franchises,
and first of the Church Franchise p. 71 Chap. 28. Of the second franchise
called the Marches p. 72 Chap. 29. Of County Palatines p. 73 Chap. 30. Of
Franchises of the person ibid. Chap. 31. Of Manors p. 75 Chapter 32. Of Courts
incident and united unto Manors p. 77 Chap. 33. Of Townships, and their
Markets p. 79 Chap. 34. Of the Forests p. 82 Chap. 35. Concerning Judges in
Courts of justice p. 84 Chap. 36. Of the proceedings in judicature by
Indictment, Appeal, Presentment, and Action p. 85 Chap. 37. Of the several
manners of extraordinary trial by Torture, Ordeale, Compurgators, and Battle
p. 88 Chap. 38. Of the ordinary manner of trial amongst the Saxons by Inquest
p. 91 Chap. 39. Of passing judgment and execution p. 94 Chap. 40. Of the
penal Laws amongst the Saxons p. 96 Chap. 41. Of the Laws of property of Lands
and Goods, and the manner of their conveyance p. 102 Chap. 42. Of the times of
Law and vacancy p. 110 Chap. 43. An Epilogue to the Saxon government p. 111
CHap. 44. Of the Norman entrance p. 113 Chap. 45. Of the title of the Norman
Kings to the English crown; that it was by election p. 115 Chap. 46. That the
government of the Normans proceeded upon the Saxon principles, And first of
Parliaments p. 120 Chap. 47. Of the Franchise of the Church in the Norman times
p. 123 Chap. 48. Of the several subservient jurisdictions, by Marches,
Counties, Hundreds, Buroughs, Lordships, and Decennaries p. 131 Chap. 49. Of
the immunities of the Saxon free men under the Norman government p. 135 Chap.
50. Recollection of certain Norman Laws concerning the Crown, in relation to
those of the Saxons formerly mentioned p. 138 Chap. 51. Of the like Laws that
concern common interest of goods p. 142 Chap. 52. Of Laws that concern common
interest of Lands p. 144 Chap. 53. Of diverse Laws made concerning the execution
of justice p. 150 Chap. 54. Of the Militia during the Normans time p. 152 Chap.
55. That the entry of the Normans into this government could not be by Conquest
p. 155 Chap. 56. A brief survey of the sense of Writers concerning the point
of conquest p. 158 CHap. 57. Of the government during the Reigns of Steven,
Henry the second, Richard the first, and John; and first of their titles to the
Crown, and disposition in government p. 165 Chap. 58. Of the state of the
Nobility of England from the Conquest, and during the Reign of these several
Kings p. 172 Chap. 59. Of the state of the Clergy, and their power in this
Kingdom from the Norman time p. 175 Chap. 60. Of the English Communally since
the Norman time p. 188 Chap. 61. Of Judicature, the Courts, and their Judges p.
189 Chap. 62. Of certain Laws of judicature in the time of Henry the 2. p. 193
Chap 63. Of the Militia of this Kingdom during the Reign of these Kings p.
205 CHap. 64. Of the government of Henry the third, Edward the first, and
Edward the second, Kings of England: And first a general view of the
disposition of their government p. 207 Chap. 65. Of the condition of the
Nobility of England till the time of Edward the third p. 221 Chap. 66. Of the
state of the English Clergy until the time of Edward the third: and herein
concerning the Statutes of Circumspecte agatis, Articuli cleri, and of General
Councels, and National Synods p. 225 Chap. 67. Of the condition of the Free
men of England, and the grand Charter, and several Statutes concerning the
same, during the Reign of these Kings p. 253 Chap. 68. Of Courts, and their
proceedings p. 284 Chap. 69. Of Coroners, Sheriffs, and Crown pleas p. 286
Chap. 70. Of the Militia during these Kings reigns p. 294 Chap. 71. Of the
Peace p. 300
PROLOGUE.
THe policy of English government, so far as is praiseworthy, is all one
with Divine providence, wrapped up in a veil of Kings and wise men, and thus
implicitly has been delivered to the World by Historians, who for the most
part do read men, and wear their Pens in decyphering their persons and
conditions: some of whom, having met with ingenuous Writers, survive
themselves, possibly more famous after death then before: Others after a
miserable life wasted are yet more miserable in being little better then tables
to set forth the Painters workmanship, and to let the World know that their
Historians are more witty then themselves of whom they wrote were either wise
or good. And thus History that should be a witness of Truth and time, becomes
little better then a parable, or rather then a nonsense in a fair Character,
whose best commendation is that its well written.

Doubtless Histories of persons or lives of men have their excellency in
fruit, for imitation and continuance of fame, as a reward of virtue: yet will
not the coacervation of these together declare the nature of a Commonweal
better, then the beauty of a body dismembered is revived by thrusting together
the members, which cannot be without deformity. Nor will it be denied but many
wise and good Kings and Queens of this Realm may justly challenge the honor
of passing many excellent Laws, (albeit its the proper work of the
representative body to form them) yet to no one nor all of them can we
attribute the honor of that wisdom and goodness that constituted this
blessed frame of government; for seldom is it seen that one Prince builds
upon the foundation of his predecessor, or pursues his ends or aims; because
as several men they have several judgments and desires, and are subject to a
Royal kind of self-love that inciteth them either to exceed former
presidents, or at least to differ from them that they may not seem to rule by
copy as insufficient of themselves; which is a kind of disparagement to such
as are above. Add hereunto that its not to be conceited that the wisest of our
ancestors saw the Idea of this government; nor was it any where in president
but in him that determined the same from eternity; for as no Nation can show
more variety and inconstancy in the government of Princes then this, especially
for three hundred years next ensuing the Normans: so reason cannot move
imagination that these wheels, by diverse, if not contrary motions, could ever
conspire into this temperature of policy, were there not some primum mobile
that has ever kept one constant motion in all.

My aim therefore shall be to lay aside the consideration of man as much as
may be, and to extract a summary view of the cardinal passes of the government
of this Kingdom, and to glance at various aspects of the ancient upon the
modern, that so these diverse Princes and wise councels in their different
course may appear to be no other then the instruments of him that is but one,
and of one mind, whose goings forth have been in a continual course of Wisdom
and goodness for our selves in these latter days: and herein I am encouraged
because I am not in danger of temptation to flattery or spleen, nor pinched
with penury of grounds of observation; having to do with a Nation, then which
a cleerer miror of Gods gracious government is not to be found amongst all the
Nations and peoples under Heaven.

The Contents of the several Chapters of this Book.
I. THe sum of the several Reigns of Edward the third, and Richard the
second. fol. 3. II. The state of the King and Parliament, in relation of him to
it, and of it to him. fol. 13. III. Of the Privy Council and the condition of
the Lords. f. 26. IV. Of the Chancery. fol. 35. V. Of the Admirals Court. fol.
41. VI. Of the Church-mens Interest. fol. 45. VII. Concerning Trade. fol. 64.
VIII. Of Treason and Legiance, with some considerations concerning Calvin's
Case. fol. 76. IX. Of Courts for causes criminal, with their Laws. fo. 92. X.
Of the course of Civil Justice during these times. fo. 96. XI. Of the Militia
in these times. fol. 98. XII. Of the Peace. fol. 108. XIII. A view of the
summary courses of Henry the fourth, Henry the fifth, and Henry the sixth, in
their several Reigns. fol. 115. XIV. Of the Parliament during the Reigns of
these several Kings. fol. 127. XV. Of the Custos, or Protector Regni. fol.
134. XVI. Concerning the Privy Council. fol. 141. XVII. Of the Clergy and
Church Government during these times. fol. 146. XVIII. Of the Court of
Chancery. fol. 162. XIX. Of the Courts of Crown Plas and Common Law. fo. 165
XX. Concerning Sheriffs. fol. 168. XXI. Of Justices and Laws concerning the
Peace. fol. 170. XXII. Of the Militia during these times. fol. 175. XXIII. A
short survey of the Reigns of Edward the fourth, Edward the fifth, and Richard
the third. fol. 181. XXIV. Of the Government in relation to the Parliament.
fol. 187. XXV. Of the condition of the Clergy. fol. 191. XXVI. A short sum of
the Reigns of Henry the seventh, and Henry the eighth. fol. 194. XXVII. Of the
condition of the Crown. fol. 202. XXVIII. Of the condition of the Parliament
in these times. fol. 223. XXIX. Of the power of the Clergy in the Convocation.
f. 229. XXX. Of the power of the Clergy in their ordinary Jurisdiction. fol.
232. XXXI. Of Judicature. fol. 241. XXXII. Of the Militia. fol. 245. XXXIII. Of
the Peace. fol. 253. XXXIV. Of the general Government of Edward the sixth,
Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth. fol. 259. XXXV. Of the Supreme power during
these times. fol. 268. XXXVI. Of the power of the Parliament during these
times. fol. 277. XXXVII. Of the Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical during these last
times. fol. 283. XXXVIII. Of the Militia in these later times. fol. 290. XXXIX.
Of the Peace. fol. 297. XL. A summary Conclusion upon the whole matter. fol.
300.
A PREFACE, CONTAINING A Vindication of the Ancient way of the Parliament OF
ENGLAND.
THE more Words the more Faults, is a divine Maxim, that has put a stop to
the publishing of this second part for some time; but observing the ordinary
humor still drawing off, and passing a harsher censure upon my intentions in my
first part, then I expected: I do proceed to fulfill my course, that if
censure will be, it may be upon better grounds, when the whole matter is
before: Herein I shall once more mind, that I meddle not with the Theological
right of Kings, or other Powers, but with the Civil right in fact, now in
hand. And because some men's Pens of late have ranged into a denial of the
Commons ancient right in the Legislative power; and others, even to adnull the
right, both of Lords and Commons therein, resolving all such power into that
one principle of a King, Quicquid libet, licet; so making the breach much wider
then at the beginning; I shall intend my course against both: As touching the
Commons right, jointly with the Lords, it will be the maine end of the whole;
but as touching the Commons right, in competition with the Lords, I will first
endeavor to remove out of the way what I find published in a late Tractate
concerning that matter, and so proceed upon the whole.

The subject of that Discourse consists of three parts, one to prove that the
ancient Parliaments, before the thirteenth Century, consisted only of those
whom we now call, the House of Lords; the other, that both the Legislative and
Judicial power of the Parliament rested wholly in them: lastly, that Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses of Parliament, or the House of Commons, were not known
nor heard of, till punier times then these. This last will be granted, Viz.
That these several titles, of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, were not known
in Parliament till of later times: Nevertheless, it will be insisted upon,
that the Commons were then there: The second will be granted, but in part, Viz.
That the Lords had much power in Parliament in point of Jurisdiction, but
neither the sole, nor the whole.

The first is absolutely denied, neither is the same proved by any one instance
or pregnant ground in all that Book, and therefore not clearly demonstrated by
Histories and Records beyond contradiction, as the Title page of that Book does
hold forth to the World. First, because not one instance in all that Book is
exclusive to the Commons; and so the whole Argument of the Discourse will
conclude, Ab authoritate Negativa, which is no argument in humane testimony at
all.

Secondly, the greatest number of instances in that Book, are by him supposed
to concern Parliaments, or general Councils of this Nation, holden by the
Representative thereof; whereas indeed they were either but Synodicall
Conventions for Church matters, whereunto the poor Commons (he well knows)
might not come, unless in danger of the Canons dint; or if they did, yet had
no other work there, then to hear, learn, and receive Laws, from the
Ecclesiastics. And the Lords themselves, though present, yet under no other
notion were they, then as Council to the King, whom they could not cast out of
their Council till after Ages, though they often endeavored it.

Thirdly, the Author of that Tractate also well knows, that Kings usually
made Grants and Infeodations by advice of the Lords, without the aid of the
Parliament: And it is no less true, that Kings, with the Lords, did in their
several ages exercise ordinarily Jurisdiction, in cases of distributive
Justice; especially after the Norman entrance: For the step was easy from
being Commanders in War, to be Lords in peace; but hard to lay down that
power at the foot of Justice, which they had usurped in the rude times of the
Sword, when men labor for life rather then liberty; and no less difficult to
make a difference between their deportment in commanding of Soldiers, and
governing of Contrymen; till peace by continuance had reduced them to a
little more sobriety: Nor does it seem irrational, that private differences
between party and party, should be determined in a more private way, then to
trouble the whole Representative of the Kingdom, with matters of so mean
concernment. If then those Councils mentioned by the Author, which concern the
Kings Grants, and Infeodations, and matters of Judicature, be taken from the
rest of the Presidents, brought by him, to maintain the thing aimed at; I
suppose scarce one stone will be left for a foundation to such a glorying
Structure, as is pretended in the Title page of that Book: And yet I deny not,
but where such occasions have befalne the Parliament sitting, it has closed
with them, as things taken up by the way.

Fourthly, It may be that the Author has also observed, that all the Records
of Antiquity passed through (if not from) the hands of the Clergy only, and
they might think it sufficient for them to honor their Writings, with the
great Titles of Men of Dignity in the Church and Commonwealth, omitting the
Commons, as not worthy of mention, and yet they might be there then present, as
it will appear they were in some of the particular instances ensuing, to which
we come now in a more punctual consideration.

The first of these by his own words, appear to be a Church-mote, or Synod;
it was in the year 673. called by the Archbishop, who had no more power to
summon a Parliament, then the Author himself has: And the several
conclusions made therein, do all show that the people had no work there, as
may appear in the several relations thereof, made by Matthew Westminster, and
Sir Henry Spelman, an Author that he makes much use of, and therefore I shall
be bold to make the best use of him that I can likewise, in Vindicating the
truth of the point in hand: For, whatever this Council was, its the less
material, seeing the same Author recites a president of King Aethelbert,
within six years after Austins entry into this Island, which was long before
this Council, which brings on the Vann of all the rest of the Opponents
instances, which King called a Council, styled, Commune Concilium tam Cleri
quam Populi: Page 126.
and in the conclusion of the same, a Law is made upon the like occasion, Si
Rex populum Convocaverit, etc. in both which its evident, that in those times
there were Councils holden by the People, as well as the Magnates, or Optimates.

His next instance is in the year 694. which is of a Council holden by the
Great Men, but no mention of the Commons, and this he will have to be a
Parliament, albeit that he might have found both Abbatesses, or Women, and
Presbyters, to be Members of that Assembly, and (for default of better)
attested the conclusions of the same, notwithstanding the Canon, Nemo militans
Deo, etc. But I must also mind him, that the same Author recites a Council
holden by King Ina, Suasu omnium Aldermannorum and Seniorum and Sapientum
Regni: and is very probable, that all the Wise men of the Kingdom, were not
concluded within the Lordly dignity.

The third instance can have no better success, unless he will have the Pope
to be allowed power to call a Parliament, or allow the Archbishop power to do
that service by the Popes command, for by that authority; this (what ever it
be) was called, if we give credit to the relation of Sir Henry Spelman, who
also recites another Council within three leaves foregoing this, Council.
Britt. Page 212.
called by Withered at Barkhamstead, unto which the Clergy were summoned, Qui
cum viris utique militaribus communi omnium assensu has leges decrevere: So as
it seems in those times, Ibid. pa. 194.
Soldiers or Knights were in the common Councels, as well as other Great Men.

In the next place, he brings in a Council holden in the year 747. Ibid.
pa. 242. 245.
which (if the Archbishop were then therein President, as its said, in the
presence of the King) was no Parliament, but a Church-mote, and all the
conclusions in the same do testify no less; they being every one concerning
Ecclesiastical matters.

Page 219.
And furthermore, before this time, the Author out of whom he cites this
Council, mentions another Council holden by Ina the Saxon King, in the
presence of the Bishops, Princes, Lords, Earls, and all the wise old Men, and
People of the Kingdom, all of them concluding of the intermarriage between the
Brittons, Picts, and Saxons, which, formerly, as it seems, was not allowed:
And the same King by his Charter, mentioned by the same Penman, notes that his
endowment of the Monastry of Glastenbury, was made, not only in the presence
of the Great Men, but, Cum praesentia populationis; and he says, that Omnes
confirmaverunt, which I do not mention as a work necessary to be done by the
Parliament, yet such an one as was holden expedient as the case then stood.

Forty years after, he meets with another Council, which he supposes to
be a Parliament also, but was none, unless he will allow the Popes Legate
power to summon a Parliament: It was holden in the year, 787. and had he duly
considered the return made by the Popes Legate, of the Acts of that Council,
Page 300.
which is also published by the same Author, he might have found, that the
Legate says, that they were propounded in public Council, before the King,
Archbishop, and all the Bishops and Abbots of the Kingdom, Senators, Dukes,
or Captains, and people of the Land, and they all consented to keep the same.

Then he brings in a Council holden in the year, 793. which he would never
have set down in the list of Parliaments, if he had considered how improper it
is to construe, Provinciale tenuit Concilium, for a Parliament, and therefore I
shall need no further to trouble the Reader therewith.

The two next are supposed to be but one and the same; and its said to be
holden, Anno 974. before nine Kings, fifteen Bishops, twenty Dukes, etc. which
for ought appears, may comprehend all England and Scotland, and is no
Parliament of one Nation, but a party of many Nations, for some great matter,
no doubt, yet nothing in particular mentioned, but the solemn laying the
foundation of the Monastry of Saint-Albans.

What manner of Council the next was, appears not, and therefore nothing can
be concluded therefrom, but that it was holden in the year, 796.

That Council which is next produced, was in the year, 800. and is called in
great letters, Concilium Provinciale, which he cannot Gramatically construe to
be a Parliament; yet in the Preface it is said, that there were, Viri
cujuscunque dignitatis; and the King in his Letter to the Pope, says
concerning it, Page 321.
Visum est cunctis gentis nostrae sapientibus; so as it seems by this, and
other examples of this nature, that though the Church-motes invented the
particular conclusions, yet it was left to the Witagen-mote to Judge and
conclude them.

There can be no question, but the next three Presidents brought by the
Opponent, were all of them Church-motes: Council. Brit. Page 328.
For the first of them, which is said to be holden in the year, 816. is called
a Synod, and both Priests and Deacons were there present, which are no Members
of Parliament, consisting only of the House of Lords, and they all of them
did, Pariter tractare de necessarijs and utilitatibus Ecclesiarum. The second
of them is called a Synodall Council, holden, Anno 822. and yet there were
then present, Omnium dignitatum optimates, which cannot be understood only of
those of the House of Lords, because they ought all to be personally present,
and therefore there is no Optimacy amongst them. The last of these three is
called, Synodale Conciliabulum, a petty Synod in great letters; Council. Brit.
Page 334.
and besides, there were with the Bishops and Abbots, many Wise men; and in all
these respects it cannot be a Parliament only of the great Lords.

The next Council said to be holden in the year 823. cannot also be called
properly a Parliament, but only a consultation, between two Kings and their
Council, to prevent the invasion of the Danes; and the attests of the Kings
Chapplain, and his Scribe, do show also that they were not all Members of the
House of Lords.

The Council cited by the Opponent in the next place, was holden, An: 838.
being only in nature of a Council for Law, or Judicature, to determine the
validity of the Kings Grant made to the Church of Canterbury, which is no
proper work for a Parliament, unless it befall during the sitting of the same.

The next is but a bare title of a Council supposed to be holden, An. 850. And
not worth its room, for it neither shows whether any thing was concluded, nor
what the conclusions were.

The work of the next Council alleged to be holden, An. 851. was to
confirm the Charter of the Monastry of Croyland, and to determine concerning
affairs belonging to the Mercians; and if it had been a Parliament for that
people, it might be worthy of inquiry how regularly the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the Bishop of London, and the Ambassadors from the West Saxons
could fit amongst them and attest the conclusions therein made, as well as the
proper members of that Nation.

He comes in the next place to a Council holden in the year, 855. which is
more likely to be a Parliament then most of them formerly mentioned; if the
Tithes of all England were therein given to the Church, but hereof I have set
down my opinion in the former part of the discourse. And though it be true,
that no Knights and Burgesses are therein mentioned, as the Opponent observes
out of the Title; yet if the body of the Laws be duly considered, toward the
conclusion thereof it will appear that there was present, Fidelium infinita
multitudo qui omnes regium Chirographum Laudaverunt Dignitates vero sua nomina
subscripserunt. Council. Brit. Page 350.
And yet the Witagen-motes in these times began to be rare, being continually
inrerrupted by the invasions of the Danes.

The three next Councills alleged to be in the years 930. 944. 948. Were
doubtless of inferior value, as the matters therein concluded were of
inferior regard, being such as concern the passing of the Kings Grants,
Infeodations, and confirmations.

The Council mentioned to be in the year 965. is supposed to be one and the
same with the next foregoing, Council. Brit. Page 480.
by Sir Henry Spelman, which calls it self a general Council, not by reason
of the general confluence of the Lords and Laity, but because all the Bishops
of England did then meet. The Primi and Primates were there, who these were is
not mentioned; but its evident that the King of Scots was there, and that both
he and diverse that are called Ministri Regis, attested the conclusions: It
will be difficult to make out how these should be Members of the House of
Lords, and more difficult to show a reason why in the attesting of the acts of
these Councills which the Opponent calls Parliaments, we find so few of the
Laity that scarce twelve are mentioned in any one of them, and those to descend
so low as the Ministri Regis, to make up the number.

Five more of these instances remain, before the coming in of the Normans.

The first of which was in the year 975. and in a time when no Parliament,
Council. Britt. Page 490.
according to the Opponents principles could sit, for it was an Inter regnum.

The two next were only Synods to determine the difference between the
Regulers, and the Seculers, in the Kings absence, by reason that he was under
age; and they are said to be in the years 977 and 1009. But its not within the
compass of my matter to debate their dates.

The last two were Meetings or Courts for Judicature, to determine the crime of
Treason, which every one knows is determinable by inferior Courts before the
high Steward or Judges, and therefore not so peculiar to a Parliament, as to be
made an argument of its existence. And thus are we at an end of all the
instances brought by the Opponent, to prove that Parliaments before the Norman
times consisted of those whom we now call the House of Lords. All which I shall
shut up with two other notes taken out of the Book of Councils, published by
Sir Henry Spelman.

The first of which concerns a Grant made by Canutus, Page 534.
of an exemption to the Abbey of Bury Saint Edmonds, in a Council wherein, were
present Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Dukes, Earls. Cum quamplurimis
gregariis militibus, cum populi multitudine copiosa votis regiis unanimiter
consentientes. The other taken out of the confessors Laws, which tells us that
Tithes were granted to the Church, A Rege Baronibus and populo. Page 621.
And thus shall leave these testimonies to debate with one another, whiles the
Reader may judge as seems most equal to himself.

Being thus come to the Norman times, and those ensuing; I shall more summarily
proceed with the particulars concerning them, because they were times of force,
and can give little or no evidence against the customs rightly settled in the
Saxon times, which I have more particularly insisted upon, that the original
constitution of this government may the better appear. Now for the more speedy
manifesting of the truth in the particulars following; I shall pre-advise the
Reader in three particulars.

First, that the Church-motes grew more in power and honor, by the aid of the
Normans Law, refusing the concurrence and personal presence of Kings, whom at
length they excluded from their Councils with all his Nobles; and therefore it
is the less wonder if we hear but little of the Commons joining with them.

Secondly, that the Norman way of government grew more Aristocraticall then the
Saxon, making the Lords the chief Instruments of keeping Kings above and people
underneath, and thus we meet with much noise of meetings between the King and
Lords, and little concernning the grand meetings of the Kings, and the
representative of the people; although some footsteps we find even of them
also. For Kings were mistaken in the Lords; who meaned nothing less them to
serve them with the peoples liberties, together with their own which they saw
wrapped up in the gross.

Thirdly, by this means the Councils of the King and Lords grew potent, not
only for advise in particular occasions, but in matters of judicature, and
declaring of Law, ordering of process in Courts of Plees; which in the first
framing were the works of Wise and Learned men, but being once settled become
part of the liberties of every Freeman. And it is not to be doubted but these
Councills of Lords did outreach into things two great for them to manage, and
kept the Commons out of possession of their right, during the present heat of
their ruffling condition, yet all this while could not take absolute possession
of the legislative power.

I now come to the remainder of the particular instances produced by the
Opponent, which I shall reduce into several Categories, for the more clear
satisfaction to the Reader, with less tediousness.

First, it cannot be denied but the Council of Lords gave advise to Kings in
cases of particular immergency, nor is it incongruous to the course of
government even to this day, nor mere that the Parliament should be troubled
with every such occasion, and therefore the giving of advise to William the
Conqueror, what course he should take to settle the Laws of England according
to the instances in Councills holden, An: 1060. And 1070. And to gain favor
of the great men according to that in An: 1106. and in the manner of endowment
of the Abbey of Battle, as in page: 25. of the Opponents discourse: and what to
do upon the reading of the Popes Letter, according to that in An: 1114. And
whether the Popes Legate should be admitted, as in page 18. And how King Steven
and Henry shall come to agreement, as An: 1153. And how to execute Laws by
Judges and Justices Itinerant, as An: 1176. And touching the manner of
ingageing for a voyage by Croisado to Jerusalem, An: 1189. And to give answer
to Ambassadors of a foreign Prince, page 25. And how King John shall conclude
peace with the Pope, An: 1213. Where nevertheless Math. Paris says, Page 23.
was Turba multa nimis: I say all these might well be done by a Council of
Lords, and not in any posture of a Parliament; albeit that in none of all these
does any thing appear but that the Commons might be present in every one, or
many of them all.

Secondly, as touching judicature, the Lords had much power therein, even in
the Saxon times, having better opportunites for Knowledge, and Learning,
especially joined with the Clergy, then the Commons in those times of deep
darkness, wherein even the Clergy wanted not their share, as in the first part
of the discourse I have already observed. Whatsoever then might be done by
Judges in ordinary Courts of judicature, is inferior to the regard of the
Parliament; and therefore the Plea between the Archbishop and Aethelstan,
concerning Land, instanced, An: 1070. And between Lanfranke and Odo, An: 1071.
and between the King and Anselme, page: 15, 16. and the determining of Treason
of John (afterward King) against his Lord and King Richard, page: 23. And the
difference concerning the title of a Barony between Mowbray and Scotvile, page:
25. And giving of security of good behavior by William Brawse to King John,
page 26. All these might well be determined only before the Lords, and yet the
Parliament might be then sitting or not sitting, as the contrary to either does
not appear, and therefore can these form no demonstrative ground to prove
that the Parliament consisted in those times, only of such as we now call the
House of Lords.

A third work whereby the Opponent would prove the Parliament to consist only
of the House of Lords, is, because he finds many things by them concluded
touching the solemnization, and the settling of the succession of Kings; both
which, he says, were done by the Lords in Parliament, or those of that House;
and I shall crave leave to conclude the contrary: For neither is the election,
or Solemnization of such election, a proper work of the Parliament, according
to the Opponents principles, nor can they prove such Conventions, wherein they
were to be Parliaments. Not the election of Kings, for then may a Parliament be
without a King; and therefore that instance concerning William Rufus, page 16.
will fail, or the Opponents principles, who will have no Parliament without a
King.

The like may also be said of the instance concerning King Steven, page 18.
Much less can the solemnization of the election by Coronation, be a proper
work for the Parliament: Nevertheless the Opponent does well know that both
the election of a King, and the solemnization of such election by Coronation,
are Spiritlesse motions, without the presence of the people; and therefore
though his instance, page 17. concerning the election of Henry the First, by
the Bishops and Princes, may seem to be restrictive as to them, yet it is not
such in fact; if Matthew Paris may be believed, Mr. Seldens Title of Honor.
who tells us, that in the Conventus omnium, was Clerus and Populus
universus, and might have been noted by the Opponent out of that Learned
Antiquary, so often by him cited, if he had pleased to take notice of such
matters.

A fourth sort of Instances, concerns matters Ecclesiastical, and making of
Canons; and hereof enough has been already said, that such work was
absolutely challenged by the Church-motes, as their proper work; and therefore
the Instance, page 16, 17. of the Council in Henry the firsts time, and the
Canons made by the Bishops there; and that other called by Theobald Archbishop
of Canterbury, and instanced by the Opponent, page 19. I say, both these do
fail in the conclusion propounded.

Fifthly, As touching the most proper work of Parliaments, which is, the
making of Laws concerning the liberties and benefit of the people; the
Opponent produces not one instance concerning the same, which does not
conclude contrary to his proposal; for as touching those two instances in his
thirteenth page, Anno 1060. they concern not the making of Laws, but the
reviving of such as had been difused formerly, which might well enough be done
by private Council. But as to that in his fifteenth page, of the Law made by
the Conqueror, concerning Remigius, Bishop of Lincoln, although it be true,
that we find not the particular titles of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses,
yet besides the Council of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, and Princes, we
find the Common Council; for so the words are, Communi Concilio, and Concilio
Archiepiscopus, Episcopus, Abatus, and omnium Principum, although the Opponent
would seem to wave these words, Et Concilio, but putting them in a small
Character, and the rest in a voluminous Letter, that the Readers eyes might be
filled with them and overlook the other.

Secondly, as to the instance of the Council at Clarindon, in his nineteenth
page, which he cites out of Matthew Paris, Matthew Westminster, and Hoveden,
although he pleases to mention the several ranks of Great Men, and those in
black Letters of a greater size; and says, That not one Commoner appears,
yet Master Seldens Hoveden, in that very place, Tit. Honor, Page 703.
so often by the Opponent cited, tells him, that both Clerus and Populus were
there.

Thirdly, The Opponent cites an instance of Laws made by Richard the First,
in his twenty fourth page, and he sets down the several ranks of Great
Men, and amongst the rest, ingeniously mentions, Milites, but it is with a
Gloss of his own, that they were Barons that were made Knights, when as
formerly Barons were mentioned in the general, and therefore how proper this
Gloss is, let others judge; especially seeing that not only Milites, and
Milites Gregorij, but even Ministri, were present in such conventions, even in
the Saxon times: And Master Seldom in the former known place, mentions an
Observation, that, Tit. Honor, Page 703.
Vniversi personae qui de Rege tenent in Capite, sicut ceteri Barons debent
interesse judicijs curiae Domini Regis cum Baronibus.

Fourthly, He cites in his twenty fifth page, another instance in King John's
time, in which, after the assent of Earls, and Barons, the words, Et omnium
fidelium nostrorum, are also annexed, but with this conceit of the Opponents,
that these Fideles were those that adhered to the King, against his enemies; be
it so, for then the Commons were present, and did assent; or they may be, says
he, some specially summoned as Assistants; take that also, and then all the
true hearted in the Kingdom were specially summoned and were there, so as the
conclusion will be the same.

In the fifth place, he cites a strange President (as he calls it) of a Writ
of Summons in King John's time, in his twenty seventh page, wherein Omnes
miletes were summoned, Cum armis suis, and he concludes therefore the same was
a Council of War.

First, Because they were to come armed, its very true, and so they did unto
the Councills in the ancient Saxon times, and so the Knights of the Counties
ought to do in these days, if they obey the Writ, Duos Milites gladijs
cinctas, etc.

Secondly, He says, That the Knights were not to come to Council; that is his
opinion, yet the Writ speaks, that the Discreti Milites were to come, Ad
loquendum cum Rege ad negotijs regni: Its true, says he, but not, Ad
tractandum and faciendum and consentiendum: Its true, its not so said, nor is
it excluded; and were it so, yet the Opponents conclusion will not thence
arise, That none but the King, and those who are of the House of Lords were
there present.

The sixth and last instance mentioned by the Opponent, is in his thirtieth
page, and concerns Escuage granted to King John, who by his Charter granted,
that in such cases he would summon Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls, and
the greater Barons, unto such Conventions by special Writts, and that the
Sheriff shall summon promiscuously all others which hold in Capite; and thence
he concludes, That none but the Great Lords, and the Tenants in Capite (whom
he calls the lesser Barons) were present, but no Knights, Citizens, or
Burgesses; all which being granted, yet in full Parliament the Citizens and
Burgesses might be there. For Councills were called of such persons as suited
to the matter to be debated upon.

If for matters purely Ecclesiastical, the King and his Council of Lords, and
the Churchmen made up the Council.

If for advice in immergencies, the King and such Lords as were next at hand
determined the conclusions.

If for Escuage, the King and such as were to pay Escuage, made up a Council
to ascertaine the sum, which was otherwise uncertain.

If for matters that concerned the common liberty, all sorts were present,
Littlet. lib. 2. cap. 3.
as may appear out of the very Charter of King John, noted in my former
discourse, Britt. Pa. 122.
page, 258. and also from an Observation of Cambden, concerning Henry the
third, Ad summum honorem pertinet (says he) Ex quo Rex Henricus tertius, ex
tanta multitudine quae seditiosa ac turbulenta fuit optimos quosque ad Commitia
Parliamentaria evocaverit.

Secondly, The Opponent takes that for granted that never will be, Viz. That
all the Kings Tenants In Capite, were of the House of Lords; when as himself
acknowledges a difference, page 28. Viz. That the Barons are summoned by
Writs, Sigillatim, as all the Members of the House of Lords are, but these are
by general summons, their number great, and hard it will be to understand,
how, or when, they came to be excluded from that Society.

I shall insist no further upon the particulars of this Tractate, but demurr
upon the whole matter, and leave it to judgment upon the premises, which might
have been much better reduced to the maine conclusion, if the Opponent, in the
first place, had defined the word PARLIAMENT: For if it was a Convention
without the People, and sometimes without the KING, as in the Cases formerly
mentioned, of the Elections of William Rufus, and of King Steven: And if
sometimes a Parliament of Lords only, may be against the King, and so without
King or People; as in the Case between Steven and Maud the Empress, and the
case likewise concerning King John, both which also were formerly mentioned;
possibly it may be thought as rational for the Commons in after Ages, to hold
a Parliament without King, or House of Lords; and then all the Opponents labor
is to little purpose.

An Historical Discourse of the uniforme Government of ENGLAND.
CHAP. I. Of the Britons, and their government.
THis is Pritaine, or rather that part thereof in after ages called Saxony and
England, from the peoples names transplanted thither. The Britons (to lay aside
all conceits of Fame) I take to be an issue of the neighboring Nations from
the German and Belgicke shores; induced hereto partly by the vicinity of the
names of the Peoples, Cities, Caes. com. l. 5.
or Towns, and places, but more of their manners and customs, both in Religion
and civil Government. Barbarians they were, and so esteemed by the Romans that
were but refined Barbarians themselves; and yet they worshipped an Invisible,
Infinite, Tacit. Anal. 14. Amian. lib 15. Caes. com. lib. 6 Tacit.
Omnipotent God by Sacrifices: but the greatest part of their reverence fell
short, and rested upon their Priests, whom they accounted the only Secretaries
that God had on earth, feared their interdict worse then death it self, and
(in these times of uttermost darkness) held them forth to neighboring
Nations, to instruct them into an higher excellency then that of brutish men.

In their civil Government they allowed preeminence to their Magistrates
rather then Supremacy, and had many chiefes in a little room; the Romans
called them little Kings, for the greater renown of their Empire: but others of
more sobriety account them no better then Lords. Caes. com. lib. 5
Of liberties not much exceeding those of a City; and these (though in time of
peace independent upon each other, yea perpetual enemies, yet) in time of
foreign war, joined together to choose one head to command them all, according
to the custom of the Germans, Lib. 6.
as Caesar notes. But that which yet clears the matter, is the testimony of
Dion in the life of Severus the Emperor, who expressly says, that in Britain
the people held the helm of Government in their own power, so as these were
not Kings nor their government Monarchical, and yet might be regular enough,
considering the rudeness that in those days overspread the World. True it is
that by a holy man this Nation was in latter times of barbarism called
Tyrannorum gens, Hieron.
the word being taken mitiori sensu, or from a common repute of excessive
cruelty or oppression by superiors. As touching their cruelty, I find no
footsteps in story: somewhat reflecteth upon their Sacrifices, as if they
offered man's flesh; Caes. com. 6.
but that was common to the Gaults, who borrowed their Religion from Britain;
and it might be founded rather upon an error in judgment then savagenesse of
nature. Much less cause does appear of any cry of oppression upon inferiors,
but rather against that; as the multitude of Kings or Lords do manifestly
witness, who being observed in the time of Julius Caesar continued in Tiberius
his time and afterward until in the reign of Claudius it is said that
Caractacus ruled over many Nations: for its a certain maxim, that though
great Nations may be upholden by power, small Territories must be maintained by
justice; without which the door will be soon set open to the next passenger
that comes, especially where the people are bent to war as these were, and
therein had attained such exquisite perfection of skill in Chariot service, as
must needs convince us of their much experience against themselves in regard
that to other people it was scarce known; no nor yet to Caesar himself that
had been practiced in the wars of all Nations. And this is all that I can
produce out of story touching the government of Britain before the entry of
that light that lightneth every one that comes into the world.

CHAP. II. Concerning the conversion of the Britons unto the Faith.
IT was long before the Son of God was inwombed, and whiles as yet Providence
seemed to close only with the Jewish Nation, and to hover over it, as a choice
picked place from all the earth, that with a gracious eye surveying the
forsaken condition of other Nations it glanced upon this Island; both thoughts
and words reflected on Isles, Isles of the Gentiles, Isa. 42.4.51.5.60.9.66.19.
Isles afar off, as if amongst them the Lord of all the earth had found out one
place that should be to him as the Gemme of the ring of this Terrestrial
Globe: and if the ways of future providence may be looked upon as a gloss of
those Prophesies: we must confess that this Island was conceived in the womb
thereof long before it was manifested to the world.

To recover the forgotten ways of past providence is no less difficult then
to search out the hidden bowels of future promises; and therefore I shall not
busy my self to find out the particular instruments that brought Gods
presence into this dark corner; but only glance at the time and manner, that
it may appear we were not forgotten, nor yet last, or least in mind, at that
time of the dispensation of this grace unto all men. I dare not instance as
Gildas, the certain time of six years; yet I may say, that no sooner was the
Scepter departed from Judah, but with a swift pace both it and the Lawgiver
came hither like an Arrow flying through other Countries, but sticking with a
ne plus ultra in this Island (then a People rather then a Commonweal) as if we
were the only white that then was in Gods aim. Its probable in the highest
degree that the work was done within the first Century, and very nigh about
the Apostolic times; for that in the second Century Britain was a Church of
Fame, and known to the Fathers that dwelt afar off, even to Tertullian and
Origin, and in a short time had outreached the Roman confines in that Island
(which had cost them above two hundred years travail) and was grown to the
state of the first Christian Kingdom that ever was: Tertul. adv. Judaeos.
unto which, if we shall allow time for the gathering and growth thereof unto
this royal pitch, proportionable to the half of that which afterward was
spent in the like work, upon the Saxon and Danish Kings, we must in reason
conclude that the work was first ordered by Apostolical direction, or some of
their emissaries. Customs also do not obscurely declare ages. For before that
Pius Bishop of Rome began to speak in the big language of Decrees, it was
indifferent to keep Easter either upon the day observed by the Roman Church,
or on the day according to the Jews custom; and although the Roman Church
began within fifty years after the death of John the Evangelist, Platina. de
vit. Eleuthe.
to stickle to impose their custom upon other Churches; yet the Church of
Britain conformed not to that course by the space of five hundred years after
that time; which reflecteth probability, Beda. l. 3. cap. 25.
that the Church was there settled in times of indifferency, not by Roman order,
but by some other purposed messenger.

The manner yet is more remarkable, for that not only Principalities and
Powers, and Spiritual wickednesses in high places (which are but
stumbling blocks) but also natural wisdom of the Druides, who were masters of
the consciences of the Britons, and their high conceit of their excellency
above the ordinary strain of men, and unto which the Cross of Christ is mere
foolishness; and above all, the deep obligement of the people unto these their
Rabbis, in a devotion beyond the reach of other Nations; all these, I say,
stood in the way, and rendered the people more incapable of any new light. But
when the time fore-set is fully come, all mountains are laid low, and
double-folded doors fly open; and this Conqueror of all Nations attempts
Britain not in the rear, nor by undermining, but assailes them in their full
strength, presents in a clear Sunshine that one true Sacrifice of God man; at
the appearing whereof their shadows of many Sacrifices of man's flesh fly
away. And thus those Druides that formerly had dominion of the Britons faith,
Origin. hom. 4. Ezekiel.
become now to be helpers of their joy, and are become the leaders of the blind
people in a better way, and unto a better hope; and held forth that light which
through Gods mercy has continued in this Island ever since through many
storms and dark mists of time until the present noonday.

CHAP. III. Of the entry of the Romans into Britain, and the state thereof
during their continuance.
THis conversion of the Druides was but the first step to that which followed;
for the Decree was more full of grace then to make this Isle to be only as an
Inn for him to whom it was formerly given for a possession; Ps. 2.8.
The Romans are called in to the work, under whose Iron yoke God had subdued
all Nations, thereby more speedily to bring to pass his own conquest, both of
that one head, and all its members. The first Caesar had entered Britain before
the Incarnation, and having seen and saluted it, and played his prize, Tacit.
returned with the fame only of conquest of some few Lordships neighboring to
the Belgicke shore; and so it continued correspondent to the Romans, or rather
forgotten of them till the time of Claudius the Emperor, Vit. Agric.
who being at leisure to bethink him of the Britons tribute, or rather aspiring
to honor by a way formerly untroden by his Ancestors, first settled Colonies in
Britain, and brought it into the form of a Province, and engaged his
successors in a continual war to perfect that work, which outwearied their
strength at last, and made them forgo the prey, as too heavy for the Eagle to
trusse and carry away.

It often befalls that things of deformed shape are nevertheless of excellent
spirit, and serve the turn best of all: and it is no less remarkable, that
this tide of Roman invasion, however it represented to the world little other
then a tumor of vainglory in the Romans that must needs be fatal to the
Britons liberty and welfare: yet by overruling providence it conduced so much
to the Britons future glory, as it must be acknowledged one of the chief
masterpieces of supernatural moderatorship that ever this poor Island met
with. First, it taught them to bear the yoke, to stoop, and become tractable;
for stubborn spirits must first stoop under power, before they will stoop to
instruction; but this only in the way; for tractablenesse, if good ensue not,
is of it self but a disposition for evil. Secondly, it brought into Britain
the knowledge of Arts and civility; and questionless it was a wise policy of
Agricola to go that way to work; Tacit. vit. Agric.
for its an easy and Royal work to govern wise men, but to govern fools
or mad men is a continual slavery; and thus religion already settled in
Britain became honored with a train of attendants, and handmaids. Thirdly,
they reduced the number of little Lordships nigher to the more honorable
estate of Monarchy: for the Romans by dear experience finding no stability or
assurance in what they had gotten, so long as so many petty Kings had the rule;
they wisely brought the whole into one Province (because it is much easier to
govern many subordinate each to other, then coordinate one with another) over
which they allowed one chief, to rule the people according to their own Laws,
saving their service to the Romans and their Lieutenants, until they were
necessitated to yield up all to the next occupant: This served the British
Church with a double interest. For first, Religion spreads sooner under one
uniform government, then under variety; and under Monarchy, rightly ordered,
rather then any other government whatsoever; albeit that other governments may
afford it faster footing when it is entered. Secondly, Rome was a renowned
Church throughout the world for gifts and graces; and it is obvious to conceive
that it was specially purposed by divine providence to make that place a
fountain, that from thence the knowledge of Christ might convey it self
jointly with the influence of Imperial power, as the spirits with the blood,
into all Nations of that vast body.

Above one hundred years were spent in this Provincial way of government of
Britain under the Roman Lieutenants; during all which time Religion spread
under ground, whiles the Roman power in a continual war sprang upward: Nor is
it strange that Religion should thrive in war; the French wars in Edward the
thirds time brought much of this happiness to England from the Waldenses; and
Germany had no less benefit by the wars of Charles the fifth with the
Italians, French, and Turks: and thus the Romans levened with the Gospel, by
exchanging men with Britain, and other mutual correspondencies insinuated
that leven by degrees, which in the conclusion prevailed over all.

For the Roman Lieutenants having gotten sure footing in Britain, steered
their course with a different hand; generally they were of the Roman stamp,
seeking to kill Christ in the Cradle; and by that means Religion met with many
bitter storms of bitter persecution, and so was compelled to bear a low sail;
but some being more debonaire, and of wiser observation, soon found, that the
way of justice and gentleness had more force in Britain then Arms, and so
endeavored to maintain that by moderation which they had gotten by labor and
blood (as it is ever seen that where conquest is in the van, gentleness
follows in the rear, because no Bow can stand long bent but at length must
give in and grow weak.) And thus by connivance the Britons got a little more
scope, and Religion more encouragement, till it became acquainted with the
Roman Deputies, began to treat with the Emperors themselves, and under the
wise government of Aurelius the Emperor mounting into the British throne,
crowned Lucius first of all Kings with the Royal Title of a Christian.

He now not so much a vassal as a friend, and ally to the Romans, and
perceiving the Empire to be past noon, and their Lieutenants to comply with the
Christians, began to provide for future generations, and according to the two
grand defects of Religion and Justice, applied himself for the establishment
of both.

Religion in Britain has hitherto been for the most part maintained by
immediate influence from Heaven. No Schools, no learning, either maintained or
desired, the want whereof, together with the persecutions stirred up by the
Emperors, especially Domitian, brought the Church to so low an ebb that the
Sacraments ceased; for Histories tell us that Lucius sent to Rome for relief
and that the Bishop of that place (whether Evaristus or Eleutherius) sent over
learned men to preach and baptize both King and people; and in this, Rome might
probably gain some honor, M. Westminster. an. 181.
although possibly the King intended it not, or muchlesse to acknowledge any
authority or power in that Church over that of Britain. This act of Lucius so
advanced him in the opinion of writers, that they know not when they have said
enough; Some will have him to be the instrument of the first entry of Religion
into this Isle: others, that he settled a form of Church Government under the
three Archbishops of London, York, and Caerlion upon Vske, and 28 Bishoprics;
the first of which is cried down by many demonstrative instances, nor can it
consist with the second, nor that with it, or with the truth of other stories.
For it neither can be made out that Lucius had that large circuit within his
Dominion; nor that the title of Archbishop was in his days known; and it is very
improbable that the British Church was so numerous, or that Religion in his
time was overspread the whole Island: nor is there any mention in any Author
of any Monuments of these Archbishops or Bishops of Britain for the space of
200 years after this Kings reign, and yet no continual raging persecution
(that we read of) that should enforce them to obscure their profession, or hide
their heads: or if such times had been, it would have been expected that
Bishops in those days should be in Britain (as well as in other places) most
famous for gifts and graces, and pass in the forefront of persecution. But we
find no such thing; no not in the rages of Dioclesian, which made the British
Church famous for Martyrs: Writers speak of Alban, Amphibalus, Aron, Julius,
and a multitude of Lay People, but do not mention one Bishop, nor Presbyter,
nor other Clergyman, M. Westminster. an. 303.
but quendam Clericum, a man it seems of no note, and of unknown name. In
charity therefore the English Church in those days must be of mean repute for
outward pomp; and not lifted up to that height of Archbishops, when as Rome it
self was content with a Bishop.

Somewhat more probable it is, that is noted by writers concerning Lucius his
endeavor to settle the Commonwealth, and good Laws for government, and to
that end did write a Letter to Eleutherius Bishop of Rome for a model of the
Roman Laws; probably being induced thereunto by the splendour of the state of
the Roman Church and Commonweal; the only favorite of fame in those times
through the Northern parts of the World. Things afar off I confess are dim,
and its meet that Antiquaries should have the honor due to great after-sight.
And therefore I might think (as some of them have done) that the Epistle of
Eleutherius to King Lucius is spurious, if I could imagine to what end any man
should hazard his wits upon such a fiction; or if the incongruities charged
against it were incurable; but being allowed to be first written in Latin, and
then translated into British for the peoples satisfaction; and in that Language
(the original being lost) traduced to posterity; and then by some Latin
writer in after ages returned into Latin, and so derived to these times (all
which very probably has been) such occasions of exceptions might well arise by
mistake of translators and transcribers in ignorant times, and the substance
nevertheless remain entire and true. Considering therefore that the matter of
that Epistle savoureth of the purer times of the Church, and so contrary to the
dregs of Romulus, Cic. Attic. 2.
I mean, the policy, practice and language of the Roman Clergy, in these
latter ages, wherein this forgery (if so it be) was made; I must allow it to
pass for current for the substance, not justifying the syllabicall writing
thereof.

To others it seems needless and vain that Lucius should send for a model
to Eleutherius, when as the Roman Deputies and Legions at home might have
satisfied the Kings desire in that particular, or their own experience might
have taught them grounds sufficient, after two hundred years converse with the
Romans, that they should have little needed a model for that which they saw
continually before their view, or might have understood by inquiry of their own
acquaintance. But what could be expected of rough soldiers concerning form of
government of a Commonweal? or if some exceeded the ordinary strain in
policy, yet they were too wise to communicate such Pearls to conquered
Nations, that ought to look no higher then the will of the Conqueror, and
subsist in no better condition then may be controlled by the Supreme Imperial
Law of the Lord Paramount: or if in this they had corresponded to the desires
of the Britains, yet being for the most part ignorant of the maine, they could
never have satisfied the expectations of a Christian King, who desires such a
Law as may befriend Religion, and wherein no man was more like to give
direction then Eleutherius; who seeing a kind of enmity between the Roman
Laws, and Christ's Kingdom, sends to the King a fair refusal of his request
upon this ground, that leges Romanas and Caesaris semper reprobare possumus; he
saw that they were not well grounded; he therefore refers the King to the
sacred Scripture, that is truth it self. Laws that come nighest to it are
most constant, and make the government more easy for the Magistrate, quiet for
the people, and delightful to all; because men's minds are settled in
expectation of future events in government according to the present rule; and
changes in course of government are looked at as uncouth motions of the
Celestial bodies, portending judgments or dissolution. This was the way of
humane wisdom; but God had an eye on all this beyond all reach of preconceipt
of man, which was to make England happy in the enjoying of a better Law and
government then Rome, how glorious soever then it was; and to deliver that
Island from the common danger of the world; for had we once come under the law
of the first beast, as we were under his power; we had been in danger of being
borne slaves under the Law of the second beast, as other Nations were, who
cannot shake it off to this day.

But Lucius lived not to effect this work; it was much delayed by the evil of
the times; nothing was more changeable then the Empire grew; the Emperors many
of them so vicious, as they were a burden to mankind; nor could they endure any
Deputy or Lieutenant that were of better fame then themselves had. Some of them
minded the affairs of the East, others of the North; none of them were ad
omnia: And the Lieutenants in Britain either too good for their Emperor, and
so were soon removed; or too bad for the people of the Land, and never suffered
to rest free from tumults and insurrections: neither Lucius could prevail, nor
any of his successors. But passing through continual cross floods of
persecutions under Maximinus, Dioclesian and Maximinianus, and many civil
broils, till the times of Constantine, at length it attained the haven.

For Constantine having overcome Maxentius, and gotten thereby into the highest
Orb of government in the Empire; reflected such an amiable aspect upon the
Churches, especially in Britain, as if he had intended to pay to them all that
God had lent him. A wise Prince he was questionless; yet toward the Church
showed more affection; endeavoring to reduce the government in every place
unto the Roman Prototype, and therein added much honor to that See, especially
to Pope Sylvester, whose Scholar he had been. This may seem a sufficient
inducement to persuade that he was the first patron of English Prelacy, seeing
we find it in no approved testimony before that time; nor was it long after,
whenas the presence of the British Bishops are found at the Synod by him
called at Arles, viz. the Bishops (not Archbishops) of London and York,
Council. Brit. 42.
and the Bishop of Maldune; and those in no great pomp, if the relation be
true, that by reason of their poverty they were not able to undergo the charge
of their journey and attendance, so as it seems they had but new set up, and
had not yet found out the right way of trade that other Bishops had attained.
And thus God ordered first the settling of a Government of the Church in
Britain, and its Liberties, before the Secular part enjoyed any: therein
working with this Nation as with a man, making him to be bonus homo before he
can be bonus civis.

The Church of Britain thus set together, is wound up for motion; they soon
learnd the use of Synods, from that Synod at Arles, if they had it not before;
and took as much power to themselves in their Synods as in other Countries was
used, and somewhat more to boot. For they had the hap to continue in Britain
in free course a full century of years before the civil Magistrate had any
other power, but what was wrapped up under the allowance of their Roman
Masters, who like Gallio looked upon the Church affairs as out of their
Sphere, and therefore cared for none of those things; or if the zeal of any
See far prevailed, it was much in favor of the Bishops upon whom the Emperors
began to dote as Oracles; and this raised the price of the Clergy, and taught
them the way to fish for themselves: No wonder it is therefore if Synods in
Britain, or rather the Clergy in the Synods (which probably were then the
representative body of the Nation) swayed all that was free from the Roman
Magistracy, and in some things outreached their limits; especially during this
interim wherein the Romans held the arms of civil Magistracy bound and let
the Clergy have their scope, that soon began to be ambient, and conceit a new
Idea of deportment, like that of the second beast in its infancy: Nor did the
Britons espy their danger herein, for they had been used to idolize their
Druides; and it was no more but faces about to do as much for their Bishops. Of
this power of Synods I shall propound but three presidents, and so draw to a
conclusion of what I think meet to note conconcerning the British affairs. I
suppose it will not be doubted but that public consultations concerning the
public government of any place or Nation, ought not to be called but by the
Supreme power; and that such consultations are to be directed by that Supreme
power. The Britons had a King, and yet without his consent they call a Synod
against the Pelagian Heresy, M. Westminster. An. 446. Beda. Lib. 1. cap. 17.
and choose a Moderator from beyond the Sea, and by that Synod not only
overwhelmed the Heresy, but excommunicated their King. This was a National
Synod, and might well stand with the rule of State, which then had seated the
Supreme power in the people, as I formerly noted out of Dion. But it could be
no warrant for that which followed, viz. that a Country Synod should
excomunicate a King, as it befell in the cases of Moris and Morcant. Council.
Brit. p. 49, 62, 382.
Or that such a Synod should intermeddle in matters of meum and tuum, as in the
case of Loumaek, who having invaded the patrimony of the Church, the Bishop of
Landaff in a Synod of his Clergy enjoined him penance; Council. Brit. 385.
and the like befell unto B ockvaile, who was compelled by the Synod to make
amends to Civiliack Bishop of Landaff for injury to him done: which I note not
by way of imputation; for this exorbitancy (if so it were) might correspond
with these times wherein very probable it is that justice could not be had
elsewhere; and had the Clergy been as careful of holiness, as in the former
cases they seem jealous for justice, Britain must have had the repute of a
Nation of Priests and holy men, rather then of Tyrants: whereas it was become a
glut of wickedness, Gildas.
and a burden that God would endure no longer; which renders their Synod
liable to exception, as being such as were either lifted up, or drawn aside,
and as the List to the Cloth, shows that the Nation stood in need of that
instruction which with a strong hand God wrought into them by the sad calamity
which ensues.

CHAP. IV. Of the entry of the Saxons, and their manner of Government.
WAsted with time, and wounded by eternal doom, the glory of the Western
Empire going down apace, now draws nigh unto its everlasting night; and that
vast body (not able longer to subsist, but dying by degrees) abandons this Isle
of Britain its utmost limmit, and last inlivened to subsist alone miserably or
else to die. The choice was more difficult by how much the more England was
much wasted in the Roman wars, the flower of their strength spent in foreign
service, the remainder but few, and these exceeding vicious; and which was
worst of all, engaged by the Romans in a war with the Picts, against whom the
Romans themselves found it too burdensome for them to hold out, without the
help of a wall: and albeit that the very name of an old servant of four
hundred years continuance might have moved a Roman heart to commiseration, yet
their spirits fail, and forsaken England must now go into the Wilderness,
and naked as they are endure the brunt of the cold storms of the Northern
Picts, without any shelter but the hidden will of God then frowning upon them.
In this condition they half desperate seek for a cure in reason worse then
the disease. For it had been better for them to have stooped to hard conditions
with the Picts, considering they were all but one people, and differing only
by the breadth of a wall, then to call in a new people whose qualities they were
ignorant of, and at the best to make them their companions, who might prove (as
they afterward did) both Lords and Masters over them. But there is no reason
against Gods will. The Britons needed present help, they overlayd by invasions
from the Picts (who soon espied the Romans gone and their own advantage) sent
for aid where they were most like to speed for the present, Aman, l. 26.
and left the future to look to it self. Ireland was nigh, but we find
nothing concerning their interest in shipping; the French coasts were not their
own men, being yet within the Roman Line: and none were at liberty but such as
were never subdued by the Romans: Only the Saxons are in the thoughts of the
Britons, a mighty people not far off, Zossimus hist. lib, 3.
able to mate the Romans in their chiefest pride, and though in a manner
borderers upon the Roman world, yet unsubdued by them, used to the wars, mighty
at Sea; and now given over by the Romans in a plain field, were at leisure, and
so well knew the way to Britain, that the Romans entitled the coasts of
Norfolk and Suffolk the Saxon coasts, Amian. lib. 28, 30.
from the many visits that the Saxons had already made into those parts full
sore against the Romans wills.

I hold it both needless and fruitless to enter into the Lists concerning the
original of the Saxons; whither they were natives from the Northern parts of
Germany, or the relics of the Macedonian army under Alexander. But it seems
their government about the time of Tiberius was in the general so suitable to
the Graecians, Suffeid. Petrus Fris. antiquit. lib. 3. cap. 1.
as if not by the relics of Alexanders army (which is generally agreed
emptied it self into the North) yet by the neighborhood of Greece unto these
Nations, it cannot be imagined but much of the Grecian wisdom was derived
into those parts long before the Romans glory was mounted up to the full pitch:
and because this wisdom could never be thus imported but in vessels of man's
flesh rigged according to the Grecian guize, it may be well supposed that there
is some consanguinity between the Saxons and the Grecians, although the degrees
be not known. The people were a free people, governed by Laws, and those made
not after the manner of the Gauls (as Caesar notes) by the great men, Caes.
com.
but by the people; and therefore called a free people, because they are a Law
to themselves; and this was a privilege belonging to all the Germans, as
Tacitus observes, in cases of most public consequence (de majoribus omnes)
like unto the manner both of the Athenians and Lacedaemonians in their Concio.
Histor. Germ. Plutarch. vit. Solon. and Lycurg.
For which cause also I take the Gauls to be strangers in blood unto the
Britons, however nigh they were in habitation. That some matters of action
(especially concerning the public safety) were by that general vote
concluded and ordered, seems probable by their manner of meeting with their
weapons. But such matters as were of less concernment the Council of Lords
determined de minoribus Principes, Albinus. Sax. 72.
says the same Author. Their Country they divided into Counties or Circuits,
all under the government of twelve Lords, like the Athenian territory under the
Archontes. Xenophon.
These (with the other Princes) had the judicatory power of distributive
justice committed to them, Tacit.
together with one hundred of the Commons out of each division. The election of
these Princes with their commission was concluded inter majora by the general
assembly; and they executed their commission in circuits, like unto the
Athenian Heliasticke or Subdiall Court, Emius.
which was rural and for the most part kept in the open air; in brief, their
judicials were very suitable to the Athenian, but their military more like the
Lacedemonian, whom above all others in their manners they most resembled. In
their Religion they were very devout, saving that they much rested in the
reverence they bare to their Priests whom they made the moderator of their
general Assembly, their Judge, advocate and executioner in Martial Law,
therein submitting to them as unto Gods instrument. They worship an invisible
and an infinite Diety: man's flesh is their sacrifice of highest account: and as
often as they make inquiry by lots, they do it with that solemn reverence as
may put all the Christian world to the blush, precatus Deos, coelumque
suspiciens; and this done by the Priest of the Town (if it be in public
causes;) or otherwise, if private, then by the master of the family; so as they
had family worship as well as public. These things I note, that it may
appear how nigh these invited guests resemble the old Religion of the Britons,
Avent. Anal. Bowr 1.10. Bruter. in Tacit. 125.
and how probable it is that this Island has from time to time been no other
then as a sewer to empty the superfluity of the German Nations; and how the
influence of these old principles does work in the fundamental government of
this Kingdom to this present day. These are the instruments chosen by God, and
called by the Britains to be their deliverers from their enemies; which they
did indeed, yet not swayed thereto by love of justice or compassion; for (if
writers say true) they were no better then highway men both by Sea and Land,
Amian.
but by their love of spoil and prey and by the displeasure of God against a
dissolute people. They profess friendship nevertheless in their first
entrance; but espying the weakness of the Britons and feeling the strength of
the Picts, and finding the Land large and good, they soon picked quarrels with
their Host, made peace with the Picts, and of fained friends becoming
unfeigned foes to the Britons, scattered a poor remnant of Christians, some to
the furthest corners of the Kingdom, others into foreign Nations, like so
many seedesmen to sow the precious seed of life in a savage soil. And those
few that remained behind profiting under much misery, by their doctrine and
good example yielded better blessings unto their new come guests then they
either expected, or desired. And thus the miseries of poor Britain became
riches of mercy to the North and Eastern people; and the ruins here, the
foundations of many famous Churches elsewhere. Nor yet was mercy from the
Britons utterly taken away, nor their blood drawn out to the last drop; or
their name quite blotted out of the book of fame: for whereas two things make
men miserable, viz. the heaviness of the burden without, and the failing of
the heart within, and Gods ordinary way of redress of the former begins in
taking away the later; thus dealt he with the Britons; for in danger as want of
strength breeds fear, and that (by extremity) despair, so despair
oftentimes revives into a kind of rage that puts strength forth beyond reason;
I say beyond reason, for cause cannot be given thereof, other then Gods
extraordinary dispensation in a judiciary way, when he sees the stronger to
wax insolent over the weaker. Thus the Britons fled from the Picts so long as
they had any hope of relief from the Saxons; but being become their enemies,
and pursuing them to the low water mark, that in all reason they must either
drink or bleed their last; then their courage revived, and by diverse victories
by the space of 200 years God stopped the hasty conquest of the Saxons: the
result whereof by truces, leagues, commerce, conversation, and marriages
between these two Nations declared plainly that it was too late for the Saxons
to get all, their bounds being predetermined by God, and thus declared to the
world. In all which God (taming the Britons pride by the Saxons power, and
discovering the Saxons darkness by the Britons light) made himself Lord over
both peoples in the conclusion.

CHAP. V. Of Austins coming to the Saxons in England, his entertainment, and
work.
DUring these troublesome times came a third party that wrought more trouble to
this Isle then either Pict or Saxon; for it troubled all. This was the
Canonical power of the Roman Bishop, now called the Universal Bishop. For the
Roman Empire having removed the Imperial residence to Constantinople weakened
the Western part of the Empire, and exposed it not only to the foreign
invasions of the Goths, Vandals, Herules, Lombards, and other flotes of people
that about these times by secret instinct were weary of their own dwellings,
but also to the rising power of the Bishop of Rome, Naucler. 505.
and purposely for his advancement; Who by patience out rode the storms of
foreign force, and took advantage of those public calamitous times to
insinuate deeper into the consciences of distressed people, that knew no other
consolation in a plundered estate, but from God and the Bishop, who was the
chief in account amongst them; the beauty of the Bishop of Rome thus growing
in the West, made him to out-reach not only his own Diocese and Province,
but to mind a kind of Ecclesiastical Empire, and a title according thereunto;
which at length he attained from an Emperor fitted for his turn: and this was
enough to make him pass for current in the Empire. But Britain was forsaken
by the Roman Empire above 153 years before: so as, though the Emperor could
prefer his Chaplains power or honor as far as his own, which was to the
French shore: yet Britain was in another world, under the Saxons power, and
not worth looking after till the plundering was over, and the Saxon affairs
settled, so as some fat may be had; then an instrument is sought after for the
work, and none is found so far fit to wind the Saxon up to the Roman bent
as a Monk, that was a holy humble man in the opinion of all but of those that
were so in the truth, and knew him. This is Austin, sent by Pope Gregory to do
a work that would not be publicly owned; it was pretended to bring Religion
to the Saxons in England; therefore they give him the title of the Saxon
Apostle; but to be plain, it was to bring in a Church-policy, with a kind of
worship that rendered the Latria to God, and the Dulia to Rome. The Saxons were
not wholly destitute of Religion; and that, Gregory himself in his Letter to
Brunchilda the French Queen confesses: Indicamus, says he, ad nos pervenisse
Ecclesiam Anglicanam velle fieri Christianam; Greg. Epist. lib. 5. Epist. 59.
so as there was a good disposition to religion before ever Austen came, and
such an one as rang loud to Rome. But far more evident is it from the Saxons
keeping of Easter more Asciatico, which custom also continued after Austens
coming fifty years, sore against Austens will: Bed. hist. lib. 3. cap. 25.
the dispute between Coleman and Wilfride bears witness to that: and it had
been a miraculous ignorance or hardness, had the Saxons a people ordained for
mercy (as the sequel showed) conversed with the Christian Britains and Picts
above 150 years without all touch of their Religion. Bed. hist. lib. 1. cap.
23. Lib. 3. cap. 4.
If we then take Austen in his best color, he might be said to bring religion
to the South Saxons, after the Roman garb; and his hotest disputes about
Easter, Tonsure, the Roman supremacy and his own Legatine power, Bed. hist.
lib. 1. cap. 27. Lib. 2. cap. 2.
and his worthy Queres to the Pope show he regarded more the fashion then the
thing; and the fashion of his person more then the work he pretended; for he
loved state, Greg. Epist. l. 7. Epist. 13.
and to be somewhat like to the Legate of an Univerall Bishop; and therefore of
a Monk he suddenly becomes a Bishop in Germany, before ever he had a Diocese,
or saw England; Council. Brit. 92.
and after he perceived that his work was like to thrive, he returned and was
made Archbishop of the Saxons, before any other Bishops were amongst them; Bed.
hist. lib. 1. cap. 29.
and after three years had the Pall, with title of supremacy over the British
Bishops that never submitted to him.

His advantages were, first his entrance upon Kent, the furthest corner of all
the Island from the Britains and Picts, and so less prejudiced by their
Church-policy; and at that very time interessed in the Roman air above all the
other Saxons: for their King had married a daughter of France, one that was a
pupil to Rome, and a devout woman; Bed. hist. lib. 1. cap. 25. Greg. Epist.
lib. 9. Epist. 59.
she first brought Austen into acceptance with the King, who also at that
present held the chief power of all the Saxon Kings in this Isle, which was
now of great efficacy in this work; for where Religion and power flow from one
spring in one stream, its hard to choose the one, and refuse the other. And
thus Rome may thank France for the first earnest they had of all the riches of
England, and we for the first entrance of all our ensuing bondage and misery. 2
These. 2.
Austen had also a gift or trick of working miracles, wherein whither more
suitable to the working of Satan or of God I cannot define. It seems they
walked only in the dark; for either the Britons saw through them, or saw them
not; nor could Austen with his miracles or finenesse settle one foot-step of
his Church-policy amongst them; happily they remembering the Roman Dagon, liked
the worse of the Roman woman; and the rather because the Carriage of their
messenger was as full of the Archbishop, as it was empty of the Christian: I
would not touch upon particular passages of action, but that its so remarkable
that Austen himself, but a novice in comparison of the British Bishops (the
clearest lights that the Northern parts of the world then had) and unto whom
the right hand of fellowship was due by the Roman Canon, should nevertheless
show no more respect to them at their first solemn entrance into his presence
then to vassals, as I could not but note the same as a strong argument that his
whole work ab initio was but a vapor of Prelacy. This the British Bishops soon
espied, and shaped him an answer suitable to his message, the substance whereof
was afterward sent him in writing by the Abbot of Bangor; and of late published
by Sir Henry Spelman, as follows:

BE it known (and without doubt) unto you, that we all, and every one of us are
obedient and subject to the Church of God, and to the Pope of Rome; and to
every godly Christian, to love every one in his degree in perfect charity, and
to help every one of them, by word and deed to be children of God: And other
obedience then this I do not know to be due to him whom you name to be Pope;
nor by the father of fathers to be claimed or demanded. And this obedience we
are ready to give and pay to him, and to every Christian continually. Besides
we are under the government of the Bishop of Caerleon upon Uske, who is to
oversee under God over us, and cause us to keep the way spiritual.

This was the Britons resolution, and they were as good as their word; for they
maintained the liberty of their Church five hundred years after this time, and
were the last of all the Churches of Europe that gave their power to the Roman
beast, and in the person of Henry the eighth that came of that blood by
Teuther, the first that took away that power again. Austen having met with
this affront, and perceiving that the Britons were stronger in their faith then
he by his miracles, cast about to try the Saxons courtesy, that what the Ephod
could not, the Sword wrapped up therein should. Bed. hist. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Council. Brit. fo. 111.
I say not that he procured, but he threatened or prophesied the destruction of
the Monks of Bangor; and it came to pass, and its by writers loudly
suspected. Nevertheless the Saxons were not so zealous of their new Religion,
as to make a new National quarrel between the Britons and themselves, but
left the game to be played out by Austen: who finding by experience that it
would not prove the work of one man, left it to successors to work out by
degrees in efflux of time. And thus Austen neither good servant to the Servant
of Servants, nor good Monk, retires to settle his Saxon province, and to
present or rather to prostitute it to the lusts of that red whore, which was
the general piety of those ignorant times.

CHAP. VI. Of the imbodying of Prelacy into the government of this Kingdom.
I Cannot think that the platform of the mystery of iniquity (when boiled to
the hight) was ever foreseen, or in the aim of the wicked spirits on earth, or
those in hell; yet were they all instruments of this monstrous birth, filled
with subtilty and mischief, guided principally by occasion, and overruled by
the Justice and Wisdom of God, to make a yoke for Monarchs, and a scourge to
the world for their refusal of the government of Christ, until this monster
came to perfection, and wherein themselves were feloes de se, and wrought their
own mischief: for Austen coming in as a third proprietor with King and
people; and having gathered the materials of a Church, reason told them that a
form of government must be settled in that Church; the Saxons had no principles
of their own, Tacit. mor. Sermon.
(for they had no learning) and to go to the Britons for a pattern might be
thought ignoble; and where the choice is small its soon made; Rome held now
the most part of the Churches of Europe at School, the Saxons soon resolve
Rome that had been their mother shall be also their father: and thus at one
draught they drank up a potion of the whole Hierarchy of Rome from the Pope to
the apparator, with a quicquid imponitur and imponetur, which was of such
lasting efficacy that it cease not to work even to this day, although it was
slow in the first provocation: For the Saxons had a Commonweal founded in the
liberty of the people; and it was a masterpiece for Austen and the Clergy, so
to work as to remain members of this Commonweal, and yet retain their
hearts for Rome, (which was now grown almost to the pitch of that Antichrist:)
for reason must needs tell them that the Saxon principles would not suffer them
to be ad omnia for Rome, nor the Roman Canon allow them to be wholly Saxon; and
they saw plainly that the times were too tender to endure them to be
declarative on either part, and therefore they chose a third way, which was to
preserve the municipall Laws in moderation toward the Canon; and to that end
to endeavor such a temper upon the State as must admit them to be in repute,
such as without whom the Commonweal could not well subsist, no more then a
body without a soul; and that few occasions should befall but at least in
ordine remoto must reflect upon both; and then all reason will be speak them
to join in the legislative power and government of this Kingdom; but
especially as Bishops, who are now Magnae spes altera Romae, and the very
top-flowers of wisdom and learning. And unto this temper the Saxons were
sufficiently prepared and inclinable; for it was no new thing for them to admit
their heathenish Priests into their general meetings, and allow them much
power therein, and then its but the person changed and they must do as much
for their Bishops now they are become Christian; especially themselves being
all for the field, and overgrown with a general ignorance, the common disease
of those times. Kings were in no beteer condition; it was hard for them to be
baptized and not to be baptized into Rome, and commonly under such a Covenant
as though many might repent of, yet none durst amend: for when as the Pope is
Lord of the consciences of the People, the Kings power may sometimes outface,
but can never govern; the Saxon Kings were therefore feign to make a virtue of
necessity, and advance Bishops to be common favorites both of Rome and
themselves, to maintain good correspondency between both Swords; and to
countenance the power of the temporal Magistrate in cases of dispute, else he
might oftentimes command, and yet go without. Thus enter the Prelates upon
affairs of Kings and Kingdoms, and became lovers of Lordships, and troublers
of States; and if in any thing they served their Country, they served Rome
much more; their merchandise was made of the policies and Councels of all
Kingdoms and States, and such returns proceeded as were still subservient to
the Roman interest; and they so intoxicated the domestique counsels in such
manner, as they generally staggered, and many times came short of home.
Nevertheless at the first this was but rare, clancular, and covered with much
modesty; for (excepting such choice spirits as Austen had) Roman Prelacy in
these younger times was but Velvet-headed, and endured not much greatness or
big titles, but spoke like a Lamb, Ego non verbis quaero prosperari sed
moribus, said this Gregory to the Alexandrian Bishop, who had put upon him the
title of universal Bishop or Pope: Greg. Epist. ad Eulog.
and whereas he had in a way of Courtship called Gregory's counsels commands,
he startles at it; quod verbum jussionis says he, peto a meo auditu removere,
quia scio quis sum and qui estis. Thus Prelacy first conveyed it self into
opinion, afterward into conscience, and ambition coming in the rear made it
become both Bishop and Lord.

CHAP. VII. Of Metropolitans in the Saxons time.
BEing in pursuit of the government of this Kingdom in elder times, and
therein first of the persons with their relation, then of their work, and
lastly of their Courts and Laws, and now in hand with the Ecclesiastical
persons, I shall descend to their particular ranks or degrees, and shall show
what they were in their original, and what overplus they had by Laws. And
first concerning the Metropolitan. In his original his Office was to visit
the Bishops, admonish and exhort them, and in full Synod to correct such
disorders as the Bishop could not reform, and in all things to proceed
according to the prescript Canon. Council. Brit. p. 258.


Thus witnesses Boniface an Archbishop to an Archbishop of an Archbishop; not
according to the practice of the times wherein it was written, but according to
the ancient rule. For long before Boniface his time Archbishops were swollen
beyond the girt of the Canon; An. 745.
and before that England was honored with that rank of men, Metropolitans
were become Metronomians, and above all rule but that of their own will, and
through common custom had no regard to any other; so as if England will have
them, it must be content to have them with their faults. But the truth is, the
dignity or title, which you will, was a plant of that virulent nature that
would scarce keep underground in the time of the hottest persecution: for
Steven Bishop of Rome liked the title of universal Bishop. Mag. cent. 3. cap.
7.
And after a little peace its a wonder how it grew to that height that it had;
And no less wonderful that the Saxons gave intertainment to such potentates.
Much of whose spirit they might have observed in the entrance of their first
Archbishop Austen, if God had not given them over to thraldom under that
mystery of iniquity, of sinful man aspiring into the place of God, taught by
that Courtly messenger of Rome, because they would not stoop to that mystery of
godliness, God manifested in the flesh, as it was taught in simplicity by the
rural Picts and Britons. But this was not all, for because Archbishops were
gotten above Canon, which was thought scandalous, therefore they gave as large
a power by Canon as the former usurpation amounted unto, and so stretched the
Canon to the mind of the man, whenas they should have rather reduced the man to
the Canon. The words of the Canon in our English tongue, run thus: It belongs
to the Metropolitan Bishop to rule Gods Churches; to govern, choose, appoint,
confirm, and remove Abbots, Abbotesses, Presbyters, and Deacons, and herewith
the King has nothing to do. And thus though the apparent power of Archbishops
was great and unlimited, Council. Brit. p. 190.
yet what more was wrapped up in that word Churches, only time must declare;
for its very likely that in those days it was not understood, yet the practice
does not obscurely declare the matter; for before, this Law was established by
Withered in a Council wherein Bertnaldus Archbishop of Canterbury was
president, An. 694. Ant. Brit. p. 55.
and who was first Primate of England. Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury used
such power over other Bishops in ordaining and removing them, as a writer
says, Malmsb. lib. 1. cap. 2. Ant. Brit. p. 54.
that his rule was no other then perturbatio and impetus animi, and his
carriage toward Wilfrid produced as a testimony. But the Metropolitan in
England as the times then were, had yet a further advantage, even over Kings
themselves; for there were diverse Kingdoms in this Island, and Kings had no
further power then their limits afforded them: but there was but one
Metropolitan for a long time in all the Saxon territories, so as his power was
in spirituals over many kingdoms, and so he became indeed alterius orbis Papa;
and it was a remarkable testimony of Gods special providence that the spirits
of these petty Popes should be so bound up under the notion of the
infallibility of the Roman chair; that they had not torn the European Church
into as many Popedomes as Provinces. But no doubt God ordered it for a scourge
to the world, that Antichrist should be but one, that he might be the more
absolute tyrant, and that Kings should bow down their necks under the double or
rather multiple yoke of Pope and Archbishops, for their rebellion against the
King of Kings.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Saxon Bishops.
HAd not Bishops been somewhat suitable, the Roman Clergy had not been like it
self; and it had been contrary to Austins principles to have advanced to
Bishoprics men better qualified then himself. They first ruled the Saxon
Church jointly in the nature of a Presbytery till about sixty years after
Austins time, their pride would not endure together any longer; and it may be
grew somewhat untractable under the Metropolitan, that resolved to be prouder
then all; and thereupon Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury first divided his
Province into five Diocesses, Ant. Brit. 52. Council. Brit. 133. Ant. Brit. 54,
Ibid. 53.
and by appointment of them Kings and people placed Bishops over each, every
one of them being of the right Roman stamp, as himself was of the right Roman
shaving. And it had been a wonder if Episcopacy now for the space of three
hundred years degenerated, and that into such a monstrous shape as a Pope
should by transplanting become regenerate into their original condition of
meekness and humility. But its much greater wonder that they should become so
purely ambicious as not to endure a thought of the ways of sobriety, but would
be proud by Law; to let all the world know that they held it no infirmity but
an honor. For albeit that in the first time the Bishops work was to instruct
and teach, to see the service of God to be diligently and purely administered in
public congregations, Council. Brit. 238, 246, 261.
to exhort, reprove, and by teaching to amend such matters as he should find
in life and doctrine contrary to Religion: and accordingly they carried
themselves meekly and humbly, Mag. Cent. 7. cap. 7.
studying peace and truth, and meddled not with secular affairs: they are now
grown up into state, and must now ride on horseback that were wont to go on
foot preaching the Word; Bed. hist. lib. 4. cap. 3.
and must be respected above the rank of ordinary Presbytery: none must doubt
of their truth, nor question their words, but they must be holden sacred as the
word of a King, Council. Brit. 196. An. 697.
sine juramento sit irrefragabile. Their presence must be a Sanctuary against
all violence; all Clerks and religious houses must stoop under their power;
Ibid. 329. An. 816.
their sentence must be definitive: and thus advanced they must keep state,
viz. not go too far to meet Princes in their approach toward them, nor to
light off their horses backs to do Princes reverence at their meeting: because
they are equal to Princes and Emperors; Council. 8. genesis constant. can. 14.
and if any Bishop shall behave himself otherwise, and after the old rusticall
fashion, (for such are the words of the Canon) for disgrace done to theitr
dignity they must be suspended: so as by their own confession Bishops
henceforth are Bishops of a new fashion, that must incur a note of infamy,
for showing any gesture of humility to Princes: which if any man will see more
fully, ler him peruse the Canon if he please. But this is not sublime enough;
they must be not only equal, but in many respects superior to Princes: for
in matters that concern God, Omnibus dignitatibus praesunt; and more plainly,
Princes must obey them, Mag. cent. 8. cap. 9.
Ex cord cum magna humilitate; and this was allowed of by Offa the great in a
legatine Synod. And thus highly advanced Bishops are now consecrated to any
work, and make every thing sacred. Council. Brit. 182. An. 693. Ll. Sax. cap.
37.
Oaths taken before them are of highest moment; and therefore the trial of
crimes before them, and the acknowledgement of deeds of conveyance in their
presence are without control. An. 928. Ll. Aethelst. cap. 11. Council. Brit.
Council. Brit. p. 197. An. 697.
Their custody is a sufficient Seal to all weights and measures, which they
committed to some Clerk whom they trusted; and at this day (though a
Lay-person) bears title of Clerk of the market. And although anciently they
might not interesse secularibus; yet afterward it became a part of their
Office to assist Judges in secular causes, to see that justice be not wronged:
and had the sole cognizance of all causes criminal belonging to the Clergy,
their tenants or servants; and in their Synods their power reached to such
crimes of Laymen as came within the savor of the Canon, though it were but in
the cold sent, as the Laws of Athelstane and other his successors sufficienly
set forth. And thus dressed up let them stand aside, that room may be made for
their train.

CHAP. IX. Of the Saxon Presbyters.
THese follow their Lords the Bishops as fast as they can hunt; Council. Brit.
p. 576.
for being of the same Order (as the less proud times acknowledged) they would
not be under foot, and the others above the top. True it is, that the Bishops
loaded them with Canons, and kept them under by hard work, under the trick of
Canonical obedience: yet it was no part of their meaning to suffer them to
become vile in the eyes of the Laity; for they knew well enough that the
Presbyters must be their bridles to lead and curb the people; and their eyes
to see whether the winds from below blew fair or foul for them, whose
consciences already told them that they merited not much favor from the
people. They see it therefore necessary to inhaunce the price of a Presbyter
somewhat within the aloye of a Bishop; to the end that the Presbytery may not
be too like the Babylonian Image whose head was Gold, and feet of Iron and
Clay. A Presbyter therefore they will have to be of equal repute with a Baron;
Council. Brit. p. 448. Ll Ethelst. 13. Ibid. 406. Council. Brir. p. 273. L.
Aethel. c. 2. Ll. Canut. c. 12. Mag. cent. 8. cap. 9.
and his person shall be in repute so sacred as that all wrong done thereunto
must be doubly punished with satisfaction to the party, and to the Church. His
credit or fame must not be touched by lay-testimony. Nor is he to be judged by
any seculer power; but to be honored as an Angel. Such are these instruments
of the Bishops government; and these are put as a glass between the Bishops
and people, and could represent the people to the Bishop black or white, and
the Bishop to them in like manner, as they pleased; and so under fear of the
Bishops curse kept the people in awe to themselves, and it.

CHAP. X. Of other inferior Church Officers amongst the Saxons.
THey had other inferior degrees of the Clergy, which because they are merely
subservient, and not considerable in Church Government, I shall only touch
upon them. The first are called Deacons, Deacons.
which were attending upon the Presbyters to bring the offerings to the Altar,
to read the Gospel, to baptize, and administer the Lords Supper: Then follow
the Subdeacons who used to attend the Deacons with consecrated vessels, Sub.
Deacons.
and other necessaries for the administering of the Sacraments. Acolites.
Next these Acolites, which waited with the Tapers ready lighted while the
Gospel was read, and the Sacrament consecrated. Then Exorcists, Exorcists.
that served to dispossess such as are possessed by the Devil, an Office (as
it may seem) of little use, Council. Brit. p. 54. Lecturers.
yet very ancient; for they are found at the Synod at Arles, which was within
three hundred years after Christ's death. Lecturers come next, who served to
read and expound; and these were of use when Churches began to multiply, and
Presbyters grew idle. Lastly, Ostiaries; Ostiaries.
which used to ring the bells, and open and shut the Church-doores.

These are the several ranks of Church Officers, being seven in number (for
Bishops and Presbyters make but one) and might be (as thus ordered) the seven
heads of the beast whereon the woman sits; Council. Brit. 261. An. 750.
and with much ado make up a kind of Church Service somewhat like a great Hoe
in a ship-yard at the stirring of a little log, and are nevertheless well paid
for their labor.

CHAP. XI. Of Church-mens maintenance amongst the Saxons.
I Take no notice in this account of the Abbats and Priors, and other such
religious men, as they were then called; nor can I pass them amongst the
number of Church Governors or Officers, being no other then as a sixth finger,
or an excrescence that the body might well spare, and yet they sucked up much
of the blood and spirits thereof. But as touching the maintenance of those
formerly mentioned, who had a constant influence in the government of the
affairs of the public worship of God, and regard of the salvation of the
souls of the people; I say their maintenance was diversely raised, and as
diversely employed: First, through the bounty of Kings and great men, Lands and
Manors were bestowed upon the Metropolitan and Bishops, in free alms; and
from these arose the maintenance that ascended up in abundance to the higher
Region of the Clergy, but came again in thin dewes scarce enough to keep the
husbandmans hope from despair; otherwise had not the Prelates so soon mounted
up into the chair of pomp and state, as they did. I say, these are given in
free alms, or more plainly, as alms free from all service: and this was
doubtless soon thought upon (for it was formerly in president with their
heathenish Priests and Druids; as Caesar notes, Com. 6.
that they had omninm rerum immunitatem:) yet with the exception of works of
public charity and safety, such as are maintaining of high ways, repairing
of bridges, and fortifying of Castles, etc. and hereof the presidents are
numerous. The work whereto this wages was appointed was the worship of God,
and increase of Religion; and thus not only many of the Kings Subjects were
exempted from public service, but much of the Revenue of the Kingdom
formerly employed for the public safety became acquitted from the service of
the field, to the service of the beade; the strength of the Kingdom much
impaired, and the subjects much grieved; who in those early times saw the
inconveniences, M. Paris in vit. Eadrick. Abb.
and complained thereof to their Kings, but could not prevail. This was the
vintage of Kings and great men, but the gleanings of the people were much more
plentiful; (for besides the Courts which swelled as the irregularities of
those times increased, and thereby enriched the cofers of that covetous
generation, An. 1009. Council. Brit. 523. Ll. Aetheld. 31.
the greatest part whereof ought by the Canon to go to the public) the best
part of the settled maintenance, especially of the inferior degrees, arose from
the good affections of the people, who were either forward to offer or easily
persuaded to forgo constant supply for the Churchmen out of their estates as
well real as personal, especially in the particulars ensuing. The most
ancient of all the rest was the First Fruits, First Fruits.
which was by way of eminency called Cyrick-sceate, or in more plain English,
Church-fee; which was always payable upon St Martins day unto the Bishop out
of that house where the party did inhabit upon the day or Feast of the
Nativity. Council. Brit. p. 185. An. 693. Council. Brit. p. 545.
It was first granted by Parliament in the time of King Ina; and in case of
neglect of payment or denial it was penal eleven-fold to the Bishop besides a
fine to the King, as was afterward ordered by Canutus.

Tithes. Council. Brit. p. 298. An. 787.
After the first fruits comes to consideration the Revenue of Tithes, whereof
I find no public act of state to warrant till the Legatine council under
Offa: although the Canon was more ancient. The Bishop at the first was the
general receiver as well of these as of the former, and by him they were
divided into three parts, and employed one to the poor; another for the
maintenance of the Church; Council. Brit. 259.
and a third part for the maintenance of the Presbyter. But in future times
many acts of state succeeded concerning this, Ingulsus.
amongst which that grant of Athelwolfe must be a little paused upon. Some
writers say that he gave the tenth mansion, Gest. pontif. Lib. 2. cap. 2.
and the tenth of all his goods: but Malmsbury says, the tenth of the hides of
Land; but in the donation it self, as its by him recited, its the tenth
mansion. But Math. Westminster. understands that he gave the tenth part of his
Kingdom; An. 854.
but in the Donation by him published it is decimam partem terrae meae. In my
opinion all this being by tradition, little can be grounded thereupon. The
form of the Donation it self is uncertain and varions, the inference or
relation more uncertain, and unadvised; for if the King had granted that which
was not his own, it could neither be accounted pious or rational. Nor do we
find in the donation that the King in precise words gave the Land, or the
tenth part of the Land of his Kingdom; but the tenth of his Land in the
Kingdom: and the exemplification published by Math. Westminster. countenanceth the
same, albeit the Historian observed it not; but suppose that the Kingdom
joined with the King in the concession, and that it was the course to pass it
only in the Kings name, yet could not the tenth Hide, tenth Mansion, or tenth
part of the Kingdom be granted without confusion in the possessions of the
people; for either some particular persons must part with all their
possessions, or else out of every man's possession must have issued a
proportionable supply, or lastly a tenth part of every man's possession, or
house and land, must be set forth from the rest: or some must lose all and
become beggars, to save others: all which are to me equally improbable.
Nevertheless I do not take the thing to be wholly fabulous, but may rather
suppose that either a tenth was given out of the Kings own Demesnes, which is
most probable; or else the tenth of the profits of the Lands throughout the
Kingdom; and that it was by public act of state, and that clause forgotten
by Historians. Council. Brit. p. 392. An. 905. Ibid. 527. An. 1009.
And thus might a good president be led to Alfred, Athelstan, and other Kings,
who settled Laws under payment of penalties, and appointed the times of
payment, viz. the small Tithes at Whitsuntide, and the great Tithes at
Alhollantide.

Another Tribute was that of Luminaries, Luminaries. Council. Brit. p. 377.
Ibid. 545. An. 1032.
which by Alfred and Gunthrun was first settled by Law, although it had been
before claimed by Canon. It was payable thrice a year, viz. Hollantide,
Candlemas and Easter, at each time a half penny upon every Hide of Land, and
this was under a penalty also.

Ploughalmes. An. 905.
Another Income arose from the Plough, and under the name of Plough-almes: at
the first it was granted by Edward the Elder generally, and the value was a
penny upon every plough; and in after times it was ordained to be paid fifteen
days after Easter. An. 1009.


Souleshot. Council. Brit. d. 571. An. 1009.
Next comes a fee at the death of the party, which was commonly called
Soul-shot: and paid (before the dead body was buried) unto that Church where
the dead parties dwelling was; so as they never left paying and asking so long
as the body was above ground; and its probable turned into that fee which was
afterward called a mortuary.

The incumbent also of every Church had Glebe laid to the Church; Glebe.
Council. Brit. 260. An. 750.
besides oblations, and other casual profits, as well arising from houses
bordering upon the Church, as otherwise. All these four last were payable to
the Priest of that particular Congregation, and had not their beginning till
Parishes came to be settled.

Peterpence.
Lastly, the zeal of the charity of England was not so cold as to contain it
self within its own bounds: they were a dependent Church upon Rome, and their
old mother must not be forgotten. An Alms is granted, for under that lowly
title it passed first, but afterward called Romscot or Romesfeogh, or
Heord-penny; for it was a penny upon every hearth or chimney, payable at the
Feast of St Peter, ad vincula; and therefore also called Peter Pence; it was
for the Popes use; and was settled under great penalties upon the defaulters. It
arose by degrees and parcels: Council. Brit. p. 230. An. 725.
for first Ina the Saxon King granted a penny out of every house in his
Kingdom: after him Offa granted it out of every dwelling house that had ground
thereto occupied to the yearly value of thirty pence, Council. Brit. p. 311.
An. 791.
excepting the Lands which he had purposed for the Monastery at St Albans: This
Offa had a much larger Dominion then Ina, and was King over three and twenty
shires: after whom Aethelwolfe passed a new grant thereof out of his whole
Kingdom, Ibid. 343. An. 847.
which was well nigh all that part which was called Saxony, with this proviso
nevertheless, that where a man had diverse dwelling houses, he was to pay only
for that house wherein he dwelt at the time of payment. Ibid. 621.
Afterward Edward the Confessor confirmed that Donation out of such Tenements
as had thirty pence vivae pecuniae. If then it be granted that the Saxon
subjects had any property in their Lands or tenements, as no man ever
questioned, then could not this charge be imposed without the public consent
of the people; and then the assertions of Polidore and the Monks, who tell us
that Ina and Offa had made the whole kingdom tributary to Rome, must needs be
a mistake, both in the person, and the nature of the gift, seeing there is a
much more difference between an Alms and a Tribute then between the King and
the people. Now that it was an Alms and not a Tribute, may appear, for that
the original was a sudden pang of zeal, Vit. Offae. 29.
conceived and borne in one breath, while the King was at Rome; and therefore
not imposed as a Tribute. Secondly, it was ex regali munificentia, and
therefore free. Thirdly, it was expressly the gift of the King; for the Law of
St Edward which provideth for the recovery of the arreares of this money,
Council. Brit. p. 445, ^4^. Council. Brit. p. 621.
and enjoyneth that they must be paid to the King, and not to Rome, as it was
in the days of Canutus, and Edgar, rendereth the reason thereof to be, because
it was the Kings Alms.

Secondly, that it was an Alms only from the King, and out of his own
Demesnes, may seem not improbable, because it was ex regali munificentia, which
could never be affirmed if the gift had been out of the estates of others.
Secondly, it was granted only out of such houses as yielded thirty pence rent,
called vivae pecuniae, because in those times rent was paid in Victual; so as
it may seem that only Farms were charged herewith: and not all men's Farms
neither; for the general income will never answer that proportion. The
particular hereof I shall in brief set forth. It appears in the former
quotation that Offa charged this leavy upon the inhabitants dwelling in nine
several Diocesses, viz. Hereford, which contained the City and County
adjacent. 2. Worcester, containing the Cities and Shires of it and Gloucester.
3. Lechfield, containing VVarwickeshire, Cheshire, Staffordshire, Shropshire,
and Darbishire. 4. Leicester, with the County adjacent. 5. Lincoln, with the
County adjacent. 6. Dorchester, whereto belonged Northamptonshire,
Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, Huntingtonshire, Cantabridgeshire, and half
Hartfordshire. 7. London, with Essex, Middlesex, and the other half of
Hartfordshire. 8. Helmham, with Norfolk. 9. Domuck or Dunwich with Suffolk.
In which nine Diocesses were two and twenty shires. And he further granted it
out of Spatinghenshire (now Nottingham) whose Church belonged to York. But in
Ethelwolfes time the grant was enlarged and extended into fifteen Diocesses;
which together with their several charge out of the English Martyrology I
shall particularize, Fox Martyr. p. 340.
as follows:

l. s. d. Cantuar. Dioces. 07. 18. 0. London 16. 10. 0. Roffen 05. 12. 0.
Norwic. 21. 10. 0. Elienum 05. 00. 0. Lincoln 42. 00. 0. Cistrens 08. 00. 0.
Winton 17. 06. 8. Exon 09. 05. 0. Wigorniensis 10. 05. 0. Hereford 06. 00. 0.
Bathon 12. 05. 0. Latisburgh 17. 00. 0. Coventree 10. 05. 0. Ebor 11. 10. 0.
200. 06. 8.

The whole sum whereof not exceeding two hundred pounds six shillings and eight
pence, will not amount to seven hundred pounds of now current money, if the
weight of a penny was not less in those times then in the reign of Edward the
first, when it was the twentieth part of an ounce, and that the twefth part of
a pound, as by the statute thereof made may appear. Nor can the difference be
much (if any) in regard of the vicinity of the time of this extract to that of
the Statute: for though no particular date thereof appear, yet it seems to
be done after the translation of the Sea from Thetford to Norwich, which was
done in William Rufus his time; and after the erecting of the Bishopric of
Ely, Brit. Antiq. p. 18.
which was in the time of Henry the first. Now albeit this charge was in future
times diversely ordered and changed; yet upon this account it will appear,
that not above eight and forty thousand and eighty houses were charged in this
time of Edward the second with this assessement; which is a very small
proportion to the number of houses of husbandry in these days, and much more
inferior to the proportion of houses in these times, if Polydores observation
be true, that in the Conquerours time there were sixty thousand Knights fees;
and as others, fifty thousand Parishes. It may therefore be rather thought that
none but the Kings farmers were charged herewith, notwithstanding the positive
relations of writers, who in this case as in most others wherein the credit of
Rome is engaged, spare not to believe lightly, and to write largely. And thus
for their sevenfold Church Officers; we have also as many kinds of constant
maintenance. One in Lands and Tenements, and six several kinds out of the
profits and the personal estate, besides the emergent benefits of oblations
and others formerly mentioned.

CHAP. XII. Of the several Precincts of Jurisdictions of Church Governors
amongst the Saxons.
THe Church Officers thus called to the Drum and paid, are sent to their
several charges, over Provinces, Diocesses, Deaneryes, and Parishes, Malms.
gest. Reg. lib. 1. c. 4.
as they could be settled by time and occasion. Before the Saxons arrival,
London had the Metropolitan See, or was chiefest in precedence; for
Archbishops the Britons had none. Afterward by advice of the wise men,
Canterbury obtained the precedence for the honor of Austin, who was there
buried. The number of Provinces, and their several Metropolitan Sees was first
ordered by advice of Pope Gregory, Bed. hist. lib. 1. cap. 29.
who appointed two Archbishops in Saxony; the one to reside at Canterbury, the
other at York; and that each of them should have twelve Bishops under them;
but this could never be completed till Austin was dead; as by the Epistle of
Kenulphus to Pope Leo appears. Malmesb. loco. citat.
Nor then had the Pope the whole power herein intailed to his Tripple-Crowne;
for the same Epistle witnesses, that the council of the wise men of the
Kingdom, ruled the case of the Primacy of Canterbury. Vit. Offae. Malmesb.
Council. Brit. 133. Antiq. Brit. Antiq. Brit. p 54. M. Westminster. An. 775.
And Offa the King afterward divided the Province of Canterbury into two
Provinces, which formerly was but one. The Precincts of Diocesses have been
altered ordinarily by Kings, or the Archbishops and their Synods, as the lives
of those first Archbishops set forth. Theodore had divided his Province into
five Diocesses, and within a hundred years after Offa we find it increased
unto eleven Diocesses.

Diocesses have also been subdivided into inferior Precincts called Denaries
or Decanaries, the chief of which was wont to be a Presbyter of the highest
note called Decanus, or Archpresbyter. Ll. Edw. conf. cap. 31. Lindwood. l. 1.
de constit. c. 1.
The name was taken from that Precinct of the Lay-power, called Decennaries,
having ten Presbyters under his visit, even as the Decenners under their
chief. The smallest precinct was that of the Parish, the oversight whereof was
the Presbyters work; they had Abbeys and other religious houses, but these were
however regular amongst themselves, yet irregular in regard of
Church-goverment, whereof I treat.

CHAP. XIII. Of the manner of the Prelates government of the Saxon Church.
HAving discoursed of the persons and precincts, it now befalls to touch upon
the manner of the government of the Church by the Saxon Prelates; which was not
wrapped up in the narrow closet of private opinion, but stated and regulated by
public Council, as well in the making as executing of laws already made;
This course was learned from Antiquity, Malmesb. gest. pontif. lib. 3. fo. 263.
and enforced upon them by a Roman constitution, in the case that concerned
Archbishop Theodore and Wilfrid upon this ground, Quod enim multorum concilio
geritur nulli consentientium ingerat scandalum. These are most ordinarily
called Synods, although at the pleasure of the Relator called also Councels,
and are either Diocessan or Provincial, or National, and these either
particular or general. Baronus An. 930.
The general consisted of all the Bishops and Clergy; and such was the Synod
under Archbishop Dunstan called. The National Synods were diversely called;
sometimes by the Pope, sometimes by the King, as the first moving occasion
concerned either of them. For Pope Agatho in a Synod at Rome ordered that a
Synod should be called in Saxony (viz England) Sacrosancta authoritate and
nostra Synodali unitate, Malmesb. gest. pontif. lib. 3. p 163. An. 680.
and many Legatine Synods in succeeding times demonstrate the same. That the
Saxon Kings also called them upon occasion, is obvious through all the
Councels, and needless to instance amongst so many particulars. The
Provincial Synods were sometimes convocated by the King, and sometimes by the
Archbishop, Council. Brit. p. 191, 310, and 318.
and sometimes jointly. The Diocessan were called by the Bishop. In the
National and Provincial sometimes Kings moderated alone, sometimes the
Archbishop alone, and sometimes they joined together. Ibid. 316, 318, 387.
The Assistants were others both of the Clergy and Laity, of several ranks or
degrees; and it seems that women were not wholly excluded; for in a Synod
under Withered King of Kent, Abbatisses were present and attested the acts of
that Synod, together with others of the Clergy of greater degree. The matters
in action were either the making or executing of Laws for government; and
because few Laws passed that did not some way reflect upon the King and
people, as well as the Clergy, the King was for the most part present, and
always the Lords, and others: Yet if the matters concerned the Church in the
first act, the King though present, the Archbishop was nevertheless president;
Council. Brit. 245, 327, 387.
as it befell at a Synod at Clevershoe, An. 747. and another at Celchith, An.
816. And in the reign of Edward the elder, though the Synod was called by the
King, yet the Archbishop was president. Concerning all which it may be in the
sum well conceived, that the penning of the Councels aforesaid, either the
Clergy (being the penmen) were partial or negligent in the setting down of
the right form; and that the Kings called these Assemblies by instance of the
Archbishop, and sometime presided in his own person, and sometimes deputed the
Archbishop thereto.

The executing of Laws was for the most part left to the Diocesan Synods; yet
when the cases concerned great men, the more general Councels had the
cognizance, and therein proceeded strictly sparing no persons of what degree
soever; Examples we find hereof, M Westminster. An. 955, 958. Council. Brit. 479.
amongst others, of one incestuous Lord, and two delinquent Kings, Edwy and
Edgar. Nay they spared not the whole Kingdom; for in the quarrel between
Cenulphus the King and Archbishop Wilfrid the whole Kingdom was under
interdict for six years space; and no Baptism administered all that time.
Ibid. 332.
Nor were they very nice in meddling with matters beyond their Sphere, even with
matters of property; for at a provincial Council (for so its called) they
bore all down before them, even the King himself, as in the case between
Cenulphus the King and the Archbishop of Canterbury concerning the Monastery of
Cotham. Ibid. 319, 332. Council. Brit. p. 334.
The like also of another Synod concerning the Monastery of Westburgh: Its true
the Lords were present; and it may be said that what was done, was done in
their right; yet the Clergy had the rule, and begat the child; and the
Lay-Lords only might challenge right to the name. This concurrence of the
Laity with the Clergy contracted much business, and by that means a customary
power, which once rooted, the Clergy after they saw their time (though not
without difficulty) turned both King and Lords out and shut the doors after
them, and so possessed themselves of the whole by Survivorship. But of this
hereafter.

The particular Diocesan Synods were, as I said, called by the Bishops within
their several Diocesses. The work therein was to preach the word as a
preparative; then to visit and inquire of the manners of the Clergy in the
worship of God, Mag. cent. 8. cap 9.
and of all matters of scandal, and them to correct. These Synods were to be
holden twice every year, at certain times; and if they met with any matter
too hard for them to reform, they referred it to the Provincial or National
Synod.

CHAP. XIV. Of Causes Ecclesiastical.
AS the power of Synods grew by degrees, so did also their work; both which
did mutually breed and feed each other: Heresy. An. 446.
Their work consisted in the reforming and settling matters of doctrine, and
practice. The first was the most ancient, and which first occasioned the use of
Synods. In this Island the Pelagian Heresy brought in the first president of
Synods that we have extant; and herein it will admit of no denial, but in the
infancy of the Church the teachers are the principal Judges of the nature of
error and heresy, as also of the truth; as the Church is the best guide to
every Christian in his first instruction in the principles; but after some
growth there is that in every Church and Christian that makes it self party in
judging of truth and error jointly with the first teachers. And therefore its
not without reason that in that first Synod although Germanus was called Judex,
Beda. hist. l. 1.
yet the people has the name of Arbiter, and it is said that they did contestare
judicium.

Blasphemy Blasphemy.
was questionless under Church-censure, but I find no footsteps of any
particular Law against it: yet in Scotland a Law was made to punish it with
cutting out the tongue of the delinquent: Council. Brit. p. 341. An. 840.
but it may be feared that neither the Saxons nor their Roman teachers were so
zealous for the honor of Gods name, as to regard that odious sin; unless we
should account them so holy as that they were not tainted therewith, and so
needed no law.

But Apostasy was an early sin, and soon provided against; Apostasy. An. 314.
Council. Brit. 41. Ibid. 376.
the Church-censure was allowed of in Britain before the Saxons Church had any
breath: afterward it was punished by fine and imprisonment, by a law made by
Alfred, as he provided in like manner for other Church laws.

The times anciently were not so zealous for due observance of Divine worship,
False worship.
unless by the Churchmen who were the leaders therein; Canon. Apost. cap. 10.
a foreign Canon was made to enforce that duty long before; but it would not
down with the rude Saxons: they, or the greater sort of them were content to
come to Church only to pray and hear the word, and so went away; this is
noted by that ancient writer in nature of an imputation, Bed hist. lib. 3. cap.
26.
as if somewhat else was to be done which they neglected; this somewhat was the
mass which in those days was wont to be acted after the Sermon ended: Mag.
Cent. 7. cap. 6.
and its probable that if the Nobles were so ill trained up, the inferior sort
was worse; and yet find we no law to constrain their diligence: or to speak
more plainly, its very likely the Saxons were so resolute in their worship as
there was either little need of Law to retain them, Council. Brit. p. 306.
or little use of Law to reclaim them; for its observed in their late Psalter
that the Roman Clergy was not more forward to Image or Saint-worship, then the
people were backward thereto; and therein showed themselves the true seed of
their ancestors in Germany, of whom its observed that they endured not Images,
Tacit. Mor. Germ.
but worshipped a Deity which they saw sola reverentia.

Sorcery and Witchcraft they had in abomination: yet it was a sin always in
a mist, and hard to be discerned but by the quicksighted Clergy; and therefore
it was left to their censure, Council. Brit. 246. An. 745.
as a sin against the worship of God. This Ethebald the Mercian King first
endowed them with; and they alone exercised the cognizance thereof till Alfreds
time, who inflicted thereupon the penalty of banishment: Ibid. 377.
but if any were killed by enchantment, the delinquent suffered death by a Law
made by Aethelstan. Ibid. 403. An. 928.
And thus by degrees became one and the same crime punishable in several
jurisdictions in several respects.

Concerning perjury, Perjury.
the Prelates had much to do therewith in future times, and they had the first
hint from Ina the Saxon Kings grant to them of power to take testimonies upon
oath; Ll. Sax. fo. 4.
as supposing that the reverence that men might bear to their persons and
functions would the rather over-aw their tongues in witnessing; that they would
not dare to falsify, least these knowing men should epsy it, and forthwith
give them their doom. But no positive Law allowed them that power of sentence
till Aethelstans law gave it, An. 928.
and upon conviction by the same Law distested the delinquents oath for ever.

Sacrilege Sacrilege.
comes in the next place, being a particular crime merely of the Clergy men's
exemption and naming; for before they baptized it, you might have well enough
called it theft, oppression, or extortion. This crime the Prelates held under
their cognizance by virtue of that general maxim, Council. Brit. p. 127. An.
610. Ibid. 265.
that all wrong done to the Church must be judged by the Church. The first time
that I can observe they challenged this power, was by Egbert Archbishop of
York in the seventh Century.

But nothing was more their own then Simony; Simony.
and that may be the reason why we find so little thereof either for the
discovery or correcting thereof. All former crimes were in their first act
destructive to the Church, but this advantageous; Council. Brit. 263.
and therefore though the Canons roar loud, yet the execution is not mortal,
because its bent against the dignity, and not the gain; and although the Canon
would not that any Presbyter should be made, but presented therewith to some
place to exercise his function in, yet it serves not for those times when men
were sent forth rather to make flocks, then to feed flocks.

And yet the theme of marriage was the best dish in all their entertainment:
Matrimonial causes.
they had the whole common place thereof with the appurtenances within the
compass of their text, before ever it attained the honor of a Sacrament. It
was a branch of Moses Law, whereof they were the sole expositours, and so
seems to be cast upon them by a kind of necessity, as an orphan that had no
owner. Nevertheless a passage in Eusebius seems to repose this trust in the
civil Magistrate: for he relates out of Justin Martyr concerning a divorce
sued out by a godly Matron long before the Prelacy got into the saddle, or the
Clergy had the power of Judicature: And whereas Lucius taxed Vrbicius the
Magistrate for punishing Ptolomy who was guilty of no crime worthy of his
cognizance in that kind; amongst other crimes enumerated by him, whereof
Ptolomy was not guilty, he names the crimes against the seventh Commandment,
intimating thereby a power in the Judge to have cognizance of those crimes as
well as others. But the Prelacy beginning to mount, nibled at it in the second
Century, but more clearly in the fourth, when the persecutions were allayed,
and men of learning began to feel their honor; and never left pursuit till
they had swallowed the bait, and exercised not only a judiciary power in
determining all doubts and controversies concerning the same; but challenged an
efficienciary power in the marriage-making. This garland Austin brought over
with him, and crowned the Saxon Clergy therewith, Beda. hist. l. 1. cap. 27.
as may appear by his Queres to Pope Gregory; and thus the Saxons that
formerly wedded themselves, became hereafter wedded by the Clergy; yet the
civil Magistrate retained a supreme legislative power concerning it, as the
joint marriages between the Saxons, Britons, and Picts do manifest; for its
said of that work, that it was effected per commune concilium and assensum
omnium Episcoporum, procerum, comitum and omnium sapientum seniorum and
populorum totius regni and per praeceptum Regis Inae, and in the time of Edmond
their King were enacted Laws or rules concerning marriage, Council. Brit. 219.
Council. Brit. p. 427. An. 944.
and so unto the Lay power was the Ecclesiastical adjoined in this work.

The Clergy having gained the principal, with more ease obtained the
appurtenances; such as are Bastardy, Adultery, Fornication, and Incest. There
was some doubt concerning Bastardy, Bastardy.
because it trenched far into the title of inheritance, and so they attained
that sub modo, as afterward will appear. The Laws of Alfred and Edward the
elder allowed them the cogisance of Incest; Incest. Council. Brit. p. 392. An.
905.
although nevertheless the civil Magistrate retained also the cognizance
thereof, so far as concerned the penalty of the temporal Law. Adultery and
Fornication they held without control, yet in the same manner as the former;
Adultery. Fornication. Council. Brit. p. 558.
for the civil Magistrate had cognizance thereof, so far as touched the
temporal penalty: And to give them as much as can be allowed, its probable
that in all or most of the cases foregoing they had the honor to advise in
determining of the crime, and declaring the Law, or defining the matter; for in
those ignorant times it could not be expected from any other.

But how the cognizance of Tithes crept under their wing, Tithes.
might be much more wondered at, for that it was originally from the grant of
the people; nor can a better ground be found by me then this, that it was a
matter of late original; for till the seventh Century the times were
troublesome, and no settled maintenance could be expected for the Ministry,
where men were not in some certainty of their daily bread. And as it will
hardly be demonstrated that this title was ever in any positive National Law
before the time of Charlemaine, in whose time by a Synod of Clergy and Laity it
was decreed that Tithes should be gathered by selected persons, to pay the
Bishops and Presbyters: Synod Durien. cap. 7. An. 785. Rabban. epist. ad
Hadubrand.
So neither can I find any Saxon National constitution to settle this duty,
till Alfreds time, although the Church men had them as a voluntary gift (so far
as touched the quota pars) for the space of well nigh a hundred years before.
But Alfred made a National Law under a penalty to enforce this duty, Council.
Brit. p. 377
which the Canon could not wring from the Saxons, how dreadful soever the
censure proved. And by this means the Church had their remedy by
Ecclesiastical censure for the matter in fact, and also the civil Magistrate
the cognizance in point of right, albeit future times introduced a change
herein.

CHAP. XV. A brief Censure of the Saxon Prelaticall Church Government.
THis that I have said might at the first view seem to represent a curious
structure of Church policy, which might have put a period to time it self; but
(to speak sine ira and studio) the height was too great, considering the
foundation, and therefore ever weak, and in need of props. The foundation was
neither on the rock, nor on good ground, but by a ginne screwed to the Roman
Consistory, or like a Castle in the air hanging upon a pin of favor of Kings
and great men. At the first they thought best to temporise, and to hold both
these their strings to their bow: but feeling themselves somewhat underpropped
by the consciences of the ignorant people, they soon grew wondrous brave, even
to the jealousy of Princes; which also was known so notoriously, that the
public Synods rang that the Prelates loved not Princes, Council. Brit. p. 254.
An. 747.
but emulated them, and envied their greatness, and pursued them with
detraction. And if the Cloth may be judged by the List, that one example of
Wilfrid Archbishop of York will speak much. He was once so humble minded as
he would always go on foot to preach the Word; Malmesb. gest. pontif. lib. 3.
An. 680.
but by that time he was warm in his Archbishops Robes, he was served in
Vessels of Gold and Silver, and with Troops of followers, in such gallantry as
his pomp was envied of the Queen. A strange growth of Prelacy in so small a
space as eighty years, and in the midst of stormy times, such as then
afflicted this poor Country: But this is not all, for never does pride lead
the way, but some other base vice follows. I will not mention the lives of the
Monks, Nuns, and other Clerks; Boniface epist. ad Cutbertum. An. 745.
Malmsbury speaks sufficiently of their luxury, drunknesse, quarrelling and
fighting: Others witness thereto, and tell us that the Clergy seldom read the
Scripture, and did never preach; and were so grossly ignorant, that Alfred the
King being a diligent translator of Latin Writers into the Saxon tongue,
renders this reason, because they would be very useful to some of his Bishops
that understood not the Latin tongue. Council. Brit. p. 379.
Nor were the Presbyters of another die; for that King bewailing their
ignorance, in his Letter to Wolfegus, says, that those which were de gradu
spirituali were come to that condition that few of them on this side Humber
could understand their common prayers, or translate them into Saxon; and so
few, as I do not (says he) rememember one on this side the Thames when I
began to reign. And the Synod that should have salved all, covers the sore
with this Canonical plaster, that those of the Clergy that could not say
Domine miserere in Latin, Council. Brit. p. 248. and 253. An. 747.
should instead thereof say Lord have mercy upon us in English. It was
therefore a vain thing for the Clergy to rest upon their works, or title of
Divine right; Their great pomp, sacred places, and favor of Kings commended
them to the admiration, or rather adoration of ignorant people, and the favor
of the Roman chair unto the regard of Kings; who maintained their interest
with the Conclave on the one side, and with the people on the other side by
their means; and so they mutually served one another. It cannot be denied but
the Pope and Kings were good Cards in those days; yet had the Prelacy maturely
considered the nature of the Saxon government, so much depending upon the
people, they might have laid a more sure foundation and attained their ends
with much more ease and honor. I commend nor the base way of popularity by
principles of flattery; but that honorable service of truth and virtue which
sets up a Throne in the minds of the vulgar, few of whom but have some sparks
of nature left unquenched; for though respect may chance to meet with
greatness, yet reverence is the proper debt to goodness, without which we
look at great men as Comets whose influence works mischief, and whose light
serves rather to be gazed upon, then for direction.

The foundation thus unhappily laid, the progress of the building was no less
irregular in regard of their ends that they aimed at: For first, they admitted
the Laity into their Synods; who were not so dull but could epsy their
ambition, nor so base spirited as to live in slavery after conviction: This
error was espied I confess, but it was too late; and though they reformed it,
yet it was after four hundred years labor, and in the mean time by the
contentions of the Clergy amongst themselves, Kings had first learned so much
of their Supremacy, and the Laity so much of their liberty, as they began to
plead with the Clergy, and had brought the matter to issue, before the Synod
could rid themselves of these Lay Spectators, or rather overseers of their
ways and actions. A second error, was the yoking of the Bishops power under
that of the Synods. For they had little or no power by the Canon that was not
under their control, neither in admission or deprivation of Presbyters or
others, determining of any cause, Council. Brit. 260, 263.
nor passing sentence of excommunication: and this could not but much hinder
the hasty growth of Antichrists power in this Kingdom; nor could it ever be
completed so long as the Synods had the chief power. Nevertheless the
inthralled spirits of the Clergy, and terror of the Papal thunderbolt, in
continuance of time surmounted this difficulty, and Synods became so tame and
easily led, as if there had been but one Devil to rule amongst them all. For
if any quick eye, or active spirit did but begin to peep or stir, the Legate e
latere soon reduced him into rank, and kept all in awe with a sub poena of
unknown danger. A third error, was the allowing of peculiars and exemptions of
Religious Houses from ordinary jurisdiction; and this was an error in the
first concoction, a block in the way of Prelacy, and a clogge to keep it down.
This error was soon felt, and was occasion of much mutiny in the body
Ecclesiastical: but exceeding profitable for Rome, not only in point of
Revenue by the multitude of appeals, but especially in maintaining a party for
the Roman See, in case the Prelacy of England should stumble at the Supremacy
of Rome. Otherwise it seemed like a wenne upon the body, rather then any
homogene member, and without which certainly the English Prelacy had thriven
much better, and the Roman chair much worse. In all which regards I must
conclude that the Prelaticall government in England was as yet like a young
Bear not fully licked, but left to be made complete by time and observation.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Saxon Commonweal, and the government thereof; and first of
the King.
HAving already treated of the Saxon Church, in order I am now come to the
Republique, which in all probability will be expected to be suitable to their
original in Germany, whereunto having relation, I shall first fall upon the
persons and degrees abstractively, then in their assemblies, and lastly of
their Laws and customs. The Saxons in their first state in Germany were
distributed into four classes, viz. the Nobles, the freemen, the manumitted
persons, and the bondmen. Under the Nobility, and from them, arose one that
was called a King, of whom I shall speak a part: the two last differed only
in the bare liberty of their persons, and therefore may be comprehended under
one head, as they were in their original.

A King amongst the Saxons in probability was anciently a Commander in the
field, an Officer pro tempore, and no necessary member in the constitution of
their state; for in time of peace, when the Commonwealth was it self, the
executive power of the Law rested much in the Nobility: but in times of war,
and in public distractions they chose a General, and all swear obedience
unto him during the war; Witikum. gest. Saxon. lib. 1.
it being finished, the General laid down his command, and every one lived
aequo jure propria contentus potestate. But in their transmigration into
Britain, the continuance of the war causing the continual use of the General,
made that Place or Office to settle and swell into the condition of a King; and
so he that was formerly Dux became Rex, there being no more difference in the
nature of their places then in the sense of the words, the one signifying to
lead, the other to govern; so as he that formerly was a servant for the
occasion, afterward became a servant for life, yet clothed with Majesty, like
some bitter Pill covered with Gold, to make the service better tasted. Nor was
the place more desirable, if duly considered. For first, his Title rested upon
the good opinion of the Freemen; and it seems to be one of the best Gems of
the Crown, for that he was thereby declared to be most worthy of the love and
service of the people. Yet was the ground of their election so uncertain, as a
man might imagine that sometimes there appeared more of the will then of the
judgment in it; that it might be said to be the more free; for they neither
excluded women nor children further then present occasions lead them. The
West Saxons deposed Seburg their Queen because they would not fight under a
woman; M. Westminster. An. 672. M. Westminster. An. 912, 919. Tacit. Cragius.
but the Mercians obeyed Elfled their Queen, and under her fought valiantly
with good success against the Danes; imitating the custom of the Sitones or
Norwegians in Germany; as they might borrow it from the Lacedaemonians. A
custom it was so much the more honorable, by how much it demonstrateth
freedom, and that the worth of the people rested not so much in the head, as
its diffused through the whole body. And it seems to run in the blood of an
English man, even to this day, to be as brave under a single Queen, as under
the most valiant King, if not much more: and still to strive to be as famous
for the defense of Majesty wherever they set it, as the Britons were of old:
Nor were they different in their respect of age from that of the sex; for
though after the death of Edmond, Edwin or Edgar were to have succeeded in the
Crown by the right of descent, yet the States would not admit them, because
they were minors; but the Mercians admitted Kenelme a child of seven years old
to be their King. They likewise excluded not bastards till the Clergy
interposed; for they having wound themselves into the Councels of the Kingdom,
procured a constitution to back them in the election of Kings Legitime, etc.
Let the Kings be legally chosen by Priests and Elders, and not such as are
begotten by adultery or incest: Which constitution was made in a Legatine
council, Mag. cent. 8. cap. 9. An. 747.
and confirmed by great Offa: The rule of their election was the same with that
in Germany, viz. to elect the chiefest out of the chiefest family, that is,
Tacitus.
the chiefest for worth, not by descent; yet the honor they bare to their
brave Kings who had deserved well, made some to honor their posterity, and to
choose their eldest after their decease, and so in time Crowns were taken up by
Custom, and election often times subsequent was accounted but a ceremony,
unless the people will dispute the point.

Secondly, this election was qualified under a stipulation or covenant, wherein
both Prince and people were mutually bound each to other; the people to defend
their King, which the Historian says was praecipuum Sacramentum; Tacitus.
and the Prince to the people to be no other then the influence of the Law
suitable to that saying of Aethelstan the Saxon King, Council. Brit. p 397.
seeing I according to your Law allow you what is yours, do you so with me; as
if the Law were the sole umpire between King and people, and unto which not
only the people, but also the King must submit. The like whereunto Ina the
great Saxon King also, Ll. Inae. Lamb.
No great man, says he, nor any other in the whole Kingdom may abolish the
written Laws. Kings furthermore bound themselves (at their entrance into the
Throne) hereunto by an oath; as its noted of Canutus, unto whom after
Aetheldred was dead, the Bishops, Abbats, Dukes, Miror cap. 1. sect. 2.
and other Nobles came and elected him to be their King, and swear fealty unto
him; and he again swear to them that Secundum Deum and secundum seculum etc.
viz. according to the Laws of God and of the Nation he would be a faithful
Lord to them. Wigortn. An. 1016.
Its probable I grant that the praecipuum Sacramentum formerly mentioned was in
the first nature more personal for the defense of the person of their leader
whiles he was their Captain because it much concerned the good of the Army, and
without whom all must scatter, and bring all to ruin; and this the words of
the Historian do evidence. But the safety of the whole people depended not on
him after the war was done, and therefore the oath tied them not any further;
nor did the safety of the people afterward, when as the Saxons entered this
Land so absolutely rest upon the person of the King, especially if he proved
unfit to manage the work: and therefore the fealty that the people swear to
their King, was not so absolutely determined upon their persons, otherwise then
in order to the public weal, as may appear from the Laws of the Confessor,
who was within thirty years after the reign of Aethelstan, formerly
mentioned; The words in English run thus: All the people in their Folkmote
shall confederate themselves as sworn brethren, to defend the Kingdom against
strangers and enemies, together with their Lord the King, and to preserve his
Lands and Honors together with him with all faithfulness, and that within and
without the Kingdom of Britain they will be faithful to him as to their Lord
and King. So as it is evident the Saxons fealty to their King was subservient to
the public safty, and the public safety is necessarily dependant upon the
liberty of the Laws. Nor was it to be expected that the Saxons would endure a
King above this pitch. For those parts of Germany (whence they came) that had
the Regiment of Kings (which these had not) yet used they their Kings in no
other manner then as servants of State in sending them as Ambassadors and
Captains, Tacitus.
as if they claimed more interest in him then he in them: and the Historian
says expressly, that amongst those people in Germany that had Kings, their
Kings had a defined power, and were not supra libertatem. And this maxim of
State became afterward privileged by Sanctuary: for by the growth of
Antichrist, not only the Clergy, but even their tenants and retainers were
exempt from reach of Kings, even by their own concession allowed of a Law that
cut the throat of their indefined prerogative, Ll. Sax. Ed. cap. 17.
viz. That if the King defend not his people, and especially Churchmen from
injury, nec nomen Regis in eo constabit, verum nomen Regis perdit. Which Law
however it might pass for current Divinity in those days, yet its strange it
should get into a public act of State. Nor was this a dead word, M. Westminster.
An. 756, 758. Wigorn. An. 755.
for the people had formerly a trick of deposing their Kings (when they saw
him peep above the ordinary reach) and this was an easy work for them to do,
where ever neighboring Princes of their own Nation watched for the windfals of
Crowns: This made the Monarchical Crown in this Land to walk circuit into all
parts of the Country to find heads fit to wear it self until the Norman
times.

Thirdly, the Saxons had so hammered their Kings in their elections, and made
him so properly their own, as they claimed an interest not only in the person
of their Kings, but also in their estates, so as in some respects they were
scarcely sui juris. For King Baldred had given the Manor of Malings in Sussex
to Christchurch in Canterbury; and because the Lords consented not thereto,
Council. Brit. 340.
it was revoked, and King Egbert afterward made a new grant by advice of the
Lords; which shows that the Demesnes of the Crown were holden sacred, and not
to be disposed of to any other use, though pious, without the consent of the
Lords: and herewith concur all the Saxon infeodations, attested and confirmed
by Bishops, Abbots, Dukes, and others of the Nobility under their several
hands.

Nevertheless Kings were not then like unto plumed Eagles, exposed to the
charity of the Fowls for food, but had a royal maintenance suitable to their
Majesty; their power was double, one as a Captain, other as a King; the first
was first, and made way for the second; as Captain, their power was to lead
the army, punish according to demerits, and according to laws; and reward
according to discretion. As Captain, they had by ancient custom the whole
spoil left to their ordering by permission of the army, Tacitus.
Exigunt Principis liberalitate illum Bellatorem equum, illam cruentam and
victricem frameam: and they were not wont in such cases to be close handed (per
bella raptus munificentiae materia) the spoils in these wasted parts of
Germany bring little other then horses and arms. But after they came into
Britain, the change of soil made them more fat; Horses and Arms were turned
into Towns, Houses, Lands, and Cattle; and these were distributed as spoils
amongst the Saxon soldiers by their Generals, and this redounded to the
maintenance of the State and port of the great men, who were wont to be
honored non stipendiis sed muneribus, Tacitus.
and the people used ultro and viritum confer principibus vel armentorum vel
frugum aliquid; but now upon the distribution of conquered Towns, Houses,
Lands, and Cattle in Britain a yearly product of victuals or other service
was reserved and allowed to the Saxon kings by the people, as the people
allowed to Joshua his Land, Jos. 19.49. so as they needed no longer the former
course of Offerings, but had enough to maintain their Royal port, and great
superfluity of Demesnes besides; as their charity to the Church men does
sufficiently evidence: and by this means all the Lands in England became
mediately or immediately holden of the Crown, and a settled maintenance annexed
to the same; besides the casual profits upon emergencies, or perquisites of
fellons or fugitives goods, mines of Gold and Silver, treasure trove, mulcts
for offenses, Miror. 101, 298 Ll. Edw. cap. 14
and other privileges, which being originally in the kings were by them
granted, and made Royalties in the hands of subjects as at this day.

To the increase of Majesty and maintenance there was an access of power, not
to make, dispense with, or alter Laws, but to execute and act the Laws
established: and against this power there was no rising up so long as it like
an unfethered Arrow gadded not at random. Its true the Church men or Prelates
checked them often, but could never give them the mate. For peace sake Kings
many times yielded much; yet would no King of Saxon principles allow of any
Canon that extolled the Clergies authority above that of Kings: and though the
placing and displacing of Bishops seemed to be all Ecclesiastical work, yet
would not the Kings altogether connive: as the examples of Ina in placing a
Bishop in Wels, Offa in making two Provinces of one, Malmesb. gest. pontif lib.
3. gest. Reg. lib. 1. cap 4. M. Paris An. 1095,
Cenulphus in restoring Polydorus, Edfrid in deposing Wilfrid, and Edward the
Confessor in making Robert Norman Archbishop of Canterbury may induce into
opinion; and for their own safety sake the Prelates thought it wisdom for them
sometimes to stoop to that power that at other times they must be beholding to;
and therefore though in Synodicall disputes they would hold with the Canon, yet
in matters of action would suite with the occasion, and thereby taught Princes
to account of Canons but as Notions; and politiquely to put the honor of
Commissioners upon these men: thus the current of both powers passing in one
channel made the people drink double Beer at once; the turns both of Pope and
King were competently served, and these men had the honor of the two-handed
Sword; and all seemed composed into a fair compromise. But the Popedom
finding its authority becalmed endured this but as a burden, till Pope Nicolas
the seconds time, who by the like trick commended all to the Crown, as from the
Papal benediction. For Edward the Confessor upon his foundation of the Abbey of
Westminster sent to the Pope for his allowance, and confirmation of what he had
done, or was to do; and to make way for the more favor sent presents, and a
confirmation of Romescot: The Pope was so inflamed with such an abundant
measure of blessing, as he not only granted the Kings desire, but also
discharged that Abbey from ordinary jurisdiction, made it a peculiar subject
only to the Kings visitation, and concluded his Bull with this horn. Vobis
vero and posteris vestris regibus committimus advocationem and tuitionem
ejusdem loci and omnium totius Angliae Ecclesiarum, Council. Brit. p 634. An.
1066.
and vice nostra, cum concilio Episcoporum and Abbatum constituatis ubique quae
justa sunt. How the King took the conclusion I find not, but he could never
make better use then by way of estoppel unless he meaned to sacrifice his own
right as a thankoffering to a shadow, which I find not that he or his next
successors ever did: but as touching the Laity, Histories do not touch upon
any conceit of withdrawing Monarchical power. Its true Kings had their
excesses, yet all was amended either by the body of the people, when they
pleased to examine the matter, Ll. Canut. cap. 67.
or by the Princes fair compliance when complaint was made, and so the Law was
saved. And thus upon all the premises I shall conclude that a Saxon King was no
other then a primum mobile set in a regular motion, by Laws established by the
whole body of the Kingdom.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Saxon Nobility.
THe ancient Saxon Nobility in Germany were the chiefest in action both in war,
and in peace. That rank of men was continued by three means, viz. by birth or
blood, by valor, and by wisdom: the first was rather at the first a stem
arising out of the first two, then a different degree or kind: for Noble blood
was at the first innobled by brave actions, afterward continued in their honor
to their posterity, till by as base courses it was lost, as it was gained by
worthy achievements; these were called Adelingi. The nobility of action
consisted either in matters of war or of peace. Those of peace arose
principally from wisdom, which being gained for the most part by much
experience, were therefore called Aldermanni or elder men. The Nobility of war
arose somewhat from valor or courage with wisdom, but more from good
success; for many brave and fortunate Commanders have not been very daring,
Ll. Edw. cap. 35. Nitard. lib. 4.
and the bravest spirits though wise have not been ever honored with good
success; these were called Heretochii. Nevertheless all these names or titles
were used promiscuously in following times, and all called Nobiles; but both
that and Duces, Satrapae, and Comites were all of the Roman Dialect, as the
former were of the Saxon. Time also brought others into this Honorable band,
viz. The great Officers of the Kings household, and their attests are found
amongst the Kings charters, amongst the Nobles; And that much advanced the
price of Kings; for he that is worthy to be not only Lord above Nobles, but
master of some, may by a little courtesy prevail over all. This starry Heaven
had several Orbs: Tacitus.
some so high, as in common esteem they were next the Imperial Heaven, having
a tincture of Royal blood, and at the next door to the Throne; Others, though
not of so clear light, had nevertheless no less powerful influence upon the
people, but rather more, by how much more nigher to them. Their power in
matters of peace or government of the Commonweal was exercised either
collectively or apart and severally. In their meetings they ordered the smaller
emergencies of the public in convocating and directing the people. De
minoribus rebus consultant principes. Tacitus.
These minora are such as are subservient to the majora and pro hic and nunc
require sudden order touching any particular part or member of the
Commonwealth. At other times they visited their several Territories or
circuits, hearing and determining matters of controversy, and executing
judgment according to the known Laws. Principes jura per pagos vicosque
reddunt. Yet they had comites of the Country joined with them, Tacitus.
whereof afterward. This was their course in German Saxony; but in England the
new stem of Kingly power arising higher then all the rest sucked much from
them, and kept them under: for the judiciary power was in time drawn up into
the Regal order, and the Lords executed the same as deputies from and under
him, designed thereto by Writs and Commissions, as its more particularly noted
of King Alfred. Miror cap. 5. Sec. 1.
The Lords thus lessened in their judiciary power, carried the less authority
in their votes and consultations. The King was a perpetual moderator in that
work, and it was no small advantage he had thereby to sway the Votes. Men that
are advanced, if they have any excellency, soon gain admiration; and its a hard
thing for one that has yielded his heart to admiration, to keep it from
adoration. This has mounted up Kings to the top more then their own ambition,
and made them undertake what they ought not, because we esteem more highly of
them then we ought. I speak not against due, but undue obedience; for had the
Saxon Lords remembered themselves, and the true nature of the authority of their
King, they needed not to be amazed at their check, nor to give way to their
passion, Council. Brit. p. 333.
as they did many times, and advised others to do the like. Nor had Kings by
degrees become beyond controlle and incapable to be advised. This error the
Lords espied too late, and sometimes would remember their ancient right and
power, and did take boldness to set a Law upon the exorbitancy of their King,
M. Westminster. An. 854.
as in that case of Aethelwolfe and his Queen amongst others may appear: but
that was like some enterprises that owe more to extremity of occasion then to
the courage of the undertaker.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Freemen amongst the Saxons.
THe next and most considerable degree of all the people, is that of the Free
men called anciently Frilingi or free born, or such as are borne free from all
yoke of arbitrary power, and from all Law of compulsion other then what is made
by his voluntary consent; for all free men have votes in the making and
executing of the general Laws of the Kingdom. In the first they differed from
the Gauls, of whom its noted, that the Commons are never called to council,
Caes. Com. lib 6.
nor are much better then servants. In the second they differ from many free
people and are a degree more excellent being adjoined to the Lords in
judicature, both by advice and power, consilium and authoritas adsunt; Tacitus.
and therefore those that were elected to that work were called Comites ex
plebe, and made one rank of free men for wisdom superior to the rest:
Another degree of these were beholding to their riches, and were called
Custodes Pagani an honorable title belonging to military service; Limb. in 4.
fo. 71
and these were such as had obtained an estate of such value as that their
ordinary arms were a Helmet, a Cote of Maile, and a guilt Sword: The rest of
the free men were contented with the name of Ceorles or Pagani, viz. rural
clownes, who nevertheless were the most considerable party both in war and
peace: and had as sure a title to their own liberties, as the Custodes pagani,
or the Country Gentlemen had.

CHAP. XIX. Of the villainies amongst the Saxons.
THe most inferior rank amongst the Saxons were those that of latter times
were called villains; But those also anciently divided into two degrees, the
chiefer of which were called Free-lazzi. These were such as had been slaves,
but had purchased their freedom by desert; and though they had escaped the
depth of bondage, yet attained they not to the full pitch of free men; for the
Lord might acquit his own title of bondage, but no man could be made free
without the act of the whole body. Tacitus.
And therefore the Historian says, that they are not multum supra servos, or
scarce not servants. They are seldom of account in any family, never in any
City. But in Kingdoms sometimes advanced above the free men, yea above Nobles.
Those are now adays amongst the number and rank of such as are called copy
holders, who have the privilege of protection from the Laws, but no privilege
of vote in the making of Laws.

The most inferior of all were those which were anciently called Lazzi or
slaves; those were the dregs of the people, and wholly at the will of their
Lord to do any service, or undergo any punishment; Tacitus.
and yet the magnanimity of the Saxons was such as they abhorred Tyranny: and
it was rarely used amongst them, by beating, torture, imprisonment, or other
hard usage, to compel them to serve; they would rather kill them as enemies;
and this wrought reverence in these men toward their Lords, and maintaintd a
kind of generosity in their minds, that they did many brave exploits, and many
times not only purchased their own freedom, but also brought strength and
honor to the Kingdom. And though the insolency of the Danes much quelled this
Saxon Nobleness, yet was it revived again by the Confessors Laws which
ordained that the Lords should so demean themselves toward their men, that
they neither incur guilt against God, nor offense against the King; or which
is all one, to respect them as Gods people and the Kings subjects. And thus
much of the several degrees of men amongst the Saxons, being the materials of
their Commonweal; a model whereof in the making and executing of the Laws
and manner thereof, now next ensues.

CHAP. XX. Of the grand Council of the Saxons called the Micklemote.
IT was originally a Council of the Lords and Free men; afterward, Tacitus.
when they assumed the title of a Kingdom the King was a member thereof, and
generally president therein, but always intended to be present, though
actually and in his own person by emergent occasions he may be absent, and
sometimes by disability of his person he be unmeet to Vote or be President in
such an assembly: as it was in the Council at Clano or Cleve in Wiltshire,
when the great case between the Monks and married Priests was concluded;
Malmesb. gest. Reg. lib. 2. cap. 9. Lib. 5. An. 978.
the King was absent, as the story says, because of his minority, and yet if
writers say true, he was then in the sixteenth year of his age. The Lords were
also nevertheless in the same condition of privilege as formerly, and though
it appears that the Kings had gotten the privilege of summoning the grand
meeting in his own name, yet it was by advice of the great men, and being met
their votes were no other in value then as formerly; for all their Laws were ex
consilio sapientum, and for ought can appear out of antiquity the vote of the
meanest continued as good as of the greatest, Tacitus.
arbitrium est penes piebem. And thus the Micklemote or Wittagenmote of the
Saxons in England continued in the King, Lords, and Free men by the space of
one hundred and fifty years, and in some parts of England nigh two hundred
years before ever the Roman Bishops foot entered, or the Roman Clergy crept
into the Councels of State. Afterward the Prelates were admitted de been esse,
for advice, as sapientes, and continued by allowance; how Canonically ipsi
viderint, for I understand it not, especially as the Scripture was then
expounded, Nemo militans Deo implicet negotiis saecularibus: yet if they be
allowed (what in those days they ordinarily took up) a degree of policy above
devotion, that knot is also soon untied. I say they entered as Sapientes, not
as Prelati, or Church Governors; for then they had holden the same power in
Church Matters agitated in the Wittagenmot that they had usurped in their
Synods which they held only for Church-visitation, which they could never have
because the Sapientes regni had their Votes therein as freely as they. Nor
could the Prelates by any Law entitle themselves to such power or privilege,
so contrary to the privilege of the Wtttagenmote. For though it be true that
the German Priests had a liberty to be present in these grand assemblies, and
to have some presidency therein, as to command silence, etc. yet its no title
to these, Tacitus.
unless they will interest themselves as their successors, to possess by a
jus Divinum that jus Diabolicum (which those Priests formerly had) in a way of
immediate providence; somewhat like the possession of the mantle of Eliah found
by Elisha. They might, I grant, plead the title from Kings; but it must be
granted also that Kings as yet had no more power over the Church then in the
Commonwealth. Nor could they have that from the Lords which the Lords never
had, but was ever accounted amongst the majora, and of which the Wittagenmot
had the only cognizance, as it will appear in some particulars ensuing.

Unto the King, Lords, and Clergy must be added, as I said, the Freemen, to
make up the Micklemote complete; and though it be true that no monument of
story speaks of this grand meeting from their being in Germany, until after
the coming of Austin; yet when as the Saxon Histories then find them in the
same condition that the German story leaves them, its very probable that in the
intervall they continued their wonted custom, although they had no Learning to
leave monuments thereof unto the world. And hereof the examples are not rare in
those remembrances that those ancient times have left us. For within six years
after Austins arrival Aethelbert calls a Common Council tam cleri quam populi.
Council. Brit. 126. Ll. Sax. Lamb. cantab. fo. 1. Ibid. fo. 22. Ibid. fo. 53.
Ina after him made Laws suasu and instituto Episcoporum omnium senatorum and
natu majorum sapientum populi; in magna servorum Dei frequentia. Alfred after
him reformed the former Laws consulto sapientum. After him Aethelsian called a
Council, in which was the Archbishop, and with him the Optimates and sapientes
frequentissimi besides others, whereof I shall treat now that I come to the
matters handled in this Court.

The matters in agitation in the Wittagenmot generally were all both of
public and private concernment. That which concerned the public were such
as regarded removal of inconveniences, such as are laws for leagues and
affinity with other Nations for preventing of war; and thus became the Saxons
and Britons united, Council. Brit. p. 219. Ll. Lamb. Cantabr. fo. 36.
and the mortal feude between those two Nations laid aside, and they made one;
and the Saxons and Danes reconciled by a covenant agreed unto, and sworn
between both Nations. The like also may be said of their making of war of
defense against foreign invasion. Matters of public and general charge also
were debated and concluded in that assembly, as the payment of Tithes, Ll. Edw.
Lamb. Came. fo. 139.
its said they were granted Rege Baronibus and populo. Such also as concerned
the Church; for so Edwin the King of Northumberland upon his marriage with a
Christian Lady, being importuned to renounce his Paganism, answered he would
so do, Antiq. Brit. p. 51.
if that his Queens Religion should be accounted more holy and honorable to
God by the wise men and Princes of his Kingdom. And all the Church Laws in the
Saxons time were made in the Miklemote. Monasteries were by their general
consent dedicated, Council. Brit. 127. Ibid. 321.
and their possessions confirmed. The City of Canterbury made the
Metropolitan; matters also of private regard were there proceeded upon, as not
only general grievances, but perverting of justice in case of private
persons: as in that Council called Synodale concilium under Beornulfus the
Mercian King, Ibid. 332.
quaesitum est quomodo quis cum justicia sit tractatus, seu quis injuste sit
spoliatus. The name of which Council called Synodall minds me to intimate
that which I have often endeavored to find out, but yet cannot, viz. that
there was any difference between the general Synods and the Wittagenmot,
unless merely in the first occasion of the summons. And if there be any credit
to be allowed to that book called, Cap. 1. Sec. 3.
The Mirror of Justices, it tells us that this grand assembly is to confer of
the government of Gods people, how they may be kept from sin, live in quiet,
and have right done them according to the Customs and laws; and more
especially of wrong done by the King, Sec. 2.
Queen, or their children; for that the King may not by himself or Justices
determine causes wherein himself is actor; Cap. 4. Sec. 11.
and to sum up all, it seems a Court made to rise and stoop according to
occasion.

The manner of debate was concluded by vote, and the sum taken in the gross by
noise; Tacitus. Plut. Lycurg. Thucyd. lib. 1. de Lacedem.
like to the Lacedaemonians, who determined what was propounded clamore non
calculis; yet when the noise was doubtful, they took the votes severally. The
meeting of the Saxons at this assembly in the first times was certain, Tacitus.
viz. at the new and full Moon. But Religion changing, other things changed
these times to the Feasts of Easter, Pentecost, and the Nativity; at which
times they used to present themselves before the King at his Court, for the
honor of his person, and to consult and provide for the affairs of his
Kingdom; and at such times Kings used to make show of themselves in their
greatest pomp, Crowned with their Royal Crown. This Custom continued till
the times of Henry the second, An. 1158.
who at Worcester upon the day of the Nativity offered his Crown upon the
Altar, and so the ceremony ceased.

This grand Assembly thus constituted was holden sacred; and all the members,
or that had occasion therein, were under the public faith both in going and
coming, unless the party were fur probatus. If a member were wronged, the
delinquent paid double damages, and fine to the King, by a Law made by
Aethelbert above a thousand years ago. Council. Brit. p. 127. Ll. Canut. p. 2.
cap. 79. Ll. Edw. cap. 35
This privilege of safe pass being thus ancient and fundamental, and not by
any law taken away, rests still in force. But how far it belongs to such
as are no members, and have affairs nevertheless depending on that Court, I
am not able to determine; yet it seems that privilege outreacheth members:
unless we should conceit so wide that the state did suppose that a member
might be a notorious and known thief.

Lastly, this assembly though it were called the Wittagenmot, or the meeting of
wise men; yet all that would come might be present and interpose their liking
or disliking of the proposition, si displicuit sententia fremitu aspernatur, si
placuit frameas concutiunt; and some hints I meet with that this course
continued here in England; for some presidents run in magna servorum Dei
frequentia, as that of Ina: Ll. Sax. Lamb. p. 1. Council. Brit. 219. Ingulfus.
commune consilium seniorum and populorum totius regni: another Council by him
holden. The council of Winton, An. 855. is said to be in the presence of the
great men, aliorumque fidelium infinita multitudine. And it will appear that
it continued thus after the Norman times: what power the vulgar had to control
the vote of the wise men, I find not; fremitu aspernabantur its said, and
probably it was a touch of the rudeness of those times; for it was not from
any positive Law of the Nation, but a fundamental Law in nature that wise men
should make Laws: and that the supreme judicature should rest in the
Wittagenmot, was never an honor bestowed upon it by the Saxons, but an
endowment from the light of reason, which can never be taken away from them by
that headless conceit provoco ad populum, but that body must be as monstrous
as the Anthrophagi whose heads are too nigh their belly to be wise.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Council of Lords.
THis in the first condition was a meeting only of the Lords, for direction in
emergent cases, concerning the government and good of the Commonweal; and for
the promoting of administration of justice: these the Historian calls Minora,
because they were to serve only the present passions of State. Afterward when
they had gotten a King into their number, they had so much the more work as
might concern due correspondency between him and the people, and of themselves
toward both. This work was not small, especially in those times of the growth
of Kings, but much greater by the access of Prelates into their number, with
whom came also a glut of Church affairs, that continually increased according
as the Prelates ambition swelled, so as this Council might seem to rule the
Church alone in those days; when as few motions that any way concerned
Churchmen, but were resolved into the Prelaticall cognizance, as the minora
Ecclesiae: and thus under the color of the minora Ecclesiae, and the minora
Reipublicae, this mixed Council of Lords came by degrees to intermeddle too
far in the magnalia Regni. Mag. cent. 8. cap. 9. An. 712. Council. Brit. p.
189. An. 694.
For by this means the worshipping of Images, and the mass was obtruded upon
the Saxons by the Roman Bishop and his Legate, and the Archbishop of
Canterbury; and decreed that no Temporal or Lay person shall possess any
Ecclesiastical possessions. That elections of Ecclesiastical persons and
officers shall be by Bishops. That the possessions of Churchmen shall be free
from all Lay service and taxes. And in one sum they did any thing that bound
not the whole body of the Free men. In which had these Lords reflected more
upon the office, and less upon the person, and not at all upon their private
interest, they doubtless had been a blessing to their generations, and a
Golden Scepter in the hand of a righteous King; but contrarily missing their
way they became a Sword in the Kings hand against the subjects, a snare to the
Kingdom, and had not the Wittagenmot in their meeting allayed those
distempers, the Saxon government had been little other then a Commonweal
reversed.

CHAP. XXII. Of the manner of the Saxon Government in time of war.
AS the condition of States or Kingdoms are diversely considered in war and
peace, so also must their government be: for however war in it self be but a
feverish distemper in a Commonweal, yet in some cases it is as necessary as
a kindly ague in due season is for the preservation of the body which many
times takes distemper rather from the excellency of its constitution then from
the abundance of humors. Nor did the temper of the Saxon Commonweal ever
shine more then in war, whiles it set a law upon that which ordinarily is
master of all misrule and confusion, and so fought by rule rather then by
passion. Their chief in the first times was chosen by the Freemen in the
field, Tacitus. Ll. Edw. cap. 35
either at the Wittagenmot or the Folkmot, according to the extent of his
command, being carried upon a shield born upon their sholders like as now
Knights of the shire are. This Emblem they entertained him with, to declare
their trust in him, and the work that was expected from him. His first Title
was Heretock, afterward he was called Duke or Duce; the latter whereof turned
to a bare Title in the conclusion; but the former maintained its own honor,
so long as the name lasted. After his election all swear to be at his Order,
and not to forsake him: this was a trick of imbased times; Tacitus.
for though the Lacedemonian Law was positive, that none should fly or break
his rank, but get the victory or die, yet were they neither bound by oath or
penalty: shame in those times being accounted worse then death by those brave
minds. But times growing more old grew also more base-spirited, and could not
be (drawn into the field) holden in rank by oaths or honor; and this
occasioned that Law of Ina the Saxon King that in such case a Country
Gentleman should be fined 120 shillings if he were landed, Ll. Sax. Lamb.
Cantab. 10.
but if otherwise, 60 shillings, and the Yeoman 30 shillings, and afterward
the penalty was increased to the forfeiture of all the estate of the
delinquent. Council. Brit. p. 528. An. 1009.
In their wars they went forth by bodies collectively as they were united by
the law of pledges; this made them stick close together for the honor of
their families and friends, Tacitus:
and rendered their encounters mortal, and to the worsted party commonly
fatal: for once beaten in the field they could hardly recover either by
rallying or gathering a new Army. Probable it is that the Lords might have
their villains to follow them in the battle, but the strength consisted of
the free men; and though many were bound by tenure to follow their Lords to the
wars, and many were volunteers, yet it seems all were bound upon call under
peril of fine, and were bound to keep Arms for the preservation of the
Kingdom, Ll. Edw. cap. 35.
their Lords, and their own persons, and these they might neither paune nor
sell, but leave them to descend to their heirs, and in default of them to
their Lord, and in default of him to their chief pledge, and for want of such
to the King. They mustered their arms once every year both in Towns and
Hundreds, viz. the morrow after Candlemas; and such whose bodies were unfit for
service were to find sufficient men for service in their stead. They were
strict in their discipline, Ll. Canut. cap. 58.
if they followed their rule which was made not by the arbitry of the General,
but by Parliament. These amongst other scattered principles concerning
Sea-affaires, may serve to let us know that the Law-Martiall, and that of the
Sea were branches of the positive Laws of the kingdom, settled by the general
vote in the Wittagenmot, and not left to the will of a lawless General or
Commander; so tender and uniforme were those times both in their Laws and
liberties.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the government of the Saxon Kingdom in times of peace; and
first of the division of the Kingdom into shires, and their Officers.
IF the Saxon government was regular in time of war, how much rather in time
of peace? All great works are done by parcels and degrees, and it was the
Saxons ancient way in Germany to divide their Territory into several circuits
or circles, and to assign to each their several Magistrates, all of them
ruled by one Law; like one soul working in several members to one common
good. Thus they did here in England, having found the Land already divided into
several governments; they likewise what they conquered divided into several
parts called Comitatus or Counties, from the word Comes that signifies a
companion; and the Counties thence called are nothing but societies or
associations in public charge and service. But the Saxon word is shire or
share, that is a portion or precinct of ground belonging to this or that person
or great Town and bearing the name of that person or Town; and sometimes of the
situation of the people, as North or South folk, East or South Sex or Saxons.
This division by the names seems to be of Saxon original, and though by the
testimony of Ingulfus and other writers, Seld. Tit. Hon.
it might seem to be done by Alfred; yet it will appear to be more ancient, if
the reader mind the grant of Peter pence made by King Offa, wherein is
recorded the several Diocesses and shires out of which that grant was made
under the very same names that they own at this day: M. Westminster. An. 794.
and that grant was more ancient then Alfreds time by the space of 80 years.

Each of these Shires or Counties had their two chief Governors for
distributive justice; of these the Sheriff was more ancient and worthy
Officer, being the Lieutenant, Sheriffs.
and aided by the power of the County in certain cases: for his Commission
extended not to leavy war, but to maintain Justice in that County, and within
the same; and in this work he was partly ministerial and partly judicial: in
the one he was the Kings servant to execute his Writs; in the other he
regulated the Courts of justice under his survey. Ll. Edw. c. 35.
He was chosen in the County Court called the Folkmote, by the votes of the
Freeholders, and as the King himself and the Heretock were entitled to their
honor by the peoples favor.

Coroners.
The Coroner though in original later, was nevertheless very ancient: he was
the more servant or Officer to the King, of the two. His work was to enquire
upon view of manslaughter, and by indictment of all felonies as done contra
coronam, which formerly were only contra pacem, and triable only by appeal.
Miror cap. 1. Sec. 13.
As also he was to inquire of all escheates and forfeitures, and them to seize.
He was also to receive appeals of Felonies, and to keep the rolls of the Crown
pleas within the County. Its evident he was an Officer in Alfreds time; Miror
p. 300.
for that King put a Judge to death for sentencing; one to suffer death upon
the Coroners record, without allowing the delinquent liberty of traverse. This
Officer also was made by election of the Freeholders in their County Court as
the Sheriff was, Fits N. Br. 163, 164.
and from amongst the men of chiefest rank in the County, and sworn in their
presence, but the Kings Writ lead the work.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the County Court, and the Sheriffs Torn.
THe government of the County in times of peace consisted much in the
administration of justice, which was done in the public meetings of the
Freeholders: and their meetings were either in one place, or in several parts
of the County: in each of which the Sheriff had the mannaging of the acts done
there. Folkmote or County court.
The meeting of the Freemen in one place was called the Folkmote by the Saxons
(saving the judgment of the honorable reporter) Coke instit. 2. p. 69. and of
latter times the County court: the work wherein was partly for consultation and
direction concerning the ordering of the County, for the safety and peace
thereof, such as were redress of grievances, election of Officers, prevention
of dangers, etc. and partly it was Judicial, Miror: p. 147.
in hearing and determining the common pleas of the County, the Church
affairs, and some trespasses done therein, but not matters criminal, for the
Bishop was Judge therein, together with the Sheriff, and by the Canon he was
not to intermeddle in matters of blood: yet neither was the Bishops nor
Sheriffs work in that Court, other then directory or declaratory; for the
Freemen were Judges of the fact, and the other did but edocere jura populo;
Ll. Canut. Miror. cap. 1. Sec. 15.
yet in special cases upon petition a Commission issued forth from the King to
certain Judges of Oier to join with the others in the hearing and determining
of such particular eases. Miror cap. 5. Sec. 1.
But in case of injustice or error the party grieved had liberty of appeal to
the Kings Justice. Nor did the Common pleas originally commence in the County
court, Ll. Canut. Ll. Edgar.
unless the parties dwelt in several Liberties or Hundreds in the same
County: and in case any mistake were in the commencing of suits in that Court,
which ought not to be, upon complaint the Kings Writ reduced it to its proper
place; and in this also the Kings own Court had no preeminence. Council. Brit.
p. 197. tit. 22.
In those ancient times this County court was to be holden but twice a year by
the constitution of King Edgar; but upon urgent emergencies oftener, and that
either by the Kings especial Writ, Ll. Edw. cap. 35
or if the emergent occasions were sudden and important by extraordinary
summons of ringing the Moot-bels. Unto this Court all the free men of the
County assembled to learn the Law; to administer justice, Ll. Edw. cap. 35
to provide remedy for public inconvenience; and to do their fealty to the
King before the Bishop and Sheriff upon oath; and in the work of administering
justice, Ll. Edw. cap. 4.
causes concerning the Church must have the precedence; so as yet the Canon law
had not gotten footing in England.

The other Court wherein the Sheriff had the directory was in the meeting of
the free men in several parts of the County; and this was anciently, Sheriffs
Torn.
and now is called the Sheriffs Torn; which simply considered is but a Hundred
Court, Miror cap. 1. Sec. 16.
or the Sheriffs Torn to keep the Hundred Court. It was ordered to be kept
twice every year, viz. at the Lady day and Michaelmas, Ll. Edgar cap. 5 Ll.
Edw. cap. 35
or soon after: unto this Court all the Freeholders of the Hundred repaired,
and there they, the Bishop and Sheriff executed the same power and work for
kind that they did in the County Court. Ll. Canut. p. 2. cap. 17.
In this Court all the suits in the Hundred court depending had their
determination, and others had their commencement and proceedings as well the
pleas of the Crown as others. Some have conceived it to be a County court, or
superior thereto; but there being no ground thereof, I conceive it to be no
other then a visitation of the County by parcels or in circuit.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Division of the County into Hundreds, and the Officers and
Court thereto belonging.
COunties were too great to meet upon every occasion; and every occasion too
mean to put the whole County to that charge and trouble: and this induced
subdivisions; the first whereof is that of the Hundred now, and also anciently
so called, but as ancient (if not more) is the name Pagus; for the Historian
tells us that the Germans in the executing of their Laws, Tacitus.
a hundred of the free men joined with the chief Lord per pagos vicosque, and
in raising of forces one hundred were selected ex singulis pagis, which first
were called Centenarii or Hundreders from their number, but used for a title of
honor like the Triarii: And as a second hereunto, I shall add that testimony
of the Council at Berkhamsted, which speaking of the reduction of suits from
the Kings Court ad pagi vel loci praepositum, in other places its rendered to
the governors of the Hundred or Borough. And at this day in Germany their
Country is divided into circuits called centen or canton and centengriecht and
the Hundredere they call Centgraven or Hundred chiefes, Cluer. lib. 1. cap. 13.
whether for government in time of peace, or for command in time of war; the
later whereof, the word Wapentake, does not a little favor. Amongst these one
was per eminentiam called the Centgrave or Lord of the Hundred, and thereunto
elected by the free men of that Hundred, and unto whom they granted a stipend
in the nature of a rent, Malmesb. Reg. gest. p 54.
called Hundredsettena, together with the government of the same. The division
of the County in this manner was done by the free men of the County, who are
the sole Judges thereof, if Polydores testimony may be admitted: and it may
seem most likely that they ruled their division at the first according to the
multitude of the inhabitants: which did occasion the great inequality of the
Hundreds at this day. The government of the Hundred rested at the first upon
the Lord and the Hundredars; but afterward by Alfred they were found
inconvenient, Ll. Alured cap. 4.
because of the multitude, and reduced to the Lord or his Bailiffe, and twelve
of the Hundred; and these twelve were to be sworn neither to condemn the
innocent, nor acquit the nocent. This was the Hundred court, which by the Law
was to be holden once every month; and it was a mixed Court of common pleas,
and Crown pleas: Ll. Edw. 35, Ll. Aetheldr. 1. Ll. Aethelst. 20
for the Saxon Laws order that in it there should be done justice to thieves;
and the trial in diverse cases in that Court is by ordeale. Their common plees
were cases of a middle nature, as well concerning Ecclesiastical persons and
things as secular, Ll. Edw. cap. 32
for the greater matters were by Commission or the Kings Writ removed as I
formerly observed: Ll. Aetheldr. cap. 1. Lindenbrog. Ll. Allm. and Saxon.
all Freeholders were bound to present themselves hereat. And no sooner did the
defendant appear, but he answered the matter charged against him, and
judgment passed before the Court adjourned, except in cases where immediate
proof was not to be had; albeit it was holden unreasonable in those days to
hold so hasty process: and therefore the Archb. of York preferres the
Ecclesiastical or Canonical way before this. Lastly, in their meeting,
Council. Brit. p. 273. Tacitus. Glossar. 155.
as well at the Hundred as County Court, they retained their ancient way of
coming armed.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Division of the Hundreds into Decennaries.
THis was the last subdivision of the County, and that rested upon the persons;
and it was either not at all or not so observable as to be worthy of the Roman
story; and therefore may rather be thought an extract from Moses law introduced
by Alfred or his direction. I say this rested on the persons and not upon the
place; for though the Centeners were comprehended with certain bounds; yet the
Decenners were not limited but only within the limits of the Hundred. And of
these also it appears to me there were diverse sorts; for such matters of
controversy that did arise amongst the Decenners, if of greater moment, were
referred to the chiefer Justices, which were appointed super december decanes,
which I conceive were ten chief pledges; and these might bear the names of
the Centeners, although they be not the Centgraven; and the rather I incline
thereto because in all probability there must needs be above one hundred
Freeholders in Hundredo, and all free men were Decenners, Ll. Canut. c. 19.
that is ranked into several tens; each one being pledge for others good
abearing, and in case of default to answer it before the judge; and in case of
default of appearance his nine pledges should have one and thirty days to
bring the delinquent forth to justice. If this failed, then the chief of those
Decenners by the votes of that and the neighbor Decennaries, was to purge
himself and his fellow pledges both of the guilt of the fact, and of being
parties to the flight of the delinquent. And if they could not this do, then
were they by their own oaths to acquit themselves, and to bind themselves to
bring the delinquent to justice as soon as they could, and in the mean time to
pay the damage out of the estate of the delinquent: and if that were not
sufficient, then out of their own estate; but if the delinquents estate was
sufficient, the surplussage thereof remained with the pledges. And lastly, the
Master of the family was a pledge for his whole family. Ll. Edw. cap. 15 Ll.
Canut. c. 28
This was the Law of Decenners, and may seem to be somewhat a rigorous law, not
only in case of delinquency, but also for their abode, for none of them might
depart from their dwelling without consent of his fellow pledges, Ll. Alured
cap. 33. Ll. Canut. p. 2. cap. 15.
nor out of the County without allowance of the Sheriff, or other Governor of
the same. And if any controversy arose between the pledges, the chief pledge
by them chosen, called also the Deane or Headburrough may determine the same;
Ll. Edw. c 20.
but this held only in matters of lighter consequence.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Francheses: and first of the Church Franches.
WE have hitherto trod in the rode way of the government of the Commonweal:
but private regards have made bypath, which we must trace, or else the
footsteps in many particulars will remain unknown. These are called
exemptions, but more ordinarily Francheses, from which scarce any part of the
Kingdom remained free; and are to be considered eithet in regard of the place
or person. In the later I intend that of the Churchmen, whose persons and
estates in many particulers were exempted from the civil power of this
Kingdom. Their persons devoted to a peculiar work, they would have to be under
a peculiar Law, called the Canon law; which at the first extended only to
their own persons, and that only pro reformatione morum: Council. Brit. p. 258.
for so an Archbishop tells us, that it did teach quomodo Canonici id est
regulares Clerici vivere debent; but when it grew to its full charge it gave a
louder report, Quicunque aliquid tenuerit vel in fundo Ecclesiae mansionem
habuerit extra curiam Ecclesiasticam non placitabit quamvis foris fecerit. Ll.
Edw. Conf.
And thus as Church ground increased by the blind charity of those times, so
long Churchmen multiplied, and the Canon enlarged from the persons of regulers
to all Clergymen, and from them to their Tenants and neighbors; from thence to
certain Spiritual or Ecclesiastical crimes or scandals, wherever they were
found, and wherever it touched, it took and bound by Excommunication, Ll. Edw.
cap. 7.
and upon significavit being first delivered to Satan they delivered him over
to the sentence of the Law, to be imprisoned. If the offender be out of reach
by the space of thirty and one days he is outlawed; so as there is no way left
to escape the Church fury.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the second Franches called the Marches.
FRanchises of the place were such as were limited within precincts of place,
and annexed thereto; and of this sort first were those of the borders, of which
those are the most ancient that bordered the Britons, now called the marches of
Wales, in which was a peculiar government, so far as concerned administration
of justice; for otherwise the subjects each of them submitted themselves to the
service of their own Prince. This was therefore a third, different, and mixed
government, agreed upon jointly between the Britons and Saxons, who after a
long and burdensome war, wherein both peoples were well wearied by degrees
became friends, entered traffic and into the strictest societies by marriage.
Thus finding the sweetness of peace, they provide against future occasions of
strife that might arise in commerce by the justling of two Laws together, and
agree in one law, and upon a certain number of Judges elected by common
consent, who were to see to the execution of these Laws as joint assessors.
From these as I conceive arose those which are now called the Lords marchers,
Ll. Aetheld. cap. 3.
and were at the first twelve in number, viz. six Saxons and six Britons. It
seems this form of government was first instituted by Aetheldred, and by way
of prescription or custom continues till this day: and as it was the birth of
truce, so for the future became both mother and nurse of peace between those
two peoples, like the twilight between the day and night, until both were
brought under one head, and by divine providence settled in a lasting day.

CHAP. XXIX. Of County Palatines.
OF the same sort of Francheses were these which are called County Palatines,
which were certain parcels of the Kingdom assigned to some particular person,
and their successors, with royal power therein to execute all Laws
established, in nature of a Province holden of the Imperial Crown: and
therefore the Kings Writ passed not within this precinct no more then in the
Marches. These were occasioned from the courage of the inhabitants that stoutly
defended their liberties against the usurping power of those greater Kings that
endeavored to have the Dominion over the whose Heptarchy, and not being easily
overcome were admitted into composition of tributaries; and therefore are found
very ancient: for Alfred put one of his Judges to death for passing sentence
upon a malefactor, for an offense done in a place where the Kings Writ passed
not: Miror: cap. 5. Sec. 1.
and the same author reciting Another example of his justice against another
of his Judges for putting one to death without president, renders the Kings
reason for that the King and his commissioners ought to determine such cases;
excepting those Lords in whose precinct the Kings Writ passes not.

CHAP. XXX. Of Francheses of the Person.
FRancheses of the person are such liberties annexed unto the person as are not
absolute Lordships, but only tending thereto, and limited within a Precinct,
but not annexed thereto: and these are matters of profit rather then power; as
those of Bury St. Edmonds, Doncaster, Dorchester, Circester; all which were in
the Saxon times: Miror cap. 5.
and these or some of them had juridicall power in cases of felonies and
robberies arising within that precinct, so as the delinquent was both
inhabitant and taken within the same; this was called Infangtheoff,
Infangtheoff.
and if upon fresh pursuit made by the right owner or possessor, the delinquent
was taken with the prey in his possession, or as the old Dialect is Handhaben
Backbearend; Ll. Edw. cap. 26
Then was he carried immediately before the Coroner of that liberty, and the
Sakeber or party wronged made his proof by witnesses; and thereupon judgment
forthwith passed without answer, and execution immediately ensued. Some
Liberties had Outfangtheoff, Outfangtheoff. Bracton lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 35.
Briton. cap. 15.
that is, the trial and forfeiture of such delinquents, being no inhabitants,
and yet taken within the liberty, or inhabitants and not taken within the
liberties; but this trial was always by Jury. The antiquity of these
Liberties are not obscurely manifested in their names, and more clearly by the
Saxon Laws and Acts; Ll. Edw. cap. 21
for its observed of Alfred that he seized a Franches of Infangtheoff, because
the Lord of that Franches would not send a felon (taken within his liberty for
a felony committed without the same) to the jail of the County, Miror cap. 5.
Sec. 1.
as he ought to have done. Other Liberties there were granted also by charter;
a taste whereof may be seen in one grant made by King Edgar to the Monastery of
Glastenbury, wherein was granted Sack, Hamsockne, Friderbrece, Forstel, Teme,
Flemone, Ferdre, Hundred Setene, Sock, Tholl, Adae, Horda, Bufan Orderan, Been
Orderan, the particular natures of each may be observed in the Glossaries; All
of them being allowed to the Crown by the Law, and by the advice of the
Council of Lords granted over to these Grantees in nature of Deputies to the
King, to possess both the power and profit thereto belonging.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Manors
Nevertheless most of these liberties, if not all of them were many times
granted by Kings as appendent to Manors; which were Francheses of smaller
circuit being at the first portions of ground granted to some particular
persons, and by them subdivided and granted over to particular persons to hold
of the Grantors by rents, services, and suit to one Court, all being no other
then the spoils of war, and rewards of valor, or other service. These in
their collective nature are called a Manor, and by continuance of time become a
kind of body politic. In antiquity its called Mansum from the mansion house,
although it is not of the Essence of a Manor, Bracton. fo. 212
nor ought the words of Bracton to be construed according to the literal
sense; for the house may be destroyed, and yet the Manor continue; and the
ground was granted in tenure before any house built thereupon. The quantity of
the ground thus given to hold by service was according to the pleasure of the
Lord more or less, and therefore might extend into diverse Parishes, as on the
other part one Town might comprehend diverse Manors. Flera. lib. 4. cap. 15.
The Estate that was granted depended partly on the condition of the Grantee:
for some were servi or bondmen, and their Estate was altogether at the will of
the Lord, as was also the benefit; but the servants merit, and the Lords
benignity concurring with some conscience of Religion, as the light grew more
clear, abated the rigor of the tenure into that which we now call Copyhold.
Other Estates were made to the Free men, which in the first times were only
for years; albeit therein they were not niggardly, for they sticked not at
Leases for a hundred years, Ingulsus Croyl.
yet with a render of rent, which in those days was of Corn or other Victual;
and thence the Leases so made were called Feormes or Farms, which word
signifies Victuals: But times ensuing turned the victual into money, and
terms of years to terms of life and inheritance, retaining the rents, and those
called Quit rents, or the rents of those persons that are acquitted or free.
Gloss. 158. Ll. Saxon 16, 17. Lamb. Gloss. 348. Ll. Canut. p. 1. cap. 69.
But in case of estates of inheritance for the most part after the death of the
Tenants were reserved Heriots or a relief: which were not left to the will of
the Lord, but was put in certainty, in the very letter of the Law: for
according to each man's degree, such was his relief or heriot.

But over and above all, they reserved special service to be done by the
person of the Tenant, or some other by his procurement, of which those that
were their servi or villains were at the will of the Lord: others had their
particular service set down in their grants. Knight Service.
These concerned either war or peace; the former was afterward called the
service of the Knight or Soldier; the later the service of the Husbandman or
Plough. That of the Soldier was the more honorable, and suitable to the old
German trade; Pigrum and iners videtur sudore acquirere quod possis sanguine
parare: Tacitus.
and the work was to defend the Kingdom, the Lords person and honor; and to
this end he was ever to have his weapons in readiness, which gave name to the
service, and altered as times and customs changed. This service by custom
from a work degenerated into the bare Title, and became a dignity; and the men
named, or rather entitled Milites: and many of the Saxon charters were
attested by men bearing that Title; yet the service it self was far more
ancient, and called servicium loricae, of which sort also were the Custodes
pagani that wore a Helmet, a coat of Maile, and a guilt Sword: not unlike the
old German way of calling forth of their Tirones to the war. Tacitus.
Of this rank some were more eminent then others; for some bare the single
title of Knight, and it seemed served on foot: Others served on horseback, and
were called Radknights, or Knights riders, as Bracton notes; Seldom. Spicil.
and these I take to be the Vavasours, noted in the Conquerours Laws: for that
their relief is a Helmet, a Cote of Maile, a Shield, a Spear, and a horse.
Now for the maintaining of this service, they had Lands and Tenements called
Knights Fees, which bound the owner to that service, into whose hands soever
they came, to be done either by the person of the owner or other fit person by
him procured, and therefore were discharged from the payment of all taxes and
tollage, which was the Law of the Goths of old, Co. Litlet. 75. Bureus.
and remains in Sweden at this day. The number of these Fees much increased, so
as in the Conquerours time they were above sixty thousand, which was a mighty
body for a small Island, and brought much honor to the Nation.

But the profit arose from beneath, Soccage tenure.
I mean from the soccage tenure or service of the Plough, which in the first
times was performed by those that were unfit for the service of the wars,
either being green and young, or decrepet and aged; Tacitus.
and sometimes by the women. But after that the Saxon conquest was at a stop,
and that no more was to be gotten by blood, men endeavored to satisfy their
desires by sweat, and turned their Swords into Ploughshares; and thus the
Husbandry increased exceedingly, and has proved the best pillar of the
Commonweal: the nature of this tenure is fully set out by the Reporter, Co.
Litlet. fo. 86. Ll. Edw. c. 33. Spiceleg. Ll. Edw. c. 33.
nor can I add thereto more then the Law of the Confessor concerning these
men, viz. that no man might trouble them but for their rent, nor any Lord
thrust them out of their Farm so long as they do their service; and thus it
appears that the service became in nature of a condition subsequent begetting
an increaser of the Estate, which by continuance wrought an inheritance, and so
the Title of Entry was turned wholly into distresses for service not performed;
yet the Lord was no looser thereby so long as Heriots, Rents, and Services
accrewed unto him.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Courts incident and united unto Manors.
BY grants made by Lords unto Tenants already noted, the Lords had power by
common right to call their Tenants before them and enquire concerning their
payment of rents, and performance of services, which became Courts of constant
appointment: of which sort there were two, one for the free men, the other for
the bond men; and this brought forth an other service, Court Leet.
which we call suite of Court. The Court of Free men was holden from three
weeks to three weeks, wherein the free men, Miror p. 17. Lind. gloss. Albin.
hist. Saxon. p. 72.
as in the Hundred and County were Judges of the fact, and from them named, as
at this day Court leete, or the Court of the Liti, or such as are manumitted or
free men. In this Court all actions or suits between the free men of the same
Manor, and within the same arising, were determined; nor could any Court (no
not the Kings) intermeddle with such suits before trial had, but by the Lords
allowance: And upon this privilege the Writ of right patent was grounded. But
the full nature of this Court is not within my intention, but I must refer
the Reader to the Law-bookes. F. N. Br. 2.
For it was the least part of the work and power which this Court obtained by
continuance of time; in regard that manors exceedingly multiplied, so as no
part of the Land was left free; and many one of them extended into diverse
Decennaries, the Lords obtained great power over them, View of Frankpledge.
and had of Kings grants of view of Frankpledge within their several
Lordships; and further power of inquiry and punishing of matters of public
nuisance, and such as were contra pacem and coronam; which by custom became
annexed unto the Court-leete. The nusances of Copy-holds being done to
disherison of the Lord, and not proper for the Court of public inquiry. The
Judge of this Court Leet was the Lord, or his Steward, for the directory part;
and the Steward was properly Coroner within the Manor to take presentiments, and
certify them to the Coroner of the County. And thus this Court swallowed up
much of the power of the Decenners Court in the very infancy, so as we find no
footsteps of any Writ of Right to the Decenners or chief pledges, but
contrariwise many views of Frank pledge granted to particular persons in the
time of Alfred: Miror cap. 5. Sec. 1
and many things done by the chief pledges in the Courts of these Manors, as
is to be yet seen in many ancient Court Rols.

The other Court which by common right belonged to the Lords of Manors was
that of the Copyholders, Court Baron.
called or rather included under the name of the Court Baron, which albeit it
is called in the ordinarily style Curia Baronum, yet not so properly as I
conceive, Co. Instit. cap. 57.
and it may be by way of mistake for Baronis: for if it were so properly united
formerly to the Court of Free men, as ab excellentiori it always passed under
that name; yet when that Court is omitted and slipped out of the way, the Court
of Copyholders that remains, improperly retains the name of that which is
gone. This Court at the first was intended only for the Lords benefit, and for
the Tenants right, as subservient thereunto; I say the Tenants right, not
against their Lord for they had no right against him, but against any other
they had protection of Law both for themselves and their estates; and as I said
before, by custom, or rather light of Religion their persons and estates were
considerable, even by the Lords themselves; which also caused a Law to be made
ut sic de suis hominibus agant quatenus erga Deum reatum non incurrant and
Regem non offendant: Ll. Edw.
which law could never be intended of the free holders; for it had been a vain
redundancy to have made an especial Law for that, which was provided for by
the known fundamental Law of the Kingdom, against which a speedy remedy lay
by the Kings Writ. And that these men, how mean soever, had even in those days
a kind of property both in Lands and goods; for the Laws, though by their
antique language darkened, Seldom. Spicil. 184. cap. 33.
yet plainly speak de terra sua and Catallis ejus; and if the ancient Germans
were so generous to their bondmen, surely much rather after their coming into
this Island in as much as their service was more, and more necessary in
agriculture, which could never be performed by the natives, who were not in
their own persons conquered although their land was.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Townships and their Markets.
THe next Franchese is that of Towns; this was taken up as a birth of war and
nurse of peace; for their ancestors liked not to dwell in crowds, Tacitus.
ne pati quidem inter se junctas seeds: it being their trade or pastime to
war upon beasts, when they found no enemies amongst them. This solitudinary
custom could not be soon shaken off, and might well occasion multitudes of
Towns in those times (though small ones doubtless) that writers speak of; if
true it be that after the wasting times of the Danes and Normans in the
Conquerours time were found in England forty five thousand Parishes, and sixty
two thousand Villages. Nor was peace less beneficial to them then they
careful of it; for by continuance of peace, Husbandry, Manifactures, and
Commerce occasioned people to gather to places commodious for habitation in
good soil nigh navigable Rivers or Havens, and according to their situation
and trade, so they swelled in multitude or decayed, some of whom growing more
eminent then others, more care was had of their government and safety; for the
later by building of Walls and Castles, and for the former by settling a
Magistracy peculiar to that place or Township; not as so many Decenners, but as
one body consisting of many members; and thus by custom they grew to be
Fraternities, or Corporations under one Magistrate or head, whom they called
Alderman; and held a Court of Justice (at the first holden twice a year) which
was in nature of a Leet with a view of Frank pledge, Ll. Canut. cap. 44. Miror
cap. 5. Sec. 1. Markets.
as may appear in the cases of Dorcester, Circeter, and Doncaster, in Alfreds
time; and herewith they had public markets which served them for their better
convenience.

This privilege of Market was a liberty of public sale and trade in
commodities that principally concern the belly, but by common course became a
pass for commodities of every kind almost. Concerning this liberty I shall
desire leave to enterpose this parenthesis ensuing before I proceed in the
intended discourse.

In the first times as every man by common right had property in his own goods,
so by the same right he had power to alien them to any person, at any time, in
any place, by gift, sale, exchange, or other ways; and that by such
alienation, but especially by sale a right was vested in the buyer against all
men (saving the Eignee right which was recompensed upon warranty and recovery
in value) and in those days common sense taught men to buy or sell, of or to
the next neighbor that would bargain with them: and for want of such occasion
to repair to the next assembly, meeting, or concourse of people, for the sale
of such commodities as their neighborhood would not take off their hands. And
thus the greater Towns that had walls or Castles became the greatest Markets,
and others less; and this made the neighborhood of those Towns to repair
thither to buy, as others to sell. But time discovering a double inconvenience
herein, viz. that by these less public sales in smaller Villages, where
little or no care of right or justice was had (and by which means the word
Pagan became a word of reproach) many men's goods by clandestine contracts were
lost, and no care had of their recovery; and (which was yet more prejudicial
to the public) that the greater Towns appointed for the strength and defense
of the Kingdom became ill provided with supply of victual, either for the
present or future; and what was had for the most part was gotten at the second
hand, and higher rate then the Country Villages had. The wise men by public
edict laid a restraint of Markets in smaller Villages, and more private places;
and thus the greater Towns having Markets formerly became more public
Markets, not by any new right or privilege from the Crown (for it neither had
such power, nor could have, but upon usurpation) against the common right of
such Towns and places of public defense. This restraint upon the reasons
aforesaid, was made first in the Saxon times as may appear by their Laws, but
more clearly declared and confirmed afterward by the Laws of the Normans,
which never gave any new right of Market overt unto those places of public
defense, but only did inhibit the same in the smaller Villages and private
places. In which respect although the Kings of this Nation in future times
took leave to abolish that restraint which did lie upon some of those more
private places for certain reasons of State; and so these places became
Markets overt which formerly were none; yet could they never take away that
privilege which nature it self cast upon those greater Towns being the very
limbs of the Kingdom, without wrong done to common right and the public
good: nor abridge them of that power, but that they might still use their
liberty at times and places within their precinct, as might best conduce with
the benefit of the inhabitants of those places, even as any particular free man
may govern his own estate as him likes best. And thus upon the whole matter
its to be concluded, that the ancient Buroughs of this Kingdom properly do
not hold their liberty of Market overt by prescription or charter, but by
common right, and not as a Corporation made by charter; but as they are a
multitude of people anciently gathered together and united, upon whom the
strength and wealth of the Kingdom does or did formerly much more depend then
on any of the smaller Villages and open Towns; even as every free man
possesses and uses his proper inheritance and estate without particular
privilege derived from the Crown: nor can the King take away the liberty of
Market overt from such places, more then he can take away the liberty of buying
and selling from any free man, to whom the Law allows a liberty of ownership.
This I submit to the censure of the learned in the Laws, in regard of the
different opinions concerning the same.

This liberty of Township thus made, and the place and people inhabitants
thereof being of such consequence in the public administration, had for their
better support and safety liberty of Fortification, Ll. Edw. cap. 1. Ll.
Aethelst. cap. 12. Ll. Aethelst. cap. 13. Gloss.
and power to charge one another with the maintenance of these Fortifications
by an imposition called Burghbote, and held their Tenements under a rent to
their Lord or King called Burgage, as they were a body aggregate.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Forests.
BEsides other prerogatives of the Saxon Kings, they had also a Franchise for
wild beasts for the Chase, which we commonly call Forest, being a precinct of
ground neither parcel of the County nor the Diocese, nor of the Kingdom, but
rather appendant thereunto. This savoured of the old German sport, but by
custom turned from sport to earnest. For although in the first times the
Saxons were so few, and the Country so spacious, that they might allow the
beasts their farm as well as themselves their own; People nevertheless so
multiplied, as of necessity they must intercommon either with Beasts or Fishes:
the former whereof, however more cleanly, yet the latter had the surest
footing, and was chosen as the least of two evils, rather then for any
likelihood of good neighborhood: for as nature taught beasts to prey for
themselves, so men to defend their own; and this bred such a fewd between
beasts and men, as that Kings doubting to loose their game, took in with the
weaker; that the world might see the happiness of England, where beasts enjoy
their Liberties as well as men. But this was, as it were, by compromise; for it
had been very hard to have pleased the free men, who had liberty of game within
their own ground by common right, Ll. Canut. c. 77
and to preserve the Kings liberty of Forest coincident therewith, had not the
King employed on the one side the power of a Dane that looked somewhat like a
Conqueror, and on the other side that which looked as like to the bounty of a
King, in allowing liberty of ownership to men inhabiting within the bounds of
the Forest, which at the first was set apart only for the Kings pleasure: and
all his wits to make a Law somewhat short of a full freedom, and yet
outreaching that of bondage, which we since have commended to posterity under
the Forest charter; and yet for all that it proved a hard matter for Kings to
hunt by Law; and the Law it self a yoke somewhat too heavy for a Commonwealth
to bear in old age, if self denying Majesty shall please to take it away.

CHAP. XXXV. Concerning Judges in Courts of justice.
THus far of the several Tribes and members of this Commonweal, which like
so many Conduit heads derived the influence of government through the whole
body of this Island; and in every of which Judiciary power acted it self in
all causes arising within the verge of that precinct; some of which had more
extraordinary trial before the King and his Council of Lords according as the
parties concerned were of greater degree, or the cause of more public
concernment. Examples hereof are the cases between the Bishop of Winchester and
Leoftin in Aetheldreds time; and between the two Bishops of Winchester and
Durham, in Edwards time: but custom made this Court stoop to smaller game in
latter times, and to reach at the practice of the County court, by sending the
Kings Writs to remove certain causes from the cognizance of those rural
judicatories to their sublime determination. Glanvil. lib. 6. cap. 6, 7, 8.
And thus became the Council of Lords as an Oracle to the whole Nation, and
the King amongst the rest, as the Priest that many times rendered the answer or
sentence of that Oracle in his own sense, and had it confirmed to him by an
oath se judicium rectum in Regno facturum and justiciam per concilium procerum
regni sui tenturum; Ll. Edw. cap. 16.
so as, though he was the first in view, yet the Council of Lords was the
first in nature, and the Cynosure to direct his tongue and actions.

From this fountain issued also streams of judicature into all parts by Judges
itinerant under the Kings Commission to reform errors, punish defaults in the
ordinary rural judicatories, Miror cap. 5. Sec. 1. and ca. 1. Sec. 3.
and to dissolve hard and knotty cases; and these were occasioned at the
instance of the party: and Alfred (whose birth this was) sent them forth in way
of Association with the Sheriff, Lord of the fee, or other ordinary Magistrate.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the proceedings in Judicature by Indictment, Appeal,
Praesentment, and Action.
FOr the proceedings in course the Saxons were wont to begin with matters
belonging to the Church, and afterward to secular causes; In which if the
matters were criminal the most ancient way of proceeding was by appeal of the
party complaining; but afterward in cases that concerned damage, injury, or
violence done to the body of a man or his estate, the King was found to be
therein prejudiced, besides the prejudice immediately done to the subject; for
a man disabled in body or estate is disabled to serve the King and public;
Indictment.
and upon this ground a way was found out to punish the offender by indictment,
besides the satisfaction done to the party wronged. The proceedings against
such delinquents were by attachment of the party, Lambert. Ll. Inae. 15.
who thereupon gave pledges for his appearance. If the party could not be
found, a fugam fecit was returned, and that was a conviction in Law, and
pursuit was made after the party by huy and cry. If he was thereby taken, the
ancient way was that of Halifax law; but in later times he was imprisoned, Ll.
Inae: Lam: fo. 7. Ll. Alured cap. 6. Miror: c. 2. Sec. 24. Ll. Edw. cap. 4.
Miror p. 255. Gloss. 335. Miror cap. 5. Sec. 9 and 10. Ll. Edw. cap. 7. Ll.
Canut. cap. 45. Miror cap. 2. Sec. 22.
or admitted to bail if the offenses were baileable; and if the party bailed
made default, or did not abide the trial, his bail suffered as principal: If
no bail could be procured, the delinquent was imprisoned till he was legally
acquitted; but this imprisonment was only in nature of a restraint. If the
delinquent was found upon the huy and cry, and would not yield himself, he was
in repute a common enemy, and (as a wolf) any man might kill him; as the Law
was also the same in case of Utlary. At the time of trial (if at the Kings
suit) the delinquent was indicted in this manner by any party present: I, D.C.
do say for the King, that I. S. is defamed by good men; that he upon -- day of
-- etc. into the house and goods of -- did cast fire, and the same did burn: or
(if it were for bloodshed) with a Sword did strike and wound him in the left
arm, and that this was done feloniously, or (if the case required)
traitorously; and if I. S. deny the same, I will for the King prove the matter
against him, as the King ought to do; that is to say, Appeal. Miror cap. 2.
Sec. 15^.
by witnesses, and twelve men. But if the complaint was at the suit of the
party, then the prosecutor sued him upon Appeal, in manner following: I. C.
appealeth D. H. here present, for that E father, brother, son, or Uncle
(according as the case was) to I.C. being in the peace of God, and of our
Sovereign Lord the King in the dwelling house of E. at -- etc. the said D.H.
upon the -- day of -- in the -- year of -- with a Sword made a wound of two
inches long, and six inches deep in the left pappe of the body of the said E.
whereof he died; and this was done feloniously, and of malice forethought. And
if the said D.H. shall deny the same, the said I.C. is ready to prove the same
against him by his body, or as a Monk, woman, or Clerk behooveth to prove the
same, that is, by Champion; for neither Monk, woman, nor Clerk was by Law to
justify by battle in their own person. The several causes of appeal and
indictment may be found in the Law books, to whom I refer the Reader, it not
being within the compass of this discourse to fall upon the particulars: I
shall only observe the difference between Indictments former and later, and
between them and appeals, viz. that appeals are positive accusations in the
name of the prosecutor of the fact done by the party appealed; whereas
indictments were only a publication or affirmation of the fame of a fact done
by the party indicted, and wherein not guilty pleaded, served only as in
nature of a Quere, to usher in the votes of the free men.

Concerning the fact secondly the difference between former Indictments from
these in these days, consists in this, that the ancient Indictments were in
the name of one man: those of the later sort are in the name of the Jury, and
the former were only of a fame, the later of the fact.

Miror cap. 2. Sec. 23. Presentment.
A third way of bringing controversies unto judgment concerned only such
matters as were of less consequence; and these were introduced by way of
presentment, in the name or behalf of the King, in nature of positive accuse
of one for a crime first laid down generally, and then asserted by a particular
fact, in this manner: I say, for our Sovereign Lord the King, that H. here is
perjured, and has broken faith against the King, because whereas H. is or was
Chancellor of the King, and was sworn that he would not sell right, or any
remediall Writ to any one: yet upon the -- day of -- etc. he sold to B. a Writ
of Attaint, and would not grant the same under half a Mark: so as the
difference between an Indictment and Presentment in those days was only in
the degree of crime for which the party delinquent was accused, and in the
manner of conclusion of the Presentment, which was without averment.

The last way of trials concerns such offenses that exceed not the nature of
trespass done to a man's person or his goods: Miror cap. 2. Sec. 24. Action.
and this was by way of Action, and it was to obtain recompense for damage
sustained. Now because the former were called personal trespasses the Process
was by attachment of the person, who thereupon put in bail, or else his person
was secured by imprisonment till trial, and satisfaction made; but in the
later that concerned the realty, Ll. Aetheldr. cap. 20. Ll. Canut. c. 10
Lindenbr. tit. 36.
three Summons went forth in the Hundred court; and if default were made,
complaint thereof ensued in the County court, and thence issued forth a
distringas; and if the defendant still persisted in declining his appearance,
the distress was forfeited, and a summons issued upon the Land if then the
defendant would not appear, or upon appearance would not give pledges to abide
judgment, his whole land was seized for the benefit of the King, the Lord of
the Hundred, and complainant, because he had offended against all three. But if
the party appeared in former times, he answered forthwith, and judgment passed
without delay, as has been said; unless in urgent cases, where the matter was
raw, and then it was adjourned, and pledges given by the defendant to the full
value, Ll. Edgar c. 7.
after the custom of the Athenians; and if the defendant made default at the
day, his pledges were forfeited. But in after times for better and more advised
proceeding the defendant was admitted to his Essoines; yet with a proviso,
Miror cap. 5. Sec. 1.
that no Essoine should be allowed for above fifteen days: and this was the
direction of King Alfred:

In the answer of the defendant he either traversed the matter in fact, Miror
cap 3. Sec. 16.
or confessed and justified, or confessed and submitted. The first put the
matter to the judgment of the free men; the second to the judgment of the
Judge; the third to the discretion of the complainant, whereby the defendant
generally found mercy, and in case of trespass rendered less damage. I find
no footsteps in those times of Dilatory pleas: or demurrer, or other delays,
unless in case of infancy; for the Saxons knew no other age of ability to do
or suffer, Lindenbr. gloss. Miror cap. 5. Sec. 1.
but the age above one and twenty years; and in Alfreds time a Judge suffered
death for passing sentence of death upon one under that age: albeit the
Canonists had in those days brought into custom other ages of ability in
matters concerning marriage, although it may well be thought that it requires
no less maturity to manage the affairs of a married life, then to discern
the nature and difference of manners, especially in case of crimes, which are
contrary to the very light of nature.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the several manners of extraordinary trial by Torture,
Ordeale, Compurgators and Battle.
EVidence of the matter in fact, upon trial of causes in the Saxon judicatory
sometimes consisted in the pregnant testimony of the fact it self, Torture.
and sometimes in the testimony of some circumstances. The first was an
unquestionable ground of conviction; the second was too weak to command the
Verdict, although sometimes it persuaded it; and therefore those
incompassionate times found out a trick of extorted confession, by torture of
the party, following the principles of passion therein, rather then sober
judgment: for circumstances are sufficient to irritate the hearts of those
that are passionate; and where jelousie is once entered, there is no place for
sparing, be the matter never so untrue: yet I do not find any Law amongst the
Saxons to patronise this fashion of conviction, albeit it seems it was
practiced, for Alfred the King punished one of his Judges with death for
passing sentence upon an extorted confession by torture before the Coroner;
Miror cap. 5, Sec. 1. Cragius.
and possibly it might be gained from the Lacedaemonians, although little to the
praise of their Greekish wisdom in that particular. Seeing that in all reason
it must be supposed that fear and grief will enforce flattery upon the
tormentor as well as self love, draw forth flattery to the benefactor.

A second sort of evidence was that of Ordeale, Ordeale.
being also grounded upon a preconceit or suspicion: the manner hereof was
diverse. The thing seems to be the birth of the brain of some Churchman who
had read of the accursed water. The first mention that I find thereof was at
the Council of Ments, An. 813. An. 895.
and afterward in the Council of Triers, but not a footstep thereof in this
Kingdom till by Aethelstan it was advanced into the degree of a Law; Ll.
Aethelst. Can. 23. An. 928.
after which time it continued in use well nigh three hundred years. A strange
monument of Gods indulgency to an ignorant age thus turning extraordinary to
ordinary, for the clearing of innocence; and which is no less wonderful)
allowing in those times unto men under nature such a power over themselves, as
to adventure against nature. Doubtless that man or woman was of a daring
spirit that first tried the trick, if he had not a miraculous faith in that
promise, Cum ambulaveris per ignem, Isa. 43.2.
etc. and it showed metal in them that followed the example: but the next age
grew dull, and men being weary of such bane touches, the Clergy that cried it
up, their successors cried it down, and so devoured their own birth, without
any difficulty, other then a bare injunction of a King that had power to
command only such as would obey. Spicil. Seldom.


But where fame was yet more slight, Compurgators.
and springing rather from want of charity and misapprehension then promising
circumstances; men were wont to be contented with a voier Dire, or the oath of
the party suspected, and the concurrant testimony of other men: the first
attesting his own innocence, the other contesting their consciences of the
truth of the former testimony; and therefore were, and still are called
compurgators: their number was more or less, and of greater or less value,
according as the offense or the party suspected was of greater or less
concernment. Ll. Edm. c. 16.
This manner of trial was of ancient use, and both it and that of Ordeale
under the directory of the Clergy; yet this was the ancienter by three hundred
years, and first brought into this Nation by the Council at Berghamsted under
Bertwald Archbishop of Canterbury. An. 647.
And it was performed sometimes more solemnly by solemn receiving of the
Eucharist, Ll. Canut. cap. 5.
especially if the party suspected was of the sacred Function.

Battle.
One manner of trial yet remains which was used both in trial of matters of
crime and title; and it is the trial by battle which was in criminal
matters with sharp weapons, but in titulary matters with blunt weapons. No
defendant could refuse battle offered, but such as were too excellent, as the
King; or too sacred, as the Clergy; or too weak, as women, maimed persons, and
children; or too inscient, as Idiots and Lunaticks; or too mean, as villains.
And as these were not necessitated to answer in battle, so was no free man
compelled to answer them by battle. Miror cap. 2. Sec. 13.
This way was an old way, as may appear by the conclusion of appeals, and
seems more satisfactory then that of Ordeale; because this rested upon the
consciences both of Appellant and Defendant, whereas Ordeale rested only upon
the single conscience of the Defendant, which oftentimes was rather hardy then
innocent. And the continuance of this trial in title even at this day shows
that men can away with this, and that there is not evil sufficient in it to
eradicate this weed; although it be kept under ground partly because its
fatal; and partly because both Scripture and experience show, that right and
victory always do not concur.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the ordinary manner of trial amongst the Saxons by Inquest.
THe last and most ordinary way of trial was by witnesses (upon travers of the
matter in fact) before the Jurors, Inquest.
and their vote thereupon: this made the Verdict, and it determined the matter
in fact. In former time questionless it was a confused manner of trial, by
votes of the whole multitude, which made the verdict hard to be discerned: but
time taught them better advice, to bring the voters to a certain number,
according to the Grecian way, who determined controversies by the suffrages of
four and thirty, or the major part of them. Emmius.
But how the number came to be reduced to twelve I cannot conjecture, unless
in immitation of that rule of compurgators, that ordinarily exceeded not that
number. The first law that defined this number was that of Aetheldred about 300
years before the conquest. In singulis Centuris, etc. An. 675. Ll. Sax. Lamb.
In English thus: In every Century or Hundred let there be a Court, and let
twelve ancient free men, together with the Lord of the Hundred be sworn that
they will not condemn the innocent, nor acquit the guilty: And this was so
strictly eyed, that Alfred put one of his Judges to death for passing sentence
upon a verdict corruptly obtained, upon the votes of the Jurors, Miror cap. 5.
Sec. 1.
whereof three of the twelve were in the negative. And the same King put
another of his Judges to death, for passing sentence of death upon an
ignoramus, returned by the Jury: and a third, for condemning a man upon an
Inquest taken ex officio, when as the Delinquent had not put himself upon
their trial.

But the Saxons were yet more careful of the credit and life of man, Two
Juries.
for no man's life or credit rested altogether upon the cast of twelve opinions:
but first twelve men inquired of the fame and ground thereof, which if liked
rendered the party under the spot of delinquency, and meet to be looked upon as
under the suspicion of the Law, who formerly was but under the suspect of some
particular man. And then was a second enquiry of the fact, if the party
traversed the vote of Fame. In both which trials the verdict grounded it self
upon those allegata and probata which were before them. The first of these
inquiries was before the Coroner, who even in those old days had the view of
bloodshed. The second was had before the Judge of life and death: neither of
which could legally indammage the party without the other, unless the Judge
meaned to answer it with the peril of his own person and estate, as it befell
in Alfreds time, when as a Judge suffered death for passing sentence upon the
Coroners only record, unto which a replication is allowed, Miror cap. 5. Sec.
1.
as the book says; and another Judge had the same measure for condemning one
without appeal or indictment foregoing. Where by the way I may note another
difference between Appeals and Indictments, Miror cap. 2. Sec. 11.
in this, that Appeals were and are the more speedy trials then Indictments,
in as much as the former were but one act, the later two.

Medietas Linguae.
And yet time and experience refined this way of trial into a more excellent
condition: For the bloody times of the Saxons first age passing over, and peace
arising by degrees, they together with the Britons began to intercomon, and
about the Marches become a mixed people under a mixture of government and Laws
(as has been already noted) amongst which one concerned their way of trial of
matters in fact by a Jury mixed both of Britons and Saxons, Ll. Aetheldr. cap.
3. Lamb.
which was settled by a law made by Aetheldred. Viri sint, etc. In English thus:
Let there be twelve men of understanding in the law, six of them English, and
six Welsh; and let them deal justice both to English and Welsh. The equity of
this law in future ages spread it self into all trials of Foraigners in every
place throughout this Island. Unto such as stumble at this conceit, because
they are said to be aetate superiores, and jure consulti, I shall only note
thus much: that it is not to be doubted but the work of Jurors required chief
men both for experience and knowledge in the customs of those times, to enable
them to judge of the matter in fact, and upon whose judgment the life and
death of the party rested principally: and as probable it is that those Jurors,
as they were then chief men, so they sat in the most eminent place of the
assembly or court, and were coassessors with the Bishop and Sheriff who did
serve, but only to advise the rest, and they or one of them to publish the
sentence which the Law predetermined: And this chief place the Jurors might
have possessed at this day, as they do in Sweden, had the chief men holden
the service still worthy of their attendance.

But great men grew too great in their own esteem for the service of their
Country, Peers.
betaking themselves to serve themselves; and matters of highest employment
were left to those of the meaner condition, who being in their own persons of
less admiration, were thought unmeet to sit in such eminent places, and so
from the bench descended to the floor, as at this day. This desidiousnesse of
the greater sort made one step further to the full perfection of that Manner of
trial both of the persons and estates of the English, which has been the envy
of other Nations, and is called the trial per pares or by Peers. For the
pride of the Danes (now growing into one people with the Saxons) not enduring
such fellowship with the mean Saxon free men in this public service; and the
wise Saxon King espying the danger in betrusting the lives and estates of the
poorest sort unto the dictate of these superbient humors; and on the contrary
in prostituting the Nobler blood unto the vote of the inferior rank of men,
provided a third way, and by agreement between him and Gunthurne the Dane,
settled the law of Peers. Ll. Alured.
Si minister regius, etc. If a Lord or Baron be accused of homicide, he shall
be acquitted by twelve Lords: but if of inferior rank, Council. Brit. fo. 499.
he shall be acquitted by eleven of his equals and one Lord. Thus Gods
providence disposed of the pride of men, to be an instrument of its own
restraint; for the great men ere they were aware hereby lost one of the fairest
flowers of their Garland, viz. the judicature, or rather the mastership of the
life or death of the meaner sort; and thereby a fair opportunity of containing
them for ever under their aw. And no less remarkable was the benefit that
redounded to this Nation hereby, for had the great men holden this power, as
once they had it, it might soon have endangered the liberty of the free men,
and thereby been destructive to the Fundamental constitution of the government
of this Realm, which consists in the just and equal participation of these
privileges, wherein all are equally concerned. This was the trial wherein the
people of this Nation were made happy above all other people, and whereby the
free men, as they had the legislative power, so likewise had the juridicall;
and thereby next under God an absolute dominion over themselves and their
estates: for though this course of trial was first applied to matters of
crime, yet it soon also seized upon the Common pleas, which for the most part
was the work of main import in the Hundred Court; and suitable hereunto are
the prescriptions which are extant in the Law Books of cognizance of pleas, and
writs of Assize, etc. from the times of the Saxons, as in that case of the
Abbot of Bury amongst others does appear. 26. aff. pl. 24.


CHAP. XXXIX. Of passing of judgment and execution.
AFter verdict judgment passed according to the letter of the Law, or known
custom; in criminal matters according to the greatness of the offense,
either for death or loss of member. But if the circumstances favored the
delinquent he was admitted to redemption of life or member, by fine also settled
by Letter of the Law, and not left to the Judges discretion. If the crime
reached only to shameful penance, such as Pillory or whipping (the last
whereof was inflicted only upon bondmen) then might that penance be reduced to
a ransom, Ll. Inae. Ll. Canut.
according to the grain of the offense assessed in the presence of the Judge
by the free men, and entered upon the roll, and the estreat of each ransom
severally and apart sent to the Sheriff. This ransom was paid usually unto
the King and Lord, and the party indammaged, or his friends, if the case so
required; Ll. Inae cap. 22.
according to the old German rule, Pars mulctae Regi vel civitati pars ipsi qui
vindicatur vel propinquis ejus. This course opened indeed a way for mercy,
Tacitus.
but through corruption a floodgate to wickedness in the conclusion. Of
imprisonment there was little use in the eldest times; afterward it was more
used not only to secure the person to come to trial of Law for miscarriages
past, but sometimes to secure men against committing of future mischief,
especially if it more concerned the public. I find but little or no use
thereof barely as a punishment, nor would their ancestors so punish their
bondmen: Vinculis coercere rarum est. In case of debt or damage the recovery
thereof was in nature of elegit; for the party wronged either had the offenders
goods to him delivered or the value in money upon sale of the goods made by the
Sheriff; and if that satisfied not, Ll. Edw.
then the moity of the lands was extended, and so by moities so far as was
possible, salvo centenemento, and when all was gone the defendants arms (which
were accounted as the Nether-milstone or stock of maintenance) were last of all
seized, Ll Alured c. 1.
and then the party was accounted undone; and cast upon the charity of his
friends for his sustinance: but the person of the man was never imprisoned as a
pledge for the debt, no not in the Kings case; for Alfred imprisoned one of his
Judges for imprisoning a man in that case. One punishment of death they had in
cases of crime, Miror cap. 5. Sec. 1.
and that was by hanging or strangling; and where the crime was not so great,
sometimes ensued loss of member or mutilation; and in many such cases
Excommunication pronounced indeed by the Clergy, but determined by the Law,
which in the first conception was framed in the womb of the legislative power
in Parliament, Council. Brit. 105, 251, 365, 420.
as may appear in many laws there made; nor was there in those times any
question made of the cognizance thereof, so long as the Clergy and Laity had
charity enough to join in all public Councels.

CHAP. XL. Of the penal laws amongst the Saxons.
PAssing the Courts and manner of proceedings till sentence we are now come to
the particular Laws that directed the sentence, and first of those that
concerned criminal offenses. During the Saxons time the Commonwealth was in
its minority, the government tender, the Laws green and subject to bend
according to the blast of time and occasion, and according to the different
dispositions of governors, ages, and peoples. For though the Saxons were in
name our first matter, yet not they only; but they having once made the breach
open, and entered this Island it became a common sewer to the excrescency of
those Eastern peoples of the Angles, Danes, Almains, and Goths; as their
several Laws left with us in power do not obscurely inform us; and amongst
all the rest the Goths were not the least concerned herein; for the Saxon King
determining what people shall be holden Denisins in this Kingdom, says that
the Goths ought to be received and protected in this Kingdom, as sworn
brethren, kinsmen, and proper Citizens of this Commonweal. Nor can any Nation
upon earth show so much of the ancient Gothique law as this Island has.
Nevertheless in this mixture of people of several Nations, there being a
suitable mixture of Laws, as the power of any one of these peoples changed, so
likewise did their Laws change in power; and long it was ere a right temper of
one uniforme law could be settled, yet in the interim these short remembrances
left unconsumed by time, I have subjoyned, that it may appear their notions
were excellent, though somewhat inconstant in their practice.

Those times were dark, and yet so far as any light appeared the people were
to be honored for their resolution in the defense thereof. For there was few
of the Commandments of the two Tables which they did not assert by Laws by
them made, the third and tenth excepted; which latter commands the inward man
only, and whereof God has the sole cognizance.

True it is that the first Commandment contains much of the same nature; yet
somewhat is visible, The first Commandment.
and that they bound; for whereas in those times the Devil had such power as
he did prevail with some, Witchery.
and those it may be not a few, to renounce God, and deliver themselves wholly
to his own will; they punished this crime with banishment as unworthy of their
society that would communicate with Devils, yet if the delinquent had done any
mischief whereby death ensued, the parties punishment was death; Ll. Sax. cap:
6.
yet might all be discharged by ransom, and good security for good behavior
for time to come.

For their worship of God they were no less zealous in maintenance of the
manner; The second Commandment.
as their forefathers liked not the use of Images or pictures for adoration,
neither did they: and although the clergy in other matters led them much, yet
in this they were alone for a long time; for although the Roman Church had the
use of Images above three hundred years before Austins coming, yet could not
that custom fasten upon the Saxons for the space of above one hundred years
after Austins coming, notwithstanding the endeavors of Charlemaine and Pope
Constantine by his bastard decree begotten upon the dream of the Bishop of
Worcester that saw the Virgin Mary's picture brought him in his sleep by her
self, and with a command from her that it should be set up in the Church and
worshipped: Council. Brit. 218.
I say it could not fasten any constant practice of Idol worship, nor ever
wrest a Law from the Wittagenmot to countenance the same; but rather on the
contrary they still preserved the memorial of the second Commandment in the
Decalogue even then when as the Romanists had expunged the same out of the
number; Council. Brit. 364 Ll. Canut. c. 5
and they enforced the same by a law of their own making, so far as their
Clergy, or reverence they bare to Rome would allow.

It has been formerly observed that the Saxons took no note of the vice of
profane swearing and cursing; The third Commandment.
which crime (if it were in use, as it cannot be otherwise conceited but it
was) as the times then were must lie upon the Clergymens account for their
neglect of teaching the point, or upon the general ignorance of those times,
which understood not the Commandment, nor the Scripture. For we find no Canon
against it, nor scarce any doctrine concerning it, but only in case of false
swearing, till Anselms time. True it is that Chrysostom seems zealous
against all swearing; but that was his personal goodness, which for ought
appears died with him. And Anselme contending against swearing by the
creatures, and idle swearing, renders his grounds in such manner as it may be
well conceived that he understood not the maine. Cent. 11. cap. 4. de lege.


The fourth Commandment.
I am the rather induced to conceive charitably of those times in regard of
their exceeding zeal for the honor of the Lords day; which shows, that so
far as their knowledge would maintain them they had zeal to make it into
action. They began this day doubtless as other days, according to the custom
of their forefathers in Germany, Tacitus.
Nox ducere diem videtur. And because they would not allow their secular
affairs to trench too nigh that days devotion, they made the Lords day to
begin upon Saturday at three of the clock in the afternoon, and to continue
till Monday morning. Council. Brit. 445. 446.
No pastime, no not their beloved sport of hunting, was allowed during all that
time: nor no works were to be done, but such as concerned the worship of God;
and those laws they bound with penalty of fine, if the delinquent were a free
man; if he were a bond servant, he was to be whipped: Nor were these the Laws
of one King, Ibid. 268, 377, 404, 518, 546.
or age only, but of the whole current of the Saxon government, and may,
although dark times they were, yet put us in these days of light to the
blush, to enter into compare with them for their devotion.

The fifth Commandment.
In their conversation with men the Saxons seemed yet more strict, and being a
people of a public spirit, they preferred the good of their Country above
all; accounting treachery against it, or neglect thereof in time of danger to
be a crime of the greatest concernment, Treason.
and to be punished in the highest degree. Tacitus.
Proditores and transfugas arboribus suspendunt. Other Treason then this, no
not against Kings, did they then acknowledge any; and therefore the form of the
Indictment for contriving the death of their King concluded only Felonice,
Miror cap. 2. Sec. 11.
as may appear in that form of an indictment for an offense of that nature
intended and plotted against Edmond the Saxon King: when as for the plotting
against aliance, though of common and inferior nature, the Indictment
concluded felonice and proditorie. Miror cap. 2. Sec. 13.
And whereas the penalty in case of treachery against the Country was death,
and forfeiture of the whole estate, Ll. Edw. cap. 38
both real and personal: in treachery against the King it was only loss of
life, and of the personal estate. Council. Aenham 26.
And therefore it may seem that Majesty had not yet arrived at its full growth;
or else that the greatest measure thereof rested in the body still.

If in any thing the Saxons were indulgent, The sixth Commandment.
it was in matters of blood; for they were a warlike people, and looked upon it
as under the regiment of valor; and therefore it was punished only with fine,
according to the old rule, Manslaughter. Tacitus.
Luitur homicidium certo armentorum and pecorum numero. So as even in Germany
they had learned the trick to set a price upon that crime; and this they
afterward called Manbotta wera wirgida wita and lashlight: and which was worse,
they countenanced that which in after ages was called deadly feude; and so
under color of punishing murder with revenge, Sax. Lamb. fo. 17, 18.
they added blood to blood. But as times grew more tame, and inclining to
civility or Religion, the cry of blood was more hideous; and this urged on the
Law of appeals, and so private revenge became under the power of the Law:
which punished death with death, Miror cap. 5. Sec. 1. Ll. Alured Sax. praeface
Lamb.
savouring of such a King as Alfred was who first taught the Scriptures to
speak in the dialect of our own Laws; like the Rubric amongst the Canons,
bringing therewith both strength and beauty; yet they had degrees of bloodshed,
and made a difference in the punishment; for some sprung from sudden passion,
but other was forethought and purposed; which last they called Abere murder,
Glossar. p. 4. Ll. Canut. cap. 93.
or murder by foreplot or treachery; and this was made nullo precio
emendabile; and yet toward the times of the Danes devotion grew of so high a
dye that a Sanctuary could represent any bloodshed more allowable, if not
acceptable; under the golden color of recompense made to the King, the Lord of
the party slain, and the parties friends; for the loss of a subject, a tenant,
and a friend, according to that of their forefathers; recepitque satisfactionem
universa Domus. Tacitus.
It would be too tedious to recite all the particular Laws, with their changes,
and therefore they shall be left to the view in the several Laws of Alfred,
Edmond, Canutus and Edward, the Saxon Kings. Yet one custom first begun by the
Danes, Englishire. Stamf. lib. 1. cap. 10. Miror cap. 1. Sec. 13.
I cannot omit: That if a man were found slain, whose parents or friends were
unknown, by common intendment he was to be presumed to be a Dane, and then if
the delinquent were not taken, nor fled to Sanctuary, nor known where he is,
the whole Hundred was amerced for the escape; Bracton lib. 3. tract. 1. cap. 15
but if the party slain was known to be of English parents, it was otherwise.
This custom lasted long after the Normans time, the Dane being only changed
into the Norman, Breach of peace. Batteries. Maimes. Imprisonments. Alured.
praes. Lam. 19.
and was called Englishire. Batteries, maimes, imprisonments, and other
breaches of peace were punished by fine, which they called Fightwitt,
Grithbrece or Frithbreck; and the delinquent ordinarily put in sureties for the
peace for future time; The fine was increased by the number of delinquents
joining in the fact; for if seven joined, it was a riot, and the fine was then
called Flothbote. If the number were five times so many; viz. thirty and five,
then it was a rebellion or war. Secondly, the fine was increased by the time
or season of the fact, as in Lent, or while the Army was in the field; because,
in the first case, the holy time was profaned; in the second, the Country was
more endangered when the strength was abroad, and the Army might be discouraged
at the news of the disturbance at home. And therefore the Saxons punished this
with death, or fine suitable. Ll. Edw. c. 31. Ll. Sax. cap. 36. Ll. Inae cap. 6.
Thirdly, the fine was the greater in case of the excellency of the place,
where it was holy ground, or in the presence of great persons, such as the King
or Bishop.

The seventh Commandment.
Adultery amongst the old Germans was holden a crime of a high nature; the
penalty of the woman that committed that crime was death. I find not what
became of the man; in latter times of the Saxons it grew less penal, Baronus
Anal. 745. number. 5. Council. Brit. 558. Ll. Canut. 50. reg. 22.
and more common. By Alfreds Law it was finable, and the fine called Legierwit.
By Canutus the man was fined or banished, the woman to lose her nose, ears,
and her portion. Incest was more penal to the man then Adultery, and yet it
touched not his life. Incest. Ll. Sax. 48. reg. 19.


Robbery amongst the Lacedaemonians was accounted but a trick of youth, the
Athenians thoughts were more severe. The Germans likewise differed in their
censures concerning it; The eighth Commandment.
the Saxons punish it with death, but the Angles with fine only; yet Ina the
King made it mortal, and Canutus followed him therein: Lind Ll. Ang. and Sax.
Ll. Sax. 4. reg. 3 Miror 262. Burning of woods Burglary. Ll. Edm. cap. 6. Ll.
Canut. p. 59 Trespasses.
And Edward the Confessor limited that punishment to thefts of twelve pence in
value, or above, burning of woods was fineable by Inaes law: but Burglary was
felony. In King Edmunds time only the Danes made it finable; possibly being
guilty in their own consciences of their own propensity to rapine and
plunderings. This privilege of the dwelling house was anciently called
Hamsoca, or Hamsoken, or Hamsokne. Trespasses committed upon ground were all
comprehended under the general name of Ederbrece, or hedge-breaking; and the
penalty was not only the damage to the party, but also fine to the King upon
action, which in these days passes under the name of Quare clausum fregit,
according to the words of the Writ. Ll. Sax. cap. 36.
The damages were more or less according to the time or season when it was
done; for if when the Army was abroad, the damages were doubled, and in like
manner, if done in Lent time. If the trespass was done by a beast, the owner
must pay the damages: Ll. Inae 56. Ibid. c. 40.
But if it were occasioned through the complainants default (as through his
gap) no damages were paid. The constant fine to the King in all such
trespasses was by Alfreds law set at five shillings. Ll. Sax. c. 36.
Other actions also were then used as touching damage done to goods and
actions upon the case; for in Alfreds time the Plantiff recovered not only
damages for trespasses done to possessions and goods, Miror p. 301.
but also costs for injuries in point of scandal and defamation, in case the
complainant specially declares that he is thereby disabled or indammaged in
his preferment and makes proof of the same suitable unto the forms of our
pleadings at this day, The ninth Commandment.
which conclude with per quod etc. or and deterioratus est etc.

The Saxons were utter enemies to perjury: they punished Ll. Aethelst. c. 10.
with eternal discredit of testimony; Ll. Canut. c. 6.
and sometimes with banishment, or with grievous fines to the King, and mulcts
to the Judge. Spec. Sax. l. 3, art. 53.
For that difference I find observed in those days between fines and mulcts,
albeit the more ancient times used them for one and the same; for so the
Historian, pars mulctae Regi. In all these matters where any interest was
vested in the Crown the King had the prerogative of pardon; yet always the
recompense to the party was saved; Ll. Edw. c. 18.
besides the security of the good behavior for time to come, as the case
required.

CHAP. XLI. Of the Laws of property, of Lands and goods, and their manner of
conveyance.
THus passing over some tops of Saxon penal Laws, besides the general rule or
law of eye for eye, tooth for tooth, etc. it now remains as lightly to glance
at a few generals concerning the settling and property of possessions in point
of title; Miror cap. 5. Sec. 1.
Concerning which, although it be true that the conquerours of this part of the
Isle were a body aggregate of many Nations or peoples; and so diverse customs
must necessarily settle by common intendment in several places, according as
they chose their habitation: Inheritance.
yet the general custom of the Germans, as touching descent of inheritance
was to the eldest son; For Tacitus speaking of the German Cavalry, says,
that the horse of the party dead went not to the eldest son ut cetera, but to
the most valiant man amongst them of that lineage; which words ut cetera do
plainly intimate, that other matters of profit passed to the eldest son in
point of descent; Nor can I conceive how men should be induced to conceit that
the custom of Gavelkind was the ancient general custom of the Germans. Its
true the words of the same Historian have misled some; the words are, Haeredes
tamen and successores cuique Liberi; these taken collectively I grant may
import somewhat tending that way; but they may as properly be taken
disjunctively, that the children inherit by course; and if none such were,
then the brothers; if they failed, then the unkles. And its not only evident
that in the public succession to the Crown they had an eye this way; but in
the descent of private and particular estates, as by many instances out of
those old Histories may appear; and had any other custom been general,
Alfreds rule by Moses Law had never succeeded; nor could that other custom
hold out against the constant desire of the Saxons to perpetuate their families
in greatness and honor: all which besides the express laws set forth in the
Codes, are in my conceit sufficient to induce an historical faith that the
general course of descent was to the eldest sons, and not to all jointly.
Nevertheless out of this estate of inheritance diverse particular estates were
created, as well by common custom, as by the especial act of the owner of
such estate. Such of them as were wrought by custom was occasioned from
marriage, whereby if the man was settled of such estate as formerly has been
recited, and died; Dower.
his wife surviving, by ancient custom she had her dower or third part of such
estate of inheritance. This custom though ancient, yet was not originally from
the Germans, but from the Latins, who used to give dower with the man, Plut.
vit. Solon. Apotheg. Lacon.
and receive portion with the woman. But the Germans learned from the Greeks
otherwise; for the Laws both of Solon and Lycurgus forbad the latter, lest
marriages should be made for reward, and not grounded upon affection; which, as
they conceived, would be a means to maintain the strength of mankind in
generation. And therefore Tacitus notes this by way of Antithesis Dotemnon
uxor marito sed uxori maritus offert. The dower that was given in the first
times was goods; and these were utensiles for war. And the wife many times
returned to the man tokens of her love in the same kind, and not as gages of
future maintenance, unless we shall account war their proper calling from
whence their livelihood issued. Succeeding times growing more calm changed the
custom of fighting into trading, and taught them to prefer the stock gotten
by commerce, before that of war, and so the dower was changed. This course
continued all the Saxons time, for ought I can find; for not much above
threescore years before the conquest it was by a public law confirmed, Ll.
Sax. Lamb. Edm. fo. 76.
that the Bridegroom before marriage should set forth that portion of goods
that should be his wifes, Ll. Sax. 50. Reg. 22.
and these were ever afterward holden her own proper goods. But if no such
provision was made before marriage, then the law or custom gave the wife half
her husbands goods, if she outlived him; and if there were children, then the
whole estate in goods, to provide for her self and them, until she took a
second husband; but if the husband suffered death as a malefactor, the wife was
to have but one third part. Ll Sax. Lam. fo. 14. Ll. Inae cap. 58
I find no footsteps of Dower in Lands until the Normans time; who were also
as well owners of the wifes personal estate, as of their persons; and before
which time the Saxon wives in diverse regards were more absolute and
independent: I say not more happy, because they were never one with their
husbands; nor were they ever under the Law of free pledge, as wives; nor was
the husband his wifes pledge as he was her husband; although as a master he was
free pledge for his servants: for the Law was, that in case the husband carried
his wife away into another Lordship, Ll. Edm. Lamb cap. 7.
as he must give pledges that his wife shall have no wrong, so she must give
pledge by her friends that she shall do no wrong; and she passed therefore as
an appurtenant to her husband, then in unity with him; and her estate or
portion was rather appurtenant to her then him: for if she failed in her good
carriage to her husband, she was to make amends out of her own estate to her
husband; and if her estate sufficed not, then her pledges were to satisfy the
husband. Ll. Sax. 50. Reg. 22.
Nevertheless what failed in the relation of the woman to the man, was
supplied in the relation of the man to the woman; for besides the respect the
men bare to the women, as their wives, they honored them as German women, that
admired valor in all, Idolized it in their husbands, and shared in it
themselves; and upon occasion merited thereby not only to be companions in
honor, but triumphers above men, ye their Commanders and governors: Nor was
this the original trick of the rude and uncompt Germans or Barbarous Britons,
but of the wise Greeks; and received as may be supposed from the Lacedaemonians,
upon as good ground as the wise of Leonidas the Lacedemonian King rendered, who
being asked why the Lacedemonian women ruled their husbands: Its true, said
she, Courtesy of England.
for we only know how to obey our husbands. A second particular estate, which
the Law derived out of the inheritance, was advancement to the husband; for the
Saxons were not so stupid as to refuce favor proferred: and therefore they
made a law of Counter-tenure to that of Dower which we commonly call tenure by
the courtesy of England; which was but a perquisite of the wives estate given
to the husband, in case he over lived his wife, and had issue by her born
alive: The name was probably given by the Normans, who as it seems had no
such custom; and therefore they gave it the name from the English (albeit
since that time Scotland has also allowed it amongst them) who might probably
bring it into this Kingdom or Country amongst the mingled people; Ll. Alm.
tit. 92. Lindenbr. cod.
for this custom or law is found amongst the ancient Almain laws: differing
only from the law this day in the evidence of the title, which now arises
upon the birth of the child heard to cry; when as in those days the title
vested not unless the child opened his eyes ut possit videre culmen domus, and
quatuor parietes, which touches not only the opening of the eye, but also the
rolling of it about.

Estates that were derived out of the estate of an inheritance by the act of
the party, Estate tail.
either were such as concerned the whole inheritance, or part thereof. That
which concerned the whole inheritance, was nothing but a parcelling of it out
according to the will of the giver; and this was afterward called estate
Tail, which passed also amongst some places by way of custom, Ll. Ang. tit 6.
Lindenbr.
as amongst the Angles it was a law that the inheritance should pass unto the
issue males on the fathers side, until the fifth generation, before any title
could accrue to the issue female; and then according to their Proverb, it went
from the Lance to the Spindle. But the Danes possibly might prevent this in the
continuance thereof; for they brought along with them that which was formerly
the Saxon custom, Ll. Sax. tit. 7. ibid. Council. Brit. 333.
which carried the inheritance unto the daughters, upon the failing of the
issue male: as in the example of Cenedritha daughter to Cenulfus amongst
multitudes of others may appear. Ll. Alured. Sax. c. 7.
But where Lands were conveyed by writing or act of the party, it was a maxim
that the will of the conveyor should be strictly observed: nor could ever any
one that came in by virtue of such writing ever alien the Land to cross the
current of the original conveyance. The entailing of estates therefore was
very ancient, Plo. com. 251. b.
although by corrupt custom it was deluded, as the Lord Dier in his argument
of the L. Berklies case observes.

Another custom of inheritance was caught I know not how, its called Borough
English, and by the name may seem to be brought in by some Cynicall odd Angle
that meant to cross the world, and yet in a way not contrary to all reason:
for where nature affords least help, the wisdom of men has used to be most
careful of supply; and thus the youngest became preferred before the elder in
the course of descent of inheritance according to this custom. There is no
further monument of the antiquity hereof that I have met with, then the name it
self, which imports that it sprang up whiles as yet the names of Angles and
Saxons held in common cognizance: and might arise first from the grant of the
Lords to their Tenants, and so by continuance become usual; and by this means
also might arise the custom of Copyholds of this nature so frequent,
especially in those Eastern parts of this Island where the Angles settled, and
from whom that part had the name of the East Angles.

Gavel kind.
Another custom of descent remains, and that is to the children collectively,
and its called Gavell kind, or Gave-all kind: and by the very name seems at
the first to arise rather from the donation of the parent or other ancestor,
contrary to common custom, then by common Law: otherwise no need had been of
an especial name. In the original it seems it equally concerned all both
sons and daughters, as parceners; and for want of such, the brothers and
sisters. It seems to be first the Law of the Goths or Jutes; Stephanus Dan.
Burcus Suel.
for it remains in use in these parts of the Eastern Countries. But in later
times this estate was also tailed, or cut out sometimes to the sons and
daughters severally; that is, the sons or brothers to have two parts, and the
daughters or sisters one part; other times to all the sons, and for want of
such, to all the daughters: and thus these courses of estates passed over Seas
to the Southern parts of this Island where that people most settled in a double
stream; the first from the Athenians that loved the stateliness of their
families, the other from the Lacedaemonians who desired rather the continuance
of their familes then their greatness. Emmius. Grec.


The manner of conveying of estates between party and party was either by act
of the party executed in his life time, Conveyances in writing.
or after his death: such as were executed in the lifetime of the owner, and
were such as for the most part were in matters of great moment, were estates
passing by deed of conveyance in writing: and for this way the Saxons were
beholding to the Latins, who taught them that course, Ll. Sax. cap. 37.
both for form and language; and Alfred enforced it by a particular law, viz.
that all such as hold Lands by deed in writing should hold them according to
the intent thereof, and not alien the same contrary thereunto, the intent
thereof being proved by witnesses. The nature of the conveyances in these
ancient times may appear by a deed of the Kings of this Island about 400 years
before the Conquest, whereby he granted four plough lands in the Isle of Tenet
unto an Abbess; wherein instead of that which we now call the habendum,
Habendum.
the words are contulimus possidendum, etc. and after that follows the uses
of the deed tuo usui etc. Use.
and then concludes with a warranty, Warranty.
in these words, tu vero successoresque tui defendant in perpetuum nunquam me
haeredesque meos contra hanc chartulam aliquando esse venturos: the effect of
which last clause may appear by the Law of the sale of goods, which in those
times was that if the sale of goods warranted did not hold, the loss should
light upon the seller. Ll. Inae. c. 74. Ll. Sax. c. 24. Ll. Edw. c. 25. Signed.
The deeds were usually subscribed with the name of him that made the
conveyance, or passed the estate; and if he could not write his name (as it
befell often) then the Deed was under signed with his mark: for Withered King
of Kent used the sign of the Cross in subscribing his grants pro ignorantia
literarum. They used also in those days to seal their Deeds; Sealed. Council.
Brit. p. 198.
for so much the conclusion of King Ina's Charter to the Abbey of Glastenbury
imports, in words to this effect in English: I Inas the King do confirm this
grant and liberty, by subscription of my own hand, and under the seal of the
holy Cross. True it is Ingulfus tells us that seals to Deeds were of Norman
original; I believe his intent is concerning seals of Wax anexed or affixed
unto deeds. Lastly, Witnesses.
in those days also they used to attest their Deeds by subscribing the names
of such as were present; who being of greater or meaner rank, rendered the
credit of the Deed accordingly more or less valuable: Acknowledgement.
and upon this ground did the acknowledging or proving of Deeds before the
King, Bishop, County, or Hundred, first arise.

Livery and Seisin. Cragius.
That was the Roman fashion; but the more ancient German way of conveyance was
by livery and seisin, as most suitable to their ignorance, who had learning in
as slight account as the Lacedaemonians had, and cared for no more then would
serve the turn of natural necessity. A property they had both in Lands and
goods; and where that rests, no man can deny them the natural way of giving
and receiving by delivery. And therefore though matters of ordinary use seldom
come into the observation of story, and this petty ceremony might very well
pass sub silentio; yet we are not altogether left destitute of the footsteps
thereof in antiquity. For Aethbald the Mercian King above eight hundred years
ago gave the Monastry of Cutham, Council. Brit. 319.
with all the Lands thereto appertaining to Christchurch in Canterbury, and for
the confirmation thereof commanded a clod of earth with all the Writings to be
laid upon the Altar. Another Monument hereof more ancient by the space of above
100 years we find in that grant of Withered King of Kent, Council. Brit. 192.
of four plough lands in the Isle of Tenet, the latter part whereof this
clause concludes thus: Ad cujus cumulum affirmationis cespitem hujus
supradictae terrae super sanctum altar posui.

Last will.
But every man had not liberty to execute the law of his inheritance in his life
time; for some were surprised with sudden occasions, and unexpected issues and
ends; and in such cases they did what they could to declare their intents by
last will, which by common intendment being in writing has occasioned some to
think that the Saxons in their original had no use thereof, being as they
conceived so illiterate as not having the use of writing; but the Character
remaining to this day evinceth the contrary; nor can those words of Tacitus,
and nullum est testamentum in any rational way be expounded in this sense if
we consider the context, which runs thus: Haeredes and successores cuique
liberi, and nullum est testamentum. Which in my opinion sounds in this sense:
The heirs and successors to every one are his children, and there is no
testamentary power to disherit or alter the course of descent, which by custom
or law is settled. Otherwise to deny them the use of all testamentary power, was
a matter quite abhorring the custom of all the Grecians, from whom they
learned all that they had. M Westminster. An. 817. Malmsb. gest. Reg. l. 2. c. 2.
Nevertheless the Saxons had not been long acquainted with the Romanists, but
they had gotten that trick of theirs also of disheriting by last will, as by
the testament of Aethelwolfe and others of the like nature, in Histories may
appear.

The conveyances formerly mentioned concerned Lands and goods; but if no such
disposal of goods were, Goods.
the ancient German custom carried them after the death of the ancestor
promiscuously, or rather in common to all the children; but in succeeding times
the one half by the law of Edmond passed to the relict of the party deceased,
by force of contract rather then course of descent. After him Edward the
Confessor recollecting the Laws declared that in case any one died intestate
the children should equally divide the goods, which I take to be understood
with a salvo of the wifes dower or portion. As yet therefore the ordinaries had
nothing to do with administration; for goods passed by descent as well as
Lands; and upon this custom the Writ de rationabili part honorum was grounded
at the common law, as well for the children as the wifes part, F.N. Br. 122.
according as by the body of the Writ may appear.

CHAP. XLII. Of times of Law and vacancy.
SUch like as has been showed was the course of government in those darker
times; nor did the fundamentals alter either by the diversity and mixture of
people of several Nations in the first entrance, nor from the Danes or Normans
in their survenue; not only because in their original they all breathed one
air of the laws and government of Greece, but also they were no other then
common dictates of nature refined by wise men, which challenge a kind of awe in
the sense of the most barbarous. I had almost forgot one circumstance, which
tended much to the honor of all the rest, that is their speedy execution of
justice; for they admitted no delays till upon experience they found that by
staying a little longer they had done the sooner: and this brought forth
particular times of exemption, Miror cap. 4. Sec. 16.
as that of infancy and childbearing, in case of answer to criminail
accusations. But more especially in case of regard of holiness of the time: as
that of the Lords day, Saints days, Ll. Sax. cap. 10. Council. Brit. 518.
Fasts, Ember days; for even those days were had in much honor. Nor only
days, but seasons: as from Advent to the Octaves of Epiphany; from
Septuagesima till fifteen days after Easter, or (as by the Laws of the
Confessor) till eight days after Easter; and from Ascension to the eighth day
after Pentecost; and though as Kings and times did change, so these seasons
might be diversely cut out; as the Laws of Alfred, Aethelstan, Aetheldred,
Edgar, Canutus, and Edward, do manifest; yet all agreed in the season of the
year, and that some were more fit for holy observation then others. And thus
by the devotion of Princes, and power of the Clergy, the four Terms of the
year were cut out for course of law in the Kings Court, the rest of the year
being left vacant for the exercise and maintenance of Husbandry, and particular
callings and employments, saving that even in those times the Courts of the
County and Hundred held their ancient and constant course, Last of all, and as
a binding law unto all, Miror cap. 4. Sec. 18.
it was provided that false Judges should give satisfaction to the party
wronged by them, and (as the case required) to forfeit the residue to the King;
to be disabled for ever for place of judicature, and their lives left to the
Kings mercy.

CHAP. XLIII. An Epilogue to the Saxon government.
ANd thus far of the joints of Saxon government in their persons, precincts,
courts, causes, and laws, wherein as the distance will permit, and according to
my capacity I have endeavored to refresh the Image of the Saxon Commonweal;
the more curious lineaments being now disfigured by time; afar off it seems a
Monarchy, but in approach discovers more of a Democracy; and if the temper of a
body may appear by the prevailing humor toward age, that government did
still appear more prevalent in all assaults both of time and change. The first
great change it felt was from the Danes that stormed them, and showed therein
much of the wrath both of God and man. And yet it trenched not upon the
fundamental law of the peoples liberty. The worst effect it had was upon the
Church in the decay of the power of Religion and worship of God. For after much
toil and loss both of sweat and blood, the Danes (finding that little was to
be gotten by blows but blows: and that the Clergy at the least was the
side-wind in the course of all affairs) laid aside their Paganism, and joined
with the Clergy; and as their converts and pupils gained not only their quiet
residence, but the favor of the Clergy to make trial of the Throne, and
therein served the Clergy so well as they brought the people to a perfect
Idolatry, with times, places, and persons, and subjection of their estates to
Church tributes. And as at Tenis the Dane and Bishop served each other with the
fond Country man, that whether Lord Dane or Lord Bishop was the greater
burden, is hard to be determined. Thus became ambicious Prelacy in its full
glory, and the poor Church of Christ clouded in darkness, and little hold
left for recovery, but only by the liberty of the Saxon freeman; which the
Danes could never conquer, not for want of will or power, but of time and
occasion; for the Crown returned to the Saxon line again after the half age
of one man, although it was worn by three; so God would have it; nor did any
monument of the Danish government remain, saving a few customs in some places
which show rather that the Danes were there then ruled here.

To sum up all. The Saxon Commonweal was a building of greatest strength
downward even to the foundation, arched together both for peace and war, That
by the law of Decenners, wherein Justice was the bond, this by their armies
gathered, not by promiscuous flocking of people, but by orderly concurrance of
families, Tacitus.
kindreds, and Decenners, all choosing their own leaders; and so honor, love,
and trust conspired together to leave no man's life in danger, nor death
unrevenged.

It was a beautiful composure, mutually dependant in every part from the Crown
to the cloune, the Magistrates being all choice men, and the King the choicest
of chosen; election being the birth of esteem, and that of merit; this bred
love and mutual trust, which made them as corner-stones, pointed forward to
break the wave of danger; nor was other reward expected by the great men, but
honor and admiration, which commonly brought a return of acts of renown

Lastly, it was a regular frame, in every part squared and made even by Laws,
which in the people ruled as lex loquens, and in the Magistrate as lex
intelligens; all of them being grounded on the wisdom of the Greeks and
Judicials of Moses. Thus the Saxons became somewhat like the Jews, diverse from
all other people; their laws honorable for the King, easy for the subject;
and their government above all other likest unto that of Christ's Kingdom,
whose yoke is easy, and burden light: but their motion proved so irregular as
God was pleased to reduce them by another way.

CHAP. XLIV. Of the Norman entrance.
THus was England become a goodly Farm; The Britons were the owners, the
Saxons the occupants, having no better title then a possession upon a forcible
entry, with a continuando for the space of four hundred years, seldom quiet,
either from the claim and disturbances of the restless Britons, or invading
Danes, who not only got footing in the Country, but settled in the Throne; and
after gave over the same to the use (as it proved) of another people sprung
from the wild stock of Norway, and thence transplanted into a milder Climate,
yet scarcely civillized; that in one Isle the glory of Gods bounty might shine
forth to all the barbarism of Europe in making a beautiful Church out of the
refuse of Nations. These were the Normans out of the continent of France, that
in their first view appeared like the pillar of the cloud with terror of
revenge upon the Danish pride, the Saxon cruelty, and Idolatry of both peoples;
but after some distance showed like the pillar of fire, clearing Gods
providence for the good of this Island, to be enjoyed by the succeeding
generations. Nor was this done by revelation or vision, but by overruling the
aspiring mind of Duke William of Normandy to be a scourge unto Harold for his
usurpation, and unto the people for their causeless deserting the royal
stem: yet because the haughtiest spirit is still under fame and opinion, and
cannot rest without pretense or color of right and justice, the Duke first
armed himself with titles, which were too many to make one good claim; and
served rather to busy men's minds with musing, whiles he catches the prey,
then settle their judgments in approving of his way. First, he was cousin
german to the Confessor, and he childlesse: and thus the Duke was nigh, though
there were nigher then he; but the worst point in the case was that the Duke
was a bastard, and so by the Saxon law without the line; nor was there other
salve thereto but the Norman custom, that made no difference; so as the Duke
had a color to frame a title, though England had no Law to allow it; and this
was the best flower of his Garland, when he meant to solace himself with the
English, as may appear by what his son Henry the first sets forth to the
world in his charter whereby he advanced the Abbey of Ely into the degree of a
Bishopric, and wherein amongst his other titles he calls himself son of
William the great, Spicileg.
Qui Edwardo Regi successit in regnum jure haereditario.

But if that came short, he had the bequest of the Confessor, who had designed
the Duke to be his successor; and this was confirmed by the consent of the
Nobility, and principally of Harold himself, M. Paris. 1. An. Brit. Eccles. 96.
and in assurance thereof promised his sister to the Duke in marriage. This
countenanced a double title, one by legacy, the other by election, and might be
sufficient if not to make the Dukes title just; yet Harold's the more unjust,
and to ground that quarrel that in the conclusion laid the Dukes way open to
the Crown: And for the better varnish the Duke would not be his own judge, he
referres his Title to be discussed at the Court of Rome; and so flattered the
Pope with a judicatory power amongst Princes (a trick of the new stamp) whereby
he obtained sentence in his own behalf from the infallible chair: The Pope
glad hereof laid up this amongst his treasures as an estoppell to Kings for
times to come; And the King made no less benefit of estoppel against the
English Clergy that otherwise might have opposed him, and of assurance of those
to him that were his friends, and of advantage against Harold that had gotten
the Crown sine Ecclesiastica authoritate and by that means had made Pope
Alexander and all the Prelates of England his enemies. M. Paris: 2.


But if all failed, yet the Duke had now a just cause of quarrel against
Harold for breach of oath and covenant, Hist. vit. Eadm. 5.
wherein if Harold chanced to be vanquished, and the Crown offered it self
fair; he might without breach of conscience or modesty accept thereof and be
accounted happy in the finding, and wise in the receiving, rather then unjustly
hardy in the forcing thereof. And this might occasion the Duke to challenge
Harold to single combat, as if he would let all the world know that the
quarrel was personal, and not National.

But this mask soon fell off by the death of Harold, and the Duke must now
explain himself, that it was the value of the English Crown, and not the
title that brought him over. For though he might seem as it were in the heat of
the chase to be drawn to London, where the Crown was, and that he rather sought
after his enemies then it; yet as soon as he perceived the Crown in his power,
he disputed not the right, although that was Edgars, but possessed himself of
the long desired prey: and yet he did it in a mannerly way, as if he saw in it
somewhat more then Gold and precious stones: for though he might have taken it
by ravishment, yet he chose the way of wooing by a kind of mutual agreement.
Thus this mighty Conqueror suffered himself to be conquered, and stooping
under the law of a Saxon King he became a King by leave: wisely foreseeing that
a title gotten by election is more certain then that which is gotten by power.

CHAP. XLV. That the title of the Norman Kings to the English Crown was by
election.
SOme there are that build their opinion upon passionate notes of angry
writers, and do conclude that the Dukes way and title was wholly by conquest,
and thence infer strange aphorisms of state destructive to the government of
this Kingdom. Let the Reader please to peruse the ensuing particulars, and
thence conclude as he shall see cause.

It will easily be granted that the title of conquest was never further then
the Kings thoughts, if it ever entered therein; else wherefore did he pretend
other titles to the world? But because it may be thought that his wisdom would
not suffer him to pretend what he intended, and yet in practice intended not at
what he did pretend: it will be the skill of the Reader to consider the manner
of the first William's Coronation, and his succeeding government. His
Coronation questionless was the same with that of the Ancient Saxon Kings; for
he was crowned in the Abbey of Westminster by the Archbishop of York, because
he of Canterbury was not Canonical. At his Coronation he made a solemn
covenant to observe those Laws which were bonae and approbatae and antique
leges Regni, Hoveden. Eadmer. Hist. l. 1. p. 13. M. Paris: vit. Gulielm.
Malmsb, l. 3. fo 154. Wigorn. An. 1066. Glossar. Ll. Gul. Spicil. 190.
to defend the Church and Church men, to govern all the people justly, to make
and maintain righteous Laws, and to inhibit all spoil and unjust judgments.
The people also entered into Covenant with him, That as well within the Land as
without they would be faithful to their Lord King William, and in every place
to keep with all fidelity his Lands and Honors, together with him, and
against enemies and strangers to defend. It is the selfsame in substance with
the fealty that the Saxons made to their Kings, as will appear by the
paralelling them both together. The Saxons were sworn to defend the Kingdom
against strangers and enemies, together with their Lord the King, and to
preserve his Lands and Honors together with him with all faithfulness; so as
by the Saxon way the allegiance first terminated on the Kingdom, and then as
in order thereunto upon the King, with his Lands and honors: but the Norman
either wholly omitted the first as needless to be inserted in a municipall
Law, it self being a Law in nature; or else includes all within the words
Lands and Honors, taking the same in a comprehensive sense for the whole
Kindome, and so made up the sum of the Saxon fealty in fewer figures. Which
may seem the more probable of the twain, because little reason can be rendered
why the King should restrain that defense to his private lands (if he claimed
all by conquest) when as all equally concerned him; or why he should exclude
the public, when as both himself and all he had was embarked therein, and it
might subsist without him, but contrarily not he without it, appears not to
my understanding; nor did the thing enter into the Kings purpose, if the file
of his purposes be rightly considered: For speaking concerning Castles,
Buroughs, and Cities, which are in nature of limbs of the Commonweal he
says that they were built for the defense of the people and Kingdom; was this
the service of walls and fortifications, Ll. Gul. Spicil. 61.
and not much rather of men within those places of strength? Certainly the
plain English is, that in time of breach of public quiet and peace, the
subjects were bound to defend the Kingdom, and in order thereto the people of
the same, and of the Kings right included in the public defense; else it were
a strange conclusion, that each man in particular, and in their own person
alone was bound to defend the Kings right; but being imbodied, the Kingdom.
And yet more clearly its apparent in that the service of the order of
Knighthood which was the chief strength of the Nation in those days, was
determined upon the service of the King, M. Paris. An. 1100, 1213.
and defense of the Kingdom; or which is more plain, for the service of the
King in or for defense of the Kingdom, as the statute of Mortmaine expounds
the same. Stat. 7. E. 1.
But not to force the Kings sense by argument; if the King had purposely
omitted that clause of the Kingdoms safety as of inferior regard to his own
personal interest; it was one of his rashest digressions, wherein he soon
espied his error: for in the midst of his strong and conquering army he held
himself unassured, unless he had a better foundation then that which must
change with the lives of a few at the utmost. And therefore besides the oath of
fealty formerly mentioned he established a law of association, that all free
men should be sworn brethren; Ll. Gulielm. Spicil. 59.
1. To defend the Kingdom with their lives and fortunes against all enemies, to
the utmost of their power. 2. To keep the peace and dignities of the Crown. 3.
To maintain right and justice by all means, without deceit and delay. Join
then these two oaths together, viz. that of fealty, and this of fraternity;
and it will easily appear, that the allegiance of the English to the Norman
Kings was no other then what might stand with brotherhood, and tender regard of
the public above all: and differing from the Saxon fealty only in this that
that was in one oath, and this in two. Wherefore whatsoever respects steered in
the rear of the Kings course its less material so long as the vanne was
right, albeit that the sequel will prove not much different from the premises,
as will appear in the foot of the whole account.

Thus entered the first Norman upon the Saxon Throne: and as he had some color
of right to countenance his course, William Rufus.
so had his son his fathers last will, and yet he had as little right as he.
This was William Rufus that was of his fathers way, but of a deeper die; and
therefore might well be called William Rufus, or William in grain. He was
exceeding happy in the fear or favor of the people, for he had nothing else
to make room for his rising. True it is he had the good will of his father, but
he was dead, and probably the people as little regarded it as he did them. Nor
was it ever observed that the English Crown was of so light account, as to
pass by devise of cestui que use; and therefore though it was designed to him
from his father, yet both right and possession was left to the people to
determine and maintain. The Clergy first led the way, Eadmer. hist. Wigorn. M.
Paris.
having fist taken a recognisance of him for his good behavior toward them,
which he assured as far as large promises and protestations would serve the
turn: and within one year after, standing in need of the favor of the
Commons (to maintain possession against his brother Robert) he gave them as
good security as the Clergy had; which he kept in such manner, that it was a
wonder that one of so small interest in the Title, but what he had by the
peoples leave and favor, should rule in such manner, and yet die a King: The
favor of the people being like a meteor that must be continually fed, or it
soon goes out and falls: for evident it is that the right of inheritance was his
elder brother Roberts, who was the braver man, and more experienced soldier;
and upon these principles had obtained the love of the Norman Barons (the
flower of his fathers chivalry; M. Paris An. 1088.
) and the liking of the Clergy, after they had found by experience the
emptiness of their hope in his brother William, and was every way so superior
to his brother in advantages, as we are left to believe that William got the
day without any other ground but only that God would so have it. Its true the
English stooke close to him; but how they were gained or contained, writers
speak not, but tell us of his promises, which also they tell us were vain,
and never had issue further then would stand with his profit.

Exit William Rufus, Henry first.
and in comes his younger brother Henry the first of that name: A Prince that
excelled in wisdom, and by it ruled his courage, which served him so far as
his aims and ends reached: His title was no better then his fathers or
brothers, but rather worse; for he had no color of last will to propound him
to the people, and his elder brother Robert was still alive, and by his service
of the Church in the war of Jerusalem might merit that respect of the Clergy,
as not to permit him to be a looser by so well deserving service, as in those
days that was accounted. Nevertheless the English look upon Henry as the
fitter man for their turn; being now at hand and Robert at Jerusalem, and
being a native born in England, civilized into the English garb by education,
and of a wiser and fairer demeanure, and more inclining to peaceable
government, which both Normans and English much inclined to as being weary of
thirty years service in the wars. And therefore its not mavelous if they
applied themselves to him in a way of capitulation, Math. Paris 1100. Eadmer.
Speed.
and less wonderful if he hearkened thereunto; and yet neither unadvisedly
yielded unto by him, nor traitorously propounded by them, as some in zeal to
Monarchy conclude the point. The worst of the whole matter resting in this,
that the King bound himself to be just, that he might be great; and the people
to submit unto justice, that they might be free: like as their ancestors were,
and themselves by the Law established ought to be. For that capitulation was in
substance settled by the ancient laws of the Saxons mixed with some additions of
laws made by the Kings father, with the joint advice of the grand Council of
the Kingdom; all which both the Norman Williams had often cofirmed by solemn
protestations and promises, however their actions upon sudden surprisall were
malae consuetudines and exactiones injustae, Math. Paris.
by this Kings own acknowledgement. Thus these three Norman Kings made their
way to the Throne; the first, by arms, under color of title: the second, by a
kind of title, under color of arms; and the last by favor: but all entered
the same by capitulation, election, and stipulation; and for the general had
some regard to suit their course in order of retaining the good will of their
people, although in a different measure, according to the differency of
occasions.

CHAP. XLVI. That the government of the Normans proceeded upon the Saxon
principles, and first of Parliaments.
THe principles which I mean, are these: First, the legislative power and
influence thereof upon the whole. Secondly, the members of that government,
with their several motions. Thirdly, the laws and customs or rules of those
motions: and first concerning the legislative power. Although it be true that
the first Williams great and most constant labor was to have and to hold and
had but little time or liberty to enjoy, yet that time of rest which had, he
did apply it and himself in the settling of the Laws by advice of
Common Council; I say, not by advice of his own heart or two or three Norman
Lords, or of the Norman Nobility only, as some men take the confidence to
aver, as if they had been eyewitnesses to the actions of those days: but by
the joint advise of the grand Council of the Lords and wise men of the
Kingdom of England. Spicileg. p. 5.
I will not insist upon force of argument to show that common reason must of
necessity sway the King into this course, but shall reserve that to another
place; the testimonies of Writers must now serve the turn; and herein the
testimony of the Chronicle of Leichfield must have the first place, which
speaks both of a Council of Lords, and says that by their advice he caused to
be summoned a meeting of all the Nobles and wise men through all the Counties
of England, to set down their laws and customs. This was in the fourth year
of his reign, or rather after his entry; and as soon as the Kingdom was
brought into any reasonable posture of quiet; and which besides the intention
of governing the Kingdom according unto Law does strongly pretend that the
Parliament had the legislative power and right of cognizance, and judicature in
those laws that concerned the Kingdom in general; and for the particular laws
or customs of several places or precincts, it was referred to a Committee or
Jury in every County to set them forth upon oath.

Secondly, that this Council had power to change laws may likewise appear in
that act made concerning the introduction of the Canon law, Spicil. 167. Fox.
Mart. l. 4.
which shows not only the power of that Council in Church Matters, but also
that the Canon was no further in force then the same would allow; and this was
also done by the Common council, and the Council of the Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbots, and all the Princes of the Kingdom; which connection shows plainly
that there was Council besides that of the Prelates and Princes.

Thirdly, in matters of general charge upon the whole body of the people the
King used also the help of this grand Council, Ll. Gulielm. c. 58. Spicil.
as may especially appear in the charge of arms imposed upon the subjects;
its said it was done by the Common council of the whole Kingdom; as is
witnessed even by the Kings own law. It may seem also that the grand Officers
of the state were elected by such grand assembly of the wise men; for we find
that Lanfrank was elected to the Sea of Canterbury by the assent of the Lords
and Prelates, and of the whole people, Antiq. Brit. fo. 110.
that is, by the Parliament of England: and as probable it is that Bishops were
therein also elected, for that the Bishop of Liechfield resigned his Bishopric
in such like assembly, if the meaning of Lanfrank be rightly understood, Baron.
Anal. An. 1070.
who says in his letter that it was in conventu Episcoporum atque Laicorum.

Lastly, that one Law of this Kings which may be called the first Magna charta
in the Norman times, by which the King reserved to himself from the free men
of this Kingdom nothing but their free service, Ll. Gulielm. c. 55.
in the conclusion says that their Lands were thus granted to them in
inheritance of the King by the Common council of the whole Kingdom, and so
asserts in one the liberty of the free men, and of the representative body of
the Kingdom. These footsteps of the Parliament find we in the Conquerours
time, besides other more general intimations scattered amongst the Historians,
which may induce opinion to its full strength, that this King however
Conqueror he was, yet made use of this additionall power of Parliament to
perfect his designs, and it may be more often then either of his sons that
yet had less pretense of superlative power to countenance their proceedings.

William Rufus was a man of resolution no whit inferior, if not surpassing his
father, and had wit enough for any thing but to govern his desires, which led
him many times wild, and might occasion conceit that he was almost a mad King,
though he were a witty man; and therefore its the less marvel if he used not
the help of the Common council more then needs must; where Kings many times
are told of that which they are loath to know. Nevertheless William the second
could not pass over thirteen years without a parley with his Commons and
Clergy; unless he meant to adventure a parley between them and his brother
Robert, who like an Eagle eyed his posture, though he hovered afar of.

But Henry the first was more wise, and being trained up even from the Cradle
in the English garb, moralized by learning, and now admitted into the Throne,
found it the wisest course to apply himself to the rule of an English King,
viz. to win and maintain the good opinion of the people by consorting
together with them under one Law, and pledging himself thereto by taking unto
wife one of the English blood-royall; by this means reseised and reassumed the
English in partnership with the Norman in their ancient right of government;
and reconciled the minds of the people under a lively hope of enjoying a settled
government. Nor were they greatly deceived herein; for his course was less
plannetary then that of either of his predecessors, and yet we find little
said of his parley with his people in a Parliamentary way, although more of his
laws then of any of his predecessors. The reason will rest in this, that the
writers of those times touch more upon matters of ordinary then political
observation, and regarded rather the thing then the place or manner how. The
Laws therefore although they are not entitled as made in Parliament, yet in
the continuation of the History of Bid its noted that the King renewed or
confirmed the ancient Laws in Concilio peritorum and proborum virorum regni
Angliae, Bid hist. l. 3. c. 30.
which may give sufficient cause to suppose that he declined not the ancient
way no more then he did the ancient Law.

CHAP. XLVII. Of the Franchise of the Church in the Normans time.
THe Canon law that ever since Austins coming like Thunder rumbled in the
cloud, now breaks forth with confusion to all opposers. It had formerly made
many fair proffers of service to this Island, but it was disaccepted as too
stately to serve, yet by often courtesies received it was allowed as a friend a
far of. For the vast body of the Roman Empire like a body wasting with age,
died upward, and left the Britons to their own Laws before the second beast was
grown, which being young was nourished under the Imperial Law of the first
beast, till it grew as strong as its damme, and began to prey for it self. The
Empire perceiving its gray hairs, and the youthful courage of this upstart,
was glad to enter mutual league with it, the one to maintain the
Ecclesiastical Monarchy of the other, and that the Imperial Monarchy of the
former; and so became the Canon and Imperial Law to be united, and the
professors to be utriusque juris. But this parity continued not long; the
young beast looked like a Lamb, but spoke like a Lion; and contrarily the Eagle
had cast its feathers and could tower no more; so as by this time the Pope was
too good for the Emperor and the Canon law above the Imperial; yet allowing
it to serve the turn: and so the professors of both Laws became students in
the Civil but practisers of the Canon. This composition thus made beyond the
Seas, the great work was how to transport it over into this Isle: for the
Emperors could entitle the Pope to no power here, because none he had. Austin
the Monk undertakes the work; he offers it to the Britons under the goodly
title of Universal Bishop: but they kept themselves out of Canon-shot. The
Saxons allowed the title, but liked not the power. The Monk observed the stop,
and left time to work out that which present cunning could not, being content
for the present that a league of cohabitation should be made between the two
Swords, Ll. Edw. c. 3.
though the spiritual were for the present underling, not dispairing that it
would work out its own way over the Saxon law, as it had done over the
Imperial. Nor did his conceit altogether fail; for the Saxons by little
allowed much, and the Danes more; although the main was preserved until the
Normans came upon the stage, who made their way by the Popes leave, and gave
him a color of somewhat more then ever any of their Saxon predecessors had
done; and to gain the more quiet possession of the Crown to themselves,
allowed the Pope the honor of their Council, learned to draw the conveyance;
which as some think was made advantagiously for the Pope himself in point of
tenure, but more probably in the covenants. For the Conqueror was scarce
settled in his seat, but the Canon law began to speak in the voice of a Royal
law: Spicil. 167. Fox Mart. l. 4.
First, complaining of mis-government, as if the Church were extremely wronged
by having the same way and law of trial with the Commons of England; and then
propounds four several expedients, enough to have undone the whole
Commonweal in the very entrance; had not the superstition of those times
blinded both Parliament and people, and rendered them willing with that which
their successors in future ages often repented of.

No offense against the Bishops Laws shall be handled in the Hundred.

By the Saxon law Church matters had the pre-eminence both in the Hundred, and
in the County; and it was the Bishops duty to join with the Sheriff in those
Courts, to direct and see to the administration of justice: and yet the Canon
had been above three hundred years foregoing in the negative.

No case concerning the Regiment of souls shall be brought before the secular
Judge.

The Regiment of souls was a common place sufficient to contain any thing
that was in order thereunto: and so every one that has a soul must be no more
responsall unto the temporal Judge for any matter concerning it, but unto the
Ecclesiastical power; and this not only in case of scandal, as against the
moral law or rule of faith, but for disobedience done to the Canons, made afar
off, concerning any gesture or garb that may come within the savor of an
Ecclesiastical conceit.

That all delinquents against the Bishops laws shall answer the fact in a place
appointed by the Bishop to that end.

So as now the Bishop has gotten a Court by the Statute law, that had formerly
no other Cards to show but that of the Canon, and a Court of such place as the
Bishop shall appoint, however inconvenient for distance or uncertainty it be.

That the trial of such matters shall be according to the law of the Canon,
and not according to that of the Hundred.

That is, not by Jury, but by witnesses, in a clandestine way if the Bishop
please, or without any accuser, or by more scrutiny, or any other way that may
reserve the Lay man to the breast of a prepossessed spirit of the spiritual
Judge. And thus the poor Countreyman is exposed to the censure of an unknown
law in an unknown tongue, by an unknown way; wherein they had no footing but by
an implicit faith: And herein the providence of God (I imagine) was more
manifest then the wisdom of man, which was too weak to foresee events at so
great a distance; For questionless it was a point of excellent wisdom for the
people (now under a King of a rugged nature that would not stick to catch
whatsoever he could get) to deposite part of their liberties into the hands of
the Clergy; from whom moderation might be expected as from friends and
neighbors, and (as partners in one ship) mutual engagement to withstand the
waves of prerogative of Kings that seldom rests till it breaks all banks, and
sometimes over-reaches its own guard, and cannot return when it would. And thus
it fell out; for many times the Pope and Clergy became protectors of the
peoples liberties, and kept them safe from the rage of Kings, until the time
of restitution should come; and became not only a wall of defense to the one,
but a rock of offense to the other. For the Tripple Crown could never solder
with the English, nor it with that; the strife was for prerogative, wherein if
the Clergy gained, the Crown lost, and no moderation would be allowed. For the
conquering King was scarce warm in his Throne when as the Pope demanded fealty
of him for the Crown of England, Spicil. 164 Baronus Anal. An, 1068.
and the Kings own good Archbishop and friend Lanfranke delivered the message;
as also Anselme did afterward to William Rufus, which though Kings had courage
enough to deny, yet it showed plainly that the Popes meaned no less game then
Crown-glieke with the King and people, the Archbishops and Bishops holding the
Cards for the Pope, while in the interim he oversaw all. The Norman Kings thus
braved, paid the Popes in their own Coin, and refused to acknowledge any Pope
but such as are first allowed by their concurrance. Edmer. hist. l. 1. p. 25.


Thus have we the second bravado of the Canon Law; for as yet it was not so
fully entered, as it seemed. The words of the act of Parliament its true were
general; yet their sense was left to time to expound, and the course of
succeeding affairs nevertheless passed with a non obstante. For whereas in
those days the Clergy claimed both legislative and executory power in Church
matters, the Normans would allow of neither, but claimed both as of right
belonging to the Imperial power of this Island, originally and only. As
touching the legislative power, its evident that notwithstanding the Canon that
had long before this time voted the Laity from having to do with Church
matters; yet the Norman Kings would never allow to the Metropolitans the power
of calling Synods nor such meetings, Edmer. hist. p. 6. and 24. Spicil. 163.
but by their leave, although it was earnestly contended for. Neither could the
Clergy prevail to exclude the Laity out of their Synods, being assembled, nor
from their wonted privilege of voting therein; albeit that for a long time by
Canon it had been contradicted. The differences between the Clergy and the
Kings concerning these and other matters grew so hot, that Kings liked not to
have any Synods or meetings of public Council; Epist. ad Pascal. pap.
and Archbishop Anselme complained that William Rufus would not allow any to be
called for thirteen years together; which by the file of story, compared with
that Epistle, made up the kings whole Reign. And this was questionless the
cause that we find so little touch upon Parliamentary assemblies in the Norman
times, Kings being too high to be controlled, and Bishops too proud to obey;
But necessity of State, like unto fate prevails against all other interests
whatsoever; and the wisdom of Henry the first in this prevailed above that of
his predecessors, as far as their will was beyond his. For it was bootlesse
for him to hold out against the Church that stood in need of all sorts to
confirm to him that which common right (as then it was taken) denied him; and
therefore (though it cost him much trouble with Anselme) he recontinued the
liberty of public consultations, and yet maintained his dignity and honor
seemly well. I shall not need to clear this by particulars, for besides the
public consultations at his entrance, and twice after that, for supply or aid
for his wars, and the marriage of his daughter with the Emperor, its
observed that the Archbishop of Canterbury summoned a Council at Westminster,
but it was authoritate Regia, and that there assembled magnae multitudines
Clericorum, Laicorum, Conten. Wigorn. An. 1127.
tam divitum quam mediocrium; and that upon the third day the debate was de
negotiis saecularibus nonnullis: The issue of all was, that some things were
determinata, others dilata, and other matters propter nimium aestuantis turbae
tumultum ab audientia judicantium profligata. Out of which may be probably
concluded, 1. That the Laity as yet were present in Councels with the Clergy.
2. That they were all in one place. 3. That they all had votes, and that the
major mumber concluded the matter. 4. That certain persons used to determine of
the major number by the hearing, and that the votes were still clamore non
calculis. 5. That they held an order in debating of affairs, viz. on some
days Ecclesiastical, and on other days secular. 6. That all matters
concluded were attested by the King, who as it is said, did give his consent, and
by his authority did grant and confirm the same. And upon the whole matter it
will be probable that as yet Councels, and those now called Parliaments
differed not in kind, although possibly there might be difference of names, in
regard that some might be immediately and mainly occasioned, and urged by
Temporal exigences, and others by Ecclesiastical; but whether Temporal or
Ecclesiastical the first occasion was, yet in their meetings they handled both
as occasion offered it self.

Secondly, as the Clergy could not attain the sole legislative power, so
neither had they the sole juridicall power in Ecclesisticall causes; for not
only in case of error in the Ecclesiastical courts was an appeal reserved
to the Kings court, as formerly in the Saxons time: but even those things which
seemed properly of Ecclesiastical cognizance were possessed by the Kings Court
in the first instance, as that of Peter Pence, which was a Church-tribute, and
might be claimed to be proper the Church cognizance much rather then Tithes;
and yet by the Law of this Kingdom in the Conquerours time it is especially
provided, Ll. Gulielm. c. 20. Spicil. 180.
that defaults of payment of that duty shall be amended in the Kings Court, and
a fine for default was given to the King, albeit that the Bishop was made the
Collector, and the Pope the Proprietor. And many other particulars, which were
holden to be of Ecclesiastical cognizance, Kings would draw them within the
compass of maintaining the peace of the Church, which properly belonged to
them to defend; and so had the cognizance of them in their own Courts, and
fines for invasion of the Church rights. But because this may seem but
colorable, and by way of flattery of the Churches right, and not in opposition
thereof: In other things it will appear plainly that Kings were not nice in
vindicating their own claim in matters which the Clergy held theirs quarto
modo, as namely in the case of excommunication, a weapon first fashioned by the
Churchmen, and in the exercise whereof themselves were in repute the only
masters; and yet in this were mastered by Kings, whose Laws directed and
restrained the swelling of that censure, Eadmer. hist. p. 6. Ll. H. 1. cap. 5.
and made it keep measure; whose Tenants and Officers or servants must not be
meddled with by this censure, but by the Kings leave; nor must they be called to
answer but in the Kings Court. That right still remained to them after the
spoil made by the Hierarchy upon the rights of all the rest of the free men,
and therefore could not of right be called nova in the Historians sense; seeing
that it was no other then the ancient custom used amongst the Saxons before
that the Clergy had either purpose or power to reach at such a height as
afterward by degrees they attained unto. Furthermore, the Hierarchy as they
neither could possess the legislative nor juridicall power in Church matters;
so neither could they possess themselves: for as yet they were the Kings men,
and the more the Kings men, because they now think a Bishopric but a naked
commodity, if not robed with a Barony. Nevertheless, before that ever they
knew that honor, what ever the Canon was for their election, yet both their
title and power de facto was derived to them from the Kings, who also invested
them with Staff and Ring; nor had the Pope as yet (though he had conquered the
Hierarchy) possessed himself of their colors; but during all the Norman times
the Kings maintained that trophie of the right they had from their
predecessors, notwithstanding the many assaults from Rome, and treacheries of
the Cathedrals within the Realm; Eadmer. Hist. l. 2. p. 53. and l. 3. and l. 4.
Eadmer. hist. l. 1. and l. 5. Wigorn. An. 1128. Spicil. 142.
and albeit sometimes Kings were too weak to hold the shadow, yet the
convention of the States did maintain the substance, viz. the right of
election without intermission, as the examples of Lanfrank unto the Sea of
Canterbury, and Anselme and Ralph his successors, and of Thomas into the Sea of
York, and Ralph coadjutor to Thurstan Archbishop of the same See, and of
Gilbert into the Sea of London, besides others, do sufficiently set forth:
whether it was because the convention of states was more stout, or that the
Bishops now wedded to temporal Baronies were so unquestionably interessed in
the public affairs of the Commonweal, that it was against common sense to
deny the States their vote and cognizance of their election, I cannot
determine; yet it is a certain truth, the more Baron, the less Bishop, and
more unmeet for the service of Rome: politiquely therefore it was done by Kings
to hold these men by a Golden hook, that otherwise had prostituted themselves
to a foreign power, and proved absolute desertors of their Countries cause,
which now they must maintain under peril of the loss of their own honor.

In the next place, as they were the Kings men, so their Bishoprics and
Diocesses were under the Kings power to order, as by the advice of the Bishops
and Baronage should be thought most convenient; either to endow an other Bishop
with part thereof and so to make two Diocesses of one, Eadm. l. 4. p. 95. 96.
as befell in the case of the Diocese of Lincoln, out of which the Diocese
of Ely budded in the time of Henry the first, or to endow a Monastry or other
religious foundation with part, and exempt the same from all Episcopal or
ordinary jurisdiction, as in the example of the foundation of the Abbey of
Battall in Sussex, in the time of William the Conqueror may appear. Spicil.
65.


Lastly, what ever the first intention of this recited Statute were, it may
probably be judged, that it was but a noise to still the Clergy; and that it
never had more then a livelesse shape, not only in regard of the
beforementioned particulars, but especially in regard of that subservient law
of Henry the first concerning the County court which recites it as a custom
in his time used, Ll. Hen. 1. c. 7.
that the Bishop and Earls, with other the chief men of that County were
there present as assistants in directory of judgment. And that in order are
handled first matters of the Church; Secondly, Crown pleas; Thirdly and lastly,
Common pleas; however therefore the King spoke fair, they either acted not at
all, or so cooly as the current of the custom was too strong; but most
probable it is, that the Kings spoke fair till they were settled in their
Thrones, and afterward pleased themselves: for by the general thread of story
it may appear that the Clergy in those times were more feared then loved, and
therefore riden with a straight reine. The Prelacy on the contrary grew unruly,
yet too weak for the rugged spirits of the Norman Kings; they are glad to be
quiet, and the Pope himself to drive fair and softly, as judging it expedient
potestatem Regalem mitius tractandam, Greg: epist. l. 9.
and continued that course and posture till the calmer times of Henry the
first; Eadmer: hist. l. 4 p. 95.
wherein they mended their pace, and got that without noise which they had long
striven for, viz. the preeminence and presidency in the Synods, though the King
himself be present, and (if the Historian writes advisedly) the whole
ordaining, or legislative power, for so runs the style or phrase of the
author, Archiepiscopi and Episcopi statuerunt in praesentia Regis, as if the
presence of the King and his Barons and people were but as a great Amen at the
common prayer (after the old stamp) to set a good color upon a doubtful
matter to make it go down the better. How the Kings brooked this draught, I
cannot say; but it has made the kingdom stagger ever since, and it may be
feared will hardly recover its perfect wits, so long as the brains of the
Clergy and the Laity thus lie divided in several Cells.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of the several subservient jurisdictions by Provinces, Marches,
Counties, Hundreds, Buroughs, Lordships, and Decennaries.
HAd the Normans owned no other title then that of Conquest, doubtless their
mother wit must needs have taught them the expediency of preserving the
particular subservient jurisdictions of the kingdom, entire and unquashed, if
they regarded either the benefit of their conquest, or reward of their
parteners and allies; unless it should be allowed unto Conquerous, to be more
honorable for them to do what they will, rather then what is meet. But hereof
there is no cause of queston in this present subject: for nothing is more
clear then that Wales enjoyed in the Conquerours time, and for ages after
him, its ancient liberties, Tribute excepted; nor did conquest ever come so
nigh to their borders as to trench upon the liberties of the Marches. For as it
had been a piece of state nonsense to have holden two peoples under conquest,
and their Marches in freedom; or to preserve them in good neighborhood by
Marches, which by the law of Conquest were made one: so was it no less vain
if all had been once subdued by conquest, to have raised up the liberties of
the Marches any more.

And as they had less cause to have invaded the bounds and ancient limits and
partitions of the Counties, County courts
so questionless had they so done, they would have taken the old course of the
Micklemote, Eadmer. hist. l. 4. p. 96.
as they did divide the Diocese of Lincoln into two Diocesses by advice of
the Bishops, Princes, and other wise and holy men, Ll. Hen. 1. c. 6.
and turned the Abbey of Ely into a Bishops See. But it was their wisdom to
preserve the ancient Landmarks; and no less both wisdom and care to continue
their due privileges and interests to each. Every County had its Court, Ll.
Gulielm. cap. 41. and 42.
and every Court its wonted jurisdiction: No complaint must be to the Kings
Court if right may be done in the County; no distress must be taken but by
warrant from the County, and that must be after complaint thrice made. The
County court must be called as our ancestors have appointed: Ll. Gulielm. cap.
64.
such as will not come as they ought, shall be first summoned, and in case of
default destrained, at the fourth default; the complainant shall be satisfied
out of the distresses so taken, and the King also for his fine. These are the
express Laws of the Conquerours own establishment; Ibid. c. 64.
the last of which also was confirmed by another express Law, saving that he
would allow but of two summons and two distresses, before execution. And as it
was one principal work that he undertook to reduce the Laws into course,
which had been intermitted during the violent times of his father and brother
(the first of whom never had liberty for reformation, and the latter never had
will) so amongst other Laws he settled those concerning the County court, Ll.
Hen. 1. c. 7.
namely, That the Bishops, Earls, and chief men should be present for
direction. 2. That it should be holden once each month. 3. That the Church
matters should precede, and then the Crown pleas. And lastly, the Common pleas;
besides some other particulars concerning pleading, and proceedings in the
handling of causes. Neither were these causes of a petty regard only, but of
greatest concernment: One example I shall remember the reader of, Epicil. 197.
and not recite in terminis, but refer to Mr Seldens own pen. The occasion
was this: Odo the Conquerours half brother was by him made Earl of Kent, and
therewith had the gift of a large Teritory in Kent; and taking advantage of the
Kings displeasure at the Archbishop of Canterbury, Stigand.
possessed himself by disseisin of diverse Lands and Tenements belonging to
that See: Lanfrank the succeeding Archbishop being informed hereof, petitioned
to the King that justice might be done him secundum legem terrae; And the King
sends forth his Writ to summon a County court: the debate lasted three days
before the free men of the County of Kent, in the presence of many chief men,
Bishops and Lords, and others skillful in the Laws; and the judgment passed
for the Archbishop Lanfrank upon the votes of the free men. This County court
was holden by special summons, and not by adjournment, as was allowable by the
Saxon Law upon special occasions: And this suit was originally begun, and had
its final determination in the County court, and not brought by a Tolt out of
the Hundred court, as is supposed by an Honorable reporter; nor by the ancient
laws could the suite commence in the Hundred, because the Lands and Tenements
did lie in several hundreds and Counties. The upshot of all is that the County
courts in those days were of so great esteem that two of the greatest Peers
of the Realm, one a Norman, the other an Italian, did cast a title in fifteen
manors, two Townships, with many liberties upon the votes of the Freeholders
in a County court, and that the sentence was allowed and commended by the King,
and submitted to by all.

In the next place we are to come to the Hundred Courts, Hundred court.
of which there are by the Normans allowed two sorts; the first whereof was
holden twice a year: This was formerly called the Torn, and was the Sheriffs
Court; hereof little notice is taken, Ll. Hen 1. c 8.
saving that by the Laws of Henry the first its work seems to be much designed
to the view of free pledges. But the more ordinary Court, is that which belongs
to the Lord of the Hundred, unto whom also belong the fines in cases there
concerned. This Court is to be holden once in each month; Ll. Gulielm. cap.
41. Ll. Hen. 1 c. 7. Ll. Gulielm. cap. 41. Ll. Gulielm. cap. 42.
and no suit to be begun in the Kings Court that regularly ought to begin in
the Hund ed. No distringas shall issue forth till three demands made in the
Hundred. And three distresses shall then issue forth; and if upon the fourth
the party appear not, execution shall be by sale of the distress, and the
complainant shall receive satisfaction.

But by the latter Laws of the same King there is but two summons allowed, and
then two distresses; Ll. Hen 1. c. 64.
and in case no appearance be, execution shall be for the complainant, and for
the Kings fine.

Ll. Hen. 1. c. 7.
Lastly, as the case concerned either persons or places, sometimes they used to
join several Hundreds together into one Court: but this was by special
Commission or Writ.

As touching inferior Courts of Tows and Manors, there is little observation
to be had, Courts of Towns and Manors. Ll. Hen. 1. c. 7.
being of too private a regard to come into fame in those rough times; yet in
Henry the firsts Laws its ordered that Town courts should meet every month;
and that Lords should hold Plees either in their own persons, or by their
Stewards, and that the chief man in that Parish, with four other of the
chiefer sort, and the Minister or Parish Priest should join their assistance in
that work. But in nothing more did the Norman Kings show their paternall love
to the Commonweal, Decenners.
then in the law of pledges or Decenners: for as of all other beauties it
suffered most blemish from the storm of the Norman invasion; so was it their
especial care to renew the life thereof, not now amongst the natives only,
but joining the Normans to the Saxons in the same bond of brotherhood, utterly
drowned thereby, all memory of Lordly power, and so of diverse peoples making
one, conquered even conquest it self, if any were, and made all joynt-partners
in one common liberty.

Ll. Gulielm. cap. 64. Ll. Hen. 1. c. 8.
Every free man must be under pledges to satisfy justice in case of delinquency.

Over every nine persons under pledges there must be one man in authority.

View of free pledges must be to see that the Decennaries be full; and if any
be departed, to enquire the cause: and if any be come in, whether he be under
pledges or not.

And thus the Norman Kings had their people under treble guard: one of fealty,
the other of association, and the third that of pledges; and all little enough
to secure that which they in their own consciences might have some cause to
question, whether it belonged to them or not.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the immunities of the Saxon free men under the Norman
government.
THe freedom of an English man consists in three particulars: First, in
ownership of what he has. Secondly in voting any Law whereby that ownership is
to be maintained: and thirdly, in having an influence upon that Judicatory
power that must apply that Law. Now that the English under the Normans enjoyed
all this freedom unto each man's own particular, besides what they had in
bodies aggregate, may appear, as follows: The free men of England were such
as either joined in the war with Harold against the Normans; or such as
absented themselves from the way of opposition or enmity, and were either
waiting upon their own affairs, or siding with the Normans: and questionless
all the sadness of the war befell the first sort of the English; whose
persons and estates (to make the ways of the first Norman William regular, and
of one piece) never fell so low as to come under the Law (or rather the will)
of conquest; but in their worst condition were in truth within the directory of
the Law of forfeiture for Treason against their Sovereign Lord, whose claim
was by title, as has been already noted. The other sort either did appear to
be the Normans friends, or for ought appeared so were; and so never offending
the Law never suffered any penalty; but held their persons and possessions
still under the patronage of Law, as anciently they and their ancestors had
done; and that this was the Normans meaning, they publish the same to the world
in a fundamental Law, whereby is granted, Ll. Gulielm. cap. 55.
That all the freemen of the whole Kingdom shall have and hold their Lands and
possessions in hereditary right for ever.

And by this being secured against forfeiture, they are further saved from all
wrong by the same law which provideth,

That they shall hold them well or quietly, and in peace free from all unjust
Tax, and from all Tallage, so as nothing shall be exacted nor taken, but their
free service which by right they are bound to perform.

This is expounded in the Laws of H. 1. cap. 4. that no tribute or tax shall be
taken, but what was due in the Confessors time.

Under the word Tax is understood monetagium commune per civitates, or
comitatus; so as aides and escuage are not included, for they are not charged
upon Counties and Cities, but upon Tenures in Knight Service: nor was Dane
grelt hereby taken away, for that was a Tax in the Confessors time, and granted
by Parliament.

So then the Norman Kings claimed no other right in the lands and possessons of
any of their subjects, then under and by the law or common right; and they
conclude the law with a sicut, which I thus English, As it is enacted to them,
(or agreed by them) and unto them by us given and granted by the
Common Council of our whole Kingdom. Statutum est eis, and illis a nobis
datum and concessum per commune concilium totius Regni nostri.
I leave the words to be criticized upon as the Reader shall please; being well
assured that the most strained sense can reach no further then to make it sound
as an estoppell or conclusion to the King and his successors, to make any
further claim unto the estates of his subjects then by Law or right is
warrantable; under which notion conquest never did nor can come, as shall more
fully be manifested hereafter. But the right genius of this law will also more
evidently appear by the practice of those times, which even when justice it
self did most importune, so tenderly regarded the liberty of men's estates,
that no distress could issue without public warrant obtained, Ll. Gulielm.
cap. 42. and 45.
and upon three complaints first made, and right not done; and when rape and
plunder was in the heat, and men might seem to have no more right then they had
power to maintain: yet even then this Law was refuge sufficient for such as
were oppressed; Gloss 227. Camb. Brit. Norff.
and was pleaded in bar against all usurpations and intrusions, under pretext
of the Conquerours right whatsoever, as by the case of Edwine of Sharneburne
may appear. Secondly, that the free men of England had vote in the making of
Laws, by which meum and tuum was bounded and maintained, as may appear by what
has been already said; nor shall I endeavor further therein. Thirdly, they
had an influence upon the judicatory power; for first, the matter in fact was
determined by the votes of the free men, as the Laws of the Conqueror, and of
Henry the first do sufficiently manifest. Secondly, they had an influence in
the making of the Sheriff, who as well as the Bishop was by election of the
people. Ll. Gulielm. cap. 15.
Thirdly, they had an influence upon all Judges by setting a penal Law upon
them in case of corruption; which if not so penal as to take away life, was
nevertheless penal enough to make an unjust Judge to be a living pattern and
example of misery, to teach others to beware.

Two things more must be added, though somewhat collateral to this purpose.
Concerning the right of the free men in the common Mint, and in their villains.
Concerning the Mint, Ll. Aethelst. c. 6 Ll Aetheldr. c. 22.
that the Saxons having made it as parcel of the demesnes of the kingdom, and
leaving to the King only an overseership, reserved the control and chief
survey thereof to the grand Council of the kingdom, who had stated the same
in the Confessors time. But after him the Normans changed the current according
to their own liking, till by Henry the first it was reduced into the ancient
course, Ll. Hen. 1.
allowing no money but such as was current in the days of the Confessor, whose
laws also (with some alterations by the Conqueror, with common advice) he also
established. Concerning the Lords right to their villains it is observable,
first, Ll. Gulielm. cap. 65 and 66.
that liberty of infranchisement was allowed, which could never have been, had
not the liberty of the subject been saved. Secondly, that Infranchisement
properly is the work of the people, or the body, and the Lord was to deliver
his villain by his right hand unto the Sheriff in full County court, and
pronounce him free from his service, and shall make room for him by free
passage and open doors, and deliver him free arms, viz. a Lance and a Sword,
and then he is made a free man, as I conceive, to all intents and purposes. Ll.
Gulielm. c. 66.
Otherways there might be manumission, as if the villain remained in a City,
Borough, walled Town, or Castle by a space of a year and a day, and no claim
made to his service by his Lord, he shall be thenceforth free from the service
of his Lord for ever; and yet this manumission could not conclude any but the
Lord and his heirs or assigns: nor could it enforce the body to allow that
for a member which was none before. Thirdly, that notwithstanding they allowed
the Lords liberty of infranchisement, Ll. Gulielm. 65.
yet would they not allow them free liberty of disposing them as other
chattels; nor by the law of the Conqueror might they sell their villains out
of the Country, or beyond Sea, for the King had right to the mediate service
of every villain, though the Lord had the immediate; and therefore that Law
might hold in force: nevertheless the Ordinance that Anselme made, that no
Lord should sell his villain, they would never allow for a Law, nor did it
hold in force.

CHAP. L. A recollection of certain Norman Laws, concerning the Crown in
relation to those of the Saxons formerly mentioned.
I Call them Norman Laws because they were allowed by them or continued in
force, although many of them had their original from the Saxons.

First and second Commandments.
One God must be worshipped; and one faith of Christ maintained thoroughout the
whole Kingdom.

This is found amongst the Laws of King William published by Mr Seldom, Ll.
Gulielm. c. 51.
and was for substance in the Saxons time, saving that we find it not annexed
to the Crown summarily until now; so as by this law Heresy and Idolatry
became Crown pleas; and the like may be collected concerning blasphemy,
concerning which its said, as of the servants killing his Lord, that its
impardonable: Ll. Hen. 1. c. 75
nor could any man offend herein, but it endangered his whole estate. The
trial of these crimes is not found particularly set forth. It might possibly
be in the meeting of the Clergy, and as possibly in the County court of the
Torn where the Bishop was present Jura Divina edocere.

Peterpence, Ciricksceate, and Tithes, must be duly paid.

These are all Saxon laws united to the cognizance of the Crown, as formerly
has been showed: Only the first William especially provided, that in case any
man worth thirty pence in chattels did pay four pence for his part; Ll. Gul.
c. 18. etc. 20. Ll. Hen. 1 c. 10.
it should be sufficient both for himself and his retinue, whether servants or
retainers: and defaults in payment of these duties were finable to the King.

Invasion upon the right of Sanctuary fined.

This I note, not so much in relation to any such law amongst the Saxons, Ll.
Gulielm. cap. 1.
as to the future custom, which now began to alter, according to the increase
or wane of the Moon. I do not find this misdemeanour to be formerly so much
taken to heart by the Crown; nor possibly would it have been at this time, but
that the King must protect the Church, if he mean to be protected by it: and
it was taken kindly by the Churchmen, till they found they were able enough to
defend their own right by themselves. Amongst all the rest of Church rights
this one especially is confirmed, viz. That any delinquent shall have liberty
of Sanctuary to enjoy both life and member, notwithstanding any law to the
contrary. This privilege was claimed by the Canons; but it must be granted by
the Temporal power, or else it could not be had; and though it be true that
Kings formerly did by their Charters of foundation grant such privileges in
particular; yet could not such grants create such immunities contrary unto, or
notwithstanding any public law of the kingdom; and therefore the Monasteries
had their foundations confirmed by Parliament, or general assembly of wise
men, if the first foundation was not laid thereon.

Working upon the feast days punished by fine. 4. Commandment. Ll. Hen. 1. c.
10


Before this time no days for solemn worship of God were acknowledged by the
law of the Kingdom, but the Lords days. By this all days celebrated or
instituted by the Church for that purpose are defended by the civil power, and
breach of the holy observation of these days made inquirable, and punished
amongst other pleas of the Crown.

6 Commandment.
Breach of the peace, bloodshed, and man slaughter punished by fine.

This was the ancient Law of the Saxons, and was continued without alteration
till about Alfreds time, whose zeal against blood caused murder to be punished
with death; but the Danes bringing in a moderation, if it may rightly be so
called, are now seconded by their kindred the Normans, who will not admit of
punishment by death, Ll. Gulielm. cap. 67.
partly because being a warlike people, bloodshed might seem to rank it self
under the Regiment of valor; and partly because they owed much to that Title
for the possession of all that they had gotten in England. And to prevent
scandal, entering upon the rear, opinion stepped in, that a miserable life was
more penal then death; and therefore in crimes of the deepest die they would
to fine and loss of member: Ibid.
and which course prevailed most, either to stop or enlarge the course of that
sin, was left to the disposition of such as intended to make trial. But in
matters of less malignancy the purse rather smarted then the body, wherein
they proceeded so far as to punishment of death by violence; yet was not the
fine to be measured by the judgment of the mercy or rigor of any person,
Miror 254. Ll. Gulielm. c. 8, 10, 12, 13, etc.
but only of the Law it self, which set down in certainty both the nature and
quantity of the fine; and left that memorial upon record of a good mind at
least to an equitable and just government. In all these cases of breach of
peace the Kings Court becomes possessed of the right of cognizance, and the
peace is now called the Kings peace; not so much because that it is left only
to his providentiall care to maintain as because the fines, Ll. Gulielm. cap.
3.
for most of those crimes pertained to the King: for otherwise there is a sort
of crimes that are contra pacem vicecomitis, as will be more cleared hereafter.

I shall conclude this subject with these three observations: First, that the
Laws in those ancient times of the Normans were so general, as they then made
no difference between places or persons; Ll. Hen. 1. c. 10.
but whether the peace was broken upon holy or common ground, or upon a
Layman, or one in orders, the Lay power seized upon all. The second is the
care they had for apprehending of the offenders in this kind. If the party
slain were a Norman or Frenchman, Ll. Gulielm. cap. 53.
the Lord of the manslaier was charged to have him forthcomming within a
certain time, or to pay the Kings fine of 46 Marks so long as he had wherewith
to satisfy, and what remained the whole Hundred was charged. But if the party
slain were of any other people, Ll. Gulielm. cap. 26.
the Hundred was immediately charged with the manslayer, and must bring him to
answer within a certain time, or pay the Kings fine. The third and last is,
the care they had to prevent breach of peace for the future: First in settling
of nightwatches by all Cities, Buroughs, Castles, and Hundreds, in such manner
as the Sheriff or chief Officers by common council shall advise for the best
safety of the Kingdom. Ll. Gulielm. c. 56. Ll. Gulielm. cap. 46. Ll. H. 1.
cap. 8.
Secondly, in forbidding intertainment of unknown persons above three days
without surety for his good abearance, or becoming his pledge for the public
safety, nor to let any person pass away without testimony, under the ministers
and neighbors hand of their good carriage.

A man committing adultery with a married woman shall forfeit to his Lord the
price of his life. 7. Commandment.


This made the crime inquirable at the common law as an contra pacem Domini;
Ll. Gulielm. cap. 14.
but afterward it was finable to the King, and inquirable amongst the pleas of
the Crown by the law of Henry the first. Ll Hen. 1. c. 10.


Force upon a woman, to the intent to ravish her, Ll. Gul. c. 19.
it shall be punished with loss of member.

The Crimes and offenses against this Commandment were always punished in the
Temporal Courts, by fine at the least; and are still in the Normans time
prosecuted in the same way notwithstanding the growing authority of the Canon.

8. Commandment.
Robbery is finable.

The different Law between the Saxons, Angles and Danes, now by the Normans is
settled in the more merciful way; and in case the delinquent made flight, the
pledge satisfied the law for him. Ll. Gulielm. cap. 4. Glanv. l. 6. c. 6.
Hoveden. 9 Commandment. Ll. Gulielm. c. 57. Ll. Hen. 1. c. 10.
But in the latter times of Henry the first the law was again reduced to the
punishment of this crime by death, and so has continued.

There shall be true weights and measures throughout the Kingdom, and those
shall be sealed. And this was the constant Saxon Law.

Perjury to be punished by fine, and as formerly still inquirable amongst the
Crown pleas.

CHAP. LI. The like of Laws that concern common interest of Goods.
IF Cattle be taken by distress the party that will replery them shall pay
for the return of the Cattle, Ll. Gulielm. cap. 6.
and give security

This Law I take to be intended where the Cattle are taken damage faisant;
because nothing shall release the distress in other cases, but obedience to
the summons.

ad comparendum shall be taken but after three several summons, Ll. Guilelm.
c. 42.
and so many defaults made; and in such case distress shall issue by especial
order from the County court.

I noted this partly to show the difference of the Normans from the Saxons in
the delay of execution of justice by so much mean process, and partly to show
the difference between the Norman times, and these days wherein men's Cattle
lie open to the distress of every oppressing or extorting Bailiffe or unknown
person, and no summons made at all, whereby many poor men's estates are either
undone, or they must submit to the unjust demands of their adversary.

No manner of goods of above four pence in value shall be Ll Gulielm. cap. 43.
And the vendor shall satisfy out of his own estate, if the sale be not
effectual, and in case the vendor have no warrant for such goods by him sold.

No living Cattle shall be sold, but only in Cities, Ll. Gulielm. cap. 60.
and before three witnesses; nor shall any thing forbidden be sold without
warranty.

No faires or markets shall be holden, but only in Cities, Ibid. c. 61.
Buroughs, walled Towns and Castles.

These Laws concerning sales and markets were ancient Saxon laws, and tend
all to the avoiding of cheating men of their Cattle by surreptitious sale of
them made by such as had no right.

Goods found shall be published by the finder to the neighborhood; Ll.
Gulielm. cap. 7.


The children of persons intestate shall equally divide the heritage. Ll.
Gulielm. cap. 36.


This is in terminis the Saxon law, and therefore concerning it I shall refer
to the same formerly recited; only I shall add hereto the law of Henry the
first, Ll. Hen. I
which may serve as an explanation of the former. Any free man may devise his
chattels by will: and if he die intestate, his wife, children, parents, or next
kin shall divide the same for his souls good. The first branch whereof was
ancient, and doubtless in continual use; but the iniquity of the Norman rude
times was such, that the Lords under surmise of arreares or relief would seize
all the personal estate after the tenants death, and so the right of last wills
was swallowed up; but this restores the power of last wills into its place, and
in case the party died intestate, preserves a kind of nature of descent,
although they be more personal. Nor does that last clause of the souls good
disannull the same, although the words may seem to carry away the benefit to
some other hand. For the whole matter is left to the discretion of such as are
next to the intestate.

CHAP. LII. Of Laws that concern common interest of Lands.
THe Laws that concern Lands, and peculiarly belonging to the Normans, are
such as concern principally the tenure of Lands; which if duly considered,
although savoured somewhat of the King, yet little of the Conqueror: for
generally it must be granted that tenures long before and after this time, were
as the services, ordered according to the will of the giver, in which as the
King had the greatest share, and he the most public person of all: so were
his donations ordered chiefly to advance the public service; and in this
regard the tenure by Knight service might more principally challenge the Kings
regard then the regard of all the great men besides. But this was not the
soar, yea rather it was the beauty and strength of the Kingdom; and for which
the King deserved an honorable name above most of his progenitors, who had not
so much land to dispose of as he had, and therefore could not advance that
service in any proportion equal unto him. The sore that caused so many sighs,
was the encumbrances raised upon this most Noble and free service, which
through the evil of times by this means became the most burdensome and the
only loathed and abhorred service of all the rest. I say through the evil of
times; for it cannot lodge in my thoughts but in the Norman times the
encumbrances were nothing so great as of latter ages, and that much has been
imputed to the Laws of the Conqueror, which they never deserved, as may
appear in these particulars, which the Laws of Henry the first have preserved
in memory.

Tenant of the King or other Lord dying, 1 Relief. M. Paris An. 1100, and 1213,
his heir shall pay no other relief then what by Law is due.

That which by Law is due is set down in the laws of William the Conqueror.

The Relief of an Earl Ll. Gulielm. cap. 12.
8. Horses sadled and bridled. 4. Helmets. 4. Cotes of Maile. 4. Shields. 4.
Spears. 4. Swords. 4. Chasers bridled and sadled. 1. Palfray bridled and
sadled.


The Relief of a Baron Ibid. c. 23.
4. Horses with Saddles and Bridles. 2. Helmets. 2. Cotes of Maile. 2. Sheilds.
2. Spears. 2. Swords. 2. Chasers bridled and sadled. 1. Palfray bridled and
sadled.


The Relief of a Vavasor to his Lord Ibid. c. 24.
His best Horse. His Helmet. His Cote of Maile. His Shield. His Spear. His
Sword. Or if he had no Arms, then he was to pay s. 100


The relief of the Country man is the best beast that is in his possession;
Ll. Gulielm. cap. 29.
and of him that farmeth his Lands a years rent.

These are the Reliefes due by law, and now settled in goods or arms, but
afterward turned into money; and its likely that the ill customs in the
former times did extort both money and arms, or such sums of money as they
pleased; and by the very words of the law it seems they had brought it to an
arbitrary power to take what they could get, and yet all against Law.

2. Marriage.
The Kings tenant shall advise with the King in marriage of his daughter,
sister, niece, or kinswoman; and his widow in like manner.

The sense hereof in short is, that these might marry at their own will,
without paying fine or composition to the Lord, and yet must have the liking of
the Lord so far as to declare whether the man intended were his enemy or not,
and fit to perform Knight service. This law was therefore grounded upon the
present distress of affairs, wherein the nation was unsettled, and common
right having established a mutual trust between Lord and Tenant found out this
means to preserve the same; for if the marriages of those that are related to
the Tenant in such manner as may inherit part or all his lands, or have
jointure therein, should be left altogether at the liberty of the Tenant or his
widow; it must needs follow that the mutual trust between Lord and Tenant must
fail, and the public receive damage. And therefore if this custom were of
Norman birth, it was begotten bpon a Saxon law, and might the rather be owned
by the English.

3. Dower.
The widow of the Kings Tenant having children, shall have her dower and
portion so long as she keeps unmarried.

The portion here is in the Latin word maritagium, which I take to be the
marriage portion given by the husband according to the Saxon custom, when as
the dower in land was not in use, whereof is spoken formerly in that Chapter of
dower. And the Normans were necessitated to introduce this custom of theirs
with themselves, partly because it was a privilege which was their own by
birth, and it could not be waved without an evident wrong done to the wives of
these men who had ventured their lives in that service; but principally because
it would not consist with the work in hand to disclaim that custom which
must needs be of infinite consequence in the effecting of what was principally
sought after, viz. the union of the two peoples Normans and Saxons into one: I
say it was principally sought after by the Norman conqueror, if not led
thereto by his own genius, yet necessitated thereto by force of reason of
state, as shall appear hereafter. And what could be imagined a more ready way
to stay the effusion of blood, and all other unhappy events of enmity, then by
taking away enmity it self? or a more speedy and certain course for union,
then to reduce the men and women of each people to mutual society, and to
seal up all by a lasting bond of marriage? or greater encouragement for the
comfortable proceedings therein, then the settling of the constant maintenance
of the wife, in case of survivorship by the law of dower of the Lands and
Tenements of the Husband? Lindenbrog. Council. Aenham. c. 19. Ll. Edm.
which was so full of contingencies, and uncertainties in the portion of goods
that was by the Saxon law appointed to the wife in such case. Nor was this all;
for by marriage thus made to the Normans they had a great hold, not so much
over the English, as in the English, and that not only during coverture, but
by reason of this title of Dower the women became tenants, and under the Lords
wing, so as they durst not willingly and illegally offend their Lord in their
widdowhood, nor by law nor reason match themselves and their dowry to any other
that was not first allowed by the Lord to be in friendship with him; and thus
became the tenants widows to be at the liking of the Lord for their marriage:
and the like hereto may be said concerning the husband in case of tenant by the
courtesy; Miror fo. 20.
and however by the Norman former practice it was much disturbed; yet by Henry
the first it was again reduced to its former right, rather then original
arising from his grant, as some hold, and proved advantageous for the ends
aforesaid. Now as touching their marriage portion of goods, because the Saxon
law had already endowed them thereof, they could not be induced to lay down
their known ancient right, till they found the new law of dower to settle, and
so for some time both laws were in force, until the more ancient Saxon law had
an honorable burial. Nevertheless for the present the law abridged that
right so far as to limit it to the widow during widdowhood, according to the
former Saxon law. Upon consideration of all which it may well be conceived that
the power of the Lords in consenting or dissenting to the marriages of their
tenants, widows, and wards, was not so much an usurpation upon the common
right of the English subjects, as a custom rationally, and with great wisdom,
as the course of affairs then stood, upholden and allowed amongst them,
principally for the speedy settling of a peaceable government, and consolidating
of two Nations into one, and wherein England was then so happy as to come to a
conclusion in seven years, which cost their ancestors nigh two hundred years
experience with the Britons, besides a world of bloodshed that might have been
spared, ere they could find out the right way to a desired peace by mutual
marriages had between them.

cap. 4. 4. Wardship.
Such widow shall have the custody of the Lands of such children, or otherwise
such other person as by right ought to have the same.

This is the first news of Wardships, that passed abroad cum privilegio of a
received Law, which together with the former declare the right custom of the
Normans, M. Paris.
and thereby the injustas consuetudines quibus Angliae regnum opprimebatur,
viz. Arbitrary relief taken of the Tenants estate, arbitrary marriages made of
their persons, and arbitrary grants of guardianship of their lands; for as yet
oppression was not so high flown as to cast the government of the persons of
their Wards out of the view of the Lords provisionary care, upon adventure of
the next inlaw, whether man or woman, wise or unwife, under pretense to train
him up in military service fit for the Lords own safety, and the Kingdoms
lifeguard: but it was the proper ground of the Lords own seizure and right of
wardship, he being looked upon by the eye of common reason as the only meet
man that both could and would effect that work, so as might be most
advantageous to the public, which seemed to be chiefly concerned herein; and
upon the same general ground the survey of fools accompanied the former,
albeit it was not in practice till Henry the first brought it in, as the Mirror
of justice says (fo. 258. Ll. Canut. 37.
) yet it came upon an ancient foundation laid in the time of the Danes. For my
own part I will not dispute the point whether this custom of Wardship was
purely Norman, or whether it was derived from the Saxons anciently, who
possibly might have some respect to Orphans, in such cases to train them up
for the public service in point of war, especially being possessors of a
known right of relief, as well as Alfred the Saxon King did undertake the
work for the training of some such particular persons in learning for the
service of the public, Asser Menev.
in time of peace and civil government; yet thus much appears that
guardianship of Lands was a known custom enough to make and maintain a right,
and that it by law was a right belonging to some persons before others, and
that this had been a custom before the former unjust customs crept into
government of the Conqueror, and principally of his son Rufus: and though it
be questionable whether it settled first upon the Normans or the English, yet
its manifest that if one people had it, the other people now coming into union
with that people, could not in reason except against that custom which the
other people had taken up upon so honorable grounds as reason of State, which
as the times then were, was evident and superlative; especially the customs
being under the regulating of Law, and not of any arbitrary power, and can be
no presidents of the relief, marriage and wardship that after ages usurped.

Tenants in Knights service shall hold their Lands, cap. 5.
etc. acquitted of all taxes, 5. Acquittall.
that they may be more able to provide Arms, and be more ready and fit for the
Kings service, and defense of the Kingdom.

This law whither it be a renewing of a former custom, or an introduction of a
new Law, its clear it was upon an old ground: That Tenants by Knight service
must be ready for the service of their Lord, and defense of the kingdom,
whereof afterward: But the law is, that these men shall hold their lands of
that tenure acquitted of all taxes, though legally imposed upon the body of the
Kingdom, which must be conceived to be for the public benefit, viz. either
for the preparation or maintenance of public war; for in such cases it has
been in all times held unreasonable that those whose persons are employed to
serve in the wars should hold lands doubly charged to the same service, viz.
to the defraying of their own private expenses in the war, and maintenance of
the public charge of the same war besides.

CHAP. LIII. Of diverse Laws made concerning the execution of justice.
ALthough in proceedings in cases of vindicative justice delinquents might seem
to be left rather to the fury then mercy of the law; yet so long as men are
under the law, and not without the law, it has been always held a part of
justice to extend what moderation might possibly stand with the honor of the
law, and that otherwise an over rigid and fierce prosecution of the guilty is
no less tyranny then the persecution of the not guilty; and although violence
was the proper vice of these times, yet this point of honor must be given to
the Normans, that their Sword had eyes and moved not altogether by rage, but by
reason.

Ll. Hen. 1. c. 5.


Ll. Hen. 1. M. Paris.


By these two laws of Henry the first the subjects were delivered from three
great oppressions: first, in making them offenders without complaint or
witness. Secondly, in imposing immoderate fines. Lastly, in urging
extraordinary bail.

Forfeiture of fellons Lands is reduced to a year and a Miror fo. 261:


The Normans had reduced the Saxon law in this case unto their own last, which
stretched their desire as far as the estate would bear; but this being so
prejudicial to the immediate Lords who were no offenders in this case; and so
contrary to the Saxon law, it was both done and undone in a short space by the
allowance of Henry the first.

Intent of criminal offenses manifested by act punished by

This by Alfreds law was punished by Talioes law, Miror fo. 254.
but now by a law of Henry the first reduced to mulcts.

Mainperners are not to be punished as principals, unless

This law of Henry the first repealed the former law of Canutus, which must be
acknowledged to be rigorous, Miror fo. 141.
although not altogether without reason.

No person shall be imprisoned for committing of mortal Ll. Hen. 1. c. 5.


By imprisonment is intended close imprisonment, or imprisonment without bail
or mainprise; for otherwise its apparent that as well by the Saxon as Norman
laws men were brought to trial by restraint.

Appeals of murder restrained within the fourth degree.

Before this law Appeals were brought by any of the blood or kin of the
party slain; Miror cap. 2. Sec. 7.
but now by Henry the first restrained. The ground seems to be, for that
affection that runs with the blood, grows so cold beyond the fourth degree
that the death of the party is of so small account as can it scarcely be
reputed a loss of such consequence to the party, as to expose the life or
price of the life of the manslayer unto the claim of such an one; and thus the
Saxon law that gave the satisfaction in such case to the whole kindred, became
limited to the fourth degree, as I conceive from the Ecclesiastical
constitution concerning marriage.

Two things more concerning juridicall proceedings may be noted, the one
concerning speedy course of justice, wherein they may seem to justify the
Saxon way, but could never attain to their pace, in regard they yielded so
much time to Summons, Essoines, etc. The other concerns election of Judges by
the parties; for this we find in the laws of Henry the first.

CHAP. LIVE. Of the Militia during the Normans time.
THe power of Militia is either the legislative or executory power; the
legislative power without contradiction rested in the grand Council of the
Kingdom, to whom it belonged to establish laws for the government of the
kingdom in time of peace. And this will appear in the preparation for war,
the levying of war, and mannaging thereof after its levied: for the
preparation, it consists in leavying men and munition, or of money; In all
which questionless will be a difference between raising of war by a King to
revenge a personal injury done to the Kings own person, and a war raised by
the whole Kingdom, or representative body thereof, which is commonly done in
defense of public interest, and seldom in any offensive way, unless in
recovery of a right of possession, either formerly lost, or as yet not fully
settled. Now although it be true that seldom do injuries reflect upon the Kings
person alone, but that the Kingdom will be concerned therein to endeavor a
remedy; yet because it may fall out otherwise, Kings having been occasioned to
leavy war of their own accord, but in such case could neither compel the
persons of his subjects or their estates to be contributory. And of this nature
I take the war leavied by Harold against the Conqueror to be, wherein the
greatest part of the Kingdom was never engaged, nor therefore did it feel the
dint of the Conquerours Sword at all; and in this case the Militia must be
allowed to such as bear the purse: nor can it be concluded to be the Militia
of the Kingdom, nor any part thereof, although it may connive thereat. But to
set this consideration aside, as not coincident at all with the Norman
engagements after they were crowned, and to take all the subsequent wars to
be merely defensive of the right of the Crown, as in sober construction they
will appear to be: as touching the levying of money, its evident that it lay
only in the power of the grand Council of the Kingdom; for otherwise the
laws were settled that no Tax should be made or taken, but such as were due in
the Confessors time, as formerly has been showed. Secondly, for the preparing
of men and munition, it was done either by tenure or by special law; as
touching tenure, it was provided by way of contract, that those that held by
Knights service should be ready with their Arms to assist the King for the
defense of the Realm: So as they were not bound by their tenure to aid him in
any other cases. Ll. Gulielm. cap. 57.
Others were also by especial law of the Land bound to be ready for their
service in that kind: For all the inhabitants of this Kingdom held their
estates under a general service, which by common right they are bound to
perform, viz. in time of danger to join in defense of their Country: This is
the common fealty or allegiance which all men owe; Ll. Gulielm. c. 59.
and which if neglected or refused, renders the party guilty of treason against
his Country, and his estate under the penalty of forfeiture, according to the
old Saxon law revived and declared by Henry the first. Ll. Hen. 1. c. 13.
Thus the law made preparation for the war, both of men and Arms. Ll. Gulielm.
61.
Castles and Forts were likewise either first made by the order of the grand
Council, or otherwise allowed by them for the defense of the Commons, and the
Kingdom; so was the law of William the first. The levying and mannaging of the
war must not be denied de jure to belong to the representative body, so far
as may consist with the directory part, for that it is a maine part of the
government of the Kingdom in times of war: And therefore Henry the first,
amongst his laws made in the ordinary course of law making, provideth for the
ordering of men in the army in the field, and established a law, that such as
forsook their colors or associats in the field, during the battle, should be
punished with death, and forfeiture of is whole estate. Nor yet can it be
denied but that de facto Kings of their own accord, and by secret Council did
direct therein; either in the vacancy of Parliament, which was the general
case of the first times of the Norman Conqueror, and the whole reign of
Willam Rufus; or by connivance of the grand Council, while they saw nothing
done but what was well done. Ll. Hen. 1. c. 13.
Nor can it be rationally said that Kings by such advice as they have (in the
recesse of the grand Council) levying war in defense of the public,
according to rules, do otherwise then their duty; or if the grand Council
look on, see nothing misgoverned, and say nothing, that they do other then is
meet; For it must be remembered, that Kings in their first original were rather
Officers for war, then peace; and so are holden by all Antiquity, and as
Generals in war were called Reges or Imperatores by the Grecians, Romans, and
Germans: and at such times as war was concluded, at the general meeting of
the people they chose their Dux or Rex, call him which you please; and he being
chosen, all bound themselves to be at his command, and to defend his person: so
as while a King keeps within his place, in time of danger its his duty first
to stir himself, and stir up the rest; to lead them and order them, as may
be most for the public defense, and to govern the Army by such Laws as are
or shall be established by order of the public meeting, and in case of sudden
exigences to use his own wits; and in all this is the common liberty no whit
infringed, in regard that all is for the public defense, to which the Knights
are bound by their tenures, and all others by the law. And this was this
Kingdoms case in the Normans time, that both Leaders and soldiers, whether by
election of the people, or prescription, yet all served for the defense of the
Kingdom. Nor were they compelable to any other service inconsistent therewith,
nor to stand to any judgment in such cases differing from, or contrary to that
of the Parliament it self.

CHAP. LV. That the entry of the Normans into this Island could not be by
conquest.
THat in point of fact the entry of the Normans into England was not by
Conquest, will suficiently appear from what has been already noted. I shall
make one step further, and show, that as affairs then stood with the
Conqueror, it was impossible for him to merit that name against the stream of
providence, that had preingaged him to three sorts of men, viz. the Normans,
the Clergy, and the Commons of England.

It must be taken for a ground that Duke Willam must give all fair
correspondency to the Normans, considering they are members of his own body,
and the arm of his strength, without which he could do nothing. And its not
less certain, that however the Sea divided the two Countries, yet long before
the arrival of the Army, M. West. An. 1072. Ll. Gulielm. c. 55.
the Normans and Saxons were so well acquainted by the latter access of the
Danes, that partly by marriage and other interests the Normans made so great a
party in England, as that party merited no less from the Duke in his
entrance, then those he brought with him; and therefore both they and their
allies in all reason must expect such reward of their faithfulness to him, as
the other had; nor could the Duke deny the same, unless he had disclaimed his
own interests, whereof he had none to spare. Secondly, their merit from the
Duke was accompanied with no less mutual relation to his Army, being of the
same blood with themselves, and of ancient acquaintance, and as impossible for
the Duke to keep them from consociation with the mixed people, as to abstract
the mixed people each from other; one or both of which must be done, and the
Conquerours must be kept from incorporating with the conquered, or else the law
of conquest cannot hold. Thirdly, if these two had failed, yet had the Duke by
his manner of rewarding his Army disabled himself from holding, however he
might seem to have by conquest. This was his gift of Manors, Lands, and
Franchises unto his soldiers, completed with their ancient rights, and
privileges in free service; otherwise it had been little better then a trap to
bring his own men into bondage, who but lately were free soldiers under no
better then a Duke of their own election; and their government in their own
Country, however big, yet had not yet brought forth a sovereignty into the
world; their Duke no complete King, nor themselves so mean as vassalls; and it
was equally difficult for him to get up higher, as for them to stoop lower: And
however, it was dangerous now for the Duke to try masteries, unless he meaned
to hazard all, and to change the substance for the shadow. Lastly, to lay them
all aside, and to take the Normans as in themselves considered, a people under
such laws and customs as were the same with the Saxons, and originally in
them, and from them derived into Normandy by Rollo, or some other; or take them
as a people willing to lay aside their own law, as some writers affirm, and
more willing to take up the Danish customs, which were also very nigh a kin
to theirs, and in part settled by the Danes, in that part of the Kingdom where
themselves most resided. It must be concluded, that a government by law was
intended, and such a law that was no way cross to the fundamental laws of
this Kingdom, but concurring therewith; In every of which regards the future
generations may justly claim their immunities as successors and heirs unto
the Normans, albeit no Saxon could have enjoyed or derived the same to
posterity.

A second sort of men that made the King incapable to hold by conquest was the
Clergy, a considerable part of the Kingdom in those days, when as in every
Nation they grew checkmate; and in this Kingdom had well nigh the one half of
the Knights fees, and thereby a principal part of the strength of the
Kingdom, besides the consciences of them all; and for a reserve they had the
Pope in the rear, whose power in every Kingdom was little inferior to that
of the Kings own, and therefore sufficient to stop an absolute conquest,
unless it were first conquered. But the King came in upon great disadvantages
in both these regards: For whereas his pretense upon his entery was to advance
justice principally toward the Clergy, who formerly were wronged by Harold or
voiced so to be, this bound him from injustice and oppression; and furthermore
the Pope had him in a double bond; one as Prince of the English Clergy; the
other as Judge of the title of the Crown by the Kings own election; and that by
sentence; for the King had merited of him, if not to hold the Crown it self by
fealty to the Roman See, yet by such services, as that the tripple Crown should
be no loser. The King therefore must resolve to have no more to do with the
Church then will stand with the Popes liking, unless he meaned to adventure
himself and all he had into the danger of the great curse, of which the King
would seem more sensible then perhaps he was. Nor were those times of the
Church so moderate, as to bring forth Churchmen that would catch the good will
of the Laity by condescension, or Popes of that height of perfection as to part
with one tittle of their great Titles, much less ought of that pitch of power
which they had griped, though it would save the world from ruin. In all which
regards the Norman Duke was too far inferior to attain by conquest any thing
in this Kingdom, wherein the Pope or Clergy claimed ought to have or do.

A third sort of people avoided the dint of conquest either by timely siding
with the Norman, or by constant resisting of him, or by neutrality. Of the
first sort were many, Hoveden. lib. 6.
both Lords and others, that by affinity and consanguinity were become
Englishmen to the Norman use; others were purchased thereunto by the Clergy,
that were zealous for the Popes honor, that was engaged in the work. Ingulsus
512.
Of those likewse that were resolute in the defense of the liberty of their
Country there were not a few that purchased their liberty, who otherwise might
under pretense of treachery have forfeited the same to the rapacious humor of
the Conqueror; and this was not done only by valor, for Normandy stood in a
tottering condition with their Duke; partly drawn away by the French, that
feared the Duke would be too strong for them; and partly declining their own
further aid, least their Duke should be too great for the Duchy. It was
therefore wisdom in the Conqueror to settle the English affairs in the
fairest way to gain them for himself, who had been so brave against him. But
the greatest number, especially of the commons, looked on while the game was
playing, as contented with the cast of the Dice, what ever it should be. These
were afterward by the King looked upon, not as enemies (as the president of
Edwin of Sharneburne witnesses sufficiently) but upon such as either were or
by fair carriage would be made his friends; Gloss. 227.
and therefore he concluded them under a law of assurance, that they that had
been so peaceable, should have, and enjoy their Lands as entirely and peaceably
as they had formerly done before his entry. To conclude therefore this point:
if these three parties of the English Normans, the English Clergy, the stout
English, and the peaceable English be set aside from the title of conquest, it
will be probable that not one tenth part of the Kingdom were ever under other
change then of the Governors own person.

CHAP. LVI. A brief survey of the sense of Writers concerning the point of
conquest.
THe clamours in story that the Conqueror altered and made laws at pleasure,
brought in new customs, molested the persons and estates of the people with
depopulations, extortions, and oppressions, and others of that nature have made
latter times to conclude his government to be (as of a Conqueror) merely
arbitrary, and that he did what he list: how different this conclusion is from
the intent of those Writers I know not; but if the Kings title and government
was as a Conqueror, then was his will the only law, and can administer no
cause of complaint of wrong and oppression; and therefore if these be taken in
nature of complaints, they declare plainly that there was a law in title, or
else there could have been no transgression or cause to complain. But if the
Reader shall apprehend these passages in Writers to be no other then sober
relations, then were it not amiss to consider from what sort of men these
complaints or relations do proceed, viz. from Writers that have been
cloystered men, little seen in affairs of State more then by common report and
rumor; prejudiced by the Kings displeasure against their Cloisters, and
therefore apprehensive of matters in the saddest sense, and many times far
beyond the truth, and might as well be supposed to misrelate, as to mistake.
For if we shall

But the change of laws makes the greater noise; wherein England, before
Normandy was in a condition of a state. Yet if this should be granted, and that
there were such change of laws as is pretended, it makes nothing to the point
of conquest, so long as the new laws are made by advice of common Council, and
for the common good; and so long as they are established to be rules for
government. I remember its affirmed by some of those ancient Writers, that the
Duke or King would have brought in the customs of Norwey, but the earnest
mediation of the English prevailed against it; and it evinceth two things to my
opinion: first, that there was question made what law should be established.
Secondly, that notwithstanding the interest that the Normans had in the
Kingdom, they could not prevail to bring in the whole body of their law, or
of the customs of Norwey, which were not only the prima materia of their law,
but also in kind had a settling at that very time in those places of this
Kingdom where the Danes had their principal seat; and therefore not
altogether strange to the Saxons themselves. The sum of which will be this,
that upon debate a law must be settled, and that not the law of the Conquerours
own will, nor the law that suits with his desire; but the ancient law of the
Kingdom: and therefore if at any time the unquietness of some of the English
brought the King to some thoughts of arbitrary rule, and to shake off the clog
of Saxon law; it was long ere it stirred, and sprang up too late to raise the
title of conquest; and withered too soon to settle it.

As touching the change of customs (for that also is imputed to the
Conqueror) it cannot be denied but some alteration might be in matters of
smaller consideration; yet are the Writers not without mistake in the
particular instances; For whereas they tell us that the Conqueror took away
the custom of Gavell kind, and brought the custom of descent to the eldest
son; and that Kent saved their liberties and continued this custom of Gavell
kind; I shall not contend about the liberties of Kent, but must till I see
better reason hold the opinion of the change of inheritance to be a mere
conceit: For (besides what has been already said concerning that custom of
Gavell kind) if we believe Glanvile, the difference was between Lands holden by
Knights service, Lib. 7. cap. 3.
and in socage: the first of which in his time by ancient custom always
descended to the eldest: and those Lands that were holden in Socage (if not
partible by custom, in which case they went equally to all the sons) went by
custom in some places to the eldest, in other places to the youngest; so as
the rule of inheritance in the Norman times was custom, as well as in former
times. And furthermore, if the custom of Gavell kind had been the general
custom of this Nation, the King by his change had contradicted his own
Prerogative, and granted as great a liberty to his subjects as could have been
invented: For had the custom of Gavell kind happened upon the Lands in Knight
service, it had brought all the sons under the law of Wardship, and had made
a ready way to inthrall all men of worth, and undo all husbandry; the first
whereof had been as advantageous to the Kings private interest, as both
destructive to the public.

Nor is it clear from any Author of credit, that the Normans Littlet.
are recorded amongst the grounds of English laws; none of which appear to me
to be of Norman original, although they received their names according to that
dialect.

The next thing objected is the change of Language, which thing some Writers
tell us the King endeavored; or which is Language wherein they were wonted
formerly to be written, Ingulfus.
lest through ignorance the people might rashly offend. And another Author
says, M. Paris. fragm. Gulielm.
that the King had a desire to learn the English tongue, that he might the
better know their Law, and judge according thereto. Its probable nevertheless,
that the laws were in the Norman tongue; and its no less likely that the
pleadings, in real actions especially, were also in the same Language; else
must the Normans be put to school to learn English, upon peril of loss of
their estates: but that either the written laws were wholly concluded into the
Norman Tongue, or that the public pleading of causes by word of mouth in all
actions where the issue was left to the Country, were in any other Language
then English, no advised Reader will conceive: seeing it had been a madness
for an English Jury to pass their verdict in any case wherein its likely many
of them understood scarce a syllable of the Norman language, much less ought
of the matter upon which their verdict should be grounded. Add hereunto, that
its not likely but the Conqueror inhibited the use of the English language in
all matters of public Record, in as much as the Charters made by him to
corporate Towns and Franchises were sometimes in the Saxon, more generally in
the Latin, but seldom or never in the Norman dialect; and that pleadings and
indictments were entered in like manner in the Latin Tongue (as formerly by an
old custom brought in by the Clergy was used) for the Clergy, who had gotten
the Key of knowledge and Law into their own custody, laid it up in that
Language whereof the Commons had little knowledge, that they might thereby be
enforced to depend upon these men for justice, as well as for piety. The
Normans therefore either found it too hard to alter the former custom in such
cases; or else thought it the wisest way to choose the Latin as a third
Language indifferent as well to the Normans as Saxons, and best understood of
any foreign Tongue besides: and yet endeavored to bring both peoples into one
Language, as they were intended to be one people; and to press the use of the
Norman Tongue in public affairs, so far as might consist with good
government and justice, leaving time and occasion to work the issue, which
doubtless was much, and had been more, had the Norman race continued in the
Throne. But falling out otherwise, the English blood prevailed in the head, and
the Language continued possession, mixed only with some Norman words, as the
people were also a mixed people. So as the Language was changed, though it was
altered.

Lastly, its affirmed that the Normans did impose a new custom called
Coverfeu; and its thought by some to be a mere Scotland received it without
such coercion; and can be reputed for no other then a seasonable advice, which
any Corporation in time of danger might order within their own Precinct,
without transgressing the liberty of the subjects. Of less consequence is that
change, which is alleged was brought in by the Normans in the sealing of Deeds
of conveyance, by seting a print upon Wax annexed to the Deed, which formerly
was wont to be by setting a print upon the blanke at the end of the Deed; and
yet its looked upon by some as a trophee of conquest or absolute government:
concerning which, I will not dispute whether the Normans first brought in this
course, but shall rest in this, that the King being about to complete the unity
of the Laws in the superstructure as well as in the fundamentals, if herein and
in some other particulars the English submitted to the Normans, they likewise
stooped to the English Law in other things: and therefore such concurrences
ought not to be imputed unto a conquering power, but unto moderation amongst a
company of wise men.

Thus having glanced at the changes of Property, Laws, Tenures, Language, and
some customs, we come to that which is the maine occasion of all these
complaints, I mean unlawful Taxes, afforstinges, and other such oppressions
upon the estates of the people: concerning which I purpose not to contend, for
much thereof is like to be true: the Norman Kings (especially the two Williams)
being under continual occasion of expense, many wars, more provocations,
which kept them ever in action, and that wrought their spirits into an
immoderate heat, little inferior unto rage; and so they might soon outreach
their bounds, and sit heavy on the people; and in such occasions no man
escaped, Norman nor English, Clergyman nor Layman; nor did the Kings themselves
come off such gainers, but that they might sometimes put up their gettings into
their own eyes, and see never a whit the worse. And yet to do them right, they
were not always of such sad influence, but had their lucida intervalla;
especially he that had the least cause, I mean the Conqueror, who certainly
was a man of a serious regard, and did not only remit sometimes his rigor in
exacting where he ought not, but also forbear to require that which he had some
color to demand: for whereas the Daneguelt was left unto him in the nature of
an annuity, he was contented to turn it into a sum in gross, and to demand
it only Cum ab exteris gentibus bella vel opiniones bellorum insurgebant;
Hoveden.
and it was then done consultis magnatibus. These things thus considered, might
have mollified somewhat the Pens of angry Writers; and where they fail, may
be caution to Readers to consider occasions and dispositions of Princes; and so
long as Laws hold in title, to construe the irregularities of Princes to be but
as steps out of the path to avoid a little dirt, that a man may get home the
more cleanly; and therefore rightly can derive no other title of absolute
sovereignty to their successors then to hold by infirmity. And thus the
Government under the Normans at the worst was but like that of childhood,
following sudden and present desires; not wise enough to plot for absolute
Monarchy, nor to keep off a polity, which still rooted underneath, though the
fruit, while it was now green was harsh and unpleasant.

I shall conclude this Norman discourse with this advertisment, that
notwithstanding the words Conqueror and Conquest have often fallen from my Pen,
and hereafter may do the like, yet can I see no reason why diverse succeeding
Kings coming to the Crown by argument of the Sword, and not by right of
descent, may not deserve the Laurel as well as the first Norman King; only
because fame has fancied him that Title, under a kind of prescription I do the
like.

CHAP. LVII. Of the Government during the Reigns of Steven, Henry the 2.
Richard the 1. and John. And first of their Titles to the Crown, and
disposition in government.
I Have cut out this portion of one hundred twenty and five years (containing
the reigns of these Kings) apart from their successors, in regard of their
titles; all of them being under one general climate, and breathing one air of
election, and compact between them and the people. Now was the issue male of
the stock of Normandy quite wasted; I mean in relation to succession by
inheritance: for although it was the lot of Henry the first to have many
children, yet it was not his happiness to have many lineal; nor to hold what
he had; nor of them all was there left above one that might pretend to the
Crown, and it a daughter, who was the great Grandmother to all the succeeding
Kings till this day. Only King Steven Steven.
like an unruly ghost coming in upon the Stage troubled the play during his
time. This daughter of Henry the first was married to the Emperor Henry the
fourth, and surviving him was in her fathers life time acknowledged to be his
heir; (the Sea having formerly swallowed up the remainder of his hope) unto
her the Lords swear fealty as to the next successor in the Throne after the
decease of her father, being led thereto by the instigation of her father,
whose conscience told him that the Title to the Crown by inheritance was
weakened by his own president, himself coming to the same by election of the
people, contrary to the title of his brother Robert. Nevertheless this was not
the first time that the English Crown refused to be worn by practice; for
Henry the first being dead, Steven the younger son to a younger sister of
Henry the first put up head; who being of the Royal stem, a man, and a brave
Soldier, by the ancient course of the Saxons, had title enough to be thought
upon in a doubtful succession. Besides, he was a rich man, and had enough to
raise up his thoughts to high undertakings; and a Brother, a Bishop and Legate
to the Pops here in England; one who was of a high spirit, and vast power;
advantages enough to have quickened a much duller spirit then his was, who was
the son of a daughter to William the Conqueror; and to make him yet more
bold, he had the upper ground of the heir, who was a woman, disadvantaged by a
whispering of wilfulness, and customary government like an Empress; which was
too high a sail for an English bottom, wherein so precious a treasure as the
subjects liberties was to be shipped. Thus provided, Steven stepped up to the
English Throne, and with protestations of good government entered and made up
the match both for Crown and Scepter, the people waving the title both of
Empress and heir; the pretensions of the E. of Bloys elder brother to Steven
gave way to the common law and liberties of the subject to fasten root and
gather recompense after the violence of the Norman blasts was out of breath;
thus making way over hedge and ditch of all Oaths, till the King was quietly
settled in the Throne.

Quietly, said I? that I must retract; for he never had quiet during his life,
though generally was victorious, and did as much as a King could do that had
the passions of a man and Soldier, to give the subjects content. The true
cause whereof was an error in the tying of the knot; wherein he neither became
theirs, nor they his: For the fealty that was sworn to him was but conditional
and eousque; and yet the Kings promises were absolute, and better observed then
the peoples were, possibly because his engagements were more. For besides his
protestations, the King pledged his brother the Legate to the people, and
morgaged himself to his brother; and to boot gave both to the Clergy and
Barons liberty to build and hold Castles for their private security: the issue
whereof may mind, that too much countersecurity from the King to the people is
like so many Covenants in marriage, that make room for jealousy, and are but
seeds of an unquiet life; and thus it befell this Kings reign. His first
troubles are brought in by Historians, as if they dropped from Heaven, yet
probably came immediately from without, viz. from beyond Sea where the Empress
was: for as the Kings engagements were in their first heat on the one side, so
was also the Empresses choler on the other side, and therefore might make the
first assault; and the Kings first success therein falling out prosperously
for him, conceited him that he was strong enough to encounter his own Covenant,
although in truth he invaded but the skirts thereof; I mean that collateral
security of Castles: for by experience he now feels that they are blocks in
his way, he must therefore have them into his own power. But the Clergy are
loath to forgo their pawn till they had their full bargain, (for now they were
working hard for investures of the Mitred Clergy under the patronage of a
Legate that had the King in bonds) acted their parts so well as they engaged
the Nobility for their liberty of Castles, in which atchivement the King was
taken prisoner. The Empress betakes her self to the Clergy, and by the
Legates means procures a kind of election to be Queen; but she sick of the
woman's humor, and thinking too much of the Empress, and too little of the
Queen; and forgetting that the English Crown would not fit an Empress, unless
she could fit her head first to it, choked her own title by prerogative, and
so let the Crown slip through her hands, which fell upon the head of Steven
again, who maintained it by his Sword, after by composition, and then died a
King; and thus like a vapor mounted up by the Clergy, tossed by tempests for a
time, and at length falling, gave way to the Crown to have its free course to
the Empresses son by Geoffery Plantagenet.

This was Henry the second, Henry 2d.
the most accomplished for wisdom, courage, and power, of all his
predecessors, and one that wanted nothing but purpose to have undone what the
foregoing Princes had done, in the settling of the liberties of the people; for
the subjects were tired with the unquiet former times, and the Clergy in
distraction through the Schism in the Popedom between Victor the fourth and
Alexander the third; and very unfitting all were to dispute the point of
prerogative with so mighty a Prince. And it was the wisdom of God to order his
affairs so, as that he was not very fit to dispute with the people in that
case: for his title to the Crown was not very excellent, being neither heir to
the last King that reigned, nor to the last of that title, I mean to Henry the
first; but son only to the Empress, who was now alive, and by descent was
to be preferred before all other. His title therefore is clearly by compact and
agreement made between the Lords, King Steven, and himself, all being then
ready to try the right by the Sword to that to which none of them had any right
at all at that time, but by the favor of the people. Nor did the King ever
after dispute the strength of this title, although before he died, his mothers
death conveyed over to him what right of descent soever was consistent with the
Law of the Crown; nor did occasion favor him thereto: for as its never seen
that any man is honored by God with many advantages, without proportionable
employment for the same; so it befell with this King; His great Territories in
France brought jealousy in the rear; and it strife and contention with
France, enough to turn his thoughts from waxing wanton against his own people:
and therefore his wisdom taught him to prefer peace at home to the chief of
his prerogative; to become somewhat popular, and yet to loose nothing of a King
thereby; his way was to keep the Church men down, that had during his
predecessors time grown, whether more obstinate against the King, or insolent
over the people, is hard to judge; and in this he had the people to friend; and
might have prevailed much more then he did, but that the people feared the
threats of Rome more then he; and himself (if not guilty of Beckets death)
more the conceit of fame then there was cause: these concurring with unnatural
troubles from most unthankful sons, made that spirit of his to fail that
formerly knew no peer; as its often seen that the most generous spirits are
sooner quelled with shame and grief, then with fear of any danger whatsoever.
Toward his Lay-subjects he was more regardant for the settling of Laws, and
executing of justice, so as some have thought him the first womb of our
English laws; others more truly the first Mecoenas since the conquest that
brought on the spring time of a settled Commonweal, and thereof left this
fair testimony by his putting forth that Primrose of English laws, under the
name of Glanvill, letting all men know that thenceforth England would no more
vale it self in an unknown law, but explain it self unto the World to be a
regular government, such was the Kings Idea; yet was he touched with so much of
the common infirmity of Kings as showed him to be a man; especially in his old
age, being laden with military affairs, wherein he had been long exercised,
he had contracted some shifting courses of a soldier in gathering money, and
soldiers somewhat out of the rode way of an English King, Hoveden. 348.
and led an ill example to future ages: nor had he other salve for this wound,
but that it was for the honor of Christian faith, and for the sake of
Jerusalem.

Next comes in Richard the first, Richard the first.
Henry the seconds son both in birth and courage; yet was his behavior to
his father such that his meritorious holy war could never wipe it out of the
Callender of story. His entrance was upon an election made in his fathers life
time, and the same confirmed by receiving of homage from the Peers. M. Paris.
The sad troubles that this election amongst other things occasioned to his
father in his old age show plainly that Richard trusted not to the title of
inheritance; nor the French King (that took his part) unto the English
custom, for the possession of the Crown; but all must be done in the life of
the father, that must secure the government to the son when the father is
dead: and thus is he entered upon the Throne, not as heir, but as successor to
his father, yea rather as survivor, taking possession of what was by special
compact conveyed to him by the means of his father in his lifetime, though sore
against his will, if writers speak true. As his entrance was, it promised a
better government then followed; for though it was for the most part hidden in
the womb, as himself did subsist in an other world, yet by a secret
providence he was given over to the election of ill deputies; and therefore he
was not welbeloved, however dear he was to this Nation. A third part of his
government was spent in a calm with Pope, Clergy, Commons, and all Nations that
were not Infidels, upon conscience it seems that he ought not to be troubled
who adventured his person so bravely in the holy war. But above all he was
the Clergies darling, not only for his adventure in the holy Land, but now
much more in his return by his imprisonment in Germany; and therefore they
stuck close to him in his absence, not only in maintenance of his right to
the Crown (whereto some made claim, and his own brother John did more) but
emptied themselves to the utmost for his delivery, which they effected to the
envy of the French, and such as longed for his downfall here in England. The
King comes like the Sun rising, scattering his brothers designs by his very
view; then returns his thoughts for France, where he spent the rest of a
restless life, and as his entry upon the Throne was unnatural (for he made
his way upon his fathers Hearse) so was his reign full of troubles, and his
end not unlike; for it was violent, and by the hand of his own subject; and so
ended his reign that scarce had any beginning.

Next comes in King John John.
to act his part according to his entry hand over head; whether called by a
people scared with the noise of succession by inheritance, or such as thought
it not convenient nor safe in a stirring time to have a child to be their King;
or lastly, led by an interest that John the youngest son of Henry the second
had by woeful experience obtained amongst the Lords, or some or all concurring;
its clear they crossed the way of inheritance, waved Arthurs title who was
heir to Richard the first, and by him also appointed to succeed, being then
but a child; and they chose John, a man of war, trained up in the government
of Ireland, which made way for his active spirit; and well seen in the
government of England, which might have made him wise: and under these conceits
were willing to forget his oppression in Ireland, his treachery against his
Lord and King in England, set the Crown upon his head, and in conclusion acted
the Tragedy of Ahimelech in English, wherein the Cedar was rooted up, and the
Bramble trodden down.

The general temper of his government shows that though the King must be
thought sober, yet the man was mad; for he hauked at all manner of game,
France, Scotland, England, Laity, Clergy, spared not the Pope himself, scorned
to stoop to occasion; all which he did by the strength of the name of a King,
till at length being well cuft and plumed, he was feign to yoke his lawless
will under the grand charter, depose his Crown at the Popes foot, and instead
of a King became little better then a chief Lord in England. Thus although
Richard the first forgot this man's disloyalty, yet God remembered it: for the
King having gotten the Pope upon the hip, and put him to his last shift to
stir up the French to set his curse on work was by an hidden providence
conquered in the midst of a Royal Army, without view of enemy, or other
weapon then a mere noise; his Nobility (either suspecting all would be gone to
Rome, or expecting that the King would not deny them their own, seeing he had
been so profuse in giving away that which was not his) demand that their
liberties might be confirmed; but he being loath to be mated by his Nobles,
though he was overmatched by the Pope, arms himself with the Popes curse, and
the Lords themselves with the French men's power: thus the tables are turned,
and the French playing an after-game to gain to themselves the Crown of
England; after they saw the death of a Warlike King discovered their design
before it was ripe; and in the conclusion were beaten out of the Kingdom by a
child.

Its not worth inquiry what the King allowed or disallowed; for it was his
course to repent of any thing done contrary to his present sense, and made it
his chief principle in policy to have no principle but desire; wherein he
triumphed too long by reason of the contentions between the Clergy and the
Laity, which coming nigh unto the push of the pike, and the King ready for the
spoil of both; the Barrons and Clergy suddenly close their files, and like a
stone-wall stood firm to each other till the King wearied with successlesse
labor was glad to give and take breath, M. Paris An. 1215.
confirmed the liberties of the people by his Charter, which is now called the
Magna charta for substance; and gave such collateral security for performance
on his part as did let the world know the thing was as just as himself had
been unjust: The worst point in the case was that the people got their own by a
kind of redisseisin; a desperate remedy for a desperate condition, wherein the
Commonweal then lay between life and death upon the rack of the will of a
King that would be controlled by nothing but his own appetite, and was in the
end devoured by it.

CHAP. LVIII. Of the state of the Nobility of England from the Conquest, and
during the reign of these several Kings.
UNder the title of the Nobility of England I shall comprehend all such as are
of the greatest eminency for birth or wisdom and learning, and advancement
into place of government and honor. These were in the Saxons times the flower
of the people, flourishing only from the honor that ascended from beneath
their deportment then was full of cheer and safety to the people: after that
royalty sprung up, the influence thereof upon them exhaled such a reciprocal
interest back again as made them less regardfull of their own root. Whereas
we see the more mature flowers are the more propence to turn head and look
downward to their own original. This distemper was yet much worse by the
coming in of the Normans, whose Nobility, besides their titles of honor in
their own Country, obtained by custom such command and power amongst the
meaner sort, being soldiers under them in time of the service in the field;
that when the wars had breathed out their last, neither of them could forget
or were very careful to lay aside. This was observed by Kings, and advantage
espied to clime to the top of Monarchy by the help of these great men, whom if
they could make their own, all would be theirs; and wherein they had prevailed
much more then they did, if they had been wise enough to have maintained them
in unity; but in that failing, Kings were necessitated to take parties, and
serve the Nobility to save the maine: and thus continued they a considerable
party in the government of this kingdom from the Normans for the space of two
hundred years well nigh, to the prejudice both of the growth of the
prerogative of Kings and liberties of the Commons; and benefit of none but the
Lords, who in those unquiet times were the chief Commanders in the field. This
error of Kings was soon espied, but could not be avoided; its natural to man
to be proud, and to such to fall into contention: another course therefore is
taken, viz. to raise up some so high as may overtop all, and keep them under;
nor is it altogether without reason, for Kings are no ubiquitaries, and some
must bear their power where they cannot be personally present, yet it is
dangerous to bestow too much upon one man; for there is no man fitting to be a
King but himself that is a King; and where kings are immoderate in bestowing
power, it many times works much woe to the people, and not seldom sorrow to
the Kings themselves. The place of the chief Justice was in show but one
Office, yet in these times was in nature of the Kings Lieutenant-generall
throughout the kingdom. A power and work too great for any one man in the
world, that can make no deputies to manage it; Hoveden. 443, 375. Nubr. lib.
4. cap. 14.
and yet in those times you shall meet with one man made up of an Archbishop, a
Legate, and chief Justice of England; or a Bishop, a Lord Chancellor, a
Legate, and chief Justice of England; and a strange kind of government must
that needs be wherein the servants Throne is above his masters, and a subject
shall have a plenitudinary power beyond that which his Lord and King was, as
the times then were, was capable of. By these and such like pluralities the
great men of England kept the Commons below and themselves above, and probably
rendered the temper of the government of this kingdom more Aristocraticall then
in after ages. And if their personal authority was of such value, how much
rather in their joint assembly or court of Council; concerning which I must
agree that as in their original in Germany they did consult and determine of
the meaner matters, that is to say, of matters concerning property, and
therefore were in their most ordinary work meetings of Judges, or Courts of
Judicature: and also matters of defensive war, because themselves were the
Commanders: and lastly, in matters of sudden concernment to the State, not
only to serve as eyes to foresee, but to provide also if they can, or
otherwise to call in the aid of the peoples advice; so also they continued this
course, and it may be now and then (as all Councels have done) strained their
endeavors beyond their reach (especally since the Normans entrance:) and
therefore I shall not deny but that they alone with the King, and without the
Commons, have made many Laws and Constitutions, some of which now are called
Statutes, (although many of them in truth are no other then rules for
Judicature, which ordinary Courts may frame; or Judgments in particular cases,
such as are the constitutions at Clarindon in Henry the seconds time) and many
other Laws which are reported to be made between the King and his Lords. Nor
can I look upon such laws otherwise then as upon judgments in Courts of
Justice in new points of controversy, grounded upon ancient grounds, which
properly are not new Laws, but the ancient rule applied to new particulars; and
being so published to the world, may bear the name of Laws, Ordinances,
Constitutions, or Judgments; the word Statute being of later times taken up
and used in a more restrictive sense, of which more in their due place. Now
that this Court was a settled Court of judicature, Hoveden. An. 1175.
and so used, may appear in that fines were leavied therein, and Writs of
right determined; as in that great case between the two Kings of Navarr and
Castile, Ibid.
referred to the judgment of Henry the second, and tried in this Court; its
said that the trial was by plea, and if need wereby battle. The Judges in
this Court were the Baronage of England; for the entry of judgment in that
great case is thus, Comites and Barons Regalis Curiae Angliae adjudicaverunt,
etc. so as though doubtless many were absent, some being enemies, others
discontented, others upon other occasions, yet all might claim their votes as
Barons. The President over all the rest was the chief Justice, or if the King
were present then himself; and by him was the sentence or judgment declared,
according to the entry in the case aforesaid, Habito Concilio cum Episcopis,
Comitibus and Baronibus adjudicavimus etc. The honor of this Court was great
so long as the Lords had liberty or care to attend thereon: but when Kings
began to have private interests they would have these to be more private
Councels, which weakened the esteem of conclusions that there passed, and
reduced the honor thereof scarce to the degree of a Conventicle; and by this
means the necessity of calling together the whole body representative was made
more frequent, the power of the Nobility of England decayed, and this Court
forfeited all its juridicall power to the three Courts at Westminster, viz. the
Kings bench, Common pleas, and Exchequer; saving still the supreme judicature
unto the grand Convention of Estates in Parliament, where all the Lords had
liberty of meeting, and free voting without impeachment.

CHAP. LIX. Of the state of the Clergy, and their power in this Kingdom from
the Normans time.
IF the prerogative of Kings prevailed not to its utmost pitch during the
Normans time, it did much less in these times succeeding, wherein the Clergy
took up the Bucklers and beat both King and Commons to a retreat; themselves
in the interim remaining sole triumphers in the field. In their first adventure
they paced the stage, no man appearing to oppose: Steven then was King by their
leave, and their Bondservant; and they might have any thing sobeit they would
suffer him to enjoy his Crown. His brother the Bishop was the Popes servant,
the Churchmens patron, and the Kings surety; in whom the Clergies favor to the
King, and his good behavior toward them and all men concentred: Besides all
this, the King was but so upon condition, and there being no better title then
election, conscience in those times was well enough satisfied in the breach of
covenant on their part; where on the Kings part it was first broken. All this
the King saw full well; and therefore what can he deny to such benefactors?
Vacances of Churches he readily parts with; and his right of investure of the
Mitred Clergy he dispensed: so as he opened the way to his successors of an
utter dereliction of that privilege. He sees his brother the Legate deflower
the Crown of England by maintaining appeals from the Courts in England unto
the Court of Rome, and he says nothing; he is contented with the stumpe of the
Crown, and (with Saul) if he be but honored above or before all others of the
people, its his enough: But the Clergy, like the barren womb has not yet
enough. The King has allowed them Castles, and too late he sees that instead
of being defencas against the Imperial power of the Empress, they are now
made bulwarks against the lawful power of a King; he had therefore
endeavored to get them down, and gotten some of them into his power. The King
himself is now summoned to answer this before a Legatine council, wherein his
brother is President: that was a bold adventure in them, but it was extreme
rashness in him to appear and plead the cause of the Crown of England before
a Conventicle of his own subjects: And thus to secure Rome of supremacy in
appeals, he suffers a recovery thereof against his own person in a court of
Record; and so loses himself to save the Crown. Thus are Synods mounted up on
Eagles wings; they have the King under them, they will next have the Crown.
Within a while Steven is taken prisoner: the Empress perceiving the power of
the Clergy, betakes her case to them now assembled in Synod; they now proud of
the occasion (and conceiting that both Law and Gospel were now under their
decree) publish that the election of the King belongs unto them, and by them
the Empress is elected Queen in open Synod, Stevens brother leading the game;
and had she been as willing to have admitted of the Laws as Steven was, she had
so continued, and had left a strange president in the English government for
posterity. But the Citizens of London, who had made the way to the Throne for
Steven, reduced the Synod to sober consideration, and helped the kings return
unto his Throne again, wherein he continued a friend to the Clergy during the
rest of his time.

Henry the second succeeded him; as brave a man as he, but beyond him in title
and power, and one that came to the Crown without preingagement by promise or
Covenant, saving that which was proper for a King. A man he was that knew full
well the interests in the government, the growing power of the Clergy, and the
advantages lost from the Crown by his predecessor: and to regaine these he
smoothes his way toward these braving men, speaks fair, proffers fair; M.
Paris: An. 1155.
he would act to increase the bounds of the Church: he would have the Popes
leave to do him a kindness, and sobeit he might gain an interest in Ireland,
he would take it from the Pope; who pretended, as heir of Jesus Christ, to
have the Islands and utmost parts of the earth for his possession; and, as if
he meaned to be as good to the Church as Steven was, and much better, he
desires the Popes kindness for the confirmation of the liberties and customs of
his Crown and kingdom; and no sooner desired then obtained. This was the 2d
example of a King of England, but the first of an English king that sought to
Rome for right in the Crown; and thereby taught the Pope to demand it as a
privilege belonging to the Tripple crown. Nor was Henry the second less
benign to the Churchmen, till he found by his dear bought experience that he
had nourished Scorpions; and would have suppressed them, but was rather
suppressed himself; as in that shameful success of the death of Becket may
appear, wherein he yielded the day up to the Clergy, who formerly scorned to
stoop to the greatest Potentate on Earth. The state of Kings is to be pitied,
who must maintain a politic affection above, and sometimes against nature it
self, Constit. at Clarindon.
if they will escape the note of tyranny in their undertakings, and of a feeble
spirit in their sufferings: For the King having made Becket Chancellor of
England, and then Archbishop of Canterbury, he became so great that his feathers
brushed against the Kings Crown, who begins to rouse up himself to maintain
his honor and prerogative Royal. The Bishops side with Becket: the King
intending the person, and not the Calling, singles out the Archbishop, and
hunts him to soil at Rome; yet before he went the King puts the points of his
quarrel in writing, and made both Archbishop and Bishops sign them as the
rights of his Crown, and as the Consuetudines Avitae: but Becket repenting went
to Rome and obtained the Popes pardon and blessing, the rest of the Bishops
yielding the cause.

The particulars in debate were set down in the nature of Laws or
Constitutions, commonly called the Constitutions at Clarindon, which show the
prevailing humor that then overspread the body of the Clergy in those days,
and therefore I shall sum them up as follows:

cap. 1.
Rights of Advousons shall be determined in the Kings Court.

This had been quarrelled from the first Normans time, but could never be
recovered by the Clergy. Before the Normans time the County courts had them,
and there they were determined before the Bishop and Sheriff; but the
Ecclesiastical causes being reduced to Ecclesiastical Courts, and the
Sheriff and the Laity sequestered from intermedling: the Normans according to
the custom in their own Country, reduced also the trial of rights of
Advousons unto the Supreme courts, partly because the Kings title was much
concerned therein, and the Norman Lords no less; but principally in regard
that Rights require the consideration of such as are the most learned in the
Laws.

cap. 2.
Rights of Tithes of a Lay fee, or where the tenure is in question belong to
the Kings court.

Pleas of debts by troth-plight belong to the Kings Court. cap. 3.


These were Saxon Laws, and do intimate that it was the endeavor of the Clergy
to get the sole cognizance of Tithes, because they were originally their dues;
and of the debts by troth-plight, because that oaths seemed to relate much to
Religion, whereof they held themselves the only professors.

The Kings Justice shall reform errourrs of Ecclesiastical Courts and Crimes
of Ecclesiastical person. cap. 4.


Appeals shall be from Archdeacons Courts to the Bishops Courts and thence to
the Archbishops courts, cap. 5.
and thence to the Kings court, and there the sentence to be final.

No man that ever was acquainted with antiquity will question that these were
received Laws in the Saxons time; Constit. at Clarindon.
nor did the Clergy ever quarrel them till the Normans taught them by courtesy
done to Rome to expect more from Kings then for the present they would grant,
whereof see Cap. 47. But King Steven that was indebted to the Clergy for his
Crown, and could not otherwise content them, parted with this Jewel of
supreme power in causes Ecclesiastical to the Roman cognizance, as has been
already noted; but Henry the second would none of this cheat at so easy a
rate. This struck so smart a blow, as though the Popedom had but newly
recovered out of a paralitique Schism, yet seeing it so mainly concerned the
maintenance of the tripple Crown) Alexander the Pope having lately been blooded
against a brave Emperor, made the less difficulty to stickle with a valiant
King; who in conclusion was fain to yield up the bucklers, and let the Pope
hold what he had gotten, notwithstanding against this law, and all former Law
and custom. And thus the Popes supremacy in spiritual causes is secured both
by a recovery and judgment by confession thereupon. Constit. at Clarindon.


The King shall have vacances of Churches, cap. 6.
and power to elect by his secret Council; The party elected shall do homage
salvo ordine, and then shall be consecrated.

This certainly was none of the best, yet it was a custom not altogether
against reason, although not suitable to opinion of many; yet we meet two
alterations of the ancient custom. First, that the election shall be by the
King and secret Council; whereas formerly the election of Bishops and
Archbishops was of such public concernment, as the Parliament took
cognizance thereof, and (that which was worse) a Council was hereby allowed,
called a secret Council; which in effect is a Council to serve the Kings
private aims; and unto this Council power given in the ordering of the
public affairs without advice of the public Council of Lords, which was
the only Council of state in former times; and thus the public affairs are
made to correspond with the Kings private interest, which has been the cause
of much irregularity in the government of this Island ever since. The second
alteration rests in the salvo, which is a clause never formerly allowed,
unless by practice in Stevens time, when as there was little regard of the one
or the other: Nor does it concur with the file of story that it should be
inserted within these constitutions, Constit. at Clarindon.
seeing that writers agree it was the chief cause of quarrel between him and
Becket, who refused submission without the clause, and at which the King stooke
with the Archbishop for the space of seven years, which was six years after
the Constitutions were consented unto, and concluded upon.

cap. 7.
No Clergy man or other may depart the Realm without the Kings license.

Its a law of Nations, and must be agreed on all hands, that no reason of state
can allow dispensations therein, especially in a doubtful government, where
the Supremacy is in dispute: and this the wilful Archbishop never questioned
till he questioned all authority, but in order to his own; for but the year
before, when he went to Turonn to the general Council upon summons, M. Paris.
he first obtained license from the King before he went.

No sentence of excommunication or interdiction to pass against the Kings
tenant or any minister of state, cap. 8.
without license first had of the King, or his chief Justice in the Kings
absence.

Till the Conquest no Excommunication passed without warrant of Law made by the
joint assembly of the Laity and Clergy; but the Conqueror having let loose the
Canons, Constit. at Clarindon.
and the Clergy having gotten the upper hand in Councels, made Canons as they
pleased, and so the Laity are exposed to the voluntary power of the Canon: vid.
cap.
only as well the Normans, as until these times Kings have saved their own
associates from that sudden blow, and upon reason of religious observance least
the King should converse with excommunicate persons ere he be aware.

The Laity are not to be proceeded against in Ecclesiastical Courts, cap. 9.
but upon proof by witnesses in the presence of the Bishop: and where no
witnesses are, the Sheriff shall try the matter by Jury in the presence of the
Bishop.

A negative law; that implies another course was used upon light fame or
suspicion ex officio, although the oath at that time was not borne into the
world, and that all this was contrary to the liberty of the Subject, and law of
the Land: and it intimates a ground of prohibition in all such cases upon the
common law; which also was the ancient course in the Saxons times, as has been
formerly noted.

Excommunicated persons shall be compelled only to give pledge and not Oath,
cap. 10.
or bail to stand to the judgment of the Church.

Upon the taking and imprisoning of the party excommunicate; Constit. at
Clarindon.
the course anciently was it seems to give pledge to stand to order: of this
the Bishops were weary soon as it seems; and therefore waved it, and betook
themselves to other inventions of their own, viz. to bind them by oath or
bail; both which were contrary to law: for no oath was to be administered but
by law of the kingdom; nor did it belong to the Ecclesiastical laws to order
oaths or bail, and therefore this law became a ground of prohibition in such
cases, and of the Writ de cautione admittenda.

cap. 11.
Persons cited, and making default, may be interdicted, and the Kings Officer
shall compel him to obey.

If the Kings Officer make default, he shall be amerced, and then the party
interdicted may be excommunicated.

So as the process in the Spiritual Courts was to be regulated according to
Law: nor did it lie in the power of such Courts to order their own way, or to
scatter the censure of excommunication according to their own liking. This
together with all those that foregoe, the Archbishop upon his repentance
absolutely withstood, all though he had twice consented and once subscribed to
them, Constit. at Clarindon.
having also received some kind of allowance thereof even from Rome it self.

cap. 12.
Clergy men holding per Baroniam shall do such services as to their tenure
belong, and shall assist in the Kings Court till judgment of life or member,

Two things are hereby manifest: First, that notwithstanding the Conquerours
law formerly mentioned, Bishops still sat as Judges in the Kings courts, as
they had done in the Saxon times, but it was upon causes that merely concerned
the Laity; so as the Law of the Conqueror extended only to separate the Laity
out of the Spiritual Courts, and not the Clergy out of the Lay courts.
Secondly, that the Clergy especially those of the greater sort questioned their
services due by tenure, as if they intended neither Lord nor King, but the Pope
only. Doubtless the use of tenures in those times was of infinite consequence
to the peace of the kingdom, and government of these Kings, when as by these
principally not only all degrees were untied and made dependant from the Lord
paramont to the Tenant peravale; but especially the Clergy with the Laity upon
the Crown, without which a strange metamorphosis in government must needs have
ensued, beyond the shape of any reasonable conceit, the one half almost of the
people in England being absolutely put under the dominion of a foreign power.

Sanctuary shall not protect forfeited goods, cap. 13, 14.
nor Clerks convicted or confessed.

This was Law, but violence did both now and afterward much obliterate it.

Churches holden of the King shall not be aliened with out License. Constit. at
Clarindon. cap. 15.


It was an ancient Law of the Saxons, that no Tenements holden by service could
be aliened without license or consent of the Lord, because of the Allegiance
between Lord and Tenant: Now there was no question but that Churches might lie
in Tenure as well as other Tenements; but the strife was by the Churchmen, to
hold their Tenements free from all humane service, which the King withstood.

Sons of the Laity shall not be admitted into Monastery without the Lords
consent. cap. 16.


Upon the same ground with the former: for the Lord had not only right in his
tenant, which could not be aliened without his consent, but also a right in his
tenants children, in regard they in time might by descent become his tenants,
and so lie under the same ground of law: for although this be no alienation by
legal purchase, yet it is in nature of the same relation; for he that is in a
Monastery is dead to all worldly affairs.

These then are the rights that the King claimed, and the Clergy disclaimed at
the first; although upon more sober consideration they generally consented unto
the five last: but their Captain Archbishop Becket withstood the rest, which
cost him his life in the conclusion, with this honorable testimony, that his
death Samson like effected more then his life; for the maine thing of all the
rest the Pope gained to be friends, for the loss of so great a stickler in the
Church affairs, as Becket was.

In this Tragedy the Pope observing how the English Bishops had forsaken their
Archbishop, espied a muse through which all the game of the Popedom might soon
escape, and the Pope be left to sit upon thorns in regard of his authority
here in England. For let the Metropolitan of all England be a sworn servant
to the Metropolitan of the Christian world, and the rest of the English
Bishops not concur, it will make the tripple Crown at the best but double.
Antiq. Brit. 302. F xe. An. 1179.
Alexander the Pope therefore meaned not to trust their fair natures any
longer; but puts an oath upon every English Bishop, to take before their
consecration, whereby he became bound 1. To absolute allegiance to the Pope and
Romish Church. 2. Not to further by deed or consent any prejudice to them. 3.
To conceal their counsels. 4. To aid the Roman papacy against all persons. 5.
To assist the Roman Legate. 6. To come to Synods upon Summons. 7. To visit Rome
once every three years. 8. Not to sell any part of their Bishopric without
consent of the Pope.


And thus the English Bishops that formerly did but regard Rome, now give their
estates, bodies, and souls unto her service; that which remains the King of
England may keep: And well it was that it was not worse, M. Paris An. 1167.
considering that the King had vowed perpetual enmity against the Pope; but he
wisely perceiving that the Kings spirit would up again, having thus gotten the
maine battle, durst not adventure upon the Kings rear, least he might turn
head; and so he let the King come off with the loss of appeals, Baronus Anal.
1164. Sec. 11.
and an order to annull the customs that by him were brought in, against the
Church, which in truth were none.

This was too much for so brave a King as Henry the second, to loose to the
scarcrow power of Rome: yet it befell him as many great spirits that favor
prevails more with them then fear or power: for being toward his last times
worn with grief at his unnatural sons; a shadow of the kindness of the
Popes Legate unto him won that which the Clergy could never formerly wrest
from him in these particulars granted by him: M. Paris An. 1176.
That

No Clerk shall answer in the Lay courts, but only for

This savoured more of courtesy then justice, and therefore we find not that
the same did thrive, nor did continue long in force as a Law, although the
claim thereof lasted.

Vacances shall not be holden in the Kings hand above

This seems to pass somewhat from the Crown, but lost it nothing; for if the
Clergy accepted of this grant, they thereby allow the Crown a right to make it,
and a liberty to determine its own right, or continuing the same by being sole
judge of the necessity.

Killers of Clerks convicted shall be punished in the

In the licentious times of King Steven, wherein the Clergy played Rex, they
grew so unruly that in a short time they had committed above a hundred murders.
To prevent this evil the King loath to enter the List with the Clergy about too
many matters, let loose the law of feude for the friends of the party slain to
take revenge; and this cost the blood of many Clerks: the Laity happly, being
more industrious therein then otherwise they would have been, because the
Ecclesiastical Judge for the most part favored them. As an expedient to all
which this Law was made, and so the Clergy was still left to their Clergy, and
justice done upon such as sought their blood.

Clergy men shall not be holden to trial by battle.

It was an ancient Law of the Saxons, and either by neglect worn out of use,
or by the valor of the Clergy laid aside, as resolving rather to adventure
their own blood, then to end their quarrel before the Lay Judge by plea; but
grown weary of that course, and likely also put hard to the pinch upon
complaints made by them against Clerkslayers, they are feign to have recourse
to their ancient privilege.

Hitherto therefore its manifest the Clergy were in their growing condition,
notwithstanding the policy and power of Henry the second, who was the paragon
of that age.

After him reigned Richard the first, that must expiate his disobedience to his
father by obedience to his ghostly father the Pope in undertaking the holy
war; and being gone, left the government in his absence so deeply entrusted
to the Clergy, as they could loose nothing of what they had gained, unless
they would; and might have gained much more then they did or should; had not
the Bishop that was the overseer of the whole Kingdom being drunken with
vanity, and spued out his own shame. However the success was, it was not
contrary to the principles of those times: for Richard had experience in the
Emperor Frederick and his fathers example, that the Pope and Clergy were too
hard for all the Potentates in Europe, and therefore might most safely trust
them with all he had at home, whiles he was in their service abroad. Nor were
they short of what was entrusted to them, but stook close for the maintenance
of his right to the Crown, and emptied themselves even to the very consecrated
Vessels, and procured the Laity of all sorts to do the like, to save the
Kingdom from the rape of strangers and usurpers, who esteemed the King dead in
Law, and as one buried alive.

Thus passed they to King John the government, supposing themselves well enough
assured of what they had gotten by their several achievements had under the
reigns of three several Kings successively: and King John might well enough
have understood the times if he had seriously considered them; but being
heigthned all his life time with lawless government, wherein he was trained up
in Ireland; he knew not how to stoop till he stooped so low as the Legates
knee, and his Crown at the Popes foot; leaving an example to posterity to
beware of striving with the Clergy.

If then these sparks of ambition were so virulent being alone, certainly in
their joint consultations much more. They had long striven now since the
conquest to have excluded the Laity from their Synods, and about these days
effected it; and yet about Henry the seconds time it may be supposed the thing
either was not yet done, or so lately that the Law was not clear in that
point; for Petrus Blecensis, who was Archdeacon of Bath about those times, in
his Epistle to the Archbishop of York concerning the restraint of the growing
sect of the Publicans, he advises in these words, Accipite clerum, congregate
populum, and ex eorum communi deliberatione, qui spiritum Domini habent,
terribilis constitutio promulgetur, etc. and if the Historian does not mistake;
the proceedings against that sect being only for errors in Religion, was in a
Council of Bishops and Lords. Nevertheless, whether present or absent the
Laity sat there as ciphers, making the number great, but not valuable by
themselves. For even in the Norman times they were brought so low as the
constitution made by the Clergy wrought more upon them then civility it self
can work upon professors of Religion in these days. M. West. An. 1127.
For it seems excess of long hair was grown to that measure that the Synod
cried out against it, and decreed that men should cut their hair so as their
eyes and laps of their ears might be seen, and the King himself, I mean Henry
the first submitted to this cut, and made all his Knights to do the like, and
exposed themselves to the then odious by-names of clowns or Priests (like to
the round heads of these days) who formerly marched under the titles of
criniti or Ruffians. This did but touch the hair, but they went to the quick
when they decreed that Lords should not sell their villains, and that outlaries
should pass in certain particular cases, as in the constitutions of Archbishop
Anselme may appear. Afterward in these Kings times they flew at the throat of
the government, got all places of honor, or profit, or power, whether for
peace or war under their gripe; Antiq. Brit. 150. ibid 155.
deposed and advanced as they pleased, even to the Royal Thron it self; and
that not only out of a sudden passion of State, but advisedly concluded it for
a maxim, that the election of the King belonged to them as in the case of the
election of Maude the Empress they did hold forth to all the world, Ibid. 127.
and in which the King also then flattered them, as holding their election so
necessary that he kept the whole Synod in duresse to have their votes for the
election of his son to be his successor.

CHAP. LX. Of the English Commonalty since the Normans time.
THe dignity of the English Crown thus deflowred by the great men was no loss
to the common people: for as in all decays of Monarchy the great men get
nothing if they please not the people, so the King can hold nothing if they be
not contented. And yet contented or not contented, they could not gain much;
for as affairs then stood in the Christian world the Politicians discourse of
three kinds of government proved idle; neither could Monarchy, Aristocracy, nor
Democracy, attain any semblable condition in any place so long as the Church
held its design apart, and prevailed to have the greatest share in all, not
now by the favor either of great or small, but by a pretended divine right,
through which they now had gotten to their full pitch of Lordship in the
consciences of men. It must be acknowledged that this was a distemper in
government; yet such it was as kept humors low and restrained the inordinate
excesses that in all kinds of government are subject to break forth; so as
neither King, nor Lords, nor people could swell into larger proportion then
would suit with the ends of the Churchmen. But to mind the matter in hand:
somewhat the Commons gained in these stormy times: The taxes that they were
charged with were rather persuaded then imposed upon them; and generally they
were sparing in that work; and its noted for the honor of King Steven, that
though he was seldom without war, yet he not only never charged the people
with any tax, but released that of Daneguelt and acquitted the subject for ever
of that tax, which former Kings challenged as their right; all which show him
to be a brave King if he was not a very rich man. Henry the second was more
heavy because he had more to do: yet find we but one assessment which was
escuage (unless for the holy war) which was more the Clergymens then his.
Richard was yet a greater burden: his reign was troublesome to him, and he
deserved it; for from the beginning thereof to the ending could never the guilt
of his disobedience to his father be blotted out; but it was more troublesome
to the people because it cost so much treasure, was managed by such ill
governors (except the Archbishop of Canterbury) and was unsuccesfull in most
of his undertakings: yet never invaded the liberties of the Commons by any face
of prerogative. But what wanted in him was made complete and running over in
his successor John, who (to speak in the most moderate sense of his
government) being given over to himself when he was not himself, robbed the
Lords of their authority, bereaved the Church of its rights, trod under foot
the liberties of the people, wasted his own Prerogative; and having brought all
things into despair, comes a desperate cure; the head is cut off to save the
body, and a president left for them that list to take it up in future ages. And
thus that which Steven gave, Henry the second lost, Richard the first would not
regaine, and John could not; and so all were gainers but the Crown.

CHAP. LXI. Of Judicature, the Courts, and their Judges.
IT is no silent argument that the Commons gain, where Laws grow into course;
and it was the lot of these troublesome times to lay a foundation of a constant
government, such as all men might learn, which formerly was laid up only in
the breasts of wise experienced men. The two most considerable points in
government is the law, and the execution; the latter being the life of the
former, and that of the Commonweal. I say not that the law was augmented in
the body of it, or that the execution had a freer course then in the best of
the former times; but both were more and more cleared to the world in many
particulars, as well touching matters concerning practice of the Law, as
touching rules of righteousness: for the first whereof we are beholding to
Glanvile in Henry the seconds time; and for the latter to King John, or rather
the Barons in his time in the publishing of the grand Charter, or an
enumeration of the liberties or customs of the people derived from the Saxons;
revived, continued, and confirmed by the Normans and their successors; which
for the present I shall leave in lance dubio to stand or fall, till occasion
shall be of clearing the point, in regard that King John soon repented of his
oath (the bond of his consent) and to heal the wound, got the Popes pardon and
blessing thereupon: so easy a thing it was for a son of the Roman Church to
pass for a good catholic in an unrighteous way.

The execution of the Law was done in several Courts according to the several
kinds of affairs, whereof some concerned matters of crime and penalty; and
this touched the Kings honor, and safety of the persons of himself and his
subjects; and therefore are said to be contra coronam and dignitatem, etc. The
second sort concern the profits of the Crown, or treasure of the Kingdom. The
third concern the safety of the estates of the people. These three works were
appointed unto three several Courts, who had their several Judges especially
appointed to that work. Originally they were in one, viz. in the supreme Court
of Judicature, the court of Lords, whereof formerly was spoken; but after
through increase of affairs by them deputed or committed to the care of
several men that were men of skill in such affairs, and yet retained the
Supremacy in all such causes still. And because that which concerned the
public treasure was of more public regard then the other, the deputation
thereof was committed probably to some of their own members, Gloss.
who in those days were Barons of the Realm, and afterward retained the
title, but not the degree; and therefore were called for distinction sake
Barons of the Exchequer. The particular times of these deputations appear not
clearly out of any monument of antiquity; nevertheless its clear to me that
it was before Henry the seconds time, as well because Henry the first had his
Judex fiscalis, Ll. Hen. 1. c 24.
as Glanvile so frequently touches upon the Kings court of pleas, which cannot
be intended at the court of Lords, for that in those days was never summoned
but in time of Parliament, or some other special occasion: but more
principally because the Historian speaking of the Judges itinerant, recites
some to be of the common pleas; Hoveden.
which shows that there was in those days a distinction of jurisdiction in
Judicatures. And it may very well be conceived that this distinction of
Judicature was by advise of the Parliament after that the grand council of
Lords was laid aside by Kings, and a Privy council taken up, unto whom could
not regularly belong any juridicall power, because that remained originally in
the grand assembly of the Lords.

Over these Courts, or two of them one man had the prime title of chief
Justice, who then was called Lord chief Justice of England, and whose Office
was much of the nature of the Kings Lieutenant in all causes and places, as
well in war as peace; and sometimes was appointed to one part of the
Kingdom, and by reason thereof had the name only of that part, and some other
of the other parts. The greatness of this office was such as the man for
necessity of state was continually resident at the Court, and by this means the
Kings court was much attended by all sorts of persons, which proved in after
times as grievous to the King as it was burdensome to the people. Other Judges
there were which were chosen for their learning and experience, most of them
being of the Clergy, as were also the under Officers of those courts; for those
times were Romes hour and the power of darkness.

Other Courts also were in the country, and were Vicontiel or Course of
Sheriffs and Lords of Hundreds and corporations, and Lordships, as formerly;
and these were settled in some place; Hoveden.
but others there were which werr itinerant, over which certain Judges
presided, which were elected by the grand council of Lords, and sent by
commission from King Henry the second throughout the Kingdom, then divided
into six circuits, unto each of which was assigned three Justices; so as the
whole number of Justices then was eighteen. The Office was before the coming
of the Saxons over hither, but the assignation was new; as also was their oath,
for they were sworn. But the number continued not long, for within four
years the King redivided the land into four circuits, and unto each circuit
assigned five Justices, making in the whole the number of twenty and one
Justices; for the Northern circuit had six Justices which the King made
Justices of the Common pleas throughout the Kingdom. Hoveden. 337. Ibid. 445.
Neither yet did the first commission continue so long as four years; for
within that time Richard Lucy one of the Justices had renounced his Office and
betaken himself to a cloister, and yet was neither named in the first
commission nor in the latter; nor did the last commission continue five years;
Hoved. An. 1184.
for within that time Ralph Glanvile removed from the Northern circuit to that
of Worcester, as by the story of Sir Gilbert Plumpton may appear; though
little to the honor of the justice of the Kingdom, or of that Judge however
his book commended him to posterity. I take it upon the credit of the reporter,
Co. jurisd. c. 33
that this Itinerary judicature was settled to hold every seven years; but I
find no monument thereof before these days.

As touching their power, certainly it was in point of judicature as large as
that of the court of Lords, though not so high: it was as large because they
had cognizance of all causes both concerning the Crown and common pleas; and
amongst those of the Crown this only I shall note that all manner of falsehood
was inquirable by those Judges which after came to be much invaded by the
Clergy. Hoveden. Glanvil. l. 14. c. 7.


I shall say no more of this, but that in their original these Iters were
little other then visitations of the Country by the grand Council of Lords.
Nor shall I add any thing concerning the Vicontiel courts and other inferior
but what I find in Glanvile: that though robbery belonged to the Kings court,
Glanv. lib. 1. cap. 2.
yet thefts belonged to the Sheriffs Court; and (if the Lords court intercepts
not) all batteries and woundings, unless in the complaint they be charged to
be done contra pacem Domini Regis: the like also of inferior trespasses, Idem
lib. 9. and 10.
besides common pleas, whereof more shall follow in the next Chapter as
occasion shall be.

CHAP. LXII. Of certain Laws of Judicature in the time of Henry the second.
ANd hereof I shall note only a few as well touching matters of the Crown as
of property being desirous to observe the changes of Law with the times, and
the manner of the growth thereof to that pitch which in these times it has
attained.

We cannot find in any story that the Saxon Church was infested with any
Heresy from their first entrance till this present generation. The first and
last Heresy 1. Heresy.
that ever troubled this Island was inbred by Pelagius; but that was amongst
the Britons, and was first battered by the Council or Synod under Germanus;
but afterward suppressed by the zeal of the Saxons who liked nothing of the
British breed, and for whose sake it suffered more happly then for the
foulness of the opinion. The Saxon church leavened from Rome for the space of
above five hundred years held on its course without any intermission by cross
doctrine springing up, Hoved. 585.
till the time of Henry the second. Then entered a sect whom they called
Publicans; but were the Albigenses, as may appear by the decree of Pope
Alexander, whose opinions I shall not trouble my course with; but it seems they
were such as crossed their way, and Henry the second made the first president
of punishing Heresy in this Kingdom unders the name of this Sect, whom he
caused to be brought before a council of Bishops, Nubrig. l. 2. cap. 13.
who endeavored to convince them of their error; but failing therein they
pronounced them Heretics, and delivered them over to the Lay power; by which
means they were branded in the forehead, whipped, and exposed to extremity of
the cold (according to the decree of the Church) died. Decret Papae Alexand.
Hoveden. 585.
This was the manner and punishment of Heretics in this Kingdom in those
days; albeit it seems they were then decreed to be burnt in other countries,
if that relation of Cogshall be true which Picardus notes upon the 13 chapter
of the History of William of Newberry, out of which I have incerted this
relation.

Another case we meet with in Henry the seconds time concerning Apostasy, 2.
Apostasy. Bracton, lib. 3. cap. 9.
which was a crime that as it seems died as soon as it was born; for besides
that one we find no second thereto in all the file of English story. The
particular was, that a Clerk had renounced his baptism, and turned Jew; and
for this was convicted by a council of Bishops at Oxford, and was burned. So
as we have Apostasy punished with death, and Heresy with a punishment that
proved mortal; and the manner of conviction of both by a council of the
Clergy, and delivered over to the Lay power, who certainly proceeded according
to the direction of the Canon, or advice of the council. These (if no more)
were sufficient to demonstrate the growing power of the Clergy, however brave
the King was against all his enemies in the field.

Treason 3. Treason.
was anciently used only as a crime of breach of trust or fealty, as has been
already noted; now it grows into a sadder temper, and is made all one with that
of laesa Majestas; and that Majesty that now a days is wrapped up wholly in
the person of the King, was in Henry the seconds time imparted to the King and
Kingdom, as in the first times it was more related to the Kingdom: And
therefore Glanvile in his book of laws, speaking of the wound of Majesty,
exemplifies sedition and destruction of the Kingdom to be in equal degree a
Lib. 1. cap. 2.
wound of Majesty, Lib. 10. cap. 1.
with the destruction of the person of the King: and then he names sedition in
the Army, and fraudulent conversion of Treasure trove, which properly belongs
to the King, All which he says are punished with death and forfeiture of
estate, and corruption of blood; for so I take the meaning of the words in
relation to what ensues.

Fellonies, 4. Felonies.
of Manslaughter, Burning, Robbery, Ravishment, and Fausonry are to be punished
with loss of member and estate.

This was the law derived from the Normans, and accordingly was the direction
in the charge given to the Justices itinerant in Henry the seconds time, as
appears in Hoveden. But treason or treachery against the oath, fealty, Ll.
Hen. 1. c. 25.
or bond of allegiance, as of the servants against the Lord was punished with
certain and with painful deaths: and therefore though the murder of the King
was treason, yet the murder of his son was no other then as of another man,
unless it arose from those of his own servants. Ll. Hen. 1. c. 79
The penalty of loss of estate was common both to Treason and Felony; it
reached even unto Thefts, in which case the forfeiture, as to the movables,
Glanvil. lib. 7. cap. 17.
was to the Sheriff of the County, unto whose cognizance the case did belong;
and the land went to the Lord immediately, and not to the King. But in all
cases of Felony, and of the higher nature, the party (though not the Kings
tenant) lost his personal estate to the King for ever, his free holds also for
a year and a day, after which they returned to the Lord of the soil by way of
escheat. It seems also that the loss not only of chattels and goods but
also of lands, etc. extended to Outlaries (I conceive in case of Felony) and
the Kings pardon in such case could not bind the Lords right of escheate;
although it might discharge the goods, and the year and the day whereunto the
King was entitled; which case alone sufficiently declares what power Kings
had in the estates of their subjects.

Manslaughter 5. Manslaughter.
made not bailable.

This was law in Henry the seconds time, although it crossed the Norman Law;
Glanvil. l. 14. cap. 1 and 3.
and questionless it was upon good ground: for the times now were not as those
in the Conquerours times, when shedding of blood was accounted valor; and in
most cases in order to the public service. And now it seems it was a growing
evil, and that cried so loud, as though in case of Treason bail might be
allowed, yet not in this case ubi ad terrorem aliter statutum est, says the
author.

Robbers 6. Robbery.
shall be committed to the Sheriff, or in his absence to the next Castelane,
who shall deliver him to the Sheriff. And the Justices shall do right to
them, and unto trespassers upon Land.

Ll. Gul. 4. Spicil. 174.
By the Conquerours law these offenders were bailable, and I conceive this was
no repeal thereof; and the rather because Glanvile allows of pledges in all
cases (except Manslaughter) yea in those crimes that did wound Majesty it
self, Glanvil. lib. 14. cap. 1.
although they concern the destruction of the Kings person, or sedition in the
Kingdom or Army thereof. The Justices herein mentioned were intended to be the
Justices itinerant: and the trespasses upon Land are meant such as are contra
pacem Domini Regis, as riotous and forcible entries; for some trespasses were
against the peace of the Sheriff, as formerly has been observed.

Fauxonry 7. Fauxonry. Glanvil. lib. 14 cap. 7.
is of several degrees or kinds: some against the King, others against other
men; and of those against the King some are punished as wounds of Majesty, as
falsifying the Kings charter: and whether falsifying of money were in that
condition or not I leave, or falsifying of measures, yet more inferior I
cannot determine; but its clear by Glanvile that falsifying of the deed of a
private person was of smaller consideration, and at the utmost deserved but
loss of member.

Inheritances may not be aliened.

8. Glanvil. lib. 7. cap. 1. Ibid. c. 5.
Inheritances were in those times of lands or goods; for it was the custom then
that the personal estate (the debts deducted) was divisible into three parts;
one whereof belonged in right to the wife as her reasonable part, the other to
the heir, and third to the testator to make his will of them; and of the other
two parts he could not dispose by will. Concerning Lands, it was regularly true
that no man could alien his whole inheritance to the disherisin of his heir,
either by act in his life time, or any part thereof by his last will, without
the concurrance of the heir. But of purchased lands he may give part by act
executed in his life time, though he have no Lands by inheritance; and if he
has no issue, then he may alien all. And where a man has Lands by
inheritance, and also by purchase, he may alien all his purchased lands as he
pleases. If the lands be holden in Gavel kind, no more of the inheritance can
be conveyed to any of the children, then their proportionable parts will amount
unto. This law of inheritance was diverse according to the tenure, for the lands
in Knight Service always descended to the heir; but such as were holden in
soccage passed according to the custom, either to the eldest or to the
youngest, or to all equally. And thus stood the general state of inheritance
from the Normans times hitherto, Ll. Hen 1. c. 88.
seeming somewhat too strait for the free men that by law of property might
challenge a power to do with their own as they pleased. But the Normans saw a
double prejudice herein; the first was the danger of ruin of many of their
families who now ingrafted into the English stock; and yet not fully one might
expect a late check to their preferments from the Saxon parents after a long
and fair semblance made of their good will. The second prejudice was the decay
of their Militia, which was maintained by riches more then by multitude of men,
partly because that rich men are most fearful of offending, and therefore
ordinarily are most serviceable both with their bodies and estates against
public dangers; and partly because by their friends and allies they bring
more aid unto the public, by engaging them in the common cause, that
otherwise might prove unsensible, of the condition of their Country.

The heir of a free man shall by descent be in such seism as 9.
his ancester had at the time of his death, Vide Glanv. l. 7. c, 9.
doing service and paying releif; and shall have his chattailes.

If the heir be under age the Lord shall have the Wardship for the due time,
and the wife her Dower, and part of the goods

If the Lord withhold seisin the Kings Justice shall try the matter by twelve
men.

The first of these branches is declaratory of a ground of common law; but
being applied to the last is an introduction of a new law of trial of the
heirs right by Assize of Mortdancester, where formerly no remedy was left to
the heir, but a Writ of right. If these three branches be particularly
observed, they speak of three sorts of heirs, of tenants by Knight Service,
viz. such as are majors, or of full age; and such as are minors, or under age;
and such as are of a doubtful age. Those that are of full age at the death of
their ancestors may possess the lands descended, and the Lord may not disseise
him thereof; but may be resisted by the heir in the maintenance of his
possession, so as he be ready to pay relief, and do service that is due; and
if the Lord expel him he shall have remedy by Assize. Those heirs that are
minors shall be under the Lords guardianship till they come to one and twenty
years. Tbe heirs of such as hold by soccage are said to be at full age at
fifteen years, because at that age they were thought able to do that
service: but the sons of Burgesses are then said to be of full age when they
have ability to manage their fathers calling, such as telling of money,
measuring of cloth, and the like: yet does not Glanvile or any other say that
these were their full age to all purposes; albeit that some Buroughs at this
day hold the last in custom to all intents whatsoever. The last branch
provideth the remedy to recover to the heir his possession in case it be
detained, either through doubtfulnesse of age of the heir, or his title; and
it directs the issue to be tried by twelve men. This trial some have thought
to be of Glanvils invention; and it may well be that this trial of this matter
as thus set down was directed by him; yet he uses often in his book the word
solet, and in his preface says, that he will set down frequentius usitata, and
its past question; but that the trial by twelve men was much more ancient, as
has been already noted. One thing more yet remains, concerning the widow of
the tenant, whose dower is not only provided for, but her reasonable part of
her husbands personal estate. The original hereof was from the Normans, and
it was as popular as that of Wardships was Regal; and so they made the English
women as sure to them as they were sure of their children.

The Justices shall by Assize try disseisins done since the Kings 10.
coming over Sea next after the peace made between him and his son.

This is called the Assize of Novel disseisin, or of disseisins lately made. It
seems that the limitation was set for the Justices sake, who now were appointed
to that work, which formerly belonged to the County courts; Glanv. lib. 13.
cap. 33.
and to prevent intrenchments of Courts, a limitation was determined, although
the copy seems to be mistaken, for the limitation in the writ is from the
Kings last voyage, or going into Normandy.

Justices shall do right upon the Kings writ for half a 11.
Knights fee, and under, unless in cases of difficulty, which are to be
referred to the King.

The Justices itinerant ended the smaller matters in their circuits, the other
were reserved to the King in his bench.

Justices shall inquire of Escheates, Lands, Churches, and 12.
women, in the Kings gift: And of Castle guard, who? how much? and where?

So as the Judges itinerant had the work of Escheators; and made their
circuits serve as well for the Kings profit as Justice to the subjects. They
used also to take fealty of the people to the King at one certain time of the
year, and to demand homage also. These matters of the Kings Exchequer made the
presence of the Judges less acceptable, and it may be occasioned some kind of
oppression. And as touching Castleguard, it was a tenure in great use in these
bloody times, and yet it seems they used to take rent instead of the
personal service; else had that enquiry (how much?) been improper.

13.
Of a tenants holding, and of several Lords.

That one man may hold several lands of several Lords, and so owe service to
them all is so common, as nothing can be more: nevertheless it will not be
altogether out of the way to touch somewhat upon the nature of this mutual
relation between Lord and Tenant in general, that the true nature of the
diversity may more fully appear. The foundation or subject of service was a
piece of land, or other tenement at the first given by the Lord to the Tenant
in affirmance of a stipulation between them presupposed, by the giving and
receiving whereof the tenant undertook to perform service to the Lord, Glanv.
lib. 9. cap. 4.
and the Lord undertook protection of the tenant in his right to that
tenement. The service was first by promise solemnly bound, either by oath which
the Lord or his deputy by the common law has power to administer; as in the
case of fealty, in which the tenant bound himself to be true to the honor and
safety of his Lords person, and to perform the service due to the Lord for the
tenement so given: or otherwise by the tenants humble acknowledgement, and
promise not only to perform the services due, but even to be devoted to the
Lords service, to honor him, and to adventure limb and life, and to be true
and faithful to the Lord. This is called Homage, from those words, I become
your man Sir; and yet promises upon the matter no more but fealty in a deeper
complement, albeit there be difference in the adjuncts belonging to each. For
though it be true that by promise of being the Lords man, a general service
may seem to be implied, yet in regard that it is upon occasion only of that
present tenure, it seems to me that it is to be restrained only to those
particular services which belong to that tenement; and therefore if that
tenement be holden in soccage, although the tenant be bound to homage, yet that
homage ties not the tenant to the service of a Knight; Lit. lib. 2. cap. 5
nor contrarily does the homage of a tenant in Knight service tie him to that
of socage upon the command of his Lord, though he professes himself to be his
man. Nor does the tenants homage bind him against all men, nor ad semper; for
in case he holds of two or diverse Lords by homage for several tenements,
Glanv. lib. 9. cap. 1. Lib. 7. cap. 10.
and these two Lords be in war one against the other, the tenant must serve
his chief Lord of whom the capital house is holden; or that Lord which was
his by priority, who may be called the chief Lord because having first
received homage he received it absolutely from his tenant; but all other Lords
receive homage of such tenant with a saving of the tenants faith made to other
Lords and to the King, who in order to the public had power to command a
tenant into war against his own Lord. If therefore he be commanded by the
King in such cases unto war he need not question the point of forfeiture;
Glanvil. lib. 9. cap. 1.
but if he be commanded by a chief of his other Lords into war against a
party in which another of his Lords is engaged, his safest way is to enter upon
the work, because of his allegiancc to that Lord, yet with a salvo of his
fealty to that other Lord. Ibid. cap. 4.
But in all ordinary cases tenants and Lords must have regard to their
stipulation, for otherwise if either break the other is discharged for ever;
and if the fault be in the tenant, his tenement escheats to his Lord; and if
the Lord fail, he loses his tenure, and the tenant might thence forth
disclaim, and hold over for ever. Nevertheless the Lords had two privileges
by common custom belonging to their tenures, which although not mentioned in
the stipulation, were yet more valuable then all the rest; the one concerning
matter of profit, the other of power: That of profit consisted in ayds and
relief. The ayds were of three kinds: Ibid. c. 8.
one to make the Lords eldest son Knight, the other to marry his eldest
daughter; the third to help him to pay a relief to his Lord Paramont; which
in my opinion sounds as much as if the tenants were bound by their tenures to
aid their Lord in all cases of extraordinary charge (saving that the Lord could
not distraine his tenant for aid to his war) and this according to the Lords
discretion; Ibid.
for Glanvile Glanv. l. 9. c. 8,
says that the law determined nothing concerning the quantity or value of
these ayds. These were the Norman ways, and savoured so much of Lordship, that
within that age they were regulated; But that of reliefes was an ancient
sacrifice, as of first fruits of the tenement to the Lord, in memorial of the
first Lords favor in conferring that tenement; Ibid.
and it was first settled in the Saxons time. The Lords privilege of power
extended so far as to distraine his tenants into his own Court to answer to
himself, in all causes that concerned his right; and so the Lord became both
Judge and party, which was soon felt and prevented, as shall appear hereafter.
Another privilege of the Lords power was over the tenants heir after the
tenants death, in the disposing of the body during the minority and marriage of
the same. As touching the disposing of the body, the Lord either retained the
same in his own power, Glanv. 7.10.
or committed the same to others; and this was done either pleno jure, or
rendering an account. Ibid. c. 12.
As concerning the marriage of the females that are heirs, or so apparent: the
parents in their life time cannot marry them without the Lords consent; nor may
they marry themselves after their parents death without the same; and the Lords
are bound to give their consent, unless they can show cause to the contrary.
The like also of the tenants widows that have any dowry in the lands of such
tenure. And by such like means as these the power of the Barons grew to that
height, that in the lump it was too massy both for Prince and Commons.

14.
Of the power of the last Will.

It is a received opinion, that at the common law no man could devise his lands
by his last will. If thereby it be conceived to be against common reason, I
shall not touch that; but if against custom of the ancient times, I must
suspend my concurrence therewith until those ancient times be defined: for as
yet I find no testimony sufficient to assert that opinion; but rather that the
times hitherto had a sacred opinion of the last will, as of the most serious,
sincere, and advised declaration of the most inward desires of a man, which was
the main thing looked unto in all conveyances, Voluntas donatoris de cetero
observetur. And therefore nothing was more ordinary then for Kings in these
times as much as in them did lie to dispose of their Crowns by their last Will.
M. Paris An. 1216. Hoveden. An. 1199. Malmsb. nov. l. 1. Malmsb. l. 3.
Thus King John appointed Henry the third his successor, and Richard the first
devised the Crown to King John; and Henry the first gave all his lands to his
daughter; and William the Conqueror by his last will gave Normandy to Robert,
England to William; and to Henry his mothers lands. If then things of greatest
moment under Heaven were ordinarily disposed by the last Will, was it then
probable that the smaller free holds should be of too high esteem to be
credited to such conveyances? I would not be mistaken, as if I thought that
Crowns and Empires were at the disposal of the last will of the possessour;
nor do I think that either they were thus in this Kingdom, or that there is
any reason that can patronize that opinion; yet it will be apparent that Kings
had no slight conceit of the last will, and knew no such infirmity in that
manner of conveyance, as is pretended; or else would they never have spent that
little breath left them in vain. Glanvil. l. 7. cap. 1 and 5.
I have observed the words of Glanvile concerning this point, and I cannot
find that he positively denies all conveyance of land by Will, but only in
case of disherison; the ground whereof is, because its contrary to the
conveyance of the law: and yet in that case also allows of a disposing power
by consent of the heir, which could never make good conveyance, if the will in
that case were absolutely void, and therefore his authority lies not in the
way. Nor does the particular customs of places discountenance, but rather
advance this opinion; for if devise of lands were incident to the tenure in
Gavell kind, and that so general in old time, as also to the burgage tenures,
Ll. Gulielm. cap. 61.
which were the rules of Corporation and Cities, Vbi leges Angliae deperiri non
possunt nec defraudari nec violari, how can it be said contrary to the common
law? And therefore those conveyances of lands by last will that were in and
after these times holden in use; seem to me rather remnants of the more
general custom, wasted by positive laws then particular customs growing up
against the common rule. Its true that the Clergy put a power into the Pope to
alter the law, M. Paris An. 1181. Hoved An. 1181. Decret. Alex. pap. Hoveden.
fo. 587.
as touching themselves in some cases: for Roger Archbishop of York procured a
faculty from the Pope to ordain that no Ecclesiastical persons Will should be
good unless made in health, and not lying in extremity; and that in such cases
the Archbishop should possess himself of all such parties goods: but as it
lasted not long, so was himself made a president in the case; for being
overtaken with death ere he was provided, he made his will in his sickness,
and Henry the second possessed himself of his estate. And its as true that
Femme coverts in these days could make no will of their reasonable part,
Glanv. l. 7. cap. 5 and 16.
because by the Saxon law it belonged jointly to the children. Nor could
usurers continuing in that course at the time of their death make their will,
because their personal estate belonged to the King after their death, and
their lands to their Lords by escheate, although before death they lie open to
no censure of law; but this was by an especial law made since the Conquerours
time; for by the Saxon law they were reputed as outlaws. Nevertheless all
these do but strengthen the general rule, Ll. Edw. 37.
viz. that regularly the last will was holden in the general a good conveyance
in law. If the will were only intended and not perfected, or no will was made,
then the lands passed by descent, and the goods held course according to the
Saxon law, Glanv. l. 7. c. 6. cap. 8.
viz. the next kinsmen and friends of the intestate did administer, and as
administrators, they might sue by Writ out of the Kings court, although the
Clergy had now obtained so much power as for the recovery of a legacy, or for
the determining of the validity of the will in its general nature it was
transmitted to the Ecclesiastical court.

CHAP. LXIII. Of the Militia of this Kingdom during the reign of these Kings.
I Undertake not the debate of right, but as touching matter of fact shortly
thus much: that from the Norman times the power of the Militia rested upon two
principles; the one the allegiance for the common defense of the Kings person
and honor and Kingdom; and in this case the King had the power to levy the
force of the Kingdom, nevertheless the cause was still under the cognizance
of the great council, so far as to agree or disavow the war, if they saw
cause; as appeared in the defections of the Barons in the quarrel between King
Steven and the Empress, and between King John and his Barrons. The other
principle was the service due to the Lord from the Tenant, and by virtue hereof
(especially whenas the liberty of the Commons was in question) the Militia was
swayed by the Lords, and they drew the people in Arms either one way or the
other, as the case appeared to them: the experience whereof the Kings from time
to time felt, to their extreme prejudice, and the Kingdoms damage. Nor did
the former principle oversway the latter, although it might seem more
considerable, but only in the times of civil peace, when the Lords were quiet
and the people well conceited of the Kings aims in reference to the public,
which happiness it was Henry the seconds lot to enjoy; for he being a Prince
eminent amongst Princes both for endowments of mind and of outward estate, not
only gained honor abroad, but much more amongst his own people at home, who
saw plainly that he was for foreign employment of honor to the Kingdom; and
not only contented with what he had in England, but embarked together with the
Laity against the growing power of the Clergy, for the defense and honor of
the privileges of the Crown, wherein also the liberties of the people were
included: They therefore were secure in the Kings way, and suffered themselves
to be engaged unto the Crown further then they or their ancestors formerly had
been, out of pretense of sudden extreme occasions of the Kingdom that would
not be matched with the ordinary course of defense. For the King (finding by
former experience that the way of Tenures was too lame a supply for his
acquests abroad, and that it had proved little better then a broken reed to the
Crown in case of dispute with the people) aimed at a further reach then the
Lords or Commons foresaw; and having learned a trick in France, brought it
over, (although it was neither the first nor last trick that England learned to
their cost from France) which was a new way of leavying of men and Arms for
the war, Hoveden. 1181.
by assessing upon every Knights fee, and upon every free man, of the vallew of
sixteen Marks yearly, their certain Arms; and upon every free man of ten
Marks yearly value their certain Arms; and upon every Burgess and free man
of an inferior value, their certain Arms. 2. That these should be ready
prepared against a certain day. 3. That they should be kept and maintained
from time to time in the Kings service, and at his command. 4. That they should
not be lent, pledged, sold or given away. 5. That in case of death they should
descend to the heir, who if under age should find a man to serve in his
stead. 6. That in case the owner were able he should be ready at a certain day
with his Arms for the service of the King ad fidem Domini Regis and Regni sui.
7. That unto this every man should be sworn: I call this a new way of levying
of Arms and men, not but that formerly other free men and Burgesses found
Arms, albeit they held not by Knight service; for it was so ordained by the
Conquerours laws formerly used: but now the King thrust in two clauses (besides
the altering of the Arms) the one concerning the oath whereby all men became
bound; the other concerning the raising and ordering of men and arms, which
here seems to be referred to the King only, and in his service; and this I
grant may imply much in common capacity, viz. that all the power of the Militia
is in Henry the second. But this trick catched not the people according to the
Kings meaning: for the words ad fidem Regis and Regni still left a muse for the
people to escape, if they were called out against their duty to the Kingdom,
and taught the doctrine which is not yet repealed, viz. That what is not
according to their faith to the Kingdom is not according to their faith to the
King; and therefore they could find in their hearts sometimes to sit still at
home, when they were called forth to war: as may appear in one passage in
the days of King John, who had gathered together an Army for the opposing of
foreign power, at such time as the Pope had done his worst against him and the
whole Kingdom; which Army was of such considerable strength, as I believe none
since the conquest to this day exceeded or paraleld it: but the Kings mean
submission to the Popes Legate so distasted the Nobles and people, as they left
him to his own shifts; and that in such manner as although afterward he had
advantage of them and liberty enough to have raised an Army to have strengthened
himself against the Nobles, yet the Lords coming from London, brought on the
sudden such a party as the King was not able to withstand, and so he came off
with that conclusion made at Renny meade, which though in it self was
honorable, yet lost the King so much the more, because it was rather gained
from him then made by him.

CHAP. LXIV. Of the Government of Henry the third, Edward the first, and Edward
the second, Kings of England. And first a general view of the disposition of
their government.
ONe hundred and ten years more I have together taken up, to add a period to
this first part of discourse concerning English government; principally because
one spirit of arbitrary rule from King John seems to breathe throughout the
whole, and therewith did expire.

The first that presents himself is Henry the third, begotten by King John
when he was in the very first enterprise of oppression that occasioned the
first Barons bloody wars, and which this King was so miserable as to continue
for the greatest part of his life and reign; and yet so happy as to see it
ended about four years before he died. Although the soul be not ingendered
from the parent, yet the temperature of the body of the child does sometimes so
attemper the motion of the soul, that there is in the child the very image of
the fathers mind: and this Henry the third lively expressed, being so like unto
his father John in his worst course, as if his fathers own spirit had entered
into him, and animated him in all his ways. He brought in with him the first
president of conscience in point of succession by inheritance in the English
Throne; for the stream of probabilities was against him. He was a child, and
the times required a complete man, and a man for war: He was the child of
King John, whose demerits of the State were now fresh in the minds of all men.
He was also designed to the Throne by his fathers last Will, M. Paris. An. 1216.
which was a dangerous president for them to admit, who had but even now
withstood King John's depositing of the Crown in the Popes hands, as not being
in the power of a King of England to dispose of his Crown according to his own
will. Yet leaping over all these considerations, and looking on Henry the third
as the child of a King, that by good nouriture might prove a wise and just
King: they closed about this spark, in hope it might bring forth a flame
whereby to warm themselves in stormy times. Nor did their hopes soon perish;
for during his minority the King was wise to follow good council, and by it
purged out all the ill humors that the kingdom had contracted in the rash
distempers of his fathers government: Nor did he only follow the counsels of
others herein, but even at such times as their counsels crossed, he chose those
councels that suited with the most populer way; as is to be seen in the
different counsels of the Archbishop of Canterbury and William Briware. M.
Paris An. 1223.
And yet two things troubled much those times: one that they were times of
parties; the other, that the Protector was somewhat too excellent to be a mere
servant; and its hard for the English Nobility to endure him to be greater;
although it may seem reasonable that they that are thought worthy to govern a
King should be much more worthy to govern themselves. But the Pope put an end
to all occasion of question hereabout; for by his brief he declares the King
to be sixteen years old, and of age to govern himself; and therefore all
Castles are forthwith to be rendered up into the Kings hands. M. Paris. An.
1223, 1224.
This proved the rock of offense, whiles some obeyed the Pope, and were
impugners of those that put more confidence in the Castles then in the Kings
good nature. Hence first sprang a civil broyle, thence want of money, then a
Parliament; wherein the grand charter of Englands liberties once more was
exchanged for a sum of money. Thus God wheeled about successes. But the King
having passed over his tame age under the government of wise Counselors, and
by this time beginning to feel liberty, it was his hard condition to meet with
want of money; and worse, to meet with ill Counselors, which served him with
ill advice, that the grand Charter would keep him down, make him continually
poor, and in state of pupilage: to this giving credit, it shaped an Idea in
his mind that would never out for forty years after; and thus advised he
neglects his own engagement, defies the government that by his Royal word, and
the Kings his predecessors in cool blood had been settled; and that he might
do this without check of conscience, he forbad the study of the law, that so
it might die without heir, and he have all by Escheat. This sadded the
English, and made them drive heavily; the King (to add more strength) brought
in forrainers and foreign Councels; and then all was at a stand. The Councels
were for new ways. The great design was to get money to supply the Kings
wants; and as great a design was to keep the King in want: otherwise it had
been easy for those at the helm to have stopped the concourse of forrainers
(other then themselves) from abroad; the confluence of the Queens poorer
alies, lavish entertainment, profuse rewards, cheates from Rome, and all in
necessitous times. But strangers to maintain their own interests must
maintain strangeness between the King and his subjects; to supply therefore
these necessities all shifts are used, as revoking of Charters, displacing of
Officers, and fining them, Afforestations with a train of oppressions
depending thereon, fines and amercements, corrupt advancements, loanes, and
many tricks to make rich men offenders, especially projects upon the City of
London. Nevertheless all proved infinitely short of his disbursements, so as
at times he is necessitated to call Parliaments, and let them know his wants.
At the first the people are sensible and allow supply; but after by experience
finding themselves hurt by their supplies to the King, they grant upon
conditions of renewing the power of the great Charter; and many promises pass
from the King to that end, and after that oaths, and yet no performance; this
makes the people absolutely deny supplies. Then the King pretends wars in
France, wars in Scotland, and wars against the Infidels in the Holyland,
whither he is going: the people upon such grounds give him ayds; but finding
all but pretenses, or ill success of such enterprises, they are hardened
against supplies of him for the holy war: then he seems penitent, and poures
out new promises, sealed with the most solemn execration that is to be found
in the womb of story, and so punctually recorded, as if God would have all
generations to remember it as the seal of the covenant between the King of
England and his people, and therefore I cannot omit it.

M. Paris. An. 1253.
It was done in full Parliament, where the Lords Temporal and Spiritual,
Knights, and others of the Clergy, all standing with their Tapers burning. The
King himself also standing with a cheerly countenance, holding his open hand
upon his breast, the Archbishop pronounced this curse ensuing:

By the authority of God omnipotent, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, and
of the glorious mother of God the Virgin Mary, and of the blessed Apostles
Peter and Paul, and of all the other Apostles, and of the holy Martyr and
Archbishop Thomas, and of all the Martys, and of the blessed Edward King of
England, and of all Confessors and Virgins, and of all the Saints of God,

We Excommunicate and Anathematize, and sequester from our holy mother the
Church all those which henceforth knowingly and maliciously shall deprive or
spoil Churches of their right.

And all those that shall by any art or wit rashly violate, diminish or change,
secretly or openly, in deed, word, or council, by crossing in part or whole
those Ecclesiastical liberties, or ancient approved customs of the Kingdom,
especially the liberties and free customs which are contained in the Charters
of the common liberties of England, and the Forests granted by our Lord the
King to the Archbishops, Bishops, Prelates, Earls, Barons, Knights, and
Freeholders.

And all those who have published, or being published have observed any thing
against them or their Statutes, or which have brought in any customs, or being
brought in have observed; and all writers of Ordinances or Councels, or
executioners, or such as shall judge by such things,

All such as are knowingly guilty of any such matters shall ipso facto incur
this sentence: such as are ignorantly guilty shall incur the same censure, if
being admonished he amend not within fifteen days after admonition.

In the same censure are comprehended all perturbers of the peace of the King
and Kingdom: for everlasting memory whereof we have hereunto put our Seals.

And then all throwing down their Tapers extinguished and smoking, they said,
So let all that shall go against this curse be extinct, and stink in Hell.
The King all the while continuing in the posture above mentioned, said, So God
me help, I will observe all these things sincerely and faithfully, as I am a
man, as I am a Christian, as I am a Knight, as I am a King crowned and anoinied.

If we shall pare away the superstitious ceremonies, and consider divine
providence, we may search into all Histories of all ages, and we shall not
find a parallel hereunto; so seriously composed, solemnly pronounced, with an
Amen from the representative body of the whole Kingdom, put in writing under
seal, preserved to posterity; vindicated by God himself in the ruin of so
many opposers. And yet the dust of time has almost buried this out of the
thoughts of men; so as few even of such as know it do seriously consider how
far it may yet and even now be charged upon the account of this Nation. Serious
as it was, it was soon forgotten: nor would the King be long holden with
promises, some unhappy Star struck him in his birth; he had been too hard
for his promises, and now having the Pope at his elbow, he can dispense with
his oath, and bid defiance to an execration; and in flat defiance of the grand
Charter professes oppression, accumulates foreign Counselors, and foreign
guards, contemnes his own people, ushers in the Popes extortions upon them to
fill up the measure; thrives in nothing but in the match of his son and
successor with a sister of Spain, and yet that also helps to hasten on the
publque poverty, and that a Parliament that brought forth a bloody issue;
although not by any natural power, but occasionally: For the Barons mean now
no longer to trust to promises; strangers are banished the Realm, and others
of the English blood stepped into their places and Revenues. But this was not
all, the King must confirm the grand Charter, and thereto he adds not only
his own oath, but causes the Prince his son to confirm the same in like
manner. It is likewise propounded to him that the chief Officers of the
Kingdom may be chosen such as the Parliament shall like of: And that other
laws meet for the government of the Kingdom might be established; of all these
the King made no bones. And to make men believe that he was in good earnest, he
was contented to disrobe and disarme himself, Dan.
and invest the Barons both with Sword and Scepter, retaining nothing but the
Crown for himself. This had been safety enough for the Kingdom, but that it
was a conclusion without an agreement; for as it was on the Kings part made
from a principle of shame and fear, so it was determined in anger; for after
that the King had been thus dressed and girt for the space of four or five
years (whatsoever he thought all the while its no matter) he began first to
stretch his conscience, and having the Popes dispensation to help, soon makes
his oath to fly asunder (although his son had for the present more
conscience.) But the other girt held more stoutly, for the Lords had the Sword
chained to their arm by the Kings own grant. Liceat omnibus in regno nostro
contra nos insurgere and ad gravamen nostrum opem and operam dare ac si nobis
in nullo tenerentur; Dan. An. 1258.
and the Lords maintained their hold, though not without some jealousies
amongst themselves; and its very probable had the King been a little longer
breathed with patience, he might have had his will upon easier terms: for the
Lords were not so jealous of one another as the Commons were jealous of the
Lords, that they meaned to rule only for themselves. But the King being now in
a wood, and bemired, so as he must now resolve to get all, or lose all, and so
either sacrifice his natural desires, or the remainder of his politic power,
entered the field with the aid of those Commons that chose rather to be
oppressed by one King then many Lords: and thus the Lords received the first
blow, and gave the first foil: afterward being worsted by their own divisions
and jealousies, they left a victory to the King that might have made him
absolute, if he had been moderate; but pursuing revenge too far, he was
distasted of his own party that looked on him as a Polyphemus that intended to
devour the enemy first, that he might more freely feast upon themselves in the
issue: this made victory follow the King a far off, and taught the King that
the end of civil war must be attended with moderation in the Conqueror, so
far as may stand with public safety, or otherwise he that is conqueror to
day by Sword, may be conquered to morrow by jealousy. Thus many humors
consumed, and all parts tired after four years continual war, the State
comes to its right wits. The Kings gains in all this bloody sweat may be
summed up in two heads: First, that he had liberty to choose his principal
Officers of State by advice of the Lords, and them also to displace by like
Council. Secondly, in that he gained (though at a dear rate) wisdom to
observe the state of affairs, and to apply himself according to occasion: so
lived Henry the third for three or four years after these troubles; long
enough to let the world know that he was able to govern like an English King,
and to teach his son by his own late experience to be a wise governor
betimes.

For Edward the first being trained up in the Tragedy of a civil war wherein
he was one of the chief actors; Edw. 1.
and having expiated the bloody way of his riotous youth by his holy war, as
they called it; now he betakes himself to amends making by justice in
government, having found by his fathers experience that a Kingdom well governed
(like good husbandry) preserves the owner, but being neglected destroys both.

He came over in his third year in August, was crowned in September, summoned
a Parliament in February following, but adjourned it till after Easter; and
then it is found that the Church of late had been ill governed; the Clergy men
grieved by many ways, the people otherwise handled then they ought to be, the
peace ill kept, the laws less used, and delinquents less punished then was
meet; and in the sense of these inconveniences were the laws of Westminster
the first made, wherein the world may see the great difference between the
Prince and the King in one and the same man.

The most part of those laws were little other then plasters applied to
particular botches of those times, wherein the King dealt with a tender hand,
as if he feared to ulcerate any part, and especially the Clergy, and therefore
delivered the last law in a petitionary way to the Clergy, because it concerned
the execution of justice in prohibited times, and yet bound up all with a salvo
to himself and his prerogative, like a wise King that would neither loose
right, nor do wrong; nor yet stickle to debate with his subjects now when as
his eye was upon a further mark. Walsing. 46.
For Leolin the Prince of Wales had affronted him; and though he could not
endure affronts, yet could he dissemble them for advantage, and so he suffered
the Parliament to run its course, that he might have done the sooner.
Otherwise he had a seed of his fathers conceit that laws are not made for
Kings, as appeared afterward: for after he had gotten his army into the field,
he took a fifteenth which was granted to his father, and this was inaudito
more: M. West. An 1276.
but there was no disputing with power, and therefore the subject must be
contented rather to score it up against the future, then require present pay;
so dangerous a thing it is for England that Kings should have occasion to
gather armies, though for never so honorable employment.

The Welsh chase is hotly pursued, yet it did not rid much way, for it cost the
English a voyage of nine years travel before they could attain the shore
although it had been often within their view. It may be the King found it
advantageous for his government to maintain an Army in the field under the
color of the Welsh war, that he might more bow his subjects to his own bent;
for during these wars the King made many breathings, and took time to look
to the husbanding of his own revenue, as those Ordinances called Extenta
manerii, and Officium coronatoris do witness, and the Statute of Bigami. But
the people were not altogether yet tamed; for the times being still in wars,
and they occasioning much waste of treasure, put the King to the utmost pitch
of good husbandry, and one degree beyond the same; so as under color of
seizing his own he swept up also the privileges and liberties of his subjects;
M. West. Polyd. virg.
some authors reciting the complaints of the Church men, others of the Laity:
so as it seems the King was no respecter of persons, but his own. This and
others not unlike had almost occasioned another combuston, had not the meeting
at Gloucester settled things for the present, by referring the right of
franchises to debate in the Eyer, and ordering reseisure of such liberties into
the subjects hands, whereof they had been dispossessed by Quo warranto and Quo
jure, under color of the fourth chapter of the Statute of Bigami.

Nevertheless however debonaire the King seemed to be, the sore between him
and his subjects was not fully cured; nor did the Lords trust him further then
needs must, for whether they served in the field or met at council, still they
were armed; and during this daring of each other were many profitable laws
made, whiles neither party durst venture bloodshed in touching too nigh upon
the privileges of each other; principally because the affairs in Wales were
but laid asleep, and upon reviving might turn the balance to either side.

The wars awake again, and therein are consumed nigh five years more of the
Kings reign, so as what ever his intent was, he could have hitherto little
opportunity to effect any thing for the advancement of the prerogative of the
Crown at home. Nor had he scarcely breathed himself and army from the Welsh
wars, but he found both France and Scotland his enemies at once. The King faced
only the first, and fought the second; which held him work the remainder of
his days, and at the same time also he arred both the Clergy and Laity at his
own home as if providence had given him security for the good behavior; and
yet it failed him in the issue, and left him to the censure of the world,
whether his justice was spontaneous or by necessity; for as yet he held the
grand Charter at parley, and therefore was rather eyed then much trusted:
Albeit he was put upon confidence in the subjects discretion for aid of him in
his continual undertakings; nor did they disclaim him herein, however
chargable it was; for all seem willing he should be employed any where, so as
not within the four Seas.

Its probable the King knew it, and therefore having made a voyage into France
he changed the Scene of war, but to the other side as it were of a river, in
hope his Lords would follow; but it would not be; this angered him, and he them:
nor would his Clergy allow him any aid papa inconsulto, and therefore he outs
them from his protection; these and his irregular preparations for war by
summons not only of his Knights, but all other that held Land worth 20 li. per
annum, Walfing. 69.
and taxes imposed by an arbitrary way increased rancour into a kind of state
scoule, little better then a quarrel: for appeasing whereof the King granted a
consultation upon a prohibition, and unto both Clergy and Laity a confirmation
of the grand Charter at the long run, and allowed it as the common law of the
Kingdom, and seconded the same with many succeeding confirmations in the 27,
25 Edw. 1.
28 years of his reign, as if he had utterly renounced all thought of a
contrary way; but the Stat. in his 28th year had a sting in the tail that was
as ill as his saving of ancient aid and prisals which was in the Stat. of
confirmation of the Charters, though it were omitted in this Stat. for the
saving was of such a sense as time and occasion would move the Kings heart to
make it; and thus this Statute became like a Hocus pocus, a thing to still the
people for the present, and serve the Kings turn, that he might more freely
intend the conquest of the Scots; which once done, he might if he would try
masteries with England. But God would not have it so; the King in Scotland had
power to take, but could not overtake; and the Scots like birds of the prey had
wit enough to fly away, and courage enough to return upon advantages: and so
the King was left to hunt the wind, which made him to return.

He might now expect the applause of his people for his good success, and the
terror of those that had stopped the broad way of his extravigant prerogative;
and therefore looks big, rubs up old sores, and (having his Army yet in the
field) sends for those Lords that would not follow him in his wars in
Flanders: all come and submit, and as it were in so many words let the King
know that all England is now tame, and like to be ridden at his discretion. And
now there is nothing in his way but the fatal execration which he feared, not
in relation to Gods anger; but rather to the exasperated Clergy, and the dread
of the Popes direful thunderbolt. To avoid this storm he procures a
dispensation from Rome to perjure and oppress without sin. A trick that he
learned of his father, and hid it within his breast till now about two years
before his end he brings it forth to tell all the world that hitherto he had
been just against his will. But having obtained his purpose he nevertheless
misseth of his end, for a new King of Scots our old good enemies by divine
providence suddenly crossed his way before him, and now it boots not to contend
for arbitrary rule in England, and lose the Crown of Scotland, which he once
thought he had sure; he faces about therefore, and having spoken fair to his
people, for Scotland he goes. Thus if all were not in a parenthesis the King
intended a good period, but God only knows what his furthest reach would have
been if he had returned, for he was taken out of this world in Scotland, and so
left this his government somewhat like an imperfect sentence. Edw. 2.


His son Edward should have completed it, but that he wanted his fathers
sense, and had too much of his grandfathers superbient humor, that meeting
with a stiff spirit, and a weak mind brought sudden fire into the course of
government till it consumed it self in its own flame. For this King having
newly slipped out of a bondage of wise government under his father, ran the
wild chase after rash desires, spending his former time in inordinate love,
and his later time upon revengefull anger, little inferior to rage, and so in
his whole government was scarce his own man. His love was a president of a
strange nature, that commanded him from all the contentments of his Kingdom to
serve one man, a stranger, and prostitute to all manner of licentiousness;
merely for some personal endowments. It shows that his judgment was weak,
and his affections strong; and in that more weak, because he discovered it
before he was crowned: like some of the weakest of the weaker sex, the birth of
whose minds are borne as soon as they are conceived, and speak as soon as they
are borne. Its true that bravery of Spirit may work after absoluteness in
Kings under the color of some kind of wisdom. But it is one thing to rule
without law, and another to live without rule; the one dashes against the law
of an English King, and may put on the name of policy, but the other destroys
the law of mankind, and can bear no better name then of brutish desire.

All the while Gaveston was in view we find nothing concerning common weal or
monument of Parliament, saving two Ordinances made by the King and such Lords
as suited to the Kings way rather then to his wants. 1. Edw. 2.
The first was that de militibus, the other de frangentibus prisonam; for all
the Kings labor was to royallize Gaveston into as high a pitch as he could,
and so to amaze his own eye sight with contemplating the goodlinesse of his
person. So as Gaveston is become the image of the King, and presents his beams
and influence into all parts of the Kingdom, and according to his aspect they
often change and waine, and yet at the best were but as in a misty night

The Barons liked not this condition of state Idolatry; they were willing to
adore the King, but they could not bow to an image: they desired nothing more
then that their King might shine in his proper glory. Thrice is Gaveston
banished, thrice he returns; the last occasioned another civil war, wherein
Gaveston lost his head; thus the Lords removed the eclipse, but (little the
better thereby) they find it a vain labor to compel the Sun to shine by
force when it has no light. Though Gaveston be gone, the mist of foreign
councels prevail; this was bred in the blood, fed with blood, and ended in
blood. Through the glass of foreign Councels all things seem of foreign
color; the King to the people, and the people to him. The King at length
begins to see himself undervalued, and that it began in himself, ventures
himself into the wars with Scotland to win honor; goes with much splendor,
but returns with the greatest blot that ever English King suffered, confounded
abroad, and slighted at home. For the bravest men by ill success are lost in
common opinion: or, to speak in a higher strain, where God does not bless,
man will not. The King thus almost annihilated, catches hold of Rome, fawnes on
the Clergy, passes to them the Ordinances of Articuli Cleri, and de prisis
bonis cleri: which lost the free men no right although it concluded the Crown.
And to caresse the Commons made the Statute de vice-committibus, and the City
of London likewise by the statute de Gavelletto. But God saw all sorts of men
run at riot, and sends in upon the Nation plague, famine, and other
extraordinary testimonies of his displeasure, even to the wonderment of other
Nations; and this brought a kind of sobriety into affairs, made all sorts
tame, and for the present only prepared them for better times. For the Kings
time of longing, again is come, and he must have new playfellows; finds the
Spencers, or rather was found of them; they grow in honor almost beyond the
reach of the Nobles, but not beyond their envy; and are more secure then
Gaveston in this, that in their first sprouting the Kings Council served
himself and them to keep in with the Commons by making good laws; such as
the Statutes at York, of Essoines; Attaints of Jurors, Leavying of fines; and
Estreates into the Exchequer, etc. all of them promising good government. The
Barons nevertheless like not the Spencers greatness, and being by several
occasions exasperated, join in one, and occasion a new war; the King aided
by the Commons (who yet thought better of the King then of the Barons, whom
they saw prejudiced rather out of selfe-apprehensions, then the public good)
prevailed against the Barons, and made them the first president of death upon
the Scaffold.

Now the Spencers are Lords alone, thinking themselves above reach of the once
formidable Barons, and the Commons too inferior for their respect. Thus lifted
up they take a flight like that of Icarus. They had so much of the Kings heart
as they could not spare any part thereof to the Queen, and she being as loath
to spare so much for them as they had, retired with the Prince to a relief
which they brought from beyond Sea, and with whom both Lords and Commons join.
The favorites missing of their wonted wings come down faster then they
ascended, and together with them the King himself, all of them irrecoverably.
Thus favorites instead of Cement between Prince and people becoming rocks of
offense, bring ruin sometimes to all, but always to themselves.

The King foresaw the storm, and thought it safest first to cry truce with the
people, and come to agreement with them by common consent, Prerog. Reg. 17 Edw.
2.
for the extent of his prerogative in certain particular cases questionable;
and this summed up, become a Statute for future times to be a ne plus ultra
between the King and people. Stat. de Homag.
The like agreement likewise was concerning services of tenants to their Lords;
and an oath framed to vindicate them from all encroachments. Stat. Templar.
And something was done to calm the Clergy for the demolishing of the Templer
Knights, but the wound was incurable, words are not believed if actions do not
succeed; nor will oaths now made to bind Kings, Bishops, Counselors of State,
Sheriffs, Majors, Bailiffs, or Judges to justice; nor directions for regulating
of Courts, nor Ordinances against false moneys and weights, nor all of them
settle the people; but they adhere to the Queen, burning with jealousy against
the King, and both her self and the Lords with rage against the Spencers. The
King flies, and being forsaken of the people, the Lords, the Clergy, his own
son, and the wife of his own bosom, and of God himself, as the most
absolute abject that ever swayed Scepter, lost the same; and being made a
monument of Gods revenge upon inordinate desires in a King, and of the English
people, being enraged, not long surviving his demise, he died a death meet to
be forever blotted out of the thoughts of all subjects, but to be had in
everlasting remembrance of all Kings. For if a Kingdom or Parliament misleads
the King, at the worst he is but misled by his Council; but if he be drawn
aside by favorites, he must thank his own lust; in the one he has but the
least share in the burden, in the other he must bear the whole.

CHAP. LXV. Of the condition of the Nobility of England till the time of Edward
the third.
NOw was prerogative mounted up to the highest pitch, or endeavored so to be;
either through the weakness or power of these Kings, of whom the first and
last had little to ground upon but their own will; and the other, I mean
Edward the first, had more wisdom and power, but was otherways distracted by
foreign and more urgent employments; so as the work fainted before it came to
its full period. The contest was between the King and Barons, who till those
days were rather the great and richer sort of men, then Peers, although they
also were of the number. I am not so sharp sighted as to reach the utmost
intentions of the Lords; but their pretenses are of such public nature, as
its plain that if their private interest was wrapped up therein, they were
inseparable: and I shall never quarrel the Lords aim at private respects,
whenas its plain the public was so importantly concerned; and yet I will not
justify all that I find written concerning their words and Actions. M Paris.
An. 1217.
The speech of the E. of Cornwall to his elder brother, and King Henry the
third, I will neither render up my Castle, nor depart the Kingdom, but by the
judgment of the Peers: and of Simon the E. of Leicester to the same King,
That he lied, and were he not a King the Earl would make him repent his word:
and of the Lords that they would drive the King out of his Kingdom, and elect
another: and of the E. Marshall to Edward the first, that he would neither go
into Gascoine nor hang; and such other do savor of passion (especially that
of the E. of Leicester and the Lords) and may seem harsh and unmannerly; and
yet may admit of some alay, if the general rudeness of the time, the Kings
injurious provocations, and the passions of colerick men be weighed together:
Yet will not all these trench upon the cause, nor render the state of the Lords
too high, or disproportionable to their place in the policy of the kingdom of
England, as things then stood I say it was not disproportionable; for where the
degree of a King was mounting up to such a pitch as to be above law, the Lords
exceeded not their places in pressing him with their councels to conform to
the laws; and in maintaining that trust that was reposed in them in keeping off
such sinister councels and invasions as might violate the laws and liberties,
or hinder the current of justice; concerning which I shall shortly state the
case, and leave it to the censure of others. The government of the people of
this Nation in their original was Democraticall mixed with an Aristocracy (if
any credit be to be given to that little light of History that is left unto us
from those ancient times.) Afterward when they swarmed from their hive in
foreign parts, and came over hither, they came in a warlike manner, under one
conducter whom they called a King; whose power, whatever in the war, yet in
time of peace was not of that height as to rule alone; I mean that whereas the
Lords formerly had the principal executory power of laws settled in them, they
never were absolutely divested of that power by the access of a King; nor was
the King ever possessed of all that power, nor was it ever given to him; but
the Lords did ever hold that power the King concurring with them; and in case
the King would not concur the people generally sided with the Lords, and so
in conclusion the King suffered in the quarrel. From this ground did arise
from time to time the wanderings of the people in electing and deposing their
Kings during the Saxon times. Nor did nor could the Norman Williams shake off
this copartnership, but were many times, as well as other ensuing Princes,
persuaded against their own minds and plotted desires. Nor can it otherways be
supposed where Councels are settled; for whereto serve they, if (notwithstanding
them) the King may go the way of his inordinate desire? If the Lords then did
appear against these Kings whereof we treat, in cases where they appeared
against the laws and liberties of the people; it was neither new, nor so
heinous as its noised, for them who are equally if not more entrusted with the
Commonwealth then the King (by how much the Counselors are trusted more then
the councelled) to be true, for the maintenance of their trust in case the King
shall desert his. But the greater question is concerning the manner by threats
and war. Its as probable, I grant that the Lords used the one as the other,
for it was the common vice of the times to be rugged; yet if we shall add to
what has been already said, first, that Knight service was for the defense of
the kingdom principally. Secondly, that the greatest power of Knight service
rested with the Lords, not only in propriety and ownership, but in point of
direction for the benefit of the Commonwealth; and lastly, that the state of
the times now was such as the kingdom was oppressed by strangers counsels, and
the Councels of the kingdom rejected; that instead of law, garrisons of
strangers ruled; that no man could own his own, that the subjects were looked
upon as enemies; and of all this the King made the principal instrument, who
had ruled and overruled in this manner, and so was resolved to continue; I
shall leave it to the better judgment of others what other healing plaster was
to be had for such a sore. Albeit it cannot be denied, that more due respects
might have been tendered to kingly dignity then was in those times practiced:
And yet there was a difference also in the occasions of war, for certainly
that last war with Edward the second was more fatal, and yet less
warrantable; and in the issue declared that there was more of the Queen
therein then of the Lords, who knew a way of removing favorites from the King,
without removing the King from the kingdom, or driving him out of the world.
In all which nevertheless it cannot be concluded that the Lords party was
increased more then in the former Kings times; for the loss of the field in
Henry the thirds time against the Prince, kept them in awe all the succeeding
reign (although they were not then tongue tied) and their second loss against
Edward the second, which was yet more sharp, questionless quelled their
spirits (although they lost no right thereby) and increased the Kings party
much by the access to the Crown of the services of such as held of those
Lords that were attainted or disinherited: And yet by a hidden providence the
King was little the better when it came to the pinch; for when Edward the
seconds Queen came from beyond the Seas, though with but a small force, all
forsake the King; neither regarding the former terror of the Army of a King,
nor the right of service, nor oath of fealty, nor promises, nor laws, nor
other engagements; and so the King becomes a prey to an enraged woman, or which
is worse to a jealous wife: so little can the name of a King do, when his
person is despised; and so vain for him to trust in his Militia, that has
already disarmed himself of the hearts of his Subjects. The sum then of all
the labors of the Nobles during these times will rest in this, that they won
the day, and yet lost the field: although they lost their own bloods and
estates, yet they saved all to the people, and left laws in force able to
debate with prerogative in the hand of any King that should succeed. Thus stood
the matter in fact upon such grounds as it had, the validity whereof its not my
work to censure neither by the balance of Law or Gospel, but leave it as a
sore time, that scarce will endure touch; nor bear a King further then he was
good or brave.

CHAP. LXVI. Of the state of the English Clergy until the time of Edward the
third: and herein concerning the Statute of Circumspecte agatis, Articuli
Cleri, and of general Councels and national Synods.
IT was a time of much action throughout the whole Christian State; and Rome
now having attained to its full glory, began to be eyed on all parts, as an
irregular motion crossing all affairs, that it may like the sole Empress
command all, and be controlled by none; and this wrought some stirrings in
France, complainings in England, M. Paris. 720.
and facing between the Emperor and the Pope. How chargable this was to the
Popes treasury its not material, but it occasioned or was pretended to be the
occasion of all the intolerable exactions ensuing; there being scarce one year
passed over without some extraordinary exaction leavied upon the Churchmen,
either by provisors, tenths, procurations, levies for the Holy war,
Quindizmes, benevolences, or other such like; and where money was not to be
had, by levies of Ornaments or of rich apparel; by intimation, begging
persuading, commanding, threatening, and in this course continuing till they had
outfaced shame it self, and that the whole law of Rome became comprehended in
this one Quicquid libet licet. In general therefore the Church of Rome cannot
be said to thrive during these extorting times, although Rome did; for if the
Laity were pillaged by the King, the Clergy much more both by Pope and King; if
the one complained the other cried, the one sometimes found relief from the
King, but the other was helpless, for the Pope had no ears to hear, M. Paris
not the King hands to help; he neither durst nor would cross the Pope,
although the Clergy told him that by these exactions they were impoverished in
such manner as they were disabled to do him service for their lay Fees. Thus
Rome becomes a burden to Rome, and the members weary of bearing their head.
Hereafter must the Pope beware of falling out with Kings, for the English
Clergy now though late, see that all is not Gold that glisters; nor is it any
great privilege to be the Popes men further then the Pope will be a good
master, but this was not to be expected; Popes were grown so excellent, as they
could not amend; and England so enamoured of them, as its become their vere
bortus deliciarum, M. Paris.
as the Pope called it when he saw the rich vestments of the English Church
men: And therefore they must now be contented to be the Popes viands as often
as his hungry maw does call, or otherwise they must fall out. An excellent
posture of affairs, and brave preparative to dispose the hearts of all sorts
for intertainment of the easy yoke of Christ's government, which was now at the
door and ready to be revealed. Nevertheless poor and mean as the Clergy was
they had courage enough not only to stickle both with King and people for
their own liberties, but also to invade the liberties both of the Crown and
Commons, having this advantage, that they had to do with a King and people
that were two; and themselves well seconded by the Pope, that had no less
power in those times of public distraction, and was bound to serve the
cattle well that yielded him so much milk. M. Paris An. 1257. Vid. Addit.
Baronius Anal. 1306.
The particular matters of debate may appear in their paper of grievances
composed in Henry the thirds time, and their resolutions thereupon; their
complaints were renewed again in the time of Edward the first (if we may give
credit to Baronius) after the Statute of circumspecte agatis. To the end
therefore that the whole may lie before us, I shall set down the matter or
substance of both these papers severally in regard they sound much alike, and
note the difference; all which I shall do to the end that it may more plainly
appear what the Churchmens Idea was, and how far the common law and Kings
prerogative would agree thereto.

The complaints are of this natures

1. That the Church-possessions in their vacances are wasted, and that
Escheators do not only seize the personal estate of the Abbot or Prior
deceased, but such Corn in the barn, and other goods belonging to the houses,
for their maintenance; as also the profits of Churches impropriate. 2.


3, and 4, and 5. Elections are either disturbed by the Kings Letters
praeceding, or by delay of the Royal assent subsequent the said elections.

6. The Lay power without the advice of the Clergy do put in, eject, or
restore incumbents to Benefices void.

7. Prelates are summoned to answer to the Lay power in the Writs Quare
excommunicavit, and Quare non admisit.

8. Clerks are distrained in their Lay fees, to answer before the Lay power in
action of debts, trespass, or other personal actions; and in case they have
no Lay fees, the ordinary is distrained by his Barony to cause the Clerk to
appear.

9. The Laity are forbidden to take oath, or to inform upon oath before the
Prelates, and to obey Prelates commands in such cases.

10. Persons taken and imprisoned upon excommunication are ordinarily dismissed
without satisfaction unto the Prelate; and sometimes are not taken by the
Sheriff, 11. 12. and 33. 13.
notwithstanding the Kings Writ; and as well the King as his Officers do
ordinarily communicate with such as are excommunicated, and likewise command
others to communicate with them.

14. Clerks imprisoned for felony are refused to be delivered to the Ordinary,
unless upon security to appear before the Justices in Oyer, 15.
and sometimes are hanged before their Ordinary can demand them; and sometimes
their heads are all shaven that they may not appear to be Clerks.

16. Justices itinerant do imprison Clerks defamed for felony, or otherwise
outlaw them if they do not appear. And otherwise proceed against Clerks after
their purgation before the ordinary. 17.


18. The Lay power seises upon the estates of Clerks degraded for crimes.

19. Clergy are compelled to answer and give satisfaction for offenses against
the forest laws, 20.
before the Lay power: And in case of default the Bishop by distress is
compelled to order satisfaction, 21.
as well in such cases as in person all actions.

22. Privileges of Sanctuary are invaded by force.

23. Executors of Bishops are hindered from administering the estate without
license first obtained from the King.

24. The Kings tenants goods are seized after their decease by the Kings
Bailiffs.

25. Intestates goods are seized by their Lords, and their Ordinary hindered
from administration.

26. The Kings prohibition passes in case of Tithes and Chapels.

27. The like in cases of troth-plight, perjury, cerage, heriet, or other
Church duties, as money for reparations of Churches, and fences in Churchyards,
28.
pecuniary punishment for Adultery, 40. 29.
and costs of suit in Ecclesiastical court, sacrilege, excommunication for
breach of the liberties of the Church, contrary to the grand Charter.

30. In cases of prohibition if the Ecclesiastical Judge proceed contrary to
the same he is attached and compelled to show his acts in Court; if the Lay
Judge determine the cause to be temporal the Ecclesiastical Judge is amerced,
if he proceed against the prohibition, and its tried by witnesses of two
ribaulds: and in case it be found for the Ecclesiastical Judges cognizance, 31.
yet there is no costs allowed for such vexation.

32. That Jews in matters Ecclesiastical aforesaid are by the Kings
prohibition drawn from the Ecclesiastical Judge unto the Lay Magistrate.

34. Question about Lands given in Frankalmoine are tried in the Lay courts;
35. 36. 37. 38.
and by reason of such tenure the owners though Clergy men are compelled to do
suite at the Lay courts, and are charged with impositions, and are distrained
hereunto, although the Lord have other Land of the Donor in Frankallmoine
subject to his distress.

39. Prelates summoned to higher Courts are not allowed to make atturnies to
appear for them in the inferior civil courts.

41. Grantees of murage or other unwonted impositions compel the Churchmen to
pay the same.

42 and 43. The Clergy are charged with Quarter, Cart-service, and purveying.

44. The chancery sends out new Writs contrary to the liberties of the
Church, and the law of the Land without the assent of the Council of the
kingdom, Princes and Prelates.

45. The King does compel the Clergy to benevolences to the King at his voyage
into foreign parts.

46. Amercements granted to Clergy men are turned into fines by the Justices,
and by them taken.

47. Clergy men are fined for want of appearance before the Justices itinerant,
and of the Forest upon common summons.

48. Quo warrantoes granted against the Clergy for their liberties, and the
same seized, unless they be set down in express words in their Charter, 49.
50.
notwithstanding that by long custom they have enjoyed the same, and many
times contrary to express grant.

This is the sum of their paper of grievances; and because they found the
King either wilful or unconstant, they resolve upon a remedy of their own, by
excommunication and interdiction, not sparing the persons of any principal or
accessory, nor their Lands, no not of the King himself; and for this they join
all as one man: Now what scare this made I know not, but Henry the third in the
Stat. of Marlb. and Edward the first in his Stat. at Westminster, and other
Satatutes: the first spoke fair, and seemed to redress some of these
complaints; as also did Edward the second, and yet the Common law lost little
ground thereby.

That which Henry the third did besides his promises of reforming was done in
the Stat. of Marlbridge.

The successors of Abbats, Priors, and Prelates, Marlbr. c. 29.
etc. shall have an action of trespass for trespasses done nigh before the
death of their predecessors upon the estates of their Corporations. And shall
prosecute an action begun by their Predecessors. And also shall have an assize
against intruders into any of the possessions belonging to the said
Corporations whereof their predecessors died seized.

This might seem a remedy provided against the first malady complained of, and
questionless bound all but the King; and so might perchance abate somewhat the
edge of that Article. But it being the Clergies reach to grow rich, and the
Popes cunning to help on that work, that they might be as stores for supply of
his treasury; and had forbidden Abbats and other Prelates, etc. the liberty of
disposing their estates by last Will. Kings therefore as supreme patrons to
these bodies in their vacances used to seize all the estates of the Prelates
with the temporalties to their own use, as well to preserve the riches of the
kingdom to it self, and the possessions of such Corporations from spoil, as
to be a cloak of their own covetousness. And under the estates of the Prelates
or heads of these Corporations all the Goods and Chattels belonging to the said
Corporations were comprehended in regard that all was by law adjudged to be in
the sole possession of such head, Fits. Abbe 25.
and without whom all the rest were accounted but as dead persons.

Marlbr. c. 10.
No Clergy man is bound to attend at the Sheriffs Turn.

William the Conqueror first exempted the persons of the Clergy from
attendance upon temporal Courts; yet they were still urged thereto, Gloss. p.
428. Ll. Hen. 1. c. 31.
and especially by a Law in Henry the firsts time; but by this law they are
discharged, and in some measure a provision made against the grievance in the
39th Article before mentioned. These amends we find made to the Clergy by Henry
the third, besides his confirming the grand Charter: And his son Edward the
first pursued the same course, especially in his first times, when he was but
tenderly rooted: as may appear in the Statute of West. 1.

Clergy men nor their houses shall be charged with Quarter, nor their goods
with purveyance or cart-service, West. 1. cap. 1.
under peril of imprisonment and damages by action or imprisonment.

The great endowments of Lands, Rents, and Revenues given to the Churchmen by
the Laity was for the maintenance of Hospitality and works of charity. The
founders and benefactors hereby obtained a right of corody or entertainment at
such places, in nature of free quarter, which in the necessitous times of Henry
the third became so common that every one that had power never questioned
right, and the King above all the rest; by means whereof the Church Revenues
were exceedingly wasted: for remedy whereof all offenders are by this Statute
made liable to fine and imprisonment, and double damages in case of action of
trespass; the King only excepted, against whom they had no defense, but would
rather have won him to have been their defense against the exactions from
Rome that continually plagued them.

A Clerk taken upon felony, being demanded, West. 1. cap. 2.
shall be delivered to the Ordinary; but being indicted shall not be dismissed
by the Ordinary without due purgation.

With due respects to the judgment of those grave and honorable persons of
the Law, Co. 2. instit. 164. Stamf. 130.
it seems to me that before the making hereof the use was, that if a Clerk
was defamed or appealed by an offender for felony, before conviction he was
forthwith imprisoned; nor could he be delivered unto the Ordinary upon demand
before inquest taken, unless upon sufficient security to endure the trial
before the Judges itinerant; which thing was not easy to be had for a Clerk,
as times then were. This Law therefore was made in favor of the Clergy, who
required that such as were Clerici noti and honesti should forthwith upon their
apprehending be sent unto their Ordinary, M. Paris addit. fo. 200, 306, 207.
and those which were vagi and incogniti should upon demand be delivered to be
judged by their Ordinary freely, and non expectatis justiciariis quibuscunque:
Such wandering Clerks therefore the Clergy will have delivered before
inquisition if demand be made; Nevertheless because the indictment passed many
times before the demand came, (for by the 15 Article of the Clergies complaints
foregoing, it appears that the Lay Judge made more then ordinary speed, for
fear of stop.) This law provided that such also should be delivered to their
Ordinary, and that due purgation should pass before the party were delivered;
and in case the Ordinary neglected his duty herein, he was liable to a fine or
amercement. Briton 4. fo. 11.
Thus is Briton to be understood in this point; whereas Bracton speaking of
such as are convicted, affirms that if demand be made of such as are not
indicted (for of such he speaks) they ought to be delivered without
indictment: Bracton, lib. 3. fo. 123.
I suppose he means by the Church law, for till this Statute the temporal
Judges practice was otherwise, as appears by the 14 Article of the Clergies
complaint foregoing; and so by this Law the 14 and 15 Articles of the Clergies
complaint are answered.

West. 1. c. 5.
Disturbers of the freedom of elections fined.

With submission to the judgment of others I suppose that this was framed
principally for the satisfaction of the Clergies complaints in the third,
fourth, and fifth Articles foregoing: and I am the rather induced hereto,
because as touching elections into temporal places of government several laws
are especial framed; such as are elections of Sheriffs and Coroners, whereof
the one is West. 1. cap. 10. the other Artic super Cart. cap. 10. and no law is
especially made as touching the elections of the Clergy if not this.

W. 2. c. 19.
Ordinaries having the Goods of the intestate shall answer his debts.

Originally the goods of the intestate passed by a kind of descent to the
children: afterward by a Saxon law the wife had her part; and this continued
all the Normans time. But now the strength of the Canon law growing to its full
pitch, after a long chase attached the prey. In Henry the firsts time they had
gotten a taste, for although the wife and children, or next of kin had then
the possession, yet it was for the good of the soul of the deceased; and the
Ordinary had a directing power therein, and so was in the nature of an
overseer, and somewhat more. Afterward in the time of King John the Clergy had
drawn blood: for though the possession was as formerly, yet the dividend must
be made in the view of the Church; and by this means the deviders were but
mere instruments, and the right was vanished into the clouds, or as the
Lawyers term it in Abeyance. But in Henry the thirds time the Clergy had not
only gotten the game but gorged it; both right and possession was now become
theirs, and wrong done to none but the Clouds. This was not well digested
before Edward the first recovered part of the morsel; and by this law declared
the use and benefit of the deceased; and thus the one was satisfied in having
what he used not, the other in using what he had not.

But these are but gleanings; the Law of Circumspecte agatis brings in a load
at once: For the Clergy being vexed with the passing of the Stat: of Mortmaine
(whereof hereafter when we come to speak of the Clergies losses) they make
grievous complaints of wrongs done to their privileges; Antiq. Brit. 194.
and after six years the King is at length won; and passed a writing
somewhat like a grant of liberties, which before times were in controversy;
and this grant if it may be so called has by continuance usurped the name of a
Statute; but in its own nature is no other then a Writ directed to the Judges,
in substance as follows:

Take good heed that you do not punish the Bishop of Norwich and his Clergy if
they hold plea in Court Christian of things merely spiritual: Circumspect.
agatis.
for in such cases the Ecclesiastical Judge has cognizance notwithstanding
the Kings prohibition.

Its therefore neither grant nor release, but as it were a covenant that the
Clergy shall hold peaceable possession of what (...) had, upon this ground,
that the Kings prohibition has no place in such things as are merely
spiritual. So as hereby the Clergy got a judgment against the Crown by
confession, and an estopell, upon this maxim that spiritual things belong to
spiritual men, into which rank the Kings person cannot come; thus thought
they, but what are spiritual causes, and why so called? are they such as
concern spiritual persons, and things? this was the old way mark; but if we
bring into this Category, Adultery, Fornication, Incest, etc. we shall mar
all. Linwood tells us that mere spiritualia are such as are sine mixtura
temporalium: there may be somewhat in this though I cannot find it; nor can I
make out the sense of the term any other way, but to limit it to such things
which by common custom the Ecclesiastical Judge had cognizance of: for
otherwise neither King nor law ever intended it to be expounded by the Canon,
nor was it the intent of this Writ, Law, or License, (call it what you will)
thus to conclude, as the particulars following will manifest.

Fornication, Adultery, and such like punished sometimes upon the body, and
sometimes upon the purse.

These crimes the Saxons punished by the temporal power, as I have already
showed. The Normans continued this course if we may believe the Conquerours
laws which gave the fine in such cases to the Lord of the delinquent. Ll.
Gulielm. cap. 14, 19, 371.
And it is confessed that Henry the first and the second continued it (as the
Clergies own complaint just or unjust does witness.) And what course was
holden in the times of King Steven and John is to me unknown, M. Paris addit.
fo. 201. art. 28.
nor is it much to be regarded, seeing the latter did he cared not what, and
the former to gain the good will of the Clergy regarded not what he did. The
custom therefore cannot be made good for the Clergy, much less to punish the
bodies of freemen in such cases, it being contrary to the grand Charter; never
asked by the Clergy formerly, nor no complaint before now for denial: for my
part therefore I shall not apprehend it of a higher nature then the Kings Writ,
which in those days went forth at random, if the 44th Article of the Clergies
complaints foregoing be true. It be (...) so contrary to the common sense of
Parliament to give the bodies of the free men to the will of the Clergy, to
whom they would not submit their free holds. But the Writ proceeds in
enumeration of particulars.

Reparations and adornings of Churches and Fences of Churchyards. Violence
done to a Clerk, Defamation to reform, not to give damage. Perjury,
oblations, payments of Tithes between Rector and Parishioner: Right of Tithes
between two Rectors to a fourth part of the value: Mortuaries due by custom: A
pension from a Rector to a Prelate or Advocate.

The most of which were under the power of a prohibition in the time of Henry
the third, who was King but yesterday, as the Articles of complaint formerly
set down do manifest. Nor had the Clergy ever better title then connivance of
some such favorites as King Steven, whose acts may peradventure be urged
against Kings, but not against the people, unless their own act can be
produced to warrant it. The learning in the Princes case will (I suppose) admit
of a difference: Coke lib. 8.
for it can never be made out that the Kings Council in Parliament was the
Magnum concilium Regni, but only the house of Lords; and therefore whatever
passed in Parliament by their only advice might bind the King, but could
never reach the Commons nor their liberties. And thus the grand Charter in the
first conception was conclusive to the King but was not the act of the
Parliament, because the Parliament cannot grant a Charter to it self of that
which was originaly custom. And therefore this law however countenanced can
never be concluded to be other then a permission; not only because it was
never the act of the Commons of England, but because its contrary to the
liberty of the free men; and its beyond all imagination that the Commons should
out themselves from the protection of the Common law, and yoke themselves,
their free holds, and estates under the bondage of the Canons; nor ought such a
construction to be admitted without express words to warrant it. As for the
conclusion, it is much worfe, and not only dishonorable to the King in
binding his arms from protecting his Subjects by the Common laws, and so in
some respects making them outlawes: but dishonorable to it self, whiles it
makes prohibitions grounded upon Laws to be nullities by a late trick of
non-obstante, which was first taken up by the Pope, then by Henry the third,
and by this King granted to the Clergy: and thus are all set at liberty from
any rule but that of licenciousnesse. Nevertheless this Law did thrive
accordingly, for we find scarce any footsteps in Story of any regard had
thereof till it became gray headed; For it was not long ere the King stood in
need of money, and was necessitated to try the good wills of the Clergy more
then once: this occasioned them to be slow in answer, and in conclusion to deny
that they should aid the King with any more money, Antiq. Brit. vit. Winchelsy.
Papa inconsulto. The King hereupon disavowes the Clergy, and leaves them to
the Romish oppressions, which were many; and then the Clergy rub up all old
sores, and exhibit their complaints to their holy Father, Baronus Annal. An.
1306.
to this effect: 1. That the Kings Justices intermeddle in testamentary causes,
accounts of Executors, and cognizance of Tithes, especially to the fourth part
of the Living. 2. That the Clergy were charged to the Kings carriages. That
the Kings Mils were discharged from paying of Tithes. That Clerks attending on
the Exchequer were necessitated to non-residency. And that after their decease
their goods were seized till their accounts were made. That Ecclesiastical
possessions were wasted during vacancies. 3. That Clerks were admitted to free
Chapels by Lay men. 4. That the Kings Justices took cognizance of Usury,
Defamation, violence done to Clerks, Sacrilege, Oblations, Fences of the
Churchyards and Mortuaries. 5. That prohibitions are granted without surmise.
6. That Clerks are called to answer in the Kings court for crimes, and being
acquitted the informers escape without penalty. 7. That Clerks are not allowed
their Clergy. 8. That after purgation made, Clerks are questioned in the Kings
court for the same offense. 9. That persons in Sanctuary are therein besieged.
10. That the Writ de Cautione admittenda issues forth although the Church be
not satisfied, and excommunicate persons being imprisoned are enlarged in like
manner. 11. That debts between Clerks due, are determined in the temporal
courts. 12. That Bishops are compelled by distress to cause Clerks to appear
in Lay courts without cause. 13. That the Church loses its right by the
ceasing of rent or pension by the space of two years. 14. That Nuns are
compelled to sue in the Lay courts for their right in possessions befalling by
decease of their kindred. 15. That Churches are deprived of their privileges
till they show Quo warranto they hold them. 16. That Ecelesiasticall Judges are
stopped in their proceedings by Sheriffs and great men. 17. That Bishops
refusals of Clerks presented are examined in the Lay courts. 18. That patrons
of Religious Houses do oppress them by extreme Quarter. 19. That Bigamy and
Bastardy are tried in Lay courts. 20. That the King suffers his Livings to be
vacant for many years. 21. That the Clergy are wronged by the Statute of
Mortmaine.


Here Is all, and more then all that's true; and more then enough to let the
reader see that the Writ Circumspecte agatis was but a face put on for the
present, after laid aside, and the Clergy left to the bare Canon. They likewise
show what the Clergy aimed at: and in that they did not obtain was to be
attributed to the resolution of the Laity, and not to any neglect in
themselves; for the Archbishop died in the service, and its thought that grief
for these matters was no little cause thereof. But the times within a while grew
troublesome, Antiq. Brit.
and the King in pursuit of the French wars, being unadvised in in his way
angered the people by his arbitrary levies of men and money, Articuli cleri.
as it brought forth a State scoule, little inferior to a quarrel. And to
pacify the Clergy he granted them the Writ de consultatione habenda in all
matrimonial and testamentary cases, Stat. de consul. tat. 24. E. i.
which were of their least doubted privileges; and this qualified the first
Article of complaint next foregoing, if such cause they had of complaint; and
this was all that the Clergy got at Edward the firsts hands. Edward the second
was a man that was neither well affected to Rome, nor weak in spirit, and yet
so unhappy that his way neither promised good success, nor ever had it; and so
he became a servant unto the humors of his servants, to keep his head above
water; but especially after he was chased by the Scots, and quite out of
breath, he calls for help of all, but first of the Clergy, and bespeaks them
with the Ordinance of Articuli cleri; wherein he gives some satisfaction to the
complaints formerly mentioned, which it seems by Baronius were exhibited in
Parliament.

Ecclesiastical cognizance extends unto Tithes, Oblations, cap. 1.
and Mortuaries, and to pecuniary recompense.

In the first times neglect or denial of Church-duties was punished in the
Kings court by fine. Afterward the Bishop was joined in that work, Ll.
Alfred. c. 9. Ll. Edw. cap. 6.
and the tythable goods were seized; eight parts whereof was taken to the Lords
and the Bishops use by moities; a ninth part left to the owner, and the tenth
to the Church; Ll. Canut. c. 8.
nor had the Bishops any peculiar Courts of cognizance of causes till the times
of the Normans; nor as yet in those times had they power to all intents; for
though it be true that the Roman tribute of Peter Pence was allowed by the
Conquerours law to the Bishops court, Ll. Gul. 20. cap. Spicileg. 180.
yet we find no law for Tithes and other profits to be recovered by the
Ecclesiastical court till about the end of Henry the seconds reign, or King
Stevens time; for at a Council at London in Henry the seconds time it was
ordained that three summons in the Popes name should be made to such as paid
not their Tithes, Binius Tom. 7 fo. 661. An 1173.
and in case they then refused they should be anathema: and after that time in
a Council at Oxford under Steven Archbishop of Canterbury it was decreed that
the Laity should be entreated first to pay their Tithes, Baronius Annal. 1222.
cap. 19.
and then if necessity require that they should be compelled by Ecclesiastical
censure: so as their power crept up by degrees in recovering of Church-duties,
as it did in testamentary matters; and at length Henry the third worn and
spent with the Barons wars, about his latter end yielded to Boniface the
Archbishop his importunate demands, and first gave liberty to the Clergy to be
their own Judges; and yet the Lay Judges, although diverse of them were Clergy
men did not suddenly forbear till this law came, which gave some satisfaction
to the first and fourth Articles of complaint foregoing.

Ecclesiastical cognizance extends not to a fourth part of the Tithes of any
Living, cap. 2.
nor to pecuniary mulcts for sin, saving by way of commutation.

The complaint of the Clergy in Henry the thirds time was against the Kings
prohibition in case of Tithes indefinitly; for in those times and afterward in
Edw. the firsts time the Kings court had the cognizance of all Tithes, and
therefore in the Statute of Westminster. 2. c. 5. the Writ of Indicavit was allowed
in case of right of any portion of Tithes; yet the Church still gained ground,
and about or before the death of Edward the first the Temporal Judge had
yielded unto the Clergy the cognizance of a portion of Tithes under the value
of the fourth part, Artic. 1.
(for in the Article next foregoing the Clergies complaint was that the Kings
Justices held cognizance of the fourth part) and here they were confined
thereto by this law, which the Clergy could never remove.

For violence done to Clerks the offender shall render damage in the Kings
Court, but Excommunication, cap. 3.
Penance, and Commutation shall be in the Bishops court.

The Canon law had an ancient claim to the Protection of Clerks both as
touching their persons and estates; and prevailed so far as they were thereby
imboldned to offer violence unto others. But as I formerly showed by a Law in
Henry the seconds time the Temporal Judge resumed his original power; and
this became a sore evil between the Clergy and Laity, for though it were
allowed that Clerks should not be sued but before the Ecclesiastical Judge in
such cases, yet it was no warrant for the Laity likewise to be called before
the Ecclesiastical Judge in such cases; and therefore the Clergies complaints
show that the matter was doubtful, and that the Lay Judge generally maintained
his jurisdiction, although sometimes he disclaimed it as it may appear in the
case of a trespass in the nature of a riot committed upon the priory of St
John's of Jerusalem in the seventh year of Henry the third, when as it was
adjudged per curiam that it belonged to the Ecclesiastical court to punish:
Fits. Harb. 7 Hen. 3. prohibition. 30
But in Edward the firsts time, by the Ordinance of Circumspecte agatis, and
Articles concerning prohibitions; the difference was made between damages and
pre reformatione, and the same affirmed by this Law, and so the matter settled,
and the fourth Article of the Clergies complaint in some measure satisfied.

cap. 4.
Defamation within cognizance of the Ecclesiastical court, and corporal
penance therefore, and Commutation.

The words are general and peremptory with a non obstante the Kings
prohibition, and yet the Law afterward restrained the sense to defamation for
crimes or offenses triable in the Ecclesiastical court: and this gave further
satisfactin to the fourth Article of the Clergies complaint foregoing.

cap. 5.
Tithes of new Mils may be recovered in the Ecclesiastical court.

This Tithe of Mils was a new incroached Tithe never mentioned in any former
law of this Kingdom, nor demanded by the Synod at London, Anno 1173. which
mentions fruit trees, young broods of living creatures that are tame, Herbage,
Butter, Cheese, with other particulars, but mentions not new Mils. Its true
that anciently Mils paid Tithes, but such they were which were ancient and had
paid the same by custom; and such as by Law in the Confessors time were
declared to be given a Rege Baronibus and populo. But by the second Article of
the Clergies complaint next foregoing it appears that the Kings Mils refused
to pay this Tithe; now whether the new Mils were called the Kings Mils, as
being made upon the public streams by the Kings license; or whether the Mils
newly made within the Demesnes of the Crown its not to be insisted upon; but
its evident that till this Law made the new Mils would not tithe their labors.

One and the same matter may be tried at the common Law after sentence in the
Spiritual Court in diverse respects. cap. 6.


The great sore that was complained of was that the Clergy after purgation in
the Ecclesiastical court made, were proceeded against in the Kings court in
case of breach of peace, or felony, as may appear out of the 16th Article of
the Clergies first complaints, and the 8th Article of that taken out of
Baronius. Nevertheless the present law subjoynes an example of the questioning
a Lay man in the Ecclesiastical court in case of violence done to a Clerk as
a matter which may be tried in the Ecclesiastical court, and yet reviewed by
the Kings court.

The Writ de Excommunicato deliberando shall not issue forth but upon evident
breach of the Kings liberty. cap. 7.


This might be intended in satisfaction of the tenth Article of the Clergies
complaint in Baronius, and the tenth Article in the Clergies complaint first
recited; although that complaint both in the 10, 11, 12, and 33 Articles seem
to be but clamor upon Officers, and not the Kings court of justice.

Clerks Officers to the Exchequer are to be corrected by their Ordinaries; cap.
8.
and yet not tied to residence during their attendance on the Exchequer.

This is in part an answer to the second Article of the Clergies last
complaint, and a justification thereof as a thing that is pro bono publico.

Clergy men's goods shall not be distrained either in the high way or Sanctuary
grounds, cap. 9.
unless such as have been of late purchase.

The complaint exhibited in Henry the thirds time, and the 8th Article was
only in ordinary personal actions; but in the complaint made in Edward the
seconds time Article 12. is that its without cause that they are so distrained.
This law yields them somewhat, viz. immunity from distress within their
ancient possessions which had been by ancient custom privileged, but yields
nothing as touching their latter purchased Lands, because they had no such
custom.

cap. 10.
High ways and Sanctuaries shall be free for such as abjure, so as they shall
neither be restrained from liberty, nor necessaries kept from them. Felons may
make free confession to the Priest without danger.

The grievance in the 22th Article of the Clergies complaint, in Henry the
thirds time, and the ninth in that of the times of Edw. 2. are hereby relieved;
provided that the delinquent keeps himself in due order.

cap. 11.
Houses of Religion shall not be oppressed with corodies, pensions or
entertainments of great men.

This answered the grievance in the 42 and 43 of the first complaint, and the
18 of the latter, and in effect little other then what was formerly settled by
West. 1. cap. 1.

cap. 12.
The Kings Tenants may be cited before the Ordinary out of their own Town, and
if Excommunicated for want of appearance, the Writ de excommunicato capiendo
shall be awarded.

A remedy this was against the grievances in the 12 and 33 Articles of the
first complaint, and in the 10th Article of the last scedule of complaints. And
thus the Clergy have gotten the day of the Kings Tenants, which they had been
striving for ever since the conquest, as may appear by what has been formerly
said; and now the Kings Tenants are in no better condition then other men, viz.
they may now be excommunicated without the Kings license: nor is the answer
Nunquam fuit negatum to be referred to the point of Excommunication; for that
power was denied them but unto the citing them out of their own Parish, which
cannot be found to be denied to the Clergy by any thing that yet appears.

A Clerk presented and found unable by the Ordinary shall be tried again by
the Ecclesiastical, cap. 13.
and not the Lay Judge.

Although the fitness or sufficiency of the party presented is to be examined
by the Ordinary, yet the civil Magistrate has power in action brought to
inquire and determine whether the Ordinaries work was rightly done, and so the
17 Article of the last complaint answered.

Elections shall be free. cap. 14.


The law was of the same with this in the Stat. W. 1. cap. 5. which see before;
and it may be that the iniquity of the times continued notwithstanding and so
occasioned the renewing of this law.

A Clerk having taken Sanctuary shall not be compelled to abjure. cap. 15.


Nor after confession of the crime, cap. 16.
or appealing others before the secular Judge shall be denied his Clergy.

Although the Temporal courts proceeded not so far as to pass sentence
against a Clerk that had taken Sanctuary; yet they proceeded to inquiry, as
may appear by what was said formerly concerning the Stat. West. 1. cap. 2. and
therefore though this law in the 15th Chap. allows that a Clerk in Sanctuary
shall enjoy his Ecclesiastical liberty, yet the words legi Regni se reddens
are interposed; and the reason is, because the King upon indictment found had
right to the delinquents goods and profits of his lands until due purgation, 7
E. 2. Fits. tit. forfaiture 34.
and then his Lands were by a Writ out of the Chancery to be restored to him
again; nor could any purgation regularly pass before the party was indicted.

Stat. de asport. relig. 35 E. 1.
No religious House shall be charged with tax to any superior without the
Realm of England; nor shall send to any visitation out of England.

This was neither at the request of the Clergy nor act of kindness intended
unto them but for the good of the Kingdom, to prevent the bleeding of the
treasure of the Kingdom into foreign parts.

Mag. carta cap. 35.
Patrons of Abbeys shall have their custody during their vacancies.

This was the ancient Law now revived by the Clergies consent and intended for
the safeguard of the Revenues of the Houses, and their maintenance; and
therefore its with a sicut superius dictum est, cap. 5.

Stat. de prisis Edw. 2.
The goods of the Clergy freed from purveyance, unless they will.

It was a favor given by Edw. 2. to the Clergy to gain their good will after
the death of Gaveston the shameful defeat received in Scotland, and some
particular testimonies of Gods displeasure, whereof he began to be somewhat
sensible.

Stat. de quo Warranto. 18 Edw. 1.
Franchises holden by prescription or charter confirmed, and trials by Quo
warranto allowed to be in eyer.

It was the common share of the great men, but especially of the Clergy to have
their franchises exposed to the prey of the Eagles, or to such as hauked for
them; and its likely the King had not so easily forgone his prise, if all the
fat had fallen to his own share; but perceiving that more benefit came to his
instruments then was meet, and himself little the better thereby; he
sacrificed his Judges to the people, but it was to his own behoof, and so
gained both credit and favor from the people, and profit to himself; and in
some measure satisfied the 48, 49, 50. Articles of the Clergies complaint in
the time of Henry the third, and the 15th Article of their last complaint.

Lands or Tenements aliened to a Religious house shall escheate to the Lord,
Mag. carta cap. 37.
if the alienor take the same back to hold of that house.

The ground hereof principally was the prejudice done to the Lord by
destruction of the tenure albeit that it had been an ancient grievance
complained of in the Saxon times that the Clergy were covetous, and swallowed
down estates, and thereby weakened the Kingdom: But now they are become even
cheaters, serving the turns of treacherous tenants that would give their Lands
by compact with the Church men to receive them again from them to hold of the
Church, which was a liberty that men thirsted after in those times wherein the
Church men were more adored then their Images. Bracton, lib. 1. fo. 13. Coke.
2. instit. super Magna carta cap. 36. p. 74, and 75. Bracton lib. 2. cap. 10.
fo. 27.
It seems this Law was made after Bractons time, if that be true in the second
institutes: for he says that a man may give his lands to any one, whether
Christian or Jew, or religious person, and nothing shall hinder it but the
special reservation of the donor; and yet he says that such gift or grant
takes not away the right of the Lord Paramount in his tenure, albeit the gift
be in free alms. Nevertheless it seems to be such restraint as the Templers
and Hospitallers were feign to find out a new way, which was to protect men's
tenements from execution of law by levying crosses thereon, albeit the right of
the Lords was not barred; and therefore Edw. 1. Stat. West. 2. cap. 33.
provided a law to make this also in nature of a Mortmaine within the Statute
made in the seventh year of his reign, called the Statute de Religiosis by
which it was enacted that in case of such alienations in Mortmaine the Lord
should have liberty to enter; if he failed then the Lord paramont, Stat. de
Religiosis. 7 E. 1.
or if he failed the King should enter and dispose of the same; and that no
license of Mortmaine should be sued out but by the mean Lords assent; and where
part of the premises remain still in the Donor, and the original Writ
mentions all the particulars. And thus at length was this issue for the
present stayed which hitherto wasted the strength of the Kingdom, Stat. de
Amortizandis terris. M. West. An. 1280. Mag. carta cap. 39.
and by continual current emptying it into the mare mortuum of the Clergy
consumed the maintenance of Knight service, by converting the same to
Clerk-service.

No Judge shall compel a free man to make oath without the Kings command.

Miror Just. cap. 5. sec. 3.
So is the sense of the law rendered by an ancient author; and I hope I shall
not wrong the Text if I affirm that the Ecclesiastical Judge was included
within the equity, though properly he be not Balivus; for the Law intends to
show that its a liberty that the subject has, not to be compelled to take oath
without the Kings especial command: and by consequence it shows also that
the King at that time, and until then had the directory of oaths; for it was
an ancient liberty given in the Kings charters unto such as they pleased, viz.
to impose oaths, Malimsb. de gest. Reg. lib. 2.
and to punish for breach of oath, and this passed under the word Athae or
Athas; and so Edmund the Saxon King gave to the Abbey of Glastenbury amongst
other Athas and Ordulas; and the Churchmen that first procured vacations from
suits of law during holy times, procured a law also to be settled by Edward the
Saxon King and Gunthurne the Dane, Ll. Edw. cap. 9.
that Ordeale and oaths should be forbidden upon the holy Feasts and lawful
fasts. And a wonder it is how it escaped the gripe of the Clergy so long, who
catched at any thing that had but a glance of Gods worship in it. And if this
were the subjects liberty not to be compelled to swear, surely much more not
to be compelled to accuse himself, unless by the law he be especially bound;
Bracton. lib. 3. cap. 7 fo. 106.
for it is Glanviles rule, Ob infamiam non solet juxta legem terrae aliquis per
legem apparentem se purgare nisi prius convictus fuerit vel confessus in
curiae. But the power of the Clergy now was grown strong, and they begin to
remember themselves; and that oaths are of a holy regard, and they men for
holiness best able to judge when and to whom they shall be ministered, and
therefore now they begin to enter their claim, and to make a sure title, they
get a grant from Pope Innocent to Steven Langton Archbishop of Canterbury of a
faculty of licencing administration of oaths during the time of Lent; and he
accordingly enjoyed it during the mad time of Henry the third. But Edward the
first quarrelled it, and left it questionable to Edward the second, who being
in his condition as a lost man had less care of such smaller matters, and
therefore allowed that his Judges of Assizes should be licenced by the
Archbishop to administer oaths in their circuits in the sacred times of Advent
and Septuagessima: Antiq. Brit. Eccles. 209.
and this course continued till Henry the eights time. The Clergy having thus
gotten the bridle, gallop amain: they now call whom they will, and put them to
their oaths to accuse other men or themselves, or else they are
excommunicated; Henry the third withstood this course, if the Clergy men's
complaints in the times of that King, Artic. 9. be true, and notwithstanding
the same the law holds its course, and in pursuance thereof we find an
attachment upon a prohibition in this form ensuing.

Put the Bishop of N. to his pledges that he be before our Justices to show
cause why he made to be summoned, Regist. fo. 36.
and by Ecclesiastical censures constrained Lay persons, men or women to
appear before him to swear unwillingly at the Bishops pleasure, to the great
prejudice of our Crown and dignity, and contrary to the custom of the Kingdom
of England. And thus both King and Clergy were at contest for this power over
the peoples consciences, to which neither had the right otherwise then by rules
of law.

Bigamists shall not be allowed their Clergy, Stat. Bigam. 4 Edw. 1. cap. 5
whether they become such before the Council of Lions, or since; and that
Constitution there made shall be so construed.

Whatsoever therefore their Synods in those times pretended against the married
Clergy seems by this law that they had Clergy that were married once and
again; and yet before and after the Council were admitted as Clerks in the
judgment of the Law. But the General council interposes their authority, and
deprives them that are the second time married of all their privileges of
Clergy. It was it seems twenty years and more after that Council before the
Churchmen in England were thoroughly reformed, for either some were still Bigami
at the making of this law, or as touching that point it was vain; nor is it
easy to conceive what occasion should after so long a time move such
exposition, the words of the Constitution being Bigamos omni privilegio
clericali declaramus esse nudatos Now whither this slow reformation arose from
the defect in law, or in obedience thereto, may be gathered from some
particulars ensuing. First, it is apparent that the canons of General councels
General councels.
eo nomine had formerly of ancient times gotten a kind of praeeminence in this
Nation; but by what means is not so clear. In the Saxon times they were of no
further force then the Great council of this Kingdom allowed by express act.
For the Nicene faith, and the first five General councels were received by
Synodicall constitutions of this Kingdom made in the joint meeting both of the
Laity and Clergy; and during such joint consulting the summons to the General
councels was sent to the King to send Bishops, Abbats, etc. but after that the
Laity were excluded by the Clergy from their meetings, and the King himself
also served in the same manner; the summons to the General council issued
forth to the Bishops immediately, and in particular to each of them, and to the
Abbats and Priors in general; Bineus tom. 13 Ps. 2. page 674. M. Paris.
by virtue whereof they went inconsulto Rege, (and sometime Rege renitente) and
appeared either personally or by proxy. Others came as parties to give and
receive direction, or hear sentence in matters tending to spiritual regards:
and for this cause issued summons sometimes even to Kings; as at the council
of Lions aforesaid, its said that the Pope had cited Reges terrae and alios
mundi principes and dictum principem, meaning Henry the third; M. Paris An.
1245.
the matter was for assistance to the holy war; and to determine the matter,
Henry the third, and his Clergy men. And as in that case so in others of that
kind, Kings would send their Ambassadors or Procters, and give them power in
their Princes name interessendi, tractandi, communicandi and concludendi.
First, of such matters quae ad reformationem Ecclesiae universalis in capite
and membris, then of such as concern fidei orthodoxae fulciamentum, Bineus
Tom. 3. Ps. 2. page 913. and Tom. 4. Ps. 1 page 14.
Regumque ae principum pacificationem, or any other particul r cause which
occasionally might be incerted: so long then as Kings had their votes in the
General councels, they were engaged in the maintenance of their decrees; and
by this means entered the Canon law into Kingdoms. Nor was the vote of Kings
difficult to be obtained, especially in matters that trenched not upon the
Crown; for the Pope (knowing well that Kings were too wise to adventure their
own persons into foreign parts where the General councels were holden, and
that it was thrift for them to send such proctors that might not altogether
spend upon the Kings purse) allowed Bishops and Clergymen to be Proctors for
their Princes, that in the negative they might be pii inimici, and less
active; but in the affirmative zealous: and so make the way wider by the
Temporal and Spiritual vote joined in one. Neither did Kings only save their
purse but they also made their own further advantage hereby; for by the
engagement and respect which these his proctors had in councels, they (being
for the most part such as were had in best esteem) obtained better respect to
the cause that they handled, and speedier dispatch.

Nevertheless the case sometimes was such as could not expect favor, and then
as the Kings temper was they would sometimes ride it out with full sail, and
to that end would either join with their Ecclesiastical Proctors some of the
Barrons, and great men of their Realm, to add to the cry, and make their
affairs ring louder in the ears of fame (although the Pope had the greater
vote) or otherwise would send an inhibition unto their Proctors and their
assistants; or an injunction to look to the rights of the Crown (as Henry the
third did at the council at Lions) and this sounded in nature of a protest,
Fox Mart. Ps. 2. 263.
and (within the Realm of England) had the force of a proviso, or saving. But
if the worst of all came to pass, viz. that the council passed the cause
against Kings without any inhibition or injunction: yet could it not bind the
law of the Land, or Kings just prerogatives, no not in these times of Romes
hour, and of the power of darkness: For at a Synod holden by Archbishop
Peckam, An. 1280. the acts of the Council of Lions was ratified, and amongst
others a Canon against non residency and pluralities; and yet neither Council
nor Synod could prevail. for in Edward the seconds time an Abbat presenting to
a Church vacant (as was supposed) by the Canon of pluralities the King whose
Chaplain was disturbed enjoined the Abbat to revoke his presentation upon this
ground Cum igitur etc. in English thus: Antiq. Brit. Eccles. fo. 209.
Whereas therefore that decree binds not our Clerks in our service in regard
that the Kings and Princes of England from time to time have enjoyed that
liberty and prerogative that their Clerks whiles they attend upon their service
shall not be constrained to undertake holy things, or to be personally resident
on their benefices, etc.

And if this present law be considered whereof we now treat, which took leave
to enact a sense upon a former Canon so long since made; and (which is all one)
to make a general Council (will or nill it) to tread in the steps of an
English Parliament, or (which is more mean) to speak after the sense of an
English Declaration that had not yet attained the full growth of a Statute, 30
aff. pl. 5.
as was then conceived; it will evidently appear that the power of a Council
made up of a mixture of a few votes out of several nations, or the major part
of them being unacquainted with the Laws and customs of Nations (other then
their own) was too mean to set a law upon any particular Nation contrary to
its own original and fundamental Law. And as the voters sent to the general
Councels from England were but few, so neither were the Proctors, as may
appear from this, that Pope Innocent out of his moderation, if we may believe
it; and to avoid much expense, as he says, did order that the number of
Proctors in such cases should be few: but in truth the times then were no times
for moderation amongst Popes and their Officers, and therefore it was another
thing that pinched; for multitude of Proctors, if their number had not been
moderated, might perhaps if not prevail yet so blemish the contrary party,
that what the Pope should get must cost him loss of spirits if not blood; and
although the Bishops being fast friends to the Pope by virtue of their oath did
prevail in power, and the Pope had the control of the Council; yet the
exceeding number of the Proctors on the contrary might render their conclusions
somewhat questionable in point of honesty, as being made against the minds of
the greater number of persons present, though their votes were fewer. To avoid
this difficulty therefore for more surety sake the Popes enlarged the number of
the voters; for whereas it seems to be an ancient rule that only four
Bishops should go out of England to the general Council, Hoveden. An. 1179.
in after ages not one Bishop could be spared unless in cases of great and
emergent consequence; as may appear by the Popes letter to Henry the third,
and the case required it: for the oppressions of the Pope began to ring so
loud, M. Paris An. 1245.
as the holy chair began to shake. Neither did Kings confine themselves to any
certain number of Proctors, notwithstanding the Popes moderation; but as the
case required sent more or less, as unto that Council at Pisa for the
composing and quieting that great schism in the Popedom, Henry the fourth
sent solemn Ambassadors, and with them nigh eighty in all. But unto the
Council at Basell, Henry the sixth sent not above twelve or thirteen, as Mr
Seldom more particularly relates. Spicil. 215.
And unto the council at Lions formerly mentioned the Parliament sent but six
or seven to remonstrate their complaints of the extorsions of the Court at
Rome, their Legates and Emissaries. The sum of all will be that the Acts of
general Councels were but councels which being offered to the sense of the
Parliament of England might grow up to the degree of Laws, if the Parliament
liked them.

Nevertheless Nation all Synods Synods.
in England undertook the quarrel of General councels: for Archbishop
Peckham in a Synod 1280. enjoined the constitutions made in the Council at
Lions to be observed under a curse without consultation first had with the
Parliament, or before he knew whether they would be right or wrong; and before
him Boniface made constitutions in opposition to the customs of the Kingdom,
so as the matter was now come to a kind of contest whither Synods or
Parliaments should hold supremacy in doubtful cases concerning the limits of
the Ecclesiastical and temporal power: for henceforth Kings must bid adieu to
the Synods, and sit no more amongst them; and Synods now think themselves free
to consult and determine what they please without speaking under correction;
nor was there other remedy left to Kings but threats, by Writs directed to the
Bishops firmiter inbibendo quod sicut Baronias quas de Rege tenent deligunt
nullo modo praesumunt concilium tenere de aliquibus quae ad coronam Regis
attinent vel quae ad personam Regis vel statum suum vel statum concilii sui
contingunt, Rot Parliam. 18 H 3. number. 17.
quod si fecerint Rex inde se capiet ad Baronias suas.

And this prevailed so far as the Bishops durst not adventure too far least
they should go beyond their guard; and therefore they come and ask leave of
the Parliament in cases that trenched upon the Law of the Kingdom, as they did
in the case of bastardy, wherein they would have had their consent that
children borne before marriage to be made legittimate by the marriage
subsequent; Stat. Merton. cap. 9.
and yet they could not prevail, for they were answered Nolumus leges Angliae
mutari, notwithstanding that the Canon law, and the laws of the Normans sided
with them; and so they obtained not their desire, although they still retained
the trial of general bastardy unto themselves.

Nevertheless the times were such as Kings being too weakly assisted by the
people, and the Clergy strongly seconded by the Pope, they took advantage of
those times of distraction so as to hold themselves no further obliged to the
King then the Pope and their own covetousness would allow them; and to make
all sure, they had settled it so far as they were able by a constitution, that
the Clergy were not bound to aid the King Papa inconsulto; Antiq. Brit.
and they put it in practice in a Synod under Archbishop Winchelsie, Anno 1295.
in the time of Edward the first; and although the King prevailed in the
conclusion at that time, yet from the times of Henry the third the Clergy for
future times granted their aides to the King by themselves, and a part from the
rest of the body of the Kingdom, and held themselves not bound by any aid
granted by the Parliament, albeit that their own ayds granted in their Synods
were not obligatory unto the body of the Clergy in this Kingdom, unless first
allowed and confirmed by the Parliament. And thus is England become like a two
bodied monster supported with one pair of legs.

CHAP. LXVII. Of the condition of the free men of England of the grand Charter
and other Statutes during the reigns of these Kings.
SHattered asunder by broiles of Civil wars, the free men having laid aside
that regard of the ancient mutual covenant and bond of Decenners are now
become weak, and almost inthralled to the lust of Kings, Lords, Pope, and
English Clergy; and therefore its no wonder if taxes and tributes were many and
new although most of them deserved not to march under any banner but the
colors of oppression; nor did any thing save them from the worst tenure of
all, but the several interests of those superior powers which oftentimes did
justle with one another, and thereby gave the Commons liberty to take breath so
as though for the present they lost ground and hunted upon a cool sent, yet
they still retained the prey within their view. Sometimes they were cast far
behind; other times they recovered themselves; a truce is cried, and laws are
made to moderate all, and determine the bounds of every one; and thus comes the
grand Charter into the Public Theater. The Historian says it was the same
with that of King John's framing; and yet by comparing them together we find
them disagreeing both in words and sense, and therefore shall sum the same up
as shortly as I can, observing the difference of the two Charters as I pass
along. The first Chapter concerned the Church, of which sufficient has been
spoken. Mag. carta.


The Free men shall enjoy these liberties to them and their heirs for ever.
cap. 2.


The heir in Knightservice shall pay the ancient relief.

cap. 3.
That reliefes were settled by the Saxons has been already showed, and also that
they were continued and confirmed by Henry the first: only in those times they
were paid in Horses, Arms, etc. but in after times all was turned into money,
which was more beneficial for all.

cap. 4. Vide Stat. de Wardis, 28 E. 1
Lords shall have their Wards bodies, and Lands after homage received until
the full age, though the Ward be formerly Knighted.

Glanvil. lib 6. cap. 1. and 4.
The Law of Wardship may seem more anciently seated in this Kingdom then the
Normans times, for if the Statutes of Scotland bear any credit, that Law was
in Scotland before those times. The Lords were not to have the Wardship before
they were possessed of the tenure because it was theirs as a fruit of the
tenure, according to the Saxon law concerning distress, that it could not be
in the power of the Lord to distraine till he was possessed of the service.
Stat. Marlbr. cap. 6 and 7.
And if by fraudulent conveyance the heir did hold the Lord out of possession,
a Writ of Ward did lie against him; and if he did not appear the Lord might
seize the Lands, unless in case of Wardship per cause de guard.

Stat. Marlbr. cap. 16. and prerog. Reg. cap. 3.
And in case the Lord would hold the Wardship longer then the full age of the
heir, an Assize did lie against the Lord, for the heir could not enter
without livery. But if the heir were of full age at the time of the ancestors
death, the Lord could not enter the Lands; and yet he should have a relief,
and the primer seisin.

And if the heir entered the Lands before homage done, he gained no free hold,
Prerog. Reg. cap. 13.
though he were Knighted before, as this Law provideth: for it may seem that
these times of civil war brought forth a trick of Knighting betimes, as an
honorable encouragement for young sparks to enter the field before they were
complete men of discretion to know whether the cause of war was good or
evil: and yet reason might induce a conceit that he that was thought meet to
do Knight service in his own person might expect the maintenance fit for the
ability of the person and honor of the service.

Grantees or their assigns or Committees of Wardships shall preserve the Land,
etc. from waste, cap. 5.
and the tenants from extortion.

They shall yield up the same stocked if they receive them stocked. cap. 6.


The first of these is the law of common reason for its contrary to
guardianship to destroy that which by their office they ought to preserve. As
touching the words of the Law the Grantees are omitted in the Charter of King
John; and also their assignees albeit that doubtless they were within the
intent and meaning of the Law. The matter declares plainly not only the
oppession of Lords upon their Wards, but also the corruption even of the law it
self, that at the first aimed at the good of the public, and honor of
Knightservice, but now was degenerated into the base desire of profit by making
market of the Wards estates and marriages, that brought in strip and wast of
Estates, and niggardly neglect of the education and training up of the persons
of the Wards and an imbasing of the generation of mankind and spoil of times.
Nor did these times ever epsy or provide against the worst of these, but only
endeavored to save the estate by punishing the wasters in damages by this
law, and by forfaiture of the Wardship by a Law made in the time of Edward the
first; Stat. Gloc. cap. 5.
and this as well for waste done during the time of the custody, as in the life
time of his ancestors by another law in Edward the firsts time. Stat. de vasto.
20 E. 1.
And because the Escheators and their under Officers used to serve themselves
out of the estates of minors before they certified to the King his right; and
those were not within the Law of Magna Carta, or at least not so reputed.
Artic. sup. cart. cap. 18.
It was therefore afterward provided that these also should render damages in
a Writ of wast to be brought against them.

The marriage of Wards shall be without disparagement. cap. 7.


It was an ancient law amongst the Germans and the Saxons brought it hither,
Tacitus mor. Germ.
and as a Law settled it that marriage must be amongst equals; but the Danes and
Normans slighted it, and yet it continued, and was revived. Now as the Lord
had the tuition of the Ward instead of the ancester, so had he the care of the
marriage in such manner as the ancester might have had if he had lived. For in
case the Ward were stolen and married, the delinquent suffered fine and
imprisonment. Or if the ward married without the Lords consent he shall have
the double value, S at. Merton. cap. 6.
and hold the land over till satisfaction; But in case the Lord marries the
Ward within fourteen years of age to its disparagement, cap. 7.
he shall lose his Wardship thereby. And if the Ward refuses to accept of a
marriage tendered by the Lord before her age of 16 years, West. 1. c. 22.
the Lord shall hold the Lands till he have received the full value; and in
case where one tenant holds of diverse Lords, the Lords by priority shall have
the marriage. West 2. cap. 16
These laws were in use during the reigns of those Kings, although it can not
be certainly concluded hereby that the wives portion properly belonged to the
Lord, as for his own benefit, partly because the female Wards should have no
advancement if it belonged to the Lords, and partly because this forfeiture was
given to the Lords in nature of a penalty, as appears by the frame of the
Statute of Merton.

cap. 8. Vide Stat. Merton cap. 1 and 2. Prerog. Reg. cap. 4.
Widows shall have their Dower, inheritance, their inheritance which they have
jointly with their husbands, their marriage freely, and their Quarentine.

With due regard of the opinion of others I shall propound my own. It seems
to me that the King is within this Law, as well as within the former laws of
the Normans, and those of Henry the second that are of this kind; and as he is
within the compass of every law of this Charter, and that it is called the
Grand charter as most immediately coming from the King to the people, and not
from the Lords. Nor is there any ground that the Law should intend to give
liberty to widows of Wards belonging to inferior Lords to marry whom they
will; and that only the Kings widows shall be bound: Nor did this suite with
the contest between the Barons and the King, that their widows should be bound
unto the King, and the widows of their tenants discharged from their tuition;
and therefore I conceive by the word maritagium is not meant liberty of
marriage, but her marriage portion, or rationabilis pars according to the
foregoing Laws of Henry the first, and Henry the second; and the Saxon
customs. But as touching the liberty of marriage it is defined and expressed
that the widows shall not be compelled to marry nevertheless if they shall
marry they must marry with the Lords liking, cap. 9. Glanvil. lib. 7. cap. 12.
otherwise he might have an enemy to be his tenant that might instead of homage
and service prove traitor, and be his ruin. Lastly touching the widows
dwelling, the law thought it unreasonable that she should immediately after the
death of her husband be exposed to be harbourlesse, and therefore ordained that
she might continue in her husbands house forty days, if it were not a Castle,
and then she was to have another dwelling assigned to her, because by common
intendment she is not supposed to be a person meet to defend a castle: and this
was called her Quarentine, which I met not with amongst the Saxon laws, and
therefore suppose it be of Norman original.

No man's land shall be seized for debt to the King so long as the personal
estate will satisfy. cap. 10.
Nor shall his pledge be troubled so long as the principal is sufficient,
unless he refuse to satisfy, and then the pledge shall recover in value.

The first part hereof was the issue of the law concerning elegit, formerly
observed in the Saxons times; for the regard of law principally extended unto
the person next unto the free hold, and lastly unto the goods. The latter part
of this law was the law of pledges or Decenners in the same times; unto which
the Reader may resort for further light herein.

The City of London, and other Cities, Buroughs, cap. 11.
and Towns; and the Cinqueports, and other ports shall enjoy their ancient
liberties.

The whole Kingdom, and the members thereof herein expressed had all their
liberties saved from the dint of conquest by the law of William the first;
upon which, although some of the succeeding Kings did invade, Seld. Spicil. fo.
192.
yet none of them made any absolute disseisin, although disturbance in some
particulars. But King John did not only confirm them by his grand Charters
but by particular Charters to each Corporation, with some enlargements, and in
his grand Charter inserted one clause which in the grand Charter of Henry the
third appears not, which thus ensues, Et ad habendum commune concilium Regni
de auxiliis assidendis aliter quam in tribus casibus praedictis, which if the
barbarism of the Latin mislead me not, is thus in English. And to have right
of Common council, or to be of the Common council of the Kingdom for the
assessing of ayds, other then in three cases aforesaid, viz. for redemption of
their captive King, for Knighting of the Kings son, and for his daughters
marriage: because these three might be due by the common Law, the two latter by
custom, the former by common right, although mentioned from the late disaster
of King Richard, which King John might with shame enough remember, and expect
the same measure from the censure of an unquiet conscience. I shall not enter
into debate concerning the omission hereof in the later Charters; possibly it
might seem a tautology. Nor concerning the restriction, as if it did imply that
the Burgesses had vote only in cases of general assessements, but shall leave
it to the consideration of the Reader.

cap. 12.
No distress shall be taken for greater service or other matter then is due.

Distresses are in nature no other then a summons in act or the bringing of a
man to answer by seizure of part of his goods; and it was used by the Saxons,
as has been showed: and because the rich men under color of seeking their
right many times sought for wrong, and though they could not prevail in the
issue, yet prevailed so far as the defendant could not escape without charge
and hindrance; Glanvil. lib. 12 cap. 9.
therefore the law provided a Writ of remedy against unjust vexation, which
Glanvile remembers us of; and yet because that remedy also carried with it
matter of charge and disturbance to the Plantiffe, and so the remedy might be
worse then the disease; therefore the Law defined distresses by circumstances
of person, matter, time, and place, under penalties of fine and amercement,
besides the recompense to the party: First, Stat. Marlbr. cap. 1. Glanvil. lib
9. cap. 1 and 8.
it must not be taken but by leave from the Kings court, unless in case of
matters due by common right, and upon complaint made by the plantiffe. The King
sent out a summons in this manner, Henricus Rex Ang. Hominibus Abbatis de
Ramsey salutem. Gloss. 215.
Precipi oquod cito and just reddatis Abbati Domino vestro quicquid ei debetis
in censu and firma and debitis and placitis; quod si nolueritis, ipse vos inde
constringat per pecuniam vestram. And in all cases of matters due by common
right, Glanvil. lib. 9. cap. 8. Stat. Marlbr. cap. 2, 3, 4, 15.
the distress never was done in an arbitrary way, but by Judicial act in the
Lords Court. Secondly, no distress for suite shall be made out of the fee, nor
against any person, but such as are of that fee. Nor shall any distress be
made in the Kings high way or open street, but by the Kings Officer, and
special Writ; because distress is incident to service, and that is due as
from the fee; and therefore by common right the same must be recovered from the
fee, and such as owe service in the same; but the high way or open street are
more properly a franchise belonging to the King, although the soil happly may
be the Lords; and therefore it was an old law that they should be under the
Kings safeguard, Ll. Inae.
Sit pax publica per communes vias; and no violence must be there tolerated but
by the Kings especial Writ, which presupposes the especial notice taken by
the King of the nature of the occasion. A moderation also must be observed in
the taking of the distress; for it must not be excessive, and also in keeping
thereof: for if the owner will he may replevy the same according to the ancient
course; Marlb. cap 21. Glanvil. lib. 12 cap. 12.
and the Sheriff must grant replevy if it be demanded, although formerly no
replevy was without special Writ, and yet they also not always readily
obeyed. For the times were such as the Lords were bold with the Kings courts,
and Ministers, and refused the order of the law; now in such cases wherein the
matter concerned contempt of the Kings authority, a fine was set upon the
offender: but in case it concerned only a tort done to the party, he was
amerced: the one is called redemption, because the penalty otherwise must lie
upon the person, Miror cap. 5. Sec. 3.
if it be not redeemed by pecuniary fine: the other is called amercement, which
is originally a satisfaction unto the party wronged, by recompense out of the
personal estate of the delinquent. Distric. Scac. Artic. mag. cart. cap. 12.
Thirdly, as touching the matter of the distress, it must not be of Plough
beasts or sheep, unless in case of damage fesant, if other distress may be
had; for the Law had a care of such Cattle as were most of public
concernment, and which was the maine stock of subsistence, so far as justice
would allow: and therefore the unjust taking of any man's Cattaile by any person
whatsoever is liable to the same penalties that unjust distresses are. West. 1.
cap. 16.
Fourthly, concerning the using of the distress, it must not be sold, no not
in the Kings case till fifteen days be past after it is taken; Marlbr. cap. 4.
Distric. Scac.
nor must it be carried out of the County, but it must be so impounded as the
owner may come to feed it; and it must be discharged if the owner give security
of satisfaction before the return of the Writ. Artic. sup. cart. cap. 12.
Fifthly, the intent of the distresses must be that which is just, and
therefore not for other suit then by the feofment is due, or else by
prescription; and in case many are jointly seized, Marlbr. cap. 9.
the suit shall be by one, and the rest shall contribute. cap. 22.
Nor must any man be compelled to show his title to his Land by distress.

cap. 13.
The Common pleas shall be holden in one certain place.

The Office of Judge of the Common Pleas was in my opinion distinct and
several from that of the Crown pleas; nor though one and the same man might
execute both authorities, does it therefore follow that it was by one and the
same power? as if being Judge, he had thereby power in all matters of the
Common pleas, and also of the Crown: for though it be true that Bracton says,
the King has one proper court wherein are the chiefest Judges, Capitales Just.
nostri.
which both by his own testimony and Britons also did hear and determine
causes of all sorts; yet is it true also that it was by appeal or Writ of
error, as in case of false judgment; and that the King had plures curias,
Marblr. cap. 20.
which doubtless had their proper work: and in the time of Henry the second
its clear that six were especially assigned for the Common pleas throughout
the whole Realm; and yet by another especial Commission or Letters patents
the same men might also have power to determine matters of the Crown, as at
this day in their several circuits. This law therefore does not as I conceive
work any alteration, but only in this, that whereas formerly the Judges of
Common pleas attended on the Kings Court continually, as all other Judges did;
and whither the King removed they did the like, which was a great uncertainty
and grievance unto the Commons. Henceforth they are fixed to a certain place.

Assize of Novel Disseisin and Mortdancester shall be determined in the proper
County only, cap. 14.
and by the Justices itinerant sent by the King or his chief Justices.

The law was so declared in Henry the seconds time, and was questionless put
in practice; so far forth as with convenience to the Judges might be; but now
the convenience of the people is preferred, and they must not be brought up to
the Kings Court, but the Justices must come down to them; and yet in case of
difficulty the bench where the Common pleas are holden must determine the
matter, and where the time in the Iter in one County is too scant, the remanets
shall be adjourned over to be tried elsewhere in that circuit; which shows
that the Judges itinerant had their time proportioned out to every County.
These trials also were so favored, Westminster. cap. 51.
as in the then holy times of Advent and Septuagesima or Lent, they might be
tried, which although was gained by prayer made by the King to the Bishops, as
the words of that law are concluded; yet it shows that the Parliament had so
much light as to hold the time not inherently holy, but merely sequestered by
the will of the Clergy. The Plantiffs also in Mortdancester may be diverse, if
there be diverse heirs of one ancester by one title. Stat. Gloc. ca. 6.
And if there be joyntenants, and the Writ be against but one, and the same
pleaded, Conjanct. feofat. An. 34. E. 1. Stat. Gloc ca. 1
the Writ shall abate; but if joyntenancy be pleaded, and the plea be false,
the defendant shall be fined, and imprisoned. And if in the action the verdict
be for the plaintiff he shall recover damages.

cap. 15.
Darraine presentment shall be taken only in the common Bank.

Trials in the common bank or other Courts at Westminster have ever had an
honorable esteem above those in the County by Nisi prius, although all be
equally availeable. This might be one cause why the Titles of Churches were
still retained at the common Bank, when as all other rode circuit. For that
Churches affairs in those times were of high regard: Speed of trial also was
not little regarded herein; for Justices by Nisi prius properly were but for
inquiry till the Statute at Westminster. the second made them of Oyer and terminer in
the cases of Quare impedit and Darraine presentment, West. 2. cap. 30.
and gave them power to give judgment. And thus the Commons gained still in
point of convenience.

cap. 16.
Free men shall be amerced according to the degree of the fault, saving to them
their free hold, and to Merchants their maine stock, and to villains their
Waynage; and Clergy men shall be amerced according to their Lay fee. Barrons
shall be amerced by their Peers, others by the vicinage.

In this, regard is to be had first of the persons that are to be amerced, then
of the parties by whom, and lastly of the nature and quantity of amercements.
The persons amerced are ranked into four Classes: Barons, Clergy, Free men,
and villains. But in regard of the parties by whom they are to be amerced,
they are but two, Barons and Freemen, for the Clergy villains and free men are
to be amerced by the free men of the neighborhood. Marlb. cap. 19.
In what Courts these amercements shall be the Stat. Marlbr. tells us, not
before the Escheator, nor other that make enquiry by Commission or Writ, nor
before the Justices of Assize or Oyer and terminer, but only before the chief
Justices, or Justices itinerant. The Statute of Westminster adds a fifth
Classes of Cities, and Towns, by express words, Westminster. 1. cap. ^
which seems not so necessary, unless in pillaging and oppressing times, for
they were taken to be within the Statute of Magna carta, Miror cap. 5. sect. 4.
though not therein named. The rule of the quantity of amercements is now set
down in general, and left to the discretion of the Peers or Vicinage, which
formerly by the Saxons were specially set down in the law. The rule in general
is with a ne plus ultra, viz. not further or more then that the party amerced
may spare, and yet hold on in the maintenance of his course, according to his
degree. And it must be also according to the quantity of the offense, for the
greatest amercements must not be ranked with the least offenses: so as in every
degree the maine sustainance of the party is saved: yea the villains (how ever
mean they be) they must have their maintenance. And this shows that
villains had a maintenance which was under the protection of the Law, and not
under the gripe of their Lords to all intents, unless they were the Kings
villains, who it seems were merely under the Kings mercy, as being both
their Lord and King, against whom they could hold nothing as properly their
own: and therefore in all other cases, even then the villains were borne under
a kind of liberty, as in the Saxon times formerly has been declared; which
the Law protected against their own Lords.

No man shall be compelled to make repair, cap. 17 and 18.
or maintain any bridges, banks, or causies, other or otherwise then they were
wont to be made, repaired, or maintained in the time of Henry the second.

The limitation to the times of Henry the second, shows that his justice was
such as maintained the common rights of men; but in the times of Richard the
first, Miror cap. 5. sect. 2.
and more especially of King John, those rivers, waters, and fishings formerly
used in common were incroached upon, enclosed, and appropriated to particular
men's uses, which occasioned many bridges, banks, and causies, to be made and
repaired to the great charge of private men, all which are discharged by this
Law.

cap. 19.
No Sheriff, Constable, Coroner, or other Bailiff, shall hold any pleas of the
Crown.

Escheators are also expressed in the old books of Magna carta, and the
abridgements, however it seems that its within the intent of the law, which
was made to avoid the extraordinary oppression that these Officers exercised
upon the people. For Escheators under color of inquiry of estates of men would
inquire of matters concerning the lives of men, and Sheriffs that had power of
trials in cases of theft, as has been already shown, Ll. Hen. 1. c 8. Glanv.
lib. 1. cap. 2.
abased the same for their own benefit, because in such cases they had the
forfeitures. This law therefore takes away such occasions, viz. from the
Sheriffs and Corroners and Bailiffs or Justices, (other then by express
commission thereto assigned) all power to hold pleas of the Crown by trial,
leaving unto them nevertheless power of inquiry, of which anciently they had
the right.

cap. 20.
If the Kings tenant dies supposed in arreare, an inventory shall be made of
his stock by honest men, but it shall not be removed till accounts be cleared;
and the overplus shall go to the Executors, saving to the wife and children
their reasonable part.

The first clause hereof was a law in Henry the firsts time, and a customary
law in Henry the seconds time, Glanv. lib. 7. cap. 5.
being a remedy against an old Norman riot of the Lords seizure of the whole
personal estate of the party deceased, under color of a law. The second part
concerning the overplus has this additionall subjoyned in the Charter of King
John. If any free man die intestate his Chattels shall be divided by his
parents and his friends in the presence of the Church, saving to every one
their proper debts: and thus since the conquest, the Church men incroached by
degrees unto a great power in matters testamentary; I say by degrees; for as
yet by this law it appears that they were but overseers or eyewitnesses; for
as yet right of ordering or disposing they had none, as may appear in that
case of a bastard dying without issue and intestate, the Lord shall have his
personal estate: Glanvil. lib. 7. cap. 16.
and in all cases the executor had then nothing but bare assets, and the
overplus was assigned between the wife and children according to their
reasonable part: or if the party died intestate the next friends did
administer, paying the debts and making dividend of the overplus into the
reasonable parts, according to the ancient Saxon custom still continued: nor
does the testimony cited out of Bracton prove any other then that the auncestor
has free power to order his estate as he pleases, Coke instit. 2. page 33.
and that the children shall have no more then is left unto them by their
auncester either in his will, or in case of dying intestate by the custom or
law which is and ever was the rationabilis pars.

No purveyance for any Castle out of the same Town where the Castle is, but
present satisfaction must be made: cap. 21.
and if in the same Town, satisfaction must be made within forty days.

Purveyance was ancient provision for the necessities of the public, and so
far was commendable, seeing its not the common case of all men to regard the
public above their own private interest; therefore the public must provide
for it self, by their means in whom the public is most concerned: and this
was in those elder times, but in two cases, viz. of Kings and Castles; in the
one of which the government is principally concerned, in the other the public
defense. For it may be well conjectured that Castles were either first made in
places commodious for habitation, and great Towns gathered to them for their
better safety; or that the Towns were first gathered in places of commodious
habitation, and then Castles were made for their better defense, or if they
were imposed upon them by the victor to keep them in awe, they were
nevertheless by continuance together become tractable, and conspired for the
mutual defense of each other. But as touching such Cittadels or Castles that
were set in solitary places, they may seem rather first intended for the
particular defense of some particular man and his family, and neighboring
tenants; and therefore in the purveyance for Castles it seems the proper Town
wherein it is, is principally liable to that duty, because their safety is more
principally interested; and therefore prizes there taken may be paid at a day
to come; but in all other places immediately. Nevertheless this lasted not
long, for the soldiers found out a trick of favoring their own quarters, and
preserving them in heart against a back winter, knowing that at such times its
better to seek for provision nigh, then to be compelled to seek far off. But
this Stratagem was cut off by the next King, who inhibited all manner of
purveyance in any other Town, Westminster. 1. cap. 7
then in the same Town wherein the Castle is seated. This was a charge that was
but temporary, and occasional: That which was more lasting and burdensome upon
the subjects was purveyance for the King, which nevertheless cannot be
avoided, by reason of the greatness of his retinue, especially in those days;
and if they should have their resort to the market, the same could not be free
to the people, for that the first service must be for the Kings household, and
so what scraps will be left for the Commons no man can tell. It was therefore
necessary for the Kings family to be maintained by purveyance; Artic. super
cart. cap. 2.
and to avoid the many inconveniences which might and did arise in those
spoiling times, It was ordained that it should be felony for any purveyor to
purvy without warrant. 2. That none but the Kings purveyour must purvey for the
Kings house, and that he must purvey only for the Kings house; and to purvey
no more then is necessary; and to pay for the things they take. And because
Kings were oftentimes necessitated for removal from place to place, purveyance
of carriage was also allowed: West. 1. c. 32.
and in case the subjects were grieved either by more purveyance then was
necessary, or by non payment for their commodities so taken, or with
composition for the Kings debts; for such purveyance the offenders were liable
to fine and imprisonment. Artic: super cart. cap. 2.
Or if they were grieved by purveyours without warrant, the offender was to be
proceeded against, as in case of felony.

He that serves in Castle-guard is not liable to payment of rent for that
service; cap. 22.
Nor is he compellable to either, so long as he is in the service in the Army.

By the ancient custom none but a Knight might be charged with the guard of a
Castle belonging to the King, for the letter of this law mentions only such;
and therefore to hold by Castle-guard is a tenure in Knight Service: and it
seems that rent for Castle guard originally was consistent with
Knightservice, and that it was not annual; but promiscuously Knights might
either perform the service, or pay rent in lieu thereof; and upon occasion did
neither, if the King sent them into the field. And lastly, that a Knight might
either do the service in his own person, or by his Esquire, or another
appointed by him thereto.

No Knights nor Lords, nor Church-mens Carriages, cap. 23.
nor no man's wood shall be taken against the owners consent; Nor shall any man's
Carriages be taken if he will pay the hire limited by the Law.

Churchmen were exempted from charge to the Kings carriages merely in favor
to the Canon which exempted the goods of the Clergy from such lay service;
nevertheless the complaints of the Clergy formerly mentioned show that this
was not duly observed. Knights and Lords were discharged not only for the
maintenance of their port; but more principally because they were public
servants for the defense of the Kingdom in time of war; and the Kingdom was
then equally served by themselves and their equipage, and their carriages, as a
necessary assistant thereunto.

The King shall have no more profit of felons Lands then the year and a day,
cap. 24.
and the Lord is to have the remainder.

Anciently the Lords had all the estate of felons being their tenants, Instit.
2.
and the King had only the prerogative to waste them as a penalty or part
thereof, but afterward the Lords by agreement yielded unto the King the year
and a days profit to save the Lands from spoil; Bract. lib. 3. fo. 137.
Prerog. Reg. cap. 16.
and in continuance of time the King had both the year and day, and waste.
Fugitives also were in the same case, viz. such as deserted their Country
either in time of need, or such as fled from the trial of Law in criminal
cases: for in both cases the Saxons accounted them as common felons.
Nevertheless the two customs of Gloucester and Kent are saved out of this law
by the Statute; the first whereof saves the Land to the heir from the Lord,
and the second saves the same to the heirs males, or for want of such to the
heirs females, and to the wife her moity until she be espoused to another
man, Prerog. Reg. cap. 14. Fits 2 E. 2. Tit. Escheat. 12.
unless she shall forfeit the same by fornication during her widdowhood. And
by the same law also the King had all Escheates of the tenants of Archbshops
and Bishops during the vacancy as a perquisite. But Escheats of Land and
Tenement in Cities or Buroughs the King had them in jure coronae, of
whomsoever they were holden. cap. 25.


All wears shall be destroyed but such as are by the Sea coaste.

The Lieutenant of the Tower of London as it seemed claimed a Lordship in the
Thames, and by virtue thereof had all the wears to his own use, as appears
by a Charter made to the City of London recited in the second institutes upon
this Law; and this was to the detriment of the free men, especially of the City
of London in regard that all free men were to have right of free passage
through Rivers as well as through high ways, and purprestures in either were
equally noxious to the common liberty; and therefore that which is set down
under the example or instance of the rivers of Thames and Medway contained all
the rivers in England; albeit that other parts of the Kingdom had not the like
present regard as the City of London had.

cap. 26.
The Writ of precipe in capite shall not be granted of any free hold, whereby a
man may be in danger of loosing his Court thereby.

It seems that it was one of the oppressions in those times that if a suit
were commenced in the inferior or Lords court, concerning a free hold. A Writ
of praecipe in capite might be had upon a surmise that the free hold was holden
in capite, which might prove an absolute destruction to the inferior Court,
and was the spoil of the demandants case; and therefore I think the charter
of King John instead of the word court has the word cause.

There shall be but one known weight and measure, cap. 27.
and one breadth of Clothes throughout the Realm of England.

This law of weights and measures was anciently established amongst the Saxons,
Ll. Edgar. c. 3.
as formerly has been showed and continued in the Normans times, and confirmed
by Richard the first and King John. And as touching the measure of the breadth
of Clothes, although it might seem to abridge the liberty of particular
persons, yet because it was prejudicial to the common trade of the Kingdom,
it was settled in this manner to avoid deceit, and to establish a known price of
Cloths. And it seems that Wine was ordinarily made in England as well as Ale;
otherwise the measures of Wine could not have been established by a Law in
England if they had been altogether made in other Countries.

Inquisition of life and member shall be readily granted without fees. cap. 28.


It was a Law of latter original, made to take away a Norman oppression; for
by the Saxon law, as has been already noted, no man was imprisoned for crime
not baylable) beyond the next County court or Sheriffs Torn; but when those
rural Courts began to lose their power, and the Kings courts to devour trials
of that nature, especially by the means of the Justices itinerant, which were
but rare, and for diverse years many times intermitted, during all which time
supposed offenders must lie in prison, which was quite contrary to the liberty
of the freemen amongst the Saxons; it occasioned a new device to save the
common liberty by special Writs sued out by the party imprisoned or under
bail, supposing himself circumvented by hatred and malice; and by the same
directed to the Sheriff and others an inquisition was taken and trial made of
the offense, whether he deserved loss of life or member; and if it were found
for the supposed offender he was bailed till the next coming of the Justices:
and for this the Writ was called the Writ of inquisition of life or member; and
sometimes the Writ de odio and atia. But these inquests were soon become
degenerate, and subject to much corruption, and therefore as soon met with a
counterchecke from the Law. Or first rather a regulation; West 1. cap. 11
for it was ordained that the inquest should be chosen upon oath; and that two
of the inquest at the least should be Knights, and those not interressed in the
cause: but yet this could not rectify the matter, for it seemed so impossible
to do justice and show mercy this way, Glocest. cap 9.
that the Writ is at length taken away; and men left to their lot till the
coming of Justices itinerant. But this could not be endured above seven
years; for though the King be a brave soldier, West. 2. cap. 29.
and prosperous, yet the people overcome him and recover their Writs de odio
and atia again.

cap. 29.
Lords shall have the Wardships of their Tenants heirs, although they hold
also of the King in Petit Serjeanty, Soccage, Burgage, or fee Farm.

Inferior Lords had the same right of Wardships with the King for their
tenures in Knightservice, although their tenants did hold also of the King,
unless they held of him in Knight Service, which was a service to be done by
the tenants own person, or by the person of his Esquire, or other deputy in his
stead; but as touching such service as was wont to be done to him by render or
serving him with Arms, or other utensiles: this was no Knightservice though
such utensiles concerned war, Glanvil. lib 7. cap. 9.
but was called Petit Serjeanty, as in the Lawbookes does appear.
Nevertheless Henry the third had usurped Wardships in such cases also and the
same amongst others occasioned the Barons wars.

cap. 30.
No judge shall compel a freeman to confess matter against himself upon oath
without complaint first made against him. Nor shall receive any complaint
without present proof.

This law in the original is set down in another kind of phrase in the first
part thereof, which is obscure by reason thereof: in express words it is thus,
No Judge shall compel any man ad legem manifestam; which implies that the
matter was otherwise obscure if the party that was complained of or suspected
did not manifest the same by his own declaring of the truth or matter inquired
after; and therefore they used in such cases to put him to oath, and if he
denied the matter or acquitted himself, the Judge would sometimes discharge
him, or otherwise put him to his compurgators; and this was called lex
manifesta, or lex apparens: and it was a trick first brought in by the Clergy
and the temporal Judges imitated them therein; and this became a snare and
sore burden to the subjects. To avoid which they complain of this new kind of
trial; and for remedy of this usurpation, this law reviveth and establishes
the only and old way of trial; for Glanvill says, Ob infamiam non solet
juxta legem terrae aliquis per legem apparentem se purgare, nisi prius
convictus fuerit vel confessus in curia: Bracton. fo. 106
and therefore no man ought to be urged upon such difficulties unless by the
express law of the land. The old way of trial was first to bring in a
complaint and witnesses ready to maintain the same; and therefore both
appeals and actions then used to conclude their pleas with the names of
witnesses subjoyned, which at this day is implied in those general words in
their conclusions, Et inde producit sectam suam, that is, he brings his sect or
suite, or such as do follow or affirm his complaint, as an other part also is
implied in those words Et hoc paratus est verificare. Seld. super Hengham.
For if the plaintiffs sect or suit of witnesses did not fully prove the matter
in fact the defendants averment was made good by his own oath, and the oaths
of twelve men, and so the trial was concluded.

No free men shall be imprisoned or disseised of his freehold cap. 31.
or liberties, outlawed or banished or invaded, but by the Law of the Land, and
judgment of his Peers. Nor shall justice be sold, delayed or denied.

Its a comprehensive law, and made up of many Saxon laws; or rather an
inforcement of all laws, and a remedy against oppression, past, present, and to
come; and concerns first the person, then his livelihood, as touching the
person; his life and his liberty; his life shall be under the protection of the
law, and his liberty likewise, so as he shall be shut into no place by
imprisonment, nor out of any place by banishment, but shall have liberty of
ingresse and egresse. His estate both real and personal shall also be under
the protection of the Law, and the law also shall be free, neither denied nor
delayed. I think it needless to show how this was no new law, but a
confirmation of the old, and reparation added thereto, being much impaired by
stormy times; for the sum of all the foregoing discourse tends thereto.

cap. 32.
Merchants shall have free and safe passage and trade without unjust taxes, as
by ancient custom they ought. In time of war such as are of the enemies
Countries shall be secured till it appear how the English Merchants are used
in their Countries.

That this was an ancient law the words thereof show, besides what may be
observed out of the Laws of Aetheldred and other Saxon laws. So as it appears
that not only the English free men and natives had their liberties asserted by
the law, but also forrainers if Merchants, had the like liberties for their
persons and goods, concerning trade, and maintenance of the same; and were
hereby enabled to enjoy their own under the protection of the law, as the free
men had. And unto this law the charter of King John added this ensuing.

It shall be lawful for every free man to pass freely to and from this
Kingdom, saving fealty to the King, unless in time of war; and then also
for a short space, as may be for the common good, excepting prisoners, outlaws,
and those Contrymen that are in enmity, and Merchants who shall be dealt
with as aforesaid.

And it seems that this law of free passage out of the Kingdom was not
anciently fundamental, but only grounded upon reason of State, although the
free men have liberty of free passage within the Kingdom according to that
original law, sit pax publica per communes vias; and for that cause, as I
suppose, it was wholly omitted in the Charter of Henry the third; as was also
another law concerning the Jews, which because it left an influence behind it
(after the Jews were extinct in this Nation) and which continues even unto
this day, I shall incert it in this short sum.

After death of the Jews debtor no usury shall be paid during the minority of
the heir, though the debt shall come into the Kings hand. And the debt shall
be paid, saving to the wife her dower and maintenance for the children,
according to the quantity of the debtors Land, and saving the Lords service;
and in like manner of debts to others.

The whole doctrine of usury fell under the title of Jews; for it seems it
was their trade, and their proper trade hitherto. Council. Brit. 299.
It was first that I met with forbidden at a Legatine Council nigh 300 years
before the Normans times; but by the Confessors law it was made penal to
Christians, to the forfeiture of estate, and banishing; and therefore the Jews
and all their substance were holden to be in nature of the Kings villeines, as
touching their estate, Ibid. 623. Glanvil lib. 7. cap. 16.
for they could get nothing but was at his mercy; and Kings did suffer them to
continue this trade for their own benefit, yet they did regulate it as touching
infants, as by this law of King John, and the Statute at Merton does appear;
M. Paris An. 1229. Merton. cap. 5. Stat. de Judais. An 18 E. 1.
but Henry the third did not put it into his Charter as I think, because it
was no liberty of the subjects but rather a prejudice thereto; and therefore
Edward the first wholly took it away by a Statute made in his time, and
thereby abolished the Jews.

Tenants Lands holden of Lands escheated to the King shall hold by the same
services as formerly. cap. 33.


cap. 34.
In all alienations of Lands sufficient shall be left for the Lords distress.

Prerog. Reg. cap. 7.
Submitting to the judgment of the learned I conceive that as well in the Saxon
times as until this law, any tenant might alien only part of his lands, and
reserve the services to the alienor, because he could not reserve service (upon
such alienation) unto the Lord paramount, other then was formerly due to him,
without the Lords consent, and for the same reason could they not alien the
whole tenancy, to bind the Lord without his express license saving the
opinion in the book of Assizes, 20 ass. pl. 17.
because no tenant could be enforced upon any Lord, least he might be his
enemy. Nevertheless it seems that de facto tenants did usually alien their
whole tenancy; and although they could not thereby bar the Lords right, yet
because the Lord could not in such case have the distress of his own tenant,
this law saved so much from alienation, as might serve for security of the
Lords distress. But tenants were not thus satisfied; the Lords would not part
with their tenants, although the tenants necessity was never so urgent upon
them to sell their Lands; and therefore at length they prevailed by the Statute
of Quia emptores to have power to sell all, 18 Edw. 1. Westminster. 3. ca. 1.
saving to the Lords their services formerly due; and thus the Lords were
necessitated to grant licenses of alienation to such as the tenants could
provide to buy their lands. Nor was this so prejudicial to the Lords in those
days when the public quiet was settled, as it would have been in former times
of war, when as the Lords right was maintained more by might and the aid of
his tenants, then by law, which then was of little power.

cap. 35.
The 35 Chapter I have formerly mentioned in the Chapter concerning the Clergy.

cap. 36.
No man shall be appealed by a woman for the death of any but her own husband.

The right of appeal is grounded upon the greatest interest. Now because the
wives interest seems wholly to be swallowed up in her husband; therefore she
shall have an appeal of the death of him only; and such also was the Law in
Glanvils time. How far this point of interest shall extend to the degrees of
consanguinity the Norman Law formerly has shown. And against whom appeals
did lie the Statute at Westminster tells us, viz. not only against the
principal, West. 1. cap. 14
but also against accessories; yet not against them till the principal be
attainted. And because it was ordinary for men of naught to appeal others in a
malicious way, Westminster. 2. ca. 13
it was by another law established that if the party appealed was acquitted the
appealor should not only render damages, but be imprisoned for a year.

The County court shall be holden at the wonted time. cap. 36.


The Torn shall be holden at the accustomed place twice in the year, viz.
after Easter and Michaelmas.

The view of Frank pledges shall be holden at Michalmas

The Sheriff shall not extort.

The Sheriffs Courts had now lost somewhat of their jurisdiction, though for
time and place they are confirmed statu quo; to the end that through
uncertainty thereof the suitor might not make defaults, and be amerced; yet
they lost much of their respect within the compass of these few years by two
laws, Merton. cap. 10
the one of which made at Merton allowed all suitors to the rural Courts to
appear by proxy or attorney, which it seems had power to vote for the
masters in all cases public and private; and did not only themselves grow
into parties and maintenance of quarrels, and so spoiled these Courts of their
common Justice, but rendered the freemen ignorant and careless of the common
good of the Country, and given over to their own private interest. And though
the corruption of justice was soon felt, West. 1. c. 33.
and against it a law was provided, viz. that the Sheriff should not allow of
such corrupt atturnies; yet this was no cure to the free men, who were still
suffered to wax wanton at home, albeit that they were discharged from doing
their suite in all other Hundreds but that wherein they dwell. Marlbr. cap. 10.
The second law that took away much honor from these Courts was that law at
Marlbridge Ibid.
that discharged the Baronage of England, and the Clergy from their attendance
at such service, and this also opened the door wider to oppression, for where
greatness is it carries therewith honor from the meaner sort, and a kind of
aw and stop unto the minds of such men that otherwise would riot without
restraint; and though it might also be said that the pretense of great men in
such Courts would oversway the meaner, and make strong parties; yet it must
also be acknowledged that these parties being greater are the fewer, and do
not so generally corrupt all sorts as the corruption of the meaner sort do;
its said by the wise man, where the poor oppress the poor its like a raging
rain that leaves no food. The last branch in this Law is an inhibition to the
Sheriff from extortion; and surely there was great need, and much more need
then ever now that the Lords and Clergy are absent. It was thought that the
great occasion of the Sheriffs oppression was from above, I mean from the King
that raised the vallews of the farm of Counties granted to the Sheriffs,
Artic. super cart. cap. 13, 14. Stat. de vice. com. An. 9 E. 2
(for in those days Shieriffs gave no accounts, as of later times they have
done) and therefore the Charter of King John between the 17 and 18 chapter
inserteth this clause Omnes commitat and Hundred Wapentag and Trethingi sint ad
antiquas firmas absque ullo incremento exceptis Dominicis Maneriis nostris. But
this did not work the work, although it took away occasion, for the humor
was fed from within, and turned to a sore upon that place that could never be
cured to this day. Nor could the wisdom of times find other help to keep
the same from growing mortal, but by scanting the diet, and taking away that
power and jurisdiction which formerly it enjoyed.

cap. 37.
The 37 Chapter has been already noted in the Chapter of the Clergy next
foregoing.

cap. 38.
Escuage shall be taxed as was wont in the time of Henry the second.

The Charter of King John has superadded hereunto this ensuing provision.
There shall be no Escuage set in the Kingdom, except for the redeeming of the
Kings person, making of his eldest son a Knight, and one marriage of his
eldest daughter; and for this there shall be only reasonable aid. And in like
manner shall the ayds of the City of London be set. And for the assessing of
Escuage we will summon the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls, and greater
Barons of the Kingdom, specially by our several Writs, and will cause to be
summoned in general by our Sheriffs and Bailiffs all other our tenants in
capite to be at a certain day after forty days at the least, and at a
certain place; and we will set down the cause in all our Writs. And the matter
at the day appointed shall proceed according to the council of those that
shall be present, although all that were summoned do not come. And we will not
allow any man to take aid of his free men, unless for redemption of his body,
and making his eldest son a Knight, and one marriage for his eldest daughter;
and this shall be a reasonable aid only.

Thus far the Charter of King John concerning this point of tax or
assessment; and if the History says true the Charter of Henry the third was
one and the same with that of King John then either this was not left out in
Henry the thirds Charter, in that Historians time; M. Paris
or if it was omitted in the original it was supposed to be included in the
general words of the Law, as being accustomed in times past; and then these
particulars will be emergent: First, that the ayds and Escuage in Henry the
firsts time were assessed by the same way with that in this Charter of King
John; for that all the quarrel between the Lords and King John was concerning
the charter of Henry the first, which the Lords swear to maintain. Secondly, M
Paris An. 1214, 1215 25 Edw. 1. cap. 6. 34 Edw. 1. cap. 1. West. 1. cap. 36.
that neither ayds nor escuage were granted, or legally taken, but by Act of
Parliament, although the rate of them was settled by common custom, according
to the quantity of their fee. Thirdly, that some Parliaments in those times as
concerning such matters consisted only of such men as were concerned by way of
such charge, by reason of their tenancy, for escuage only concerned the tenants
by Knights service; and therefore those only were summoned unto such
Parliaments as only concerned Escuage; nor had the City of London nor the
Burgesses right to vote in such cases, it is said p. 258. And thus the Forest
laws that were made in, the time of Ri. 1. were made by the consent of
Archbishops, Hoveden 445.
Bishops, Abbots, Earls, Barons, and Knights of the whole Kingdom; for what
the great men gained they gained for themselves and their tenants. And the
truth is, that in those times although public damage concerned all, yet it
was ordinary for Kings to make a show of summoning Parliaments, when as
properly they were but Parliamentary meetings of some such Lords, Clergy, and
others, as the King saw most convenient to drive on his own design, and
therefore we find that Henry the third about the latter part of his reign,
when his government grew toward the dregs, he having in the Kingdom two
hundred and fifty Baronies he summoned unto one of these Parliamentary
meetings, Gloss. tit. Baron.
but five and twenty Barons, and one hundred and fifty of his Clergy.
Nevertheless the law of King John was still the same, and we cannot rightly
read the law in such presidents as are rather the birth of will then reason.
Fourthly, that no ayds were then granted, but such as passed under the title
Escuage, or according there unto; for the words are, No Escuage shall be
demanded, or granted, or taken, but for redeeming the Kings person, Knighting
of his son, or marriage of his daughter. Nor is the way of assessing in these
times different, saving that instead of all the knights, two only are now
chosen in every County; the tenure (as it seems) first giving the title of
that order, and both tenure and order now changed into that title taken up for
the time and occasion. Fifthly, that it was then the ancient custom, and so
used in the time of Henry the first; that the advice of those then present was
the advice of the whole, and that their advice passed for a law without
contradiction, or notwithstanding the Kings negative voice; for the words are
The matter at that day shall proceed according to the council of those that
shall be present, although all do not come; and therefore that clause in the
Kings oath quas vulgus eligerit may well be understood in the future, and not
in the pretertence. Last of all, though not gathered from the text of this law,
whereof we treat, yet being coincident with the matter it is observable that
though the Clergy were now in their ruffle, and felt themselves in their full
strength; yet there befell a posture of state that discovered to the world that
the English held not the interest of the Clergy to be of such public
concernment, or necessary concurrence in the government of the Kingdom,
Walsing. An. 1297.
as was pretended. For the Clergy finding assessements of the Laity so heavy,
and that occasions of public charge were like to multiply daily, they
therefore to save the maine stock procured an inhibition from Rome against all
such impositions from the Laity, and against such payments by the Clergy; and
in the strength of this they absolutely refused to submit to aid Edward the
first by any such way, although all the Parliament had thereunto consented. And
thus having divided themselves from the Parliament, they were by them divided
from it; and not only outed of all privilege of Parliament, but of all the
privilege of subjects, into the state of praemuniri: and thus set them up for
a monument to future times, for them also to act without the consent of those
men, as occasion should offer. But Henry 3d. not satisfied with this ancient
and ordinary way of assessement upon ordinary occasions, took up that
extraordinary course of assessement upon all the free men of the Kingdom,
which was formerly taken up only in that extraordinary occasion of redeeming
of the Kings or Lords person out of captivity, and common defense of the land
from piracy; and under the title of Daneguelt, which was now absolutely dead,
and hanged up in chains as a monument of oppression. Nevertheless it cannot be
denied but that in former times the free men were as deeply taxed, if not
oppressed with payments to their Lords at such times as they were charged over
to the King in the cases aforesaid, as by the latter words of the law aforesaid
of King John does appear, and whereby its probable that the inferior Lords
were gainers. The conclusion of the Charter of Henry the third (the fame
suiting also with the third observation foregoing) does not a little favor the
same; for its expressly set down that in lieu of the Kings confirmation of the
Charter of liberties aforesaid not only the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, Earls, Barons, and Knights, but also the free men, and all the
Kingdom gave a fifteenth of all their movables.

And thus have I summed up and compared both the copies of the grand Charters
of Englands liberties (saving two particulars inserted into the Forest laws of
Henry the third, wherein if any thing had been new and unreasonable King John
might have color to except against them as extorted by force, and Henry the
third might (as he was advised) plead nonage, M. Paris An. 1227.
and so they might have been choked in their birth; but being all
consuetudines, as in the conclusion they are called; and Kings ashamed to
depend upon such frivolous exceptions, it may be wondered what might move them
to adventure so much bloodshed, and themselves into so many troubles to avoid
their own acts, unless the writing of them were an obligation acknowledged
before the world; and they resolving secretly to be under none were loath to
publish the same to all men. Its a strange vanity in great men to pretend love
to justice, and yet not endure to be bound thereto, when as we see that God
himself loves to be bound by his word, and to have it pleaded, because he
delights as much to be acknowledged true in performing, as good in promising.
But neither was King John or Henry the third of this spirit; feign they would
undo, but could not. Its true it was at the first but a Kings charter of
confirmation, and had Kings been patient therewith it might have grown no
bigger; but by opposition it rooted deeper and grew up unto the stature of a
Statute, and settled so fast as it can never be voided but by surrender from the
whole body. Marlbr. cap. 5.


Having thus summed up the liberties of the subjects and free men of England
under this Charter, I shall make some appendix hereunto by annexing a few
additionals in these times established; and although they come not within the
letter of the Grand charter, yet are they subservient thereunto. And first
concerning the King; and this either as he is King, or as he is Lord. As King
he had these prerogatives above all Lords.

Prerog. Reg. cap. 9.
The King shall have the custody of fools and idiots lands for their
maintenance, and shall render the same to their heirs.

And concerning madmen and lunaticks, cap. 10.
the King shall provide a Baylisse for their maintenance, rendering account to
them when they are sober, or to their administrators.

It is no less liberty or privilege of the people that fools and mad persons
are to be ordered by tutors then children, and therefore this may be annexed to
the rest of the liberties as well as the other. Nevertheless it seems that
the Laws took them into their regard in respect of their estates, which might
be abused to the prejudice of the public, rather then out of respect had to
their persons. Now because there is a difference between the disability of
these persons, the one being perpetual the other temporary; therefore is there
also by these laws a difference in the disposal of their estates; for the
tutor had a right in the disposing of the one, and but a bare authority or
power in providing for the other. Secondly, the person of the tutor is to be
considered: Anciently it was the next kindred, grounded as I conceive, upon the
natural affection going along with the blood; and this so continued in custom
until these times: for though the Miror of Justices says, that Henry the
first brought in that course of giving the custody of these disabled persons to
the King, as has been formerly observed, yet Bracton that wrote long after the
time of Henry the first, speaking of these kind of persons says, Bract. lib.
5. cap. 20.
Talibus de necessitate dandus est tutor vel curator; not so much as mentioning
the King in the case. And in another place, speaking of such as are alieni
juris says, that some are under the custody of their Lords, and others under
their parents and friends. Lib. 1. cap. 10
But let the time of the entrance of this law be never so uncertain, its now a
declared law, that the King in such cases is the common curator or tutor of all
such persons, as he is a chief Justice, rendering to every one his right.

The King shall have the wrecks of the Sea. Prerog. Reg. cap. 11. West. 1. cap.
4.


What shall be called a wreck the Statute at Westminster. 1. declares, viz. where
the ship so perishes that nothing therein escapes alive; and these are rather
in their original committed to the King as a curator, then given him as a
proprietor, although that custom has since settled a kind of right, which may
perhaps be accounted rather a title by estoppell. For the fundamental ground
is, that the right owner cannot be manifested, and therefore the King shall
hold it; and if the right owner can be manifested the King shall hold it till
the owner does appear.

Marlb. cap. 17.
The heir in Socage tenure shall have an action of waste, and an account
against his guardian for the profits of his lands and marriage.

The heir in Socage being under age shall also be under custody of such
guardian of the next kindred, Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 37.
who cannot challenge right of inheritance in such lands so holden, as if the
Lands descended from the father side, the mother, or next of the kindred of the
mothers side shall have the custody; and so if the Lands descend from the
mother, the father or next kindred of the fathers side shall have the custody.
And this custody brings with it an authority or power only, and no right, as
in case of the heir in Knightservice; and therefore cannot be granted over as
the wardship in Knightservice might, but the guardian in Socage remains
accomptant to the heir for all profits both of land and marriage. The full age
of tenant in Socage is such age wherein he is able to do that service, which
is 14 years, for at such age he may b able by common repute to aid in tillage
of the ground, which is his proper service. But the son of a Burgess has no
set time of full age, but at such time as he can tell money, and measure
cloth, and such work as concern that calling.

Merton. cap. 1.
Widows deforced of their Dower of Quarentine shall by action recover damages
till they recover their Dower.

cap. 2.
They shall also have power to divise their crop arising from her Dower.

Bract. lib. 2. cap. 40.
It was used that the heir should have the crop with the Land, but this Statute
altered that former usage, and yet saved the Lords liberty to distraine if any
services were due.

Writs de consimili casu granted in cases that fall under the same Law and need
the same remedy, West. 2. cap. 24.
and such Writs shall be made by agreement of the Clerks in the Chancery, and
advice of such as are skillful in the Law.

It was none of the meanest liberties of the freemen of England that no Writs
did issue forth against them, but such as were anciently in use, and agreed
upon in Parliament. And it was no less a grievance and just cause of
complaint, that Kings used to send Writs of new impression to execute the
dictates of their own wills, and not of the Laws of the Kingdom, M. Paris
addit. Artic. 44.
as the complaints of the Clergy in the times of Henry the third does witness.
Nevertheless because many men's cases befell not directly within the Letter of
any Law for remedy, and yet were very burdensome, for want of remedy its
provided by this Law that in such emergent cases that do befall within the
inconvenience, shall likewise be comprehended within the remedy of that law.

Aid to make the son of the Lord a Knight, West. 1. c. 36.
and to marry his eldest daughter shall be assessed after the rate of twenty
shillings for a Knights fee, and twenty shillings for twenty pounds in yearly
value of Soccage tenure.

The uncertainties of ayds are by this Law reduced and settled as touching the
sum, and thereby delivered the people from much oppression, which they
suffered formerly. Nor was only the particular sum hereby, but also the age
of the son when he was to be made a Knight, viz. at the age of fifteen
years; too soon for him to perform Knightservice, but not too soon for the
Lord to get his money. And the daughter likewise was allowed to be fit for
marriage at seven years of age, or at least to give her consent thereto,
albeit that in truth she was neither fit for the one or other: and therefore it
must be the Lords gain that made the Law, and it was not amiss to have the
aid beforehand, though the marriage succeeded not for many years after; and if
the Lord died in the interim the executors having assets paid it, or otherwise
his heir.

CHAP. LXVIII. Of Courts, and their proceedings.
BEsides the Courts of Justices itinerant, which were ancient, as has been
said, other Courts have been raised of latter birth, albeit even they also have
been of ancient constitution, and diverse of them itinerant also, and some of
them settled in one place. The work of the Justices itinerant was universal,
comprehending both matters of the Crown and Common Pleas. That of oyer and
terminer is only of Crown pleas originally commenced, and inquired of by
themselves, and granted forth upon emergent crimes of important consequence
that require speedy regard and reformation. Justices of Jail-deliver have a
more large work, that is, to deliver the Gaols of all criminal offenders
formerly indicted or before themselves. Justices of Assize and Nisi prius are
to have cognizance of Common pleas only, and for the most part are but fo
inquiry. All which saving the Justices itinerant in ancient use were instituted
about these times, and therewith ended both the work and common use of the
ancient iters; and yet all these later courts jointly considered have not the
like comprehensive power that the iters had, for they had the power of hearing
and determining all causes, both of the Crown and Common Pleas, albeit in a
different manner; that is to say, in the first times promiscuously united into
one and the same person; but soon after the Norman times, and more clearly in
the time of Henry the second that power was divided into several persons, some
sitting upon the Common pleas, others upon the Crown pleas: The Judges of these
journying courts were specially assigned by the King, as in the case of the
Gaole-delivery or settled by the Law upon the Judges of both benches at
Westminster, as in case of oyer and terminer, Westminster. 2. ca. 29
and of the Assizes or Nisi prius, saving that in the last case they were
associated with Knights in the Counties for the taking of Assizes. Ibid. c. 30.


Now concerning the Courts that were settled: some were settled or annexed to the
Kings personal residence, as the Chancellours Court; for in these times it
began to have a judiciary power of eminent stature, and growing out of the
decays of the great chief Justice of England. Then also the Kings bench was
annexed by the same Law unto the Kings Court or personal residence, Fleta.
Artic. sup. cart. cap. 15.
as it anciently ever had that honor; although it seems the endeavors were to
make it like the Common pleas in that particular. Another and last court that
was settled in this manner was the Marshals court, which in the original only
concerned the Kings household, but afterward compassed in a distance of the
neighboring places, 5 E. 4 fo. 129.
because the Kings attendants were many in those times; when as the Courts of
justice continually attended on his person: and this precinct was called the
Vierge; and all cases of debt and covenant, where both parties were of the
Household, Artic. sup. cart. cap. 3.
and of trespasses vi and armis where one of them was of the household were
handled in the court of the Verge, or the Marshals court. And inquests of death
within the same shall be taken by the Coroner of the County, with the Coroner
of the household. Other Courts were rural, and affixed also to some certain
place, either of the County or Town, or other particular place. That of the
County suffered in these times great diminution, even almost to destruction by
a Law restraining the power thereof only to trespasses of 40 s. value or
under; Stat. Gouc. cap. 8.
for though formerly the Kings justices incroached upon the County courts and
contracted suits before themselves, which by the ancient law they ought not;
yet it was ever illegal, and the County courts held their right till this law
was made, which kept under those inferior Courts, and made them of less
account then formerly. Nevertheless the Kings Justicies or Writ to the
Sheriffs oftentimes inableth the inferior Court to have cognizance of cases of
greater value. Lastly, a rule was set to the smaller Courts of Corporations,
West. 1. cap. 23.
Faires, and Markets, viz. that no person should be sued in any of them, which
was not a debtor or pledge there.

CHAP. LXIX. Of Coroners, Sheriffs, and Crown pleas.
Coroners. Westminster. 1. ca. 10
COreners shall be chosen in the county from the wisest, greatest, and chief
men of the country.

Of these Officers formerly has been spoken, as touching their election,
qualification, and work: this Law brought in no change of any former Law, but
only of a former custom gained by these degenerating times, which brought men
into place that were far unfit, who otherwise of poor and mean condition
maintained themselves by bribery and extortion, and being found guilty had not
sufficient to give recompense. This law therefore revives the first law and
hold these men to their work of taking inquests and appeals by indenture
between themselves and the Sheriff, and these were to be certified at the next
coming of the Justices.

Sheriffs. Artic. sup. cart. cap. 9.
The Free holders in every county if they will shall elect their own Sheriff,
unless the Sheriffwicke be holden in see.

This was indeed the ancient custom: as the Officers of the Kingdom were
eligible by the Common Council of the Kingdom, Miror cap. 1. Sec. 3. Stat. de
vic. 9 E. 2.
so were also the Officers of the County, chosen by the County. But within a
few years in the time of Edward the second comes another law; that the
Sheriffs shall be appointed by the Chancellor, Treasurer, Barons of the
Exchequer, and the Justices, which Law was made in favor of the people, as by
the file of that Statute does more fully appear: for though at the first blush
it may seem a privilege lost by the free men, that these great men should have
the election of the Sheriff; yet it proved a great advantage to the common
quiet of the people in those times of parties, and was so apprehended:
Otherwise as the case stood in those days of Edward the second, it was no time
for him to gain upon the peoples liberties. Nor had the Statute of Articuli
super cartas, whereof we now treat been penned with these words, if they will;
and questionless in these days we now live in: if the people had but a little
taste of this seeming liberty of electing Sheriffs in the County court, as
formerly it was used, it would be soon perceived that the election of these
chief Officers were better disposed in some other hand if rightly pursued.

Homicide by misfortune shall not be adjudged murder. Chancemedly. Marlbr.
cap. 25.


That the Saxons made difference between homicide by misfortune, and that which
was done felleo animo, or with a spirit of gall, formerly has been showed; now
what it was that altered the case I cannot say, unless the violence, cruelty,
and oppression of the times: formerly all kind of manslaughter was finable, I
mean in the Norman times, and so might more rationally be ranked into one
degree; but now the punishment began to change from forfeiture of estate and
loss of member, to death and forfaiture of estate; and therefore it was more
necessary to make the difference in the penalty, seeing in the fine formerly a
difference was observed; and this difference to assert by a Law that might
limit the invenomed spirits of the Judges of those days.

Robbery Robbery.
punished with death.

This crime hitherto was punished by fine and loss of member at the utmost but
is now made capital, and punished with death. One example whereof, and the
first that story makes mention of we find of an Irish Nobleman in the days
of Henry the third, who suffered death for piracy; and it was a law that then,
though rigorous, yet seasonably was contrived to retard the beginnings and
hasten the conclusion of a civil war in a Nation who value their estates and
liberties above their own lives.

Rape. West. 1. cap. 13.
Rape upon the complaint of the party violated, made within forty days, shall
have right. If the delinquent be convicted without such complaint made he shall
be fined and imprisoned.

Before this Law this crime was but finable unless the fact was committed upon
a virgin, for then the member was lost. And this was the Saxons Law; but the
Normans inflicted the loss of the member upon all delinquents in any rape. Nor
was this made felony by any law or custom that I can find, till about these
days. Its true that Canutus punished it capitis aestimatione, by way of
compensation, which rather gives a rule of damages to the party wronged then
imports a punishment inflicted for an offense done against the Crown, as if
it were thereby made capital. But for the more certainty of the penalty,
another law provideth that if the rape be committed without the woman's consent
subsequent she may have an appeal of Rape. West. 2. cap. 34.
And though a consent be subsequent, yet the delinquent upon indictment found
shall suffer death, as in the case of appeal. But if a wife be carried away
with the goods of her husband, besides action of the party the King shall have
a fine. If the wife elopeth she shall lose her Dower, if she be not reconciled
before her husbands death. All which now recited provisoes are comprehended
together in one chapter, and yet the Chapter is partee per fess French and
Latin: so far thereof as concerns death was written in French, being the
most known language to the great men in general, many of whom were French, by
reason of the interest that Henry the third had with France in his late wars
against the Barons. It was therefore published by way of caveat, that no person
that understood French might plead ignorance of the law that concerned their
lives. The residue of that Chapter was written in Latin, as all the other Laws
of that Parliament were, upon grounds formerly in this discourse noted. One
proviso more remains, which is also comprehended in the same Chapter with the
former, viz. Any person that shall carry away a Nun from her house shall
suffer imprisonment for three years, and render damages to the house. This
crime was formerly only inwombed in the Canon law, and now borne and brought
forth into the condition of a Statute law, rather to vindicate the right of the
free men, then in any respect had to the Clergy, Antiq. Brit. fo. 197.
who had been very bold with the liberty of the free men in this matter; for
Archbishop Peckham not a year before the making of this law for this offense
had excommunicated Sir Osborne Gifford, nor could he get absolution but upon
his penance: first he was displed with rods three times, once in the open
Church at Wilton, then in the marketplace at Shaftsbury, and lastly in the
public Church there; then he must fast diverse months. Lastly, he must be
disrobed of all Military habiliments, viz. Guilt Spurs, Sword, Saddell, golden
Trappings, and to use no brave garments, but russet, with Lamb and Sheep
skins; to use no shirt, nor take up his order again until he had spent three
years pilgrimage in the Holy land: and unto this penance the Knight by oath
bound himself. A strange power, and to repress which it was time for the
people to look about them, and rather to punish delinquents themselves, then
to leave it to the will of such men as never had enough.

Concealment or neglect of apprehending of felons punished by fine and
imprisonment. Concealment of Felons. West. 1. cap. 9.


In those ancient times pursuits of felons with hui and cry were made by Lords
of manors, Bailiffs of liberties, Sheriffs, and Coroners, whereas now they are
made by Constables. See more in the Chapter of peace. Escapes also were
punished with fine and imprisonment: and in some places the Lord had the fine,
in other places the Sheriff, and in some cases the King; West. 1. cap. 3.
yet it in no case was any fine assessed or taken till the trial before the
Justices.

Persons defamed for felony, Defamed Felons. West. 1. cap. ^
not submitting to trial by Law, shall be committed to close and hard
imprisonment.

It has been accounted an extreme construction of this law, and questionless
so it is, that this Law should warrant that punishment of pressing to death
which has been of later times more constantly used then former times ever knew
of; for though it be granted that some trick of torture was sometimes used,
even before the Norman times, and so might now and then leave some few examples
after the Norman times, yet did the law never patronise such courses,
especially if the death of the party suspected ensued thereupon, Miror cap. 1.
sect. 9.
but accounted it manslaughter. And the end of this law was not to put a man to
death, but to urge him to confess; and so Briton says, such as will not
submit to trial shall be put to penance till he shall pray to be admitted
thereunto; and therefore the penance then used was such as did not necessarily
infer death; Briton cap. 4. sect. 24.
nor was it a final judgment in the trial, but only a means thereto: and
therefore it might rather consist in denial of conveniences then inflicting of
pain. Now in what cases it was used may be understood from the manner of the
indictments in those days, whereof (besides appeals by the party) some were
of particular fact done; others only of a fame: and it may be conceived that
the course in the second was, Glanvil. lib. 10 cap. 1.
that if a man would not submit, but would stand mute, he was put to this kind
of imprisonment for the discovering law was by Henry the third taken away. But
if the delinquent was positively accused of a felony, and thereupon indicted by
a witness of the fact, and then the delinquent would not submit to his trial
by law, in such case the final judgment was to die O nore, fame, etc. because
in the one there was a fact affirmed against him by a witness, and in the
other only a fame or suspicion, which is not pregnant against the life of a
man. But this manner of indictment being now laid aside, and all proceedings
being upon a fact affirmed against the party, I conceive this law of no use at
all in these days.

Bail. West. 1. cap. 15.
Bail shall not be allowed to Outlaws fore-jured, Thieves taken in the act,
notorious Thieves, appealed persons, burners of houses, breakers of prison;
false coiners, counterfeiters of the Broad-seale; prisoners upon
excommunication, open malefactors, and Traitors against the King.

The six first are in nature of persons attainted either upon their own
confession, or such manifest evidence as in common reason cannot be gainsayd;
all which were before this law under bail; yea the last of all, Glanvil. lib.
14. cap. 1.
although the most heinous of all was in the same condition. As touching
breakers of prison, in these times it was felony, for what cause soever they
were committed; and therefore their imprisonment was without bail, for who so
makes no conscience of breaking the prison, his credit will little avail: yet
it must be acknowledged that the Law imprisoned few without bail in those
foregoing times, but in case of felony or execution; but afterward the cases
of commitment being ordinary, even in matters of mean process, and because
men's credits waxing weak by the weakness of their estates now wasted by the
civilwars; there fore in Edward the seconds time a law was made to restrain the
felony in such cases, only to the breach of prison by such as were committed
for felony. And as touching imprisonment upon excommunication, its manifest
that within five years before the making of this law it was complained that
such were set at liberty by the Kings Writ de homine replegnando without the
Bishops consent. Addit. M. Paris.
But now the Clergy had gotten the day of the Law, which did much decline from
that guard of imprisonment, but hated perpetual imprisonment. Nor was this
complaint grounded upon any other law then that of the Canon, for the common
law ever held the supreme cognizance of Excommunication within its own power,
as upon the Writ de quare excomunicato may appear. Other crimes are yet also
by this law allowed bail, such as are persons indicted of larceny before
Sheriffs, etc. persons imprisoned upon slight grounds Receivers, and
Accessories before felony, Trespassers, persons appealed by provers after the
death of the approvers. If bail be granted otherwise, then the law allows
the party that allows the same, shall be fined imprisoned, render damages, or
forfeit his place as the case shall require. And thus the iniquity of the times
was so great as it even forced the subjects to forgo that which was in account
a great liberty to stop the course of a growing mischief.

Spreaders of false news. West. 1. cap. 34.
Publishers of false news whereby discord or slander may arise between the King
and his people, shall be imprisoned till he produce the relator.

It is therefore an offense against the Crown to procure or maintain an ill
conceit in the King of the people, or an ill conceit in the people of the
King; and its as well an offense against the Crown for the King to conceive ill
of his people, as for them of him. But all must be grounded upon falsehood; for
truth respects no man's parson; and all men are equally bound by that woe, if
they call good evil, or evil good; although difference must be made in the
manner of representation. And upon this ground of maintaining strife was a law
made also against conspiracy to make or maintain indictment, 33 Edw. 1.
suit, or quarrel, and it was likewise finable.

Merton. cap. 3.
Redisseisors and post disseisors found upon verdict before the Sheriff,
Coroners, and Knights shall be imprisoned.

Formerly redisseisin was under no other Law then that of disseisin, but by
this law made a matter belonging to the Crown, and tried before the same Judges
that had the power of inquiry of all offenses against the Crown. The penalty of
imprisonment in this case was to be without bail, Marlbr. cap. 8.
but only by the Kings Writ de homine replegiando; and yet even thus the
penalty was not sufficient to restrain the offense, and therefote a law was
made to abridge the power of that Writ, West. 2. cap. 26.
as touching such offender, and they became irremediable as touching their
liberty by that Writ, besides that upon recovery had against them they lost
double damages.

Trespassers upon Parks. West. 1. cap. 20.
Trespassers in Parks and Fishponds convicted within a year and a day shall
render damages, suffer imprisonment for three years, and give security of
good behavior for time to come. If any beasts be taken in a felonious manner
he shall be proceeded against as a robber.

From the times of King Steven the Lords and great men endeavored to advance
their power and greatness so high above the meaner sort of free men, as they
made Kings continually jealous of their power. Castles had been a bone of long
contention between them, but they being for the most part taken away the strife
was about prisons and power to imprison offenders; and that also after much
opposition they laid aside: yet the violence of these times being such, as
(though felonies were somewhat dreaded) trespasses of the highest nature were
little regarded, such as were riotous hunting in their Parks, and fishing in
their waters. The Lords and great men made it their last request that at least
in such cases they might have power to imprison such as they found so
trespassing; but this was also denied them, Merton cap. 11.
though by Henry the third in his first time, when as yet the government was
not worsted by projects of arbitray power or corrupt counsels of forrainers,
nor himself a man able to sway with the Lords in matters that were of
doubtful prerogative. And to speak indifferently its better for the liberty
of the subject, that the power of imprisonment should be regulated only by the
Kings Writ ordered by law, then by the warrants of great men, especially in
their own cases; and therefore in this matter the Kings prerogative was a
patron to the freemens liberty. Nevertheless these great men give not thus
over their game, for though in times of public calamities little place is
left for pleasure to any man; yet when times are grown to more quiet, pleasure
revives, and the great men renew their motion; and though they could not
obtain prisons to their own use, as they endeavored at the meeting at Merton;
yet now they obtain the Kings prisons to the use of a Law that was as good as
their own, and thereby satisfied their own displeasure for the loss of their
pleasure. And yet this law sufficed them not, but they obtain a further
privilege, An. 21. Edw. 1.
that such persons as are found so trespassing, and refusing to submit, may be
killed without peril of felony.

CHAP. LXX. Of the Militia during these Kings reigns.
THe Soldiery of England may be considered first in regard of the persons.
Secondly, their arms. Thirdly, their service. The persons were as formerly,
not only such as were milites or tenants in Knight service, but also such as
served at the plow; and concerning them both it is to be considered what the
law made by Edward the second holds forth.

All such as ought to be Knights and are not, shall be distrained to undertake
the weapons of Knighthood, Stat. de Milit. 1 E. 2.
if they show not cause to the contrary.

Regularly all tenants by Knightservice ought to be Knights, but de facto were
not; so as in these times there was a further work to make a man a Knight then
his bare tenure; for such only were milites facti, who had both Lands
sufficient to maintain the Arms and state of a Knight; and also a body fit to
undertake the service in his own person, and whereof he had given sufficient
proof in the field. Others that had Land either had not sufficient maintenance
or not habiliments of person, and as not expected were laid aside; of this sort
were many by reason of the late civil wars, in which they had much impaired
both their bodies and estates. This rendered the strength of the Kingdom and
Militia so much decayed and the minds of men so weared that they began to love
ease before the times would brook it, and a cessation from Arm before they
had any mind to peace. The Parliament espied the danger, and how necessary it
was for the people to be well armed in these times of general broile; and upon
that ground allowed this law to pass, that all such as had Lands worth 20 li.
yearly besides reprisals should be ready not to be Knights (nor under the
favor of others is there any ancient president to warrant it) but to find or
to enter the field with the Arms of a Knight, or provide some able person to
serve in their stead unless they were under 21 years of age, and so not grown
up to full strength of body; nor their lands in their own possession, but in
custody of their Lords or guardians. Nevertheless of such as were grown to
full age, yet were maimed impotent, or of mean estate, and tenants by service
of a Knight, it was had into a way of moderation, and ordered that such should
pay a reasonable fine for respit of such service; nor further as concerning
their persons were they bound. But as touthing such that were under present
only, and not perpetual disabilities of body upon them incumbent, as often as
occasion called they served by their deputies or servants: all which was
grounded not only upon the law of Henry the second, but also upon common right
of tenure.

The arms that these men were to find are said to be those belonging to a
Knight, which were partly for defense and partly for offense; of the first sort
were the Shield, the Helmet, the Hauberk or Brestplate or coat of maile: Of
the second sort were the Sword and Lance; And unto all a horse must be
provided. These Arms especially the defensive have been formerly under
alteration, for the Brestplate could not be worn with the coat of maile, and
therefore must be used as occasion was provided of either; and for this cause
the service of a Knight is called by several names; sometimes from the horse,
sometimes from the Lance, sometimes from the Helmet, and not seldom from the
coat of maile.

The power of immediate command or calling forth the Knights to their service
in its own nature was but ministerial and subservient to that power that
ordered war to be leavied: and therefore as in the first-Saxon government
under their Princes in Germany, so after under their Kings, Tacitur.
war was never resolved upon, but if it were defensive, it was by the
counsel of Lords; if offensive, by the general vote of the grand Council of
the Kingdom: so by virtue of such order either from the Council of Lords or
grand Council the Knights were called forth to war, and others as the case
required summoned to a rendezvous; and this instumentall power regularly rested
in the Lords, to whom such service was due; and the Lords were summoned by the
Lord Paramont, as chief of the fee of which their tenants were holden, and not
as King or chief Captain in the field; for they were not raised by
Proclamation, but by summons issued forth to the Sheriff, with distress; and
this only against such as were within his own fee, and held of the Crown. The
King therefore might have many Knights at his command, but the Lords more, and
if those Lords failed in their due correspondency with the King, all those of
the inferior orb were carried away after them, so the King is left to shift
for himself as well as he can; and this might be occasioned not only from
their tenures by which they stood obliged to the inferior Lords, but probably
much more by their popularity which was more prevalent by how much Kings looked
upon the Commons at a further distance in those days, then in after times,
when the Commons interposed intentively in the public government. And thus
the Horsemen of England becoming less constant in adhearing to their
Sovereign in the field, occasioned Kings to betake themselves to their foot,
and to form the strength of their battles wholly in them, and themselves on
foot to engage with them.

One point of liberty these Soldiers by tenure had, which made their service
not altogether servile, and that was that their service in the field was
neither indefinite nor infinite, but circumscribed by place, time, and end. The
time of their service for the continuance of it was for a set time, if it were
at their own charges: and although some had a shorter time, yet the general
sort were restrained to forty days. For the courage of those times consisted
not in wearying and wasting the Soldier in the field by delays, and long
work in wheeling about, and retiring, but in playing their prizes like two
combitants of resolution to get victory by valor, or to die. If upon
extraordinary occasions the war continued longer then the tenant served upon
the pay of the common purse. The end of the service of the Tenant ( viz. their
Lords defense in the defense of the Kingdom) stinted their work within certain
bounds of place, beyond which they were not to be drawn, unless of their own
accord: and these were the borders of the Dominion of the Crown of England,
which in those days extended into Scotland on the North, and into a great part
of France on the South. And therefore the Earl Marshall of England (being by
Edw. 1. commanded by virtue of his tenure to attend in person upon the Standart
under his Lieutenant that then was to be sent into Flanders, which was no part
of the Dominion of England) refused, and notwithstanding the Kings threats to
hang him, yet he persisted saying he would neither go nor hang. Not only
because the tenants by Knight service are bound to the defense of their Lords
persons and not of their Lieutenants; but principally because they are to serve
for the safety and defense of the Kingdom; and therefore ought not to be drawn
into foreign Countries. Nor did the Earl marshall only this, Walsing. fo.
69. and 71.
but many others also both Knights and Knights fellows, having twenty pounds
per annum; for all these with their arms were summoned to serve under the
Kings pay in Flanders. I say multitudes of them refused to serve, and
afterward joined with the rest of the Commons in a Petition to the King, and
complained of that summons, as of a common grievance, be cause that neither
they nor their ancestors were bound to serve the King in that Country, and
they obtained the Kings discharge under his broad Seal accordingly. The like
whereunto may be warranted out of the very words of the Statute of Mortmaine,
Stat. Mortm. 7 Edw. 1.
which was made within the compass of these times, by which it was provided
that in case Lands be aliened contrary to that Statute, and the immediate Lords
do not seize the same, the King shall seize them, and dispose them for the
defense of the Kinodome, viz. upon such services reserved as shall suite
therewith, as if all the service of a Knight must conduce thereto; and that he
is no further bound to any service of his Lord then will consist with the
safety of the Kingdom. This was the doctrine that the sad experience of the
later government of Kings in these times, had taught the Knighthood of England
to hold for the future ages.

Stat. de Militibus.
No tenant in ancient demesnes, or in Burgage, shall be distraimed for the
service of a Knight.

Clerks and tenants in Socage of other Manors then of the King shall be used as
they have been formerly.

Tenants in ancient Demesne and tenants in Burgage are absolutely acquitted
from foreign service; the one because they are in nature of the Kings
husbandmen, and served him and his family with victual: the other because by
their tenure they were bound to the defense of their borough, which in account
is a limb or member of the Kingdom, and so in nature of a Castle guard. Now
as touching Clerks and tenants in Socage holding of a subject they are left to
the order of ancient use appearing upon record. As concerning the Clergy, its
evident by what has been formerly noted, that though they were importunate to
be discharged of the service military, in regard that their profession was for
peace, and not for blood, yet could never obtain their desire; for though
their persons might challenge exemption from that work, yet their Lands were
bound to find arms by their deputies, for otherwise it had been unreasonable
that so great a part of the Kingdom as the Clergy then had should sit still
and look on, whiles by the law of nature every one is engaged in his own
defense. Nor yet did the profession of these men to be men for peace hold
always uniforme; some kind of wars then were holden sacred, and wherein they
not only adventured their estates, but even their own persons; and these not
only in defensive way, but by way of invasion, and many times where no need
was for them to appear. Tenants in Socage also in regard of their service
might plead exemption from the wars: For if not, the plough must stand still,
and the land thereby become poor and lean: Nevertheless a general service of
defense of the Kingdom is imposed upon all, and husbandmen must be soldiers,
when the debate is who shall have the Land; in such cases therefore they are
evocati ad arma to maintain and defend the Kingdom, but not compelable to
foreign service, as the Knights were whose service consisted much in defense
of their Lords person in reference to the defense of the Kingdom: and many
times policy of war drew the Lords into Arms abroad to keep the enemy
further from their borders, and the Knights then under their Lords pay went
along with them; and therefore the service of Knighthood is commonly called
servitium forinsecum. Of these Socagers did arise not only the body of English
Footmen in their Armies, Council. Brit. 406.
but the better and more wealthy sort of them found arms of a Knight, as
formerly has been observed, yet always under the pay of the common purse; and
if called out of the Kingdom they were mere volunteers; for they were not
called out by distress as Knights were, because they held not their Land by
such service; but they were summoned by Proclamation, and probably were
mustered by the high Constables in each Hundred, the Law nevertheless
remaining still entire, that all must be done not only ad fidem Domini Regis,
but also Regni; which was disputed and concluded by the Sword: for though Kings
pretended danger to the public, often times to raise the people; yet the
people would give credit as they pleased: or if the Kings title were in
question, or the peoples liberty, yet every man took liberty to side with that
party that liked him best; nor did the Kings proclamation sway much this or
that way.

Its true that presidents of those times cry up the Kings power of arraying all
ships and men without respect, unless of age or corporal disability: but it
will appear that no such array was but in time of no less known danger from
abroad to the Kingdom then imminent, and therefore might be wrought more from
the general fear of the enemy, then from the Kings command; and yet those
times were always armed in neighboring Nations, and Kings might have
pretended continual cause of arraying. Secondly, it will no less clearly
appear, that Kings used no such course but in case of general danger to the
whole Kingdom, either from foreign invasion, as in the times of King John, or
from intestine broiles, 21 E. 1. rot. 81.
as in the times of Henry the third, and the two Edwards successively: and if
the danger threatened only one coast, the array was limited only to the parts
adjacent thereunto. Thirdly, it seems that general arrayes were not levied
by distress till the time of Edward the first, 23 E. 1. Memb. 5.
and then only for the rendezvous at the next Sea coast, and for defense
against foreign invasion, in which case all subjects of the Kingdom are
concerned by general service: otherwise it can come unto no other account then
that title prerogative, and therein be charactered as a trick above the
ordinary strain. Fourthly, those times brought forth no general array of all
persons between the ages of sixteen years and sixty, that was made by
distress in any case of civil war, but only by Sheriffs Summons; and in
case of disobedience by summons to appear before the King and his Council;
which shows that by the common law they were not compelable or punishable.
Lastly, though these arraies of men were sometimes at the charge of the King,
and sometimes at the subjects own charge, yet that last was out of the rode way
of the Subjects liberty, as the subsequent times do fully manifest. And the
like may be said of arraies of ships, which however under command of Kings for
public service, were nevertheless rigged and paid out of the public
charge. The sum of all will be, that in cases of defense from foreign
invasion Kings had power of array according to the order of Law; if they
exceeded that rule, it may be more rightly said they did what they would, then
what they ought.

CHAP. LXXI. Of the Peace.
War and peace are two births by several venters, and may like the day and
night succeed, but can never inherit each to other; and for that cause they may
claim to belong to one father, and that one and the same power should act in
both: and yet its no good maxim that he that is the chief Commander in war
ought to be the chief in the order of peace. For it naturally befalls that
war, especially that which we call civil war, like some diseases in the
body does rather breed ill humors then consume them, and these must be purged
by dieting the State, and constant course of justice, unto which the rugged
waves of war have little or no affinity if not enmity: Nevertheless the
wisdom of our ancestors thought it most meet to keep their Kings in work as
well in time of peace as of war; and therefore as they anciently referred the
principal care thereof to the Lords, who together with certain select persons
in every County did administer justice in several iters or circuits: so when
Kings had once gotten the name of being chief in civil affairs as they had it
in martial; they soon left the Lords behind them (who also were willing enough
with their own ease) and had the name of doing all notwithstanding it was done
by advice of the Lords, and directory of Ministers or commissioners thereto
deputed. And thus that peace which formerly passed under the titles of Pax
Domini, pax vice comitis, it is pax Regni, became by eminency swallowed up in
that which was called the Kings peace, and the Justices called the Kings
Justices, and himself flattered into that title of Fountain of Justice, which
belongs only to him that is The Most High, or Chief Lawgiver.

The manner how this honorable care of the safety and peace of the Kingdom
was employed, may be referred to a double consideration, the one in execution
of justice upon delinquents, the other in preventing occasions of offense or
delinquency, by means whereof the public peace might be endangered. The
first was acted diversely according to the present sense of affairs; for what
was at first done by the Princes in their circuits, Tacitus.
with one hundred of the Commons called Comites, and that done per pagos
vicesque was afterward done by itinerant Judges sent from the King for the
greatest matters, and by Lords in their Leets, Governors, or chief
Magistrates of Towns in their courts, and Sheriffs in their Tornes, as Judices
stati for the ease of the people in matters of less moment. I say I conceive
it was in the Torn, for I suppose no emergent court taken up upon occasion
could by the Law draw a necessity of a sudden appearance of all above twelve
years of age at the same, 52 Hen. 3. Marlb. cap. 25.
and for the same cause it seems that one certain Torn every year was
holden for inquiries of homicide, unto which all above twelve year of age were
to come except Barons, Clergy, and women, or otherwise all such had been bound
to attendance on every Torn. Nevertheless the work of the Tornes continued
not to hear and determine as anciently they had done. For in Henry the thirds
time, and formerly, diverse men had prisons to their own use, some as
Palatines, Mitor cap. 2. Sec. 9.
other as Lords of Franchise, and others by power and usurpation, and had the
benefit of all fines incident; and by this means many were fined that deserved
it not, Mag. cart. cap. 19.
and some also that deserved worse: to prevent which evil Henry the third
took away that power of holding Crown-pleas. Glocest. cap. 8. West. 1. cap. 3.
And Edward the first took away their power to determine escapes, and left
them only the power of inquiry, and to certify at the next coming of the
Justices.

But these injurious times had holden too long to be forgotten, or laid aside
by such cool pursuit. Men were still ordinarily imprisoned, and so continued
oftentimes, till the coming of the Justices itinerant. For whereas in case of
bloodshed the Writ de odio and gratia was a remedy; the other had no remedy but
by procuring a Commission of Oyer and terminer, which ordinarily was a cure
worse then the hurt. Stat. Wint. 13 Edw. 1.
As a remedy hereof Edward the first found out the new way of making Justices
of peace, as may appear by the Statute at Winton, which law being purposely
made for the conserving of the peace, providing for penalty of crimes already
committed (as well as for the suppressing of future) ordains that offenses
against that Law shall be presented to Justices assigned to enquire thereof;
and though these at the first might be itinerant, yet it soon made way to
resiant. And before that Statute it seems the King had found out the way,
Coke Inst. 4. p. 176
if that note be true which is left revived into memory by that honorable
reporter, which relating to the sixth year of Edward the first says, that
then prima fuit institutio justiciariorum pro pace conservanda. And yet some
semblance there is that it was yet more ancient, even in the time of Hen. 1. if
I mistake not the sense of that clause in his laws concerning vagabonds; he
orders that they shall be carried Iusticiae quae praeest, Hen. 1. cap. 58.
although the language be not so Clerkly as to speak the sense out. Now though
their work as yet was but in trial, and they were only trusted with power of
inquiry, yet it induced a new way wherein the Sheriff was not so much as
entrusted to intermeddle, and which not only intermitted the course of his
proceedings in such matters, but also led the way to the dispoiling of the
Sheriffs Torn, and Lords Leets, of that little remainder that was left them of
judicatory power in matters that were against the peace, and made their
inquisitory power less regardfull; and eased the Justices itinerant of much of
their work in regard they were speedily to certify up to the King, and so
these matters should be determined in Parliament, according as those Justices
were elected in Parliament, who as it seems were jealous of giving the power
of determining those offenses into any sudden hand. To sum up then the first
part as touching the punishment of offenses against the peace, the wheel is
now in the turning, the Leets and Tornes begin to be slighted, the labor of
the Justices itinerant lessened, the Commissions of Oyer and terminer difused
by the bringing in of a new order of Justices for the peace especially
appointed. And the Parliament as the supreme providors, left as the reserve
for the asserting and maintenance of the same, albeit that under it the power
of determining, much rested upon Justices or Judges that attended the Kings
court, after that the Common pleas were settled and confined to a certain place.

The preserving of the peace for the future consisted in preventing and
suppressing riots, routs, unlawful assemblies, and in apprehending and
securing of such as were actors and contrivers of such designs, and other
malefactors. And herein we are to consider, 1. The Laws. 2. The means. 3. The
executive power. Concerning the first there is no question to be made but that
the power of making Laws for the maintenance of the peace rested in the
Parliament, although endeavor possibly might be used to settle the same in the
sole order of the Kings own person; and therefore we find not only the assize
of Arms, but generally the substance of the Statute at Winton to be formerly
taken up by Proclamation by Kings, predecessors to Edward the second who first
that I can find put the same into the force of a law by Parliament, finding by
experience that Proclamations may declare the Kings mind, but not command the
peoples wills, although peradventure the thing enjoined was of ancient use, and
little inferior to custom, or Common law. Such are the distempers of civil
broiles that bring up peace in the rear as a reserve when their own strength
is wasted, rather then out of any natural inclination thereto. A brief
recollection of the laws thus ensues,

Stat Wint. 13 Edw. 1. cap. 1.
In case of Robbery or felony committed, and the delinquent be not forth
cemming or discovered, the County or Hundred shall answer the damages.

Of this more may appear from the Norman and Saxon laws: the intent appears
by the law it self to stir up the people to use all means by pursuit with
hui and cry, and making inquisitions of the fact with all speed, in Townships,
Hundreds, Franchises, and Counties.

cap. 2.
Persons suspected shall not be entertained or harbored by any inhahitant,
unless He will undertake for him.

Of this also formerly both in the Norman and Saxon laws.

cap. 3.
Walled Towns shall keep their gates shut from Sun set to Sun rising. The
like observed in Cities, Buroughs, and Towns, from the feast of Ascension to
Michaelmas.

The power of the watch was great: it might apprehend any passenger, and stay
him all night; and if he be a suspected person he is to be committed to the
Sheriff; and if an escape be made, the party is to be pursued with hui and
cry. These two last Chapters were in effect in Henry the thirds time in course
by way of the Kings command by Writ in the 36 and 37 years of his reign, with
some more particulars concerning the same. M. Paris in Addit. and post.
Adversar. cap. 4.


High ways through every Lordship shall be kept clear on each side by the
space of 200 foot from hedges, ditches, Bushes, and underwood.

High ways herein intended are such as are from one Market Town to another,
and in such were always preserved the public peace or safety, for the
maintenance of commerce, and freedom of traffic, which is of such public
concernment that it has been of very ancient institution.

Every man between the age of fifteen years and forty shall maintain Arms in
his house, cap. 5.
according to the ancient Assize for the preserving of the peace.

This Chapter brings into consideration the second thing propounded, viz. the
means of preserving of the peace, which are two: First, by maintaining Arms.
2. By certifying defaults. In the first is to be considered the persons that
are to be assessed; 2. The Arms; 3. The end. The persons to be assessed to
Arms are indefinitely set down, and comprehend all sorts, as well bond as
free, and others; for such are the expressions in the Commission of Henry the
third. 36 Hen. 3. M. Paris post adversaria. Hoveden.
But by the Assize of Henry the second none were to be armed but free men, and
they worth sixteen or ten Marks in goods at the least: yet their ages are
limited; by this Law they must be between fifteen years and forty; but by the
Commission in Henry the thirds time all between fifteen and sixty years of age
were to be armed. King John arrayed all sorts, free, bond, and all others that
have Arms: or ought to have or can carry Arms; M Paris Anno 1213.
and it seems by what has been formerly noted, that those that were younger
then their tenure would bear them out, were accepted into service if they
would offer themselves; but by these courses they though under one and twenty
years of age were not only accepted, but compelled to war. Hoveden. Hen. 2.
M. Paris addit.
Under this title we may also touch upon the persons that were the instruments
to array these men, or rather to arm them; and these were Justices itinerant,
or one or more Commissioners, such as the King found most meet for the service;
and unto these were Commissions with instructions sent; and sometimes Writs
were directed only to the Sheriffs to take with them twelve Knights of the
County, M. Paris. post. adversaria.
and to go into every Hundred and call before them all such persons as by the
law ought to be assessed at Arms, and to cause them to be sworn to find and
maintain Arms in such manner as by the Law they then should be, or formerly
were assessed; and sometimes the establishment of Arms were set down in those
Writs, and sometimes published by Proclamation. M. Paris Anno 1253. and 1256.
For Kings found all means little enough to prevail to bring in alteration of
Arms, and of their service, which was a thing not only troublesome but
chargeable, and whereunto they could not easily prevail to bring the freemen
to consent; and therefore sometimes the endeavors of Kings in such cases did
not only meet dilationem, M. Paris An. 1253.
but also deletionem, as the Historians words are, until the way was found out
to declare an establishment by Parliament, by this Statute made at Winton.

Now for the nature of the establishment we are to consider that the people of
England were distinguished according to their teanures, Ll. Gulielm. 58.
into such as held by Knightservice, and such as held by Soccage; and that none
but those being freeholders could be charged to find arms according as by the
Laws of the Norman Conqueror may appear. The establishment of Arms for the
Knights were established by their tenures in certainty, and therefore no need
was either of assessment or oath to tie them to find such Arms; but all the
difficulty was for such as were not bound by other tenure then as free born
subjects, all of whom do owe to their Country defense and so questionless had
liberty to provide themselves of such arms as were by common and constant use
held most advantageous against the common enemy, and for the public defense.
And that these were put in certainty may appear by the Law of King William
formerly noted, and by some instances in the Saxon Laws anciently used; Ll.
Aethelst. c. 16.
amongst others that Law of Aethelstane, that for every plough every man should
find two complete horses. And another order of Aetheldred nigh 80 years after
differing from it assessed upon every eight hides of Land a Helmet and a coat
of Maile; and the Historian tells us that a Hide is a plough land, Huntington.
An. 1008. Ll. Canut. 97.
or so much land as one plough can keep in tilthe one whole year; and the
relief of the Noblemen of all sorts and ranks in Horses, Helmets, coats of
Maile, Lances, Shields, and Swords, the meanest of all which degrees being
called Mediocris Thainus, yielding a relief equal to the Arms of a Knight in
the times whereof we now treat, viz. one Horse, one Helmet, one coat of Maile,
one Lance, one Shield, one Sword; all comprehended under arma sua, as if he had
a certain proper Arms; and the Laws concerning the forfaiture of Arms do in
effect affirm the thing, viz. that all men were armed; yet probable it is that
Laws were not then so often made for the enforcing this or that particular sort
of Arms, in regard that till the Normans time this Island was troubled, but
seldom with any enemies from foreign parts that brought any new sorts of
weapons into fashion, the Danes and Norwegians being no other then an old
acquaintance of theirs. Neither were the Saxons as yet tamed by any enemy so
far as to beg a peace, albeit that the Danes had gotten them under. But
after the Norman times the English being somewhat overmatched in war inclined
more to Husbandry, and began to lay aside their regard of Arms; and this
occasioned the Kings to make assessments of Arms; yet having regard to the
ancient course of the Saxons, saving that they urged the use of the Bow more
then formerly was used, and thereby taught the conquered to conquer the
Conquerours in future ages. Of these sorts of assessments before this Statute
at Wintin I find but two; the first made by Henry the second, and the other by
Henry the third, which together with that of this Statute I parallel thus
together in their own words.

Hen. 2. Hen. 3. Stat. VVint. Lands Goods Knights fee 15 Librat 60 Marks 15 li.
land. 40 marks goods. Loricam Caffidem Clipeum Lanceam
Loricam Capellum ferri Gladium Cultellum Equum
Loricam Capellum ferri Gladium Cultellum Equum
Hauberk Shapell de fer Espee Cotell Chivall.
16 Marks chatels rents
10 Librat 40 Marks. 10 li. lands 20 marks goods Halbergellum Capelletum ferri
Lanceam
Halburgettum Capellum ferri Gladium Cultellum
Halbertum Capellu^ ferreum Gladium Cultellum
Hauberk Shapell de ferr Espee Cotell
10 marks chatels rents
100 s. 20 marks 100 s. land VVanbais Capelletum ferri Lanceam
Purpunctum Capellu^ ferreum Gladium Lanceam Cultellum
Purpunctum Capellu^ ferreum Gladium Cultellum
Purpoint Shapell de ferr Espee Cotell
Betwixt 5 l. and 40s. 9 Marks. Betwixt 5 l. and 40 s. Gladium Cultellum Arcum
and sagit.
Gladium Arcum and sagit. Cultellum
Espee Arc and setes Cotels
under 40 s. under 9 marks to 40 s. under 40 s. Falces Gisarmas Cultellos, etc.
Falces Gisarmas etc.
Faulx Gisarmes Cotells
under 20 marks goods. Espees Cotels.


I have thus impaled these three that the Reader may the better discern how
they relate each to other, and so may the better understand the matter in the
sum. And I must explain three or four words in them as they are set down,
before I can bring up the conclusion, because the mistake of the sense of the
words has made some mistake the intent of the thing, and force the same to an
unwarrantable issue. Lipsius de milit. Romans lib, 3. Dialog. 6.
Lorica signifies that piece of Armor that defends the breast or forepart of
the body, and sometimes is made of plates of Iron, of which sort I conceive
those of the old Germans were (whereof the Historian makes mention, Tacitus.
pauces loricae he says the Germans had few Arms of defense of their
foreparts, and fewer Helmets or Headpieces) for otherwise if they had Iron
defenses for their heads they would not have been content with defenses made of
Lether for their foreparts, as in the first rude times they might have been:
Ciuer. Germ. p. 339. 34.
Sometimes its made of links of Iron, and commonly is called a coat of Maile;
but I conceive it cannot be so meant in the assessments of Henry the second and
Henry the third, because that those of the second degree are said that they
ought to keep Haubergettum, or Halburgellum, or Haubertum; all which are but
several dialects of one name, and are taken for a coat of Maile: and
therefore by the diversity of names in one and the same assessment I do
conclude that the Armor was not of one and the same fashion. But its evident
that by Hauberk in the assessment of the Statute at Wint. is meant a coat of
Maile, and is never taken for a Breast Plate or Gorget, as has been taken upon
trust by some that build more weighty conclusions upon that weak principle,
then its able to bear; and for the truth hereof, as the word is a French word,
so I appeal to all French Authors, and shall not trouble the reader with the
notation of the word, or further about the meaning thereof. In the last place,
as great mistake is that also of the word Shapell de ferr, which is taken by
some to betoken a breast plate of Iron. For the truth whereof the Reader may
consider the Latin word Capellum or Capelletum, and he shall find that it is
an Iron cap, or an ordinary Headpiece: and in the Assize of Henry the third it
holds the place of Cassis in the Assize of Henry the second; for the manner of
all these let the Reader view the sculptures of the several Norman Kings armed
for the charge in the beginning of their several reigns, as they are
represented in Speeds History. It may also be conceived that there is as much
mistake of that weapon which is called cultellum or cotell, whiles they
translate it by the word Knife, for though it be true that it is one
signification of that word, yet it appears not only by this law that it was a
weapon for a Knight in war, but in use at Torniaments, as by that Statute
that forbids the use of a pointed Sword, or pointed Cottell, a Battoone, or a
Mace, at that sport: and therefore it may seem to be some weapon of greater
use, either a Cotellax or such like weapon; otherwise to enjoin the finding of
a Knife to a man as an offensive weapon against armed men in battle would
serve to no use at all.

Now concerning the difference between the several Assizes aforesaid, it
consists either in the number of the several degrees or ranks of those that
are assessed: or secondly, in the manner of their valuation: or lastly, in the
particulars of their arms assessed upon them. As touching the degrees in Henry
the seconds time, they were but three, in regard that he only assessed
freeholders; and certainly that was the ancient Law, as by the law of the
Conqueror and other Saxon laws formerly mentioned may appear. But Henry the
third taking example of King John who was the first founder of general arrayes
charged all but such as were men of nothing; albeit I find not that such as
were of the inferior degree were sworn to those Arms, but rather allowed to
have them. And though the Statute at Winchester holds to the same degrees in
Lands, yet in the value of goods there is some difference in favor of them
that only have stock, and no freehold. Secondly, there is some difference in
the manner of valuation of Lands with Chattels; and therein the Statute at
Winton favors the personal estates more then Hen. 3. and he more then Hen. 2.
and yet all of them pretend one rule of ancient custom; I believe they mean
that they had it in their eye, but not in their heart: for they would come as
nigh to it as they could, and yet keep as far from it as they durst. Thirdly,
as touching the difference of the Arms between these three assessments, it
seems so small as in this they are most of all one. For wherein Hen. 2. leads,
both Hen. 3. and Edw. 1. do imitate, saving that they add the Horse and
Sword, which questionless was to be understood as a granted case, that the
complete Arms of a man could not be carried and managed without a Horse, nor
defended without a Sword. As touching other alterations, it might be done upon
good advice, as not being deemed meet that such as were no Knights but in
estate, should be armed in every respect like as the Knights were. And thus we
have an ancient custom of maintaining Arms by every free man, for the defense
of the Kingdom, first made uncertain by the avarice of Kings and negligence
of the free men, and brought into an arbitrary charge; at length reduced to a
certainty upon all sorts of inhabitants by a Statute law (if so it then were)
unto which every man had yielded himself bound by his own consent. But to what
end is all this? I said it was for the defense of the Kingdom, and so it was in
the original; and yet also for the safety of the King in order thereunto, and
for the safety and maintenance of the peace of every member of the whole body.
This in one lump thus will not down with some who will have this assessment
only to be for keeping of the peace against routs and riots, but not
sufficient not intended to be supply for war, when Edward the first calls for
it, because Edward the first shall not have his power confined within the
compass of a Statute, but to be at liberty of array as he should think meet;
and its not to be denied but the words of this Law run thus, viz. That the
intent thereof is for preserving of the peace; but those general words will
not bear the power of a restrictive sense, for certainly the peace is as well
preserved by providing against war as against riots; and against foreign
war as intestine mutinies: and that the Statute intended the one as well as
the other will appear, because it was made in relation to former presidents of
Henry the third, and they speak plainly that their intent was to strengthen the
Kingdom against dangers from abroad; the words of the Historian are clear,
that Henry the third charged all that had 15 libratas terrae and upwards should
undertake the Arms of a Knight ut Anglia sicut Italia militia roboraretur. M.
Paris fo. 926
And because he had threats from beyond Sea by the defection of the Gascoines,
therefore he caused Writs to issue forth throughout the Kingdom that secundam
pristinam consuetudinem, M. Paris fo. 864
assessement of Arms should be secundum facultates; and in one of the Writs
published by the Historian the express assessment of Hen. 3. formerly
mentioned is particularly set down. Vid. post Adversaria. M. Paris.
Nor are these Arms thus assessed so slight as men would pretend, for the
Arms of the first rank were the complete Arms of a Knight, and their estates
equal thereunto; for those 15 libratae terrae amounted unto 780 acres of Land,
as the late publisher of Paris his History has it; and is very nigh the
reckoning of Henry Huntington, who (as has been mentioned) lays a Helmet and
coat of Maile unto eight hides of Land, which according to Gervase of
Tilburies account comes to 800 acres, Cap. penalt.
every Hide containing one hundred acres. These therefore were better then
Hoblers. And the succeeding ranks found Arms also proportionable to their
estates, as considerable as the times could find for such as were of constant
use, and might be supplied with other weapons as occasion served, and as they
might be of most benefit for the service.

Furthermore whereas its said that the wisdom of the Parliament might be
questioned if they intended no better provision against an enemy then against a
thief or rogue, I should desire the consideration of those men, whether are
those thieves and rogues in Troops or bodies and well armed, or are they a sort
of scattered out-lawes lightly armed to fly away, when they have have gotten
the prey? If they were in the former posture, I pray what difference in point
of difficulty of suppressing between them and so many enemies? and if it was
discretion in the Parliament to make this provision against the one, certainly
these with the Knighthood of the Kingdom with as much discretion will be
sufficient provision against the other. But if these be looked upon in the
latter sense, I fear the discretion of the Parliament would have been much
more questioned in arming all men that have any ability to suppress Thieves
and Rogues, against which the ordinary watch and ward of the Kingdom was an
ancient and approved remedy, and sufficient safeguard. And I would fain know of
these men whither it be for the safety of Edward the first, or any other King
to arm the whole body of the people, especially in times of jealousy for
suppressing of Thieves and Robbers when as it may be done by a guard of known
men in every County, with much more ease and less charge to the people.

Lastly, whereas its endeavored to make this Statute but a temporary provision
and taken up for the present condition of affairs when Thieves and Robbers
went with great strength, and in multitudes. This might be I grant of some
efficacy, if it had been introductio novi juris; but it being grounded upon a
former custom, the ground of that custom (which was defense of the Kingdom)
must be the warrant of the Law; otherwise the present inconvenience might be
remedied by a present order, and needed not the help of a Law that should rest
upon former custom, or provide for future generations. Nevertheless if all be
granted, viz. that this Statute is but a present order, that the Arms therein
are too slight to resist an enemy; and the end thereof was only to enable the
Kingdom against Thieves and Robbers; yet could not Edward the first pretend to
have any power to assesse Arms at pleasure upon occasion of war for the
defense of the Kingdom; nor is there any president in story that countenanceth
it, seeing Henry the third and Henry the second in their course used the rule
secundum facultates, as had been formerly observed; and the rule foregoing
tended only to freemen and their Lands. Nor did King John disclaim the same,
but pursued it (and yet if there be any president of prerogative in story which
King John had not, that King will be looked upon as a King of wonderment.) I
say King John pursued it when he was in the strength of his distemper;
threatened by the Pope, provoked by the French King now ready in the field,
vexed by his people, and himself scarce himself, summons to defend himself,
themselves, M Paris An. 1213.
and the Kingdom of England, all men that ought to have Arms, or may have
Arms, and such as have no amres; and yet arma habere possint, let them also
come ad capiendum solidatas nostras; and accordingly there came a vast number
not only of the Armed men, but of the unarmed multitude, who afterward were
sent to their own home when victuals failed. Hitherto therefore King John not
above three years before his death held himself to the assessment to Arms
only of such as had Lands; and at this time of exigency others unarmed were
summoned to take Arms from the King with their pay, or otherwise they must
fight without weapons.

I am now come to the last general point which concerns the executive power
of matters concerning the peace within this law, touching which the Statute
inforceth this, that Constables in every Hundred and Franchise shall have the
view of Arms, and shall present defaults against the Statute of Justices
assigned, who shall certify the same to the King in every Parliament, and the
King shall provide remedy; whereby it seems manifest that hitherto no law or
custom was made against any for default of Arms, but only such as held by
that tenure: and therefore they had a shift to cause them to swear to
maintain Arms, and so might proceed upon defaults, as in case of perjury; and
that the Parliament was still loath to set any certain rule for penalty, and
absolutely declined it, and left it under a general periculo incumbente, which
its likely men would rather eschew by obedience, then adventure upon out of a
daring spirit, unless their case was very clear within the mercy of common
reason; and therefore such cases were left to special order of the Parliament
rather then they would deliver such a rod as determining power was over into
any uncertain hand what ever. It is very true that by the opinion of some this
also has been controverted, as if all the executive power had been turned out
of the Parliaments order into the directory of Edward the first, which thing
reaches far; for then in order thereunto the whole Militia of the Kingdom
must have been under his safe command: and whether it ever entered into the
conceit of that King I know not, but somewhat like thereunto is not obscurely
urged to nourish and suggest such a kind of notion, and so derive it unto his
successors upon the words of a Statute de defensione portandi armorum the
English whereof I shall render out of the French, as follows:

It belongs to us (viz. Edw. 1.) and from us by our Royal Seignory to defend
force of Arms, and all other force against our peace at all times that we
shall please, and to punish according to the laws and usages of this Realm,
such as shall oppose, and to this they (viz. Lords and Commons) are bound us to
aid as their good Lord, always when need shall be.

Two things are concurrant with this, which is the body of the Statute (if such
it be;) the one is the preface, or the occasion: and the second is the
conclusion upon the whole body of the same. The preface first set down the
inscription or direction of the Law; not to the people but to the Justices of
his bench, and so its in nature of a Writ or Declaration sent unto his Judges.
Then it sets down the occasion which was a debate between Edw. 1. and his Lords
with a Treaty, which was had before certain persons deputed thereto: and it
was accorded, that at the next Parliament Order shall be taken by common
consent of the King, the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, that in all Parliaments
treaties and other assemblies which shall be had in the Kingdom of England for
ever after, all men shall come thereto without force, and without Arms, well
and peaceably; and thence it recites that the said meeting at Parliament was
had, and that there the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Cominalty being assembled
to advise upon this matter; nous eiont dit says one copy, and nous eions dit
says another copy; so as whether this was the Declaration of the King unto
the Parliament, or of the Parliament to the King is one doubt, and a principal
one it is in such a case as this. Then the conclusion of all is that the King
commands these things shall be read before the Justices in the bench, and
there enrolled; and this is dated the 30. of October in the seventh year of
his reign, which was Ann. 1279. So as if it were the Declaration of the King,
then it implies as if it were not very well accepted of the Parliament; and
therefore the King would have it rest upon record in nature of a claim or
protestando for saving the prerogative of the Crown. But if it were the
Declaration of the Parliament the King held it so precious a flower, that
fearing it should fade set it in a private Garden of his own, that it might be
more carefully nursed against the blast of time; as if the Parliament had not
assented thereto, (or if they did) meaned not to hold it forth to the world for
future times to be a constant rule, but only by way of concession, to ease
themselves of the present difficulty, in making a Law against wearing of Armor
in ordinary civil affairs, and so referred it to the Kings care to provide
against imergent breach of the peace, as an expedient for the present
inconveniences in affairs. And it will well suite with the posture of affairs
then in course, for the Welsh wars were now intermitted, and a quiet of three
years ensued; in the midst of which Soldiers having liberty to do nothing
(and that is next to naught) but recreate themselves, used their wonted guise,
as if they were not dressed that day that they were not armed; nor fit for
counsel, unless (as their ancesters) with weapons in their hands, nor worthy
of the presence of a King under other notion then as a General in the field,
and themselves as Commanders that are never a la mode; but when all in Iron and
Steel. I say to make a Law that must suddenly bind men from riding or being
armed when no man thought himself safe otherwise was in effect to expose their
bare necks to the next turn of the Sword of a King that they did not overmuch
trust, and the less in regard he trusted not them. I do not wonder therefore
if the Parliament liked not the work, but left it to the King to provide for
the keeping off breaches of the peace, and promised there assistance therein.

Lastly, supposing all that is or can be supposed, viz. that the Parliament had
given up the power of the Militia unto Edward the first, yet it was not to all
intents, nor did it continue; for besides the Statute of Torniments, which
shows plainly that the ordering of Armor was in the power of the Parliament,
and which in all probabilty was made after that law last beforementioned; the
Statute at Winton made after this Law nigh six years space orders the use
of the Trained bands in maintaining the peace, and reserveth the penalties to
themselves for any default committed against the said act. And therefore
notwithstanding any thing that yet appears to me out of any Law or History,
the chief moderatorship of war and peace within the Realm of England rests
hitherto upon the Parliament next under God, and in the King no otherwise then
in order to the public, the rule whereof can be determined by no other Judge
then that which can be intended to have no other respect then the public
good; and which is the abridgement of the large volume of the Kingdom.

A summary conclusion.
ANd thus have I brought the shape of English government (rude as it is) from
the first offspring of the Saxons through the rough waves of the Danish
tempests, the rocks of Norman invasion; and the Quicksands of Arbitrary
government under Popes and Kings to the Haven; much defaced it is I confess by
the rage of time, and yet retained the original likeness in proportion.

Kings first (about the Norman times) joining with the Lords for their joint
interest above the ordinary pitch had mounted each other too high to be Lords
over free men; Then by flattering of the free men into their designs hovered
above them all; but not being able to maintain their pitch so long as the
Lords held together, stooped for a party amongst them and soon obtained their
desire. For some Lords (more ambitious then others, and they again more
populer then them) seek several interests: And thus Kings (aided by their
party to a Supremacy which they were never borne to; and it by them into a
pre-eminence above their Peers which neither law nor custom ever gave them)
are of Moderators in the Council of Lords, become moderators of those
Councels; and so they obtained all that the Lords had, but no more. For though
both they and the Lords abused their power over the free men by extorsion and
opression as Lords over tenants; yet could they never prevail over them as
free born subjects to gain their consent to give their right, or the law up to
the Kings beck; but still that remained arbiter both of King and people, and
the Parliament Supreme expounder and Judge both of it and them. Other argument
hereof there will be little need, Bract. lib. 2. c. p. 16.
besides what has formerly appeared, then what we find in Bracton who wrote
in the time of Henry the third, to this effect: God is superior to the King,
and the Law by which he is made King, and his Court, viz. the Earls and
Barons: Earls (according to their name Comites) are the Kings associates, and
he that has an associate has a master; and therefore if the King be unbridled
(or which is all one) without Law, they ought to bridle him, unless they will
be unbridled as the King, and then the Commons may cry Lo Jesus, etc. This was
the judgment of that famous Lawyer of the State of an English King in Henry
the thirds time, I shall add hereto a concurrent testimony of a Lawyer also in
Edward the first time. Although (says he) the King ought to have no equal in
the Land: Miror Just. p 9.
yet because the King nor his Commissioners (in case where the King intrencheth
upon the right of any of his Subjects) can be both Judge and party; the King by
right ought to have companions to hear and determine in Parliament all Writs
and plaints of wrongs done by the King, the Queen, or their childrsn, and of
those wrongs especially whereof otherwise common right cannot be had. Nor is
this the opinion only of Lawyers, but it is the Law it self unto which the
Royal assent was added, Edw. 2.
and the same sealed with an Oath in the solemn stipulation made by Kings at
their Coronation with the people then present in the name of the whole body:
the sum whereof is wont to be propounded to the King in this manner,
Remonstr. Parliament. novem. l. 2. An. 1642.
though in a different Language.

1. Will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm to the people of England
the Laws and Customs to them granted by the ancient Kings of England your
righteous and godly predecessors: and especially to the Clergy and people by
the glorious King St. Edward your predecessor?

The Kings answer: I do them grant and promise.

2. Will you keep to God and the Church, and the Clergy, and the people peace
and concord sincerely according to your power?

The Kings answer: I will do it.

3. Do you grant to hold and keep the Laws and rightful Customs which the
Comonalty of your Realm shall have chosen, and to maintain and enforce them to
the honor of God after your power?

The Kings Answer: I this do grant and promise.

In few words the King promised to keep the laws already made, the peace of
his Kingdom, and the Laws to be agreed upon by the commonalty: the same in
subsistence with that of Henry the first, William the Conqueror; the Danish
and Saxon Kings formerly had, and in the foregoing discourse observed: And thus
is he led to the Throne in a Chain of Gold, a serious memorial of the Kings
duty as he is a man, and a glorious ornament to him as a King. If then the King
be under the law in case of direction, as by stipulation he is bound, if he be
likewise under the Law in case of transgression to be judged by his Comites or
Peers. Hitherto certainly an English King is but Primus inter omnes, and not
supra totum; and if at any time he skipped higher, he afterward fell lower;
for it was the lot of these times to have Lords that were bent to work the
people to regard their own liberties, in which the Lords had first wrapped up
their own claims. Thus comes the counsels of such as have been notoriously
exorbitant to be scanned; and to bring these into frame, all run out of
frame; the Barons wars arise, and thrive according as interests do concenter
more or less; the issue is like that of a drawn battle, wherein he that
continues last in the field is glad to be gone away, and so the Title is left
to be tried upon the next advantage that shall arise.

Yet had Kings gotten one step forwards to their design, which was that they
now had to deal with a divided Baronage. It was the birth of ambition, and it
was nourished by the same milk; for those that side with the King are become
Magnificoes next to the Kings person, and the sole managers of all the great
affairs of State concurrant with their own designs under-board. But the other
Lords are in account rural, standing further off, and looking on at a
distance, are laid away as supurfluous: and as they themselves are out of the
game of great men, so grow they mindlesse of their interest in the great
affairs, yet of these there is diversity, for some sport themselves in their
condition; others observe the irregular motions of those above, and watch their
own time.

This was the first advance of that society, which was afterward called the
Privy-Councell; being a company of choice men according to the Kings bent, unto
whom the consideration of all the weighty affairs of the Kingdom is
committed; but nothing can be concluded without the Kings fiat, which regularly
should follow upon the premises, according to the major vote; but more
ordinarily suteth with that which best suteth with his pleasure. And now are
Parliaments looked on as fatal, or at the best, but as heavy dull debates, and
inconvenient both for speed and secrecy; which indeed are advantages for weak
and unwarrantable counsels, but such as are well grounded upon truth, and
strength of reason of State care not to behold the clearest noonday, and
prevail neither by speed nor secrecy, but by the power of uncontrolled Reason,
fetched from truth it self. The grand Council of Lords also are now no less
burdensome: For though they were not able to prevail against the private
designs of an arbitrary Supremacy, yet do they hinder the progress, tell
tails to the people, and blot the names of those that are of that aspiring
humor; which once done, like that of Sisiphus they have no other end of there
labor then their toil.

Thus perished that ancient and rightly honorable Grand Council of Lords,
having first laid aside the public then lost unity, and lastly themselves;
besides the extreme danger of the whole body. For the sense of State once
contracted into a Privy council is soon recontracted into a Cabinet council,
and last of all into a Favorite or two, which many times brings damage to the
Public, and both themselves and Kings into extreme praecipices; partly for
want of maturity, but principally through the providence of God overruling
irregular courses, to the hurt of such as walk in them.

Nor were the Clergy idle in this bustle of affairs, although not very well
employed; for it is not to be imagined but that these private prizes played
between the Lords, Commons, and King, laid each other open to the aim of a
foreign pretention, whiles they lay at their close guard one against another:
and this made an Ecclesiastical power to grow upon the Civil, like the Ivy
upon the Oak from being servants to friends, and thence Lords of Lords, and
Kings of Kings: By the first putting forth it might seem to be a Spiritual
Kingdom, but in the blosome which now is come to some luster its evident to be
nothing but a temporal Monarchy over the consciences of men; and so like
Cuckows laying their eggs in nests that are none of their own, they have their
brood brought up at the public charge. Nevertheless, this their Monarchy was
as yet beyond their reach; it was Prelacy that they labored for, pretending to
the Popes use; but in order to themselves. The cripple espied their halting,
and made them soon tread after his pace; he is content thty should be Prelates,
without measure, within their several Diocesses and Provinces, so as he may be
the sole Praelatissimo beyond all comparison; and undoubtedly thus had been
before these times destroyed the very principles of the Church Government of
this Kingdom, but that two things prejudiced the work: the one that the
papalty was a foreign power, and the other that as yet the Pope was entangled
with the power of Councels, if he did not stoop thereunto. The first of these
two was the most deadly Herb in the Pottage, and made it so unsavory that it
could never be digested in this Kingdom: For Kings looking upon this as an
intrenchment upon their prerogative, and the people also as an intrenchment
upon their liberties, both or one of them were ever upon the guard to keep out
that which was without, and would be ruled neither by Law nor Council. And
thetefore though both Kings and people yielded much unto the importunity of
these men, and gave them many privileges whereby they became great; yet was
their greatness dependant upon the law of the Land and vote of Parliament; and
though they had the more power they nevertheless were not one jot the more
absolute, but still the law kept above their top; I deny not but they in their
practice exceeded the rule often and lifted themselves above their rank; yet
it is as well to be granted that they could never make law to bind the
Churchmen, much less the Laity, but by conjunction of the grand councels both
for Church and Commonwealth affairs; nor could they execute any Law in case
that concerned the liberty or propriety of either, but in a Synodicall way, or
as deputed by the Parliament in that manner. And therefore I must conclude that
in these times whereof we treat the principles of Church Government, so far
as warranted by law, were in their nature Presbyteriall; that is, both in
making laws and executing them; Bishops and Archbishops were never trusted with
the sole administration of them, but in and by consent of Synods in which the
Clergy and Laity ought to have their joint vote; and all power more or contrary
hereto was at the best an usurpation colored by practice, which was easily
attained where there was a perpetual moderatorship resting in the Bishop, and
over all the Pope; the King, Lords, and Commons in the mean while being buried
in pursuit of several interests elsewhere.

To make all semblable, the free men met with the sad influence of these
distempers, as well from the King and Lords, as the Clergy. Kings to save their
own stake from the Pope, remitted of that protection which they owed to their
Subjects, and let in upon them a flood of oppressions and extortions from the
Romish and English Clergy, and so like a little ship cast out a barrel for the
Whale to peruse till it gets away: but this changed no right. The Lords by
their partees shattered them a sunder and dismembered their body by intestine
broiles. The Clergy more craftily making some of them free Denisins of the
Roman See, and taking them into their protection whiles others of the free men
at a distance were exposed as a prey to the continual assaults of those
devouring times: all these conspired together to deface and destroy that
ancient and goodly bond of brotherhood, the Law of Decenners, by which the free
men formerly holden together like Cement in a strong wall, are now left like a
heap of loose stones, or so many single men scarcely escaping with their
skin of liberties, and those invaded by many projects and shifts in
government of State affairs. So must I leave them until some happy hand shall
work their repair both for time and manner, as it shall please that great and
wise Master builder of the World.

FINIS.
The Table.
ABbats page 229 Abbeys quarter p. 242 Not taxed or visited from foreign parts
p. 244 Vacancies ibid. Purveyance ibid.
Aberemurder amongst the Saxons p. 99 Accolites amongst the Saxons p. 28
Accusation, witnesses amongst the Saxons p. 150 Action amongst the Saxons p. 87
Acquittaile vide Knightservice Administration, vide Intestate Adultery amongst
the Saxons p. 42 amongst the Normans p. 141 after p. 234
Advousions cognizance p. 178 Aedeling p. 53 Age, vide Infancy Aides after the
Norman times 201, 278, 285 Alderman p 53 Alienations license p. 183, 274
Allegiance according to the Saxons p 86 The Normans p. 151
Amercements p. 250, 262 Apostasy, punished by the Saxons p. 39 after p. 194
Appeals amongst the Saxons p. 86 the Normans p. 151 after p. 274
Appeals to Rome p. 176 settled p. 179 to Ecclesiastical Courts p. 179
Archbishops, vide Metropolitans. Arraies p. 305, etc. Arms assessement p 206
vide Arraies.
Austin the Monk, his coming and his actions p. 17, etc.
B.
Bail 195, etc. 269, etc. 290 Banks, vide Bridges. Baron, vide Court.
Bargain and sail of goods amongst the Saxons p. 107 the Normans p. 143
Barons wars p. 221, etc Bastardy amongst the Saxons p. 42 Battle trial
amongst the Saxons p. 90 Batteries punished by the Sax ns p. 100, 193 Bigamists
p. 247 Bishops amongst the Saxons p. 25 vide Prelacy: amongst the Normans;
their power increased p. 123, etc. vide elections, their oath to the Pope p 184
Basphemy punished by the Saxons p. 39, 98 amongst the Normans p. 138
Bloodshed, vide Manslaughter. Bridges p 263 Britons, their Religion and
government 1 etc. 18 conversion p. 3 instructed in learning p. 6 a Province
ibid. the last that submitted to the papalty, and the first that shook it off
p. 20
Burgage amongst the Saxons p. 82 Burghbote ibid. Burglary punished by the
Saxons p. 101 Burning of woods punished by the Saxons p. 101 vide p. 195
Buroughs Mag. cart. Buroughs English p. 106
C.
CAnnon-law p. 121 vide Prelacy.
Carriages p. 266, 267 Castles, their use p. 117, 265, etc. abuse p. 166
occasion of the first civil wars p. 209
Castle guard, vide Mag. cart. p. 267 de Cautione admittenda p. 182 Chancery p.
285 Chancemedly p. 287 Church, maintenance by the Saxons p. 29, etc. Franchise
p. 71 Alienation p. 183 Reparation p. 235
Churchmen, Action p. 230 231 discharged from Torns p. 230 purveyance p. 23,
267 Their complaints p. 227, 236 Privileged from distress p. 242
Ciricksceate amongst the Saxons p. 30 Normans p. 139 Vide first fruits.
Circuits p. 192 Citation p. 182, 242 Clerks trial p. 185, 231, 243 Killers of
Clerks p. 185
Comites ex plebe p. 55 Common pleas settled p. 260 Commutation, vide Arriculi
Cleri. Compurgators amongst the Saxons p. 89 Confession sacred p. 242
Constitutions at Clarindon p. 178 de Consimili casu p. 285 Conveyance, vide
Deeds. Copy hold, vide Manor. Coroners amongst the Saxons p. 66, 286
Corporations p. 77, etc. 125 Coverfew p. 163 Councels general, vide Synods.
Councels of Lords amongst the Saxons p. 54 vide Lords.
Counties, Courts amongst the Saxons p. 65 Normans p. 131 After p. 275, 276, 285
Court Baron amongst the Saxons p. 78 Crown pleas Mag. cart. p. 264 Courtesy of
England in the Saxons time p. 105 Custodes pagani amongst the Saxons p. 55
D.
DAneguelt p. 164 Released p. 189
Darrain. presentment Mag. Cart. p. 262 Deacons p. 28 Deaneries amongst the
Saxons p. 36 Debt to the King, satisfaction p. 257 Debt to the King, Mag. cart.
Decenners amongst the Saxons p. 70 Normans p. 134
Deeds among the Saxons p. 107 Defamation p 235, 240 Departure beyond Sea
without license p. 180 Diocesses amongst the Saxons p. 36 Distress in the
Normans time p. 142 Mag. carta 258, etc. vide County court.
Disseisin, vide Redisseisin and Noveldisseisin. Dower in the Saxon time p. 103
Norman times p. 146, 256

E
Ecclesiastical cognizance and powmer p. 176, etc. 129, 204 Vide Stat.
Circumspecte agatis and Articuli cleri.
Ederbrece amongst the Saxons p. 101 Edw. the first p, 214 Edw. the second p.
218 Elections p. 121, 180, 232, 243 Elegit amongst the Saxons p. 95 Englishire,
a Saxon Law p. 100 Error, vide Appeals. Escheates p 268 Vide Forfaiture,
Felony.
Escuage, Mag. Carta p. 276, etc. Excommunication in the Saxons time p. 95
Normans p. 128 After the Normans time 181
Excommunicato deliberando p. 241 Excommunicato capiendo p. 242, 291 Execution
in the Saxon time p. 94 Executors Mag. carta. Exorsists p. 28
F.
FAires in the Norman time p. 143 Fauxonry p. 192, 195 Feastdaies, Norman law
p. 139 Felonies and Felons punishment and forfaiture p. 151, 195 267
Concelement p. 289 Defamed ibid.
Feorme or Farm amongst the Saxons p. 75 Fightwit amongst the Saxons p. 100
Fine, by the Normans p. 150, 280, etc. Folkmote, Vide County court. Fools and
idiots amongst the Normans. p. 149 After p. 280
Foreign councels p. 209, 212 219 Fornication, vide Adultery. Forests amongst
the Saxons p. 82 Franchises p. 68 Frankpledge amongst the Saxons p. 78 Vide
view.
Freemen of the Saxons p. 55 Normans p. 135 After p. 188, 272
Frithbrech amongst the Saxons p. 100 Fugam fecit p. 85 Fugitives p. 268

G
GAvellkind amongst the Saxons p. 106 Normans p. 160
Glebe amongst the Saxon p. 32 Goods found, Saxon Law p. 109 Norman p. 143 Sale
ibid.
Grithbrech, vide Frithbrech.
H
HAbendum, Saxon p. 107 Hamsockne Saxon p. 101 Heresy punished by the Saxons
p. 39 Normans p. 138 After p. 193
Haubergettum, Haubertum, Halbargellum what it is p. 309 Heretock, Saxon p. 53
Henry the first p. 119 Henry the second p. 167 Henry the third p. 207, etc.
Shifts for money p. 210 Foreign councels p. 212 Yields up his interest in the
militia to the Lords ibid. etc.
Heordpeny, vide Peterpence. Highwaies privilege p. 305 Hundred and the Court
Saxon p. 68 Norman p. 133
Hundred Setena Saxon p. 68
I
IDolatry punished by the Saxons p. 97 Normans p. 138 Vide Blasphemy.
Imprisonment Saxon p. 100 Norman p. 151
Incest punished by the Saxons p. 101 Indictment Saxon law p. 85 Infancy
amongst the Saxons p. 88 After p. 198
Infangtheoff, Saxon p. 74 Inheritance Saxons p. 102 Normans p. 160 After p.
196, etc.
Inquest Saxon p. 91 Interdict in the Saxon time p. 38 After p. 182
Intent punished by the Normans p. 151 Intestate Saxon law p. 109 Norman p. 143
Afterward 232, etc. 264, etc.
John p. 170 Judgment, vide execution. Judges, vide Justice. Judicatory 189,
etc. Jury grand and petit amongst the Saxons p. 91 Justice and their Courts
amongst the Saxons p. 84 Chief Justice p. 191
Judges or Justices itinerant after the Normans p. 192, 199 284
K
KIngs amongst the Saxons; election, continuance, covenant, maintenance, power,
in Church Matters p. 46, etc. 56 Amongst the Normans: election 113, etc.
Covenant 116. etc. Power in Church matters p. p. 123, etc. In the times of
Steven, Henry the second, Richard the first, and John: Election p. 165 Power in
Church matters p. 176, etc. In the times of Henry the third, Edward the first,
and Edward the second. Succession p. 208, etc. Power in Ecclesiastical matters
p. 225, etc. 233 In Civil affairs 277, etc. 317, etc.
Knightservice amongst the Saxons p. 76 Marriage p. 146, 202, 255 Acquittall p.
149 Widows p. 256

L
LAnguage endeavored to be changed by the Normans p. 161 Lashlight amongst the
Saxons p. 99 Lecturers amongst the Saxons p. 28 Leet amongst the Saxons p. 78
Legierwit amongst the Saxons p. 100 Livery and seisin amongst the Saxons p. 108
London p. 257 Lord's Day maintained by the Saxons p. 98 By the Normans as plea
of the Crown p. 139
Lords, their councels amongst the Saxons p. 62, 84 From the Conquerours time
till Henry the third p. 174
Lorica, what it is p. 309 Lucius p. 9, etc. Luminaries amongst the Saxons p.
31 Lunacy, vide fools.
M
MAgna carta p. 172 Renewed with the curse p. 210 Stat. etc. p. 253 Cap. 35. p.
244 Cap. 37. p. 245
Mainpernours by the Saxons p. 85, 87 By the Normans p. 151
Maimes punished by the Saxons p. 100 Manbota amongst the Saxons p. 99 Manors
amongst the Saxons p. 75 Normans p. 134
Manslaughter punished by the Saxons p. 99 Normans p. 140 After p. 195
Manumission p. 137 Marriage portion, vide Dower. Marriage, vide Knightservice.
Merchants Magna carta p. 272 Marches amongst the Saxons p. 72 Normans p. 131
Markets amongst the Saxons p. 80 Normans p. 143 Vide Townships.
Marshals Court p. 285 Matrimonial causes amongst the Saxons p. 41 Medietas
linguae amongst the Saxons p. 92 Metropolitan amongst the Saxons p. 23
Micklemote amongst the Saxons p. 57 The Primacy of Canterbury settled there p. 36
Mils tithed p. 240 Militia amongst the Saxons p. 63 The Normans p. 152 During
the Kings next ensuing p. 205 During Henry 3. Edward 1. Edward 2 p. 294
Mint amongst the Saxons. Normans p. 137
Monastry admission p. 183 Mortdancester p. 198, 261 Mortmaine p. 245 Mortuary
amongst the Saxons p. 32
N
News scandalous p. 292 Nightwatches by the Normans p. 141 After p. 304
Nobility amongst the Saxons p. 53 From the Normans time p. 172 From King John's
time p. 221
Normans, their title, etc. p. 113, etc. Not conquest p. 155
Novell disseisin p. 199, 261
O
OBlations cognizance p. 235 Odio and Atia p. 269, etc. Officers power greater
then kings p. 173 Ordeale amongst the Saxons p. 89 Ordinaries intestate p. 232
Outfangtheoff amongst the Saxons p. 74 Ostiaries amongst the Saxons p. 28 Oaths
p. 246, 271
P
PAlatine county amongst the Saxons p. 73 Parishes amongst the Saxons p. 35
Parliaments p. 120, 278 Parks trespasses p. 292 Passage p. 272 Peace amongst
the Saxons p. 100 The Normans p. 140 After p. 300
Penal Laws, Saxons p. 96 Normans p. 138 After in the time of Henry 2. p. 193
After p. 286
Perjury punished by the Saxons p. 40, 101 Peers amongst the Saxons p. 93
Peterpence amongst the Saxons p. 32 The Normans p. 139
Pledges p. 150 Plough alms, Saxons p. 32 Popes power p. 19, 177, 184
Oppressions of the Clergy p. 225
Prelacy in England not till Constantines time 11. came from Rome by Austin p.
21, etc. Suddenly grown p. 44
Praecipe Mag. carta p. 268 Priors, vide Abbats. Presbyters amongst the Saxons
p. 27 Presentment amongst the Saxons p. 86 Priority, vide Tenure. Prohibitions
p. 228, 233 Protector p. 209 Provinces amongst the Saxons p. 35 Purveyance p.
244, 265, etc.
Q
QUare Clausum fregit, Saxon p. 101 Quare excommunicavit p. 227 Quare non
admisit ibid. Quarentine p. 256, 282 Quo warranto p. 244
R
Ransom p. 94, 260 Rape, Norman p. 141 After p. 195, etc. 288
Reasonable part 257, 264 Vide Dower.
Redemption, vide Ransom. Redesseisin p. 292 Relief, Norman p. 145 After p.
201
Religious houses, vide Abbeys. Replevy, Norman p 142 259 Richard the first p.
169 Romans entry p. 5 The Papalty, with seven degrees of their Church Officers
p. 29 Seven sorts of Church maintenance p. 35
Romescot Romesfeogh, vide Heardpenny. Robbery punished by Saxons p. 101 By
Normans p. 142 After p. 193, 195, 287, 304

S
SAbbath day, Saxon law p. 98 Sacrilege, Saxon law p. 41 Sanctuary p. 139,
183, 242 Saxons in England mingled p. 90 Seal, vide Deeds p. 107 Sheriffs,
Saxon p. 65 Extortion p. 275, 286
Symony punished by the Saxons p. 41 Sorcery, vide Witchery. Soulshot Saxon p
32 Socage Saxon p. 77 Steven his government p. 165 Stat. Magna carta, vide
Magna carta. Merton, cap. 1, 2, 6, 7 p. 156 Cap. 1. p. 282 Cap. 3. p. 292 Cap.
9. p. 252 Cap. 10. p. 275 Cap. 11. p. 295
Marlbridge, cap. 1, 2, 3. p. 259 Cap. 4. ibid. Cap. 5. p. 280 Cap. 8. p. 292
Cap. 9. p. 264 Cap. 10. p. 229, 275 Cap. 15. p. 259 Cap. 16. p. 254 Cap. 17. p.
282 Cap. 19. p. 262 Cap. 20. p. 261 Cap. 21. p. 259 Cap. 22. p. 260 Cap. 25. p.
287, 302 Cap. 29. p. 229
Westminster. 1. cap. 1, 2, 5. p. 231, etc. Cap. 3. p. 289, 302 Cap. 4. p. 281 Cap.
6. p. 263 Cap. 9. p. 289 Cap. 10. p. 286 Cap. 11. p. 270 Cap. 12. p. 289 Cap.
13..p 288 Cap. 14. p. 275 Cap. 15. p. 290 Cap. 16. p. 260 Cap. 20. p. 292 Cap.
22. p. 256 Cap. 23. p. 286 Cap. 32. p. 266 Cap. 33. p. 275 Cap. 34. p. 292 Cap.
36. p. 285 Cap. 51 p. 261
Bigami p. 247, etc. Glocest cap. 1. p. 262 Cap. 5. p. 255 Cap. 6. p. 261 Cap.
8. p. 285, 302 Cap. 9. p. 270
De Religiosis p. 245 Westminster. 2. cap. 13. p. 275 Cap. 16. p. 256 Cap. 19. p. 232
Cap. 24. p. 285 Cap. 26. p. 292 Cap. 29. p. 270, 285 Cap. 30. p. 262 Cap. 33.
p. 245 Cap. 34. p. 288
Winton p. 302, etc. Circumspecte agatis p. 233, etc. Quia emptores p. 274 De
Judaismo p. 273 Quo warranto p. 244 De vasto p. 255 De consultatione habenda p.
238 De wardis p. 254 Artic. super Cart. cap. 2. p. 266 Cap 3. p. 285 Cap. 9. p.
286 Cap. 12. p. 260 Cap. 13, 14. p. 276 Cap. 15. p. 285 Cap. 18. p. 255
Conjunct feoffat. p. 262 Amortizand terris p. 246 Asportat bonis Relig. p. 244
De militibus p. 294 Artic. cleri p. 219, 238 Vicecomit p. 219, 276, 286 De
priscis bonis cleri p. 219, 244 Prerog. reg. p. 220 Cap. 3, 13. p. 254 Cap. 7.
p. 274 Cap. 9. p. 280 Cap. 11. p. 281 Cap. 14, 16. p. 268

Subdeacons p. 28 Suite of Court p. 202 Vide Manor.
Synods, Briton p. 11 Saxon p. 37 Disadvantageous to Prelacy p. 45 Norman p.
127 Without the Laity p. 187 Power p. 248, etc.

T
Tail, Saxon law p. 105 Taxes p. 278 Vide Free men.
Tenures, vide Manor. Normans changed them not p. 161
Tenures by several Lords, priority p. 200 By Escheats p 273
Term, Saxon p. 110 Testament, Saxon p. 108 After p. 202, etc.
Thefts, cognizance p. 193, 195 Tithes, original p. 30 Cognizance p. 43
Normans p. 139, 778, 238 240
Torn, Saxon p. 67, 275 Torture amongst the Saxons p. 88 Townships and their
Courts, Saxon p. 81 Normans p. 134
Treason punished by Saxons p. 98 After p. 194
Trover of goods p. 143 Trotheplight p. 179
V
VAcancies of Churches p. 179, etc. 185 Vacation, vide Term. View of piedges,
Saxon p. 78 Norman p. 134 After p. 263, 275
Villains, Saxon p. 56 Normans p. 137
Violence done to Clerks p. 235 Use in deeds of conveyance, Saxon p. 107 Usury
p. 273
W
WArdship p. 148, 202, 254, 270 Warranty, Saxon p. 107 Wears p. 268 Wera,
wergilda, Saxon p. 99 Weights and measures, Saxons p. 28 Normans p. 142, 269
Widows, vide Socage and Knightservice. William the first p. 113, etc. William
Rufus p. 118 Wife, Saxon p. 98 Will, vide Testament. Witnesses, deeds, Saxon p.
108 Witchery p. 40 Punished by Saxons p. 97
Wita, Saxon p. 99 Worship, Saxon, cognizance p. 39 Wrecks p. 281
FINIS.

