PARACELSVS Of the Supreme MYSTERIES OF NATURE.

Of The Spirits of the Planets. Occult Philosophy.


The Magical, Sympathetical, and Antipathetical CURE of Wounds and Diseases.

The Mysteries of the twelve SIGNS of the ZODIAC.

Englished by R. Turner, (...).

London, Printed by J. C. for N. Brook and J. Harison; and are to be sold at
their shops at the Angel in Cornhil, and the holy Lamb near the East End of
Paul's. 1656.

To the worthily respected, and his much honored Friend, Doctor Trigge, Doctor
in PHYSIC; Robert Turner wishes health and happiness.
Honored Sir,
THe successful experience and large practice which you have had in the
Operations of Nature, (I mean in the practical part of Physic) has invited me
to present this piece of that most renowned Physician Paracelsus to your
Patronage; which I have endeavored to bring into a garb suitable, as near as
I can, to our English fashion; though perhaps it is not so finely accoutred, and
dressed A la mode, as to suit with every critical or captious Fancy: But as
this Author in his time was too learned and sincere in the method of his
practice, to suit with general Sophistry of the wilfully ignorant Conclave of
Physicians; so I doubt not, but you have met with some Invectives amongst our
common Collegians, who ground the greatest reason of their Recipes from a
Galen's or a Pliny's Probatum: But as this famous Author made Reason and
Experience his greatest Guide, so I am assured you do; and therefore valued not
the Calumnies, Oppositions, and Obtrectations of his Adversaries. Sir, this
little Treatise presents you with the rare secrets of Alchymy, and the
miraculous Cures of Diseases by Sigils and Lamens, made in their proper
seasons, and attributed to the nature of Celestial Bodies; which to many
Ignorants seems impossible, and is by them vilified because not understood: I
therefore make bold to crave your protection, which may sufficiently arm it
against all Opposites. And be pleased to pardon my boldness herein, and admit
of this my labor into your Patronage; that your favorable acceptance hereof
may be a future encouragement to

August 20. 1655. Yours to Command, R. Turner.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
IN this last Iron age, ignorance has so much prevailed, that many have, and
yet do plead for it, and strive to uphold it, crying down all Arts, and
endeavoring to hood-wink knowledge; so that nothing but the feces and dreggs
of Art seems to remain: so that they seem but shadows, if compared with that
pristine learning of the Ancients. What golden Legends formerly flourished
among the Hebrews, and Egyptians, and are now even almost all lost in
Oblivion? But because Babels confusion is one great reason of the decay of
Sciences, which are not in every Mother Tongue understood, and the disposition
of most people of our times is to breed their children up bett^ ^ed then
taught, their conditions are rather to pou^ into the earth, Unde effodiuntur
opes irritamenta malorum; then to look Heavenwards with that O sublime
wherewith they were created which the Poet tells of, (...) Ovid me^.

Os homini sublime dedit ^lumque vider^ jussit, etc.

Whereas all beasts look down with Grovelling eye,
To man God gave looks mixed with (...),
And willed him with bold face to view the Sky.
And therefore I present the ingenious Reader with a part of the Works of the
renowned Paracelsus of the secrets of Alchymy, Occult Philosophy, and the
wonderful operation of the Celestial bodies, in curing diseases by sigils and
characters, made and applied in fit elected times and seasons, and under their
proper constellations, as the Author has directed. I must expect the sottish
Malignant censures of Zoylus and Momus, and such fools: but the Author himself
in his Prologue in the ensuing discourse, sufficiently cleares all objections,
and therefore I shall save that labor; only I would have such men not be so
wilfully ignorant, as altogether to forget, that the Heavens declare the glory
of God, and the Firmament shows his handy-worke. Indeed Mechanics and
Empiricks do abuse all Arts: One Mountebank railes in verse against Astrology,
and impudently calls the professors thereof cheaters, (Sed seipsum intueri
oportet) and gives this to be his only reason, that a fools bolt is soon shot;
and that he endeavored to vil^fie that Art, because he was altogether ignorant
of it himself, and would gladly learn it; but he knew not how nor which way to
begin: another (and too many such render the Art vile) Poetizes upon the Art of
Astrology, and pretends to cure all diseases and know all things by it, and
indeed knows nothing: such are a great Scandal to the excellency of such
Sciences: Sed non loquor stultis. This translation is rendered rather
Grammatically then Sententially, according to the Authors own phrase: shortly
expect (Deo volente) the other parts hereof, and some comments on this and
them, together with the famous art of Steganography, Authore Tritemio, to speak
our own Language; and perhaps the Occult Philosophy of Agrippa digested into a
plainer method: this should have been now enlarged, but presens Status noster
is the reason, and the excuse the same as Ovid's: Nubila sunt subitis tempora
nostra malis.

It is the General opinion of most ignorant people, to count all things that
are above their Vulgar apprehensions, to be diabolical, and merely brought to
pass by the works of the Devil: and under that notion they conclude all the
secret and Magnetic operations of nature, and thereby rob God the creator of
all things, of that glory that is due unto him only, and attribute the same to
the Devil the enemy to God and all the world: I shall therefore here take
occasion to tell such people (because their Priests, that should teach them
knowledge, either cannot or else will not) what the Devil is. As in the
Microcosmus or little world Man, the Soul is the best part, and the excrements
the worst; so in the great world, as the Universal creating spirit is the best
part, so is the Devil the excrement of that Universal Spirit, and the abject
and Caput mortuum of the world; and the poorest and most wretched of all
created beings: And that works a great Antipathy between him and us, and the
blessed holy Angels, who are our Governors and Protectors, and continual
guardians, and are continually employed about us, according to their orders and
ministeries appointed them by the most High: although the Devil always
endeavors to imitate and counterfeit the good Angels, and thereby deceives
many whose wickedness and malice suits with his nature, and at which the good
Angel being grieved, leaves them; and many times for the wickedness of some
Person or Family, the good Angel curses such a person and family, or house;
then the wicked Spirit haunts such houses, affrighting the people with many
fearful apparitions; neither can that house be quiet, nor any such person;
neither shall any of the Generation of any such family prosper until that
curse be expiated, and the angry Angel appeased; as this Author will tell you,
and woeful experience daily shows: how frequently, and familiarly did those
blessed Angels visibly communicate with the holy men and Magicians of old!
though now such is the wickedness of our age, that they have almost quite
forsaken us: although they are always present about us, though invisible,
administering to us according to the orders given unto them from the second
Hierarchy, who receive the same from the first Hierarchy, who always attend
before the Throne of the divine Majesty, offering up the prayers of the Saints,
etc. If any one account this superstition, I hope I shall never be of the
Number of those who for fear of being superstitious, have reformed themselves
and hunted Religion till they have lost the sent of it, into mere Atheism and
profaness. But lest I should digress Ultra Crepidam, and make a gate bigger
then the City, I will here conclude my self, Esse idem qui sum,

A Studio Divinae Contemplationis, August, 1655. Robertus Turner.

In Commendation of his Friend's Translation.
THrice-welcome Paracelsus, most renowned
Hermetick and Philosopher by fire,
Now in an English garb thou come crowned,
What need we for our Chemistry soar higher?
Since thou reveal'st with thy Prophetic Pen,
All Is needful to be known by the Sons of Men.
And thou, my noble Friend, who thus have dressed
Him in our English Fashion, do deserve,
With Laurel to be crowned with the rest
Of those who daily do Urania serve.
Let wry-mouthed Cynicks, prate, preach, foam, and fret,
Hermes true Sons will not thy love forget.
Fare ever well, so ever wishes he
Who is more yours, then he can seem to be.
W. F. Astrophilus.

An Encomium upon his Friend the Translator's elaborate pains.
FLy Galen hence, Hippocrates be gone;
I will preserve my choice: this is that One,
Whose true Elixir does preserve the frame
Of Man's frail Nature, vivifies the same;
By heavenly constellated Medicine,
Which vulgars count but Dross, I count Divine.
Let Zoil's and Momus 's intoxicated brains
Dispraise the Author's works; Translator's pains
I Will foster, cherish with undaunted part
This true sublime Spagyrick noble Art.
Proceed then, Friend, make all speak English: why
Should we be barred our Native Liberty?
W. Ryves, Philomedicus.

The Contents of this Book.
OF simple Fire. page 1, 2 Multiplicity of Fire. 3 Variety of Metals. 3, 4 The
Metals of the Planets. ibid. The substance of Metals. 4 The Spirit of the Sun.
4, 5 The Body of Mercury. 5 The Spirit of the Moon. 6 Of the Spirit of Venus.
7, 8 The Spirit of Mars. 9 Of the Spirit of Jupiter. 10 Of the Spirit of
Saturn. 11 Of the gross Spirit of Mercury. 12, 13 Of Tinctures how they are
made. 14, 15 The Conjunction of Male and Female. 15, 16 To form of the glass
Instruments. 16 The properties of the Fire. 17 Signs of the Conjunction united.
18, 19 To know the perfect Tincture. 19, 20 To multiply the Tinctures. 20 To
make the Furnace. 21 To place the Fire. 22 Of the Conjunction of Male and
Female. 23 Of their Copulation. 24 Of the Philosophical Conjunct. of man and
woman. 24 Of the black Tincture. 25 Buds appearing in the Glass. 25, 26 Of the
red Color. 26 To multiply the Tincture. 27, 28 Of Occult Philosophy. 29 Of
Consecrations. 33 Of Ceremonies Magical. 34, 35 Of Conjurations. 36, 37, 38, 39
Of Characters. 40 Of Pentagon and Hexagon. 41 The power thereof. 42, 43
Supernatural Diseases must have supernatural Cures. 44, 45 Visions and Dreams.
45, 46 Dreams natural and supernatural. 47, 48 Of Spirits and Persons wandering
under the earth. 51 Of Pygmies, what they are. 5^, 52 What places the terrene
Spirits do most frequent. 5^, 54 Several Opinions of them. 55, 56 That they are
subject to death. 57 The Devil seems to imitate the terrene Spirits. 58. 59 Of
Imagination. 60 The power thereof. 6^ Examples thereof. 61, 62 An Objection
answered. 63 Of hidden treasure. 64 Of Spirits frequenting such places. 65 66
The manner of obtaining such treasures. 66, 67 How the Spirits change the
treasure 68 How they remove it. 69 Of such as are possessed of evil Spirits.
70, 71, 72 73 How to deliver them that are so possessed. 74 The abuse in such
cases practiced. 75, 76 Of Tempests. 77 The appearance of Spirits. 78 To
fumigate them away. 79, 80 The abuse of Magic. 81 The purity thereof. 82
Preservatives against Witchcraft. 84 Images made by Witches. 85 How they
afflict men therewith. 85, 86 The manner of helping persons bewitched. 86, 87
Experience of Egyptians herein. 88, 89 Of the mystery of the twelve Signs. 91
The Virtue of Characters and Seals. 94, 96 Of Words. 95 Celestiael Medicines.
101 Common griefs of the head. 101, 102 The falling Evil. 102, 103, 104 To
preserve the sight. 105, 106 Against dryness in the brain. 107, 108 Against the
Palsy. 109, 110 Against the Stone and Sand in the Reins. 111, 112 Of the
members of generation. 113, 114 To preserve horses sound. 115, 116 The
sympathetical Ointment. 117, 118 The Weapon-Salve. 118 Against the Gout. 119,
120, 121, 122 Against Contractures. 123, 124 For Women's terms. 125 For the
menstrue. 126, 127 For the Leprosy. 127, 128 For the Vertigo. 129, 130 For the
Cramp. 131 For trembling of the heart. 131, 132, 133, 134 Oil of Coral to
prepare. 134 Of ruptures of Bones. 135 The mystery of the twelve Signs. 136 The
Seal of Aries. 137, 138 The Seal of Taurus. 139, 140 The Seal of Gemini. 140,
141, 142 The Seal of Cancer. 142, 143 The Seal of Leo. 143, 144 Virgo, and its
Seal. 145 The Seal of Libra. 146 Of Scorpio. 147, 148 Sagittary. 149, 150 The
Seal of Capricorn. 150, 151 Of Aquary. 151, 152 The Seal of Pisces. 152, 153
Secrets of Nature to destroy Mice. 154, 155 To preserve Sheep. 155, 156 For
Oxen and Horses. 156, 157 To destroy Flies. 157
To be sold by N. Brook at the Angel in Cornhil, A Romance called The Imperious
Brother, and The Illustrious Shepherdess. Wit and Drollery: with other Jovial
Poems.

The Prologue.
HAving first invocated the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior, we will
enterprise this Work; wherein we shall not only teach how to change any
inferior Metal into better, as Iron into Copper, this into Silver, and that
into Gold, etc. but also to help all infirmities, whose cure to the opinionated
and presumptuous Physicians, does seem impossible: But that which is greater,
to preserve, and keep mortal men to a long, sound, and perfect Age. This ART
was by our Lord God the Supreme Creator, engraven as it were in a book in the
body of Metals, from the beginning of the Creation, that we might diligently
learn from them. Therefore when any man desires thoroughly and perfectly to
learn this Art from its true foundation, it will be necessary that he learn the
same from the Master thereof, to wit, from God, who has created all things,
and only knows what Nature and Propriety he himself has placed in every
Creature. Wherefore he is able to teach every one certainly and perfectly: and
from him we may learn absolutely, as he has spoken, saying, Of me ye shall
learn all things: for there is nothing found in Heaven nor in Earth so secret,
whose properties he perceives not, and most exactly knows and sees, who
has created all things. We will therefore take him to be our Master, Operator,
and Leader into this most true Art. We will therefore imitate him alone, and
through him learn and attain to the knowledge of that Nature, which he himself
with his own finger has engraven and inscribed in the bodies of these Metals.
Hereby it will come to pass, that the most high Lord God shall bless all the
Creatures unto us, and shall sanctify all our Ways; so that in this Work we
may be able to bring our Beginning to its desired End, and the Consequence
thereof to produce exceeding great Joy and Love in our Hearts.

But if any one shall follow his own only Opinion, he will not only greatly
deceive himself; but also all others who cleave and adhere thereunto; and shall
bring them unto loss. For mankind is certainly born in ignorance, so that he
can neither know nor understand any thing of himself; but only that which he
receives from God, and understands from Nature. He which learneth nothing
from these, is like the Heathen Masters and Philosophers, who follow the
Subtilties and Crafts of their own Inventions and Opinions, such as are
Aristotle, Hippocrates, Avicenna, Gallen, etc. who grounded all their ARTS upon
their own Opinions only. And if at any time they learned any thing from
Nature, they destroyed it again with their own Fantasies, Dreams, or
Inventions, before they came to the end thereof; so that by them and their
Followers there is nothing perfect at all to be found.

This therefore has moved and induced us hereunto, to write a peculiar book of
Alchymy, founded not upon men, but upon Nature it self, and upon those Virtues
and Powers, which GOD with his own Finger has impressed in Metals. Of this
impression Mercurius Trismegistus was an Imitator, who is not undeservedly
called the Father of all Wisemen, and of all those that followed this ART with
love, and with earnest desire; and that man demonstrateth and teaches, that
God alone is the only author, cause and Original of all creatures in this ART.
But he does not attribute the power and virtue of God, to the creatures or
visible things, as the said heathen, and suchlike did. Now seeing all ART
ought to be learned from the Trinity; that is, from God the Father, from God
the Son of God, our Savior Jesus Christ, and from God the holy Ghost, three
distinct persons, but one God: We will therefore divide this our Alchymistical
work into three parts, or Treatises: in the first whereof, we will lay down
what the ART contains in it self; And what is the propriety and nature of
every Metal: Secondly, by what means a man may work and bring the like powers
and strength of Metals to effect. And thirdly, what Tinctures are to be
produced from the Sun and Moon.

Paracelsus Of the Secrets of ALCHYMY; Discovered, in the Nature of the PLANETS.
CHAP. I. Of simple Fire.
IN the first place, we shall endeavor and undertake to declare, what this Art
comprehends, and what is the subject thereof; and what are its proprieties.

The prime and chief subject to this Art belonging, is fire; which always
lives in one and the same propriety and operation; neither can it receive life
from any thing else. Wherefore it has a condition and power, as all fires that
lie hid in secret things, have, of vivification, no otherwise then the Sun is
appointed of God, which heateth all the things of the world, both secret,
apparent and manifest; as the Spheres of Mars, Saturn, Venus, Jupiter, Mercury,
and Luna, which can give no other light but what they borrow from the Sun, for
they are dead of themselves. Nevertheless, when they are kindled, as above is
spoken, they work and operate according to their properties. But the Sun
himself receives his light from no other but from God himself, who rules him
by himself, so that he burns and shines in him. It is no otherwise in this
art. The fire in the furnace is compared to the Sun, which heateth the furnace
and the vessels, as the Sun in the great world; for even as nothing can be
brought forth in the world without the Sun, so likewise in this Art nothing can
be produced without this Simple fire; no operation can be made without it: it
is the greatest secret of this Art; comprehending all things which are
comprehended therein, neither can it be comprehended in any else; for it
abides by it self: it lacks nothing; but other things which want that, do
enjoy it, and have life from it; wherefore we have in the first place
undertook to declare it.

CHAP. II. Of the multiplicity of fire, from which varieties of Metalls do
arise.
WE have first written of simple fire which lives and subsisteth of it self:
now we come to speak of a manifold spirit or fire, which is the cause of
variety and diversity of creatures, so that there cannot one be found right
like another, and the same in every part; as it may be seen in Metals, of which
there is none which has another like it self; the Sun produces his gold; the
Moon produces another Metal far different, to wit, silver; Mars another, that
is to say, Iron; Jupiter produces another kind of Metal, to wit, Tin; Venus
another, which is Copper; and Saturn another kind, that is to say, Lead: so
that they are all unlike, and several one from another: the same appears to
be as well amongst men as all other creatures, the cause whereof is the
multiplicity of fire. As by some heat is produced a mean generation by the
corruption thereof; the washing of the Sea another, Ashes another, Sand
another, Flame of fire another, and another of Coals, etc. This variety of
creatures is not made of the first simple fire, but of the regiment of
elements, which is various; not from the Sun, but from the course of the seven
Planets. And this is the reason that the world contains nothing of similitude
in its individuals: for as the heat is altered and changed every hour and
minute; so also all other things are varyed: for the transmutation of the fire
is made in the elements, in which bodies it is imprinted by this fire. Where
there is no great mixture of the elements, the Sun brings forth; where it is
a little more thick, the Moon; where more gross, Venus: and thus according to
the diversity of mixtures, are produced diverse Metals; so that no Metal
appears in the same mine like another. It is therefore to be known, that this
variety of Metals is made of the mixture of the Elements, because that their
spirits are also found diverse and without similitude; which if they were
brought forth from the simple fire, they would be so like, that one could not
be known from another: but the manifold variety of forms interceding, has
introduced the same among the creatures. From this it may easily be gathered,
why so many and so various forms of Metals are found, and wherefore there is
none like unto another.

CHAP. III. Of the spirit or tincture of.
NOw we come to the spirits of the Planets or Metals. The spirit or tincture of
the Sun takes its beginning from a pure, subtle, and perfect fire; whereby it
comes to pass, that it far excels all other spirits and tinctures of
Metals: for it remains constantly fixed in the fire, out of which it flies
not; neither is it consumed thereby, much less burnt, but rather appears more
clear, fair and pure by it; also no heat nor cold can hurt it, nor no other
accident, as in the other spirits or tinctures of Metals: and for this cause,
the body which it once puts on, it defends from all accidents and
diseases, that it may be able to sustain the fire without detriment. This body
has not this power and virtue in it self, but from the spirit of the Sun which
is included therein: for we know that the Sun is the body of Mercury, and that
this body cannot sustain nor suffer this fire, but flies from it; when as it
does not fly from the fire when it is in the Sun, but remains constant and
fixed therein. This affords unto us a most certain Judgment, that it
receives such a constancy from his spirit or tincture: wherefore if that
spirit can be in this Mercury, every one may judge that it may work the same
in the bodies of men, when it is received of them; as we have sufficiently
spoken in our Magna Chirurgia, of the tincture of the Sun, that it will not
only restore and preserve them that use it, from infirmities, but also
preserve them to sound and long life. In like manner, the strength and virtues
of all other Metals are to be known from true experience, not from the wisdom
of men and of the world, which is foolishness with God and his truth; and all
those who do build upon that wisdom, and repose their hope thereupon are
miserably deceived.

CHAP. IV. Of the tincture and Spirit of the.
HAving now spoken of the tincture of the Sun, it remains that we come now to
speak of the tincture of the Moon, and of the white tincture, which is also
created of a perfect spirit, but less perfect then the spirit of the Sun.
Nevertheless it excels the tinctures of all other Metals following, both in
purity and subtilty; which is very well known to all that treat of the Moon,
and also to Rusticks: for it suffers not rust, neitheir is it consumed by the
fire; as all other Metals, as Saturn, which fly from the fire; but this does
not: from whence it may be gathered, that this tincture is far more excellent
then the other following, for it preserves its body that it assumeth
constantly in the fire, without any accident or detriment: and from hence it is
sufficiently manifest, if this in his own corruptible body by himself makes
Mercury, what will it be able to effect, being extracted from it self into
another body? will not that also save and defend from infirmities and accidents
after the same manner? Yes surely, if it make this Mercury in its own body, it
will do the same in the bodies of men: neither does it only preserve health,
but causes long life, and cures diseases and infirmities, even in those who
subsist beyond the ordinary course of nature: for the more high, subtle and
perfect the medicine is, so much the better and more perfectly it cures;
wherefore they are Ignorant Physicians, who practice their Art only upon
vegetables, as herbs and suchlike things, which are easily corrupted: and by
these, they endeaour to effect and bring to pass such works as are firm and
stable; but in vain, whenas they occupy the Air. But wherefore should we
speak much concerning these? They never learned any better things in their
Universities: therefore if they have been compelled so to learn and study from
their beginning, they think it a great disgrace to them to do otherwise for the
future: whereby it comes to pass, that they still continue in their old
Ignorance.

CHAP. V. Of the spirit of.
WE have even now made mention of a white spirit, or candid tincture: now we
come to speak of a Red spirit, which is derived out of a Gross Elementary
mixture of the superiors, to which also it is joined, and is of a more perfect
substance, then the spirits and tinctures of the other subsequent Metals,
because it endures the fire longer then the other, and is not so soon melted
or dissolved as the other spirits which follow. Also the air, and the humidity
of the fire, are not so nocent unto it, as unto Mars; by reason whereof, it
does the longer endure the fire. This power and property has Venus, that is
his body, from the spirit that is infused into it. Now the same effect that it
works in its own body, that is, in Venus, the same effects it also produeth
in the bodies of men, so far forth as nature has granted unto it; for it
preserves wounds in such manner, so that no accident can invade them, nor the
Air or water hurt them; and expels all such diseases as are under the degree
thereof. This spirit also breaks the bodies of Metals, so that they will
endure the hammer; and also in the bodies of men, when it is taken of them with
whom it agrees not, it effects things not convenient. Wherefore it is very
necessary, that the Physician that desires to make use of these spirits, be
very expert in the knowledge of Metals. Therefore it is far better to use the
more perfect spirits, which may be taken without any such fear of danger:
nevertheless, seeing the spirits of the Sun and Moon are dear and precious, so
that every one is not able to accomplish them, to perform cures with, therefore
every one must take according to his ability, what he is able to attain unto:
also every one is not so wealthy, that he can be able to prepare these
medicines; therefore he is forced to take such as he can have. Every one may
from hence easily gather, that the Metallike medicines do far exceed vegetables
and Animals in strength and power of curing and healing. And thus-much of the
spirit of Venus.

CHAP. VI. Of the Spirit of.
THat we may now come to speak of the Spirit of Mars, that is of a more Gross
and combustible mixture of Elements, then the other spirits going before; but
the Spirit of Mars is endued with a greater hardness then the other Metals; so
that it does not so easily melt and dissolve in the fire, as the other
following. But it suffers much hurt both by the water and the Air, so that it
is consumed by them, and is burnt with the fire, as experience makes appear:
Wherefore the Spirit thereof is more imperfect then any of the superior
spirits: but in hardness and dryness it exceeds all other Metals, both
superior and inferior: for it does not only retain a perfect substance, and
resist the hammer, as the Sun and Moon, but also as those which are within it
self, as Jupiter and Saturn, and the like. Whereas therefore it thus works in
Metals, it shows that it has the same effect in the bodies of men, that is,
it produces reluctance; especially where it is taken for a disease not
convenient, it grievously afflicts the members with pain. Nevertheless, when
it is taken and applied for wounds, such as do not exceed its own degree, it
cleanses and mundifieth them, etc. Wherefore this spirit is not much less in
power and virtue then one of the superiors, in those things for which it was
by God and Nature ordained.

CHAP. VII. Of the Spirit of.
OF the spirit of Jupiter, we are to know, that it is derived of a white and
pale substance of fire; but it is of a frangible and brittle nature, not
enduring the hammer, so as Mars: wherefore it is a brittle Metal: an example
thereof appears, if it be mixed with the Moon, it can hardly be wrought to its
first malleation, without great labor: the same effect it has in all other
Metals, except in Saturn only. And the same operation which it has in the
bodies of metals, it also produces the same effects in humane bodies; but
burns and corrodeth the members, hindering them from their own perfect
operations, thereby disabling them form performing the work which nature
requires, and necessitates them unto. Nevertheless, this spirit has in it this
virture, that it takes away the ulcers of cancers, fistula's and such like,
especially such as exceed not the degree of its nature which God and Nature
have given unto it.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Spirit of.
THe Spirit of Saturn is formed and created of a dry, cold and black mixture
of the Elements; whereby it comes to pass, that amongst all other Metals, it
endures least in the fire: Whereas the Sun and Moon are proved to be durable:
if Saturn be added to them, it clearly refineth them; nevertheless the nature
thereof is to diminish their hardness. The same operation it has in the bodies
of men, but with great pain and dolor, as Jupiter and Mars, by reason of the
mixture that it has with the cold, wherefore it cannot so mildly operate. But
it has great power and virtue in the cures of fistula's, cancers and ulcers,
which are under the degree and nature thereof: it expels outward diseases,
and the outward impurities of the Moon. Nevertheless if it be not carefully
applied, it does more hurt then good; wherefore he that would rightly use it,
ought necessarily to know the nature thereof, and what diseases it cures, and
may be applied unto: which being necessarily considered, no hurt will follow
thereby.

CHAP. IX. Of the Gross Spirit of.
THe Spirit of Mercury, which is only subjected to the other superior
Spirits, has no certain determinate form or substance in it self: hereby it
comes to pass that it admits every other Metal: even as wax receives the
impression of all forms of Seals, so this Elementary Spirit comes to be
compared to the other Spirits of Metals: for if it receive into it self the
Spirit of the Sun, this shall be made out of it self; if the Moon, she is made
out of it self: the same effect this Spirit works with all the other Metals
with whom it agrees, and receives their properties into it self: for this
cause, according to its body, it is appropriated to the other Spirits above
written, even as the Male to the Female: for the Sun is the body of Mercury,
except only that the Sun fastneth and fixes the Mercury; but the common
Mercury is inconstant and volatile: nevertheless it is subject to all the
Spirits aforesaid, and generateth again, not only the metallicke Spirits and
tinctures before spoken of, but the Metal it self, by which the aforenamed
tinctures do come into their operation: But if the mean be not observed, it
will be inpossible ever to bring those kind of tinctures to perfection: for if
the fire be too high which should vivifie this tincture, it does extinguish it,
that it cannot operate; and the same effect is, if it be too weak: wherefore
in this place it is necessary to be known what medium is to be observed in this
Art, and what are the strength and properties thereof; and also after what
manner it is to be ordered, and how the tinctures are to be colored, and to
bring them to a perfect work, that they may germinate and appear. Thus
briefly do we conclude and end our first Treatise.

The end of the first Treatise.
The second Treatise; of the Philosophers Mercury, and the medium of Tinctures.
In the first Treatise we have written of the Spirits and Tinctures of Metals,
etc. Declaring all their properties and natures, and what every Metal
generateth. In this second, we shall treat of the medium of Tinctures, that is,
of the Philosophers Mercury; whereby are made the Tinctures and Leaven of
Metals, in seven Chapters following.

CHAP. I. Of what the Tinctures and Leavens are made.
WHosoever desires to have the tincture of Metals, he ought to take the
Philosophers Mercury, and let him cast the same into its own end, that is, into
quick Mercury, from whence it proceeds; and hereby it will come to pass, that
the Philosophers Mercury shall be dissolved in the quick Mercury, and shall
receive its strength: so that the Mercury of the Philosophers kills the quick
Mercury, and makes it remain fixed in the fire of the same existence with it
self: for there is the like concordancy between these Mercuries, as is between
Male and Female, man and wife; for they are both derived of the gross spirits
of metals, except that the body of Sol remains firm and fixed in the fire:
but the quick Mercury is not fixed; nevertheless they may be appropriated one
to another, as grain of corn or seed are to the earth; which we will
demonstrate by an example, after this manner: If any one sow barley, the same
he shall reap; if Wheat or Rye, or any other grain, the same he shall gather,
etc. even so it is in this art; if any one sow the Gold of Sol, the same he
reapeth; and of the Moon, he shall gather; and so also of all other Metals. For
this reason we say in this place, that the Tinctures do spring out of Metals,
that is, out of the Philosophers Mercury, and not from the quick Mercury; but
this produces the Seed which first conceives.

CHAP. II. Of the Conjunction of Male and Female, of man and woman.
IT is first of all necessary to be known, that the Mercury of the
Philosophers, and the quick Mercury, are both to be conjoined and firmly
united and fixed together; how much thereof is to be taken: neither more nor
less then equal, is to be taken, lest it hinders, or altogether destroys the
whole work; For the seed is suffocated with superfluity, that it cannot live
so long until it be joined and fixed to the Philosophers Mercury. But if there
be too little, that it cannot be dissolved into a body, it is also destroyed,
that it cannot be able to bring forth any fruit: wherefore the Artificer ought
certainly to know how much of the one, and the other ought to be taken, if he
would bring this work to its perfect end; the Receipt thereof is this: Take
one part to two, or three to four, and thou can not err, but shall attain to
thy desired end.

CHAP. III. Of the form of the Instruments of Glass.
THe Materials being thus rightly and duly prepared and mixed together, then you
must have Glass-vessels, of due proportion, and even fitness and capacity;
neither too great nor too little, but fit: For if the vessels be too big, the
Female, that is, the phlegm, is dispersed and lost; whereby it comes to pass
that the seed cannot bring forth: where the vessels are too little, the growth
is suffocated that it cannot come to fruit, no otherwise but as if seed should
be sown under trees or under thorns, so that it cannot bud and spring up, but
perishes without any fruit; therefore no little error may happen by the
vessels; which being once committed, cannot be any more mended in the same
work: neither can that work be perfected or brought to any good end.
Wherefore, note what follows, to wit, that you take three ounces with the half,
and four pounds; so the proceeding is right, and you shall preserve the matter
that it be not dispersed, nor the Phlegm nor the generation impedited, etc.

CHAP. IV. Of the properties of the fire.
WHen you have placed the matter in fit vessels, you shall carefully keep and
maintain the natural heat, that the external heat do not overcome or abound
over the internal; for if the heat be too much, there can be no conjunction
made, by reason that the matter is dispersed and burnt by the vehemence of the
heat, so that no good arises thereby. Wherefore the middle region of the air
is by nature ordained between heaven and earth; otherwise the Sun and Stars
would burn up all the creatures upon the earth, so that nothing could be
produced or spring forth from it: therefore so work, that you put such an Airy
part or distance between the matter and the fire; after this manner let it be
done, that the heat may not easily do hurt any ways, nor disperse the matter,
much-less burn it: but if the fire be too little, and not quick enough, the
Spirit then rests, the fire nothing operating upon its humidity; neither will
it be exsiccated nor fixed: for the Spirits of Metals are dead of themselves,
and do rest, so that they cannot at all operate of themselves, unless they are
quickened by the fire. It is no otherwise in the great Universe of the world,
where seed being cast into the earth, is dead, and cannot grow nor increase of
it self, unless it be quickened by the heat of the Sun; It is chiefly necessary
therefore in this work, to erect and build the fire right and proportionably,
neither too great nor too little; otherwise this work will never be brought to
a perfect and desired end.

CHAP. V. Of the Signs appearing in the union of Conjunction.
THe fire being moderately kept and maintained, the matter by little and little
will be moved to blackness; afterward, when the dryness begins to work upon
the humidity, there will likewise arise in the Glass, various flowers of diverse
colors, such as appear like the tail of a Peacocke, and such as no man ever
saw before. Also sometimes the Glass appears as if it were almost drawn into
Gold; which being perceived, it shows certainly that the seed of the Male
does rule and operate upon the seed of the Female, and that the same is fixed
together; that is, this Mercury is fixed and works upon the quick Mercury,
and begins to be mixed with it: afterward, when the humidity begins to
wear away by the dryness, those colors do disperse, and the matter then
begins at length to wax white, and so proceeds until it come to the
highest degree of whiteness. But especially it is to be noted, that the thing
is not to be hastened, according to their opinions who suppose such work to be
like unto that which is discerned in the production of corn, and of mankind; to
wit, the time of bringing forth the one, is in the Space of nine months; the
other, ten or twelve months. For so soon the Sun and Moon do cause Maturity,
and bring to the birth, as the infant from the belly of his Mother; so the
grain from the bowels of the earth. For it is to be known, that every thing
that is quickly or hastily made or born, does soon perish: An example hereof,
both men and herbs do afford. They which are soonest produced or born, their
life is short: it is not so with the Sun and Moon; for they cause a far more
perfect nature in men; whereby it comes to pass, that they produce long life to
them, and preserve them from many accidents and diseases.

CHAP. VI. Of the knowledge of the perfect Tincture
IN the foregoing chapter, we have set forth how the matter it self works by
degrees: but in this, we shall declare, by what means it may be known when it
is perfect. Thus do: take the white stone of the Moon, by which the white
springs, and separate a little piece from it with a pair of Scissars, and
put it upon a plate of Copper, heating it glowing hot in the fire: if it smoke,
then the stone is not perfect, therefore it must remain longer in the
decoction, until the stone come to its degree of perfection: but if it do not
smoke, then be assured it is perfect: the same is to be done with the Red stone
of the Sun, in the degrees of the operation thereof.

CHAP. VII. To Augment or Multiply the Tinctures.
WHen you would Multiply or increase the Tincture you have found, mixed it
together again with common Mercury, and work it in all things as at first, and
double one part a hundred times more then it was colored before; this do
oftentimes over again, until you have as much matter as you will: and by how
much the longer it remains in the fire, by so much the higher and more
sublime will the degrees thereof be; so that one part thereof will change the
infinity of the quick Mercury, into the best and most perfect Luna and Sol. Now
you have the whole progression from the beginning to the end; wherewith we end
this second Treatise, and begin the third.

The end of the second Treatise.
In the second Treatise, we have told how the Tinctures or Leavens ought to be
made; in the third, we shall declare and amply set forth wherewith the
Tinctures of the Sun and Moon are made; and after what manner Sol and the other
Planets ought to be made; to wit, with the Furnace and the Fire.

CHAP. I. Of the building of the Furnace; and, of the Fire.
MErcurius Hermes Trismegistus, says, That he which would perfect this Art,
must, as it were, build a new World; for after the same manner as God created
the Heaven and Earth, the Furnace with the Fire is to be built and governed.
That is to say, after this manner: First, Let there be a Furnace built of the
height of six spans, extended from the top of the fingers to the thumb; and in
breadth one handful; in the inside, let it be round and plain, lest the Coals
cleave unto it; from whence let it a little decline to the border thereof; and
let there be holes left underneath four fingers broad, and let every hole of
the Furnace be supplied with a Copper Cauldron to contain the Water.
Afterward, take good and hard Coals, which you shall break in Gobbets about
the bigness of a Walnut; with these fill the long Furnace; which then is to be
stopped up, that they may not burn out. And afterward, let some Coals be
kindled to the holes below: if the Fire be too great, lay a stone before it; if
too little, stir the Coals with an Iron-instrument, that they may be pierced
with the Air, and the Heat may be increased. This way you may keep your Fire,
according to the true Exigency of Nature; neither too excessive, nor too small;
but most fit and apt for the motion of the Matter: this is compared to the
Firmament. There is also in this place another Firmament, to wit, the Matter
contained in the Glass; after which follows the form of the World. Therefore
the Furnace is to be placed as the Sun in the great World, which gives Light,
Life and Heat to the universal Furnace, and all Instruments, and to all other
things whatsoever concluded under it.

CHAP. II. Of the Conjunction of the Male with the Female.
HAving now treated of the Furnace and the Fire wherein the Tinctures are to be
prepared, now we intend largely to write how the Man and Woman do agree, and
how they are joined together: that is to say, after this manner: Take the
Mercury of the Philosophers, prepared and mundified in its highest degree; this
resolve with his Wife, to wit, with quick Mercury; as the Woman receives the
Man, and as the Man cleaves to the Woman: and even as a Man loves his Wife,
and the Woman loves her Husband, so do the Philosophers Mercury and the quick
Mercury, prosecute the greatest love, and are moved by Nature with a great
affection toward us: So therefore the one and the other Mercuries are
conjoined each to other, and one with another, even as the Man with the Woman,
and she with him, according to their bodies, that there is no difference
between them; and they are congruent in their strength and proprieties, save
only, that the Man is firm and fixed, but the Woman is volatile in the Fire.
And for this Cause, the Woman is united to the Man, so that she receives the
Man, and he fixes and fastneth her firm and constant in any balance; as it
follows, They are both to be so close luted and covered, that the Woman may
not evaporate or breath out, otherwise the whole Work will come to nothing.

CHAP. III. Of the Copulation of the Male and Female.
WHen you have placed the Man and the Wife in the Matrimonial Bed; if you would
that he may operate upon her, so that she may bring forth, it is necessary, and
must be, that the Man have his operation upon the Woman, so that the seed of
the Woman may be coagulated and joined together into a Mass, by the seed of the
Man; otherwise it produces no Fruit.

CHAP. IV. Of the Philosophical conjunction of the Man and Woman.
Afterward if you perceive the Woman to be of a black color, then certainly
be assured that she has conceived, and is made pregnant: and when the seed of
the Woman embraces the seed of the Man, this is the first Sign and Key of
this whole Art; therefore be careful continually to preserve the natural Heat,
and the blackness will appear, and be dispersed and consumed away by the
natural Heat; as one Worm eats and devoureth another, and continues
consuming so long, until there be no more blackness left.

CHAP. V. Of the black Color.
THe blackness manifestly appearing, then know, that the Woman is pregnant; but
when the Peacocks Tail begins to appear, that is, when many various colors
will appear in the Glass, it shows the working of the Philosophers Mercury
upon the vulgar Mercury, and stretches out her Wings until she has overcome
it. Therefore when the dryness operates upon the moisture, these Colors do
appear.

CHAP. VI. Of the Buds springing and appearing in the Glass.
When you perceive these various Colors, then be constant in your work,
continuing the Fire, until the Color of the Peacock's Tail be fully consumed,
and until the Matter of the Moon appear white and candid as Snow, and that the
Vessel has brought it to the very degree of its perfection. Then at last break
a little piece thereof, and put it on a Copper-plate in the Fire; if it remain
constant and firm, and keep its Tincture, it is then brought to the most
perfect substance of Luna. This King has strength and power, not only to
transmute and change all metals; but also to cure all diseases and infirmities.
This King is laudable, and adorned with many virtues, and with so great power,
that he can transmute and change Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and Mercury,
into the most constant Luna, to every touchstone; and also frees and delivers
the bodies of men from infinite diseases, as from Fevours, Feebleness,
Leprosy, the French disease, or Morbus Gallicus, and from a great many other
infirmities and diseases; which no Herbs, Roots, or the like Medicines can
possibly Cure, or take away. Whosoever makes daily use of this Medicine, shall
attain to, and preserve himself in a sound and perfect long life.

CHAP. VII. Of the red Color.
AFter this King is endued with a perfect whiteness, the Fire is constantly to
be continued, until the whiteness begins to take a yellow Color; which Color
follows next after the whiteness: for by how much the longer the Heat works
upon the white and dry Matter, the more Yellow and Saffron-like grows the
Color, until it come to perfect redness, which by degrees the Fire works to
the highest degree of the red Color; then is the substance of Gold prepared,
and there is born an oriental King, sitting in his Throne, and ruling over all
the Princes of the World.

CHAP. VIII. Of the augmentation or multiplication hereof.
THe multiplication of this Matter is to be after this manner, to wit, let it
be resolved into its moisture, and then put the Fire to it, to the height as at
first, and it will work upon its moisture oftener then before, and change the
same into its own substance, turning the whole quantity of the matter into the
substance it self: wherefore the Treasures of the Earth are unspeakable, the
world cannot compare unto them; witness Augurellus.

The Conclusion.
This secret was kept by the most ancient Fathers amongst their most occult and
hidden secrets; who kept the same, lest it should come to the hands of wicked
men, who might thereby be enabled the better, and more fully to accomplish
their wickedness and evil ends. We therefore do require you whosoever shall
attain to this gift of God, that you will imitate the Fathers, and secretly use
and preserve this divine Mystery: for if you tread it under your feet, or cast
Pearls before swine; you shall receive a great judgment from God the great
Judge and Revenger of all things.

But unto those whom God by his singular and special Grace, has given
abstinency from all vices, this Art shall be more fully revealed then to any
other; for with one such man shall more wisdom be found, then among a thousand
sons of the world, by whom this Art shall never be found out.

Whosoever shall find out this secret, and attain to this gift of God, let him
praise the most high God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; the Grace of God let
him only implore, that he may use the same to his glory, and the profit of his
Neighbor. This the merciful God grant to be done, through Jesus Christ his
only Son our Lord, Amen.

Theophrastus Paracelsus OF OCCULT PHILOSOPHY.
The Prologue.
IN this ensuing book we do intend to treat of the greatest and most occult
secrets of Philosophy, and of all those things which do appertain to Magic,
Nigromancy, Necromancy, Pyromancy, Hydromancy, and Geomancy: Clearly and fully
demonstrating and setting forth every thing that may be investigated, effected
and brought to pass thereby: this Philosophy in the practice thereof is much
abused, by Ceremonies and other abuses; and hitherto the foundation thereof
has been built falsely upon the sand; whereby the whole Artifice and
instruments thereof are overthrown with the least wind, and sometimes the
Artificers themselves, especially the Nigromancers, are taken away out of the
very midst thereof, with the winds, that is, with the Spirits, and are
vanquished, overcome and carried away. It is therefore necessary that the
foundation of these and of all other Arts be laid in the holy Scriptures, upon
the doctrine and faith of Christ; which is the most firm and sure foundation,
and the chief corner stone, whereupon the three principal points of this
Philosophy are grounded. The first is prayer, whereunto agrees this word of
holy Scripture, Ask, seek, and knock, etc. By which we are to seek unto God,
and faithfully believe his promises; and doing this with a pure heart and
mind, it shall be given unto us, and we shall find what we seek after: and
those things which before remained occult and secret, shall be made open and
manifested unto us. The second thing founded therein, is faith, which is able
to remove Mountains into the Sea: for unto the faithful all things are
possible, as Christ has spoken. The third point is founded in our imagination,
which afterward is kindled in our hearts, and then aptly agrees and concordeth
with the faith aforesaid.

Therefore all Ceremonies, Conjurations, Consecrations, and such like vanities
are to be rejected and cast away, with all vain foundations, and the true
cornerstone is the foundation that is only to be embraced in our hearts, that
is, every thing which proceeds and springs from the holy Scriptures, the
light of nature, and fountain of truth: we will write therefore in most brief
and plain words, the most occult and secret things, which neither Cornelius
Agrippa nor Peter de Abano, much less Tritemius, never understood or wrote of.
Neither let any one raise scandal upon this my writing of Philosophy, but
first rather let him well peruse and ponder every word; and then it will
appear from whom I speak, and whether I have this knowledge from the Devil,
or from the experience of the pure light of nature.

Theophrastus Paracelsus OF Occult PHILOSOPHY.
CHAP. I. Of Consecrations.
SEeing God the greatest of all good did in the beginning of the Creation of
the World, plentifully and abundantly bless and sanctify all things which are
therein; both Places, Instruments, and all Creatures, that have their being
upon the Earth; There is no need of other Blessings and Consecrations; for he
is Holiness himself: wherefore all things that he ordained and made, are also
consecrated by and through him. Therefore no humane things do need any more or
other Consecrations; but may better, nay best of all, be without them,
especially such as setting Crosses in the way, Crosses, Circles, Swords,
Vestures, Candles or Lights, Waters, Oils, Fire, Fumigations, Characters,
Writings, Books, Pentacles, Seals of Solomon, Crowns, Scepters, Girdles, Rings,
etc. and many other things of the likekinde, which the Ceremonious Nigromancers
do use against the Fantastic Spirits, as if they could not be compelled and
bound by any other means; whereas Faith is the chief and principal Foundation
against them.

As often as the Ceremonial Nigromancers say, that this is consecrated and
blessed, or that many Masses are celebrated thereupon. Wherefore they all say,
that they are of power against the devil and the malignant Spirits, who are
terrified with fear and dread thereof, and fly therefrom, etc. and dare not
come near it.

O you very arch-Fools, and ignorant men of no worth! even unworthy of the name
of men, who do give Faith and credit to such monstrous and palpable lies, when
you see notwithstanding examples thereof before your eyes; when so much
lightning falls upon the Temples, that it burns and destroys the Altars; which
chiefly happens by the Tempests raised with Enchantments; also, when the Devil
and the malignant Spirits are seen to reign about these places, and are heard
by the Magitians what they speak. Therefore Negromancy with all its Ceremonies,
is absolute wickedness, a Viper used amongst Juglers, a wicked work, which
blinds the eyes of the spectators, deceiving them of their Money; but in
truth is not to be esteemed worth a halfpenny, scarce a straw or rush:
wherefore are not to be induced or made use of herein; as Judeus Solomon in his
book has written, which the Nigromancers call, The Key of Solomon. For God
would not have them to be used; but has given another thing instead thereof,
to wit, Faith; which perfectly consecrateth all things. Nevertheless, I would
not have all Consecrations to be rejected, but only those Ceremonies, which
are assumed to be used against the fantastic and malignant Spirits. But I do
not desire, that any thing should be derogated from those Magical Ceremonies
and Operations, which are made for Physical uses: neither, especially the
Consecrations in Matrimony, and in the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lord's
Supper, which are to be kept and observed by us in the highest esteem and
reverence always, unto the last day. For at that time we are all perfectly
consecrated, and sanctified, and clarified with a heavenly body.

CHAP. II. Of Conjurations.
BEfore we come to treat of Conjurations, whence they proceed, and what is the
foundation of them; It is first necessary to declare, who invented them, who
used them, and what has been brought to pass by them; and how more and more
they came to be abused. Know therefore, that they had their original Spring and
fountain from Babylon; and there did mightily increase and flourish: afterward
it came into Egypt, and from thence to the Israelites; and last of all, to us
Christians. Amongst the Nigromancers it is very familiar, and held in great
esteem, so that in their rude and ignorant understandings, they all attribute
more efficacy, power and virtue thereunto, then unto prayer and faith. This
foundation, which is drawn only from their opinions, is to be condemned, so
that no man almost ought to remain therein; but they all Justly deserve to be
punished by the Magistrate who persist therein. Although Conjurations may be
able to effect some things in themselves, nevertheless they are not to be
usurped by any Magitian or wise man, because they are contrary even to God
himself, and to his word and commandments, and also to the light of nature: For
nothing of truth can be forced or drawn from the Spirits thereby: although they
are sometimes forced to appear in their greatest and Magnificent pomp, and
with terrible pride and haughtiness, nevertheless they are not bound or
overcome by this Conjuration; for that can only be done by faith alone.

I say, those kind of Nigromancers who desire to perform and effect all things
by their Conjurations, so as to compel, bind, afflict and Torment the Spirits,
forcing to do what they will have them, are most like and fitly to be compared
to thieves and Robbers, that lurk in woods and places to Rob and murder; who
can kill and steal so long, and so far forth as God shall permit them, but no
longer: But when the time and hour comes, that their villainies and wickedness
shall be made manifest; then not one of the most subtle and craftyest of them
can escape: whereby it comes to pass, that one for Robbery receives his death,
another is accused, and at last comes under the power of the hangman, who
renders him a reward according to the desert of his works: No otherwise are we
to judge of such thieves who break houses and steal so long, till at last they
perish at the gallows. So likewise does the Nigromancer call and invocate
Spirits, conjure and afflict them with punishments and Martyrdomes, so long as
he shall be permitted by the Lord God; but not without the curse of God: and
when the time and hour of his punishment is come, then as the Proverb is, he
receives his fruits: he erred in his Conjurations, not drawing his Circle as
he ought, out of the will and power of the Spirits, which they often say unto
him: To wit, thou have erred in Conjuring, or thou have not rightly drawn the
Circle, thou have not Chastised and prepared thy self enough; or that thy Seal
and Pentacles are false: wherefore thou receivest this punishment: so thy debts
are paid thee in ready money, a long time reserved for thee; and which long
since thou ought to have had: so he deservedly receives his reward from the
Spirits, who leave some notable eminent mark remaining upon him; or mayme him
in some limb or member, if not quite break his neck: and by this he becomes
his own executioner.

Therefore let these Ceremonious Nigromancers take heed and look what they do;
let them set this chapter as a looking-Glass before them, lest by their own
frivolous and wicked operation they themselves become the servants of the
Spirits, and suffer them to rule over them, and be their own executioners:
Which being done, the Spirits will not suffer themselves any longer to be
forced or compelled by these servants; neither will they do what they will, but
now the servants shall be forced to yield obedience to the Spirits, who are
become their Lords. The hangman also does the like, he hearkneth not to him
that is to be scourged, neither will he show any mercy or favor at the prayer
of him that is condemned; but he executes the command of his Master, and what
appertains unto his office.

Even so also the Malignant Spirits are the hang-men and executioners of God,
who can execute nothing without the commission of their Magistrate, that is, of
the divine Majesty.

I say therefore that all Conjurations are against God, and are contrary to his
word, the divine law, and the light of nature; which are prohibited to be used
not only to Spirits alone, but also such as are directed to herbs, stones and
suchlike, and especially those which are made against men; it becomes not us
to act like the Heathens, who when they were not able to use men after their
own wills, and could not force and compel them, they did Conjure them (as by
many examples it is found in the Scriptures) so that they were forced and
compelled to execute and act such things as were contrary to their wills and
nature. Woe therefore to such wicked Knaves, and to all them whosoever imitate
them: how great wickedness do they commit? And what grievous Plagues will come
to them at the last, and what fearful and horrible accusations shall they hear
the Devil make against them before the wrath of God? If afterward it were
lawful for them to signify to such kind of men, their misery which they
endure, they who do such things, many thousands of them would be brought to
repentance.

CHAP. III. Of Characters.
WE are not to give credit also, neither to Characters nor Words; for the Poets
and Negromancers do also much exercise themselves in them, and do fill their
Conjuring-Books full of them, which they raise out of their own imaginations,
merely and rashly, without any Foundation, and do feign them against all Truth;
whenas many thousands of them are not worth a nut-shell. But in the mean time I
will be silent in their Characters, which they draw in Paper and Parchment,
which are uselessly blotted with such trifles. It was a custom amongst those
kind of men, which amongst some is hardly left to this day, That by imposing
these Characters upon these men, they drew them to admiration of themselves
with these Characters, and speaking such words as are wonderful to me, and
which were never heard of; yet they say, they are found out and devised by
themselves. Wherefore it is chiefly necessary to have perfect knowledge, to
discern these Letter, Words and Characters.

There are many such-kinde of words found amongst them, which have no affinity
at all with the Idioms of the Latin, Greek, or Hebrew Tongues, neither with
any other; which cannot possibly be interpreted by any man, nor rendered into
any other Tongue. Therefore I speak not without cause, and say, That we are not
to credit all Letters, Characters or Words, but to keep to those only which
are true, and have been often proved, and taken out of the Foundation of Truth.

That we may come to these, and declare what Words or Characters are just and
true; we shall only in the first place detect and unfold two: although there
may be found many other, yet nevertheless, these are most especially and
principally to be accounted and esteemed of, before all other Characters,
Pentacles, and Seals: note the delineation of them, which is thus:

Two Triangular Figures, cutting one another through with a cross, are so
painted or engraven, that they do include and divide themselves into seven
spaces within, and do make six corners outwardly, wherein are written six
wonderful Letters of the great Name of God; to wit, Adonay, according to their
true order. This is one of those Characters whereof we have spoken.

There is another which excels the former in power and virtue, and this has
three Hooks cutting one another through by a cross, and are so delineated, that
by their mutual intersection they include six spaces, and outwardly five
angles, wherein are written five syllables of the supreme name of God; to wit,
Tetragrammaton, also according to their true order.

I would have put down the Figures themselves; but because you may happily
find them in many other places and Books, I have the rather omitted them.

By these two Characters some of the Israelites and Nigromancers of Judea,
obtained many things; and they are now esteemed of great price amongst very
many, and held as great secrets: for they are of so great virtue and power,
that whatsoever is possible to be done by Characters and Words, the same may be
effected by them or one of them. I would gladly know, where and in what place
in all the Books of the Nigromancers may be found any other, wherein there is
made the like against the malignant Spirits, Devils, and Enchantments of the
Magitians, by all the deceits and devices of the Sorcerers. For they do deliver
him that is already enchanted either in his mind or understanding, so that he
is forced or compelled to act any thing against his own natural will or nature;
or if he suffer any loss or hurt in his body, by the administration of these,
made in their just and due time and hour, and being taken in his mouth with a
Wafer, Pancake, or suchlike thing, in four and twenty hours he shall be free
from the Enchantment.

There are also many other thing which are helpful in such cases; as those
which shall be by me laid down hereafter, when I come to speak of Tempests, and
the Seasons.

Briefly, these Characters are of so great force and power, that if the
Nigromancers did but know and believe their power and and virtue, they would
forthwith reject and cast away all other things, even all their other
Characters, Words, Names, Signs, Figures, Pentacles, consecrated Seals of
Solomon, Crowns, Scepters, Rings, Girdles, and suchlike Ceremonies whatsoever,
and wherein hitherto they have reposed any hope, thinking by them to secure
themselves from their dangerous experiments and operations, when they would
invoke, conjure, or think to compel and force the Spirits. Truly those which
we have spoken of, are the true Pentacles to be had and used against all
unclean Spirits, which they do all fear, even they which wander in the
Elements. Nevertheless, Faith does strengthen and confirm all these things.

But some may carpingly object, although undeservingly, and say, That I break
the third Commandment of God, of the first Table of Moses, wherein it is
forbidden of the Lord God, for any one to take his name in vain. But who
amongst any wise men, can be able to say, That I have done this; or, that I
have herein offended God? whenas I use not this for that purpose, nor after the
same manner, as the Nigromancers and Inchanters; but only for the extreme
necessity and help of men, and in those diseases and infirmities wherein no
Medicines, no Aurum potabile, nor quintessence of Gold, neither Antimony, nor
no such secret can help them, although they are of very great virtue and
efficacy.

It becomes a Physician to know the original cause of all diseases, that he
may know which proceeds from evil meat or drink, as from Apples, Herbs, and
other fruits of the Earth: and it is expedient for him to know the secrets of
Herbs and Roots, etc. whereby the disease may be cured. But if it happen under
the cause of Minerals, such diseases are to be expelled by the secrets of those
Metals; which the secrets of Herbs and Roots do not admit of, and have not
power to do.

In like manner, if diseases do proceed from the influences of Heaven, neither
of the secrets aforesaid, are able to profit any thing in the cure thereof, but
it must be expelled by Astronomy and the heavenly influences, as it is written
of Parsicaria.

Lastly, if any disease or grief happen or be inflicted upon any man in a
supernatural manner, by Enchantment or some Magical Sorceries, none of those
three remedies aforespoken of, will help them; but there must be a Magical
remedy whereby it may be expelled, as we have before delivered.

Many men who have in this kind been made miserable through enchantments, have
also hitherto been forsaken and cast off by the Ignorant Physicians; because
these things hitherto were hidden unto them: And if they chance to be told them
of others, they will answer, that if they should use them, they should act
against God, and take his name in vain; and that this which I have done has no
truth in it. But if I should use these things to the hurt or prejudice of man,
I should Blaspheme against God; or if I should Conjure any Spirits, man, herb,
root or stone, etc. by his name, it might then justly be said that I did take
his name in vain, and offend God; but not before. Let the Divines themselves
also, and the Sophisters speak what they list to these things, the thing which
I speak will not be found contrary to the truth, although herein their
opinions may be very contrary unto me: they will call me Inchanter,
Nigromancer, and a contemner of the Commandments of God, which Calumnies and
reproaches I do not at all care for: for it will be most certainly made
manifest, that their exceptions against me, will appear no otherwise then
those of the Jews and Pharisees who carped against Christ, because he healed
the sick on the Sabbath day: For they said unto him, that Christ had broke the
Sabbath and the commandment of God: the like they did with David when he was
forced and oppressed, and did eat the shewbread; But amongst these
fault-finders and slanderers, how or what shall be done that will please them
all? But the Ignorant will not cease to talk until the beasts or stones can
teach them, which we must expect will be a long time, and then they will hold
their peace.

CHAP. IV. Of Spiritual visions, appearing in dreams.
THere is a twofold kind of visions that do appear in dreams, that is to
say, natural and supernatural; but various kinds of apparitions and visions
there are, which do appear in sleep and dreams, of which in this place it is
unnecessary to make any mention, because they do most usually happen, either by
reason of sorrowfulness, or some trouble and perturbation of the mind,
uncleanness of the blood, Cogitations that is, operations of the mind and
understanding, and occupations thereof about multiplicity of business and
dealings that men are employed and conversant in; as gamesters, of the dice and
chards, of great gain or loss; Soldiers do dream of warlike affairs, as of
their gunnes, pieces of Ordnance, Powder, Arms, and all manner of weapons and
instruments of war; of victory or overthrowes: the Sons of Bacchus, and great
drinkers, of good wine and great cups, which they seem to swallow; and of such
other things filling the belly: Pirates dream of their spoils and preyes, and
what gain they have met with: Robbers, of Manslaughters; thieves, of theft; and
fornicators, of their whores. All these fantasies and visions the Spirit of
the night produces and brings unto them, whereby he plays with them in the
night, and deludeth and tempts them: Such things are kindled in the blood,
(alias) the understanding, and begets such a fire, which cannot easily be
extinguished, which for the most part may be seen in the venereous family.

Many wonderful Arts and Sciences also have seemed to be made appear to
Artists in their dreams; the reason whereof has been, because they have always
had an ardent affection to those Arts: so powerful an imagination thereof, has
for the most part followed the same, that they have supposed in their dreams,
that some Philosopher has taught them these Arts: this oftentimes happens,
but the greatest part perishes in oblivion: some rising early in the morning,
say, This night a wonderful dream appeared to me, even as that Mercury, or
this or that Philosopher corporally appeared unto me in a dream, who taught me
this or that Art; but it is fallen out of my memory, so that I cannot remember
any more thereof. To whom any such thing has happened, he ought not to go
forth out of his chamber, nor speak with any man, but to remain alone and fast,
until he call to remembrance that which he had forgotten. And thus much is
sufficient to be spoken concerning natural dreams, and visions appearing in the
night in dreams of what belongs thereunto: But for the conclusion of such
kind of visions, one thing is yet to be declared; that amongst all those
dreams that do rejoice our Spirit, grieve us, or cause sorrow, commonly that
which is the contrary comes to pass: wherefore such like kind of visions are
not always to be credited.

But the other dreams which are supernatural, are most certain Ambassadors,
and true Legates and messengers sent unto us from God, which are nothing else
but Angels and Good Spirits, who sometimes do appear to us in our greatest
necessities: Even as it happened to the three wise men when they had come a
great Journey o seek the young infant; after they had found him, they would
have returned to Herod, to tell him where the child was, and how they found
him: but the Angel of the Lord appeared unto them in a dream, saying, Do not
return to him, but return into your own Country another way. For God knew the
false heart of Herod, from which he spoke, wherefore he would not suffer his
will to be performed. The like dream happened to Joseph and Jacob, when he
would go into Egypt: the same in like manner happened to Ananias, Cornelius,
and many others; all whose dreams are supernatural: such dreams do sometimes
also happen to men in our times, but they are nothing esteemed, yet
nevertheless they are not fallacious. We are likewise to know that these kind
of visions may be obtained by us by prayer from our Lord God, in our greatest
necessities, so that our prayers be made with a sincere heart, and with a true
and undoubted faith, then he will at length send his Angel unto us, who will
appear unto us, and spiritually admonish, teach, and promise us.

Balaam was most expert in these kind of visions: for every night, as often as
he would, he could obtain a vision of this kind: yet the Scripture has given
him an obscure name, to wit, an Inchanter: it is not expedient to make any
difference, for the Scripture observes no difference herein, but calls all
them Inchanters who have experience and knowledge in the virtues of natural
things; nevertheless, great discretion is to be used in these things; God would
have us to walk in simplicity, as the Apostles did, and not to search too
deeply into such high, abstruse, and secret things above nature; that we fall
not into the abuse thereof, and therewith hurt our neighbor: and so come into
condemnation both of body and soul. They are not therefore all Inchanters
which the Scripture calls so: for then it would follow that those three wise
men of the East, should be Arch-Inchanters; when as in all Arts, especially in
such as were supernatural, they excelled all others before their time:
therefore that the Scriptures do not call them Inchanters, but wise men; what
else can be gathered from them, but that they did in no wise abuse their Arts
and occult wisdom? For Magic is such an Art and science which demonstrateth
and declares the power and virture thereof by faith: nevertheless Enchantments
may spring from thence, to wit, when it is used abusively; and before, it
cannot be called an Enchantment.

But that I may speak more largely of visions in dreams; it is to be known,
that some have been so spiritually lifted up to God in a dream, that they have
seen his glory and the joy of the elect, and the punishment of the damned;
which they could never afterward forget, but have carried the same in their
hearts and minds until the end of their life; It is possible, I say, for us to
see all these things in a spiritual manner: when we seek for and implore the
mercy of God, with a true faith and prayer, we may behold all the Mysteryes of
God very well, as Esaias and John: These kind of visions are certain and true;
to which more faith is to be given, then to all the precepts in Nigromancy by
looking-Glasses, Christals, Beryls, nails of the fingers, stones, waters, and
the like; for all these are false and fallacious: and although such Spirits do
sometime speak in such appearances, and answer, and do assert the same with an
hundred Oaths, with erection of the fingers; yet we are not always to give faith
or credit unto them, unless perchance it be done out of the special command of
God: otherwise they cannot possibly speak truth of all visions, which we have
spoken of; those Prophesies do come from a true original, which do agree with
all the Prophets. From whence had the Prophets their wisdom and knowledge, and
from whence were those Mysteries of God revealed unto them, by which they had
those Spiritual and supernatural visions in dreams? It is necessary therefore,
in the first place, to the find out the true foundation thereof, and to lay
the same upon the right stone, which is the word of God and his promises; and
to pray daily unto God; whereby it shall come to pass that he will give us all
things which he has promised in his word.

There is also another vision belonging to dreams, which we may take from them
that are dead; and do appear spiritually unto us in dre^ms, although they have
been dead fifty or (...) hundred years: this is very much to be taken ^to
consideration* for many have undertaken (...) treat thereof, which for their
too much pro^ity, (which we endeavor to avoid) we will pass them by, reserving
them to their place: Nevertheless this I will declare, (viz.) Where it
happens that one of these Ghosts do appear, it is most necessary diligently
to note and mark what he shows unto us, what he speaks with us about, or
does spiritually Negotiate; and not always to account thereof as fables: For if
it were possible for a man to retain the same reason sleeping, which he has
waking, that he could ask and enquire of such a Spirit, he should know the
truth from him, about all his desires whatsoever: But it is not needful to
speak any more largely in this place concerning this thing.

Of Persons and Spirits wandering under the Earth.
UNder the Earth do wander half-men, which possess all temporal things, which
they want or are delighted with; they are Vulgarly called Gnomi, or Inhabiters
of the Mountains: but by their proper name, they are called Sylphes or Pigmies:
They are not Spirits, as others are, but are compared unto them, for the
Similitude of their Arts and Industry, which are common to them with the
Spirits: they have flesh and blood as men, which no real Spirit has: as Christ
spoke unto his Disciples, when he came amongst them, when the doors were shut,
and they were afraid, saying, Feel me, and touch me, for a Spirit has not
flesh and blood nor bones, as I have: By this he himself has taught us, that a
Spirit has no true body that can be touched; nor bones, nor flesh, nor blood,
but existeth in its own essence of wind or Air. But of this we have briefly
spoken enough; But to return to the earthly Pigmies or halfe-men, we are to
know that these are not to be reputed Spirits, but like to Spirits; but if they
are or shall be called Spirits, they ought to be called earthly Spirits,
because they have their Chaos and habitation under the earth, and not in the
wind and Air, as the other Spirits have.

Many terrene earthly Spirits are found, seen, and heard to be in such places,
wherein great treasures, and mighty store of wealth and Riches are hid; and
also under those Mountains, where there is plenty of Gold and Silver; with
which things they are delighted, and do take the care and custody thereof, and
not willingly do they part from it.

Such as dig Metals have the best knowledge of these Spirits, for they are
most troubled with them, and do vex them, and much persecute them with blows
and stripes: sometimes also they do afford benefits unto them, admonishing them,
and warning them of death: as when they are heard once, twice, thrice or
oftener to Knock and strike in the same place, it signifies the death of him
that diggeth or labors in that place; either he is buried up by the fall of
the Mountain, or dies by some such occasion: this is certainly experienced by
them that do dig in Mines.

These Spirits are worst against those who do not appear to be Devils, and
chiefly against those which they hate: but between these Spirits and the Devil,
there is a great difference; because he dies not, but these perish after they
have lived a long life, otherwise they might be called Spirits for this reason:
but that which has flesh and blood, is obnoxious to death, and ought once to
die. There is another thing which we shall more largely declare from the common
proverb, whereby it is reported that the Devil abounds in Riches, and
possesses much wealth, money, gold, and silver; and to have all treasures
hidden in the earth under his power, and to give out of them what he will, to
them that make any Covenant with him. And from hence that common saying took
its beginning, that the Devil for this very cause gives not only Riches
plentifully, and every thing that he desires, gold or silver to any one that
prescribes himself unto him, and gives up himself solely to be his, so as to
renounce and forget his Creator. But I say that all these things are lies and
fained fables, without any foundation or ground; which ought to be rejected of
every discreet and wise man: For the devil is the poorest of all creatures, so
that there is no creature so miserable and poor, above or under the earth, or
in all the other Elements. Neither has he any money, nor Riches, nor any power
over them; how then can he give to this or that person, that which he
possesses not? But he is infinitely skilful and cunning in Arts; and has
power to give and to teach them to those he favoreth, and that he can wrest
away and delude with his deceit: he has no money, neither gold nor silver can
he give to any one; neither does he ever take or require any bonds or
obligations from men sealed with their blood, or any other compact or Covenant.
But there are other Spirits which do such things, such as are the Sylphes, or
Pygmies, which although they are persons that are little by nature, yet they
can appear to men as they will, great, or little; fair, deformed; rich or
poor: they are not defective nor wanting of knowledge in all kind of Arts
that are or can be found out in all the light of nature; but they have them,
and contain the knowledge of them all within themselves: they have enough of
gold and silver, and the mines of all Metals under their power and custody. In
old times many of them have been found and heard amongst men, but now they
cease; but no man hitherto has known, or could give a reason of their severing
and separation, seeing they have always been esteemed to be Immortal
creatures; because no man could certainly be able to know or find out their
death, or could consider any cause of their absence: neither could any man for
a long time be able to know what they now are, or whence they proceeded, or
whither they wander, or what gift or office they have. Many do suppose that
where they bring any benefits or good to men, that they are Angels, or good and
familiar Spirits, sent to those men from God, and are afterward by him taken
from them, by reason of the greatness of their sins: for oftentimes they bring
to men very many good offices and benefits, and do undertake and sustain many
hard labors for them.

Others believe that they will not be seen by us, because that when a man sees
them, he cries out; so that they vanish away, and will not appear any more.

Many that do see or hear these Spirits, suppose that they are the Spirits and
souls of men that have come to an evil death, so that they have either
desperately drowned or hanged themselves, or killed themselves some other
ways; and departing from God their Savior, have given themselves to the
devil: and for that cause, do wander about, and are reserved by the devil unto
the day of the last Judgment.

There have been some who have supposed that they are vain Fantasies, and
that they have fore-shown and presaged much good fortune to those places
wherein they have been seen or heard; which many times also has so happened
and come to pass: but for the most part, faith effects it; for of their own
nature, they do not bring any fortune, unless God compels them or our faith.
And on the contrary, they are not able to cause any misfortune, unless it be by
the permission of God.

And many do think that they are the Enchantments of the Magicians.

There are others who having seen and heard them about treasures, have judged
that they are the Spirits of men, who have hid treasures in that place, and
ought to remain there until the the Last Judgment, or until their custody
thereof is found out; and this opinion they receive from the words of Christ,
where he says, Where your treasure is, there will your hearts be also. But I
do not see any reason why they should understand the heart for the Spirit, but
that there is much difference between them; wherefore I say that all the
Judgments which are spoken of before, are but false opinions, when as these
are to be understood to be halfe-men, that bear rule and wander in the four
Elements; and in the first and pristine times of nature, they have been taken
and worshipped in stead of God: These are they of whom God Almighty admonishes
us in that Commandment of the first Table, saying, that we shall not have any
other Gods but him, neither in the waters (where the Nymphs are understood) nor
under the Earth, (by which he means Sylphes or Pygmies) For the Lord our God
is a jealous God, and for such an offense punishes the sins of the Fathers
upon the Children unto the third and fourth generation.

The Mountain of Venus in Italy, was much possessed with these Spirits for
Venus her self was a Nymph, and that Mountain was by a comparison as her
Kingdom and Paradise: But she is dead, whereby her Kingdom cease to be: but
where or in what place is there any mention heard to be made of them, as in
former time, when Danhanserus, and many others entered in unto them? Neither did
they Invent these fables: they were of such a nature and condition, that they
loved all men that loved them; and hated them that hated them: wherefore they
gave Arts and Riches in abundance, to them who prescribed and bound themselves
to them; and they know both our minds and thoughts, whereby it comes to pass,
that they are easily moved by us to come to us. I do not say this, that I would
give this Counsel to any one, but that the true ground and foundation thereof
might be known, and the true difference which is between the devil and these
Semi-homines. The devil has not any body, unless he take any thing to himself
from the four Elements; for he has neither flesh nor blood: he remains
perpetual, not subject to any infirmities or a finite death; wherefore he dies
nor, but the Pygmies do: nevertheless they are both subject to a natural and
everlasting death, and are both deprived of everlasting life: wherefore
whosoever gives or subscribeth himself unto them, the same event happens
unto him as to them: Let every one therefore have a special care unto himself,
and consider well what he does, before he subscribeth himself; for he suddenly
does that whereby he shall always be compelled to be obedient unto them, and
to fulfill all their commands; And if he shall chance to be disobedient unto
them, or anger them, they very much impair, or totally destroy and take away
his life: there have been found many examples of this kind, to wit, sometimes
men have been found dead, their necks turned about, or otherwise miserably
handled: where any such thing has happened, it has hitherto commonly been
said, that the Devil has done this for this cause, either that the man has
not kept his promise and compact with him, or that the time which he covenanted
and subscribed himself unto him for, is expired; and that now he receives his
last reward. But these opinions do not proceed from the fountain of truth: for
the office of the Devil contains no such thing in his power, but rather he
suggesteth unto men, evil thoughts and Cogitations, whereby he draws them
away from obeying the will and commandments of God; by which means he makes
them to be the greatest sinners, and to forget and deny God their Creator: and
afterward draws them into despair, so that they cannot any more be able to
pray unto God: wherefore the Elementary Spirits are most like unto the devil,
and oftentimes they are executioners of the wrath and vengeance of God;
nevertheless they do oftentimes also admonish and warn us, and do watch over
us and defend us from many dangers, and sometimes do deliver some from prison,
and afford to men many other helps.

Wherefore such men as are burdened and overwhelmed with grief and sorrowful
Imaginations, are not to be left alone, but ought to be entertained with
various and pleasant discourse, which may delight their minds, and expel their
sorrow: The Devils likewise are in these cases not idle; but as busy as those
terrene Spirits, and do easily tempt such kind of men. From hence it comes to
pass, that some people, especially women in childbed, have been so oppressed
in the night in their sleep, that they have thought themselves to be as it
were strangled, neither could they possibly cry out, or call any help, but in
the Morning have reported that they were Ridden by a hag: And they are still
accounted to be witches, or Inchanters that do this; whereas their bodies
cannot possibly enter into the chambers, where the doors and Windows are
shut; but the Sylphes and Nymphs easily can.

O thou of little faith! as doubtful as Peter, who suffer thy self to be
tossed with every wind, and art easily drowned: thou thy self art the cause
hereof, by reason of thy little, dubious, and weak faith; also thy evil
thoughts do draw thee unto this: Thou have also in thy self a secret Magnes
that attracteth every like. This is the Celestial Lodestone above all others,
which attracteth Iron and steel, above the Quintessence and starry Magnes,
which makes the dejected and hidden Iron to appear: for the Celestial Magnes
is of such power and virtue, that from the distance of a hundred thousand
miles, even from any place whatsoever, from the four Elements, he attracteth
the Iron to himself, when he passes into his own exaltation. But this we shall
make more largely to appear, in two excellent examples following.

Of the Imagination, and how the same comes into it is exaltation.
WHat powerful operation the Imagination has, and how the same comes to its
hight and exaltation, may be seen by an example taken from experience in the
time of pestilence, wherein the Imagination poysoneth more then any infected
Air; and against which, no Antidote, neither of Mithridate nor Treacle, nor
any such preservative, can exhibit any help; unless that such an Imagination
do pass away and be forgotten, nothing else will help. So quick and swift a
Runner and Messenger is the Imagination, that it does not only fly out of one
house into another, out of one street into another, but also most swiftly
passes from one City and Country into another; so that by the Imagination
only of one person, the Pestilence may come into some whole City or Country,
and kill many thousands of men: as may be understood by this example. Put case
there were two brethren dearly loving one another, and one of them lives in
France and the other travels into Italy, who is taken away by the Pestilence in
the middle way, and news should be brought to the brother living in France,
that his brother in Italy was dead of the Plague; at which he being affrighted,
it pierces through his Skin, into his Imagination, so that he cannot forget
it; and it is kindled in him, and this fire does so long reverberate and work,
as it may be seen in the trial of Gold and Silver, which do send forth their
flowers so long, until they shine bright again; which is not before they are
perfectly clear, and separated from the other impure Metals: After the same
manner also the Imagination strikes back, and works it self unto the
highest degree, after there will be a relucency thereof, now it is received in
a vessel in the man, as the sperme of a man is received in the Matrix of the
woman, whereby the conception of the woman immediately follows. So does the
Pestilence go from one to another, so long till it spread over a whole City or
Country: Ir is good therefore to keep far off; not because of any corrupt or
infected Air, for it infects not the Air, (as some Ignorant people say) but
that they may not see or hear the operations of the Pestilence, which may
infect their minds. But those people to whom any such news is reported as
beforesaid, ought not to be left alone, neither must they be suffered to muse
silently with themselves, whereby the Imagination may labor in their minds;
but they are to be comforted, and the Imagination is to be expelled from their
minds, by exciting them to mirth and joy: Neither let any think that I speak
this as a fable. as though it should seem to be a light business; neither is
the remedy so easy for oppressed Imaginations; for the Imagination is as it were
pitch, which easily cleaves and sticks, and soon takes fire, which being
kindled, is not so easily extinguished: wherefore the only remedy to resist
the Pestilence in such men, is to quench and expel the force of the
Imagination. This is one example wherein the power and operation of the
Imagination is declared, with the exhalations thereof.

But now to speak of another example, know, that the Imagination does not
only operate on men in time of Pestilence, and to deprive many of their lives,
but also in war: how many have perished in war with the fear of the shot? the
cause of whose death has been only their Imagination which they have had unto
their death: That is, they have been so greatly overwhelmed with fear, and so
terrified at every shot, that they have thought no otherwise but that they
should be wounded with every dart: such men are far oftener slain then those
that are bold, who go courageously and without fear against their enemies;
they fear no shot or wound, but have a firm faith and hope of Victory beyond
the other Soldiers; such are stout and true Soldiers: how many Towers,
Castles, Cities and Countries have such warred against, and overcome and
Vanquished the people thereof? But the other that are fearful, whether they be
great or little, Noble or Ignoble, Knights, Earls, or others, do scarce deserve
a halfe-peny to go against an enemy, much less any wages. Wherefore it becomes
him that desires to be an old Soldier, or to gain Knighthood or any honor
in war, to fix and fasten his mind and Imagination firmly upon some most
excellent stout Head and leader of an Army, such as Julius Caesar, and many
amongst the Romans have been; and by so doing, if he know how to use this
Imagination well, and be of a firm and constant mind, and as he if would
attain to and accomplish all the heroic noble acts of such a man; he shall not
only attain to be an old Soldier, but shall accomplish his desires in
attaining to the like honors.

This has suddenly happened to many who have followed the process of their
Imagination, so that they have attained to great honor and Riches.

Object. But some may Object, that fortune, strength and industry has helped
them, and promoted such men; also, that some have worn herbs, roots and
stones, etc. by reason of the virtue whereof, they could not be overcome nor
wounded.

Answ. I say that all these things are consorts and helpers with the
Imagination, which is the chief and general ruler over all others; although I
grant that there are many such things, which do preserve in the greatest
necessity against all enemies and their Arms, so that he that wears them,
could not be wounded; whereof I shall make no mention in this place, but
reserve it to another. Nevertheless faith is the exaltation and confirmation of
all those things: for without faith these things and all such like are vain
and void of strength.

Of treasure and Riches hid under the Earth.
WE shall declare something concerning Treasures hid under the Earth; and show
some means whereby they are known and gotten. And also what things, sometimes
evil, and wonderful, do happen about them.

The first thing to be treated of, shall be the signs whereby they are known,
that it may be certainly made manifest, and not out of mere opinion only.

Note that it comes to pass, where such places are, that there do appear many
Phantasmes, and sometimes immoderate strange noises are heard, wherewith they
that go out in the night are struck with terror and fear; so that sometimes
they are cast into a cold sweat, and their hair of their head stands upright,
which for the most part happens on the Sabbath night. Also if any lights do
appear and seem to fall about those places, and there their light is
extinguished and goes out; and sometimes there seem to be great flashes of
wind in their house whose the treasure is, and where it is hid; and there are
seen many visions and strange Fantasies: and many strange Rumors and noises
are there heard. Where such things happen, they are heard and do show
themselves most commonly about the middle time of the night: And the cause of
these noises and sights are, commonly that there is treasure hid, in or about
that place, neither is there any other reason thereof to be given. Nevertheless
many who have not understood these things, have had many various opinions
hereof.

Some have thought that these Fantasies have been caused by the devil, or by
some Enchantment; or by some in that house who have some work or famliarity
with the Devil, or who have given or bound themselves to the devil, or have
made some promise unto him, whereby it comes to pass that that wicked and
malignant accuser causes these things to be seen and heard, that they might
expect the expiration of their days, which he does so much desire should be
fulfilled.

Others do believe, that some have been secretly died and buried there; others
do think that some wicked man has died in that place, whose Spirit has been
forced to wander thereabouts: and there have been other various and sundry
opinions.

But all these Judgments are vain and false, except only those who conclude
that the occasion of the noises are, that there is treasure hid about that
place; or that sometimes when the devil has been driven out of some body that
he has possessed, he has been permitted to stay about that place: but where
those noises are, it is a great Testimony that there is treasure hid there.

There are two kinds of treasures hid; some that may be found, and some that
cannot be gotten; the difference whereof is this: such is easy to be found,
which contains the Metals of Gold and silver, and are such kind as we make,
and have only been used and handled amongst men: that kind of treasure is not
easy to be found, which is Gold and silver, that is made, coined, and hid by
the Nymphs and Sylphes; which kind of Gold and silver does sometimes come to
be found and used amongst men, and is by the Nymphs suddenly again buried in
the earth, and afterward cannot easily be found and gotten again.

These things are most worthy our knowledge, especially the signs before
spoken of are most diligently to be noted; because there are Magical Rods,
which are deceitful, and are too easily inclinable to bend to any money that is
let fall or lost.

There are other visions also which appear in looking-glasses, Christals, and
such like things, which Nigromancers that dig treasures do use: but they are
all false and deceitful; wherefore there is little credit to be given unto them.

We come now to speak of the manner of digging for treasure, how a time may be
taken that we may have a happy progress in the digging, which is as follows.
First, under an influence of the Moon or Saturn, and when the Moon transits
Taurus, Capricorn or Virgo, is a good time to begin to seek or dig after
treasure. Neither need you use any other Ceremonies, nor to draw any Circles,
or to use any Enchantments whatsoever; only those that dig must be of a
cheereful mind, free and alienated from any evil thoughts or cogitations, and
not to be moved, nor fear any fantasies, visions, or Imaginations of the
Spirits: although they should corporally appear, yet they are only visions.
Therefore those that dig ought to discourse, sing, and be cheereful, and not to
be affrighted at any thing, but to have a good courage: And by no means soever
let them keep silence, as some perfidious Negromancers have taught.

Now when they come near to the place where the Treasure is, that it is almost
detected, and do hear many noises; and strange visions and horible sights are
seen, which oftentimes happens to be: It shows that the Pygmies and Sylphes
are there, who do envy that men should have those treasures; and will not
willingly part from them, especially if it be their own, or such as they
brought thither. Such treasures are to be left, if the keepers thereof consent
not. And although they may be gotten and taken away as a Robbery from those
keepers, yet these keepers have an Art whereby they can change these treasures,
in this way gained, into a vile and base matter, as into earth, clay, dung, and
suchlike things, (as I have seen by examples:) wherefore when any such
transmutations happen, we are not therefore to despair in our minds, although
we find nothing like either Gold or silver, neither would any one suppose any
such thing to be there. We ought therefore to fly to the holy Scripture, which
says thus, God shall judge the world by fire; and in the Psalms thus, Gold
and silver are tried in the fire, and are found pure and clean: wherefore in
any such transmutations, the fire ought to be the judge; the proceeding in the
trial thereof, ought to be after the same manner, as the refining and
separating of minerals and Metals; And by this means, it will be forced of
necessity to return to the same essence which it had before.

There is another thing remarkable in these kinds of transmutations; for
sometimes the diggers are deluded, and there are found oftentimes pots of earth,
full of brass, ridiculous things and matter, as bones, egge-shells, pieces of
wood, and such things, which have been buried there many years before. And they
that have found the same, have supposed it to be the true treasure, Gold or
Silver, and to have been changed by the evil Spirits; which is false. For
treasure found suddenly and unsought for, cannot be changed by the Spirits, but
remains in the same substance which it had before. Therefore these things are
not to be accounted a transmutation, but rather a vexation: for sometime these
vexers of men do bury such things, that they which seek after the treasure
might labor in vain: Therefore such things are not to be regarded, which are
of no worth, and may easily be known by the lightness of their weight; But if
they be of a heavy and ponderous body, like to a Mineral or Mineral sand, there
may an experiment thereof be made by fire.

That we may omit nothing that may conduce hereunto, we will add also this
objection. Some may ask, How comes it to pass that Treasure is sometime easily
found which is not sought after? The cause whereof we may suppose to be this.
Those Spirits which are the keepers of treasures, do best know the minds,
thoughts, and cogitations of men: therefore because they know, that men have
not any thoughts or will to dig or seek after any treasures in such a place,
they give no diligence to keep the same, neither do they suspect it; whereby
it comes to pass, that it is easily taken from them. It happens to them, as
it does to those men who suddenly get some prey from their enemies, they not
thinking of them, whereby the are easily overcome, or spoiled by them. There
are two causes chiefly why treasures are so greedily sought after by men. The
first is the Covetousness of them who thirst after riches; and the other, that
those places where the treasures are, might be afterward made habitable,
secure, safe, and quiet from being infested or molested with such Spirits. For
there are at this day many ancient houses and Castles which are inhabitable, by
reason of these kind of Spirits: and the chief cause thereof is, that there
are great treasures hid about these places. In those places where such things
happen, it is chiefly necessary that great care be taken in the digging
thereabout; not so much for the money and treasure, as that the place may again
be made quiet and habitable. When any one goes about this work with diligent
digging, one of these things commonly happens; either the treasure is found, or
carried deeper in the earth, or removed by the keepers to some other place; as
visions in pure Christals have often shown, and as they have told the diggers:
I now see many Pygmies, take the treasure quite away. Credit ought to be given
hereunto, and the digging to cease.

It is further to be known, by how much the greater noises are heard about the
place, and sights and visions seen, by so much greater the treasure is to be
judged to be, and nearer to the superficies of the earth.

CHAP. VIII. Of those that are possessed of malignant Spirits, and of the Devil.
AFter what manner men are possessed and overcome by the Devil, the Apostle
Peter largely writes and declares unto us: But that the words of his
admonition may be understood according to the true sense thereof, a little
exposition is needful: For the Apostle briefly and summarily comprehends the
whole matter in two words, to wit, fasting and prayer: These seem to be very
little and light things at the first sight; nevertheless they are of very great
Moment, and signify very many things, if they be considered rightly and
attentively: When therefore the Apostle Peter does so earnestly admonish us,
saying, Be ye sober and watch: for your enemy the Devil goes about as a raging
Lion, seeking whom he may devour; Afterward he concludes, that by faith we
may be able to resist the Devil; therefore Peter would have us to understand
his first word of Sobriety, so, as if he should say, Beware of all kind of
gluttony and drunkenness.

For drunkenness is the fountain and original of all evils and vices, which are
acted and completed by drunkards through the persuasions of the Devil:
wherefore observe a mean in meat and drink, lest your hearts be troubled and
burdened therewith; for the Devil is always present, although invisible; he is a
Spirit, and understands all Arts, and can be in what place he will,
throughout the Circuit of the whole earth: he is the author and Actor of all
evil and wickedness which is done by men in the whole earth; he is as watchful
over mankind, as a Cat is over a mouse: wherefore he seduceth you unawares,
when you have filled your selves with wine; and then fills up all vices in
you: he then compasses you about with his snares and bonds, as the hangman
does evildoers and malefactors, until he has killed them; so also does he
with those that are drunk; besieging them with snares and Temptations, until
he either has destroyed their bodies, or brought them into despair.

Take heed to your selves therefore, Oh you Epicures and drunkards, and also
Soldiers, who are always filled with wine night and day. Therefore a soldier
that so overchargeth himself with meat or drink, ought to be accounted brutish
as swine, seeing both of them are Ignorant and uncertain of the time of their
death, or how soon they may be slain.

This is the meaning of the first word of St. Peter of Soberness: now we come
to understand what he means by watching.

By watching Peter seems to understand, as if he should say, Walk in
uprightness and justice; be of good courage, not faint-hearted; cast away all
evil thoughts and cogitations, and all Fantasies of the Devil, that such
Imaginations may not have any place with you; For hereby many have been
overwhelmed and besieged by the devil, the reason whereof has been their own
wicked and evil thoughts and Imaginations. Therefore relinquish and cast them
all away, and have God always before your eyes; pray unto him, and let him be
only in your thoughts; make your selves like unto him and his children, and
then he will send you his holy Spirit, who will guard you, rule you, and
declare the wonderful works of his mercy by you, as he has done by Paul and
all the other Apostles, who have been all after this manner preserved by his
holy Spirit; follow them therefore, and exclude and cast away the Devil and all
evil cogitations, and wicked thoughts, wherewith we may also seduce and deceive
our selves, and thereby attract and draw the devil into us, and be corporally
besieged and possessed by him, and so come into desperation, that we may
destroy our own lives; even as did Judas, Achitophel, and many others.

Thus much of watching, and the interpretation thereof, which Peter would have
to be understood thereby. For by watching he does not mean abstinence from the
bed and sleep, as the Carthusians and other Monasteries do teach and observe;
for God created and ordained rest and sleep, and first suffered it to enter
into Adam. Wherefore every one ought to sleep in due season, as much as his
nature requires, etc.

Lastly, note how Peter concludes and confirms his word from God, saying,
Let us resist the devil by faith; as if he should say, Do not in any wise
stick or stumble at the word of God, or doubt of his mercy; do you not burden
your conscience, nor trouble your hearts; do not persuade your selves that God
regards you not, or that he is forgetful of you; or that he accounts you
unworthy of his mercy, so that you ought not to come unto him, because you have
acted against his Divine will, or have broken his commandments, and committed
many sins: But rather, firmly believe his word, that Christ would not the death
of a sinner, but rather that he should be converted, and live: Also, that he
came into the world because of our sins, that he might take them from us upon
himself; which also he has done: there are many such comfortable words to be
found in the Holy Scriptures, which ought to be proposed to such persons as are
weak in their faith, for their comfort and consolation: After this manner a
man resists an evil conscience and the Devil, so that he is freed from them,
and not tempted any more.

CHAP. IX. Of the manner of delivering them that are possessed by evil Spirits,
and the great abuse which hitherto has been committed by many, in such kind
of business.
NOw to come to speak of the driving away of evil Spirits; it is to be known,
that very few since the times of Christ and his Apostles have rightly been
driven away. For they knew not how to use any other means but Ceremonies and
Conjurations, wherewith they endeavored to expel the malignant Spirits and the
devil; whereas this is altogether a false foundation, and by no means to be
followed or imitated. Although sometimes some have been delivered by this way,
and the devil has been driven from them; nevertheless it has not been done,
neither can it be done without loss: Like as if a Prince would vanquish some
Country or City, with the Sword, this he could not possibly do without some
apparent damage and loss to that place. A common proverb hereby comes to
mind, which says, That he that cannot get good words from good men, shall
much less wrest them from evil men, although they be compelled by force: the
more evil is to be feared, as by examples is too often seen to come to pass.

Therefore that opinionated power is to be relinquished which is used in
Ceremonies and Conjurations. But you ought to expel wicked Spirits as Christ
and his Apostles did, and no other way: But if you do otherwise, you undertake
great Labors against the Devil: for certainly the Devil is forced through
great difficulty to go out of men, and seeks all iniquities and wicked
occasions to stay, and retain them in his power. But when he sees that he can
no longer stay, and remain in the possessed, but is forced to go out, then he
requires power and license to enter into some other man, or beast, or into
some other place: which if he be permitted, there follows a greater loss
thereupon.

Therefore there is no other place to be permitted or assigned unto him, but
hell, from whence he comes, and which God has ordained for him, and cast him
into; that it may not happen, as we have an example (as we faithfully believe)
when Christ permitted the devil which he cast out of the man, to enter into the
herd of swine, which no sooner had the devil entered into them, but they were
drowned in the Sea. Therefore they are in no wise to be permitted to enter into
any other men, lest suddenly after they deprive them of their lives, as they
did these swine: Neither are they to be permitted to go into any Rivers, lakes,
or ponds; which if it should be done, they will drown many men therein, and
draw them into the deep under those waters; and will deride them as a fool
does his master with his fingers; and therewith the devils are more delighted
then before: neither ought they to have any power given them, or to their
desires to go into any house or Castle; for they will perpetually possess it,
and will so reign there, that no body will any more be able to dwell or
inhabit in that place, but they will always be inhabitable, as many both houses
and Castles are in many Countries, which are left desolate for this very cause;
many whereof I could name in this place, but I pass them by, to avoid
prolixity: let Satan therefore ask what he will, where, or to what place he
would go, nothing else ought to be granted to him, then to return into hell,
which God ordained for him, and thrust him into: from whence he came into the
man, and into which he ought to enter when he goes out of the man, etc.

Also if the devil shall cause the man to speak many vain trifles, we ought
not to answer thereunto, or to speak much with him: But if any one will speak
with him, let him say, I command thee, Oh thou unclean Spirit, by the word,
power and virtue whereby thou were cast out by Christ and his Apostles, that
thou go out of this man, etc. He is no other way to be conjured; neither are
these words to be taken for a Conjuration, but for an answer, by which alone he
is not cast out: but this is first to be done, to wit, to watch and pray; for
Christ says, This kind is only to be cast out by fasting and prayer with
faith.

Wherefore it is chiefly necessary to induce and force such as are thus
possessed, to prayer; though it be very difficult to be done, because the devil
so Rules their tongues, that he suffers them not to pray: Therefore there
must be prayers made before them; and if they will not pray with and after
those that are praying, they must be more sharply dealt withal; That is to
say, the possessed must be fast bound both his hands and feet, and afterward
let some other man lie across over them, and show himself to be very angry with
them, and severely compel them to prayer: but he ought to pray before them, and
to exhort them to pray after him the same words. By this means such people may
be induced to pray, when they cannot be brought to it by any other means;
which ought to be continued day by day, and the devil will go out of them and
leave them. This shall suffice to have spoken concerning the casting out of
unclean and evil Spirits, because I am restrained to use brevity in other
places.

CHAP. X. Of Tempests
THat we may now come to speak of the original of Tempests, and how they may be
expelled away; Also how and by what means any one may preserve himself and his
from Thunder, lightning and hail: We shall declare in the first place, that
all Tempests do proceed from the four Capital winds, viz. the East, South,
West, and North: Then from the Center of both, that is to say, of the Air and
Firmament, there are no tempests can arise; But from the four Fountains before
spoken of, which comes chiefly to be considered.

Wherefore he that desires to preserve his goods, House, Lands, garden, field,
meadow, and such things from all manner of thunder, hail and Tempest; he ought
first to know these things, whereby he may also know how to assimilate
inferiors to Superiors. We will therefore in this place briefly declare the
original of all Tempests.

The original of tempests is certainly nothing else, but the appearance of
Spirits; and lightning or corruscation preceding, is the presence of them:
whereby it may be certainly known, whether those tempests will pass away with
or without danger; and that after this manner is to be understood; to wit, as a
stranger will not enter into any ones house, unless first he speak, so these
Spirits do not appear unto us without speaking first. But their voice is
thunder, which as we see immediately follows every flash of lightning. Also if
a stranger should suddenly fly into the house of another, where he is not
known; it seems to signify no good, but evil rather; either he himself is
prosecuted by others, or else brings some damage to them. So likewise are we to
understand of the lightning of heaven; the more quick it comes, the more
dangerous it is, for commonly some Thunderbolt follows. It is therefore very
necessary to know how every one may defend and save himself herefrom, that he
fall not into some place that he would not, or receive some other hurt: the
Ringing of Bells do avail nothing in these cases; although I do not reject
them, especially in such tempests as are caused by Magicians enchantments, by
reason of the Spirits by them raised in the Air. For the Spirits do love
silence and quietness, whereby it comes to pass that great noises, as the
sounds of bells and Trumpets, do partly diminish and disperse tempests by them
stirred up: But in Thunders and hail they do no good, as the Monks and
Sacrificers have to their loss too often found. And for this cause they used
ceremonies, wherewith they seduced the Vulgar and common people, persuading
them that besprinkling places with holy water (as they call it) preserved them
safe from Thunder and hail; likewise by burning holy candles, or some palm,
or other herb by them sanctified, or with the perfume of Frankincense, or
Myrrh of these sacrificers they were preserved secure.

O thou fool, and unwise sacrificer and Monk, who art hitherto Ignorant of
these things; and understandest them not, in this place thou may be taught
the contrary; how that Malignant Spirits are not driven away with sweet
perfumes, but are mightily delighted therewith, and do run more freely and
swiftly to them, then to stinking smells; whether they be good Spirits or evil.
But if in stead of Frankincense and Myrrh, you had taught to have made a
fumigation of Assa Fetida, you might therewith drive away both good and evil
Spirits: For the good odor of Frankincense and Myrrh is nothing else but the
sacrifice of the Spirits, wherewith we attract and draw them unto us. But of
this we have spoken enough.

Now to return to that which we intended to write of; and first, how any place
may be preserved from Thunder and hail: note therefore, that to place a
preservative in the center of a house, garden, or field, etc. avails not at
all; but at the four Angles, East, West, South, and North; then the place shall
be secured: as a building set upon four Pillars is more strong and firm then
that which is founded only upon one, which is set in the middle of the center,
or some other place: this is more easily overthrown by the wind or Spirits.
Now the materials which belong to this preservative, and of which these four
pillars are made, note that they consist of simple bodies, every one whereof is
sufficient, and has strength and virtue in it self for the effects before
spoken of: As Mugwort, St John's wort, Perewincle, Celandine, Rue, Devils bit,
and many such herbs and roots, and especially if they be gathered and taken in
the right influence.

There are also other things of far greater strength and virtue; as Coral,
Azoth; and one of the Characters before spoken of being drawn in a certain
table, or engraven: In these three things is a great secret against all
Enchantments and works of witches and the Devil himself. In which
preservatives we may trust in our greatest necessities.

CHAP. XI. Of the great abuse of the Magic Art by them that use it for
Negromancy and Witchcraft.
THe Magic Art in it self, is the most secret and occult science of all
supernatual things in the world: That those things which are impossible to be
searched out by humane reasons, by this Art, to wit, Magic, it may be found
out and known: wherefore it is the most occult and secret wisdom; and
reasoning against it, is nothing else but extreme folly. It were therefore very
necessary that the Divines would learn to know something of this Art, and be
experienced in Magic what it is; and not so unworthily, without any ground at
all, to call it Witchcraft. The Magical science were very profitable for them
to know, seeing they will undertake to be the Masters and teachers of the holy
Scriptures, and persuade themselves to be so: Not that I would have them use
the Magical Art, or operate any thing by it; but to be expert therein, and to
know the virtues and effects thereof, for the high and great mysterious secrets
which are hidden in the holy Scriptures, delivered by the Apostles, Prophets,
and Christ himself; and which we by our humane reason cannot understand nor
search out.

What Divine that is Igrorant of Magic, can cast out the Devil, drive away or
bind a Spirit, or that can call one unto him, and command him to come? or that
which is far less, can he heal the sick, or administer any other help to him
by his faith alone? I will be silent of his removing a mountain into the Sea.
There follows then that faith whereof Christ speaks, of which they
understand neither much nor little: Nevertheless they make a great show and
profession thereof with their mouths, and do teach and speak much thereof;
but themselves know not how to make proof thereof, or to give any sign
thereof, by their faith, whereby it may be said that they understand this
faith, and to make use of it in the proof thereof. But if any one should come,
who by his faith and Magic should perform a good sign, you having not the
reason of knowing whether it be good or evil, will forthwith call him a
Negromancer and Witch, because he has done something above your reason and
humane wisdom; when you your selves cannot tell how to discern a Negromancer
or Witch, from a Magician.

Magic is therefore a most necessary and pure Art; not defiled nor corrupted
with any Ceremonies or Conjurations, as Nigromancy: For in Magic there is no
use of Ceremonies, Consecrations, Conjurations, Blessings or Curses; but of
faith alone whereof Christ speaks, saying, that by it we shall be able to
remove Mountains and cast them into the Sea; And to compel, loose, and bind
all Spirits: This is the true foundation and Instrument of Magic.

Truly therefore it is a thing chiefly necessary to look into this ART, that
it be not turned into superstition and abuse, and to the destruction or damage
of men; and hereby it is made Nigromancy, and Witchcraft; and at length, not
undeservedly, so called by all men, because Witches and Sorcerers have
violently intruded themselves into the Magic Art, like Swine broke into a
delicate Garden. So is Magic corrupted and made Nigromancy by these
perfidious men; wherefore it has not undeservedly been burnt in the fire with
these Witches and Sorcerers. For these kind of men are the most nocent and
hurtful, and the worst enemies to mankind, that they have not worse enemies in
all the world, which prosecute them with a more deadly hatred: from a present
public enemy, and corporal persecuter, who endeavoreth to invade us with the
most cruel weapons, Guns, or Darts; we may beware of such a one, or take up
Arms against him for our defense, with Brigandines or Darts, etc. or else a man
may tarry in his house, and keep himself, suffering none to enter in but his
Friends. But of these Witches and Sorcerers, no man can beware or defend
himself, because against this kind of Enemies of God and men, no Weapons, Coats
of Mayl or Brigandines will help, no shutting of doors, or locks; for they
penetrate through all things, and all things are open unto them. And if any one
were enclosed in Towers of Iron or Brass, he would not thereby be secured from
these enemies; Although in their own proper bodies they seldom bring hurt to
any one, but raise up, and send Spirits unto them, by their corrupt Faith, and
hurt them in some part of their bodies, although they are absent from them an
hundred miles distance; they either smite, wound, or kill them, although no
outward and external wound can be seen appear: because they cannot hurt the
outward man, but only the internal spirit. Wherefore no Coats of Mayl can
defend them, be they never so good; but they must put on other weapons and
fortifications, to wit, the Armor of Faith: This is the true way, and then let
him be clothed with a Linen garment, the wrong end turned upwards: and after
that has been often worn, thou shall be more safely delivered, than if thou
were armed and girt with all manner of weapons.

Although there are many preservatives which will keep and defend men from all
these Fascinations and Witchcrafts which are wrought by the arising of these
evil Spirits, such as are Coral, Azoth, and the like, which being used
according to their due use and order, will well preserve from these enormities
before spoken of. For the prevention and preservation from them is easy, but
the cure is difficult; nevertheless it is possible: But in such cases, the
proceeding thereunto must be magical and supernatural: From thence sprung that
saying which some use, That none can better help the bewitched, than them that
hurt them: This is a true saying which cannot be contradicted: but they which
use it, understand not the Cause of this thing, neither can they give any
reason thereof, why Witches do best of all, most happily, readily, and surely
help, and Cure the bewitched: Therefore of this thing you shall be here
sufficiently instructed.

Some Witches make and form Images in the form and likeness of some man which
they propose to themselves, and conceive in their own minds; and do stick a
nail in the sole of his foot, and after this manner hurt the man, that he
invisibly feels the pain of a nail in his foot, and is so tormented
therewith, that he is not able to go, until the nail is pulled out of the foot
of the Image; which being drawn away, the man is healed: which no man knows
better how to do, than he that fixed the nail in the Image; nor where it was
fixed, or what the Cause of the Disease was.

It oftentimes also comes to pass, that after the same manner a nail is
sometimes by these witches fixed in the teeth of the Image of the man, so that
afterward he cannot take any rest in his teeth, unless the nail be taken away,
or his teeth drawn out: In like manner are nails struck into any other members
of the Image by these arch-Sorcerers, and hereby they hurt men without making
any impression or sign thereof upon their skin.

Oftentimes also it so happens to men, that there arise Tumors in their heads
or elsewhere about their bodies, which are like Pushes; or skycolour spots,
that appear suddenly and vex men in their bodies, as if they had been beaten
with knotted Ropes: to whom any such accident happens without any visible
blow or bruise to be perceived; he will not judge any otherwise, but that he is
smitten by these Images.

It is too often seen to fall out, that a man sometimes loses an Eye suddenly,
or is struck quite blind; or deaf in one, or both Ears; dumb, or some
imperfection in his speech; crooked, lame, or dies; all which accidents are
wrought by Witches, through the divine permission: All which are Magical
acceptions and torments, and are made and completed by the Ascendants.

In these Cases the Physicians ought to take heed, and be advised, that when
they perceive such kinds of Diseases to be supernatural, that then they do not
judge them to be natural Diseases, and so think to Cure them with their common
Apothecaries Medicaments; For thereby they will reap nothing but disgrace,
which often happens to many of them: It is a cross (say they) or affliction by
God laid upon them, which no Physician can help. Oh you Quacksalvers, it is not
as you think, but indeed it is a chastisement, by the permission of God,
wrought by Witches and evil men; wherefore the Physician ought to consider the
Signs, whereby he may know, and judge of the Disease; and thereby may inform
himself which way to effect the Cure thereof: And Medicines are to be used, and
applied thereunto.

In the first place it is necessary that he ask the Patient, How, and in what
manner the Disease took him, or happened unto him; what was the original of the
evil, Whether it were occasioned by any fall, blow, thrust, bruise; or if any
other natural Cause can be perceived; or that there be any Flux, or inward
corruption of blood: but if none of these signs appear, then let him again
demand of the Patient, Whether he has any body in suspicion that is ^n enemy,
or one not wishing well to him, that might be a Witch? If he answer that he
has some mistrust of any such, then he shall judge that it has happened to
him as is above declared. Therefore it is most necessary for the Physician to
understand rightly after what manner he is to deal with the Patient, if he
desire to be perfect in this art. But the Ancients have not written at all any
thing concerning this kind of Cure, neither Galen nor Avicenna, nor any other;
we shall therefore lay down the manner of the Cure in Order, which follows.

They who are bewitched, cannot be Cured any better, than by hurting again the
same place afflicted; that is, by making (through Faith and imagination) such a
like member as is hurt, or else a whole Image out of Wax, which he shall either
anoint or bind up with Plasters, where the Tumors, Signs, or Spots be, is a
present help for that person in whose name it shall be made; and the pain shall
cease, etc. But if he be so bewitched, that he is in danger to lose an eye, his
hearing; or be impedited in the Generative faculty of his privy Members, in his
Speech, or has his Members made crooked or wreathed awry; then let there be
made an Image of the whole body of Wax, with a firm Faith, upon which Image let
the intent of your imagination be firmly fixed; and afterward let the whole
Image be consumed with fire in due order. Make no wonder that people bewitched
are thus easily Cured: neither be like the Sophisters of the Academies, who
scoff and deride at such things; and say, That they are impossibilities, and
against God and Nature, because they are not taught in their Schools.

It follows then, since they are true, That a Physician ought not to rest only
in that bare knowledge which their Schools teach, but to learn of old Women,
Egyptians, and suchlike persons; for they have greater experience in such
things, than all Academians.

We come to speak also of the Dartings and Jaculations of all Witches, as the
Inchanters and Witches do call them; when they afflict any man, that they
insert ashes, hairs, feathers, bristles of Hogs, fins of Fishes, and such like
things into the foot, or some part of the body, without any opening of the skin.

But how, or after what manner this is done, we shall not here speak of; left
if it be known to some, it may be by them made use of to do evil; wherefore we
shall pass it over, it being only necessary to write of the manner of the Cure,
that the same likewise may be effected without opening of the skin, and such
griefs taken away. The way and use of the Ancients in such kind of Cures, is
especially to be avoided, who used to lance the part affected with Razors,
about the center thereof, and that very deep, where there are no hairs, nor any
thing else to be found; and by that way of proceeding, do afflict the Patients
with most intolerable torments, as if they were racked in the hands of the
hangman: for by this kind of Remedy, very few are Cured, but many have thereby
lost their lives. Wherefore this proceeding is quite to be left, and a better
to be chosen: which is: Let some quantity, the whole, or half, much or little,
of the like injaculated matter, which may be found and buried either in an
Elder or Oak, and fixed with a wedge toward the East; which being done, there
needs not any greater labor, for then that which remains may be extracted from
the body, and the Cure will follow without using any other Remedy: But it will
be otherwise, if the extracted matter be not placed in a right place;
whatsoever it be, it causes hurt, and diminishes not the injaculated matter.
Wherefore it were to be wished, that it might be extracted from the body of
man, without labor or pain, without making any incision, combustion, or opening
thereof: It is therefore especially to be noted, that the same ought to be done
by the virtue of the Magnes, (which attracteth all bewitched matter to it
self:) such as is Oak-leaves, Celandine, Azoth, and powder of Coral: which if
any one of them be by himself bound and fastened about the Center, in 24 hours
it will extract from the body all such matter, as by any such means of
Witchcraft is injaculated therein.

I shall only add this one thing, which is a common saying, used by many to
say, I am an enemy to, and hate such Witches and Sorcerers; wherefore I am sure
they cannot hurt me: And this is firmly believed by such kind of faithless and
ignorant men, that those Witches and Sorcerers that they hate, can do them no
hurt; but only such as they love, and give something to, etc. But this is false:
for whosoever they are that are their enemies, do also give them thereby an
occasion to use hatred and enmity toward them; and from that Spring at last
arises the Persecution, according to the manner, power, and proprieties of the
enemies. But if we would resist them that they cannot hurt us, we must do it by
Faith; for that confirms and strengthens all things, raises up, and casts
down, and performs all things.

The end of Occult Philosophy, of Paracelsus.
PARACELSUS Of the Mysteries of the Signs of the Zodiac: Being the Magnetical
and Sympathetical Cure of Diseases, as they are appropriated under the Twelve
Signs ruling the parts of the Body.
The Prologue.
IT is without doubt, that many will be much ravished with admiration, when
they see these my Writings brought into the light, because of the admirable
effects and virtues which are found in Metals, being first rightly and duly
prepared with the hand and art: which among many people, are held and accounted
to be superstitious and wicked operations, and against nature; that they are
idolatrous operations, and that the help of the Devil is used to bring them to
perfection. They say, How can it be possible, that Metals being engraven upon
only with Characters, Letters and Words, should have any such power, unless
they were prepared through the Craft and Assistance of the Devil? To these we
Answer, I hear you give Credit to them, and do believe that they have power and
virtue, being prepared by the help of the Devil, and do operate through him;
And are you not able also to believe that God, who is the Creator of the whole
Work of Nature, has as much power in Heaven, and also that he gives power and
virtue to those operations in Metals, Herbs, Roots, Stones, and such like
things? But in your judgment you seem to make the Devil more wise and powerful,
than the only Omnipotent Lord God, who of his great Mercy, has Created all
Metals, Herbs, Roots, Stones, and all things whatsoever, that live, or move,
in, or upon the Earth, Water and Air; and has endued them with their several
degrees of virtue, for the benefit and use of mankind: It is also most certain,
and approved by experience evidently, That the Changes and Mutations of time,
have great and powerful strength and operation; and that chiefly in Metals,
which are made in a certain determinate time, as it is manifest to many, and
very well known to us by sundry experiences. No man likewise can teach that
Metals are dead substances, or do want life; seeing their oils, salt, sulphur,
and quintessence are the greatest Preservatives, and have the greatest strength
and virtue to restore and preserve the life of man, before all other Simples,
as we shall teach in all our Remedies assigned thereunto: Certainly if they had
not life, how could they help Diseases, and restore the decayed Members of the
Body, by putting life, and stirring up corporal vegetation in them? as in
Contractures, the Stone, Smallpox, Dropsy, Falling Sickness, Phrenzy, Gout,
and several other Diseases, which for brevities sake I omit to mention.
Therefore I say, That Metals, Stones, Roots, Herbs, and all other Fruits have
life in them, though of diverse kinds, according to their Creation and growth,
and the due observation of the time contingent thereunto. For the times have in
them singular power and virtue; which manifestly appears, and may be proved
by sundry Arguments, which we shall not here produce, since they are so
commonly known. For it is not our intent here to treat of things that are so
clearly known; but of more weighty and undiscerned secrets, which to sense seem
contrary.

Characters, Letters, and Signs, etc. have several virtues and operations;
wherewith also the nature of Metals, the condition of Heaven, and the influence
of the Planets, with their operations, and the significations and proprieties
of Characters, Signs, and Letters, and the observation of the times, do concur
and agree together. Who can object that these Signs and Seals have not their
virtue and operations, one for infirmities in the head, being prepared in his
time; another for the sight; another for gravel in the Reins and Stone, etc.
but every one is to be prepared in his own proper time, and helps such and
such infirmities, and no other; as drink is to be taken within the body, and
not otherwise? but all this is to be done by means, by the help and assistance
of the Father of all Medicines, our Lord Jesus Christ, our only Savior.

But if any one shall object, that Words and Characters have no virtue; and say
as well as others, That they are of no more power than a bare Mark, or naked
Cross or Sign; Also, that (...), has no more power in the Greek tongue, than
in the German, but only signifies the death of a Serpent, or some such thing:
Let him tell me, who believes such things, from whence it comes to pass, That
Serpents in Helvetia, or Suevia, do understand these Greek words, Osii, osija,
osii; since the Greek tongue is not so vulgar in those Countries, that venomous
worms should understand it, or in time learn it? How should they come to
understand them, or in what Universitie have they learned them, that as soon as
ever they hear these words, they will immediately stop their ears with their
tails, that they may not hear them again? For no sooner do they hear these
words, but immediately they lie still, contrary to their natures, not hurting,
or offering to bite or cast any venom at any man; and afterward if they hear
any man to approach toward them, they suddenly fly into their holes. If thou
do say that nature does effect this, it is the same which I did expect thou
should answer: but if Nature works this upon a Serpent, why does she not
the same among all other Creatures? But if you should say, That the noise of
the man's voice effects it, and that thereby the Serpents are terrified and
stupefied; or that it is done by any power in the man; why then do they not in
the same manner lie still when a man makes a far greater noise, either crying
out, or discharges a Gun, or the like?

Characters and Seals have likewise in them wonderful virtue, which is not at
all contrary to nature, nor superstitious: Also, if you say that words are of
no effect, but as the bare voice of men; I say on the contrary, if you write
the same words in Parchment, or Paper, in a selected time, and put it upon a
Serpent that is taken, in what manner you will, he will remain and lie still,
as if you had spoken the same words.

Neither is it any wonder, that Medicines can help men not taken into the body,
but only hanged about the neck as Seals: For it is common to the Bladder with
Cantharides, That it turns his Urine into Blood, that holds Cantharides
close in his hand, the Bladder holding the Urine, and containing it that it
cannot pass out of the Body, the hand being held far from the Body.

Some Creatures do retain the same virtue after they are dead, as I prove by
the Bird called the Kings Fisher, whose skin being taken off from his carcass,
and being dried, and hanged up upon a nail, will cast his feathers many years,
and new ones will grow again; and that not only for one or two years, but many
years one after another.

But if you further enquire, out of what Author or Writer I read of these
virtues, or where I learned such experience; I answer you Sophisters and
Contemners of the Gifts of God, that very Nature her self demonstrated before
your eyes, does far excel all the Authors and Writers of the world. I pray tell
me which of your Authors or Writers taught the Bear, when his sight is dimmed
by reason of the abundance and superfluity of his blood, to go to a stall of
Bees, which by their stinging him, pierce his skin, and cause an effusion of
the superfluous blood? What Physician prescribed the herb Dittany to be
medicine for the Heart? or who taught the Serpent the virtue of Briony and
Dragonwort? who taught the Dog to take Grass for his Cordial and Purge? And who
prescribed the salt Seawater to the Stork for a Clyster? Did you teach this
knowledge to them? or do not they teach you? The same might I speak of infinite
other Animals, that know naturally the Cure of their own Diseases. What! Have
the Bruit-beasts taught the Medicinal Art? If you say, It Is a Natural instinct,
and that Nature teaches them, so say I too. If Nature has infused so much
reason into Bruit-beasts, how much more should men learn thereby, who are made
according to the Image of God, the Creator of all things; and are endued with
reason from God, to consider and contemplate such things?

Also to say that things outwardly applied, and not substantially entering into
the body, cannot Cure any Diseases, is false: For the Sun, which gives us
light, warmth, splendour, and infuseth life into all things, penetrateth into
the most occult and close Mansions of the Earth; and does vivifie and quicken
all things that lie under the earth, even to the center thereof.

For who can deny that in Springtime, especially, the Sun penetrateth into the
most secret places of the earth, giving heat and warmth thereunto, when it
shines only upon the upper part thereof? From whence the roots of all things
therein receive juice, strength, and life? and why therefore may not the
splendour of Nature, and the influences of the Heavens, Stars, Planets, and
other means which we use to extract out of Metals, Herbs, Stones, and such like
things, give their virtue into the bodies of men, and penetrate into the inner
and private members thereof? as into the Nervs, Veins, and other internal
Defects lurking in the flesh and blood of men, and have been there a long time
growing. Diseases, Infirmities, and Accidents, are diverse; so likewise are the
several Cures thereof to be opposed to them according to their qualities, in
their peculiar days and times: Against which also, Metals do best of all help;
being prepared and used in due time and means: As if I should undertake to Cure
the Leprosy with Gold; what should hinder but that an Oil made thereof may
Cure it by Unction? Also, if I should anoint the Small Pox with Oil of Mercury,
do you think I am able to Cure them with this Mercury? without doubt;
especially if I observe a fitting time for this purpose, without which last
means, all anointings are in vain, although the sick were bathed in Oil of
Mercury: But in such Diseases where the Mercurial medicines are not sufficient,
we ought then to use other remedies: which unless I should do, having a due
respect to the observation of time, not only the Unctions, and all labor
besides, will be vain and fruitless, but they will bring the Patient into a
worse condition: for it is most certain, that Diseases come to men for the most
part from the power and influences of the Stars upon the bodies of men, yet not
so suddenly that the same can presently be perceived, like a stripe, or the
Falling Sickness. But they do increase in process of time by little and little
as it were a distillation, as oil causes water to wax fat by drops falling
into it. A man may also perceive his own defects, by the shrinking or decaying
of his Members, loss of Appetite to meat and drink, pain, etc. according to the
condition and property of every Disease, the operations of the Stars, and the
accidents by the Air, prepared and attracted upon us.

PARACELSUS Of the Mysteries of the Signs of the Zodiac: Being the Magnetical
and Sympathetical Cure of Diseases, as they are appropriated under the Twelve
Signs ruling the parts of the Body.
CHAP. I. Of the Common Griefs of the Head.
THe Common Diseases and Pains of the Head are various: Some proceed from our
own proper petulancy, through the excess of meat and drink; others come from
evil vapors ascending from the Stomach to the Head, and they proceed from
several Causes, which in this place we intend not to treat of; but only of the
more grievous Diseases of the Head, which follow.

CHAP. II. Of the Falling-Evil.
THe first thing to be taken notice of in this Disease, is the signs of the
Falling; whether they happen at certain equal times, months, days, and hours,
and how often; or whether they be unequal, happening at diverse times; and
whether a little before they fall, the Patients do use to shake and stagger a
little, or whether they fall to the ground suddenly, and unawares: which being
perceived, if they fall at certain times and hours, then the Disease does not
take them so suddenly; neither do they presently fall. But if it come at
unequal times and hours, the contrary will be seen to happen; to wit, the
falling comes upon them unawares. The first kind, to wit, when there is a
little shaking and staggering before the fall, is mortal: But if they perceive
the fall before it come, the Disease is accounted not to be so dangerous, but
more Curable; which proceeds not from Nature, as the first; nor is not common
therewith, wherefore it less weakeneth: The first brings Frenzy, and Madness;
but the other is a falling Disease. The Cure of these, is thus;

First, Consider in what day, and what hour he Fell the last time, and write
it: then see what Planet rules that hour; also the sign and degree of the
Patient are to be known.

Then the years of the Patient are to be numbered, and his Sex, which also keep
noted in writing; then give this Medicine every day in the morning to drink;
which follows,

of the Spirit of Vitriol, Quintessence of Antimony, each 5 drops. Quintessence
of Pearl, 4 drops.

Give all these in the morning to the Patient to drink in a little draught of
Rose Water, and let him fast four hours afterward: Let him use this proceeding
by the space of 29 days; and in the mean time, prepare the Lamen following,
made after this manner,

of pure Gold, ss. and when the Moon comes to the 12 degree of Cancer, then
lignifie the Gold in an Earthen-pot, and then let it be poured out into pure
clean water. Afterward mark when there comes a Conjunction of two Planets in
the Heavens, and at that time precisely melt again this Gold, and in the point
of the Conjunction, pour in ss. of the most perfect and fine, that there may
be an equal mixture of the and. When this matter is poured out, and cold, make
it into a Plate, that it may be four fingers breadth on both sides; then cut it
into the form of a triangle, as appears in this figure. lamen etching for
falling sickness Heat this Lamen very hot in the fire, and then let it rest
until you find the Moon in the same sign and degree that she was in at the
time of the coming of the last fit before; and in the same hour, carve and
ingrave these Signs and Characters, beginning with the Letters as they are set
uppermost, in the Lamen of Gold and Silver. And you must make haste, that the
Figures and Marks be all made and finished in the same hour, or else all your
labor is in vain. The sign of the Planet of the hour in which the Fit of the
Disease fell, is first to be engraven in the middle of the Lamen, as you may
see it is in this foregoing Figure, which was made for James Seitz, Bishop of
Salisburgh, now living; who fell in the hour of: Make the rest of the Signs as
you see in the Figure, only this excepted, that for a Woman, instead thereof
you shall put this Character: symbol for lamen for a woman with the falling
sickness and under the other the Age of the Patient, as in the Figure you shall
see 34, so many years old was the said James Seitz. Therefore the number of
years is to be written to every Disease according to the Age of the Patient

The Figure being now prepared according to the directions; after a Fit comes,
command that his Hair be shaven off from the Crown of his Head, according to
the Latitude of the Lamen: Then presently where he fell and lies, with art and
industry pour some of the Secret before prescribed into his mouth, and so hold
him that it may descend into his Stomach; then forthwith apply the Lamen to the
place shaven, so that the Sculpture may touch the naked flesh, and let it be
bound on that it fall not off; which being done, let the Patient be carried to
some place where he may quietly sleep. And after that Fall, without doubt he
will never Fall more, although he has had the Disease 30 years: But let him
always wear the Lamen about his neck, and shave his Hair at every Months end,
in the same place where they were first shaven.

CHAP. III. Some other Figures to Preserve the Sight.
MAke thee a round Lamen of the best Lead in the hour of, the being in the
Sign, and in the same hour; to wit, in the hour of, engrave the Signs and
Letters which you see written in the following Figure: Afterward in the hour
of make a Copper Lamen of the same Quantity and Form as the Leaden one; when is
in the sign, the Characters which you see in the Figure, are to be engraven.
And then both Figures are to be kept and preserved so long until comes into
Conjunction with: and then in the point of the Conjunction both the Figures are
to be conjoined together so, that the Characters and Signs may mutually touch
one another; then close them fast with Wax, that they receive no moisture, and
sew them up in a piece of Silk, and hang it about the Neck of the Patient on
the day and hour of. This is the best Remedy to recover the Sight of the Eyes,
and to preserve the Eyes from Pain and Diseases. It preserves the Sight in old
Age, as perfect as it was in youth.

To Preserve the Sight.
lamen etchings

CHAP. IV. Against Dryness in the Brain, and other Diseases in the Head.
TAKE of the following Metals, well refined:

Of Gold, ss. Of Silver, ii. Of Copper, i. Of Tynne, iii.

Let them be all melted together in the point of the new Moon; then pour them
out, and of that Mass make a piece of Plate of what Latitude you will: After
that these Metals have been melted together, they must not be put into the fire
any more. When the Planet is in his own House, to wit, in, let these Characters
and Signs be engraven in the inner-side of the Money, and in the backside of
the Money let those words be written which you see in the following Figure, in
the superior part of the Circumference of the Money: then let there be made a
Ring of pure Gold, and affixed thereunto when the Moon is declining, for it to
be hanged by: it matters not in what day the Ring be made, so that it be done
in the hour of. This Money being thus prepared, let it be hanged about the Neck
of the Patient in the point of the new Moon. It is of wonderful operation
against all Diseases of the Head, and Brain.

For Diseases of the Brain.
lamen etchings

CHAP. V. Against the Palsy, a most excellent Secret.
FOr the Consolation of those that are afflicted with the Fits of the Palsy,
to write a Remedy thereof, that not without cause, it may be called my
Archidox, seeing it excels all other Cures: Although some Ancients have
thought (but falsely) that this Disease is incurable. Therefore if any one be
in any manner taken with this Disease, let him thus do,

of pure Gold, ii. of Lead, ii.

Both these Metals ought to be most purely refined. And first, when the Sun
sets, going under the Earth, in the same hour (which you shall calculate
according to the time of the year) melt the Gold in a new Earthen melting-pot,
made and prepared for this purpose. Which being done, immediately after the Sun
is set, cast the Lead into the Gold, and forthwith pour them out together, for
the Lead will be dissolved by the Gold in a moment: Keep this Mass. Afterward
when is in the 12 degree of the sign, melt again this matter of and, and it
will appear like Bell-metal; to which add 3 drams of: but let it not be long
in melting, but pour it out, and keep it. Then when comes into the 12 degree
of, melt this matter again, and cast into it one dram of, and presently pour it
out; but cast it into a broad form, because it admits not of any impression
neither of the Hammer or Scissers. Then keep it till enters into the sign,
which Against the Palsy.
lamen etchings commonly happens every year on the 10 day of March: Then
engrave the Characters with the Signs and Words on both sides as you see them
drawn in this Figure, and begin to engrave them in the hour of, and finish them
before the end of that hour. It needs not be observed what day the same be
done, only this, that be in, as is abovesaid. The Money being thus prepared, is
to be kept; And when the Palsy takes any one, let the time, day, and hour be
diligently enquired of the beginning of the Disease; and the same hour of that
day, let the Sign be hanged about his Neck. This is a great Mystery: but in
the mean time let the Aurum Potabile of our description be administered to the
Patient.

CHAP. VI. Against the Stone and Sand in the Reins.
THe Money against the Stone, consists of 4 Metals: to wit, of Gold, Silver,
Tynne, and Lead: As follows.

of Gold, iii. of Silver, iii. of Tynne, i. of Lead, i. ss.

Let all these Metals be melted together in a new Melting-pot for Gold, on
Saturday at 10 of the Clock before noon, increasing; which being melted, cast
in Saltpeter mixed with Tartar, for this cause only, to make them the more
tractable, and easy to be molten and wrought upon. Afterward, let them be
poured out and cast into the form of a Lamen, and let it be cut, and polished,
and filed in the hour of and day of; but as yet, let nothing be engraven
thereon. Also, the Ring is not to be forged, that it come not into the fire any
more after the melting, but is to be formed with a File: wherefore the Lamen is
to be poured out, and cast the larger and broader, that the Ring and Lamen may
be both one piece. And if it can be, let the Lamen be so poured out after the
melting, that by the mixture of diverse Metals, especially of the Lead and
Tynne, the brittle matter may evade; and the substance remain hard, that it may
not be wrought with the Hammer, nor cut with Scissers. This being done, then
look for the Moon; and in the point of the New Moon, then begin the Sculpture:
and make haste, that one side of the Lamen may be finished in that hour, which
is marked with the Letter A. Afterward, let this Money be safely kept until
some day of, when is in Aspect with some good Planet, as,, or; then let the
Words and Characters be engraven on the other-side, marked with B, in the hour
of, as you see them in the following Figure. Then let the Lamen be hanged about
the Neck of the Patient that has the Stone, when the Moon is decreased, on the
day and hour of. The Ring ought to be made of Iron, to which the Lamen is
hanged. Let the Patient also drink Wine every morning, wherein the said Seal
has been steeped all night, and afterward hang it about his Neck again. This
does wonderfully expel the Stone, and Sand or Gravel out of the Reins; for
which thing also Spirit of Roman Vitriol is good to drink.

For the Stone in the Reins.
lamen etchings

CHAP. VII. Of the Members of Generation.
THe loss of Strength and Virtue in the Members of Generation, is a certain
Sympathy proceeding from gross Fatness, which as a certain Spasma impedites the
power of the Members of that place. This happens by diverse accidents; some
whereof are natural, others are against nature, by Witchcraft. For the Remedy
of the natural Passion, we use this remedy: Let these Words, with the
Characters adjoined, be written in new Parchment, which afterward is to be
bound about the nut of the yard.

AVGALIRIOR (...)
lamen etchings for the loss of strength in the members of generation

This Writing in Parchment ought to be renewed every day by the space of 9
days, before Sunrising every morning, by binding it, or rolling it with the
Writing backwards about the Prepure, and there let it remain night and day; and
as often as you renew the Parchment, or change it, let the old-one, which you
take off, be burnt to ashes, and let the Patient drink it in a draught of warm
wine. This is a most excellent Remedy, to be had with the least cost. But if
any one desires to be preserved from these evils, let him wear about his Neck a
Lamen of Silver, with the same Words and Signs engraven thereupon: Or if one
make a Lamen of Gold, and engrave the same Words and Characters thereupon, it
will be far better. But when it happens that this Disease is brought upon any
one by Witchcraft, or some Diabolical Art, wrought by the malice of wicked
people; let the Patient take a piece of a Horse-shooe found in the highway, of
which let there be made a Trident-Fork on the day of, and hour of, as you see
in this Figure following.

lamen etchings

The Fork aforesaid being made, let those Words with their Caracters be
engraven upon the Three teeth, as you see in the Figure. And upon the Handle
thereof, those Words and Signs which you see in the Figure, on Sunday before
Sunrising: which being done, let the Fork be fastened in the ground under a
running Stream of Water, so deep, that the handle may not be seen, and that it
cannot be found: by this means, thou shall be delivered in 9 days; and the
person that has wrought this mischief upon thee, shall get something himself in
that place, from which he shall not so easily be delivered: So we ought to
resist Diabolical Arts by Nature, as Christ by the holy Scripture proposed to
the Devil in the Wilderness.

CHAP. VIII. That a Horse shall live Sound a long time.
SOme will think that I write Witchcraft, or some such like things; which are
far absent from me. For this I certainly affirm, That I write nothing here,
which is supernatural, and which is not wrought and effected by the power of
nature and Celestial influences; and whereof, for the most part, we are not
altogether ignorant. As this: Let a Sadler make a Bridle for a Horse of a Lions
Skin, and upon the Reyns thereof let these Words and Characters following be
written in their certain time. And you shall perceive this Horse to live not
like a Horse, but like a Man; and longer, and his strength not to be abated: So
that you do not use him extraordinarily, contrary to his wonted custom. Also,
according as you apply those Bridly-reins to him, he will live thirty or forty
years, more or less, contrary to the common term of a Horses life. The Bridle
is thus to be prepared, that it serve him for a Halter, without a Bit. The
Leather-Dresser ought to prepare this Skin in the hour of, that is, then to put
it into his Pit; which being so prepared, let the Sadler cut the Thongs of it
in the hour of, and afterward make it into a B^idle when you will. To this
Bridle is to be affixed the Lamens following in the hour of upon the Thong of
the Head, made of Tynne.

S. U. R. Q. L. R. E.
lamen etchings

Upon the Thong, going down from the Forehead to the Nose, let there be
affixed these which follow, made of Copper in the hour of.

ph l y. chapter to. SELE.
lamen etchings

The following Lamens ought to be made of Silver, in th hour of; And affixed to
the Bridle in the hour of.

A.K.R.X.X.X.X.X.
lamen etchings

These which are last, ought to be made of Gold, and affixed to the Bridle in
the hour of 3.9.

And apply this Bridle to the Horse in the hour of, then you shall see with
what power Nature works in Words and Characters, where time is duly observed.

CHAP. IX. An admirable Ointment for Wounds.
SImpathy, or Compassion, has a very great power to operate in humane things:
As if you take Moss that grows upon a Scull, or Bone of a dead body that has
lain in the Air, to wit,

Take of that Moss, ii. of Man's Grease, ii. of Mummy, and Man's Blood, each
ss. Lanseed Oil, ii. Oil of Roses, and Bole-Armoniack, each i.

Let them be all beat together in a Mortar so long, until they come to a most
pure and subtle Ointment; then keep it in a Box. And when any wound happens,
dip a stick of wood in the blood, that it may be bloody; which being dried,
thrust it quite into the aforesaid Ointment, and leave it therein; afterward
bind up the wound with a new Linen Rowler, every morning washing it with the
Patients own Urine; and it shall be healed, be it never so great, without any
Plaster, or Pain. After this manner, you may Cure any one that is wounded,
though he be ten miles distant from you, if you have but his blood.

It helps also other griefs, as the pain in the Teeth and other hurts, if you
have a stick wet in the Blood, and thrust into the Ointment, and there left.
Also, if a Horses foot be pricked with a nail by a Farrier or Smith, touch a
stick with the blood, and thrust it into the Box of Ointment, and leave it
there, it will Cure him. These are the wonderful Gifts of God, given for the
use and health of man.

CHAP. X. The Weapon-Oyntment.
THere may also an Ointment be made, wherewith if the Weapons be anointed
(wherewith a wound is inflicted) the said wounds shall be cured without pain.
This is made as the other, except only i. of Honey, and i. of Ox-fat is to be
added to this. But because the Weapons cannot always be had, the Wood
aforesaid is better.

CHAP. XI. Against the Gout.
TAke of Mummy, Mastick, Red Myrrh, Olibanum, Ammoniacum, Oppopanax, Bdelium,
each ii. Vitriol, lb ii. Honey, lb ii. Tartar, i. ss. Aquavitae, gal. iii.

Let them be all Distilled together into an Oil. Then take little Flies, such
as are bred in the dead Carcasses of Horses, and make an Oil of them, being
well bruised. With which Oil of the Horse-flies, mix ii. with iv. of the other
Oil: These two Oils being well mixed together, let them be Distilled again, and
let this Distilled Oil be preserved.

Then prepare the Characters, in manner following.

of pure Gold, pure Silver, filings of Iron, each i. of Lead, ii.

Let them be all melted together in the hour of the New Moon, by a very strong
fire, that the filings of the Iron may be melted. For they will hardly melt,
wherefore some Boras is to be added to them. Then let all the melted matter be
poured out together upon a broad smooth stone, that it may make a thin Lamen:
for it cannot be wrought with the Hammer afterward, because of the Iron:
afterward, when is in Conjunction with, in the same hour let the Characters,
Words, and Signs of the Lamen be engraven thereupon, like two stamps of a
piece of Money; and let them be finished in that hour.

For the Gout.
lamen etchings

Let both the said pieces of Money be engraven only on one side, in the hour of
the said conjunction of and; and let them be so kept, that they touch not one
another.

Afterward let there be made a Sigil of pure Gold, not so thick as the other
Lamen: when is in Conjunction with or, let the Characters, Signs, and Words be
engraven thereon. But note, that the Seals are to be conjoined together when
there is a Conjunction of and: The second face of the Golden Seal, marked with
the number 2, is to be turned against the engraven face of the superior Seal
which has not the Image of a man, and is marked with the number 4. But if be
in Conjunction with, then the second face of the Seal marked with the number 2,
is to be turned upon the face of the upper Seal, which has engraven upon it
the image of a man, and is marked with the number 5. And when comes to the 6
degree of in the same order as is before shown, let the pieces of Money be both
joined together, the Gold being placed in the middle. Let them be all bored
with one hole through the middle, and fastened together with an Iron-wyer, and
let the Patient hang them about his neck. And let his Members be anointed with
the Oil before prescribed: hereby you shall try the powerful operations of
Nature, even in such as are 60 years old.

The Picture of Golden Money for the Gout.
lamen etchings

A Sympathetical Ointment against the Gout.
Let the Blood of the Patient afflicted with the Gout, be reserved: And that
you may know how to use it, Distill a Water from it in Balneo Maria.

Take hereof, vii. to which add, of Oil of Roses, Venice Soap, each ss. of
Man's Grease, Bears Grease, juice of Sengreen, each i. Marrow of an Ox, ss.

Let them be all gently boiled in a vessel of Brass, till they come to the
thickness of an Ointment; continually stirring it, lest it burn: Afterward
upon the eighth day of the Moon's increasing, let the Soles of the Feet of the
Patient be pricked with an instrument, as it uses to be done in Applications
for the Wind: and the place grieved being in this manner opened, let them be
anointed with this Ointment very hot, that it may penetrate. And by so doing 9
weeks, he shall be Cured clear of the Gout.

This Ointment will last 10 years in its full force and virtue, being kept in a
cold place.

CHAP. XII. Against Contractures.
Oil of Sulphur against Contractures and shrinking of Sinews, is not to be
contemned, but rather to be esteemed as a principal Remedy against such
infirmities. This Oil is made as follows: Take of the best Sulphur, lb xv.
Sublime it in a Cucurbite of Earth through a Glass Limbeck. Put the sublimed
matter in a cool Cellar to disolve, and in success of time, it will be resolved
into an Oil. Then make the following Composition.

of Oil of Sulphur, ii. Black Soap, iii. Aquavita, v. Oil Olive, Oil of Roses,
each, 1.

Let all these be boiled, as the other, unto an Ointment for the Gout; always
having a care that the flame take it not: Let the Members be very well anointed
with this Unguent for 30 days; causing the Patient to sweat in a dry Bath. It
excellently helps contracted Members.

A Seal for Contractures.
Take what quantity you please of Gold thrice purified by Antimony; or if you
will, the weight of a Ducat. Add to it a little Boras, and melt it when is in
the 19 or 20 degree of; and cast into it, a soon as it is molten, 30 grains of
the filings of under the same hour. Which being melted and mixed together, pour
them out together, and let them so remain until is in the same degree of: Then
melt it again, and cast in 30 grains of the filings of Iron, and pour it out
again as at first. Then keep it till is in: and then form and fashion it fit
for the Sculpture; which ought to be done in the hour of. You need not any
further calculate according to the Course of, till the Seal comes to be
applied, having only respect to the hour beforehand, let the Signs which you
see here drawn in the Figure, be engraven on both sides of the Money: This
Money must be fewed up in a fine Cloth; and is to be hanged about the Neck by
the Cloth only, and not by its own body, in the day and hour of, increasing.

For Contractures.
lamen etchings

CHAP. XIII. For Women's Terms.
AN inordinate Flux of this Disease, does extremely grieve many Women,
sometimes diverse years: by so much the more healthy and strong such women are,
by how much they have their Courses in their ordinary seasons, and are then
delivered from them. From whence arises a twofold way of reducing them into due
order. The first is, to stay the Flux, and reduce it into a due course: the
latter is to be used in the defects thereof, to provoke them to an ordinary
Flux: the defect of them brings death; wherefore to provoke them, let there
be formed of pure Copper, without mixture of any other metal, a Seal in the
hour of, as is in the following Figure: But if the same cannot be perfectly
finished in that hour, let it then remain unperfect until the same hour of
comes again, and then perfect it: The form whereof must be this.

For the Menstruae.
lamen etchings

This Sigil ought to be formed with a File into one piece, and is to be bound
with a string upon the Back of the woman through two Rings, applying it at the
beginning of the Backbone upon the Testes, laying the Sculpture upon the
flesh, and that in the hour of.

But if Nature suffer through too much abundant Fluxes, let the Characters be
engraven in pure Silver in the hour of, on both sides of the Money, as they are
drawn in the following Figure. Then let them be wrapped and sewed up in silk,
(for it must not be applied to the naked flesh) and let it be bound upon the
Navel of the Woman, turning that face next her body which is marked with the
number 10. And afterward when the Flux begins to stay, let her wear it 30
days, and then take it off: for if she wear it any longer, there is danger
lest they be quite driven away and stopped; and so cause a greater hurt than
the first.

For the Menstruae.
lamen etchings

CHAP. XIV. For the Leprosy.
THis Disease comes to the Lepers from their Nativity, and not only by
accidents. Wherefore we have many other Remedies for them, conducing much unto
the Cure thereof. It is certain that Aurum Potabile drunk, does palliate and
hide the Leprosy, but not quite take it out of the blood. The cause whereof
is, because every clean and sound man has Balsom, but the Leprous persons have
none in them; by reason whereof also it comes to pass, that they have no health
in them: also, a congealed Member wants Balsom; and therefore it is
insensible when the strength of the Gold comes into the Stomach, which
afterward distributeth it into the several Members of the Body; from thence
resulteth For the Leprosy.
lamen etchings a certain humidity which ingendereth the Balsom; wherefore the
Leprosy cease to increase, so long as there is any virtue or strength of the
Gold in the Stomach. Also, a Physician cannot know or discern the Disease of
Leprosy, if the Leprous person has drunk Gold three days before his
visitation. We intend not to speak in this place of such as are manifestly
infected, but only of such whose Disease is doubtful.

If any do use the Sigil above written, and such like Remedies, let them not
doubt of help. Let this kind of Sigil be made of pure Gold, and wrought into a
Lamen in the hour of; but the Characters ought to be engraven in the hour of,
when is in, and in the same sign; which usually happens in July. Let it be
hanged about the Leper in the hour of, the Moon increasing: Let the Patient
also drink Wine, wherein the same Sigil has been some time steeped.

It ought to be renewed every year in July, for this Sigil loses its force in
a year.

The Leprosy working so strongly in the body of man, wherein it fixes root.

CHAP. XV. For the Vertigo.
MAny who do labor with this disease, the Heaven and Earth seems to them to
turn like a wheel, and all things to run round. To others there seems a kind
of a Circle to fly before their eyes. This is a kind of the Falling-Evil or
Palsy more or less. For there is such a Convulsion of the Brain, that the
Spirits of the Sight and the Brain, are impedited by a certain gross thick
vapor ascending from the Stomach to the head, through the optic Nerves.
Against this Disease make the Sigil which follows.

In the hout of Mars, and day of Jupiter, the Moon in Aries, which is the best
Aspect of Mars; but see that she has no evil Aspect from any other Planet.

Take of ss. of ii. of v.

Let these 3 Metals be purely refined and melted together into one. Let them be
poured out and wrought into a very thin Lamen, and formed with a little Ear;
afterward when the Moon is in the 12 degree of Taurus, engrave the Signs
which follow, and apply it to the Patient in the hour of the New Moon, on the
very point that it first begins.

Use this Remedy with the Seal:

of Organum, grains 4. Of Unicorns-horn, grains 2. Musk, grain 1. Spirit of
Vitriol, grains 6.

Let them be administered every morning in a spoon, about 3 a Clock after
midnight, continuing it 13 days; and after every time taking it, rest one
hour.

For the Vertigo.
lamen etchings

CHAP. XVI. For the Cramp.
MAke a mixture of Sol, Luna, Venus, and Mars; and let it be wrought into a
Lamen, and thereof make a Sigil when the Sun is under the Earth, in the hour of
Saturn. And then in the hour of Jupiter engrave these Characters and Signs
with the words in the hour of the Sun; and apply it in the hour of the Sun when
he is under the earth.

You may also make a Ring of the said Metals, on which engrave the same Signs,
and wear the Ring on the finger of the Heart; but this ought to be done in the
time, day, and hour before prescribed.

CHAP. XVII. For the trembling of the Heart.
THe Hearts of men do sometimes suffer trembling, especially of Nobles and great
men; for seldom does this Disease take poor and mean men or women. From whence
may be seen how God Almighty has so artificially distributed passions to every
state and Condition for their correction and admonition, without respect of
persons. It is not to be numbered amongst easy Diseases: for where it begins
to rule, it casts the Patient upon the earth, and bereaveth him of strength and
sense, and sometimes of life. It rises from the Membranes and receptacles
wherein the Heart is involved, it being compressed with corrupt and ill Phlegm.
Against this, make a Sigil as follows, observing the due times.

First, in the day and hour of, take of ss. which put and keep in a melting-pot
until the hour of the Sun, which is the 4 hour following in the order of
unequal hours; then melt it with the fire, and the being melted, cast in two
ounces of purely refined, as the ought to be: these two Metals being well
melted and mixed together, leave them to cool in the Melting-pot by themselves,
and keep them till the hour of Venus next following: then melt them again, and
cast in two drams of pure, and pour it out; then work it into a Lamen with a
Hammer, and prepare it ready for the engraving of the Signs: then mark when
the Moon and Venus behold one another with a good Aspect; then engrave upon the
Money these two Signs which you see here.

lamen etchings for the trembling of the heart

Afterward in the point of the New Moon engrave these three Characters
following under the other two.

lamen etchings for the trembling of the heart

Let it rest from that New Moon until the next Full Moon, and in the point of
that Full Moon in the same face of the Money over all the Signs let these
following words be written.

For the trembling of the Heart.
lamen etchings

This being done, mark when the Sun enters Leo; and in the same hour of his
ingression, inscribe the Characters and Words you see in the other figure, on
the other-side of the Money; and let them all be begun and ended the same hour.

This Sigil being thus prepared and finished, is to be hanged about the
Patients Neck in the hour and point of the Full Moon, that it may touch his
naked flesh upon his Heart.

Against this trembling of the Heart, there is also a most excellent secret;
our Aurum Potabile, and Quintessence of Pearl, of our description, also oil of
Coral prepared as follows.

The manner of Preparing Oil of Coral against the trembling of the Heart.
of Coral, lb i. Of Common Salt, manip. 3.

Let them be wrought into a most fine powder, and put it into a Glass strongly
Luted according to the sequent description: Take common Clay, or Potters white
Clay, ashes made of the bones of the heads of four-footed Beasts, filings of
Iron, Glass in powder, common Salt, Ceruse, etc. which being wet, mingle them
together, etc. put the luted Glass with the matter into Ashes contained in an
Iron Kettle, according to art; kindle first a gentle fire, and increase it by
degrees until the Spirit and Fumes do pass into a Vessel below; then increase
the fire more vehemently, until there remains no more moisture. This Oil is a
most excellent Remedy for the trembling of the Heart, taken alone by it self,
without any thing else added to it.

An Appendix concerning Ruptures of the Bones.
In what manner soever Bones are broken, they are excellently well knit and
consolidated, with the following Unguent, and are all orderly joined.

Of Honey ii. Of Antimony, and Oil of Vitriol ii. Of Badgers Grease, Deers
Sewet, Bears Grease, and Soap, each i. Turpentine i. ss. Wax ii.

Let them be boiled into an Ointment, and therewith let the Ruptures be
anointed with a hot hand against the fire; it wonderfully Cures, Heals, and
Consolidates, above all other.

The end of the first Treatise.
The Second TREATISE OF Celestial Medicines, Containing, The Mysteries of the
Signs Of the ZODIAC.
THe Heaven is compassed about with a large Circle in a Circuit which we call
the Zodiac, and is divided into Twelve equal parts: these are named with the
Names, and Designated with the Characters which follow: Aries. Taurus. Gemini.
Cancer. Leo. Virgo. Libra. Scorpio. Sagittary. Capricorn. Aquary. Pisces.


The Seal of is made of the following Metals.
ss. ii. i. ss.

These Metals, in the day, hour, and very point wherein the Sun enters the
first degree of Aries, (which for the most part happens the tenth day of March,
or thereabouts) are all to be melted together with a very strong violent fire;
but first the Iron is to be reduced into filings, or else it will not be
melted. They being all melted and prepared, on the day of, being in the 9 or 10
degree of Aries, or thereabouts, which is once every month: in the same hour it
ought to be finished; but is to be applied when Mars is in the Ninth House of
Heaven, or the Eight.

Aries.
seal

This Seal is a most certain Experiment to Cure all Fluxes and Catharres
descending from the Head upon the Brain, etc. For it purges the Brain, and
dries up all Phlegm of the Head, and all Diseases which appertain to the Head;
it amendeth all Maladies thereof, being worn night and day, the Sign of Aries
being turned next the Brain.

The Seal of Taurus is made of the Metals following.
Of i. Of i. Of ss. Of ii.

They are all to be mixed together by melting them, the Sun being in Taurus,
which every year happens about the eighth day of April. And in the very point
of the Suns ingress into this sign, this Seal must be begun, and forthwith
finished, or else the whole work will be frustrate. And when the Moon is in the
10 degree of Taurus, it is to be applied.

For the expedition of this work, there may be engraven some stamps of Iron
first, wherewith the Seal may be coined after it is melted, whereby all the
Signs and Words are quickly imprinted. So all the other Seals may be done: for
oftentimes the hour slips away before they can be finished, and then happens
the greatest detriment to this work. Wherefore the time is chiefly to be noted,
as having the greatest power in these operations.

Taurus.
seal

The Nature and Property of this Sigil, gives a most excellent Remedy to them
who have lost their Generative Virtue: if it be so hanged that it may touch the
Navel, the Sign Taurus being turned next the flesh and the body, it gives the
best help to men or women.

The Seal of Gemini.
of Gold and Silver, of each i.

Let them be both melted together the Sun entering the Sign Gemini; which
happens about the 10 or 11 day of May, according to the course of the year.
Wherefore the year wherein the Sigil is to be made, you must first calculate:
There are two Lamens to be made out of the mixture of the aforesaid Metals,
whereupon the Signs are to be engraven as they are posited in the following
Figures, when the Moon is in the sign of Leo or Pisces: but the Seal being
perfected, is to be applied at such time when is in the first House of Heaven;
the air gentle, mild, and serene. That face of the Money that has the sign,
is to be turned toward, and worn upon the naked skin: both the said Lamens are
to be connexed together with a Circle made of the same matter, almost a fingers
breadth to be asunder in the middle, that they may not touch one another, with
these faces, or sides, that are without signs: for there must be so great
distance between them, that there may be a Pipe interposed, that may receive a
Goose-quill full of Quicksilver, and afterward to be stopped with Mastick: it
must also contain a Pipe of Metal, which must hold the Quill: when the work is
completed, let the Quicksilver be poured into the Quill, the day and hour of
Mercury, the Moon decreasing.

The rest was desired in a German example, even the strength and virtue of this
kind of Sigil, for which it is made: but that we may not here traduce you,
until perhaps hereafter by some examples it may be made known; we will not
feign any thing of our selves, which might agree therewith. In the mean time,
if any have so great a desire to know the power and virtue thereof, that they
cannot stay in expectation of it, seek to the most approved Authors in
Astronomy, what are the Virtues of Gemini, in producing Diseases and other
things: And then at last, according to the process of the preceding and
following Signs, maturely judge.

Gemini.
seal

Cancer.
The Sigil of this Sign is made of most pure Silver, in that hour when Sol
enters the sign Cancer, (which uses to be about the 10 or 11 day of June) but
when the Moon is in a good Aspect, and not afflicted by any evil Planet, these
Figures must be engraven in the hour of the Moon when she is increasing: in the
same hour they must be begun, and finished; or else the whole labor is in vain.

Cancer.
seal

This Seal must be applied in the day and hour of the Moon, she decreasing; and
is to be kept and worn very Clean. The Virtue thereof causes happy Journeys:
it is very profitable to be worn against the Dropsy, and all Defects of the
Body proceeding from moisture, or superfluous Phlegm.

Leo.
This Sigil of Leo is to be made with great diligence in July only, when the
Sun is in his own House, to wit, Leo, about the 13 or 14 day of the same Month.
It is to be made of pure Gold, melted and wrought into a Lamen, when the Sun
enters the first degree of the Sign, and perfected before the end of the hour.
Afterward when Jupiter is in Pisces, the Signs are to be engraven on one side
thereof, as they are in the first Figure: And the other side is to be engraven
when the Moon is in the House of Jupiter, that is, in Pisces. And note, that
after the melting of the Seal, it must not be put again into the fire, else all
things are in vain.

Leo.
seal

Let it be applied in the day and hour of the Sun. It has a most excellent
virtue: it causes great Favors to men and women that wear it: It is a very
good Remedy against Quartain Fevers. The Liquor is also good to be drunk,
wherein it has been infused all night. It is especially approved against
Pestilence and all inward infection; and against all Diseases in the Eyes
coming from heat, and from all other evil Heats and Rheums which we call flying
Humors. It is good also against Burnings, the Seal being applied upon the
place, certainly and surely draws out the fire This way we cured the wife of
one Mr. Nicholas Barber our Countryman, dwelling at a place called Villach in
Transylvania; who had a very great Burning, which we Cured, and drew out the
burning so, that the burned place was healed without any sore, or running
Matter, only by applying such a Sigil; which she wore upon the place until the
end of the Cure.

Virgo.
seal

The Seal of Virgo is made of i. Of ss. Of ii. ss.

These Metals ought to be all melted together on Sunday about the 13 or 14 day
of the Sun 's ingress into Virgo: And after they are melted, to be reduced into
a thin Lamen: afterward in the hour of Mercury, when Mercury is well Aspected
of the other Planets; let the Names and Characters be engraven upon the Lamen,
so, that they may be finished in the same hour.

Let it be applied when Mercury is in the first House of Heaven, the air being
clear and serene, (for then it is much better) and in the hour of Mercury, for
then he rules the first House of Heaven; but if it cannot be, refer it to an
hour of like nature, although the hour of Mercury is best.

Libra.
This Sigil is to be made of pure, and to be melted, poured out and made when
the Sun enters Libra, which sometimes happens on Sunday the 13 or 14 of
September, according to the progress of the year: And this is to be noted, That
when Venus is the ruling Planet, or Reservator of the year, the Sigil will be
of much more virtue, especially if those wear it, who were born under the same
Planet; and if it be made and prepared for them. When is in the sign Libra, the
Signs, Characters, and Words which you see in the following Figure, are to be
engraven in the Seal; afterward in the day and hour of Venus, in the first or
eighth hour, which Venus governs, let it be applied.

Libra.
seal

It is an admirable Remedy against all Bewitchings of Women, which hinder the
act of generation, and especially in those whom they hate: In brief, this Sigil
is most profitable and excellent against all Maladies whatsoever; especially
all griefs of the Secret Members.

Scorpio.
The Seal of Scorpio must be made of pure Iron in the day and hour of Mars,
when the Sun enters Scorpio, which happens about the 12, 13, or 14 day of
October: And in the same hour let one side of the Lamen be engraven with his
Characters. Afterward, when the Sun is entered into Aries, let the other side
be engraven. It may be applied at any time when you will.

Scorpio.
seal

It is a most excellent Remedy against all Poison and Diseases thereby
infected. It is excellent and admirable for Soldiers, Captains, and such as
are in daily Controversies: Also, if such an Animal as follows be made of pure
Iron, when Mars is Lord of the year, and the Sun enters the first degree of
Scorpio; afterward when Mars is in his own House in Aries, let it be engraven
as follows. Then let it be applied in the hour of Mars: the House wherein it is
hanged, it defends safe from all Scorpions; and all Serpents that are alive
will fly out of it: it is a most excellent Remedy against all venomous
bitings: mightily helps Soldiers in Fights: and is very good against the
Leprosy to be worn, and the Patient to drink potable Gold.

Let it be engraven as this Figure.



Let there be assixed a Ring of pure Gold to the Tail thereof, that it may be
worn hanging about the Neck with the Head downwards. It is a certain Remedy to
drive away all Flies from the Bed where it is hanged.

Sagittary.
This Sigil is to be made in the hour of the Suns ingress into Sagittary (which
annually happens on the 12 or 13 day of November) on the first degree of the
ingression: let it be signed in the hour of Jupiter, and applied in the same
hour, the Moon increasing. This is the second Seal, that I knew after long
search and enquiry; and which, according to the Art that I profess, I have
often used to the shame and scorn of my Adversaries, that they have stood
amazed like Asses, and durst not open their mouths. There must be a silver Ring
to hang it in, and it must be made of pure Sagittary.
seal Tynne, without addition of any other Metal; and to be wore and kept very
clean: But it must be left off in the time of Copulation, or else it loses its
virtue.

We are again forced to complain of envious and perfidious men, who envying
that in others, which they have not themselves, leave nothing perfect; that it
may the second time appear in this Book, that their strength and power is taken
away, as above is done concerning the sign Gemini; By the Protestation of the
same Author, in this Chapter, when he says, That this is the second Seal which
he esteemed to be most powerful in the Medicinal Art. The envious therefore
labor in vain; for whether they will or no, he will bring into light every
thing that they have taken away out of the Books, of Theophrastus Paracelsus.
For that Author before his death did prudently enclose those Books in diverse
places in Walls; so that if after his death, they were lost in one place, they
might be preserved in another, for good men; lest that if any should come to
the envious hands of wicked men, should be perpetually lost, or torn in pieces.
Hereby they were preserved for us whole, that in due time the lives of wicked
men, loving nothing but themselves, may appear out of darkness.

Capricorn.
seal of Capricorn

Now we come to treat of Saturn and his progeny: this Seal is to be made of
Gold; for Lead has no operation with other Metals. There must be made a Ring
of Copper; and together with the Seal, are both to be made in the hour when the
Sun enters Capricorn, and is farthest distant from us; Let the Seal be engraven
on the day and hour of Saturn, and when Saturn is in a good Aspect with some
other Planet. It must be applied when the Moon is decreasing or diminished in
light: but the hour of the Aspect, whether it be of the Moon or any other
Planet, matters not. This Seal may vulgarly be called the Sigil of Favor. This
Seal thoroughly heals the Itch or Scurff in the Thighs: Our Predecessors could
not by Art find out the Cure of this Disease, accounting it uncureable; when
as this is the best way to Cure it, without any other means.

Aquary.
seal of Aquarius

When the Sun enters Aquary in the Month of January, let the Seal be made in
the same hour, of these Metals, being mixed and melted together: of Gold ss.
Lead ii. of Iron. i. And when the Planet Saturn is in the Ninth House of
Heaven, let these Signs and Words be quickly engraven one after another; you
shall not apply it till the Sun is under the Earth, and in the hour of Saturn;
and then it is good, being hanged about the Neck, against Contractures, cold
Diseases, and Sinews shrunk: it is very profitable to preserve the Memory, to
get Favors amongst men, and very good against all Poison, as may be proved by
putting any venomous Spider upon the Sigil; it forthwith flies away, and
cannot possibly remain upon it.

Pisces.
seal of Pisces

The Seal of Pisces is to be made in February, when the Sun enters Pisces, of
the following Metals.

of Gold, Iron, Copper, Silver, of each ii. Of Tynne ss.

Let them be all melted together, and the Seal formed and engraven the same
hour of the Suns ingress; afterward let it be applied when Jupiter is well
placed in the eighth house of heaven, and in the day and hour of Jupiter. This
is an admirable instrument to loose and expel Choler, of which do grow many
grievous Diseases, as Contractures, the Palsy, shrinking of the Joints,
Burnings, etc. against which it gives wonderful help to men or women: it
mitigateth the pain of the Gout, takes away the Cramp, and all Griefs
proceeding from Fluxes.

This Seal ought to hang down low upon the Navel.

Here follows some more Common Secrets of Nature, of Paracelsus.
HAving found a Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, take a piece of Iron, and frame
a Mouse of it, before the Conjunction passes over: and in the hour of Jupiter,
engrave upon the Belly of the Mouse these words: ALBOMATATOX. Afterward, when
the Moon is in the 9 or 10 degree of Cancer, on the right side engrave (...).
Afterward, the Moon descending, and is in the 9 or 10 degree of the sign
Pisces, on the left side engrave as follows: (...), and upon the Back
thereof, from the beginning of the Backbone unto the Tail, engrave this
symbol word, with the Character as you see IO NATURA SUA.

Note that from the sign of Venus unto the Center of the other Character, a
Line is to be drawn over-thwart. Then prepare a Collary for this Mouse, of pure
Lead, the Moon increasing, on the day of Saturn, and first hour of the night,
which is the hour of Saturn; and engrave thereon these Characters, IL Con. 3..
AB. (...). This being thus performed, fit the Collary in the Conjunction of
Saturn with Mars as abovesaid, and place it about the Center or middle of the
House, all kinds of Mice will fly away that are in the house: and if
afterward any Mouse come therein, he will not stay there an hour. And if any
quick Mouse be bound with a thread to this Metallic Mouse, he will not live
above an hour, but will die, and swell, as if he had eaten Poison.

Of Sheep.
That we may not only have some means to drive away and expel hurtful
Creatures, but also that we may preserve the profitable; When Sheep are
Corrupted with their Diseases, make a Sheep of Mudd as follows:

Take Mudd, or Potters Clay, from three several places, much about the place
where you live: Also, take Sand of a running Water about that place where for
the most part Sheep drink; beat them all together when the Moon decreases: and
of this Clay make the Image of a Sheep, under that hour wherein the Moon
suffers her diminution: superscribe these following Signs with the Words here
and there upon the Image.

EFERET HOGERET.. JAGEREL. (...)
symbol

(...)
symbol

(...) Sanor. Panor. Tanor.
symbol

(...)
symbol

Set this Sheep in the Sheepfold sprinkled over with Salt, and let the living
Sheep lick it: And as many as lick it, or taste of this Salt, shall not be
infected, nor die with any Murrain or Rot of Sheep: And those that are
infected, by licking thereof, shall be Cured.

The same means may be prepared for Oxen, Kine, and Hogs; and other Animals;
every one being prepared according to their natures, day, and time. Oxen and
Kine have a Disease in their Blood, which causes the Murrain in them; as
Horses sometimes suffer sudden death through a Disease in the Uvula. For the
Blood, write upon an Egg new laid, Ambrammomis
symbol

Gorelis
symbol

Vortix
symbol

(...)
symbol

(...)
symbol

Open the Mouth of the Beast, and break the Egg upon his Tongue, and force him
to swallow it, and it will forthwith heal it; but let him not drink in twelve
hours afterward.

The same is to be given to a Horse: only this excepted, that in stead of this
Word and Sign, Ambrammomis, and the Cross above, let there symbol. Kupfamilon.
be writ this Word, and Sign, Kupfamilon, and then let him swallow it:
afterward give him a measure of Oats with Salt and Vinegar, and afterwars he
shall be cured in twelve hours: but presently after he has eaten the Oats,
ride him an hour or two, that he may sweat: then let him rest. These are the
secrets of Nature, which are effected by times, days and hours; and without
the observation of these, nothing can be effected.

Against Flies.
These Creatures do much infest men's houses in Summertime, and do corrupt and
putrify meat: to drive them away, do thus; make a Coffin of steel, and upon
the Coffin engrave these Signs which you see in the Figure following.

coffin of steel

And upon the Coffin, from the separation of the said Signs and Words, let
there be engraven three lines tending toward the Cusp: one in the new Moon,
the second in the full Moon, and the third in the new Moon again. Afterward,
under the Conjunction of and the, write the words and signs following.

symbol

If you six this upon the Wall of an House, and draw a Circle round about it
with Chalk, about the compass of a round Table, all Flies that are thereabouts
will enter within the Circle, and there remain, until you take the Steel away;
and then they will fly away, vexing men as at first.

FINIS.
An Election of time to be observed in the transmutation of Metals.
IF at any time you shall desire to transmute and change any Metal into another
kind, as Gold into Silver, or rather Silver into Gold, or any other Metal; it
is necessary, that you learn to elect a fit time for that purpose out of the
Table following; whereby you shall easily, sooner, and without danger bring
your Work to your desired end.

A Table showing the fit time when to transmute Metals.
To change into. Begin when the Moon is in the sixth Degree of Always begin in
the hour of that Planet whose Metal you would change.. Twenty Degrees of. First
Degree of. In twelve Degrees of. Ninth Degree of In the Hour of. Eighteenth
Degree of The Hour of. The third Degree of Hour of

Take this one Example only, and so work by the rest: as, if you would change
Luna into Sol, begin when the Moon is in six Degrees of Cancer, in the Hour of
the Moon; and so observe of the rest, according to this Table: for the
observation of the time is not to be held of a vain account in the
transmutation of Metals; for all negotiations and actions in this world are
most happily brought to perfection, which are begun with due respect to the
Course and influences of the Celestial Bodies; for our mortal Bodies are ruled
according to the operations of the superior Bodies of the Firmament, and they
are ordained for that purpose by Almighty God the Creator; and do bring unto
us, both health, sickness, infirmities, and health again: and in like manner
the times are to be noted, and duly observed in Medicinal Operations, that
their virtues may work the more powerful effects.

FINIS.
Reader, these Books following are printed by Nath. Brook, and are to be sold
at his shop, at the Angel in Cornhil.
THat excellent piece of Physiognomy and Chiromancy, Metoposcopie, the
Symmetrical Proportions and signal Moles of the Body; the subject of Dreams: to
which is added, The Art of Memory. By Ri. Sanders. Fol.

Chiromancy: or, the Art of divining by the Lines engraven in the hand of Man
by Dame Nature; in 19 Genitures: with a learned Discourse of the Soul of the
World. By Geo. Wharton Esquire

Fons Lachrymarum: or, a Fountain of Tears, with an Elegy upon Sir Chapter Lucas.
By J. Quarls. 8.

Historical Relation of the first planting of the English in New England in the
year 1628. to the year 1653. and all the material passages happening there.
Exactly performed.

That complete piece called The exact Surveyor of Land, showing how to plot all
manner of Grounds, and to reduce and divide the same. Also, Irish Measure
reduced to English Statute-Measure: useful for all that either sell or
purchase. By J. E.

Milk for Children: or, a plain and easy Method teaching to Read and to Write,
with brief Rules for Schoolmasters to instruct their Scholars in, and Masters
to instruct their Families in. By Dr. Thomas.

Culpepers Physical and Chyrurgical Remains, of his own admired experience,
never published before now by his Wife, being his last Legacies.

Culpepers Semiotica, or his Astrological Judgment of Diseases, much enlarged
from the discumbiture of the sick, which way to find out the cause, change,
and end of the Disease. Also whether the sick be likely to live or die: with
the signs of life and death by the body of the sick party, according to the
Judgememt of Hippocrates. With a Treatise of Urines, by N. Culp.

Cornelius Agrippa his fourth Book of Occult Philosophy, or Geomancy. Magical
Elements of Peter de Abano, the Nature of Spirits: made English by R. Turner.

The Queens Closet opened. Incomparable secrets in Physic, Chyrurgery;
preserving, candying, and cooking, as they were presented to the Queen,
transcribed from the true Copies of her Majesty's own Receipt-Books. By W. M.
one of her late Servants.

The Conveyancers Light, or the Complete Clerk and Scriveners Guide, being an
exact draught of all Presidents and Assurances now in use. By diverse learned
Judges, eminent Lawyers, and great Conveyancers, both ancient and modern:
whereunto is added a Concordance from K. Rich. 3. to this present.

A Satyr against Hypocrites.

Wits Interpreter, the English Parnassus, or a sure Guide to those admirable
Accomplishments that complete our English Gentry in the most acceptable
qualifications of Discourse or Writing: Also, the whole Mystery of those
pleasing Witchcrafts of Eloquence and Love are made easy, in the Art of
Reasoning, Theater of Courtship, Labyrinth of Fancies, Love-Songs, Drollery;
The perfect Inditer of Letters, A la mode. By J.C.

FINIS.

