PARACELSVS OF The Chemical Transmutation, Genealogy and Generation
of Metals and Minerals.

Also, Of the Urim and Thummim of the Jews.

WITH An Appendix, of the Virtues and Use of an excellent Water made by Dr.
Trigge.

The second Part of the Mumial Treatise.

Whereunto is added, Philosophical and Chemical EXPERIMENTS Of that famous
Philosopher RAYMVND LVLLY; Containing, The right and due Composition of both
Elixirs.

The admirable and perfect way of making the great Stone of the Philosophers,
as it was truly taught in Paris, and sometimes practiced in England, by the
said Raymund Lully, in the time of King EDW. 3.

Translated into English by R. Turner (...).

London, Printed for Rich: Moon at the seven Stars, and Hen: Fletcher at the
three gilt Cups in Paul's Churchyard. 1657.

To the Worshipful and worthy Meeaenas WILLIAM BAKEHOUSE Of Swallowfield, In
the County of Berks, Esquire
Honored Sir,
KNowing you to be a true Son of Hermes, and a delightful Student in the Courts
of Urania, it is no small encouragement in this attempt of mine, in choosing you
to patronize this piece of Hermetical Philosophy: it is but a Translation, and,
as I doubt not but you are well acquainted with the Authors in the original; so
I presume you will actum agere, peruse them again in their new Garments;
acceptably hearing them speak English. Let me therefore request you to take
this little stranger into your tuition and patronage, and with your judicious
eye to examine and correct my Errata's; relying upon the candor of your
ingenuity and learning, that thereby I may be the better fortified, and
securely armed against the batteries of ignorance; and that your protection may
quench the fiery Beacons of the envious Critics. And thus wishing both you and
your studies a Crown of happiness in this terrene Theater, and eternal glory
everlastingly, I ^ake leave to subscribe my self

Your humble Servant, Robert Turner.
LONDON, 8 November, 1656.
To the Reader.
It Is my hard fate to be still deprived of that secessum and otia scribendi,
which in things of this nature are required, and the Nasonian Poet much
complained for, in his not much-worse then my presens status: he all^dges the
cause of his condition to crimen only, if it were so much, and not culpa; and
that but crimen ingenii neither: as it seems then and now in this Beacon firing
age, it is by some accounted, men's tamen non scelerata fuit: mine was, and
still is, Crimen indulgentiae minis, fidem adhibendi viris nulla fide, as
dear-bought experience manifests; yet to revive the everlasting fame of
Paracelsus, and that the English Tyroes may hereafter reap the benefit of his
admired and experienced labors, I have reduced another part of his works, viz.
this ensuing Treatise, into the English Tongue; and the rather, because his
sleeping ashes have been ignominiously unraked out of their silent grave, by
one whose scribbling pen was Fuller of scandals then modesty: his head seemed
Owl-like Fuller of folly then wit, and his words Fuller of falsehood then truth;
else certainly he would not have fallen so foul upon the dead whom he never
knew; and if he had, was not capable of making him an answer: but dwarf-like,
tramples on a dead Giant.

His Works, Reader, I freely offer to you, wishing your benefit herein: but
those flashing boasters, of which this age affords plenty, whose brains are
made of the Mercury (not of Philosophers, but) of Fools, being very well gifted
in the faculty of prating and nothing else; I should desire them, till they
find their intellect of a more solid capacity, to forbear the profession of
this or any liberal Science, which suffers so much dishonor by them,
especially Astrology and Physic; and move every one in his Sphere, the Cobbler
to his Last and Aul, the Weaver to his Shuttle, and the Heel-maker to his
Tools: and seek not to aspire to the Turrets of Minerva, lest their wings fail,
and they fall with Icarus, Ovid Trist. Lib. 1.

Dum petit infirmis nimium sublimia pennis
Icarus, Icariis nomina fecit Aquis.
There is also added an additional Treatise, called, Natural Urim and Thummim,
The second part of the Mumial Treatise, or Diastatical Medicines of Tentzelius,
called, A natural Account of the Tree of Life: with a piece of that famous
Philosopher and Chemist, Raymund Lully.

These being all concordant in Nature, I revived them to posterity, hoping
there may yet come a thankful age, in which Learning may see Halcyon days.

I have composed a Treatise, called, The Woman's Counselor, modestly treating
of diseases incident particularly to them; whereby they may be their own
helpers in such private infirmities, as through too much modesty they oft-times
to their own hurt conceal, which will shorty be published: and also the
Chemical Experiments of Paracelsus: with many other pieces which time will
manifest, for the benefit (I hope) of all Sons of Minerva; which is the desire
of

Robert Turner.
November 8, 1656. Natus apud Holshot.
To his ingenious Friend Mr. Robert Turner, on his Translation of Paracelsus.
DIana's Darling, born upon the hills
Of sweet Parnassus, whose rare fame distills
Chrystalline dew, to dip thy learned Pen,
The Muses glory, and the praise of men;
Who will admire at this thy rare Translation,
Wherewith thou have enriched the English Nation.
Not only Metals here thou do transform,
Which purblinde Ignorance does reject and scorn;
But the Roman Eagle by thy dextrous wit,
Is made to wear an English garb to fit
Old Albyon's Sons; who for this gift of thine,
With Laurel branches will thy brows inshrine:
The quivering Mirtle-boughs shall crown thy head,
And in all ages shall thy name be read.
Why then do prosecute the brawling Laws,
To sell thy breath for every wrangling Cause?
Why will thou be with bawling Codrus vexed,
With Typstaves Base, and sherking slaves perplexed,
With Pleas, Demurrers, Bills, and Replications,
With forms of Paupers, and poor Declarations:
For which thou never reaped due praise or pay,
But care and trouble; and art kept away
From fair Vrania's Court, in which thou art
Worthily honored by the Sons of Art:
And for this work of thine, I Will ever sing,
And praise thy Learning at the Muses Spring.
Fran. Jennings.

To his industrious Friend, M. Robert Turner, on this elaborate and profitable
Treatise, and other his painful Translations.
I Have wondered often, why Scholars those should hate,
That into English Latin do translate;
But now the Reason's plain: for every man
May learn the length of Paracelsus span,
And turn a Chemist; nay what not,
That Is comprehended in a Physick-Pot,
But may by easy industry be got?
I like the man whom Fortune has made great
In Learning, and that does with judgment treat
Of every thing: and him I also love,
The meanest talent seeks to improve.
There Is many a man whose hapless fate it is,
To know no more of Natures Mysteries,
Then Brutish-Beasts; yet God and Nature are
Not wanting to them, but their Parents care;
Who all their lives will force them stand before 'um,
And bring them up in Cavea stultorum.
But princely Nature from his boundless store,
Provides a Salve for every dangerous sore:
And thus has made our Authors happy Pen,
The (...) of good, to unlearned men.
Go on, good Friend, to other things; for we
By this thy Book are able to foresee
Great Paracelsus Learning, Hermes Skill,
Shall English speak by thy ingenious Quill.
John Gadbury, (...). Paracelsus

Paracelsus OF The TRANSMUTATION OF METALS.
CHAP. I. Of the Scale of Transmutation.
TRansmutation is an alteration or changing of the forms of natural things into
other forms, as of Metals or Wood, into Stones or Glass; the changing of Stones
into Coals, etc. It has been found out, That Metals that have been first
coined into Money, have been by Nature changed under the Ground into a stony
substance; and yet have retained the impression of the Image that has been
stamped upon them: and, That the Roots of Oaks, being smitten with Thunder, or
some other influence of the Stars, have been turned into true Stones. There do
also arise Springs of Rivers in many places, that, by a certain natural
poperty, do transform all things whatsoever are cast into them, into hard
Stones. These, and suchlike works of Nature, wise men have contemplated, and
have thereby learned likewise to do the fame things by Art; by observing the
same Order which Nature teaches by her Instruments. This we see frequently
done in many Mountains, That Coals are generated of Stones naturally by a
certain Aetnean fire, of which Carpenters have frequent use. So that this last
kind of Transmutation, is done by Fire in the Earth; the other before spoken
of, by Water and Air: These are the Instruments of Nature, and they are for the
Matter, the Motion for the Form. What therefore if a natural Composition, may
be made Earth by Fire, and that made Water by Air, and this made Fire by Fire;
and that again descending, may be made Air by Air, and then this be made Water
by Water, and at last that may be reduced into Earth by Fire? what
Transmutation I pray do thou think will come thereof? if you were expert, you
would know it. The vulgar and ignorant see not these things; and that for no
other cause, but because they do not consider the secrets of Nature. Whosoever
therefore together with them is ignorant of, or denies these things, which
Nature has set before the Eyes of all, how learned or wise soever he would
seem to be, he is not worthy of the Name of a Philosopher nor Physician. Whence
has Physic her first Foundation? out of the appearance only, or manifest
superficies of natural things? Nothing less: but out of the most occult and
hidden secrets of Nature, compared to the most manifest effects. Wherefore as
Nature her self is undiscernable by every sense, no otherwise are all her
Operations. Who ever saw a Tree to grow, or the Sun or Stars move? No body: But
that the Trees have grown, and the Sun and Stars have been moved by a space of
time, who knows not?

Therefore Operations in Physic do more chiefly consist in the Understanding,
rather then in the Eyes or the other Senses; although they in their courses are
the Directors unto us, that we may make further progress: otherwise between the
Philosopher and the Clown there would be no further difference.

But to return to the purpose: The Scale or Ladder of Transmutation, has seven
Steps or principal Degrees; which are, Cascination, Sublimation, Solution,
Putrefaction, Distillation, Coagulation and Tincture.

Under Calcination are contained these his Members; Reverberation, Cimentation,
and Incineration: wherewith, in all Operations, all things are turned into
Chalk or into Ashes.

Therefore in the first Degree of Transmutation, the elementative natural
bodies are converted into Earth, with a middle Fire, as the Instrument.

And here first of all is to be noted the difference between material Elements,
and instrumental, of which by the way we shall speak; for these are external,
but the other are internal: as when the first Operation is completed, whether
it be by Calcination or Reverberation, Cimentation or Incineration. Sublimation
succeeds out of the order of Preparations; which Earth, now being calcined,
is converted either into Water or into Air, according to the Nature and
property of the thing so to be converted: for if it be of dry things, then
chiefly is to be used the elevation of the Volatile parts from the fixed.
Wherefore Sublimation is convenient for things of that Nature.

But if there ought to be made a separation of moist things, as of Vegetables
or Animals, then it is convenient to use Sublimation thereof in the fifth
Degree, to wit, Distillation.

But because in this place it is chiefly intended to treat of dry things, as
Metals and Minerals; the order congruent to their Natures is likewise to be
observed.

Therefore the Volatile part is to be sublimed, as in moist things by
Cohobations; that is, by reconjoyning of the parts separated, and by iterating
or separating them over again, until they become fixed, and remain within with
the parts fixed, and ascend no more, but remain consisting in the substance and
form of Oil of or a Stone: for with Solution by the Air, they are turned into
Oil; and with Coagulation by Fire, into a Stone.

Let Sal Armoniak be an example for every Metal; for that in Sublimation
successively becomes Stone.

By this Operation of Sublimations, many corrosives are dulcified, and
mollified; and on the contrary, with the addition of another substance. Also
many sharp things are sweetened, and many sweet things on the contrary are
sharpened: sometimes by themselves, or with other things prepared after this
manner.

Afterward happens the third Degree, to wit, Solution; and that is twofold:
the one of cold, the other of heat.

Salts, Corrosives, and whatsoever things are calcined, are coagulated by Fire,
and then by the coldness of the Air, are resolved into Liquor, Water or Oil, in
a moist place, as a Cellar, or in the Air, being placed upon a Marble-stone or
Glass: But fat and sulphurous things are dissolved by the heat of the Fire;
and that which the Fire dissolveth by heat, the same is coagulated by the
coldness of the Air: On the contrary, that which is dissolved by the coldness
of the Air, is coagulated by the heat of the Fire.

Note here the Reason wherefore we call the Air cold; which seems to oppose and
contradict the Opinion of some Philosophers: for they will have it to be hot
and moist: but they consider not whereof the Air consists: does it not consist
of Fire and Water? for what else is the Air, but Water dissolved by Fire?
Wherefore from one part thereof, to wit, the Fire, it borrows heat and
dryness; and from the other part, the Water, coldness and moisture: for they
are the two chief qualities thereof, and the other two are her Ministers; for
there is nothing hot by Nature, which is not also necessary and naturally dry;
neither is there any thing cold, which by the same reason is not moist.
Whatsoever is besides contingent hereunto, is not by Nature, but by accident.

It is no otherwise amongst the Elements: the Fire and Water have the chief
place, and the Earth borrows her coldness from her Companion, the Water; and
her dryness from the Fire: for her self, she is never hot, moist, nor cold, nor
dry; but serves her two other Princes, as the Wax submits to every Seal.

In like manner we are to judge of the Air; for so the Air receives heat and
dryness from his Father the Fire, and cold and moisture from his Mother the
Water; therefore they are generated as from their Parents, the Fire and Water;
the Air Masculine, or rather a Hermaphrodite, and the Earth a Female. And thus
far of the natural Instruments and the Matter.

The fourth Degree is Putrefaction: This for its excellency might deserve the
first place, if it were not repugnant to the true order; and a secret in this
place hidden to many, and manifested to few. It ought therefore to remain
placed in its due Series, even as the links in a Chain; wherein, if one be
wanting, the Captive detained therewith escapes and flies away.

The property therefore of Putrefaction is, that consuming the old Nature of
things, it introduces a new Nature; and sometimes produces Fruit of another
Generation: for all living things die with corruption; and being dead, they
putrefie, and again acquire life by the Transmutation of their Generation into
them.

And by it corrosive Spirits are dulcified and mollified, and all Colors are
thereby turned into others, and thereby the pure is separated from the unclean.

Now the Members of Putrefaction are Digestion and Circulation.

The fifth Degree is Distillation, which is nothing else but a Separation of
the moist from the dry; and the thin from the thick.

The Members hereof are Ascension, Lotion, Imbibition, Cohobation and Fixation.

Cohobation, which concludes all the rest, is an often effusion or pouring of
the distilled Liquor to its feses, and often distilling it over. As Vitriol
with Cohobations is fixed by its own proper Water, and then it is called
Allumen Saccarinum; which being dissolved into Liquor, and then putrefied by
the space of a Month, and distilled, yields a most sweet and pleasant Water,
after the manner of Sugar: which is a most excellent Medicinal secret, far
above others, to extinguish the Microcosmical Fire, which happens to the
Diggers of Metals; which is largely spoken of in the Book De Morbis Fossorum
Mineralium, Of the Diseases of the Diggers in Mines. After the same manner also
may any other Minerals and Waters, as Sal Nitrum, be fixed by Cohobations.

The sixth Degree is Coagulation; which also is twofold: answering contrary to
Solution, consisting of heat and dryness, that is, of Air and Fire.

Again, Coagulation is twofold, as having two parts cold, and as many of hear.

The first of cold is made of common Air, without Fire: and the last, of the
superior Firmament, by the Hy^^al Stone, which congealeth all Waters into Snow
and Ice.

But the first Coagulation of heat is made by industry in Art, observing the
gradations of the Fire, and is fixed; but the other Degrees of cold in Alchymy
are not fixed.

The later Coagulation of heat is made by an Aetnean Fire and Mineral under the
Earth and under the Mountains, and is gradated by a natural Arch of the Earth.
Not unlike to this is the Fire, which being gradated by the Art of Alchymy, is
excited and brought to Coagulation.

Whatsoever is coagulated by this Aetnean Fire, remains fixed, as is manifest
by Metals and Minerals; all which consist from the beginning of certain
Muscilaginons matter coagulated by the Aetnean Fire, and the natural Arch and
Artifice of the Earth under the Mountains, into Stones, Metals, Pearls, Salts,
etc.

The seventh and last Degree of the Scale or Ladder of Transmutation, is
Tincture, the most noble Medicine above all others that are procured by the
Chemical Art; whereby all Metallic and humane bodies are dipped into a far
more noble, better, and excellent substance then before they were naturally of,
and are thereby reduced to the highest Degree of soundness, color and
perfection, and to a more strong and excellent Nature.

Various are the kinds and species of these Tinctures, in this place least of
all intended to he treated of.

The Metallic bodies ought first to be removed by Fire from their Coagulation,
and to be liquefied; otherwise, they will not receive any active Tincture,
unless they be opened. Also all the Tinctures of Metals ought to be fixed
substances, easily fusible, and of an incombustible Nature; that being poured
upon a fiery Lamen, they may flow forthwith like Wax, and soon penetrate the
Metal without smoke, as Oil does Paper, or as Water enters into a Sponge; so
they dye that into a white and red color, remaining in the Fire, and enduring
every trial.

Therefore in the first Degree of Calcination, to come to these Tinctures, the
Metals being brought into Alcol, they acquire an easy liquefaction, in the
second Degree, to wit, of Solution; and then by Putrefaction and Distillation,
their Tinctures may be fixed and made incombustible, and the colors unvariable.

But to restore, recover, conserve, or renew the Health of humane bodies, they
ought to be drawn from Gold, Pearl, Antimony, Sulphur, Vitriol, or the like.

Various also are the Subjects of the Fire; and they have several and diverse
Operations in Chemistry: as, one Fire made of the flame of Wood, and this they
call living Fire, wherewith is calcined and reverberated the bodies of all
Metals and other things: another is a continual heat of a Candle or Lamp,
wherewith they fix Volatiles: there is another Fire of Coals, wherewith bodies
are cemented, colored, and purged from their Excrements: also, Gold and Silver
are thereby brought to a higher Degree: Venus is refined, and all other Metals
are renewed: the fiery Lamens of Irons have another Operation; for thereupon is
made the trial of Tinctures. Another heat is raised by Fire, by the filings of
Iron; another in Ashes; another in Salt; another in Balneo Mariae, wherewith
are made many Distillations, Sublimations, and coagulations: There is also
another Operation made by Balneum Roris, which sometimes I have elsewhere
called, Balneum Vaporosum, wherewith many Solutions of corporal things are
made: Then the Venture Equinus has another Operation, in which are made the
chief Putrefactions and Digestions: also, the invisible Fire has an Operation
far beyond all these, that is, of the Beams of the Sun; which plainly appears
by his Operations, as by a Speculum or Crystal. And of this the Ancients have
not made mention.

By this Fire, the three Principles of every thing may be separated upon a
Table of Wood, without any fear of flagration or adustion; and all Metals
liquefied without any visible Fire, and all combustibles consumed into Coals
and Ashes.

But the Transmutation of Metals, to bring the imperfect to perfection, cannot
be very well done without the Stone or Tincture, of which we will hereafter
treat in their due places: And we will also say something of the Transmutation
of imperfects into imperfects, bringing them only for the probation of
Transmutations. But we shall first treat of the Fire, whereupon hangs the
hinges of all the Art: and teach some process of the Stone of Paracelsus.

CHAP. II. Of the simple Chemical Fire.
HAving now sufficiently spoken to the wise and ingenious, of the Art of
Transmutations by the Scale and Degrees thereof; that the order before spoken
of may be kept, it will be necessary in the first initiation, to propose and
lay down the manner of the Instruments, before the matter it self, lest that
the rude and unskilful should first use the foot in stead of the hand.

Let them not therefore approach hither, whose understanding has no eyes, and
whose hands cannot serve them; for the feet and the fleshly eye, without a
sound and uncorrupted understanding, is altogether ignorant.

The chiefest Instrument which ought most diligently to be sought after, is the
Fire, which being living of its own proper Nature, is not vivified by any other
Fire.

From hence also it comes to pass, that it has power and virtue to vivifie
whatsoever else lies hidden in other things.

As the Sun in the World is created by God, to vivifie, stir up and quicken the
Fire resting in all other things, as of the,,,,, and: and that he might heat
the Spheres of all the other Stars by his Fire; which otherwise have no heat of
their own, neither can they give forth any of themselves; for they are dead of
themselves; but being kindled by the Solar heat, they live, and give forth
their Operations according to their several proprieties.

For the Sun does not receive the Light, Life, and Fire which he has, from any
other Star, but only from God that created and rules him, so that he always
gives Heat and Life in himself, illuminating every other natural Light.

Even so is the Fire of the Philosophers secret Furnace to be accounted in the
Spagyrick Art, which heateth the Furnace and Sphere of the Vessel, and the Fire
of the matter, even as the Sun is seen to operate in the universal World,
without which nothing can be generated therein.

In like manner nothing can be effected or brought to pass in this Art, without
this simple Fire, it being the chief part and Operation of the whole Art,
comprehending all the other parts thereof in it self, and is comprehended of
nothing; for it consists of it self, not wanting any of the other: but all
other Operations whatsoever, are made stand in need of this simple Fire, from
which they receive Life, together with the matter it self.

Paracelsus speaking elsewhere of the simple Fire, says thus:

This (says he) is the Opinion of the most excellent Philosophers, The Fire
and Azor are sufficient; for the Fire alone is the whole Work, and the complete
Art.

Some do build their Fire simply of Coals: they err, containing the Vessels
therein or thereupon: others in vain attempt it with a Fire of Horse-dung, with
the Fire of Coals; they sublime the matter without any medium, and dissolve it
not: others have stirred up Heat with Lamps; asserting this to be the secret
Fire of the Philosophers, to make their Stone: others have placed it in Balneo,
and set this in an Emmet's Nest: some have placed it in Ashes of Juniper; and
others have sought this Fire in Calce viva, in Tartar, Vitriol, Nitre, and the
like: others have thought it to be in hot burning Water, as,

Thomas Aquinas falsely speaks of this Fire, saying, That God and his Angels
cannot want it. What blasphemy is this? is it not a manifest lie? cannot God
want or be without the elementary Fire of hot Water, and be without all the
other Creatures when he pleases? does he stand in need of any of them? All
those Heats that are stirred up by the means and Fires now spoken of, are
altogether unuseful for this purpose. See also that you be not seduced by
Arnold de villa nova, who writes of the Fire of Coals; for in this thing he
deceives you.

Almadis says, That the invisible Sunbeams are sufficient for our Fire. He
produces another example, That the celestial Heat by his reflection and
continual motion does chiefly make the perfection and coagulation of Mercury.
And again, he says, Make a vaporous, continual, digesting, separating Fire;
but not flying or boiling up, but altering and penetrating. Now I have told,
and that truly, the whole way of stirring up the Heat of this Fire: if thou art
a true Philosopher, thou well understandest: this is it.

Salmanazer says, Our Fire is a corrosive Fire, which brings an Airy Cloud
over our Vessel; in which Cloud, the Beams of this Fire are hid. This due Cahos
and humidity of the Cloud being wanting, there is error committed.

Again, Almadir says, Unless the Fire heat our Sun by his humor, by the
excrement of the mountain, with a temporate Ascension, we shall not be
partakers, neither of the white nor red Stone.

All these things do sufficiently demonstrate unto us the occult Fire of the
wise men.

In brief, this is the matter of our Fire, to wit, That it be kindled by the
quiet Spirit of a sensible Fire, which again expels the hot Cahos, as from
its opposite, above our Philosophical matter: which Heat waxing above our
Vessel, temperately urges it forwards to the motion of perfect Generation,
constantly, without intermission.

Thus faith Paracelsus of the simple Fire of the Philosophers.

CHAP. III. Of the multiplicity of the Philosophers FIRE.
HAving spoken of the simple Fire, we hold it convenient to treat also of the
multiplicity of Fire, and that more copious and clearly then of the other
before; for by this later we may attain to a perfect sight, as through a
Casement.

Fire therefore is manifold, as well because of the diversity of the Subject in
which it flows, as that afterward it is excited in diverse other Subjects: it
is varied and changed, as the Fire of Ashes, Sand, Balnei, Limatures, etc. have
a mediate Heat flowing from an immediate into the Subject Matter of the
Instrument, and from hence into the matter subjacent to the Art.

In this manifold Fire, there is a difference of place; and this is the Reason,
Because in all things, there is nothing in the Nature of things that can be
seen in all things, and by all things, like one to another; although they are
both of the same Species, and their members of the same individuals: as one
Metal produces Gold from that which generateth Silver; another Saturn, Venus,
Mars, and every one of them is varied according to the difference of the place
from whence they spring and are created; neither are two men, or two members of
one body, nor two Leaves of one and the same Tree found alike to one another;
and so of other things. The dissimilitude proceeds not from the first Fire of
Creatures, but from the various Rule of the Elements by the Planets, and not by
the Sun.

For by this disposition, the heat is changed in the Elements every moment; and
also the form of decompounds from the compounds, and not from the simples.

Where there is not so great a mixture of the Elements, there is generated Sol;
where they are a little more mixed and impure, Luna; and where they are more
imperfect, Venus: and so of the rest, according to the mutation of the
mixtures, the Mine of every Metal is unlike one another: neither do their
Spirits agree in all things one with another; for if they were generated of
simple Fire alone, no multiplicity intervening, there would be no difference of
their properties and forms, not only in Metals, but in all other Creatures.

But why there are in use seven Metals and no more, six whereof are solid, and
the seventh fluxible and thin; the Reason is given in Philosophy, and not in
Chemistry; which is to be reserved to its proper place, that we digress not
from our purpose. And thus much of the manifold Philosophical Fire, deduced
from Physical Reasons.

CHAP. IV. Of the visible and local Instruments: and first, of the Spagyrick
Womb.
BEfore we come to speak of the matter, it is requisite that we proceed in
order to declare what Instruments actual and local are necessary to be used in
this Art: the first actual, is the Fire; the first local Instrument is the
Furnace, which by the Ancients is called by this Chemical Name, Athanor: this
refers to the Womb in the Spagyrick Generation.

Hermes Trismegistus, although he was not the Inventor of this Art, no less
then Paracelsus of Spagyrick Medicines, yet he deserves to be called the
Restorer thereof.

He asserteth, That this Spagyrick work (which is the utmost point of the hand
of humane Philosophy) takes its exordium and first beginning from the
meditative contemplation of the greater world: intimating, that the Spagyrick
Athanor ought to be built from the imitation of the Foundation of Heaven and
Earth.

But for the exercise of the ingenious, I shall not think it amiss a little to
examine this comparison, whereby I may happily profit the Readers. There is no
Physician will deny, but that the Sun does generate a Sun like to its self: but
every one will not confess, That it has this Generation in its Center; and
especially, the Disciples of those Philosophers, that can give no other Reason
of the Aetnean Fires, then what Rusticks and Clowns do, according to the
appearance thereof to their carnal eyes.

This Terrene or earthly Sun is kindled and bred by the Fire of the superior;
even so is kindled the Center of our matter, from the Center of our World or
Athanor; which is Fire, bearing a similitude and resemblance with the natural
Sun.

Who sees not the form and frame of the universal created World, to bear the
similitude and likeness of a Furnace: or, that I may speak more reverently,
containing the Matrix of a Womb; that is to say, the Elements wherein the Seeds
of the Sun and Moon, by their various astral influences are corrupted,
concocted and digested, for the Generation of all things?

But this is plainly manifest to Children, I need not speak it to Philosophers:
wherefore I shall not need to urge it any further.

Therefore we proceed to speak of the manner of the construction and building
of our Athanor or Furnace. First, let a Furnace be built six spans high, round
within, and of the breadth and bigness of one span; let it be somewhat larger
and bigger toward the bottom, then at top; let it be made smooth within, that
Coals or such things as are put in, do not stick by the way, but may fall down
close to the Grate. To this Furnace you may make one, two or three mouths, as
you shall think fit. To every Furnace let a Copper be fitted, with Water: the
other matter is to be enclosed within: as the Egg is within the Hen; so is a
Glass to be in this womb, for the industry of the Magistery. Then when you will
work or operate herewith, having all things diligently prepared, break you
Coals about the bigness of Walnuts, and fill up the Turrets to the top, and
kindle them at the door beneath; ^^d let the top be kept shut, lest the Coals
being kindled at the top or in the middle, de^^^oy the whole work, and they
consume and ^^rn all together. Moderate therefore your ^^re with a just
proportion, as Nature teaches in all things. The natural heat will excite and
stir up the ferment and the matter lying hid in this Egg.

Wherefore even as the Sun illuminates the ^reat World, and gives Light and
Life to all the Stars, Elements and Creatures; so does this Spagyrick Fire
illustrate and vivifie our Instruments, and all the matter of our Furnace, as
the sitting of a Hen over her Eggs, animates the young.

CHAP. V. Of the second Spagyrick Instrument, which is the Matrix or
Philosophers Egg.
MAny Philosophers, rashly presuming upon their own Judgments, have
mis-understood the right and true occult and secret Vessel of the Philosophers.
And worse is that which Aristotle the Chemist (not the Greek Academian) says,
That the matter is to be decocted in a treble Vessel. And more amiss is that
which another says, That the matter in the first separation and first Degree,
ought to be included in a Metallic Vessel; in the second Degree of its
Coagulation and Dealbation of the Earth, a Glass-Vessel; and in the third
Degree, which is Fixation, a Vessel of Earth. Nevertheless, by all these they
understand only one Vessel in all Operations, to the perfection of the red
Stone.

Since therefore our Matter is our Radix and Foundation both of the white and
red, our Vessel necessarily ought to be made after this manner, that the matter
therein may be ruled by the Celestial bodies: for the Celestial influences, and
the invisible impressions of the Stars, are chiefly necessary for this work;
otherwise it is impossible to attain to the excellent Oriental. Persian,
Chaldean, and Egyptian Stone, by any means; by which Anaxagoras knew the
virtues and power of the whole Firmament, and presaged That the great Stone
should descend from Heaven upon Earth: which also happened after his death He
did very much make known our Vessel to the Cabalists, and that according to the
true Geometrical measure and proportion; and how i^ ought to be built of a
certain Quadrature in (...) Circle, whereby the Spirits and soul of our matter
being separated from their body, may be elevated in the altitude of their
Heaven.

For if the Vessel be more straight, large^ high or low then its due measure
and proportion, and then the ruling and operating Spirits and Soul of the
matter do desire; the heat of our secret Philosophical Fire, (which is most
acute) will too violently excite and provoke the matter to Operation, and
sometimes the Vessel will fly into a thousand pieces, not without danger of
the body and life of the Operator.

On the contrary, if the Vessel be too capacious, and more large then for the
heat to operate upon the matter according to its proportion, the work will also
be frustrate and in vain.

Therefore our Philosophical Vessel is to be fabricated with greatest industry
and diligence.

But they only understand what the matter of this our Vessel is, who in the
first Solution of our fixed and perfect matter, have reduced and brought the
same into their first Essence: of which we have spoken enough.

Let the Operator therefore diligently note what he takes, and what he refuses,
in the Solution of the first matter.

The manner of describing this Vessel is difficult; yet it ought to be of such
a form as Nature her self requires, which is to be sought and investigated from
one and another. In brief, io must be such, that from the altitude of the
Philosophical Heaven, being elevated above the Philosophical Earth, it may
operate to bring forth the Fruit of its terrene body.

It ought to have this form, That when the Fire forces one from the other,
there may be a separation and purification of the Elements; so that every one
may occupy his own place wherein he remains, and that the Sun and the other
Planets may exercise their Operations about the terrene Element, and that their
course be not impedited in their Circuit, nor stirred up with too violent a
motion.

According to all these things which have been said, it ought to have a
proportion of roundness and altitude.

Those which appertain to the first cleansing and mundification of Mineral
bodies, are melting Vessels, Crucibles; lementing Vessels, Cucurbites, and
Glasses for Aqua Fortis; which are also necessary for the projection in the
last work: but as concerning the Vessel useful for this work, it is necessary
that you have a Glass rightly and duly proportioned; for if it be too
capacious, or more large then its just and due proportion, the matter, that is,
the humidity, is dilated, so that nothing can be produced therefrom. And if it
be too narrow or little, and compressing the matter, the growth thereof will be
suffocated, that it can produce no Fruit. An example thereof, may be taken from
hence: If Corn, or any thing else, be sown in the shade, or under the droppings
of an House, what Fruit can be expected therefrom? Wherefore our greatest care
ought to be in the adopting and fitting of the Glass; for an error being
committed thereby, or therein, is not easily corrected and amended; so that by
the impediment thereof, the work is not brought to the wished end.

Wherefore to two Ounces of the matter, take two Ounces and a half of Glass, or
the Philosophical Egg, that is, a Glass of that weight; having regard to the
due thickness of the Glass. This being observed, you shall avoid error in this
thing.

CHAP. VI. Of the Subject or Philosophical Matter in general.
HAving hitherto sufficiently spoken of the Chemical Instruments, now hearken
what Matter you are to choose to begin this Spagyrick Work: after that the
Vegetables are mortified, the concurrences of the two Metals, that is, Salt and
Sulphur, they are transmuted into a Mineral Nature; so that from thence at
length results a perfect Mineral.

For in the Mineral Caverns of the Earth, some Vegetables are found, which by a
long succession of time, and a continual heat; have put off the vegetable
Nature of Sulphur, and put on a Mineral Nature.

And this most especially happens, where the most proper Nutriment of these
kind of Vegetables is taken away, that they may be afterward compelled to
receive their Aliment from the Sulphur and Salt of the Earth, so long, until
that which before was Vegetable, become a perfect Mineral. And from this
Mineral condition, a certain Metallic perfect Essence does sometimes arise,
and that by the progress of one Degree unto another.

But that we may return to speak of the Philosophers Stone, the matter whereof
is most difficult to find out and understand:

The manner and most certain Rule of this Investigation, and of all other
things whatsoever, is a careful and diligent Examination of the Radix and Sperm
thereof, whereby is found out the knowledge of the matter.

Much availing hereunto, is a due and necessary consideration of the beginning
and original of Metals, how and after what manner Nature first brings them
from imperfection to the end of perfection.

To which consideration it first of all conduces, the perfect knowledge of the
three first Principles whereof Nature creates all things, that is, Sal,
Sulphur, and Mercury, naturally permixed into one body, yet so, that in some
they are volatile, and in others fixed.

For as often as the corporal Sal is permixed with the spiritual Mercury, and
animate Sulphur, then Nature begins to operate in those Subterranean places,
which she has in stead of her Vessels, by the separating Fire, which separates
the crass and impure Sulphur from the pure, and segregates the Earth from the
Sal, and the Nubes from the Mercury; reserving the first parts, which Nature
decocteth again together into one constant Geogamical body.

Which Operation is had from the greater mixture and conjunction, by the union
of three, to wit, Body, Soul, and Spirit.

This Union being completed, from thence results pure Mercury; which if it
flow through the Subterranean Pores and Veins, and be made obvious to the
Sulphur, it is coagulated herewith, according to the condition of the Sulphur.

Yet nevertheless, it is still Volatile, insomuch that it is scarce decocted
into Metal in twenty years afterward.

From thence this vulgar Opinion received its original, to wit, that Sulphur
and Mercury are the Matter of the Metals, as is manifest by the Relation of the
Diggers of Minerals.

But neither vulgar Mercury, nor common Sulphur, are the Matter of the Metals;
but the Mercury and Sulphur of the Philosophers are incorporate and innate in
perfect Metals, and in the Forms thereof: so that they never fly from the Fire,
nor are depraved by the force of the corruption of the Metals.

So that by the Dissolution of that natural mixture, our Mercury is tamed and
fixed, say the Spagyrick Philosophers.

Therefore under this form of Words, our Mercury out of perfect bodies, and the
virtue of the terrene Planets comes to be extracted: which also Hermes asserts
in these words: he says, That Sol and Luna are the Roots of this Art.

The Son of Hannel says, That the Philosophers Stone is a coagulated water, to
wit, in Sol and Luna.

From whence it plainly appears, That the Matter of our Stone is only Sol and
Luna; which is confirmed by this, That every like naturally brings forth and
generates his like.

And as we know there are two Stones, the white and the red; so there are also
two Matters of the Stone, Sol and Luna, coupled together in their proper
Matrimony, either natural or artificial. And as we see a Man and Woman cannot
generate nor produce their like, without the mixture of both their Seeds; so in
like manner, our Male Sol, and his Female Luna, cannot conceive nor bring forth
any Generation, without their Seed and Sperm.

From whence our Philosophers have gathered, That there is a third thing
necessary, to wit, the Animate Seed both of the Male and Female of the
Chemists, without which they judged their whole work vain and ridiculous.

The Sperm hereof, is Mercury, which by a natural Conjunction of both bodies of
Sol and Luna, receives and uniteth their Nature into himself.

Then, at length, and not before, is the matter apt for the congressive Work
and Generation, by the Masculine and Feminine force and virtue.

This has moved our Philosophers to say, That this Mercury is composed of
Body, Soul, and Spirit; and to assume unto it self the nature and propriety of
all Elements.

Wherefore they have asserted their Stone to be an Animal, which also they
called their Adam, who bears his occult and invisible Eve in his own body;
from which moment they are united by the power of the Great Maker of all
things. For which cause it may worthily be said, That the Mercury of the
Philosophers is nothing else, but an abstruse composed Mercury, and not that
vulgar Mercury. Therefore they have wisely said, That there is in Mercury
whatsoever the wise men do seek after.

Almadir the Philosopher says, We extract our Mercury out of one perfect Body,
with two perfect natural and incorporate conditions: This extrinsecally
produces his perfection, whereby he resists the force of the fire; and by
this his perfection is extrinsecally and intrinsecally defended from all
imperfections.

By this place of the acute Philosopher, the matter of the Stone is understood
to be Adamical, the Microcosmical Garment, the Homogeneous and united matter of
the Philosophers.

These Sayings of the Philosophers, which before we have made mention of, are
merely Golden, and to be had always in great esteem, because they contain in
them nothing superfluous, nothing invalid.

Briefly therefore: The matter of the Philosophers Stone is nothing else but a
fiery and perfect Mercury extracted by Nature and Art, that is, artificially
prepared; and is the true Hermaphrodite, Adam, and Microcosme.

This the wisest of Philosophers, Mercurius Trismegistus, asserting, calls
the Stone an Orphan.

Therefore our Mercury is he which contains in himself the perfections, power
and virtue of Sol; and runs through the Houses of all the Planets: and in
his Regeneration, acquireth the virtue of the superiors and inferiors: and by
the Matrimony thereof, he appears clothed in their candor and beauty.

The Arabians, Greeks, Persians, and Egyptians, have kept these Mysteries
secret and abstruse, denoting them by certain occult Characters and Figures.
Some have called this, The Secret of the Philosophers: and Pythagoras, The
Philosophers Stone.

Whosoever have attained to the knowledge hereof, have adumbrated and shadowed
the same, with various enigmatical Figures, and deceitful Similitues and
Comparisons, and feigned Words, that the Matter thereof might remain occult to
Posterity; so that little or no Knowledge thereof, might be found out.

But nevertheless some have sufficiently detected this matter and the knowledge
thereof, with its preparation, to the ingenious; but notwithstanding in
Parables, and under Enigmatical Words and Figures, that they might expel the
unworthy from attaining to such a mystery of Art and Nature.

Nevertheless some few, and such who are apt to apprehend this Art, have sought
out the perpetual Balsome of Nature, and the true Stone, but with exceeding
great labor and intricate difficulty; which every where occurreth in the
investigation hereof. And hence it appears why the sluggish and slothful minds
never attain to this work.

CHAP. VII. Of the Preparation of the Spagyrick Matter in general.
NAture first requires of the Artist, that the Philosophical Adam be brought
into a Mercurial substance, and at length to be regenerated into the Oriental
Sol, and Lunary Stone.

Moreover, its to be noted, That those common Preparations of Geber, Albertus
Magnus, Thomas Aquinas, Rupecissa, Polydor, and the like, are nothing else but
particular Solutions, Sublimations, Calcinations, least of all pertaining to
our universal Secret, which wants only the most secret Fire of the
Philosophers. The Fire therefore and Azor are sufficient for thee.

The Philosophers make mention of other Preparations, as Putrefaction,
Distillation, Sublimation, Ceration, Fixation, etc. which you are to understand
only to be certain universal Operations to complete Nature in the said matter;
and not only a working in the Philosophical Vessel with the like Fire, and not
with common Fire.

For the white and the red proceed both from one Radix, without any mean: it is
dissolved in it self, and copulated by it self, made white and red, black and
yellow by it self; it despouseth it self, and is conceived in it self: it is
decocted and infunded, ascends and descends: all which Operations are made
by the Fire alone.

Yet some Philosophers have dissolved the Body of Sol, by the strong essence of
Wine, and made it Volatile, that it would ascend by an Alembick; thinking this
to be the true Volatile matter of the Philosophers; whereas it is not; although
it be a secret not to be despised, to reduce a perfect Metallic Body into a
Volatile and spiritual substance: yet they err in the separation of the
Elements; for they thought by this way to separate Gold into a subtle,
spiritual and elemental virtue: and after their separation, by Circulation and
Rectification, again to copulate them into one; but in vain.

For although one Metal may be separated from another in some sort;
nevertheless, every Metal thus separated, may be separated again into another;
which parts afterward by a Pellicanical Circulation or Distillation, can in no
wise copulate into one, but will always remain a certain Volatile Matter, and
Aurum Potabile, as they call it.

The cause why these can never attain to their intentions, is this, Because by
this way, Nature will not be extracted nor separated with humane dis-junctions,
as by terrene Glasses and Instruments.

That only has known its Operations and the weight of the Elements, whose
Separations, Rectifications, and Copulations, are executed without the help of
any Operator or Manual Artifice, whilst the matter is contained in the secret
Fire, and in the occult Vessel.

This is the Opinion of the Philosophers, That when they have placed this
matter into their secret Fire, it is cherished round about with this
Philosophical hear, that beginning to transite into corruption, it waxes
black. This Operation they call Putrefaction; And this Blackness, The Head of
the Crow.

They call the ascending and descending of this matter, their Distillation,
Ascension, and Descension: they call Exsiccation, Coagulation; and Dealbation,
Calcination.

And because by a continual hear, the matter is made soft and fluid, they make
mention of Ceration. But when it cease to ascend, and remains liquid in the
bottom, they call it Fixation.

After this manner therefore, are the Apellations of the Philosophical
Operations to be understood, and no otherwise.

Thus having declared the Instruments, Matter, and Ferment, we proceed in order
to the Weights; without observation whereof, our Work is in vain.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Proportion of the Matter and Form of the Spagyrick Stone.
THe Formal part of our birth is the Mercury of the Philosophers, and the
Spirit or Tincture of Sol; but the living part is another material.

Therefore the Composition of this sacred Adamick Stone, is made after the
Adamick Mercury of the wise men; with their Female Eve, by the Matrimony and
union of the one and the other Mercury on the third part.

Therefore the only matter of the Philosophers, consists of spiritual,
corporal and animal Mercury.

The corporal Mercury is the subject of Tinctures.

The spiritual and animal Mercuries, exhibit the means of conjoyning them; but
in their conjunction, a due proportion is to be observed:

For if there be taken more of one then of the other, it will be suffocated as
Seed sown in the Field; so that it cannot live so long until it be united by
the Mercury of the Philosophers, and perfected in the Fire: or on the contrary,
if it be too little, there can be no Solution, nor no Fruit.

Wherefore, see that you take as much of the one as of the other, lest by your
ignorance in the proportion, the work be destroyed.

Let there be taken therefore one part of the Seed to two parts of Earth, or
three to four; and there will be no error, but the work will be brought to its
desired end in this behalf, so as the rest be moderated accordingly.

There is a double Reason why the Weight should be observed; the one natural,
the other artificial.

The natural follows the effect in the Earth by Nature and Concordancy; of
which Arnaldus speaks,

If there shall be added more or less Earth then Nature will suffer, it will
suffocate the Soul, and no fruit nor fixation is perceived.

The like is to be judged of the Water: if there be taken too much or little
thereof, it brings an inconvenient loss: for the superfluity thereof makes the
matter too humid; and the defect or want thereof, renders it too dry and too
hard. If the Vessel be too little, the Tincture is too much pressed; if too
large, a pale body evades: if the Fire be made too vehement, the matter is
burnt; if too remiss, it has not power of exsiccating, solving, and calefying
the other Elements.

In these consists the elemental Weight; but the artificial is most occult:
when as the Ponderations are included in the Magic Art.

Between the Spirit, Soul and Body (say the Philosophers) consists the Weight
with Sulphur, as it were the Rector of the work: for the Soul desires the
Sulphur, and necessarily observes it, by Reason of the Weight. Which
understand after this manner: Our matter is united with red mixed Sulphur, to
which is committed the third part of the Regiment until the last Degree, that
it makes on the infinite Operation of the Stone: and persisteth therewith
together with his Fire, and consists of an equal Weight with the matter it
self in all things, and by all things, without any variation of any Degree of
Transmutation.

After therefore the matter is prepared and fitted, and mixed with its
proportionate Weight, it ought to be very well concluded and sealed up in the
Philosophers Vessel, and committed to their secret Fire, in which the
Philosophical Sun will spring up and arise, and illuminate all things which
expect his Light, or hope can desire.

But because this cannot rightly be understood without a perfect knowledge in
the Metals of perfect Tinctures, we proceed now to speak of them.

CHAP. IX. Of the Tinctures and Spirits of Metals: and first, of the Tincture
of the Sun.
THe Tincture of the Sun obtains the supreme and principal place: which is
derived of subtle, pure, and most perfect fire. Wherefore this spirit flies
not from the fire, but remains therein fixed, triumphing and rejoicing: it is
not consumed nor burnt thereby, as others; but rather thereby gains more luster
and splendour: it is subject to no Corruption; neither heat, nor cold, nor any
other quality, can bring any detriment thereunto: Whereby it comes to pass,
that the body which it once puts on, it defends and preserves from all
accidents, Corruption, and diseases, that it may also endure the fire with him
without lesion.

His body has not these virtues from himself, but from his spirit alone, the
efficient cause thereof.

It is certain, that the body of Sol is Mercury; which can in no wise endure
the fire, but immediately flies therefrom.

Since therefore being in gold, Mercury persists constantly in the fire, and
flies not; there is no doubt but the fixing thereof by the spirit, will
impresse the same virtue in its self.

What gift and office therefore has it in Mercury, but that when it is freed
from its own body, and taken into a humane body, it should work and operate its
effects thereupon? who will deny, but that also it may preserve and keep it
safe from all Corruption, diseases and accidents whatsoever, and preserve the
body to a long and sound life, as our first parents of old?

The virtues and propertyes of all other Metals are not otherwise to be known,
but by certain and true experience, and not by any other reason of a Subtle
intellect: for this wisdom which is conceived by opinion only, is mere
foolishness before God and the truth: wherefore they that hope and believe
therein, do err, and are deceived.

Thus far of the spirit and Tincture of Sol: now let us see what Tincture the
Moon has.

The spirit of Luna lies in this white Tincture, as the Red in Sol: And it is
also borne of a subtle spirit; but not so perfect as that of Sol. Nevertheless
in purity and constancy it far excels the Tinctures of all the other
subsequent Metals.

For burnt lead consumes it self, and all other Metals with it in the fire,
except Sol and Luna; to which it brings no detriment.

Seeing therefore the spirit of the Moon is of power to preserve the body which
it once puts on, to wit, Mercury, from injury of the fire, and all other
accidents, and render the same fixed and constant; it is easily gathered from
hence, if it effect this in so instable and volatile a body as Mercury, how
much more efficacious and powerful will it operate, being free from its own
body, and projected into a humane body? will not that be also defended from
many diseases and Corruptions? certainly whatsoever it operates in Mercury, the
same it will do in a humane body, and preserve the same to a long and sound
life, expelling all diseases which are comprehended under the power thereof;
according to the degree thereunto prefixed by nature.

Certainly by how much the more sublime, subtle and perfect every Medicine is,
by so much the more perfectly it cures in its kind.

Wherefore ignorant are those Physicians who found their Art chiefly upon
corrupt Medicines, as Vegetables, which are not permanent; but they go about
fixed Cures with unconstant means, undertaking that which is impossible for
them to perform. But what shall I say more unto these? they have never yet
learned otherwise in their Academies.

The Spirit of Venus is derived of a permixtion of more crass elements then the
former: wherefore it is inferior and subject unto them; but it is more perfect
then the other Spirits and Tinctures which follow, excelling them in fixation
and constancy, not yielding to the fire, nor so subject to be corrupted as the
others subsequent: and remains more fixed in the fire: which virtue Venus
has not in her own body, but from a Spirit.

What operation soever it has in its Mercury, the same it does also in humane
bodies, according to the degree of nature: for it defends wounds and ulcers
from accidents, and expels such diseases as are under its degree and power,
and disperseth the root thereof.

If it be mixed with any other Metals, it breaks their perfect bodies, that
they will not be malleable any more, until they be freed from it.

The like effect it has in humane bodies, especially if it be taken for any
Disease, not destined unto its degree by nature, it brings Contractures of
the members.

Wherefore the Physician ought perfectly to learn the Natures and Tinctures of
Metals, how they agree with the Nature of Bodies, before they venture to give
them, lest they endanger their Patient.

The tincture of Mars, consists of an adustible and crass permixion of the
Elements, having a more hard and less tractable substance, then the other
imperfects; hardly fusible, but corruptible both with Air and Water, easily
subject to be consumed with rust: but in hardness and dryness it abounds above
all other Metals, as well perfect as imperfect.

It torments the body of man, if applied to any disease other then becomes its
Nature; yet it wants not power and virtue granted to it by God and Nature in
its special propriety.

The Spirit of Jupiter is created of a white pally substance of Fire, by nature
intractable with the hammer, but not so much as Mars.

Being mixed with others, it discontinueth and mixeth with them, especially
with Luna, that it will hardly be separated herefrom. The like operation it
has in all other Metals, except in Saturn: if it be taken contrary to its
Nature, to operate upon man's body, it afflicts the members with cruel passions
and pains, and gnaweth them with such burning, that they cannot exercise their
natural faculties: being outwardly applied to Fistula's, Cancers, Carbuncles,
and suchlike, which exceed not the degree of its Nature, it is the best remedy
expelling every evil.

The Spirit of Saturn is created of an obscure, tenebrose, and cold permixture
of Elements; whereby it comes to pass, that it less endures the Fire then any
other.

It mundifies the bodies of Sol and Luna, and purges them from superfluities:
it afflicts the body taken inwardly, more then Tin or Iron; but because it is
coagulated with more cold then the other, it operates not so sharply: it has
an excellent faculty to heal Fistula's, Cancers and suchlike ulcers, and many
other infirmities. But having performed its operation, unless it depart from
the body, together with the disease, it does more hurt then good. Wherefore let
the Physician, that desires to make use hereof, first know with what diseases
it agrees, and how it is naturally ordained for Medicine.

Lastly, the Spirit of Mercury has no certain determinate form but is subject
to all the other, as wax to the impression of a seal; for it receives every
Spirit whatsoever unto it self; as when the Spirit of Sol is impressed into it,
it transites into Sol; if Luna, into Luna; and so of the rest: he puts on
their nature, and embraces every Metal.

His body may be compared to the Spirits of other Metals, as the Female to the
Male, not by a corporal mixture; but when a Spirit is educed from its Metal,
and after the preparation projected into Mercury, then at length he exhibits
his transmutation, no otherwise then a dead female of Metal; although it be as
an untilled Field or Earth, if it be macerated or vivified with the
Philosophers Plough, (which female in this work remains fixed and incorrupt) it
is united to the said corporal Spirit by the degrees of the fire, into his
nature and substance; and this with the dead body of Metal, which with the
crass Spirit of Mercury cannot be done.

And although the body of Sol exist of Mercury or Argent vive, and is fixed;
nevertheless, common Mercury not fixed or mortified, never comes to its
Resurrection.

For the Resurrection of Metals is an immortal Regeneration, and the medium
whereby the tinctures are promoted to their generation.

Wherefore it cannot be united with dead bodies into fixation, but only with
extracted Spirits of the corporals before spoken of, which are subject to
Metals, as the common Mercury is subject to all Metallic Spirits.

For the crass Spirit of Mercury does in no wise generate this tincture in
substance, no more then a concubine legitimate issue.

We are to judge in like manner of the crass Spirit of Mercury, so long until
the metallike and corporal Spirit is made by the medium of the natural matter:
without this medium, it is impossible to attain to any good and perfect work in
these kind of tinctures: moreover, if the fire be too strong, it cannot
generate; if too remiss, the same event happens.

CHAP. X. Of the plain Manifestation of this Art.
WHen thou will make the Heaven or Sphere of Saturn to run with life upon the
Earth, impose thereupon all the Planets, or which you will; but let there not
be too much of Luna, but add less thereof then of the other.

Permit them all to run until you see the Heaven of Saturn quite to vanish: by
this means, all the Planets will remain of such a consistency, that their
ancient and corruptible bodies being dead, they have put on a new, perfect and
incorruptible body.

This is the Spirit of Heaven, by which the said Planets are again made
corporal, and living as at first.

Take this new body from the Life and from the Earth, and this keep; for this
is Sol and Luna.

After this manner thou have the whole Art made manifest and plain, but if
thereby thou do not know or understand the same, it is well: for so it ought
to remain, not vulgarly and indifferently laid open to all.

Finis de Transmutatione Metallorum.
Of the Genealogy and Generation of Minerals.
CHAP. I.
WHen I had diligently and accurately read the writings of the Ancients
concerning the Generation of Minerals; I appredended that they understood not
the ultimate matter of them, and by consequence, much less the first. Truly, if
the beginning of any matter may rightly be written, certainly the end thereof
may very fitly be declared. I have therefore in the first place decreed to
propose unto you the ultimate matter of all Minerals, whereby you may easily
understand the first, from whence they all deduct their original.

The first example we shall bring from Medicine, whereby a disease is to be
known from the issue, and not from the beginning; in which there is no Science
introduced by blindeness, but must be blind likewise: but the end is visible
from the issue, to which it is perceived to tend, as to its end proposed to it.

Furthermore, nothing can be better known, then by a perfect knowledge of the
end for which God created it; otherwise, it may come to pass, that the true use
of the Creatures of God, may be turned into abuse; for every thing which God
has created, he would have us enjoy, and possess it, according to the right
use thereof.

Therefore learn the last and first matter of things from the fire; for this is
the key that unlocketh the Ark of secrets, and makes every occult thing
manifest.

For example, If a Metal be dissolved in the Fire, it presently shows the first
beginning thereof to be a Mercurial water, and not Sulpher, because the
resolution thereof flameth not like Rozin. It is demonstrated not to be Salt,
because the first beginning of its Resolution is not Friation, besides
Liquation and Flagration, as of some terrene stones is seen to be.

Nevertheless, every Metal has Sulphur and Sal in him, but Mercury has the
chiefest place therein.

But it seemed good to God the Creator, to create a watery Element, and from
thence to produce every Metal for the use of man, that it should be the Mother
thereof; in which as in her womb, the Mineral Fire, Sal and Mercury should be
decocted into Metals, Stones and every Mineral substance, although the birth be
not of the same existence with the Mother.

So that the water is unlike its Metallic issue, neither is the Son like the
Mother; even as the Earth is not Wood, nor the VVood Earth, although it spring
and has its original from the Earth.

So likewise are VVood and Iron created by the Water, yet they are not of the
same existence as Water.

Earth also is made of that which it is not in it self, and so likewise is Man.

So God is one in every thing, and the first and last matter of all things: so
great an Artisex in every thing, as has none before him, neither shall have
any after.

CHAP. II. Of the first and last matter of Minerals.
THe first beginning with God, was the last matter, which he made the first; as
the fruit which should bring forth other fruit that has in it self the seed:
and this seed is in the first matter.

Likewise, in the ultimate matter of Minerals, is made the first matter; that
is, it is made into sperm or seed; which seed is the Element of Water, which is
resolved, so that it is made Water.

Therefore Nature takes that which is in water, under her power and
separation; and what belongs to Metal, she segregates into Metal, every one by
himself severally, according to his own nature, with their several genus and
species congruent thereunto.

Therefore where Nature ceases, there the Art of man begins: for the ultimate
matter of Nature, is the first nature of man: again, the corruption of Nature
by Art, is the ultimate matter of man.

So wonderfully has God created Water the first matter of Nature; which,
though it be so tender and feeble a substance, yet from thence is created the
most solid and durable fruit, as Metals and Stones, etc. as the most hardest
and durable from the most soft and feeble: and that Fire should be producted
from Water, is beyond the reach of humane capacity; yet not beyond or above the
work of Nature.

Thus having in the first place handled the Regeneration, and Chemical and
Natural Operation of Metals, we esteemed it most necessary to add these few
words of the natural Generation of Minerals, whereby the Operation thereof may
be the easier known.

This is the Opinion of all Philosophers and Students in this Art, that he that
would be an Artist in this Profession, ought most exactly to imitate Nature in
all her Operations: And whosoever understands not this, shall never attain to
the accomplishment of his desires in this thing. Therefore let him that
searches a thing so secret and difficult, be a Scholar not only of Art, but of
Nature; and it shall be done.

FINIS.
Vrim and Thummim showed to be made by Art, and are the same with the Universal
Spirit, corporate and fixed.
THe Truth seems buried, because it brings forth little Fruit; but it is great,
and prevails, to make all things manifest so far as is possible for men; for
in common sense and reason, all agree in mysteries never: so that we may not
speak of Science without Knowledge, which breaks the Gates of Brass, and cuts
asunder the Bars of Iron, before the eyes of Understanding, that the treasures
of darkness may be opened, and the bright and fiery Sword discovered, which
turns every way to keep Transgressors out of Paradise.

For if we consider wherein the Celestial and Terrestrial Bodies agree, we
shall find something objective in the inferior Bodies, whereby they
communicate their Celestial Virtue and Influence; which president Art does
imitate, to produce a glorious substance of connexed Forms, and of Cleerness,
Virtue, and Beauty beyond expression.

The Mathematicians say, The Celestial Influences do hold and govern every
natural Body, and by many unities collect a quantity subsisting without shadow:
for the real Virtues affect to be specificate; and as living Fire gives life to
other things: which central substance of Celestial Virtues or Form of Metals is
the Subject of this short Discourse.

That Urim and Thummim, which were given in the Mount, cannot be proved that
they are the potential from the Creation, may appear; for they were substances,
whose Name and Essences did predicate each other, being convertible terms, the
Name and Essence one: the words signify Light and Perfection, Knowledge and
Holiness, also Manifestation and Truth, even as Science and Essence make one
Perfection. It is likely they were before the Law given; for the Almighty God
commanded Noah to make a clear Light in the Ark, which some take for a Window;
others, for the arching and bowing of the upper Deck, a Cubit: but since the
Text says, Day and night shall no more cease; It seems, it did then cease: and
whether this were one or more Windows, is uncertain: but when the Windows of
Heaven were opened, and the Air darkened by pouring out Rain, the Sun not giving
his Light, but prohibited the generative Spirit of the Creatures in the Ark,
what exterior cleerness could be expected?

Therefore some of the Rabbis say, The Hebrew word Zohar, which the Chaldee
translate Neher, is not found in the Scripture, but in this place: so that like
the word, it seemed to be a rare Light, and that which is generally doubted to
be, The Creator commanded Noah to make by Art. Other Hebrew Doctors say, It was
a precious Stone hanged in the Ark, which gave light to all living Creatures
therein. This the greatest Carbuncle could not do, nor any precious Stone that
is only natural.

But the Universal Spirit, fixed in a transparent Body, shines like the Sun in
Glory, and gives sufficient Light to all the Room to read by: therefore it is
most probable, this was the Light that God commanded to make, to give Light to
all living Creatures: for it is of perpetual durance.

And whereas Tubal-Cain is said to be a perfect Master of every Artificer in
Brass and Iron, which some hold, does contain the whole and perfect decoction
of the Metallic Virtue, wherein the Central Virtue is most abundant, and makes
the happy more admired, who walk in the midst of the Stones of Fire; Ezekiel.
28.16.
For where there are two things of one Nature, the chief is to be understood:
Therefore in the mention of Fires, pure Fire is preferred.

The Scarlet Veil in the Temple seemed ever moving, and signified pure Fire,
generative and fixed in clear Bodies, as Vrim and Thummim: Although Essences
are not without great difficulty made manifest in themselves, yet the clear
Vision thereof, makes the possibility unquestionable; as at Elisha's Prayer,
his Servant saw the Chariot, and Horses of fire, about his Master, which before
he saw not; so are they apparent when the invisible is made visible.

Some think, Exodus 18.30.
that Urim and Thummim were not Artificial, because they are said in the Text
to be put in the brestplate, but not to be made: but this point may be cleared
by observing the several kinds of making, as betwixt those things made with
hands, and those things that are only made visible by effect: for where natural
and habitual Virtue do meet together, the perfection is more absolute by a
kind of new Generation, as the pure Sulphur of Metal, by an inward power does
purge it self by ebulition; not by the first and remote causes, but by the
second and nearer, whereof the Philosophers say, The secret of all secrets is
of such a disposition, which cannot be perfected with hands; for it is a
transmutation of natural things, from one thing to another. Also it is said,
The Artist takes impure Spirits, and by Sublimation, Nature and Art, cleanses
them into bodies pure and fixed: so that the bodily Nature does eternally
predominate; and being more then perfect, does give perfection to other things.

Now that these perfections have their beginnings from two Lights, both the
Text and the ancient Philosophers make plain; but ignorance and the matter of
the Elements are the Iron Gates, which must be cut in pieces, before the
invisible be made visible.

For the natural Urim and Thummim, the Philosophers affirm, what they have seen
and done: and that they did nothing save that they did before, and knew: so
that a perfect knowledge is especially requisite to make a perfect Art:
therefore we are to consider the means to attain to this end.

The Lord gave Bezaliel Wisdom, Understanding and Knowledge: Exodus 31.3, 4.
these are the means: for Gold is dissolved by Wisdom, in Contrition, Assation,
and Fire. The end is directed to invent works in Gold, Silver and Brass; which
is not to be understood according to the found of words, but according to the
intent of all Distillation, to extract the inward part, and manifest the
central virtue: for where the perfection of the matter is glorious, the
perfection of the form is more glorious.

The Sun and Moon are as the Parents of all inferior bodies and things, which
come nearest in virtue and temperature, are more excellent: The Sun's Motion
and Virtue does vivifie all inferior bodies; and those things which come
nearest in virtue and temperature, are more excellent: the Sun's Motion and
Virtue does vivifie all inferior bodies, and the pure form of the terrestrial
Sun is said to be all Fire; and therefore does the celestial Sun communicate
most virtue: therefore the incorrupted quality of pure Sulphur being digested
in external heat, has also regal power over all inferior bodies: for the Sun
does infuse his influence into all things; but especially into Gold: and those
natural bodies do never show forth their virtues, till they be made spiritual.

One of the Rabbis says, They made in the second Temple Urim and Thummim; to
the end, they might make up all the eight Ornaments, although they did not
inquire by them, because the Holy Ghost was not there; and every Priest that
spoke not by the Holy Ghost, and on whom the divine Majesty rests not, they
enquire not by him: so it is with Sacramental Bread, which has no
signification before Consecration.

But these men had the spirit of Bezaliel, and made these natural, spiritual
Bodies: which sovereign Tincture, some say, So purifieth, and causes the
radical humor so to abound, that the Children in the fourth Generation, (yea,
as some say, in the tenth) shall perceive the effect of such perfect health of
their Ancestors.

Others say, That if they have once finished this Art, and should live a
thousand years, they might give what they will, and when they will, without
danger of diminution; as a man that has Fire may give to his Neighbor without
hurt to himself.

Marcus Vasso said, There was much more mysteries in the Flamines Ceremonies,
then they understood. Vesta signified pure Earth, and internal Fire: of which
it is said, Vesta is Earth and Fire. Earth undergoeth the name, and so does
Fire: Vesta is both.

Thus is shown forth in a work done by Fire,
The mighty Vesta, and her pure Attire.
Philosophy is nothing but the study of Wisdom considered in a created Nature,
as well subject to sense, as invisible, and consequently material; and Wisdoms
central Body is the shadow of Wisdoms central Essence; and the moral
Interpretation can never exclude the real effects from ocular demonstration:
but where Reason has experience, Faith has no merit; and without Faith there
is no knowledge of any excellent thing; for the end of Faith is Understanding.

The Rabbis hold every natural beginning to be either matter, or cause of the
matter, viz. the four Elements. But here beginnings must be well understood;
for there are beginnings of Preparations, and beginnings of Composition, and
beginnings of Operation: for the Artist was commanded to devise work in Gold;
that is, from the object to the possibility: for if the matter be glorious, the
form must be more glorious: and though the spiritual Nature be more operative,
yet the bodily Nature must predominate eternally: so that to make the corporal
spiritual, and the spiritual corporal, is the whole scope of the intention; yet
the spiritual is not first, but the natural: for corruption must put on
incorruption, and mortality immortality: for that which is of greatest durance,
and most abundant in virtue, does most excel in Glory and Beauty, and so
fittest to make Vrim and Thummim: for power and honor are in his Sanctuary.

But because the greatest things are not done by strength, or habit of
fingering; as also because the intellect does so far excel the sense: this is a
work of a second intention, and the beginning upon the virtue of Elements; that
is a pure, bright and clear Water of Putrefaction: for the perfection of every
Art, (properly so called) requires a new birth, as that which is sowed is not
quickened except it die: but here death is taken for mutation, and not for
rotting under the clods.

Now therefore we must take the Key of Art, and consider the secret of every
thing is the Life thereof: Life is a Vapor, and in Vapor is placed the wonder
of Art: whatsoever has heat, agitating and moving in it self by the internal
Transmutation, is said to live: this Life the Artist seeks to destroy, and
restore an eternal Life, with Glory and Beauty. This Vapor is called, The
vegetable Spirit, because it is of degree of heat with the hottest Vegetable;
and being decocted till it shine like brightest Steel, you shall see great and
marvelous secrets, not by the separation of Elements by themselves, but by
predomination and victory of that pure Fire, which like the Celestial Sun
enters not materially; but by help of Elemental Fire, sends forth his influence
and impression of form.

Here we must observe difference of perfections: for although ye have now the
Fountain of complete white; yet you are not near your chief delight, which is
the Fountain of Life, and Center of the Heart, the universal Spirit, which
lives in the radical humidity, and does naturally vivificate, and is the
masculine Seed of the Celestial Sun: here is that Rule made good, Except ye sow
in Gold, ye do nothing. Therefore we must take heed what we understand by Gold,
whereof there are three sorts, Vulgar, Chemical, and Divine; which is therefore
so called, because it is a special Gift of God. The Theosophists are persuaded,
by exact diet, and by certain form of prayers at certain times, to obtain the
Angel of the Sun to be their Guide and Director.

The Philosophers advise to take the like matter above Earth, that Nature has
made under the Earth: Others, to search the most precious treasure from a vile
thing: all which is easily agreed, if rightly understood: for in the lines
following, the same Author says, The vile thing is from the Sperm of Gold,
cast in the matrix of Mercury by a prime conjunction. Others affirm Azoch and
Ignis to be sufficient for this high perfection: the which Azoch among the
Germans is Silver; with the Macedonians, Iron; with the Greeks, Mercury; with
the Hebrews, Tin; with the Tartars, Brass; with the Arabians, Saturn; and with
the Indians, Gold. All which being diverse in Nature, are potential in one
composition: and by the duel of Spirits, the Celestial Gold obtains victory
over all the rest, and is made (though not with hands) a body shining like the
Sun in glory, which is called, Ens omnis privationis expers, or Thummim. This
is the Key that made the pure clear Fountain, and of it was made himself; the
fair Woman so loving the red Man, she became one with him, and yielded him all
glory; who by his Regal power, and sovereign Quality, reigns over the
fourfold Nature eternally: but if any shall understand either common or
Chemical Gold to be the substance of this sacred body, he is much mistaken; for
a glorious Spirit will not appear, save in a body of his own kind.

Although pure Manchet be made of the finest Meal, yet Wheat is not excluded;
and so Bread is said to be of the second and nearer causes, rather then the
remote: notwithstanding, that which is made by the effect, in a successive
course, is as certain as that which is made with hands.

After we fell from unity, we groan under the burden of division, but three
makes up the union; first temporary, and afterward eternally fixed. He that
knows a thing fully, must know what it was, is, and shall be; so to know the
several parts of a successive course, is not a small thing, neither the honor
little in the right use of the Creature.

Air turned into Water by his proper mixture, becomes Wood; and the same Wood,
by Water, is turned into a Stone.

A Spring in Italy called Clytinus, makes Oxen white that drink it: And the
River in Hungary, turns Iron into Copper. What excellency things may attain by
habitual virtue, or what power when Nature and Art make one perfection, who is
able to express?

If you desire by Art to have a thing of admirable sweetness and odor, you will
take a substance of like quality, to exalt into such excellency: the proper
quality of Fire and Air is sweetness; it is but appropriate in Earth and Water:
what bodies shall we find, where these are most abundant, to be wrought upon?
As the Celestial Bodies give no Tincture, yet they are most abundant in
Tincture. Air is cause of Life; Mercury is coacted Air, Ethereal, and truly
Homogeneal, which does after a sort congeal and fix: it is called a crude Gold,
and Gold affixed, and mature Mercury. And although the crude Quality be cold
and dry; and some hold for the excellency of its temperature, That it is all
Fire, or like to it, whereby it is dissolved: however, it is at large proved,
those bodies are most abundant in pure Fire and Air, whose proper Quality is
sweetness. Therefore those are the fittest subjects to make the most precious
perfume in the world: and considering, cleerness and brightness is the center
of each thing, and those bodies have both center and superficies clear and
bright, whenever they are purified by Art, and the bodies made spiritual, and
those Spirits corporated again, they must necessarily be Bodies of greatest or
cleerest Light and Perfection: as one compares a glorified Body to a clear
Lanthorn with a Taper in it, saying, The more a man excels in virtue, the
greater or lesser was the Taper. But the work cannot be manifest without the
destruction of the exterior form, and the restitution of a better; which is the
glorious substances of Urim and Thummim, which in their being, and Physical
use, preserves the Temple of Man's Body incorruptible. Some observe not just
difference between Liquification and Solution: but all Corrosives or violent
Operations, Nature hates, because there can be no Generation but of like
Natures, neither can you have the precious Sperms without Father and Mothers.
And although one Vessel is sufficient to perfect the Infant in the Womb; yet
Nature has provided several breasts to nourish it, and different means to
exalt it to the strength of a man. How Gold should be burnt, which the Fire
cannot consume, is questionable; but every exaltation of this sovereign Spirit,
adds a tenfold virtue and power: then take one part of this Spirit, which is
become as insensible as dust, and upon molten Gold it turns all into powder;
which being drunk in White Wind, opens the Understanding, increases Wisdom,
and strengthens the Memory: for here is the Vein of Understanding, Fountain
of Wisdom, and River of Knowledge.

The Truth of every thing is said to be his incorrupted Nature; for nothing
shall rest eternally visible at the last fire, but that which is of pure virtue
and essential purity. Truth and Science is not led by chance or Fortune; but
the Spirit of God guides by the Hand of Reason. And it seems the Prophets
esteem of these Stones of Fire: some meaning the Stone of Darkness; and as it
were, Fire turned up: Others, the Stone of Tin; and Ezekiel, the Stones of Fire
attained by Wisdom: which he differs from the natural precious Stones, as
pure Fire from common Fire. Therefore let modesty allow that possible, whereof
he understands not the termination and degrees: neither refuse the Waters of
Shiloah, because they go slowly; for they that wade in deep Waters, cannot go
fast.

To obtain the Treasures of Nature, you must follow Nature only, Isaiah 8.6.
who gives not the like time to every Generation; but as the Mare has ten
months, the Elephant three; or, as some say, nine years, and fifty, before
conjunction: Be patient therefore in a work of Nature; for thereunto only is
promised Victory; and the chief errors in Art are haste and dullness.

The Regeneration of Man, and the Purification of Metals, have like degrees of
Preparation and Operation, to their highest Perfection. The first beginnings of
Transmutation or Naturation, is the smallest measure of pure Sulphur, with both
Riches and Honor in the Left Hand, and length in the right. In natural
Generations the form prepares the matter, yet there are precedent Preparations.
The beginnings of Transmutation must be distinguished: some are begun of
Preparation, and some are begun of Composition. Beginnings of Preparation, in
the well of Tears, does qualify the coldness and dullness of the crude
disposition, and tame and subdue the fearful quality of swift flying, and
changes the color of this eternal Liquour, turning the inside outward, and
adding heat by the internal Sulphur of the Homogeneal Body, which is by means
of changed Water, because Water by Water, can only be extracted; yet it is
excluded in the conclusion: for, though it be a necessary preparation to the
alteration following, yet is but the servile and passive, which has the first
operation, being preserved unhurt in weight and purity.

Beginnings of Composition are those inward Operations and Changes, that follow
after that scalding deluge, which by mixing with fixed Sulphur does dissolve
the stubbornness of this Urne; and by help of the external heat, the internal
Sulphur is excited by Operation, and purifieth the substance but only to a
pale whiteness, more hurtful then profitable to the Body of Man: what these
are, shall afterward appear.

Again, Sulphur must be distinguished: white Sulphur, and living or reviving
Sulphur: white Sulphur is of like Operation, and is perfected by restraining,
and heals almost all diseases, and tingeth to white ad infinitum.

By knowledge hereof, even mere natural men have believed the Resurrection,
become sober, temperate and patient; not doubting: within the center of
complete white, rests the red Stone of most delight.

This has caused men justly to condemn all Cementations, Calcinations, and
Citrinations; being enlightened with the glorious object, which is as clear as a
Crystal Looking-Glass.

Reviving Sulphur is the secret of secrets, and the glory of the whole world,
and only proper to such whom the Creator has apted by way of natural
disposition; for they do not only mortify, but purify a pure body, quickening
it with the same essential form; and are said to make a spiritual Body, because
there is no corruption to resist the Spirit; but the bodily Nature, being
wholly subject, is, with the Spirit, eternally fixed in a transparent Body
shining as the Sun. Therefore the conclusion must be understood of the second,
and not of the first: for though a man have never so much white Sulphur, if he
have not of this reviving Sulphur, he is as far from the precious Spirit, which
has power over all inferior bodies, as any other: for only that which is of
the Nature of the Sun, shall shine like the Sun in glory.

A Synod of Philosophers advises us, in seeking the treasures of Health and
Riches, we should show affections to Justice and Prudence; like Solomon, asking
Wisdom, Riches were given to him as advantage. Let us search therefore
celestial Virtue, which is the center of all things; so will it be easy to
manifest the sovereign Spirit of Health and Riches: for the vegetable Sulphur,
is the first Mover in Nature; and only the Mercurial Nature has power of
Metallical Life and Death.

Crude Mercury is originally a vapor from clear Water and Air, of most strong
composition coacted; or Air it self, with a Mercurial Spirit by Nature, flying,
Etherial and Homogeneal, having the Spirits of heat and cold; and by exterior
and interior heats, does congeal and fix.

Also Gold is a fixed Fire, or mature Mercury, and may be made more volative
then Mercury; but only by diverse Mercuries made. Of Mercury is Nature set on
work, the fixed Body loosed, the vegetable Sulphur created, and the universal
Spirit fixed. For the Authority of the ancient Writers, Divine and Natural
Reasons, assure us, this, and no other is the true course to manifest those
Lights, wherein the Creator has heaped up virtue and power.

But it is objected, The Philosophers do not agree amongst themselves.

Answ. Instruments of diverse strings make sweet harmony, if they be well tuned:
but their Readers do rather seek to overruled them, then by painful industry to
find them consent.

Object. Affirm Contraries?

Answ. The Artist his intention is to agree contraries.

Object. They exclude Gold and Mercury from the creation of the Stone.

Answ. Because their crude matter is from the destruction of the exterior form.

Object. They say, The virtue of Elements is their materials.

Answ. Right in respect of their beginnings upon pure bodies.

Object. All their secrets spring from one vile thing common to rich and poor.

Answ. Precious things corrupred, are most vile; and Science is common to rich
and poor, and has much use of Calcination or Dust.

Object. No Metal is required to the making of the Stone.

Answ. As no part of man to the making of man.

Object. One thing, one Glass, one Furnace is sufficient.

Answ. True, when two things of one kind are apted and conjoined.

Object. Out of one Root proceeds white and red.

Answ. Even as Male and Female from one Womb.

Object. The Stone is vegetable, animal, and mineral.

Answ. Right: joint and several it is said to be vegetable, because in the
maturation it is multiplied in virtue and quantity: it is said to be animal,
because it increases his own kind; and it is said to be Mineral, because his
original is from Metal or their Mineral. Here we may remember the Bishop of
Otrecht, who lost his life for discovering his secret. Why should we prevent
the highest distribution, who has not made knowledge hereditary, but wrapped
things in secret, that we might difference things in being, and in being and
use? Nature is even jealous of her supremacy, and abhors to see the sensible
before the intellectual Treasures preferred.

This shows the beginning and end of Art, Lux sata est justo cum rectis animo
laetitia: Mark what ye sow, for such is your harvest. Light is sown on pure
Earth; and some Grain begins to put forth Ears at three joints, some at four;
but the Ear never buds until the joints be grown. And what virtue this knotting
or fixing gives, consider; for by meditation you may see; by seeing, you may
know; by knowing, ye delight; by delighting, ye adhere; by adhering, ye
possess; by possessing, ye enjoy the Truth: that is, the incorrupted use made
visible. Therefore take heed how ye value: for, Part of these things thy mind
may prompt thee to,
And part thy better part may teach thee how to do.


The making of Urim and Thummim, and the perfection of the Elixir is aptly
compared to the fourfold Creation of Mankind: Adam from Earth, Eve from Adam,
Abel from both, and Jesus Christ from a Virgin: so man called a living stone,
produces that eternally stony and fiery conquering Spirit called the Elixir,
from their proper Earth only, their Adam from their Eve, from both their Virgo,
from her only the sovereign and universal Spirit, which does vivifie and
preserve all living Creatures, and raises the Artist from the dust to sit
among Princes.

Life without sin, is wisdom manifest in the flesh: a Body without shadow, is
the universal Spirit corporate. Urim and Thummim were holy Signs within the
breast plate to enquire of God in the Temple. Natural Urim and Thummim is a
visible quality in a clear Body, which preserves the Temple of Man's Body
incorruptible.

Is it not prophetical, that all men shall wisely consider the works of God, to
the end they may know how to value them rightly, and to make just difference
between corporal and spiritual things, Psalm. 64.9. Psalm. 111.8.
and corporate Spirits? for although Spirits possess no place, yet they fail
not to fill every part, by contact of their virtue, and in the use alters both
quality and quantity: the perfect and distinct knowledge whereof, does
necessarily manifest the things sought after by the proper and appropriate
qualities; and from th causes to the effect, opens the internal Beauty of a
true and natural Essence, as plainly, as by seeing that ye see; and also
shows the terminate, privative and perfect end of every particular act: which
is the richest of intellectual Treasures, because Science and Essence are one;
and where the several works, and successive are apparent, the time need not be
limited (like the men of Bethulia,) for only at Elisha his Prayer, his
Servants eyes were opened to see invisible things, which all that rise to glory
shall do.

It was held of old, Nothing deserves the love of an honest man, save the
internal Beauty: Therefore they held Love or natural Affection to be the first
cause or motion: like as the heat and virtue of the Sun, and of the whole
Heavens, has power in all things created under Heaven, and by their Influence
and Radiation, all things increase, grow, live and are conserved; and by their
recess, they mourn and wither, fall and droop; yet they do not necessitate any,
all their force being most in imperfect things; for a body of equal temper
receives little alteration from the Constellations, because the Earth received
virtue before the Heavens were adorned with Sun, Moon and Stars: Therefore that
is to be distinguished in Reason: so is distant in place, and different things
in being, and in being and use: for change of quality brought confusion, and a
better change Renovation.

Historians affirm, The River Nilus vaporeth not, by reason of the long
decoction under the Sun, yet is the Water most wholesome and Medicinable; and
the Neighbor earth begins to increase in weight the seventeenth of June, (and
not before) even then when the River begins to rise: which sympathy of the
distant Water and Earth, by the power of Heaven, is not against Nature,
although beyond ordinary reach. Therefore for a leading cast, let us observe
the concord of Metallical Bodies; which, like the first Male and Female, have
not several beginnings, but are all from a Sulphurous vapor, which, by help of
Influence, Instrument, Digestion, and Masculine and Feminine virtue, connexing
proper and appropriate qualities, they obtain their perfection by the power of
God 's Ordinance: yet as every Earth yields not like Metal, so every Metal
yields not like central virtue: Therefore according to that creating command,
every thing should increase in its proper kind, (not in diverse) and time
makes the number infinite.

The Ancients reading the great Volume of the Book of Nature, find no
abridgement to assimilate the Majesty of Nature, save Man and the Stone; both
which are called, Living Stones: whose original Mortification, Purification,
and difficult Exaltation, are of infinite virtue. Then observe also a Celestial
and Terrestrial Sun, which they parallel with Man, which because they only are
capable of true temper, which is certainly possible, although seldom enjoyed.

But to gain this precious Treasure of Life and Health, we must make sufficient
provision, like men that do deal with great persons; for Gold is Lord of
Stones, and noblest of Metals; and by his proper Regiment, does multiply
himself infinitely. Therefore Geber in his Book of Deundation, says, In Gold
are ten parts heat, ten parts humidity, ten parts siccity: which triple
perfection makes an absolute unity, Body, Soul, and Spirit, being eternally
vivified, because unity is a generical quality of all that is one, and is an
effect of the Form which does produce it: for of all kind of Governments, ten
is the most perfect: and for the natural substance, no composition is like to
Gold; for it is a most perfect temper, and equal mixion; the miracle of Nature,
a Celestial Star, a Terrestrial Sun, the Fountain of Life, the Center of the
Heart, the secret virtue of all Celestial and Terrestrial Bodies, the Masculine
and Universal Seed, first and most powerful of the Sulphurous Nature, the great
Secret of the Almighty Creator. It has most Form and Entity; so most Virtue
and Operation: in it the Elements are elementized. It is called Sulphur, and
Sulphur-Fire: yea, it is said to be all Fire, or like to that in which it is
dissolved. And as Light is the Center of Heaven, and Soul of the World, so
Brightness is the Center, and Celestial Virtue, the Form of Gold; whose admired
mixion, nothing merely natural can dissolve, nor any thing artificial, except
it agree with it in matter and form, and do remain with it in the
recongealation. This vertual Influence, enters potentially, and dwells in the
radical humidity; and no other thing, whether from Heaven or Earth, does
nourish the Heart: yet it is not visible, before virtue be matched; for there
is best concord, where it is most abundant: but whither shall we mount to match
this miracle of Nature?

The Historians tell us of an eternal Liquor of most strong Coaction, rained
down from Heaven: here is like descent: she is called Hyperiwn, or Daughter of
the Sun, a Body of like weight and virtue with Gold; fair, clear, quick, only
coacted and brought from the Empire of humidity, to suit the person, which in
her crude Nature shows strong Affection, and turns the noblest of Metals into
her own color. Therefore the Artist studies how to disponsate these two.

And first denudateth the Lady of her frosty Garments, that she may have the
first activity, and liquefie her fettered Lord: then are they both in the power
of Art to better.

It is objected, This Heaven-born Hermodactylus or Hydromel, is of a Nature so
obstinate and incorrect, she will by no means receive the best impression.

Consider, Her names signify mixed matter of contrary quality, therefore may be
separated: and although her original obscure condition, because it is unknown
by the innate affections and subsistence; for it is an Airy Body, or Air it
self with Mercurial Spirit, subsisting of internal heat, and external cold.
Others say, It is composed of the Spirit of the World, corporate in the womb of
the Earth, and apt to receive the qualities and properties of all natural
things, as wax impression; and being composed of Spirits, the weight is of
greater wonder. Others say, It is a crude Sperm not sufficiently decocted, (yet
not to be profaned.) Others call it an immature Gold, which kills it self, and
the Father and the Mother, to bring forth a pure Infant: by her they overcome
the Fire: she is the perfection of the Universal Medicine: what Conformity,
what Similitude, what Identity she holds with the Metallical Urne, being the
original matter and substance thereof, and may be coagulated to the equal
temper of Gold, is as the whiteness in Snow. Therefore the Ancients magnify
the most Blessed, who created such a substance, and gave it such properties as
no other thing in Nature does possess; yet we see it is a vicious matter, which
has superfluous Humidity, proper and appropriate Qualities, separable and
inseparable Accidents. Therefore the separable may be removed: to which end,
she is included in a Well of Tears, that the VVatriness may be vapored, or
through long Decoction by Dryness vanquished.

Then does it, as it were, congeal, and fix, and become more apt for durance
and extension: for whatsoever is contrary to the natural, does debilitate; and
like by his like, is nourished: but heat is contrary to cold, and the natural
property of scalding heat, is to weaken and dry. The fresh Water adds power and
heat: heat augmented becomes Fire; and Time turns Strength to Corruption.

This glutinous substance has natural heat, from which is the Life and Death
of the Elements.

Therefore as common Fire brings all things to his own Nature, so the
external working upon the internal heat, it does necessarily obtain victory.

Therefore if you can believe that heat and dryness shall overcome cold and
moisture, that lineary and successive course, hidden to all the World, is open
to you.

Therefore, as Nature delights in Concord, so the Lovers and Searchers into
Natures Work, must be of constant minds, and Gideon-like resolve to race the
City Meroz, not refusing to assist the public good, and then the Marriage: for
the Princess never unmasks her Virgin-Beauty, except to him that has skill and
power to espouse her in a bed of Love; which none can do, before the
despoliation of the exterior form: but the Obstacles removed, and Nature set on
work, the external Decree does necessitate the effect: for being now warm, and
blyth, and apt for new Generation, and pounded with her Lord, grated to Dust,
his unnatural softness deceives the sense, and they passionately condole each
others Exile, and in their embraces fall in a sound, until their dissolved
Bodies show corruption; and the more pure, being corrupted, are more vile.

The Artist finding them out of their Indian Paradise, corrects their central
virtue; and raising them from the Earth, leads them the thorny path to
threefold happiness, and by fiery trial, purifieth the Quantity, and changes
the Quality, and so brings them to perfect rest, whereby they have power over
the bodies of Men and Metals, and are crowned in token of their dignity and
boundless Territories.

Now considering the rarity of true Knowledge, the Honor and Dignity of things
desired; what Spirit is so ignoble to think much either of Cost or Time, when
that which is sought is of all Terrestrial Treasure most excellent!

FINIS.
An Appendix of the Virtues and Use of an excellent Essential Water made and
approved by Stephen Trigge, Student in Physic and Astrology; and by him gained
and experimented at Amsterdam, and also in London.
IN all manner of Fevers, both Pestilential and others; Calentures, Apoplexies,
and all Epidemical Diseases, it is a perfect and certain Remedy: and in
Quartain and Quotidian Fevers, where the Disease arises from Choler.

It perfectly remedies the Bloody Flux, and all other Fluxes, either of the
Stomach or Belly, Vomiting, Scowring, and Excoriation of the Bowels: and where
the Stomach is spoiled for want of Appetite, this is a sure Fortification; for
it wonderfully strengthens the Stomach, both the vital and animal Spirit, and
mightily succors the Heart that is oppressed with heat: And, being taken in
Aqua Melissae, it does speedily help the extreme beating and panting of the
Heart: Convulsion-fits and falling Sickness, it cures safely and speedily, and
all manner of heat breaking out in the Face, and any other part of the Body;
being either caused by the heat of the Sun, or by some noisome Food taken into
the Body, that does cause putrefaction of the Blood.

The way to take it is this: in a burning Fever, take of it in Planten-Water,
if there be looseness in the Belly, and sweeten it with Syrup of
Clove-Gilly-Flowers: and drink it as your constant Drink, till the Fever is
abated, and the Appetite recovered.

In the Calenture, Drink it in Balm-Water, being made far sharper then
white-Wine-Vinegar, and mixed with Syrup of Cowslip-Flowers: it must be drunk
very often, till the senses come, and the Patient remain cured: which will be
in few days; for it penetrateth the Blood, makes it thin, quenches the
Fever, reviveth the Heart and Brain, and quickneth all the digestive Faculties.

In the Apoplexy, take it in Betony-Water, and Aqua Vitae, with Syrup of
Stoechas: take the Dose as in the Calenture; or stronger, if the Patient be
able to bear it, and it shall be help in forty eight hours, or thereabouts.

If there be any thing in this World, that will preserve Man, if the Glass of
God's determination be not quite run out, this will help.

Though he be lame over all his Body, his Senses gone, his Speech lost; and to
the judgment of many, as dead: yet this precious Liquor will in a wonderful
manner restore them speedily and safely.

In the Scurvy, Canker, Squinancy and Inflammation of the Uvula, this does
excel all ordinary Medicines: for it does after a wonderful manner quench all
Inflammations, and tempereth well the Blood and the Spirit: as,

In the Scurvy, if it be all over the Body, and most of the Teeth be putrefied,
and ready to drop out, and the Gums very much swelled and annoyed, take a
little of this Oil once, and dip a little Lint in it upon the end of a Probe,
and lightly touch the places with it, and rub the Teeth all over once: then
drink the decoction often for eight or nine days together, being made very
sharp in Egrimony-water: and the Patient shall be assuredly help, although he
were judged past cure.

In Convulsion-fits, put it either in Cowslip-flower-water, or black
Cherry-water, and mix it with Syrup of red Poppy, and it is a sure help.

In the Falling Sickness, mix it with Aqua Epileptica, and Syrup of Pionies,
and give it often, and it is a sure help, though the Patient has had it many
years.

In an evil Stomach oppressed with Heat and Wind, and loss of Digestion, mix
it with Conserve of red Roses, and a little Mithridate.

In all loathing of the Stomach, and debility and vomiting, give it in
Mint-water, with Syrup of Clove-Gilly-Flowers.

In all heatings and burnings above Nature, as Hectic Fevers, and the like;
mix it with Barly-water, and Syrup of Violets.

In all Lotions for the Mouth or Throat, mix it with Planten-water and Honey of
Roses.

In all manner of Purges that are fulsome, and offending the Stomach with their
noysomness two or three drops of this Liquor put in, does not only amend that,
but it does also correct the working; so that it shall not corrode, nor hurt
the Stomach nor Bowels by his working.

These and many more Virtues has this worthy Medicine, in working internal
Cures, too many to relate, unless I here meant to write a Volume thereof: But I
shall here leave the rest to the Experimenter, and speak somewhat of external
Cures done by it.

As first, In all manner of Ulcers, old Sores, Fistula's, or Gangrenes,
Cancers, and Cankers, Noli me tangere, Imposthumes, or evil Pustula's,
proceeding from Morbus Gallicus, great Carbuncles, and any other not here
related; I shall commend this Sovereign Medicine, but yet very sharp and
biting, though sound, pure and perfect, and does immediately help its own
biting and gnawing. The order to use it, is this: it does both cleanse,
incarnate, siccatrize, consolidate, and soder up the Wound, and dries it, that
there fall no accidents: for it does marvellously defend either from the Humors
flowing to the Sore, or from all Inflammations which do often happen, if it be
not this way defended.

In a great and dangerous Canker in the Mouth, there where they seem rotten,
and very much eating into great holes, either in the Root of the Tongue, or
Roof of the Mouth there where it is.

Take a little Lint, and dip it in this Liquor, without any addition, and
lightly do the Sore all over: then let it remain twelve hours; then do it again
as you did before: the smart will be tedious for a time, but it will be over in
an hour or less.

With using this two or three times, the Matter or Core, and all the putrefied
substance will fall out: then once more touch the place, and there will no more
Cankerous nor corrupted Flesh engender there; for it will defend it: then make
a Lotion to wash it with Planten-water, or Honey of Roses, and make it sharp
with this Liquor, and wash it two or three times a day: then make an Emulsion
to drink with Egrimony-water and Syrup of Violets, and drink it morning and
evening; and in nine days the Cure will be perfected: and with this order you
may cure all these Diseases and Sores above mentioned. But you must understand,
That the more dangerous the Sore is, and the fuller of corrupted and dead flesh
it is, the longer the Cure will be before it be perfected.

Also for Ulcers which are great, old and dangerous, in the Legs, where the
humors are apt to flow, there this Oil excels all other Medicines.

Take this Liquor, if it be a Gangrene that eats a hands-bredth in a day, this
will assuredly heal, and separate the bad flesh from the good, and bring
quickness again in the gangrenated part, and defend the good flesh from being
touched with this venomous eating Malady. Where you find such a desperate
occasion, take the crude Liquor, and moisten it very well with it, and so let
it remain 12 hours: then do it again, and let it rest as before: then do it
again; and at 3 or 4 times, it will make separation, and preserv the good; and
all that is gangrened will come away together.

And you need not use any Instrument to scale the Bone; for this will do it of
it self, and yet not hurt in the least: as some may conceive, that do not know
the true Operation thereof.

But when there is separation made, then touch the part afflicted once more
with this: then make a Lotion to wash it; with Planten-water and Honey of
Roses, being made a little sharp with this Water; and make a Salve of
Candle-grease dropped in water, and Beeswax, of equal parts, and spread it
upon a linen-cloth, and apply it as a Plaster.

With this thou shall perform great Cures, in a fortnights time, which
otherwise may not be cured in a quarter of a years time.

These, and many more are the Virtues of this excellent Liquor, experienced
very well by Mrs. Jordan of Sowowlde in Suffolk, Daughter to Doctor Barnes of
Amsterdam, and by me Stephon Trigge, over against Baynards-Castle.

This Medicine is now prepared, and to be had at the House of Mr. Hepburne
Minister, in the Carpenters-yard in Little-Brittain.

Where are also prepared excellent Pumicils, to cleanse and whiten the Teeth,
fasten loose Teeth, and make the Breath sweet.

Lozinges for all Coughs, Tissicks, Asthma's, Consumptions, or the like: which
are also to be had at Mr. Moons shop at the seven Stars in Paul's Churchyard,
with Diet-Drinks, Electuaries, Pills, etc. especially, for all Venereal
Distempers; by (...).

(...).

The SECOND PART OF The MUMIAL TREATISE OF TENTZELIVS: Being a natural Account
of The TREE of LIFE, And of The Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. With, A
Mystical Interpretation of that great Secret, to wit, The Cabalistical
Concordance of the Tree of Life and Death, of Christ and Adam.
I Having committed to the World some Precepts and Examples about Mumy
spiritual, I hold it no Solaecism to annect this Pleasant, though Mystical
Treatise, Of the Nature of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil: for they
being obscure, this is a Lamp to dilucidate them, scarce credible, Authority to
vindicate them, and apparently false Testimony, sufficient to verify them.

Now whatever knowledge we have of this Scientifical Tree, we decerped it from
holy Writ, which says expressly, Genesis 2 verse 9. That the Tree of life was in
the midst of the Garden; and also, the Tree of knowledge of good and evil; and,
That those that eat of the fruit thereof, shall be as God, (...), knowing good
and evil. To which the Person of the Father, (speaking to the rest of the
Godhead) attests, saying, Lo, Adam is as one of us, knowing good and evil.
Which Elocution of the tri-une God, may not be thought ironical, as it might at
the first glance seem to be; Seeing then a double and contrary meaning should
be implied in the words, as if God had by a mental Reservation, hinted one
thing; and by an oral Expression, declared another: pronouncing that for
verity, which could be taken for no other then flat falsity; but let God be
true: for though on Adams part it be Metaphorical, in all other respects it is
categorical and affirmative: as if God had said, Because Adam, by the
enticement of the Serpent, has eaten of the Tree of Knowledge, and thereby
acquired the knowledge of Good and Evil; not that that is competible only to
the Deity, but that that is Philosophical and Communicable; Lo, he is as one of
us; that is, he emulates the Omniscients Pansophy in his Measure and Degree.
Yea, God the Son elsewhere uses the like Elocution, The Children of this world
are wiser in their generation, then the children of light. And that this
Interpretation is true, the following words evince irrefragably; and therefore
he thrust him out of Paradise, lest knowing the Nature and Faculty of the
other Trees, he should put forth his hand, and take also of the Tree of Life,
and eat, and live for ever.

If then the Faculty of the vivifical Tree was true, and such a Tree truly
natural existed, as had power to confer (...), immortality to its Tasters, (as
without doubt it did) the Faculty of this scientifical Tree must also be true,
and no way feigned; and I need not urge, I think, That Adam and Eve would never
have believed the Serpent to their ruin, if the light of their Nature had not
also discovered the Fruit of this Tree to be scientifical. It is therefore true
and impraegnable, That this Paradisaical Tree was endued with this same Faculty
of giving knowledge. So that the Question will now be, Whether this Faculty was
infused into it in the Creation, acquired by it after the Creation, or
communicated to it by some other means and way. And to loose this Gordian knot,
Hic labor, ho^ ^pus est. And here also the Scripture (though somewhat
obscurely) points out a mean to resolve this Quaere: the words are thus, The
Serpent was more subtle then any beast of the field, which the Lord God had
made. Which words are here inserted for no end, that I can find, unless they
portend something of moment in this matter. It is further observable, That the
Devil came not to Eve in form of an Apple, but of a Serpent, which he knew for
subtilty worthy to be preferred before all Beasts, which also Eve judged to
have spoken naturally. It is moreover also probable, That the Serpent had his
Cavern under or about that Tree; whereof, God being in no wise ignorant,
forbade man the use of its Fruit.

Moreover it is considerable, That in things obscure and dubious, that
Explication must be admitted, whereto Sense, Reason, and Experience give
suffrage, if it speak not contradiction to the Rule of Faith. Who is he then
that can conceive? or what Diver into Natures secrets has met with the like
Mystery? that he can by some weak resemblance evince the World, how by the
eating of a single Apple, her children may suck in more then humane Knowledge.
Whereas on the other side, I should very much derogate from man's praecellency,
if I should in the least doubt, that the acuteness of his Intellect, could not
find out a way how this Faculty might be acquired: and so close with our
Sentence, That this Tree became scientifical by way of Transplantation from the
Serpent; that is, this Tree and its Fruits had both the spiritual Essence, and
the spiritual Virtues of the Serpent, communicated to them, and impressed in
them, by virtue of the Serpents cohabitation with them. For in Nature we find,
That many Bodies do not only by their qualities, affect their adjacents, but
also infuse their Virtue into them, and indue them with the same Faculty. Thus
the Magnet does not only attract Iron-Rings, but communicates its Virtue to
them, and makes them Magnetical; as I can upon Ocular Testimony aver. And thus
Vegetables may transume and possess the Proprieties and Affections of Animals,
and yet not transgress the Bounds of Nature: of which rank, not only this
Treatise affords us many Examples; but Smollius also, (who was our Manuductor
into this Opinion) records some, and assigns the Reasons thereof, in his Manual
of admirable things.

Of which same Argument, Theophrastus also treating in his Book of the origin
of Sciences, affirms, That our hairy and white Serpents in Germany, are endued
with such admirable, and (...), supernaturally excellent virtues, that they are
and will be of special use for the attainment of Knowledge, both natural and
occult. And he adds further in the same Book, That the simpler sort think
themselves nothing bettered by this his service: and therefore he judges it not
Work worth the while, to cast more Pearls before such Swine, being persuaded he
has satisfied the wiser sort.

By what Art then, this incomparable Treasure may be effoded, the diligent
Searcher of Nature shall find, if he seriously perpend the forequoted words,
and with unprejudiced thoughts, judiciously consider that noble (...), and for
this purpose most truly-useful pair of little Books one treating of Time, the
other of the origin of Sciences: neither will he have cause to say, He has
spent his Oil, if he take time to confer one of them with the other, and judge,
(...), Purple by Purple; because, as in the Book of Time, the Mumy of the
Microcosm, is distinctly handled: the four corporal Mumies, being first treated
of; and afterward, the one essential and spiritual of the Microcosme: so again
in the Book of the origin of Sciences, the spiritual Mumy of the Serpent, how
it may be transplanted into certain Fruits, to make them scientifical for the
good of man, takes up the former Treatise; and the later is destined to the
corporal Mumies of the Serpent.

And hence any wise man may easily collect, That the extraction of Mumy
spiritual, is in all the same, and differs not according to the diversity of
those things whence it is extracted, as Theophrastus shows in his Book of Time;
where treating of the spiritual Mumy of the Serpent, he gives us an account,
how the Ape, by means thereof, enters league and amity with its utter Enemy the
Serpent: nay, I dare affirm, That he that has the perfect knowledge of the
Mumy-spiritual of the Microcosm, and its Consequents, which Theophrastus
handles in his Book of Time, shall easily attain the knowledge of all the
kinds of serpentine Mumy, but especially of that which he accurately delivers
in the first and second Chapter of his Book of the origin of Sciences.

The way then to get this spiritual Mumy of the Serpent, and according to this
former Treatise to transplant it into some Fruits or Grains, and with them to
confer it to some man, or the like, is, (...), one and the same with the
forementioned ways: take then the sperm, that is, the Eggs of the Serpent,
which are (...), the Elements and Principles both of their corporal and
spiritual Mumy, mix them with fat Earth, and sow some Seed, or plant some Herb
fittest for your purpose, in that Earth.

But for greater efficacies sake, in conferring knowledge, transplant them into
some Fruit appropriated to the Brain: Plant therefore a Cherry-Tree in this
Earth; for so it will magnetically attract the Mumial Spirit of the Serpent
into its Nutriment, whose Virtue and Quality will appear in the Cherries; out
of which, by Vulcan's Hammer, that is, Fire, you may elicite the Spirits, and
therewith roborate and acuate the Brain, and no little advance Knowledge.

This (...), or seminal part of the Serpent, may, with like success, be
transplanted into a Vine, out of whose Grapes you may afterward extract their
Spirits; and after the same manner, the Theriack, and all its Faculties, may,
by way of Transplantation, be inserted into the same Fruit, which will be
thereby made Theriacal.

There is yet another way of tranplanting serpentine Mumy into an Herb, thus:

Take Serpents, and include them in some Glass-Vessel, till they be suffocated
and putrefied into some viscid matter, which either transplant into some Tree,
or unite with some Earth fit for the reception of Herbs for your purpose.

You may also by like procession, extract Mumy from Serpents and Snakes, endued
not only with other admirable Virtues, but with that also that is proper to
the Universal Medicine, which they depose with their gliscent Skins; I mean,
that incomparable Remedy for the Morphew, Leprosy, etc. whose Cure can scarce
be hoped for from any other Antidote, (scarce, I say, because I verily think,
the Essence of sulphurous Vitriol, will conduce no little hereunto.)

Take Serpents then, and detracting their Sweat and Collunies from them, cut
off their Heads and Tails, (which are else of much use to other effects, as
well as the other parts) and cast those away; but put their flesh under the
stock, amongst the Roots of a Juniper-Tree, and occlude the hole with a knot of
a wild Plum-Tree: for thus in Wintertime, the Flesh will by the natural heat
of the Juniper, which is temperate, be redacted to its first entity; and in the
Spring, the vegetable Spirit of the Juniper, will attract the Balsam thereof to
its Nutriment; insomuch, that its Fruits or Berries, will be endued with most
eximious Faculties, and enrich their Possessor with a most admirable and
excellent remedy against the Leprosy: for which end,

Take the Berries of the aforesaid Juniper, pour warm Water, with a convenient
quantity of Leaven upon them: and thus let them macerate for eight days, till
they be reduced into one mixed Mass: for which purpose, agitate them once or
twice a day: then distill the Mass through a Vesica; at first with a slower, but
gradually with a hotter Fire, till all the Spirit be distilled. And now because
this Spirit is mixed with Phlegm, it must be rectified in B. M. through a
Cucurbite, and then again through a Phiola; and so you shall have the true
Spirit of Juniper.

Then calcinate the dead Head into Lees, and make Salt thereof by Evaporation;
whereof take one pound, and resolving it in the former Phlegm, mix it with a
sufficient quantity of good and well-dried Argil, till you may make it into
Pastils; which take, and distill in a close Furnace, through a well-beaked
Retorta; putting a handful or two of the Berries into the Reptacle. Let your
Fire be first slow, for the Phlegm; afterward, hotter; and at last, so hot,
that the Retorta may be made red therewith: for so you may extract all the
Spirits. Make Salt again of the dead Head, which mix with Argil, and the
fore-extracted Spirit; and then distill it again into Spirit: then so draw this
Spirit through a Glass Retorta in a dry Bath, that the Phlegm may be collected
apart; and then the great secret may proceed in flave drops, which you must
shut up in a Glass with the Seal of Hermes, and then insolate and repose it.

And thus you have that altogether praiseworthy Remedy: for the Berries of
Juniper being of themselves so conducible to the Cure of the Leprosy, that
they will not only preserve from it, but also in its initiation, profligate
it; they are now by this mystical Art, and the participation of the serpentine
Faculty, so much advanced, that they will easily overcome it in its height and
strength.

But thus much (...), and by the way: now to our purpose.

As therefore the Knowledge of Good and Evil, was, by the mediation of the
Mumy-spiritual of the Serpent, transplanted into the forbidden Tree; so also by
the presidy of some other spiritual Mumy, eternal sanity, or immortality, was
from God granted to the Tree of Life, That he that tasted thereof, should live
for ever: for which we have God's Testimony, Genesis 3. who therefore cast the
Protoplast out of Paradise, lest he should put forth his hand, and taste of the
Tree of Life, and live for ever.

And now we cannot expect, (...), a written Testimony, to prove that this Tree
received its (...), its power to give immortality, from some spiritual Mumy:
for it is observable, that Scripture in things natural gives rather a hint then
a description: for what community has Athens with Jerusalem? yet
Philosophers, those Merchants in Natures Commonwealth, after much tossing to
and fro, on these rugged Seas, arrived at a twofold Port of Verity.

For, say they, this Tree of Life either received this vivifical faculty,
(...), immediately from Gods fiat, or (...), by the mediation of something
natural. And further seeking into Natures Storehouse, they conclude with
Trismegistus,

That it is Gold by whose Virtue Life was implanted into this Tree; and this is
not (...), impossible: for (unless the Almighty ordain the contrary) Gold is of
virtue sufficient to give immortality to man; or at least to prohibit
infirmity, till the predestined term of his Life be come: and the use of this
Tree for this purpose, was in no wise prohibited.

And it is moreover probable, That the first entity or Sperm of Gold, may, as
other Mumies, be transplanted into some Vegetable and its Fruit; by whose
Energy, they may attain the virtue and efficacy of the Tree of Life: which
consideration is founded in Nature; for we see Metals by the mediation of some
Vegetables, suffer various Transmutations, as this story may evince. A certain
Metal-melter accidentally plucked a flower out of a Field, which, through
neglect, he let fall into his Caldron, where it turned all the melted Brass
into pure Gold without any Dross; wherewith the Copper-smith being amazed, he
inveighed grievously against the Melter, as though he had dealt Magically with
the Metal. And here, though we cannot discern how in the common course of
Nature, Metals should be thus changed by the mediation of a Vegetable, yet if
(...), with the strength of our Intellects we seriously and accurately weigh
the way and virtue of Transmutation, the scales of ignorance will fall from our
eyes: for as Grapes which participate not of any propriety of the Theriack, or
of a Viper, are by means of Transplantation, eximiously Theriacal, even so it
is in this case.

The flower indeed in its own Nature, was not of power to work this substantial
Transmutation; but when the spermatical virtue of the Metal, was transplanted
into this Flower, and united with the vegetable Nature, (for Minerals and
Vegetables are not so different from each other, but they may conspire in some
potential relation, and symbolical, though occult, affection) then might the
Flower communicate its received virtue unto, and work a real change in other
Metals; and that not by virtue of the Vegetables Nature barely, but of its
Metallical Transplantation: And by this means, we may not only transplant the
Essences of other Metals and Minerals, Luna, Mars, Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, Sol,
into some Tree, Flower, or Plant; but also with their Faculties, by the
mediation of such Vegetables, profligate most Diseases incident to man.

But it does not a little reflect upon these mysterious Arts and Acts of
Prudence, truly Philosophical, that those sluggish Drones, cut out of the dung
of this Age, as Bacchus of Joves thigh, who think our Mysteries main vanities,
will not be brought to believe, that the Flower of Salendine, that
Swallow-wort, and Gamandraea, wherein the Sperm of Metals is either naturally
or artificially impressed, participate of any eximious faculty, or can
profligate any great Disease: but let such observe Nature, how she is one in
diverse things, and various in one thing; how she is vegetative in Metals, and
metallical in Vegetables and Animals; and so on the contrary: which we having
sufficiently evinced in our Treatise of the Plague, we shall not further
enlarge upon it; remembering that we do not now declaim, but Philosophize.

Let such again attend to those things that cure the Plague, which is a Mineral
disease, arising from the resolution of the Arsnical Yliad: how should any
Vegetable conduce to the cure of this Disease, seeing the Cure must be
Analogical to the Cause, unless some Magnetical or Mumial Impression, or some
Astronomical Transplantation, be naturally or artificially conferred on them by
the mediation of Celestial Seeds, or by the cooperation of this Mumy
sympathetical and truly spiritual? without which influence, those things they
call Characters, were of no efficacy, which yet we see by Art and Influence,
very efficacious; nay, he that denies this conjunction, must needs confess,
that the Queen of the world intercedes, working strong imagination and credit,
both in the mind of the Giver and the Receiver, that these are influenced from
above. This kind of Transplantation is natural to Gamandraea, for the cure of
the Plague; which is most eximious therein, especially in the Climate where it
grows: the like Celestial Transplantation appears also in Arsmart, which does
not only by a natural attractive faculty, but by influence also, cure all
wounds and ulcers, teeth-aches, and the like affections proceeding from the
subtle fluxions of Salt; of which Herb, Theophrastus has a whole Book. The
sanative virtue of the Roots of Succory, is, I think, artificial, by some
Mumial sympathetical virtue; because, if they be dug up in the hour and day
of Venus, when the Sun is in Leo, they will, if eaten, cure any wound that 's
infested with no symptom. The like whereof was of late experienced by the
Magnetians, as I was in a Letter informed by a Friend of mine there: thus: A
Boy of nine years of age, was to take the Wood of an Ash, and looking toward
the East, cut it into splinters; which done, they use it with a form of words
to the cure of all joynt-dolors, as Podagry, Chiragry, Gonagry, Toothache also;
and all kind of wounds. They rub the teeth with it, and imbue it only in the
blood of the wound, and it cures them all.

And who doubts of the sovereign virtue of the Sambucus or Elder growing on a
Willow, gathered in October, a little before new Moon, and cut into nine
splinters, but it will cure the falling sickness? ( Abbas indeed would have the
Root thereof evelled on the Forenoon of St. John Baptists day, and used for an
Amulet) the reason whereof, we take to be this: Some Magpy having before
denounced the seeds of an Elder-tree, left them mixed with its dung, (which is
of efficacy against the falling sickness) on a willow, where the Sambucus
growing up, becomes, by mediation of the Mumy of the dung, a Remedy for this
disease.

And now, that this spiritual sympathetical Mumy may be helped by artifice, is
plain in Paracelsus's Zenechdo against the Plague; for though that same
consisting chiefly of Arsnick, has some resemblance of pestiferous poison; yet
as the Lodestone, which has in it the Spirit of Iron, strongly attracts Iron;
so this Diazenech, having in it the active Spirit of the Plague, is by
sydereous composition, and formation into certain Figures under the Dragons
head or Scorpion, (when either the Sun or Moon possess either of these Signs)
made a most excellent deletery against the Plague; as many by experience can
demonstrate, who have been cured by its praesidy, and know its true manner of
formation. Thus the Bezor-stone received power against Poison from Jupiter at
first; but yet not so valid, as that it could communicate that faculty to
others, till by the influence of Scorpio, under whose power it must be formed
into the resemblance of a Scorpions upper parts: it is not able to communicate
its faculty to Mastick or Frankincense. Paeony, which is also called Phoebea,
is very good, but not so efficacious unless it be used when the Sun is
predominant.

And how famous is that Martial Ring, which, carried in some fit place, or
rubbed on some such part, will allay and cure the pains of the Teeth and Head,
the Cramp, Quartain-ague, falling sickness, Vertigo, Apoplexy, Plague, and
other Diseases? insomuch, that the great capt. of Hetruria commanded the
Inventer thereof, (a Brother of S. Augustines order) To sell none to any but
himself for some years. Whereas, if this same were formed of some long
Horse-shooe-nail, pulled out of a Horses hoof on purpose, in the hour Mars
reigns, it would be ready to contract it self to fit the least, and amplify it
self for the greatest finger as you would.

But the common Theriack also, and all things sublunary, are fydereal; yea, it
is Solar, and therefore efficacious against Poisons, and all epidemical fluxes:
yea, it would be more efficacious, if from the observations of the heavens,
some opportune season were chosen for its composition, wherein it might receive
the sympathical faculty of the superior Bodies, as Ptolomy, Theophrastus,
Albertus, Marsilius, Fixinus, Rogerius, Bacho, Thurnhenserus, Crollius, and the
rest of those dexterous Searchers of Natures secrets, do all along observe.

Though some are of Opinion, That Medicks should not trouble themselves herein,
and therefore they adore the Goddess Sloth, instead of the Elisian fields,
resting themselves in their Fools Paradise, till some Patient rouse them out of
their sleep: but that we may not seem too tedious, we shall leave this natural,
and ascend to a more mystical Transplantation, whereby the Almighty
transplanted the natural Tree of Life, standing in the Garden of Paradise, into
the Mass of Adam, and afterward into Christ, the true and mystical Tree of
Life; who was suspended on the very wood of the natural Tree of Life; and so
resuscitates both Adam, and all Mankind, dead in sin, to newness of life. God
is indeed wonderful in all his works, as we may learn from the state of
corruption, and reparation of Adam; for as Adam by transgression, upon the
persuasion and enticement of the Devil and Serpent, attracted to himself,
death, eternal damnation, and all kinds of torments, by tasting of the
forbidden Tree; so is he redeemed from death eternal, and received into life
eternal, by the Tree of Life, and Life it self, Christ Jesus.

It is more then probable, That Sibylla prophesied of Christ, when she said,
That Adam, being now ready to die, desired earnestly a Branch of the Bough of
Life, in Paradise; and therefore sent one of his Sons thither to fetch one,
that he might escape this eminent death: his Son received a Bough from the
Angel; but in the mean time, Adam had changed life with death: and therefore
his Son implanted the Bough on his Fathers Sepulcher; where, getting sap, it
grew into a great Tree, and so attracted the whole Nature of Adam to its
nutriment.

Now also an ancient Doctor in the Eastern Country, and a Bishop of the Church,
a little after Christ, amongst many others, detected this venerable mystery
also: Noah (says he) was commanded by God, to carry Adam 's bones and the Tree
on his Sepulcher into his Ark, and preserve the original of Mankind: which
Noah did with all observance: and when Noah sent his three Sons forth into
three parts of the world, he divided Adam 's bones amongst them; giving his
Legs and Feet to his youngest Son, his Breast and Arms to his middle Son, and
his Head and Skul to his eldest, as such sacred relics of the Father of
Mankind, as deserved to be kept, (...). Now his Firstborn betook himself into
the parts near Jerusalem, where he buried Adam 's Skull in a little Mountain,
which was therefore called Mount Calvary, because Adam 's Calvaria or Skull was
there interred; which the Evangelist therefore calls Golgatha, or, the place of
a Skull, in the singular number.

Moreover, he says, That the Tree of the Transplantion of Adam, was by
remarkable and admirable Providence preserved, and made into a Cross for
Christ's crucifixion, and erected directly in that place where Adam 's Skull was
buried. So that he who perpends the matter well, shall fnde, that whole Adam,
as it were, is recollected in and under the Cross; and so with an admirable
tie, conjoined to the vivifical Nature it self: which, how pleasant,
efficacious, and full of consolation, let each one consider: for he that
deserved death, is present in and under the Cross; and he that repaired Life,
yea, that is Life it self, is affixed to the Cross; the true Concordance of
life and death, of a sinless Savior, and sinful man; whereby Life is united to
Death, and Christ to Adam, not without the superinfusion of Blood, like
Celestial dew, for better and more faecundity; that so Adam and his Posterity
eating of the Fruit of this transplanted Tree, might be really transplanted
into Christ, and by a certain celestial magnetism and sympathy, attracted to
Heaven, translated to Life, and made Heirs of Happiness.

For which ineffable Grace and Mercy of the Deity, be rendered to the Tri-une
God, all Praise, Honor and Benediction, Amen.
FINIS.
Philosophical and Chemical EXPERIMENTS OF The Famous PHILOSOPHER Raymund Lully.

Wherein is contained, The right and true Composition OF Both Elixirs and
Universal Medicine: The admirable and perfect way of making the great Stone of
the Philosophers, as it was truly taught in Paris, and sometimes practiced in
England by Raymund Lully in the time of K. Edward the third.

Now for the the Benefit of all Lovers of Art and Knowledge, carefully
translated into English, out of High-German and Latin, by W. W. Student in the
Celestial Sciences, and Robert Turner, (...).

LONDON, Printed by JAMES COTTREL, 1657.

The Preface to the Reader or Worker.
Gentle Reader,
LEt not thy heart be turned from this excellent Science of Alchymy, although
it be contemned and made of no account among the rich men of the world, that no
man has ever come to the perfect end and knowledge of it, with a number of
untrue reports, to hinder, as much as in them lies, this most excellent and
godly Science, the which has been finished by many persons, and by this John
Fauvere in Paris, the which he left for a testament to his Son, as he had wrote
it with his own hand: but true it is, That diverse men, for want of the true
knowledge of this Science, have brought themselves into great poverty, misery
and contempt of this world. To the which I answer, That there be many things
that do let and hinder men to find the end of any Science, not only in this,
but diverse others, as Astronomy, Physic, the profit of the use of the
Medicine, with infinite others: And first, this is the chiefest cause many men
be of so gross understanding, that they cannot perceive and find out the dark
writing of the Philosophers, which is the cause that many times they miss the
great benefit, that they made just account of; and moreover, diverse envious
persons have written Books filled with a number of lies and painted glosses, to
draw the most painful men which have labored in this Science, unto diverse
errors, to the utter undoing of them, and loss of their goods; the which they
have done only of mere malice, because they did not understand the dark
Writings of the most ancient and learned Fathers; which is the cause that they
would never attain unto the depth of this most learned Science. Also there be
many men that will begin things, without attending the end of any one of them;
and so have left off confusedly, and so have not only lost their time, but also
consumed all that they had: which if they would have begun one thing, and have
ended it, they needed not so to have done: and then they cry out, and blame
this Science, which is their own fault. Lastly, there be many men that work
daily upon receipts that they gather here and there, without seeing or making
that which they do work, whether it be agreeing with the Nature of the Science,
or from whence the receipts do come or spring, or who have written them; whereby
they also consume their substance; which is their own fault, and not the
Science. And also, God will not have the Science wrought by some men, and yet
they will work it: and thus they lose their goods. And therefore, gentle
Reader, if you will keep your self from damage or loss, so read this Treatise
over, not once but many times; so shall thou find the sweet Kernel or Marrow
of the Philosophers, and right Science of Transmutation of Metals that be base,
into most pure Metals of Gold and Silver. And therefore think not the reading
and studying of this Science or Treatise to be tedious unto thee, considering
the great profit thou shall reap by it. The Lord grant, that thou may find
it, and use it to the honor of God, and profit of Christ and his poor
afflicted Church.

Raymund Lully

The Contents of the first Part.
Chap. 1. TO prepare the Salt for the red and white Elixir. Chap. 2. To make
the Elixir to the white work. Chap. 3. Of the Key of Sciences, and Properties
of Salt. Chap. 4. The Composition of the red Elixir. Chap. 5. The projection
with the red Elixir. Chap. 6. The Composition of the Cement for Gold. Chap. 7.
To make Silver heavy as Gold. Chap. 8. The difference between the Elixirs and
Philosophers Stone. Chap. 9. The living and dead Sol and Luna.
The Contents of the second Part.
Chap. 1. THe Composition of the Philosophers Stone. Chap. 2. The Elixir of
Life. Chap. 3. To sublime Mercury to the red Elixir. Chap. 4. To sublime
Mercury to the white Elixir. Chap. 5. To prepare the white Stone upon all
Bodies. Chap. 6. To make the Lutement to all works. Chap. 7. To understand
moral and natural Philosophy. To draw Spirits out of a ponderous Body or Earth
by Distillation.
Tract. ult.
Upon Saturn, the Tincture of Gold, the Quintessence and Aurum Potabile, and
the matter of the Universal Medicine.
Philosophical and Chemical EXPERIMENTS OF The Famous Philosopher RAYMVND LVLLY.
CHAP. I. Teaches, how to prepare the Salt for the white and red Elixir.
TAke, in the Name of God, great Bay Salt as it is made out of the Sea; take a
good quantity and stamp very small into a stone-Morter: then take Cucurbites of
Glass, and pour your Salt therein: then take fair Well-water, and let your Salt
resolve into clear water; being all dissolved, then distill it by Filter; that
is to say, hang a jag Felt or Woolen-cloath, in the Cucurbite; and let the
other and hang in another Glass beside it, set as it were under it, that the
Water may drop into it, that the Felt or Cloth will draw out, and that shall
be clear as Silver: and when that all the water is dopped over, look to it if
that it be very clear; if it be not, filter it again into another Glass, till
it be clear or Christalline: and when it is so, put it into a Glasen Pan, set
it upon a Sand-Oven, and let the Water vapor away, till that it do come above
like unto white-Salt: then take stone-piss-Pots, or Pots made of Cullen-Earth,
such as the drinking Pots be made of, and put the Water and the Salt that
remains, therein, and set upon the said Oven, and let it vapor away; and while
that it does dry, stir it with a stick, till that it be very dry, otherwise,
it will come into a lump or mass: and this being well dried, beat it in a
stone-Morter very fine, as you did before, and then put it into a melting
Cruce, and set them into a glowing Oven, or Say-Oven, which is an Oven that the
Goldsmiths do enamel their Rings in: the Oven being very hot, take the Cruses
that be filled with Salt, and set them into the Oven, and let them stand until
they be glowing hot; and see that they be no hotter behind then before; if
they be, then turn them round with a pair of Goldsmiths Tongs: put but one Pot
in the Oven at a time, that you may do them the better; and when that Pot is
red glowing hot, take it out, and put in another to be calcined.

And then, when cold, put it again into your Mortar, and break it as small as
you can, the third time, and then set it in the Fire of the Oven to glow as
aforesaid, Two or three times glowing, and breaking of it every time in a
stone-Morter until seven times, and then put it into Well-water to dissolve,
till it be all dissolved into clear water.

Then distill it by Filter, until it be as clear as Crystal, then set it again
upon your Oven to dry, and the Water to vapor until that it be Salt, and stir
it with a stick as before-said.

And when that it is dry, set it to calcine again, as beforesaid, in the
Sand-Oven; and when that all the Pots that have the Salt, be all glowing hot,
then take them out, and beat them to Powder, as before; and again dissolve into
Water.

Then distill it again by Filter, as before: this shall thou do so many times,
to say, dissolve into Water, and then distill by Filter, and then congeal it
into dry Salt, glowing it by Fire: this do without resting until it come to be
fat, and that it will melt upon a hot glowing Plate of Luna: and if it will not
melt like Wax, you must dissolve, distill, congeal, until that it will come to
that point or perfection: and you must be careful, lest that it should melt in
the Calcination; for then all your labor is lost. Keep this for a great
secret: and such a preparation does appertain to the Salt, that which is the
Riches of this world.

For otherwise thou shall never come to the perfect end of any Elixir, without
such Salt prepared, as aforesaid, to say, to the white Elixir, nor yet to the
red.

Therefore, my beloved Son, he that does know the Secrets of this Salt, (to
say) his Solution, his Congealation, Distillation and Calcination, and can well
understand, knows the whole Secrets of Natural Philosophy, and wise men also;
that is to say, how and in what manner he ought to dissolve, distill, congeal,
and calcine. Therefore let not the labor in preparing of this Salt be grievous
unto thee; for without great cost you may learn herein, to distill by Filter,
dissolve, congeal, and calcine; and to form all the works that be needful unto
thee in this Science.

So that you come to the principal work, you shall not be to seek or to learn:
Therefore be patient, and leave not off to work, until thou have brought thy
Salt to that pass as I have taught thee before, until it melt upon a hot
glowing Plate of Silver, as Wax in the fire: for without this Salt thy labor is
in vain; for it is the Key of this Science.

CHAP. II. Teaches with this prepared Salt to make the Elixir to the white
work.
TAke of Saltpeter two parts, and one part of Allome, and distill thereof a
strong Water.

Then take of your prepared Salt so much as you will set to work, and take as
much fine Capel Luna as you have of your Salt.

Beat your Luna into thin Plates, and dissolve into the strong Water a part, in
a Glass by it self.

Likewise your Salt you must dissolve in the said strong Water by it self.

And when your Luna and Salt is dissolved in both Glasses, put the two clear
Waters together, and note that you put no more Water to the dissolution of
these two matters, then will dissolve them, and you shall see your Luna fall to
the bottom of the Glass, white, like Milk: take the Glass properly, and shake
it in your hand, and let it stand, and you shall see your Luna as a green Water
to rise; above the which you shall pour properly off into another Viol of
Glass: then pour upon it more strong Water, that has not occupied, and do as
aforesaid; putting the green Water off in the first green Water, shaking it, as
aforesaid.

This do until all your Luna be dissolved into green Water, that no Feces
remains; otherwise, your work will not be perfected: and when you have all into
clear Water without Feces, put the same into a Cucurbite of Glass with a Helm
and a Recipient, and Lute it strongly: and when your Lutement is dry, then set
your Cucurbite in Balneo, and make fast to the bottom of your Glass a round
Certel of Lead, like a Fol; and as your Lutement does dry, so increase your
fire a little to distill of the flame, that there shall remain no more strength
in it then common water: and to know this, put a clout in the mouth of the
Alimbeck: and when the clout does begin to look yellow, pull all the fire out
of the Oven; for then the Spirits of the strong Water do begin to come.

Therefore look well to your work, lest your fire be too hot, that no Spirits
come out of your Water; otherwise you shall fail in your work. Then let your
Glass and Oven stand and cool two hours long: then take off the Helm of your
Cucurbite, and have a Cover of Glass that may pass just in the mouth of your
Cucurbite, wherein your Medicine is in, fast luted to with Lutement, or with
white Wax: then set it in your Sand-Oven, or warm Ashes, not very hot.

Then take fair Capel Luna beaten very thin into Plates and cut into small
pieces, and put in a little at a time till it be dissolved; and when that is
dissolved, put in more till it be dissolved also. And thus let your Glass stand
in warm Ashes, and look that no Air go out of your Glass nor Cement.

This nourishing shall continue until it will dissolve no more, but lie in the
Glass undissolved two or three days long: and then is your Medicine nourished
like a Child in the Mothers Womb.

Then may you let your Glass wax cold, and you shall understand, without this
nourishing the Medicine cannot engender; and therefore it is needful that it be
nourished, that it may get strength of Generation: and when your Glass is cold,
lute your Glass well with good Lutement, that may endure against Water, the
which I will learn thee in a Chapter apart, and let the Lutement dry by it
self; then set the Glass in Balneo Mariae, to putrefie forty days long to hold
it in such a heat, as the Sun in Summer: for great fire may destroy your
Medicine. Therefore let your fire be always of one heat: for in that there
does remain a great secret of the Medicine.

And within the forty days your Medicine shall be dissolved; and if it be not
dissolved in forty days, let it stand longer until it be dissolved: for this
is the primest of all the work: for the dissolution is done by heat and
moisture, and congealed by heat and drowth.

This Point being obtained, you have the Key of the Chamber, and he is blessed
of God that has this point.

For this is a token of goodness, for in every Dissolution and Congealation,
you do augment your Medicine and Degree: for the first time it will do
projection one ounce upon seven, and dissolve and congeal again; one ounce will
project upon fourteen ounces, and the third time upon twenty eight ounces.

And so it goes forth double in projection every Dissolution and Congealation.

But you shall understand that the Congealation that comes of warmth, is no
perfect Congealation; but it ought to congeal in the Glass or in the Ampule
with heat, (to say) standing in warm Ashes: and therefore, whenas your Medicine
is dissolved in your Glass, let it cool; then take it out of your Balneo, and
dry your Glass.

And look well to your Lutements that they be close, without any clefts to let
out the Spirits; then set it in your Sand-Oven in Ashes: then put fire in your
Oven, and let your fire be no greater, then that you may hold your finger in
the Ashes: and so let it stand twenty four hours to congeal; if not congealed
in that time, you may let it stand longer; and when you see that it is
congealed, give God thanks, and rejoice; for it is ready to do projection in
this manner.

Take to project on,

Fair red Copper the best that you can get, and take from him his redness,
which serves not in the work: the which you shall do after this manner.

Beat your Venus into thin Plates, and cut it in small pieces, and anoint them
with this paste or pap.

Take white Arsnick and grind it on a Marble-stone with Oil of Tartar, that it
be thick like Pap; and with this matter anoint your (Copper) Venus pieces: then
take great Bay Salt, and put some part of it into a melting-Pot bottom, and lay
your (Copper) Venus pieces upon that: and then Salt upon them, and (Copper)
Venus pieces upon that, Stratum super Stratum, till all your Pot is full: and
uppermost in your Pot, let there be a good quantity of Salt: take a tile-stone,
and make a round Covet for the Pot, and lute it well too; and when the Lutement
is dry, set it in an Oven in fire of Calcination for twenty four hours long.

Then let it cool; and then break your Pot open, and cast the matter that is in
your Pot in warm Water, and stir them with your Hand, until the pieces be
clean, and that the Water comes fresh from them. Then dry them, and beat them
in an Iron Mortar, so small as you can. Then put your Venus, so beaten, into a
Canvas Bag that is sowed close up, and round like a Ball. Then take fat Clay
that is mixed with hair, and therewithal streak over your Bag, thinly, that it
may dry; and when that it is dry, streak it over and over again, as it dries,
until your Clay be as thick as a Pot. Then, when your Clay is luted fast about
your Canvas, take a small wooden Pin, and put through your Lutement into the
Bag, that the small end may remain within the (Copper) Venus.

Then put the round Ball of (Copper) Venus into another melting-Pot, the wooden
Pin downwards; but you must remember to put among your beaten Venus, Sandever,
Verne, Saltpeter, (Ana.)

Then set this Pot in a wide Furnace to melt, and the Venus will melt and run
out into the Pot, wherein it does lie: and then the Venus shall be fair and
white like Luna, and shall be profitable in this work: the which, without this
work of Preparation, would not be as you should do your projection.

Take seven ounces of this prepared Venus, and put it into a melting-Pot, and
slow it in the highest degree of fire that you can, in a wide Furnace: then put
to it one ounce of fine Capel Luna; and when it is melten, as aforesaid, put to
it one ounce of your Medicine or Elixir, and nimbly stir it with a wooden
stick; but let no Iron come unto it: and when it is well corporated, then take
it out, and cast it into an Ingot; so you have the best Luna in the World, to
abide all Proofs and Examinations; and it is far more fine then that that comes
out of the Earth. When you have finished this Work, give God thanks, and
remember the poor.

CHAP. III. Of the Properties of the Salt, how it is the Key of this Science.
MY beloved Son, although our Salt be the principal Key of this Science, yet
can he not do any good, although he were made melting as Butter, without
joining with his Sol or Luna; otherwise, there is no Generation: therefore he
must be prepared by himself, and then join unto him Sol or Luna, before you do
any projection upon any imperfect Metal, to make them perfect.

But when you have prepared him by himself, and after joined fine Capel Luna
with him, as before written in the other Chapter; then must the Body that you
will project upon, be made clean as aforesaid, and then made living with Luna
joined thereto.

For all unperfect Bodies be called dead, saving Sol and Luna: they be called
living, and full made; and the same living Body that we cast on him, or
projection withal, we call Featen or Ferment, and that does make our imperfect
Body perfect; and therefore they must be all three joined together, or else
there will be no Transmutation. Thus I do shut up the Composition of the white
Elixir, and now will begin with the red Elixir.

CHAP. IV. Teaches, The Composition of the red Elixir.
TAke, in the Name of God, as much of our prepared Salt as you think good, and
dissolve it in this strong Water.

Take two parts of good Vitriol, and one part of fine Saltpeter; and put so
much Salt into your Water as your Water will dissolve, that there be no Feces
remaining, but that it be dissolved and turned into clear Water: then fine Sol,
that is passed seven times through the Cement, which I will learn thee in the
sixth Chapter: take one part of the Sol that is so passed through the Cement,
and two parts of your prepared infusible Salt; but let your Salt be first
dissolved in the said Water, as foresaid: then put in your Sol, the which shall
dissolve well in the said Water: and when your Sol is dissolved, then set your
Glass upon warm Ashes; so shall it dissolve it the better into clear Water.

Then put of the clear Water in another Glass apart, and put other of that
strong Water upon your Sol: This do until you have put it all over into clear
Water in the other Glass apart; and that there does not remain any substance in
the bottom undissolved.

Then work therewith as you have done in the white work, and draw the Phlegmate
out with Balneo in such a heat that there go none of the Spirits out, or any
strength or sharpness, and do it in all manner, as in the white work; and you
must nourish the Medicine in his own matter, that is, with fine Sol, that you
have passed seven times through the Cement, making it as thin as you can in
Plates; and feed your Medicine therewith, as much as it will eat; and then set
it on warm Ashes to congeal.

Then set it to putrefie fifteen days in Balneo, not making your fire too
great; for in the fifteen days it ought to be dissolved: then congeal it on
warm Ashes; the which will be done in twenty four hours.

Do in all things as in the white Elixir aforesaid; for his first Dissolution
and Congealation does fall upon one ounce for twenty eight: and so for the
doubling.

This Elixir ought not to be projected but upon fine Luna prepared, as
heareafter shall be learned; to say, That he have weight of Sol, and deafness
of sound, like Saturn; so that he shall lack nothing but Color and Fixation,
the which our Elixir shall give him, through the Grace of God.

CHAP. V. Teaches thee to do projection with the red Elixir.
MY beloved Son, if thou will transmute Luna into Sol, take fine Capel Luna
that is prepared, in the Chapter hereafter written, being made without sounding
or ringing, and heavy in weight: the which I shall learn thee.

Take seven ounces of this Luna, and melt it in a melting pot; and being well
melten, put unto it one ounce of fine Sol that is passed seven times through
the Cement, as I will learn thee hereafter: for there is no Sol in the World
finer then this, to serve this Science.

Were it augmented in Color by our Cement, and when it is well melten together
with the Luna, stir it together with a wooden stick; but no Iron, for that will
hurt the projection. These two being well mingled together, put into it one
ounce of your red Elixir well stirred and mingled together, as aforesaid, with
a wooden stick: then take it out, and cast it into an Ingot, and you shall
find it to be fine Sol of twenty four Charracts, to pass all proofs, more
finer and better then any that comes from the Mines. Give praise to God for his
wonderful works.

CHAP. VI. Does teach the Composition of the Cement for the Sol.
TAke, in the name of God, of the finest Gold that you can get, one ounce; and
melt with it the reddest Venus and fairest that you can get, one ounce: and
when these two be well molten together, cast them into an Ingot; and when it is
cold, beat it into thin Plates, no thicker then a Crown, and with a pair of
Goldsmiths sheers cut them in pieces of the bigness of a Royal of Plate, and
put them into strong red Wine-vinegar, twenty four hours long: then take old
Tiles that have lain a long time in the Sun, and make them into subtle Powder,
and sift them through a hairen sieve: then take common Salt that is once
dissolved, distilled by Filter, and once well-glowed in the fire, and beaten
into a Powder, and passed through a sieve: then take Roman Vitriol, and
rubefie it as I shall show thee hereafter: then take good red-wine-vinegar,
distilled in a stillatory of Glass: and in that Vinegar, you shall dissolve
your Vitriol: then distill it by Filter, very clear: then set it on warm Ashes
to congeal or dry, that the Water may vapor away, and you shall find your
Vitriol to rest very fair in the bottom: then take a new earthen Pot or Pan,
and put your Vitriol therein, and set it on a cool fire, and stir it well with
a stick, and so it shall rubefie, and wax red as blood; then let it cool, and
make it into Powder, and pass it through a Sieve: and in the same Water, you
shall take Spanish Green, or Verdigreece, and dissolve it in distilled Vinegar:
then vapor it, and dry it: then glow it in the fire, doing all things as the
Vitriol aforesaid: then take as much Salt Armoniack, and dissolve it in
red-wine-vinegar that is not distilled: then take of all these substances of
Powder alike much, and sprinkle lightly over with the Vinegar, wherein the Salt
Armoniack is dissolved; and let there be as much of the Salt Armoniack
dissolved, as there is of any of the other parts: then take a melting-Pot, and
lay in the bottom of your Pot a good Ground of your Cement, and of your
Sol-Venus Plates upon the Cement; so that the Plates do not touch one another:
then put more of your Cement-powder upon it, and so Stratum super Stratum, till
that the Pot be full: let the uppermost lain be Cement.

Then take a Tile-stone, and make a Cover just for the mouth of the Pot, making
a little hole in the Cover, or else the Salt Armoniack will break your Pot, or
blow up the Cover: and when you have made this vent-hole, lute it fast
together: and when your Lutement is dry, set it into your winde-Oven, and first
give it a small fire two hours long, the next two hours more stronger; and thus
still augment your fire, till that you see the Pot be glowing red; and so let
it stand in the heat twenty four hours long: then let your Oven cool; and take
it out, and open your Pot, and you shall find your Plates augmented in color.

The first, my Son, if you will make this work in the Reverber Oven, so make
your fire: the first half hour, small fire of coals; and the other time, of dry
wood, that may be without smoke; and work in the high Ovens a yard from the
ground: and in this manner you must cement your Gold seven times, every time
new Pots, and new fresh Powder or Cement, every time melting your Sol with new
Venus, and beating in Plates as aforesaid; for in every Cement your Venus shall
be consumed, and in the Sol no more shall remain of the Venus, but the Tincture
and Color; and your Sol shall keep always his first weight, but his color
shall be so high, that none shall judge it to be Sol; and you shall understand,
that if there were so much Luna, being made without sound, and augmented in
weight, melted with the said Sol, it would seem to be fine Sol. But I counsel
thee not to do it; for in diverse meltings, it will lose its color, and come
white as before, because your fixed Elixir, or medium, is not put to it:
therefore I counsel thee not to do it; for in the end it will shame his Master;
and peradventure bring him in peril of his life, if he should sell it for fine
Sol. Therefore look well to thy self, and see that thou use no falsehood.

CHAP. VII. Teaches thee to make thy Luna deaf of sound, and heavy of weight,
as Sol aforesaid.
MY beloved Son, Take Vitriol, and distill thereof a strong Water, and dissolve
therein Salt Armoniack, as much as it can dissolve; then set it upon warm
Ashes, and put into it as much living Sulphur, as there is Salt Armoniack; and
then shake it together with your hands, stopping your Glass well, that no
Spirits go out, and set it upon Ashes, and lute a Helm upon it with a
recipient, and make a proper fire under it, till the Water be distilled forth
of the Glass: then let it cool, and take away the Water, and stop the pipe of
the Helm fast, that no vent come forth, and make stronger fire: then shall the
Sulphur and Salt Armoniack sublime up into the Helm; keep it well: then take
fine Capel Luna, and melt it in a melting-Pot, and cast of that sublime upon
your Luna three times, stirring it well together in the Pot with a wooden
stick, but no Iron; and this shall make your Luna heavy of weight, and deaf of
clank, like Sol: and you shall understand, that if you have ten Ounces of Luna,
you shall cast one Ounce of this same Powder upon it, stirring it as aforesaid;
and if your Luna be black, (as it will be) that is a good token: then cast it
out in an Ingot, and quench it in Water; and it shall come blue: then sees it
in Goldsmiths-water (that is made with Tartar and Salt-common) one hour long,
and it shall come white as at first: and thus is your Luna prepared to receive
your red Elixir.

CHAP. VIII. Teaches thee the difference between the Elixir and the great
Stone of the Philosophers.
MY beloved Son, Our Elixir white and red be called Stones and no Stones; for
in manner to speak, there is no Stone so full made, as is our great Stone of
the Philosophers, that is called Major: for the great Stone is full made, and a
perfect work serving to all unperfect Metals: for to transmute them into true
fine Sol and Luna after the preparation hereof; for if he be prepared into
Luna, so shall he ever set them into Luna: for every one of them does engender
his like: the which great Stone I will learn thee how thou shall make it, in
his place hereafter, if it please the Almighty God. The great Stone that does
serve for the red work, or to Sol, is called, Lapis Philosophorum major; and to
the white, it is called Lunary; but the Elixirs be called, Stones and no
Stones; but we call them, Elixirs de Sale, that is, Elixirs of Salt, because
they be compounded of Salt, to say, of great Bay-Sea-Salt, that is clarified by
dissolving and congealing, as is before learned; and also with another Salt
that is called Saltpeter, the which does conjoyn himself to the Salt that is in
the depth of the Body of Sol, when the Tincture is given him by the Cement. And
if the people in times past, had well understood the meaning of this Salt, they
had come to the end of their work: but for lack of understanding, they have
changed the words of the Philosophers, that say, Our Stone is Stone and no
Stone; for they have meant the Elixirs, the which the unlearned have not
understood; and they have named it their salt, that is our Salt of Nature that
we have spoken of before: our Salt of Wisdom, that is, when it is prepared: our
Menstruum; for with the same our Medicine is nourished, as the Child is in the
Mothers womb. They call it also, A King, and that noble Salt, and that living
Water, or Oil of Grace, and the most precious Water of the most secrets, and
the most coming, the which dissolveth Mercury; the same is the Mercury of the
Philosophers: and he dissolveth all Bodies of Metals, and it is a Medicine, and
the first beginning of the Stone; and it is living Water and living Sulphur; he
is the Lord and Master of all Salts, and without him the other have no full
power to make perfect any thing; he does bind and unbinde; he does join the
Man with the Wife; he does change one kind with another, and makes of Bodies,
Spirits; and of Spirits, Bodies: and this must all be compounded, and make
perfect the Philosophers stone.

CHAP. IX. Teaches, That our Sol and Luna is living, and the Sol and Luna of
the Mines be dead.
MY Son, you shall understand, That our Sol and Luna be living, and these that
are of the Mines are dead; and therefore the Sol of the Earth is not so good as
our Sol that is made by this Science; for our Sol has in him three things, (to
say) a Soul, a Body, and a Spirit: without the which three things, there can no
Transmutation be made, the which one alone cannot do; therefore they must be
all three together, if any good should be done. And understand, That no man can
do any Transmutation with the corruption of the perfect Bodies, that is Sol and
Luna: for we take the Spirit of the perfect Bodies, through our Sperm, or our
strong Water, and this same Spirits is holden in our Water, that is, our
dissolved Salt, which is our menstruum: for where the Mother has received the
Seed, that is, the Sperm of the unperfect Bodies with her menstruum into her
Body; so shall it receive no life before the Soul come into it: so do we as
Nature does ask, we conjoyn this together, till he come to clear Water without
Feces, and then we draw out the simple Phlegmate in Balneo or Ashes; and after,
that we put in the Soul, or nourish it with Sol or Luna, according to the
making of your Medicine, then be they ready to engender her like; and then we
do put them in putrefaction the time aforewritten: then is the Spirit and the
Soul perfectly made, and the copulation is done; and then, when that we shall
do projection upon any unperfect Body or Metal so called, then this Spirit or
Medicine does take to him a Body: and then it is called a Spirit, a Soul, and a
Body, which is then living.

And this Instruction (my beloved Son) I give to thee, that thou may know,
that our Sol and Luna is living, and those in the Earth or Mines be dead: and
also, that thou may know, that our Elixir white or red, are not other then
spiritual, or a Spirit: the which, when it is cast upon a dead body with the
Soul, it is made living; that same then is multiplied and augmented in goodness
and perfections; and in him is fulfilled that through accident, which in the
Earth it did lack; (to say) that sickness which is got in the earth, is taken
away through our Medicine or Elixir red or white: the which we do in this
manner; We take, in the Name of God, our Earth or Metal, that is, an unperfect
Body, and melt it with a perfect Body or Corpus, the which is our Leaven, with
the which we do prepare our paste or dough; and then we cast upon it our
Elixir, the which is our Spirit; the which then does make it perfect, and a
living Body or Metal: but the great Stone of the Philosophers, the which I will
learn thee hereafter to compound it, and perfectly to make it; the which is of
so great strength and power, that be he a dead Body or Metal, does not only
make living and perfect, but also makes of the same Metal Medicine, to
transmute any other unperfect Metal into a perfect; and it does the same in the
twinkling of an eye: so that he may be called, and is, The Riches of the whole
World. Herewithall do we conclude the first Part of this Book, to say, The
Composition of the Elixirs white and red.

The true COMPOSITION OF The Great Stone OF THE PHILOSOPHERS. PART II.
CHAP. I.
MY beloved Son, I here before opened unto thee the Truth, without leaving any
thing needful to be known of the Composition of the Elixirs, the which is the
beginning and entrance into the Great Stone of the Philosophers; and this Stone
does convert all Metals unperfect, into perfect Metals of Sol, of twenty four
Caracks fine; the Metal being melted that you will transform: and then cast
upon him his Leaven, that is, Gold, when that your Stone is made in the red
work, and that Gold must be cemented as aforesaid in the other Book, and
augmented in color; that is, if you will melt a hundred ounces of unperfect
Metal, then cast upon it Ferment or Leaven, which is Gold; stir it well
together, and put no more but one ounce of Gold to the Mass of Metal; and then
being well molten, and incorporated together, cast no more but the quantity of
a Pease or Fitch of the red Stone upon it: so shall you see, that this Stone
shall turn this Mass of Metal, or hundred ounces, into the finest Gold that may
be in the World, of twenty four caracts fine, and shall pass all the proofs
that men can do upon it, for better then that that does come out of the Mines.
And you shall understand that our Elixirs that we have before mentioned, are
not come to their full perfection, but it is the beginning of the white and red
stone of the Philosophers: but if you will make it perfect, as hereafter I
shall learn you, the white shall transform all Metals into Silver, like as of
the red is declared; that is to say, when you have melten the Metal that you
will transform, then you must cast into it one ounce of fine Capel Luna, that
you have made deaf of sound, and heavy of weight, as it is before declared in
the other Book; and when you have well mingled them together with a stick, then
cast in to the greatness of a Pease of your white Stone, and you shall find it
transformed into very fine Luna, better then any that comes out of the Earth:
and if in case you did cast one ounce of your white Stone or of your red upon a
hundred ounces of unperfect Metals; so shall that be transformed into the
Elixir or Medicine, wherewith you may tran^form all unperfect Metals into
perfect Luna or Sol, after the beginning of your work: for your white does
engender nothing but Luna, andyour red nothing but Sol, and his projection one
upon a thousand: that is to say, if you will melt a thousand ounces of
unperfect Metals, you need put to it no more then one ounce of this same last
Medicine, and it shall set it over into perfect Luna or Sol, better then any
that comes out of the Earth, to pass all proofs and examinations that may be
done upon it. And herein now following, I will learn thee the composition of
both these Stones to the red and white: and I will first begin with the red,
and then with the white, which is called Lunaris.

CHAP. II. The Elixir of life.
THou shall take (my beloved Son) the red Elixir here before written, and set
it in putrefaction the time of forty days; so that your fire be always of one
heat, and not hotter one time then another, night and day: and the same must be
done in Balneo Mariae: this time being ended, you shall find your Elixir to be
dissolved into clear Water, if that you have kept the fire all the time of one
heat: and your Elixir being dissolved into clear Water, then shall you dissolve
therein Mercury that is sublimed, as I will learn thee hereafter; and dissolve
therein as much of the sublimed Mercury, as the Elixir does weigh: and see well
hereto, that the Spirits fly not out as near as you can: then shake it softly
between your hands, without opening the Glass; and take heed that your Glass
break not through the force of the Spirits; and lute the mouth of the Glass
fast with Lutement that is strong, that it may endure the warmth of Balneum,
without opening: the which I will learn thee hereafter in a Chapter a part; and
when the Lutement is very dry, then set the Glass in Balneo, to putrefie the
time of forty days, as aforesaid, holding the fire of one heat continually the
time of forty days and nights as aforesaid. The forty days being ended, look
if all be dissolved; if it be not, let it stand longer till it be dissolved;
and being all dissolved, let the Balneum cool: and in any case, see you take it
not out hot, lest your Glass break: then take it our, and dry your Glass, and
set it upon Ashes to congeal, and make your Ashes no hotter then you can suffer
your finger to thrust it down to the bottom; and let it so stand the time of
twelve days, without taking any thing out of it; but let it remain always in
that Glass wherein it was putrefied: and see well to it, that the Lutement be
not broken in any place; if it be, lure it well again, that the Spirits fly
not out: and the twelve hours being ended, it ought to be congealed, if your
fire be well governed; if it be not, let it stand longer, till it be congealed:
and when it is congealed, then is the Stone fully made, and perfectly ended,
and it is the riches of the whole world. God grant that you may obtain it, and
give unto Almighty God a good reckning of the health of thy Soul, etc.

My Son, thou shall understand that Mercury is called a Fountain, and the first
matter of all Metals, as in Truth it is, and therefore cannot be done any great
Transmutation, without Mercury be joined therewith: there may be made small
Augmentations and Transmutations, like as we have spoken before in our Elixir;
but they cannot do any high projection, for they do but one upon seven: but
when Mercury is put thereto, and so perfectly made, it does projection in
infinitum, as here before is written: whereby it does appear, that the Mercury
is, as aforesaid, the beginning and offspring of all Metals. And therefore, my
Son, we take the Elixir, and mingle therewith our purified Mercury, and conjoyn
these together with our purified Salt, which is our Sperm: so be they so fast
bound together, that now, nor never, can they be parted asunder, for they do
claspe and enclose together, so friendly as does the Body and the Soul, if so
be ye do it as we have written it. And when these three, to say, Sol, that is,
Ferment, with the Salt and the Mercury, be joined together, then do they make
perfect all things they be cast upon, not only it does take away the sickness
of the Metal and does heal it; but it heals all Inconveniences of men's Bodies;
as one grain of this Stone, being drunk with Wine, being made hot, and then the
party to go to a warm bed, and to sweat, which shall be incontinent, like as
though he did lie in Water, and in three days he shall be made whole of what
sickness soever be have. Therefore, he may think himself happy in this world,
that has gotten him this Treasure, and well can keep it secret, and use it
godly to the help of the poor; for they be not all Masters, that do advance
themselves in this Science to do many things: for many are called, but few are
chosen.

There be many that busy themselves in this Science, but very few that do
bring it to a right end: for it may be that it is not God's will: but thou, my
Son, have thou no doubt, so long as thou followest these Precepts that I have
left thee written in this Treatise, and continue thy self always in labor and
exercise, and thou shall soon come to a perfect end of it, if it please
Almighty God: for I have written thee in this Science, the right Treatise and
Truth, as I have wrought it with my own hands, and brought it to a perfect end,
as many people do know it in this City of Paris, although I have always kept
it from thee till now: that have I done for certain causes that I will not
open. Therefore comfort thy self, and be patient, and think not thy labor
long; for by diligent labor thou shall come to the end sooner: with studying
and reading there can come none of the knowledge of this Science; but only by
labor: the study does give a man how to work, and how he shall follow Nature
in his working: for the end and profit of this Science, is the handiwork: for
a Cobbler cannot set a piece on his shoe with reading, but he must put his
hands to it, and labor to bring it to a perfect end.

CHAP. III. Teaches, to sublime Mercury to the red Elixir.
MY beloved Son, take one pound of Mercury, one pond of Roman Vitriol, and
break the Vitriol to powder; and then take one pound of common Salt that is two
times dissolved and distilled by Filter, and vapoured and calcined as aforesaid
is learned; and then break them to powder in a stone-Morter: occupy no Iron or
Metal in this work; for if you shall, it will mar it: and when that your
Mercury is mingled with the other water, with continual stirring, that you see
the Mercury no more, but that he is wholly lost in the other substance, then
shall you make moist with red-wine-vinegar, but not too much; and dry it then
by the fire, or by the Sun; then put the same in a Glass to sublime, that is
well luted beneath, and set it on warm ashes, and so long let your Glass remain
open: and when you see the mouth of your Glass to look white in the
sublimation, or that your Mercury begin to fly up, then take a linen cloth
filled with Cotten-wool, and therewith you shall stop the hole above, as surely
as you can; but your Glass must be somewhat high, that the clout with the
Cotton that is in the mouth of the Glass do not burn, for then you shall
consume your stopple: and then the Glass is well stopped: so augment your fire
a little two hours long: and then four hours greater; and at the last so great
as your Glass will bear without melting; and so hold your fire in that degree
four hours long: then let it cool; and when your Oven and Glass is cooled, then
take it out, and break it open, and you shall find your Mercury above in the
Helm as white as Snow; and some part shall lie below upon the Feces, very fair
and white: then take it up as clean as you can, both that which is flown up,
and that that lies in the bottom on the Feces.

Now to know whether that you have done right or no, take the Mercury so
sublimed, and weigh it, and see what is diminished of the first weight: for if
it be truly done, it will lack but one ounce in the pound weight; if it want
more, it is not well done: for you have made your fire at the first too great,
or at the last too small.

And if at the first your fire were too strong, then is there of your Mercury
flown away with the moisture, so that the weight comes short: and if at the
later end your fire were too great, it may be that your Glass is molten or
cracked with the force of the fire, and then is your sublimation lost: and if at
the last your fire were too small, then is there of your Mercury on the Feces,
and thereby is your weight diminished.

Thus shall you understand, that I have found it, that there is but one ounce
lacking in a pound weight, being rightly sublimed.

Then take fresh powder of Vitriol, etc. and mingle your sublimated Mercury
herewith, as you have done before, and sublime it again: and this must you do
seven times in all points, as before, or at the first; and in every sublimation
after the first, it shall diminish one quarter of an ounce, if you have done it
right as aforesaid, and no more: and when it is sublimed in this manner as
aforesaid, then it is ready to put into the red Elixir, to make the
Philosophers stone therewith.

CHAP. IV. Teaches thee to sublime Mercury to the white Elixir.
MY beloved Son, you shall understand, that the Sublimation of Mercury, serving
to the white Stone, is done as the other before in the third Chapter: for the
red Stone, there is no other difference, but that you must put in the place of
Vitriol, Roch-Allom, Saltpeter, and prepared Salt, as aforesaid and written;
and do in all points as in the third Chapter, unto seven times: and then is
your Mercury ready and perfect to put to your Elixir, to make the white Stone
of the Philosophers.

CHAP. V. Teaches thee to prepare the white Stone upon all bodies.
MY beloved Son, you shall take, in the Name of God, your white Elixir, and set
it in Balneo to putrefie, the space of fourteen days and nights; and in that
space, your Elixir shall be dissolved into clear Water, if that you have
governed your fire all the while in like warmth, or else it must stand longer
until it be dissolved without Feces: then put of your sublimated Mercury
thereto, so much as your Elixir does weigh.

Then take it, and shake it properly between your hands, that your Glass breaks
not by the force of the Spirit; and look well to your Glass before you do shake
it, that it be well luted or stopped, that the Spirits by no means fly out; for
if they do, it will mar your work.

This done, you shall set it well luted with the Lutement I have spoken of in
the red Elixir, and set it to putrefie in Balneo forty days, as you have done
in the third Elixir or Stone, and in that time it will be dissolved, if that
your fire be all that time well governed; for it lies much in the government
of the fire: and when it is well dissolved, set it to congeal as you had in the
red Stone, and it shall be congealed in twelve days into the white Stone of the
Philosophers: the which will transmute all imperfect bodies into perfect Luna,
to pass all proofs and examinations; and it shall be better and more finer
Luna, then any that comes out of the Mines.

CHAP. VI. Teaches thee to make the Lutement serving to these works.
NOw to make the Lutement, so often spoken of before, that shall not untemper
in the moisture and warmth of Water, and also another Lutement that shall keep
your Glasses from breaking in the fire; for it must hold against the heat of
the fire; and in the first place you shall take the white of Eggs so much as
you shall need, and beat them till they be all thin as water; then let it
through a sponge with your hand, till that it be clear as Fountain Water: of
this same take as much as shall be needful to temper the powders hereafter;
take the Flower or the Meal that hangs or sticks about the walls of the
Mill or Backhouse, commonly called in places beyond the Seas, Stuff-Meal,
eleven ounces, Bol-Armoniack one quarter of an ounce, Sanguis Dragonis an half
quarter of an ounce, white hard Cheese, the parings being done off, one ounce;
break all these into powder, and searse them finely through a Sieve of Hair,
and temper them with the whites of Eggs, and therewithal lute your Glasses with
Linen-clouts dipped in this Lutement, in form of a plaster, and so bound about
the helm and mouth of your Glasses, and let it dry by it self. This Lutement
does serve to lute the Helms upon the distilling-Pots; and also to lute the
Glasses that you do putrefie in, and dissolve; and also to congeal.

And now to the other Lutement spoken of before, that does serve to lute your
Glasses, to defend them from great heat of fire, that they shall not break nor
melt; for then were your work lost: you shall take to this Lutement good fat
Pot-earth, whereof the Potter does make his Pots, and mix with it a little
Sanguis Dragonis, Bol-Armoniack, as much as the half of the Earth of the Potter
does come unto; and unsleked Lime as much as half the Potters Earth; make all
these into fine powder apart by themselves, and then temper them all together
with whites of Eggs well beaten; and the blood of Oxen alike much, or if you
cannot get Ox-blood, you may take Sheeps-blood; then take Linen-clouts, and
scrape off the Lint, till you have as much as the Bol-Armoniack does weigh, and
then mingle them, and temper them all together, and beat them with a piece of
board, till that it be as soft as fine Paste or dough; and with this Lutement,
you shall lute your sublimations under that part that stands in the fire; and
also your Glasses wherein you distill your strong Waters; for it will defend
them from melting and breaking; and use it to all things that you do occupy in
great fire: for you cannot have a better then this, to defend you Glasses
against the force of the fire. Now I have written you enough of the Lutements:
and in this Chapter I will write in brief a part of Philosophy as well moral as
natural.

CHAP. VII. Teaches thee understand Philosophy, as well moral as natural.
MY Son, I have given thee to understand in this Book, and declared all the
Philosophy, as well to the red as to the white, so right and simple as possibly
I may: for if I could have left to thee any briefer, I would not: for if that I
should, thou could never have understood it: and therefore I have thought it
good to show it thee in plain Words and Reasons, to declare the same, to make
thee perfectly to understand to make this work, that thou should impute no
fault to me, if that thou should not come to the right knowledge of this
Science; but the fault should be in thy self, and in no man else: for I have
written it in right and plain Words and Reasons: but take heed that thou be not
as many men be, that do think themselves Masters of all Sciences, when that
they never saw the Door wherein the Science was learned: but I would have thee
use thy self to reading and studying of this Book, and print all these Reasons
in thy heart, and then thou may go to work with a good and glad courage, and
God will bless thy proceeding, if thou will serve him and pray to him, as it is
thy duty to do; and also thou must have a diligent care to keep God's
Commandments: for as I have often said, with bodily pains taking, and diligent
labor, both of thy body and mind, thou shall bring this Stone to a perfect
end: for the Philosophers have hidden this Science, and have written it very
darkly, and have colored it over with many parables and dark sentences, that
it is almost impossible to come to the understanding of them, without great
instructions of others, Masters of this Science, or else through the great gift
of God. Therefore I have written this Book, that thou may learn the Words and
Reasons that I do leave after me, to the end, that thou shall not fall into any
error, but to come to the right end of this Science.

My Son, thou shall understand, that there be many Books (written by the
Philosophers) remaining after their deaths; of the which they have written the
Truth, but in a very dark sense; here in one word, there in another: the which
have brought diverse men unto great errors, thinking they did understand the
meaning very well, when they were furthest from it. Therefore, my beloved Son,
through the great love I have to thee, I have thought it good to open this
Science unto thee, that thou may take heed of the dark sayings of the
Philosophers, and that thou do exercise thy self in this Book: for if thou do
observe these my precepts, you shall not come to any error. But I desire thee
upon the salvation of thy Soul, that thou do not forget the poor; and in any
case to look well to thy self, that thou do not disclose the secrets of this
Science to any covetous worldly man; for if thou do, it will turn to thy hurt:
for I have declared to thee, as I trust to be saved, upon my Salvation, the
thing that my eyes have seen, and my hands have wrought, and my fingers have
pulled forth:

and I have written this Book with my own hand, and set to my name, as I did
lie on my death in the year 1432. May 7th. Johannes Strangunere.

To draw the Spirits out of the ponderous Body or Earth by Distillation.
MAke a great many plates of new Lead of the quantity of Groats, as thin as a
penny; and hang them on a thread, or small Wyre, and fill a Body of Glass full of
them, and fasten the Thread above the mouth of the Vessel: set thereon a Head,
and lute it fast and surely, and put thereto a Receptory, and put it in a
Furnace with as easy a heat, that you may always suffer your hand under the
bottom thereof, and water shall distill every day from it, fait and clear as
Rosewater: and at the last, the said Plates will wax soft, as they were mire,
and fall down to the bottom: and then take the Glass, set it in Balneo or Fimo
Equino, until the mire be dissolved into black Pitch Liquor: then put it into
your Philosophers Vessel, and mix it, and continue it in easy fire, that it
may by Circulation become a dry earth as black as a Raven, which afterward
shall wax as white as Snow; the which is the white Elixir; the which you shall
take from the Feces that lie there-under: for as Philosophers say, Totum quod
subtle est ascendit sursum in vase, quod spissum manet in fundo.

Then put the white in a Fixatory luted up, and continue it with more Fire or
heat, till it be first gray, and after that citrine as a yellow Flower; and
finally, purple-red, the which is the great Elixir that fixes all Amalgems
into Medicine, which alters all Bodies into Sol and Luna.

In the Name of God, Amen. Upon Saturn, Philosopher of Holland.
UNderstand, That out of Lead comes the Stone called Lapis Philosophorum: and
therefore, when he is thoroughly made, he does projection as well in a man's body
as without, of all diseases that come to man, as upon Metals; and in many
vegetable Books, is no greater secret then this is: for we find not in Gold a
like perfection as we find in Lead: for Lead is in his inner part Sol; and
therefore do all Philosophers agree: for he lacks nothing else, but that his
superfluity be taken away from him, and that is his uncleanness: therefore make
him clean, and turn his inward part out, and that is his crudeness; and then is
he Sol: for vulgar Sol cannot be so lightly as Lead; for Lead will quickly be
dissolved and congealed, and he suffers his Mercury quickly to be drawn from
him; and that Mercury which is drawn from him, if it be well clarified and
sublimed, as the use is to sublime Mercury; I tell you, That that Mercury is as
good as the Mercury drawn from the Sun in all manner of works, and it is better
in our work then the Mercury of Sol. Also, if you should take Mercury out of
Sol, you should be constrained to open the body of Sol for the space of one
whole year, before the said Mercury of a body could be drawn or come out of
Le^d: you may draw out this Mercury in fourteen days, and it is as good as the
other: and if you should come to make a work of Sol, always you must be two
years about it, to do it well; but of Lead you may perfect it in thirty or two
and thirty weeks at the most, and then be fully ended; the one is as good as
the other, and Lead costs little or nothing, and is a shorter work, and is less
labor, and of one goodness, and is truth: therefore print this in thy heart,
and serve God. The same Lead is called of the Philosophers Sol, whereof they
had the name until this day, and have kept it secret: for if the thing were
known, many would work it, and the thing would be common: for the work is
short, and easy, and little of value; and therefore was it kept secret, that
the name might be known, lest it might have come to the hands of wicked men,
and so much harm might have come thereby, and this holy Science which God has
given to those that love and serve him, should to wicked persons be a means of
greater wickedness. As concerning the Lead of Sol and Luna, they have set three
Glasses, and all is Lead, but there is no need to join any strange thing, but
that only which comes from him; neither is there any man so poor, but that he
may be able to compass this work: for you make of the Salt of Lead with little
labor Luna, and with a little longer time Sol, and then they may proceed to
make the Philosophers Lead. And this is altogether concluded in Lead, as much
as is necessary for us; for in him is the perfect Mercury, and in him are all
the colors in the world, which shall show it self openly; for in him is the
true blackness, whiteness and redness: he is ponderous, and in him is the
perfect red and white bodies: look and take example, of all imperfect things
the eye of man cannot abide or bear, how little soever, though smaller then a
mote, yet it will trouble a man's eye terribly: but if you take Lead clean
scraped, and made the bigness of a Bean, and put it in your eye, it will
neither pain you, or harm you at all; and that is, because its uttermost is not
perfect like Sol or other precious Stones, that come out of Paradise, running
in the stream: and in like manner Sol, that in him is, you may well perceive by
the similitude and many other more, That Lead is our Philosophers Mercury, our
Laton: for out of it is drawn in short time, our Mercury, and our Philosophers
Mercury, that is, our golden Mercury, with little labor, little cunning, and
little charge. And therefore I charge you, and all of you, that know his name,
to keep his name secret: for if men knew it, much mischief and trouble would be
done. And therefore you shall know our Lead by its hidden name, and you shall
know that the water wherein our Lead shall be washed vinegar. This is the
Philosophers Stone whereof all the Philosophers have written many dark Books,
but there are diverse and many works in the Mineral Lead.

An Abstract our of Doctor Homodlus M S. De Elixir solis Medicina universali.
Of the Tincture of Gold, separated from its body, and turned to a Celestial and
Spiritual Nature, called a Quintessence within the Aurum Potabile.
CHAP. I. Of the Matter of the Universal Medicine.
SInce God has created all things for man's use, and that in all vegetable,
animal and mineral creatures, there is some virtue to be helpful to humane
diseases; I thought there might be something among these of incorruptible
Nature, which by it self might cure all Diseases, and prolong the life of man
to a long age, keeping his humors in a most equal temperament: and by
consequence, this thing must be of it self most equally tempered of the four
Elements.

Now seeking this thing in the Vegetables of Animals, I found it not, because
that in all of them, there is some one humor predominant over the rest
actively or passively: Therefore I turned to Minerals or Metal; but I found the
Calx and Calcanth, and other things, being reduced to Ashes, could not be
brought back again to their former bodies: And so I conclude, There was no
perfect natural composition in them. And finding the perfect Metals thus
reducible again to their own bodies, I perceived that in them was some firmer
composition then in other things: yet are in all alike; for all the rest of the
Metals, except Gold, by a strong Combustion, will be converted into dross and
smoke; but Gold is no whit the worse after all Trials: then I concluded, That
it was among all the rest incorruptible; and by consequence, of a most equal
temperament and composition of Elements.

And when I understood by Marsillis joining with Metals, could generate, I
concluded, That in Gold there was a generative and regenerative virtue: but
because I found the matter of Metals to be very gross and earthy, and that
thereby this virtue was oppressed and kept, insomuch that it could not work,
until it was delivered from the hands of its bodily Imprisonment, I judged,
That is was needful to open, rarifie, and dissolve the body, that the virtue
might actuate. Whence I concluded at last thus: That Gold was the remote matter
whereof the universal Medicine was to be made up, and that the Spirit of Gold
and Lune, which is also called Lune Quintessence, is the matter whereof it is
made up.

CHAP. II. How to make the Menstruum, and how to circulate it.
SInce I have declared heretofore the matter of the Universal Medicine,
consequently I will open the way how to make the vegetable Menstruum, and how
to circulate it, that it may be reduced into Quintessence: by that means of
this Menstruum, the true preparation is made, that is also a Physical
preparation, to wit, Subution, Putrefaction, Overflowing, Exuberation,
Multiplication and Rectification; and that with the Conservative of the former
Vegetable, and with the Multiplication of the force: for this is the Menstruum
or Vegetable Water, which Raymundus speaks of in this Codicil.

Therefore Silver and Gold are dissolved in radical things of their own kind,
and in the compound of the Soul of the Art: for this is the matter by which all
incurable Diseases are cured under the conservation of their own Nature.

Therefore this is the way to prepare it:

Gather the Vegetable Lunary of the Philosophers, in the time when the height
of Goffer does rule, which is the seventh and the first day of the Reign of
Corrocay, the Ministerial Spirit of the same height, in the sixth rank, and
last three hours before noon, and as many afternoon: when the day is fair, and
the sky is clear, then take the Lunary it self, pure and uncorrupted, with its
grains, and bray it, and put it in earthen Vessels which are new and well
glassed, and which are most carefully covered to be set in a most cold place,
and there to be left a whole month, or thereabouts.

After which time, opening your Vessels, you shall find in the bottom of each
of them, the sap of Lunary, which will send forth a most sweet savor: take it
and put it in another most clean Vessel from the Feces: and then again you must
pour it upon its Feces, and set it again, as before, for the space of eight
days in a cold place. After which time, it must be poured out again into
another Vessel: and from thence again it must be joined to its Feces: which
third time it will be done just the same manner as the second. And so you shall
have the sap of Lunary prepared in the best fashion.

But because Lunary is not found everywhere; therefore, if when your shall have
need of it, and it cannot be found, you shall take the sap of it, prepared in
the common fashion, and called by Raymund, Black baker, then black; but take of
the best: then pour it either way prepared into a Glass-Cucurbite, which is a
Great, or into a Pellican-Vessel, with handles on both sides, which is called
Circulatory, and put the Vessel; most carefully shut in a Physical Vaporary,
and let it there be circulated a whole Month: which time past, take away the
blind Head, put on at Lembeck, and join a Recipient to it; and the Joints being
well shut up, distill in Balneo Mariae, a most subtle Spirit from it; which
being first lifted up on high, is turned into the similitude of sweat, which
makes no veins: but when the Phlegm shall begin to distill like rain, take away
the Cucurbite with the Recipient, and let it cool.

This being done, transfuse the Spirit from the Recipient into the Cucurbite of
Glass: Loose then the first, and putting on the Limbecks Head, distill it in
Balneo Mariae, with a most easy fire, till the Spirit be gone out, the Phlegm
remaining in the Cucurbite.

Now when the whole Spirit is purified from the Phlegm, and rectified, and
distilled in a Recipient; The Vessel being cooled, pour out the Phlegm from the
Cucurbite, how little soever it be: then pour in again into the same Cucurbite,
the Spirit; and then distill again in Balneo with a most easy Fire, as of the
same, as is beforesaid, so often till the Spirit be wholly purified from the
Phlegm, and perfectly rectified: which Spirit so prepared, if it be fired, will
not leave any work of moisture behind it; nay, it will burn a cloth, being
made well, and put into it.

And hitherto have I imparted unto thee the best manner of drawing out the
Spirit from the Lunary: which Spirit being shut up most carefully in a Glass,
must be set in a cold place: through the Glass shut, it will vanish away: it is
subtle and heavenly, though the other part of the Menstruum or Earth of the
same thing be prepared: which then being copulated with its own Spirit, makes
the vegetable Menstruum, which is the Basis and chief Foundation of Spagyrical
preparations.

Therefore the way to prepare the Earth is thus:

After that the Spirit is drawn out by Distillation, and separated from the
Lunary, you must take the Cucurbite, wherein the sap of the same thing was
best, and put it into the Balneo Mariae, and distill it with a gentle fire, till
all the Phlegm be gone out; which you shall know by this, that in the degree of
heat, there shall nothing more fall in the Recipient, and the matter in the
bottom of the Vessel, shall be sunk down, like Honey, or melted Pitch.

Then having the Recipient, pour so much of the Phlegm of the same thing upon
the Mercurial part, that it swim above at least four fingers breadth; and with
a wooden spattle moving the Phlegm with the thick matter, wherein is the
potential Mercury, and also the Sulphur vegetable of Nature; mix them, and when
the Phlegm shall have drawn its Tincture out into its self, suffer it to rest a
little. Then afterward pour out the colourated Phlegm, but warily, lest that
the Mercurial part be poured out with it, which does not serve to our use, but
only to the Tincture of the Mereuries, as Raymund says in the Book of Mercury.

Here must be noted, We have called the thick Water in the bottom of the Glass,
like unto molten Pitch, Mercurial; and also Sulphurial, because that the
Sulphur of Nature is potentially hidden in it; which, when any will draw out of
it, it is altogether necessary, that it, or rather the purest of it, be
separated from the impure, and be brought to the first Mercury of the
Philosophers: and then converted into the Sulphur of Nature, as shall be
consequently taught: moreover, in the thick Water in the bottom, pour on again
so much of the Phlegm, that it be covered the breadth of four fingers; and, as
before, mix them together by Agitation, and then evacute the colourated Phlegm
by Inclination.

And this work must be so often repeated, till the Phlegm has drawn out the
whole Tincture, and the Earth remains in the bottom of the Vessel white as
Cristal, transparent; which set out to be dried by the fire, or by a heat
elemental of fire, not violent.

Then when it is dried, and made up into a Powder most subtle, put it into a
Glass-Vessel, fit and clean: and pour so much of the Spirit that I have
heretofore raught you, and prepare upon it, that it may stand four fingers
breadth above it.

Then shut the Vessel with a blind Head, and set it in Balneo to be digested
the space of three days; which being done, take away the blind Head, and put
to the Cucurbite an Alimbeck, and join a Recipient unto it: and having well
shut all the Joints, put the Vessel into a Furnace; and giving it a gentle fire
of the second degree, separate from hence the Spirit it self by Distillation;
which enclosed carefully in a Glass, shall be kept in a cold place: for it is
an animated Spirit.

Afterward having increased the fire with a continual course or order till all
the Phlegmatic moisture, how little soever it be in the Earth, be exhaled;
which Phlegm is to be cast away: for it serves to no use at all, but unto the
earth it self.

After it be well dried, and again calcined, pour again so much of the new
Spirit, that it stand three fingers breath: and having glewed the blind Head
upon it, put it three days into the Physical Vaporary; which time past, take
away the blind Head, and put on a Limbeck: and from thence distill an animated
Spirit, which joys to the first, and keep.

Then afterward proceed to distill, till all the Phlegm be gone out, and cast;
and those operations must be so often renewed, till the Earth appear white and
flowing like Wax upon a glowing Plate of Iron: give no smoke at all. The Earth
thus prepared, must of necessity be returned into a Calx, giving not a
dissolving but a digesting heat of the fire. When this Truth is calcined, you
shall put it in a fit Vessel of Glass, which must be set it temperate heat of
the fire, the first degree: and in it unto the Earth must be poured one ounce
of the animated Spirit: As for example, To one ounce of the Earth, you must put
one of the Spirit: which animated Spirit I taught you heretofore to draw out of
the Earth it self by Distillation.

Then shut the Vessel with a blind Head, and suffer it to be digested three
days, or so long, till the Earth has drawn up his Spirit: then taking away
the blind Head; and putting on a Limbeck, by Distillation draw out the
Phlegmatic and unsavory moisture, how little soever be in it.

Then again the second time, give to the same Earth of its own Spirit the
seventh part; and putting the blind Head upon it, set the Vessel on the first
degree of heat, to be digested three days space: then taking a way the blue
Head, and putting on the Alimbeck, distill all the insipid moisture.

Thirdly, Add to the same Earth, the fixth part of its own animated Water; and
putting on the blue Head, set in digestion for three days: and after that time,
removing of the blind Head, and putting on the Alimbeck, distill the superfluous
humidities.

Fourthly, Add again the fifth part of the animated Spirit to his own Earth,
digest it, and by Distillation, evacuate the humidity.

Fifthly, Render the fourth part of the Soul of the Body, and digest it, and
draw out the moisture, as I have shown before: and so with the fourth part of
it upon the same Earth, prosecute the operation by Unvivistives, Digestion, and
Distillations, till the Earth have drunk up all his animated Spirit, and both
be reduced to an Homogeneal Body: then take the Earth which is withheld, and
white, and put it in a Vessel of Glass, divided into three parts, which being
luted, and carefully shut, must be put in a Furnace to the fire of the third
degree, the space or a natural day: and so the pure part of it will be
separated from the impure, and will be lifted up on high, and the impure part
of the Body be left in the bottom as unprofitable, to be cast away, and the
pure to be gathered: and this is called by Raymund and other Philosophers,
Mercury sublimate, vegetable, Sal Armoniack, and set of Lunary vegetable,
wherein are so many and so great virtues, that the humane tongue of man cannot
express them.

Furthermore, All things being severally prepared, to wit, the Spirit and the
Earth, it remains here to show the way to copulate the Spirit of Lunary, with
the Earth of the same prepared, that is, with the Salt or Sulphur of Nature
vegetable: but out of the conjunction of these two, one organical Body, to wit,
the vegetable menstruum, may be made up: and the way to make it is this:

Take one pound of the Salt or vegetable Sulphur new prepared, bray it very
small, and put it in a Cucurbite of Glass, which is strong and thick, and upon
it of the foresaid Spirit of Philosophical Lunary: then shutting the Glass most
carefully with a blue Head, so that it has no Air at all, put it in the
Balneo, and let it purify for the space two days: then taking off the blind
Head, and putting on a Limbeck, and joining a great Recipient to it; After you
have stopped well all the Joints, you shall distill it in the Ashes with a
gentle heat, and all will go out by the Limbeck. Nevertheless, if any of the
Salt should remain in the bottom, you shall again pour of Spirit newly
distilled upon it; and distill it again from hence. And this shall you do so
often, till the whole Earth as a clear Water be brought over the Limbeck; being
done, take yet one pound of Salt, put it into the Cucurbite, and pour upon it
the same Spirit lastly distilled: cover the Vessel with a blind Head, and set
it to purify; and being purified, till all the Sulphur pass over the Limbeck
with the Spirit; and that being distilled, take again, as before, of new Salt
vegetable one pound; and adding the same Spirit, purify; and then distill all.
Fourthly, Take likewise fresh Salt one pound, and pour upon it the Spirit
lately distilled, till all pass by the Limbeck, and nothing remain in the
Cucurbite; and so the vegetable menstruum shall be made, and perfectly ended,
having power to dissolve both the lights, and all other Metals, with the
conservation of the vegetable form: but now it is resting to show how the
menstruum must be converted unto a celestial Nature or Quintessence: and the
way is thus:

Take the simple menstruum, and pour it into a great and strong Glass-Vessel,
that the fifth part of it only be full, or at the most the fourth, and the
rest be void: then shut the Vessel with a blind Head; shutting diligently all
the Joints, lest the power of the menstruum vanish: being shut, put it in the
Physical Bath, or in the Horse-Belly, and let it circulate a whole Month: which
time expired, put on your menstruum into another clean Vessel: and do this
warily, lest the settling in the bottom by the Circulation be poured out
together with the menstruum, but it must be left in the Circulation: so shall
you have the menstruum purified, circulated, and celestial, which the
Philosophers call, The Heaven, The Crown of Heaven, and, The Quintessence;
whose brightness and transparencie does exceed the brightness of all Lunary
things, and the sweet smell of it exceeds all other sweet savours prepared by
Nature.

This Quintessence is the groundwork of all Spagyrical and Physical
Preparation: for by the virtue of it, all solid Bodies are corrupted from their
own Natures, and are brought to Liquors, Oils, Spirits, Elixirs, Magisteries,
Stones and Tinctures. Whence it comes, That the Spagyrick can give to the
Physicians the best Medicines.

Of the manner of dissolving Gold, and of separating the Tincture of it from
the Body, or the form from the matter; and also of exuberating or multiplying
the same.
THe manner of composing the vegetable being delivered; and also, of making it
celestial: it remains that you should be showed how the matter of the
Universal Medicine, to wit, Gold, should be prepared with the heavenly
menstrual, that it may exercise its virtue upon the Body of Man: the manner to
prepare it is this:

Let Gold be cemented with Antimony, that every Heterogeneal thing be separated
from it: then being well purged, reduce it to very small Leaves: then of the
foliated or Leaf-Gold take an ounce, and put it into a little Cucurbite of
Glass, and pour upon it two ounces of the heavenly menstruum, or of the
vegetable Quintessence. This being done, put the Cucurbite closed Hermetically
into a Fire of the first degree, and then of the second; so shall the Gold be
dissolved, and the menstruum shall draw into it self the Tincture of it, or the
color; and it will become citrine, bright, resplendent, shining, and most
acceptable to the sight: then by little and little inclining the Vessel,
transfuse the menstruum into another clean Vessel of Glass: but do this warily,
lest the Earth or Feces of Gold be not poured out together with the menstruum
and Cucurbite: then to the golden Earth, which is settled, pour again two ounces
of the menstruum, and shut the Glass with Hermes his Seal, and set it first in
a fire of the first degree, and then of a second: and when the menstruum shall
have the color of Gold, ejaculate it into another Vessel of Glass; yet so,
that the Earth be not mixed with the menstruum, but may remain in the bottom;
and leaving the Feces of the Gold in the Vessel, pour again two ounces of the
menstruum upon it; and shutting the Glass Hermetically, set it in the heat of
the first, then of the second degree.

Then empty the golden menstruum into another Vessel, taking heed lest the
Feces go out with it together: reiterate these operations so often as before,
till you see the menstruum draws no more of the Tincture of Sol, and that the
body of it remain in the bottom white, which will be done in seven times, if
you do all these things well.

Now when all the Tincture of Gold is prepared from his Body, it is requisite
that all the dissolutions be joined together, and be put in a fit Vessel: then
purify.

And then lastly, having put on a blind Head: and having shut carefully all the
Joints, set it in a Furnace, and give it a heat in the second degree, and
exuberate from thence the most precious Liquor of Gold: then you shall have the
Tincture of Gold separated from the Body of it, and made volatile, joined with
the Heaven or vegetable Quintessence, from which it must be separated, by the
way which I will show you in the following Chapter.

The manner how to separate the Tincture of Gold from the Quintessence
vegetable, and the way to circulate the same, that it may be converted into
Quintessence, or Celestial Nature and Spiritual, and almost Incorruptible.
HItherto we have showed you how to draw the Tincture from the Body of the Sun,
and how they exuberate it, in a clear and open speech. Now we intend to show
how the same Tincture may be separated from the menstruum, which is Celestial,
and by Circulation is converted into a Quintessence most fragrant, and in
strength most eminent, and incorruptible as the Heavens. To do this, proceed
thus:

Take a Stillatory of Glass, and infuse into it the vegetable Menstruum, which
is circulated; in which is the Soul of the Gold: then add to it of the Element
of Water in the same thing, to wit, of the Lunary of the Philosophers, so much
as is of the menstruum it self: then put your Vessel in a Physical Furnace; and
putting an easy fire of the first degree to it, distill from it the vegetable
Quintessence, and the Element of Water admixed to it: so the Tincture of Gold
shall remain in the bottom like Wax melted, or like the fluid gum, and in
color most like unto a Ruby.

To purify this Tincture from the superfluity of the Elements, and to make it
to a Quintessence by Circulation, proceed thus: Take a fit Vessel of Glass, and
put in it the Tincture of the Sun, most red, exulerated and separated from the
vegetable Water, and pour upon it a convenient quantity of the vegetable
Quintessence: and having shut the Glass Hermetically, put the Vessel in a
Physical Vaporary, and with continual heat, as of the Sun, suffer it to be
circulated a sufficient space; which done, you shall see in the bottom of the
Glass an Earth like unto Slime, which must most be separated from the Tincture,
mixed with the vegetable, as a superfluous thing; which is done by the
Distillation of the menstruum with the Tincture in the fire of the second
degree: which being done, put the Vessel, containing the Quintessence
vegetable, mixed with the Tincture in the Physical Bath; and putting to it the
fire of the first degree by Distillation, extract the vegetable Quintessence:
and so the Tincture of Gold most beautiful, being purified from the Dregs of
the Elements, and Slime of the Earth, and made spiritual and volatile, shall be
settled in the bottom of the Circulit, converted into a Quintessence, and into a
Celestial and Incorruptible Nature, to which no earthly thing may be compared
in smell or sweet favor, nor in virtue and excellent operations. Keep the
Quintessence most carefully, as a most precious Treasure: for it is the true
potable and mutable Gold, The true Elixir of the Sun, Power, The true
Diaphoretical and Universal Medicine, The true Mercury of the Philosophers,
without which there is no Transmutation of Metals.

The way to reduce the liquid and volatile Quintessence of Gold into a fixed
Stone, and transparent like to a Rubie, with the multiplication of Celestial
Virtues.
ALthough I have hitherto delivered the true and perfect way to prepare Sol,
and to convert it into a Quintessence; so that it serves for all Medicinal
effects universally, and needs no further preparation: Nevertheless, because
the virtues of it may be further augmented, I will now reveal how it may be
fixed into a Stone; which by a manifold Solution, Coagulation by heavenly
Influences, does attain unto the highest degree, Perfection and efficacy to all
effects both within and without the body of man.

The way to make it is thus:

Prepare a Fixatory Vessel of equal bigness with their heads, having heads
equally proportionable, whose heads must be disposed, that the head of each one
may enter into the belly of each other mutually, and that the mouth of the one
Vessel may enter into its own head; but that the mouth of the other may receive
within it self the mouth of its own head: then put in each Vessel one part of
the Quintessence of Gold; and to each part severally, pour thirteen parts of
the Quintessence vegetable; which being done, put the heads upon the
Cucurbites, and join the Vessels together as they ought to be; and shutting the
Joints most carefully that there an Anchanor; and having given a most temperate
heat of the other or second degree, let the Quintessence be so long moved, till
the vegetable Water has laid off the Tincture or Color of Gold, and shall
have ascended and descended no more citrine in color, but white like a
distilled Water, which will be done in three or four weeks at the most: which
time being past, and when you have seen the aforesaid sign, then suffer the
Furnace to wax cool of it self, then taking the Vessel from the Furnace, open
them, and in the bottom of each Glass you shall find a Stone, like unto a
Rubie or Carbuncle, which is the potable Gold, congealed through the vegetable
virtue; and the purest of the vegetable Sulphur working upon the Quintessence
of Gold: from which Stone, by the Inclination of the Vessels, you shall
separate the vegetable Waters: then take out both the Stones out of both the
Vessels without any moisture, and you shall put it into a fit Vessel very
carefully, that it suffer no harm by the Air: and when you would have this
Stone to become more pregnant and powerful in operation by Celestial Virtues,
proceed thus:

Bray it in a Marble or Glass-Morter with a Glass-Pestel; and being brayed, put
it into a small Glass-Vessel, (...) to that effect; and being Hermetically
shut, put it into the Physical Bath, and leave it there three days, in which
time it will turn into a Water or Liquor very red: which Liquor, put into the
Achanor, and suffer it to be digested five days in a temperate heat: and then
again it will be conduced, and become a stony substance red, and transparent:
from thence take out again the Stone, and bray it to a powder; and then again,
put it into a Physical Bath the space of one natural day, and then again it
will be dissolved into a most red Liquor; which again put into the Achanor to
be digested, the space of two days; which time past, you shall find again a
Stone most transparent and like to a Ruby, which may be melted upon a red hot
Plate of Iron, and will send forth no smoke at all. Now this same so prepared,
has so many Virtues, that no tongue of man is able to express them.

FINIS.

