Of CHRIST'S TESTAMENTS, Viz: Baptism and the Supper.

Written in two Books.

The 1. Of holy Baptism, how it is to be understood in the Ground thereof, and
why a Christian should be Baptized.

The 2. Of the holy Supper of the Lord Christ, what it is, with the Benefit and
Effects of it, and how the same may be worthily Participated of.

And how these are to be understood, both according to the Old and New
Testament.

Set forth from the True Theosophicall Ground, through the three Principles of
the Divine Revelation, and presented to the Children of God for the Information
of their understandings.

Written in the year of Christ 1624.

by JACOB BEHM of Old Seidenberg alias Teutonicus Philosophus.

And Englished by JOHN SPARROVV, Barrister of the Inner Temple London.

LONDON; Printed by M. Simmons, and are to be sold near the sign of the
Golden Lion in Aldersgate-streete, o^ ^y H. Blunden at the Castle in Cornhill
near the Exchange. 1652.

Jesus said to his Disciples, Matthew. 28.19. Mark. 16.16.

Go forth into all the World, and Teach all People, and Baptize them in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Whosoever believes and is Baptized shall be saved, but whosoever believes
not shall be condemned.

The Englishers Preface.
THese two little Books entitled together by the Author the Book of the Two
Testaments, the one of Baptism, the other of the Supper, do the most deeply
and plainly handle those two Grand Mysteries of any Book extant since the
Apostles Times, and do clearly satisfy the doubts and put an end to the
different Opinions concerning each of them, and so make all friends together;
those that are called Anabaptists, and those that are called Paedobaptists;
those that baptize persons of age upon confession of their Faith, and those
that baptize Infants with Witnesses to stand for them: also this Treatise
intimates so much that it may be diseerned who is a fit administratour of
Baptism to those new converted, or to the Infant children of converted
Parents; It reconcileth the difference of Opinion about Transubstantiation,
Consubstantiation, and the Participation of mere Bread and Wine: and shows
how to understand truly the right Participation of the true flesh and blood of
Christ under Bread and Wine, and being there is real participation to be had
of the flesh and blood of Christ without Bread and Wine, why the Bread and Wine
was so Instituted to be celebrated and communicated: and so also seeing the
Baptism of the Holy Ghost has been many times without Water, why the Baptism
of Water is necessary to be used, even to those that had before received the
Holy Ghost as well as the Apostles.

All which, being understood, it will likewise appear what the Ground of the
Preaching of the Word of God is, as it is an Ordinance of God, and how we
shall truly perceive what is the Essence of all Ordinances as they are so
called, (which in the signification of the word is no more but a thing ordained
or appointed) and so it will be easy to find how far short men are of rightly
Esteeming the true Ordinances, and how forward they are in taking that for such
which is not indeed the Ordinance of God.

The Preaching of the Word, the Administration of Baptism, and the
Participation of the Supper, are Ordinances of God. The Communion of Saints or
holy people (two or three met in Christ's Name) are a true Church or
Congregation of God according to his holy Ordinance. The Magistrate, Ruler, or
King, and all that are in authority, are the Ordinance of God, for the
punishment of Evil doers, and for the encouragement of them that do well.
Gods Ministers, Presbyters or Elders, Oldmen or Fathers in the Experimental
knowledge of Christ; his Bishops or Overseers, Shepherds or Pastors, or
feeders of his flock; his Doctors or Teachers, Instructors in the ways of
Godliness; or Prophets appointed to tell People of their sins: also
Evangelists or Messengers of the Glad tidings of salvation; Disciples or
Scholars in the school of Christ, such as are taught of God; and Apostles, or
such as are sent of God and Christ by the Holy Ghost; these must needs be
ordained and appointed by God: and so Forgiveness of sins or Absolution;
Excommunication, or casting out from the Congregation of Christ, and delivering
to Satan. Healing of the sick by the Elders fervent prayer of Faith. The Laying
on of the hands of the Presbytery or Eldership, whereby the Gift of the Holy
Ghost was bestowed. Also Marrying in the Lord. Are all of them the Ordinances
of God; Every Duty of Man toward God, or of one toward another, mentioned
either in the Old or New Testament, are clearly the Ordinances of God.

But how any thing is a true Ordinance of God, and wherein it does consist, is
hardly known and little considered as it should be, that it might be certainly
understood, and there is much Exercise of our Minds before we can go about to
examine it rightly; we must know God before we can know his Ordinances, which
are of his own appointment, and if we know not who he is, how can we know that
we love him, and that it is not somewhat else which we love instead of him? for
it is said by the Apostle John, He that says he loves God and hates his
brother, is a liar and the truth is not in him, for if a man loves not his
brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen, and 1 John 4.8.
he that loves not knows not God, for God is love. Further the same Apostle
says, that 1 John 4.18.
God is love and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God and he in him: and
how can any know this Excellent thing Love, in which who so dwells is 1 John
3.14.
passed from death to life, if he knows not he has it in him, and then how
can he either know God or love him? This Love must be in us if we be the
Disciples of Christ; nay there is not any thing mentioned in the whole Bible
concerning Heaven and Redemption, but we must have it in us while we are in
this life, or else we are not Partakers of it; yea God has shed abroad his
love into our hearts, which is that word of Truth and life which is able to
save our souls, and does perfectly save them that Yield to it in obedience to
the dictates to it.
receive it (that is, believe): and it is both shed abroad and received by very
many souls, that neither know what that word is, nor how they have received
it: for example; when any Man is troubled at his doing of Evil, and is sorry
for it, and wishes from his heart he had not done it, endeavors to have a
better watch over himself, resolves never to do the same again, desiring
strength to be able to resist his doing of Evil any more, being careful least
evil suggestions in his mind should allure him, and entice him to any evil
again, and constantly walks thus circumspectly in his whole life to the end
of his days. This Man has the Love of God shed abroad in his heart, and has
received it, else it could not bring forth such fruits of the Spirit: and he
that is so led by the Spirit is the child of God: though it may be such a one
does not know, if you ask him, what Gods Love is, though he dwells in it;
and the cause why there is so small progress in the knowledge of Christianity,
and the true Ordinances of God, is, because men think to learn those things by
roate, and not by Heart: some are so far enemies to themselves, which is deeply
to be lamented, that if they read that the Scripture says a thing, they care
not what it m^aneth, or how to understand it aright, by seeking and finding the
thing out which is spoken of, that they may be sure of the meaning of what they
read, in that in estimable book of God: Indeed the Holy Scriptures have
perfectly declared all the Mysteries of God, and his Ordinances, and they have
been rendered out of the Original Languages of Hebrew and Greek, into the
Mother Tongues almost of all Nations, sufficiently to leave them without
excuse, that be not obedient in their lives and Conversations, so far as they
may know, so that it will be far more easy for the Heathen to excuse
themselves at the Last day, then for those that have read or heard the
Scriptures, and live not accordingly; though the Heathen also shall be left
without excuse, as the Scripture says; God has left them without excuse, in
that he does good, and gives them rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons,
filling their hearts with food and Gladness.

Furthermore, The Scriptures have had many laborious Expositions of the words
and rendrings both of the Original and translated Copies, by large Writings,
Commentaries, and Glosses, but the things which are undeniably meant by those
words, are not so well understood as they might be, if we would be more
frequent and diligent in the practice of that which brings all wisdom and
understanding, which is, inward Experience, Examination of Experimenting of
Spiritual things: according to that of the Apostle; Try or Examine all things,
but hold that which is Good: In outward things we are easily persuaded to try
before we trust, but concerning inward things, we are for the most part ready
to take them upon trust, and never try or Examine whether those things are so
or no; as the Noble Bereans, who were commended for searching or Examining the
Scriptures, to see whether those things were so or no; not whether those words
were written, but whether the things mentioned were such, for they had
experience of the things in Scripture before hand: But there is a fear in
some, that if we should be so inquisitive, and prying into Mysteries, we
should run into the Extreme of being too wise, which cannot be, except, in our
own conceit; for our Savior says; Be ye wise as Serpents, but Innocent as
Doves; and indeed true wisdom is required to be able to dispense the
Ordinances of God, and not reading and conceiving only, but Living the life of
Christ, whereby we shall come to the true knowledge of Christ within us, and
though he were in our Parents before us, and in their seed, and so from our
beginning to be, and continually ever since, in us, knocking and calling at the
inward door of our hearts invisibly and without a form, and as the seed of
God in the Embrio, before our knowing and receiving of him, yet after we have
opened to him, and heard his call by yielding our hearts in obedience thereunto,
he will get a form in us, and be born in us, and we shall be regenerated in
him, and so we shall often feel him, and see him; but after that again we
must attain the stature of a Man in Christ, and be his disciples and
scholars, and be taught by the Holy Ghost proceeding from him in us, before we
can know and understand such Mysteries as his Ordinances are: But if we did
seek, we should find God and Christ in our Hearts; for though they be in us
we find them not, because we examine not what, and who they are, and we are
discouraged in our seeking, partly because many have sought as we have
accounted it aright, and have not found, but the truth is, they have not sought
in the right place; they look to find God any where but in their hearts, and
yet he that cannot find him there, shall never be able to find him at all,
but there whosoever seeks shall find him who is the fountain, from whence all
things flow forth; the Scriptures did flow from him, and whatsoever could
possibly have been written, is hidden in him: the Prophets and Apostles wrote
and spoke what they understood, but God was in their hearts and minds, and
filled them with the understanding of the Holy Spirit: Our Savior Jesus Christ
had not the Spirit by measure; for in him dwelt the fulness of the Deity
bodily; and he grew in understanding till he had the unction above his
fellows, from which understanding in him, proceeded those sayings, whereupon
the people confessed, that he taught as one having power, and not as the
Scribes and Pharisees, who though they were learned in the Scriptures, yet
Christ said to them; Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures; that is, the meaning
of the things expressed in them, nor the Power of God; and he that
understands not the thing in his mind which he would utter, cannot rightly
speak nor write of it: the Scriptures are such writings of men full of Divine
wisdom and understanding, but few other Books are written by those that so
much as thought that the Apostles had such through knowledge of what they wrote
in divine Mysteries: some there are that seem to think that the writers of
the Scriptures had it by such a kind and manner of revelation, as if a man or
Angel should relate and dictate words to them, and they themselves have no
understanding of it, more, then their reason can apprehend, upon the bare
hearing of the words, and that is all the skill some of this age account
possible to be attained, in the Mysteries of God: but we are directed by the
Apostle James, who well understood what he said by Experience, that if we want
understanding we should ask it of God: and though God be in every one, and
every one lives, moves, and has his being in him, yet without the Spirit of
God moves and teaches us in our understandings, we know him not: where the
fruits of the Spirit are, in that Man's heart the Spirit of God has moved and
taught him in his understanding: but from that small measure of understanding,
he is not able presently to apprehend the Mysteries of that Spirit, and of
those fruits, that is, whence they spring, how they are begotten and brought
forth, how they grow, etc. nor can they be known but by the same Spirit whose
fruits they are; he that has not the fruits of this Spirit, which is
holiness, peace, righteousness, joy in the Holy Ghost, enjoys not the
kingdom of God, nor till we have sought and found peace and holiness, we
shall not see God: and except we be borne again of water and the Holy Spirit,
we cannot enter into the kingdom of Heaven, though it be Luke 17.21.
within us. Now, can any teach what it is to be born again? and what this Water
and holy Spirit is? but he that has them, and has been borne again by them;
I would men were diligent to desire such spiritual things, and then God, who
dwells in their hearts, would feel and hear their desires, and breath forth
his holy Spirit in them, and satisfy their desires with his Gifts and Graces,
and then he would fill their minds and understandings also, with the knowledge
of all his Mysteries, and so they would learn in the school of Christ by
Divine Experience, the true Ordinances of God; and then we should be better
able to edify one another in our most holy Faith, and we should by degrees,
improving that measure of knowledge we have; at length attain the highest
knowledge of the highest Apostle. We want but the sincere practice of what we
know, for by that means we should not Quench, but stir up the Gifts and
Graces of Gods Holy Spirit that are within us, till it multiply and flow forth
with all its Gifts, which we suppose are not attainable, because men have not
endeavored that they might attain them. And that is the Reason, we have the
Ordinances, not in Power, but in much weakness, wanting those Gifts which
would enable Men, to dispense the Ordinances of God: It is a Great Gift to have
our Calling and Election sure, in that sense, which the Apostle Paul meant it,
according to the highest understanding of that Mystery, which the Apostle
himself knew, must needs be attainable by labor and Endeavor; and upon the
knowledge of this Mystery, does many other Mysteries depend, it is that, for
which the Ordinances were Instituted, as helps and means to bring us to the
assured certainty of our salvation: we content our selves, with an Imaginary
superficial persuasion, without knowing assurance; for if we did endeavor,
labor, search, seek and try, we should soon perceive, how it might be made
infallibly sure; and then we should as assuredly, understand the high
Excellency of Every Ordinance of God.

All the Arts and Trades in the world are Mysteries, and are not truly known,
but by those that have had Experience in them; then how can there be a skillful
Dispencer of the Mysteries of God, his Ordinances; but by Experience in them;
we are able to learn them all by Experience, but without that, we know
nothing of them, more then the very beast: The Devils, that far surpass
Mortal Men in knowledge, yet cannot know the Mysteries of God, because they
cannot experiment them, but those of Darkness they work, and therefore know
them: and we are placed in this world, to work the works of God, that we may
know, what that Good and acceptable will of God is, and therefore we should
Work out our salvation, with fear and trembling: by obedience in well-doing;
and that will bring us, to feel and know the good Spirit of God, which will
teach us the way and course, how to find every thing, if we search and
enquire in that Spirit; threfore let us endeavor after that which is Holy, and
we shall feel what the God of Holiness is; and then we shall clearly
understand the Scriptures, and the writings of all other Men, we shall be able
to discover what is true and what is false, in all the words and writings of
any Man, understandingly and demonstratively, to the convincing of all hearers,
both in Divine and Natural things.

From these Instances that have been mentioned, it may be perceived, that all
the Ordinances of God, have proceeded from the Holy Ghost, neither can any
thing be the Ordinance of God, where the Holy Ghost is not, in some measure or
other, no man is the Minister of the Word of God, any further, then he is
taught by the Spirit of God, and speaks what he understands, by the same
Spirit. None were fit to be made Deacons or Elders, but one full of the Holy
Ghost, then surely none are able to make Deacons or Elders, but by the Power of
the Holy Ghost that is in them, and so of all other Ordinances: and according
to the measure of the Holy Spirit in us, such is the validity and Efficacy of
the Ordinances to us: the Outward performance, of the things directed in the
Scripture, by men of sincere hearts, is sufficient, and they are warnings to us
to forsake our Evil ways, in the Observance of which course, we may
assuredly find true Christianity, and consequently salvation: but this is in
the lowest degree: and it were to be wished, that none were so presumptuous, as
to arrogate to themselves, that they are such, as perform the true Ordinances
of God, unless they have the same holy Spirit of God, filling their hearts, as
they had, of whom it is recorded in the holy Scriptures, that they did perform
them aright: when we are scarce truly Children of God, let us have a care that
we suffer not others to account us above what we are, but rather inform them
sincerely that we are not such as they take us to be; and not take upon us to
be called Gods Faithful Servants, Ministers of God, Preachers of the Word,
Elders, Teachers, Pastors, Overseers, Messengers, and Ambassadors of Christ,
or Apostles, such as are sent from God; neither should any mention those Texts
of Scripture which speak of the true Officers of Christ, as if the same were
meant and applyable to thamselves, and so urge them in Sermons, that those
hearers that have not ability to discern the truth in things that differ, are
made confident to maintain stiffely, that those Scriptures mean them they call
Ministers, as well as it did the Apostles, Evangelists, and other faithful
Teachers in those days; and do allege those Scriptures in their behalf, and
call them Divines, whereas none of the Apostles were so named in all the
Scripture but John the Divine, the beloved Disciple, and most sublime in vision
and Revelation: when as if we truly examine our selves according to the
Scriptures, we shall find we ought rather to be esteemed Enemies of God and
of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord: But let us press forward in the ways of
Godliness, that we may be at length strong Men in Christ, and enjoy his
Ordinances in the Power, as it was and is, in the spirits and souls of all the
faithful holy ones, who have true understanding and knowledge in the Divine
Mysteries by Experience, such were the Prophets, and Apostles, and faithful in
all ages.

No curious workman, can make his servant expert in his work, except the
servant do try and exercise himself, and by practice attain the skill and
readiness in his trade by Experience, that he may be able not only to direct
how to work by hearesay, but to show his skill, by his own doing the same
thing himself: The Apostles could do the same thing which they taught others,
or else they could not have rightly taught as they did.

Now he that considers this Book, will find, that the Author knew and
writ Experimentally, and that if we follow his doctrine and Experience, we
may attain, not only the understanding of his Writings, but be able to speak
and write, all that he understood, and so disclose those things plainly and
fully, which he had not time nor leave to write otherwise then obscurely of;
Which when we have arrived to, we shall leave that seeking after the most
desirable worldly things, which pass away in a Moment; and press after the
high Price of the Calling of Jesus Christ: now if by my means, any shall be
stirred up, to strive, and so undoubtedly attain, the blessed Crown of
Eternal Life, it will be also my Crown of rejoicing in the world to come,
though here I must acknowledge my self one of the unworthiest of the children
of Men.

JOHN SPARROVV.

A LETTER TO Charles of Endern.
Carol von Endern.
Our salvation is in the Life of Jesus Christ in us.
NOble Sir, beloved in Christ, with the Hearty Desire of the Divine Light in
the working power of the Holy Ens in our Immanuel, I send over to you the
little Book of Christ's Testaments, with the Preface to it. It should have been
written but singly in the three first sheets, for I would have written it all
over again, and had begun with the first Chapter: And I am purposed to bring
to the Press this little Book in a more child-like manner, for the better
understanding of the simple. But because of the high sense, I let the One by
the other, one on one side, the other on the other, verse for verse.
one be written against the other: seeing you and others Exercised Lovers
understand this sense well: and so the sublime understandings may have that
which is high, and the simple that which is lowly in the sense: yet there is
one and the same understanding in them both, though in the lower sense more
simple words might be made use of; and so I commit you to the continual saving
Love of Jesus Christ. Dated at Gerlitz 7^ May, the year of Christ. 1624.

JACOB BEHM.

The Summary Contents of the Chapters in this first Book, concerning the Holy
Baptism.
CHAP. I. How Reason uses to behold it self in a Creaturely Image-like
manner, when it considers of Christ and his Testaments, and whence the strife
about Christ's Testaments arises, and how that strife is an empty unprofitable
thing. CHAP. II. Of the Covenant of God after the Fall; what the Fall of Man
is, and how God has bound himself in Covenant with him again. What the
Circumcision in the old Testament is, and what the Baptism in the New. CHAP.
III. A Brief and fundamental information, how Man is Baptized by the Holy
Ghost, with Christ's sufferings, Death, and Resurrection, in body and soul.
CHAP. IV. Of the outward Water-Baptisme by the hand of Man; who is worthy so to
Or, to Administer it.
Baptize, and what baptized Infant receives that Testament worthily; and how
it goes with the unworthy Hand, as also with the unworthy Baptized Infant.
The Preface to the Reader. SHOWING How the Testaments of Christ must be
fundamentally understood, rightly participated, and worthily fed upon.
A Looking Glass for Teacher and Hearer.
1. CHristian loving Reader, this little Book of the Testaments of Christ, in
this present time, when Men strive only about Opinions, ought well to be
considered. Men are wholly and altogether departed from the right
understanding, seeing they will maintain Christ's Testaments with Disputing and
the Sword.

2. There needs no Disputing about it, only an earnest sincere penitent Man,
who has the Faith, understands this Testamentary Covenanting.
Institution and participation in the Power of Christ, but it is foolishness
to the Natural Man, and cannot be apprehended, 1 Cor. 2.14.

3. There belongs quite another Earnest Sincerity to the true understanding,
which is not apprehended by humane Reason, and is rightly understood by no Man,
unless the Spirit of Christ open it to him in his Heart.

4. There lies a fast Seal before it, which no Reason nor Art can break up,
but only that slain Lamb of the House of Israel, who has the Key of David,
Revel. 3.7. Chap. 3.5.

5. Christ's Testaments are to Reason without the Divine Light, a closed Book,
but to the true children of Christ, they are an Opened Book. Christ's
Testaments are a Seal of the firm and Eternal Covenant of God, wherewith God
has received Man to Grace again after the horrible Defection, and sealed him
with the flowing forth of his Love, by his blood and Death, that we Or, Might.
should believe his Word and Promise, which he has revealed to us in the Holy
Scripture concerning his Son, with the Redemption from sin, and heertofore
declared by the Prophets.

6. Which Word in the flowing forth of his Love, is come into our humanity, and
has assumed a Humane Soul, also flesh and blood, and has established this
Eternal Covenant with his Blood and Death: And so now he gives this Testament
to his Faithful ones for a Ausibeute Talent, or earnest Penny, or Pawn.
Pledge, and so makes them Branches on the Vine of his Flesh and Blood, so
that they are imbodied to himself therewith, and made his right children, in
whom HE himself will dwell with his flesh and blood, with this Testamentary
Ausibeute Talent, or earnest Penny, or Pawn.
Pledge: so that thereby they may Pray to the Father with joyful affiance in
true childlike Humility, in the Name of his Son JESUS CHRIST, and so he will
give them this Grace, John 16.23.

7. This Testament he offers to us after a twofold Manner: First, through his
Word Preached, whereby he Stirs and Opens the Hearts of the Hearers, that
they enter into true Repentance for their Sins, and so procure themselves
this Pledge of his Testaments.

8. Secondly, Through the True Or, Essential.
substantial participation of his Flesh and Blood, by the Mouth of Faith with
Bread and Wine, whereby he seals the Faith with his Blood and Death, and
thereby Opens the Life's understanding of the Inward Divine Hearing, so that
the poor fallen Man, (which was dead to the Divine Hearing through sin)
attaineth again the Divine Hearing in his understanding, and so is converted
again, and so enters into his first Inheritance, which he had in Paradise,
and gives up his will to God, who renews his Heart, Senses.
Thoughts, and Mind, through his Inspeaking or Inspiration, and continues and
dwells in him with his Pledge of this Testament, and powerfully works in
him in his Faith, and generateth him to be a new Creature, which with its
Spirit walks in Heaven, and is a right Image of God, whereby the earthly
fleshly will is daily killed, and the Newborn will daily goes to Heaven, Joh.
6.56. Phil. 3.20.

9. Which Heaven in the Inward Ground of his Life, is revealed in the Spirit of
Christ in him, where the good Angelical Or, Senses.
thoughts climb up upon the right Jacobs Ladder (Genesis 28.12.) and Christ his
Lord sits above on the top of it at the Right hand of God, and daily
presents them with his humane and heavenly flesh and blood before the wrath
of God, and the severe Judgment, and is with him in all his need: Also
incloseth his Prayers in himself, and thereby presents them before Death,
Hell, the Devil, and the Anger of God.

10. This Publication, both of his Word Taught, as it is written in the Bible,
and is Impregnated, or conceived.
received in the sacramental participation, where he profferreth his Word in
his flesh and blood, a Christian Man should receive, and find himself in this
Celebration.
Custom, and unite and tie himself as a Member with the Congregation of
Christ; for in Christ we are all but one, as a Tree Text. in.
and its Branches, Gal. 3.28.

11. It is not so to be understood, that this Covenant and Testament is given
only by an outward hearing of the Word Preached, and Participation of Bread
and Wine at the Or, Sacrament
Testament, as the present World so Erreth in Many Hearts: No, it must be a
right sincere Earnest with true working Repentance, so that God with the Key of
his Love unlocketh and Opens the Hearing and the right Mouth, which shall
receive this Testament, so that the poor soul have a right hunger and thirst
after it, and bring its desire, through Christ's sufferings, Dying, Death, and
Resurrection to it.

12. Otherwise there is no true Mouth for such participation. It must be a
right Earnest sincere purpose, that must put off the Defiled Garment, and be
willing to pass into a New Life. It must be doing, doing, or it avails
nothing.

13. This Pledge belongs only to Christ's Children, which so hear and keep
the Word in their Hearts, that it bring forth fruit. There must be Great
earnestness both in the Teacher and Hearer; for if any will handle and impart
the Covenant of Christ, he must himself be capable of the Covenant and
Testament. If the Sheep must hear the voice of Christ out of the Mouth of any
and follow him, then also the Spirit and power of Christ must be in that Man's
voice: Else he is but a Hireling, and the Sheep hear not Christ's voice from
his Mouth, but only the word of Man, Joh. 10.

14. So also in like manner, the Hearers Ear should be directed to God in true
Repentance, that he also may hear the voice of Christ: not only with outward
Ears, but with the Ears of Divine power, that the Teachers and Hearers power
may strike together, that the Spirit of Christ may work Text, Between them.
together with them, and the Heart may find the Teachers Power, that Good
fruit may Grow from it.

15. A Teacher should not teach for the sake of wages only, but should know
and well consider, that he stands there in Christ's stead, and that Christ
will Teach through him, if he be a right Or, Pastor.
Shepherd.

16. So also the Hearers should incline their Ear to that, and Consider that
they should there hear Christ's voice, and receive it with great Earnestness:
and not think it is enough to Go into the Church, and there sit an hour, to
play the Hypocrite, and hear a Sermon; and remain afterward as before: No,
such going to Church and hearing, is no Service of God; It bettereth them not,
if in the Sermon or Preaching they have not heard Christ teach in their hearts:
Going to Church makes none virtuous, unless he hears in the Church Gods
Word workingly in his soul.

17. So also is it with the Sacraments, we should not think it is enough to
Confess and go away, as if such a Custom did take away sins without true
Repentance, and that he may sin a new afterward; No, it is not so, whosoever
is washed and afterward defiles himself with the same Mire, he is then as he
was before.

18. Christ must Absolve thee in thy soul with his sufferings and Death, and
Inspeake or Inspire his satisfaction into thee in thy soul, else it avails
not. The Priests Mouth is only an Outward Instrument, and coworketh in his
Spirit: but if he be a hireling, he cannot cowork, but yet the Covenant of God
in Christ Jesus works in the Repentant Heart, and absolveth it.

19. Loving Brethren, both teacher and hearer, who handle the Covenant of
Christ, have a care what you do, there is great earnestness required, that
you be not Guilty of the Death of Christ: Consider diligently the Great severe
Earnestness of God, how HE has instituted this Covenant with so Great hard
Pain and Anguish through so great reproach and sufferings; It must needs be
from a very great cause, that this Testament was Ordained with such severe
Earnestness.

20. God requires of Man again Earnestness, to the receiving this Testament:
Not with cold luke warm Hearts, only to cover over sin with the sufferings
of Christ, and Comfort ones self with it in Impenitency.

21. It is not a forgiveness from without, which is imputed to Man from
without: No, but through Christ's Blood and Death: when the poor soul
penetrateth into that, then the sufferings, Dying and Resurrection, together
with the satisfaction, in this Testamentary Covenant is put on to it in the
Blood of Christ. This kills Sin, Death, and Hell, and leads the poor
soul to the Father, in Christ.

22. It is not enough for a Man to know that Christ dyed for sin, and
assenteth to it, and holds it for true, and receives the satisfaction as a
work done: No, no, there is no such receiving: but the whole Man must give it
self thereinto, and must will to dye in Christ's Death to the Evil Natural
own will, as also to wicked Lusts: and then Christ puts on him his victory
and satisfaction, and the true heavenly Spirit springs forth through Christ's
Death in his Resurrection, as a fair flower out of the wild Earth, and there
is a true Christian borne, who is a branch on the vine Christ, John 15.

23. Now there belongs no great art or skill to this, but only a childlike
simplicity and Humility: the Plowman is as near it as the Doctor: they must
all in the simplicity of Christ enter into humility, and come with the lost
son, and the Publicane in the Temple; there is no other way to it.

24. There needs no Great Speculation about it, with what trimmed words or
behavior man comes thereto, but we must come only with the Children, which
yield to the Father under his Rod, and pray for Grace.

25. He who has learned much, and knows how to fit himself for it, is no
more acceptable to God, then he that knows nothing, but yet with his whole
Heart and soul in sorrow for sins turns to him, and has Faith in the
Grace, and a true Earnest Purpose and Resolution to be a New Creature.

26. This Ground, is only therefore brought forth so deeply, that every one
that strive about it, might see the true Inward Ground, and cease from strife,
and yield himself into the simplicity and Love of Jesus Christ. Whereby then
suddenly the power of Satan will be diminished, and People and Nations will
see that the Christians are the children of God, If they thus walk in Love;
which I wish from my Heart; for which Cause this little Book is written.

Note.
Here the Reader that loves God is to know;
FIrst, that these two little Books were copied faithfully and diligently out
of the Authors own blessed Manuscript, as he wrote them Anno 1623.

And secondly, that he afterward in the year 1624. upon the desires of some
good friends and lovers of the Truth, was purposed (as may be seen in the
foregoing Letter to Carol von Endern) for the better understanding of the
simple, to bring them both into a more child-like form, but it is done only
to part of the third Chapter of this first Book, and no further. Thus writes
the Publisher of the High dutch Copy.

But more particularly, let the Reader take notice that the Author had gone on
to the 17th verse of the 3d Chapter, as may appear in the Printing of the
double Pages in this Book, and so it was Printed in the High Dutch, and in the
same manner here in the English; only with a different magnitude of Letter,
those words which are the same on both sides, are as near as can well be
observed in a letter of the same bigness with the whole Book, but on the first
side that which is not on the other side also, is with a smaller letter, and it
was the first Book that was written and finished by the Author, and on the
second side, that which was not in the other, is with a larger letter, and was
that other Copy which he intended to finish quite through the whole Book, and
this is done to distinguish in some measure the alteration of the Expression in
the two several Copies, for the better understanding of the Mystery, and if it
be diligently Observed, it will very much help to the understanding of this,
and all his other Writings, because where the Expression is obscure in the one,
it is cleerer in the other; And besides; by the varying the Expression, all may
discern what latitude the Authors words may admit of, in their meaning in all
his Books.

Further, it is certain that we may be lead by the several Expressions to the
true knowledge of some part of the Mystery, and this great benefit accrues from
thence, that it will enable us to speak and write infallibly, that which has
never been spoken or written concerning that Mystery, be it in Divine or
Natural things.

But by the way, this is not to be attained by outward Hearing or Reading
only, but by Experience; Teachers or Hearers that want Experience are indeed
Ordinary Teachers and Hearers, but not true ones, for such are Extraordinary in
the account of our times: such hearers are all they that understand the Word
feelingly, and bring forth fruit, in their lives and Conversations, and have
the Power of Godliness, these can teach truly from what they know, though in a
weak measure; but those that are called Ordinary Teachers, that have only a
form of Godliness, and deny the Power thereof, cannot teach at all, nor deserve
so much as the Name of an Ordinary Teacher, such a one is not so much as a true
hearer. Our Savior teaches us, that whosoever will do the will of our Father
which is in Heaven, Joh. 7.17
they shall know of his words whether they be of God: and if he submit his
doctrine to be Examined by every one by this Rule, why should not every word of
all others be examined by the same Rule; let us thus do, and we shall
Ordinarily attain that which is indeed Extraordinary, even the true knowledge
of spiritual things, the things of God, which are impossible to be perceived
by the Natural man. And accordingly I desire thee to Judge of the Author of
this Book, and no otherwise. Farewell.

The First Chapter Of Reasons viewing of it self, how it uses to run in a
Creaturely Form, when it considers of Christ and his Testaments.
1. ALL Strife and Misunderstanding concerning Christ's Person and his
Testaments which he left behind him, arises from the defected Creaturely
Reason, which will be a Mistress of All things or Beeings, and looks only in
the Multiplicity of Beeings, and in the variety and difference of Beeings, and
does but loose it self in such viewing, and breaks it self off from its
Center, or Original, and disperseth the Or, Senses.
Thoughts in the Multiplicity of Beeings, that they cannot see what their
ground is out of which they are sprung, and so in their Confusion and running
out, break themselves off from their Cha^s. viz: from the Eternal WORD of
God, and from the Eternal Divine speaking. In which spoken Word, all Beeings,
together with understanding, Reason and Thoughts consist, and take their Ground
and beginning from it.

2. For if the Abyssall, not Natural, uncreaturall GOD, viz: the Eternal ONE,
speak his WORD no more, and that speaking should Cease, there would be no
understanding Reason or Thoughts more, also no Nature nor Creature, and all
Beeings would be an Eternal nothing: for every Life arises from the
Exhalation of the Eternal ONE, viz: from the Abyss: and there could be no
Formability in the Eternal One, according to which, or out of which something
might be made.

3. For if there were a formability to a figure, then there must also have been
a cause from whence the form were arisen, and God were not one only God, who
were without Ground, Time, and Place; for all that has a beginning has a
Ground; but that which has no beginning, is without Ground and Form.

4. Every beginning goes out of the Eternal ONE through the Exhalation of the
Eternal ONE, whereby the Eternal ONE brings it self into selfe-viewing
perceptibility and findingnesse, to the Moving and forming of it self. Every
visible and Invisible Being, Spiritual and Corporeal, have taken their
Original in the Exhalation of the Eternal ONE, and stand with their Ground
therein, for the beginning of every Being is nothing else but an Imagination
of the Abyss, that the same bring it self by its own longing into an
Imagination, and Modelleth and Imageth it self, and apprehends the
Imagelikenesse, and Or, Exhaleth it.
breaths it forth from the Eternal One to a viewing of it self.

5. Which Or, Haling.
breathing is the Eternal Word of the Abyssall Deity; as a speaking forth of
the Abyss into a Ground, of the Unsubstantiall into a Substantial: In which
the whole Creation, with the speaking forth, as in the seperability of the
speaking, has taken its beginning, and does yet evermore so take it. And every
life does consist in that seperability of the speaking, where the immodeled
Imagination in the Exhalation parts it self into seperability. In which
Parting the sensibilility of the only life is understood, where the One
vieweth it self in the Multiplicity.

6. Also herein is to be understood the Ground of the Properties, in that the
Parting of the Only Longing brings it self into Desiringnesse, and
Comprehends.
incloseth and makes it self Essential or Substantial: in which
Comprehensibility.
Inclosibility the seven forms of Nature take th^^ beginning, as is
sufficiently declared in our other Writings.

7. Therefore say I, the cause that Men dispute and strive about God, about his
Word, Essence, or Being, and Will, is, that the understanding has broken it
self off from its Center or Ground: which Breaking off, is nothing else, but
that the Properties (which are gone forth out of the Eternal out-speaking of
the Word, into a Creaturely Life) have brought themselves into selfe-lust, to
the out-speaking of themselves, and in their own selfe-conceived Lust, have
broken themselves off from the Eternall-Longing Or, after.
toward the Word of the Eternal speaking, and brought themselves into an own
sensibility of Nature, and confused themselves in the forms of Nature. Where
all the thoughts or senses will dwell and run without the Only God in self
Speculation and Reason: and can in no wise come to their Center or Ground,
except they sinck down into themselves in the Speculation, and go again into
the Ground out of which they are Existed, and fall again into the Eternal
speaking Word, and give their own wills into the Eternal speaking Word, that
the same own will of the Creaturely Life may be out-spoken with, and in the
Eternal Speaking Word in the Seperability of the Word.

8. In which re-out-speaking the New Regeneration of the Humane Life and Will
is understood. For the Humane Life was in the Beginning of Man, in the Word of
GOD, and by the Inbreathing of the Word into the Humane Body was manifested,
and came into Sensibility, Perceptibility and Willing. Where then the willing
has broken it self off from the Word, wherein the Life was, without Creature,
and has brought it self into a selfe-Seperability and visibility of its
perceptibility of the five senses. In which Sensibility it now at present
runs, and seeks the Seat of God therein, but finds only a
measurablenesse, and Natural and Creaturely formednesse: wherein now it
striveth about its own Center. For the own will has brought it self into an
own Center, and broken it self off from the whole, and as to the total is
become as it were dead.

9. Therefore says Christ, Unless ye be converted and become as Children, and
be newborn through water and the Spirit, ye cannot see the Kingdom of God,
Matthew. 1^.4. Joh. 3.5.7. The own will should go again into its nothing, and
then it stands again in the first Birth, and will be again outspoken from
the Eternal Word in a Divine Will. For whatsoever it is (whose living and
willing wills or runs without the Eternal speaking Word) that same is
without the Eternity, and lives merely in the Time.

10 But seeing the soul has its Original out of the Eternal Word as a Power
thereof, therefore it cannot Rest in the Being or Essence of Time, but seeks
its own Mother, who Generated it, and brought it into a Creaturely Form, but
its going forth, makes that it cannot find its Mother.

11. Therefore all Strife about the Divine Mysteries is an unprofitable thing,
and is done from without, without God, in selfe-perceptibility, where the
Sensibility vieweth it self in Nature in a Creaturely Form. There is no
comprehension or true understanding or knowledge of God, except the Image*like
Reason forsake it self, and sink down with its own will into its Center
again, out of which it is gone forth: viz: into the Eternal Speaking Word of
God: that it receive that speaking or breathing of God into it self again,
and through the Divine Science or skill, speak in a Distinguishable.
Separable and sensible Form: that it be a dwelling and Temple of God, wherein
Gods will works, Governs, and wills. Else there is no true knowledge or
skill concerning God and his Being or Essence.

12. For no Spirit knows God or his word and will, unless Gods word and will
be manifested and Stirring in it. Natural Reason without the Light of God
sees only the Natural Imagelikenesse, and goes on in its own speculation,
and frames in it self the Divine Being or Essence, as if that were just such
a thing. From whence is come the Strife amongst the Learned in Reason, so that
Men strive and dispute about God, and about his Being or Essence and Will,
where each of them holds his Imagination for Divine, and will have his own
Image which he has framed in the Imagination of his Reason, to be honored for
God: whereas yet it is only a Natural Image of Reason: and thus Men strive
all the world over about these Images of Reason.

13. But a true Man, who stands rightly in the Image of God, has no Strife
in Religion: For he lives in his first Mother, who has formed him with Soul,
Spirit, and Body, and his whole Substance, into an Image: he co-willeth and
acts with her: he is resigned into her, and yields his will to her, and she
feeds and nourishes him: Every property of the true resigned Man is
nourished with its like. As first; the Body out of the Limus of the Earth, is
nourished from the Earth: Secondly, the Body of the Thoughts.
Senses and Reason which is a spiritual Body, is nourished from its Astrum or
Constellation and Stars, out of which it has its Original. Thirdly: But the
Soul is nourished in its Principle from the Word and Being or Essence of God:
for it is out of Gods Word brought and come into a Body.

14. Now if it bring not it self in its own Imagibility and willing into
selfhood, but brings its will again into the Divine Speaking, then it gets
its nourishment from the Essential Word of God, viz: from the Essential
Wisdom of God: this is its Nutriment, from whence it also reaches and
attaineth divine skill: For every Spirit sees no otherwise, nor deeper, then
only into its Essential Imagibility; viz: into that Essence wherein it
works, so that the same has made it Imagelike through the Imagination:
therewith it forms itself, and in such Essence vieweth it self, and so high
also is its knowledge.

15. Therefore says Christ: Except you turn again with your Will and
Imagibility, and become as a Child, which has no Imagibility in its
Imagination, you shall not see God. Also ye must be newborn again, or else
ye shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: That which is borne of flesh: viz: of
fleshly Imagelikenesse, that is flesh and cannot inherit the Kingdom of God:
but that which is formed and generated spiritually and through the Spiritual
Imagination, that is Spirit, Joh. 3.6. For to be spiritually minded is Life and
Peace: and to be Fleshly Minded, is Death, and enmity to God, says St. Paul,
Romans 8.6, 7.

16. Into what the Spirit of the Will brings it self with its Imagination so
that it impresseth and comprehends it, therein also it Imageth it self into
Being or Essence: For no Spirit can bring any thing to pass without Being or
Essence; If the Eternal One were not Essential, all would be nothing: and if
that ONE had not a Will, there would be no Desire, nor Power, nor Word, nor
Essence.

17. Indeed we acknowledge that the Will of the Abyss has brought it self
into a Longing and Imagination, of it self; whence Nature and Creature have
their Original; Whence also the Natural Life has its Original; which now
also out of the Partiblenesse of the Exhaled will, has its own Will and
Imagination, to form and Image it self according to its longing and desire:
As we see such changing in Nature, how Nature Imageth it self into so many
kinds and Properties: and how those Imaged Properties, do every one desire
their like again.

18. Seeing then we understand in Man, that he especially above all other
Creatures desires and longs after three Properties. As first he longs
according to his Sensible or conceptive.
apprehensive understanding, after the Hidden God: and though indeed he sees
him not with bodily eyes, yet he desires him: Secondly, he longs after his
Astrum or Constellation, out of which the Mind and Rational Life is
proceeded, therefore the Rational Life longs again after its Mother.
Thirdly, he longs after the Stars or Powers of the Earth, and the other
Elements, and desires them for his Nourishment: and therefore we know also by
this hunger of his, that he must have his Original out of these Three: For
there is also such a threefold Spirit out of such an Original to be understood
in him: And then also such a Threefold Essence or Substance, wherein his Spirit
works; where every Operation longs after it^ first Mother, and receives
its Nutriment from her.

19. But seeing the Soul, viz: the Inward Ground of Man, in Adam the first
Man, has with its longing and desire out of its first Mother (out of its first
Original) viz* out of the Divine Word and Will, turned out into the Operation
of the Constellation and Elements, and formed it self in that Operation, and
plowed it self into a strange Imagination: whereby the Divine food, viz: the
Essential Wisdom of God is withdrawn: from which, with its longing desire,
it has broken off it self; thereupon it is wholly blind as to God, and the
first Divine Essence, (wherein God Created it,) is departed.

20. When the soul brought its Imagination from that [Divine Essence or
Substance] out of and into the Earthly and Astrall property, then also its
Body, wherein the Threefold Spirit works, became wholly Earthly Gross and
Beastiall; for into whatsoever the Imagination of the Spirit brings it self,
such a Body also is, through the Impression of the Spiritual desire. As we see
in Man, that he has gotten a Gross Earthly Body, wherein the Principles now
stand in Mere Strife, Contrariety, and Enmity: from which, Pain, Fragility.
Corruptibility and Death exist: which yet God did forbid him in Paradise,
while he yet stood therein, That he should not Eat of the Knowledge of Evil
and Good, with the Imagination, else he should fall into such Necessity,
Misery, and Death, and die to the Kingdom of Heaven, as it is also come to
pass, Genesis 2.17.

21. When the Soul brought it self into the Earthly Imagination, it brought
it self into the Earthly Image, and lost the Heavenly Image: whereas it should
Image it self into the Essential Wisdom, viz: into the Holy Heavenly
Essential Word, and take its Nourishment therestom: then it Imaged itself in
the outward Astrum or Constellation, and in the Serpents and Devils desire:
whereby in its Noble Image it became a Visard and Monster in the sight of God,
and lost its Angelical form which it had, as also Paradise, and the Kingdom
of Heaven; and now with its Ground stood in the Impression of Darkness in the
Anger of God, and must have ever stood in such Visardly Image, If the Great
Love of God had not come to help it again, and that the Divine Word, viz: its
first Mother (its first Original) had not again Inspired or Spoken the Grace
into it; so that the same Word would with its most Inward Secrecy and Love,
give it self again into the Ground of the Soul with a New wellspring and
fountain, and bring the soul a New Nourishment into its Life, whereby its
natural fiery and painful property becomes changed into the Image of God
again.

22. Which great Divine Love would be a Death to the Adverse.
Contrary will, as also to the Serpents and Devils Poison, and slay the
Monstrous Image and false Imagination, and bring the first Image again into a
New Life, which New Life in this introduced Love should again cate of the
essential Wisdom of God, and with its desire Image it self therein, that the
true Divine Science may be manifested therein again, and might work in a
Creaturely Life, and so bring it self In the midst.
together into a Creaturely Imagibility.

23. To which End also God Created Angels and Men, because he would Image his
Eternal Knowledge with the Essential Wisdom in Formings.
Forms, in and with which the Eternal Spirit plays, and has thereby
erected a Harmony of Divine fulness of joy, to the endless Solace of such
Images, viz: of the Angels and Men, and those who have their rise out of Gods
Word and Power.

24. And even therefore it is that the Eternal Word of the Divine Exhalation,
with the Manifestation of so Great Love and Grace, (which inspired or spoke it
self in again in Paradise after the Fall) is become Man, and has introduced
its Essential Love, viz: the Essential Wisdom of God, again into Our
Heavenly Ens and Substance that was faded as to God: and has made our
Substance that was faded as to God, living in him, with the Introduction of his
living Divine Essence: and with this Introduced Essential Love, which gave it
self in with the Essence of our souls, as also into our Flesh and Blood, has
with its will and desire broken the Monstrous will of the soul, viz: the
selfe-sixed Image-like false desire, as also the Devils Imagination, which he
had introduced into Man; and has with his Love brought the false properties
into the Temperature again; and is become Death to Death, which held us
captive, so that it must die to its Wrath and Fragility.
Corruptibility in this Introduced Love, and suffer the Humane Life, in this
Love to spring forth through IT, to a new Will and Eternal Life.

25. This new introduced Love and Grace, has given it self together into the
Breaking of the Humane Life, viz: into the Dying of Man, in the Person of
Christ, and brought the Humane received Owne-will, with it self, into Death
and broken it: and has suffered the Humane Image, (which the Owne-will,
through its Imagination and Desire of selfe-hood has made thus Gross and
vile, and brought it from the first Angelical Image into such a Monster) to
hang upon the Cross, and there to be put to scorn: and so has borne the
Eternal scorn which Man must have borne, as a Triumph, or show.
spectacle upon the Cross. And there openly made it appear before all Angels
and Spirits, how this great Grace of Love would destroy the Devils introduced
Desire, and Death also: and with this new Introduced Love spring forth through
death, and bring forth the humane Life through Death, and change the Wrath of
the Anger of God into Love, and make Darkness Light, and through this new
in^^oduced Love, convert and transmute the Gross (Earthly) Humane Image into a
Heavenly Image again.

26 As the impurity of Gold is changed in the fire or much more, as a Man may
by the Tincture turn Copper, Lead, or Gross Iron into Gold: so also is the
Humane Spirit, together with the Body in their Three Principles, changed into
the Divine power and property, and through Death brought into an Eternal Life,
which consists in Power and Glory in the Will of God.

27. Where now we understand, that the humane Soul in this transmuted new
Birth, and introduced Love, does again Eat of the Essential Wisdom of God,
and with its will Imageth [or frameth] it self in the Divine Science; and
therein has Divine skill and knowledge: And so by such Resurrection through
the Death, (where the Man Christ in the Divine Power is arisen through Death,
and has made Death Life) is become a Lord over Sin, Death, the Devil, and
Hell, and has borne all of them in its Resurrection, as a Show or Triumph.
spectacle on the humane Soul and Body, as a Victor over them.

28. And here may be rightly mentioned what Christ says, Joh. 17. Father the
Men were thine, but thou have given them unto Me, and I now give them this
victory, viz: the New Life introduced into Death, that Death in them also may
be Destroyed, that they in my Power may go through Death, and in my ^ower be
also thus transmuted, and through my Resurrection come again to thee: and as I
am arisen from Dead, and have brought their (by Me assumed) Humanity, to thee;
so that I as true God and Man in One Person, am One with thee, and have
possessed the Throne of Glory: So Father I will also, that those which thou
have given Me, be where I am and see my Glory.

29. Now seeing Christ has said, Joh. 6. He is the Bread that is come down
from Meaven, that gives life to the World, and that we should eat his flesh
and drink his blood: and that whosoever eats and drinks the same, he would
remain in them, and they should remain in Him; and whosoever eats not nor
drinks not the same, they have no life in them: Also Joh. 4. He would give
us the water of Eternal Life, and whosoever should drink thereof, should
thirst no more, but it would flow in him to a sountaine of Eternal Life, and
streams of living water should flow from him.

30. Therefore here-following I will set down a short fundamental Exposition,
what his Testaments, which he left behind him, of Baptism and the Last
Supper, are, what Baptiseth and is Baptized, how it is done, and to what profit
and Effect it is done; also how the participation of his body and blood in his
Testaments is effected; with what Mouth, and what food it is; also who
partaketh thereof worthily, and how it is with the unworthy.

The First Chapter How Reason uses to view it self in a Creaturely Imaginary
Manner.
Imagelikenesse, when it considers of Christ and his Testaments.
Whence the Strife about Christ's Testaments arises; and how the same is an
Empty unprofitable thing.
ALL Strife and Misunderstanding concerning Christ's Person, Office and Being
or substance, as also concerning his Testaments which he left behind him,
wherein he works At Present.
Presentially, arises from the defected Creaturely Reason, which runs on
only in an Imagelike Opinion, and reaches not the Ground of this Mystery, and
yet will be a Mistress of all things or beeings, will Judge all things, and does
but loose it self in such Image-likenesse, and breaks it self off from its
Center, and disperseth the Inward senses or thoughts.
thoughts, and runs on in the Multiplicity, whereby its Ground is confused,
the Mind disquieted, and knows not it self.

No Life can stand in Certainty, except it continue in its Center, out of which
it is sprung.

Seeing then the Soul is sprung from Gods Word and Will, and yet is entered
into its own Lust and desire to will of it self: in such searching of
selfe-willing, it cannot reach its first Ground from whence it is sprung: and
threupon it runs without its Ground in mere uncertainty till it return to
its Original again.

Every Beginning goes out of the Eternal ONE, viz: out of the Tri-unity of
GOD, through the Exhalation, or speaking of the unity of GOD. As a fountain
flows from its Original. Through which flowing forth, the unity brings it
self into selfe-viewing findingnesse and perceptibility, to the Forming and
Imaging of it self. Every visible and Invisible Being, both Spiritual and
Corporeal, have taken their Original in the Exhalation of the Divine Power,
and are a Or, Resemblance or Antitype.
Reflection of the seperable will of God, and stand with their Ground therein.
For the Beginning of every Being is nothing else, but an Imagination of the
out-flown will of God, which has brought it self into Seperability,
formednesse, and Imagelikenesse; wherein lies the whole Creation: And every
life does consist in its re-exhalation and Resemblance or Antitype.
Reflection in the same manner.

Seeing then that the Humane Life is an out-flowing and Reflection of the
Divine Power, understanding, and skill, therefore the same ought to continue in
its original, or else it loses the divine knowledge, Power and skill, and
with selfe-speculation brings it self into Centres of its own, and Strange
Imaging, wherewith its Original becomes darkened and strange.

As is to be known by Erroneous Reason, which ever teaches concerning GOD,
and yet has no true understanding: also it never comes to rest whiles it
runs on in Strange Imaging.

Therefore say I, that this is the only cause that Men Dispute and Strive
about God, his Word, Essence or Being and Will; that the understanding of Man
has broken it self off from its Original, and now runs on in mere
self-will, thoughts, and Images in its own Lust to self-ishnesse, and Imagines
to it self another Ground to the Divine Willing, wherein yet there is no true
knowledge, nor can be, so long till the Life returns into its Original, viz.
into the Divine outflowing and will.

And if this be done, then Gods will speaks forth the Divine Power and
Wonders again through the humane willing. In which Divine Speaking the life
may know and comprehend Gods will, and Or, Image.
frame it self therein. Then there is true divine knowledge and understanding
in Man's skill, when his skill is continually renewed with divine Power, and
when divine skill presses forth through the life, in that kind and manner as
in the Beginning it did flow forth from the divine Power and skill.

As Christ has taught us, when he says; Unless ye be converted and become as
a child, ye shall not come into the kingdom of God. That is, that the life
turn it self again into God out of whom it is proceeded, and forsake all its
own Imaging and Lust, and so it comes to the Divine Vision again.

All Strife about the Divine Will and Being or Essence, whereby men despise
one another, comes from self Imagelikenesse, that one Man comprehends the
Image of another, viz: his thoughts, and yet cannot rightly apprehend them.
Where One Man sets himself in the Thought and Mind of another, and brings
that which is his own thereinto, and compels that which is another into
his Meaning, and forcibly sets himself aloft in the Thoughts and Mind of
another, and holds them for his proper own, and will make a show therewith,
and therewith domineere in and over the Thoughts and Mind of others: Men must
worship and reverence his Thoughts and Mind, and hold them to be the Word of
God, or Or, Oracles.
the speaking of God.

Thus Man deludeth himself, and Robs God of his honor, takes his Covenant
in his Mouth, and yet hates the Nurture of the Spirit of God, which therefore
reproves him in his Conscience, that he is but an Apostate Lucifer, and will
compel others into his Image, that they shall hold it for the Word of God.

But a true Man, Inclines himself, to his Original, and forsakes all
Images, and desires no self Imagebility of his understanding, except what God
will frame and speak with and through him: and despises none, but only
distinguishes the true from the false, the Good from the evil, and teaches
the Truth with Divine Powerful out-flowing and will.

All Disputation concerning Gods Being or Essence and Will, is performed in
the Images of the Senses or thoughts without God: For if any lives in God, and
wills with God, what needs he dispute about GOD, who or what GOD is?

But that he disputes about it, is a sign, that he has never felt it at all
in his Mind or Senses, and it is not Given to him that God is in him, and
wills what he will. It is a certain sign that he will exalt his own
Meaning and Image above others, and that he desires the Dominion.

Men should friendly confer together, and offer one another their Gifts and
Knowledge in Love, and try things one with another, and hold that which is
Best, 1 These. 5.21. And friendly instruct one another, and not so stand in
their own opinion, as if they could not Err: Seeing we have a Mighty Enemy
against us, who suddenly brings strange Images into Man's thoughts, and makes
Men Insult: whence Sects and Scissmes exist.

It lies in no Man's Person, that Men should suppose, that the Divine
Understanding must come only from such and such: For the Scripture says; Try
all things, and hold that which is Good, 1 These. 5.21.

The Touchstone to this Knowledge, is, First, the Cornerstone Christ: that Men
should see, whether a thing enter out of Love into Love: or whether alone
purely the Love of God be sought and desired: whether it be done out of
Humility or Pride: Secondly, whether it be according to the Holy Scripture of
the Bible: Thirdly, is it according to the Humane Heart and Soul, wherein the
Book of the Life of God is incorporated, and may very well be read by the
Children of God: where then the true Mind has its Touchstone in it self,
and can distinguish all things: If it be so that the Holy Ghost dwell in the
Ground of the Mind, that Man has Touchstone enough, That will lead him into
all Truth.

Christ's Testaments are a secret Mystery, and are proffered to the Minds and
Thoughts that are departed from, and come again to God, where the Life
brings it self to God again, and so will the Thoughts that return to God
be first fed with Divine Power and Understanding: the same afterward kindle
the Life, that it hungreth after God: to which afterward is given Christ's
Flesh and Blood for a Or, Pawn or Earnest.
Pledge and Seal, and the Divine Essence or Substance will be imprinted
therein: whence the Life is brought again into its Original: viz: into Gods
Power and Word.

A false Thought or Mind of Man is nourished again by its Likeness, viz:
from its own Conjecture, or from highness of Mind, or from the Subtilty of
the Serpent: and these it desires to Exalt, and put into an Image: and that
Image is a Branch on the Tree of Satan.

Now that Man which is fed from the Divine Power and Spirit in his Mind and
Thoughts, he is Divinely Minded, and brings forth Good things out of his Good
Heart.

But that Man who is fed in his Thoughts from the Power and Will of the Flesh,
he is fleshly Minded only.

When Reason considers of Christ's Testaments, and thinks and considers
how yet Christ can be present in his Testaments, then it thinks, it is done
after an Imaginary.
Image-like Manner.

And when it knows that it is not done in an Imaginary.
Image-like Manner, then it falls quite from that, and thinks HE is
present only in Remembrance: As when his Word is preached, then he works
thus only in the same powerfully: and so it thinks also concerning his
Testaments, that Christ works only Spiritually in the Faith: and that the
Testaments are only Signs or Symboles, whereby we should instruct our selves
what he has done for us, and therewith only declare his Death, and the
shedding of his Blood, and should keep it in lively Remembrance, to our
Comfort.

Thus Reason understands nothing at all of the Kingdom of Christ, much less
of his Person, or of his Office: and in that respect Men dispute and strive
about it, and will needs attain it with the Searching of Reason: all this
attaineth not the true understanding: For Christ's Testaments are Heavenly, and
Reason is Earthly and worldly: It seeks Christ in the Time [or that which is
Temporary] and if it find him not therein according to their Power, then it
supposes, HE is present only to the Or, Senses.
Thoughts, which cast themselves up to him in Heaven: But this will not renew
the Life, and bring it into God again: It will not make the New Birth.

All Strife comes from hence, that Men do not understand that Heaven wherein
Christ sits at the Right hand of God, that he is in this world, and that the
world stands in Heaven, and Heaven in the World, and are in one another, as
Day and Night.

The Inward Ground of the Word, out of which the Four Elements are sprung, is
the Heaven, viz. a Spiritual World: In that Inward Power Christ Rules, true
God and Man, through the Outward World: For where Christ says; Matthew.
28.18.20. All Power is given to Me in Heaven and on Earth: Also; I am with you
always till the End of the World: Also; He shall rule over all his Enemies,
till all his Enemies are laid under him as a footstool, 1 Cor. 15.25. Psalm.
110.1. This is to be understood of his inward Kingdom, where, in the inward
Power he rules over the outward Earthly, and also the Hellish.

For the outward World is sprung out of the inward Spiritual World; viz: out
of Light and Darkness; which fabric, before the Office of Christ stood in the
Eternal Creators Office; who from Eternity has wrought [or effected] light
and darkness, viz: the Spiritual World: which fabric is flown forth and
become visible, and brought by God into a Creation, wherein Light and
Darkness, viz: Good and Evil, rule one with another: where is understood Hell
and Pain in the flowing forth of the Eternal Darkness, and the Light of
Nature, in the flowing forth of the Light; and in that where Evil and Good
rules alike, is understood the Kingdom of Nature, with hot and cold, and all
other properties.

This Dominion has God given to the Office of Christ, that he being both true
God and Man, should rule over all the Propriety, and selfe-willing of this
Kingdom, where Evil and Good rule one in another. As the Sun in the visible
World rules over Evil and Good, and with its light and power, and all
whatsoever it self is, is present every where, and penetrates into Every
Being, and yet in its Image-like for me does not pluck away to it self with
its Efflux, but wholly gives it self into Every Being, and yet ever
remains whole, and nothing of its Being goes away therewith: Thus also it
is to be understood concerning Christ's Person and Office; which rules in the
Inward Spiritual World visibly, and in the Outward World Invisibly, and
thoroughly penetrateth the Faithful Man's Soul, Spirit, and Heart. And as fire
gloweth through the Iron, and as the Sun works through and through an Herb,
so that the Herb becomes Solar, [or filled with the virtue of the Sun, and
as it were so converted by the Sun that it becomes wholly of the Nature of
the Sunne]: so Christ rules in the Resigned Will, in soul and body over all
Evil Inclinations, over Satan's introduced Lust, and Generateth the Man to be a
new heavenly Creature, and wholly flows with it self into him, both as to
Divine and humane power, so that the Faithful Man becomes a right branch on
his Vine, in which, God and Man (as to that same inward New Birth) dwells.

Now herein consist the Testaments of Christ, that He offers himself to the
Text, Glauben. Vide Chapter 2. v. 1. on the second side.
Faith, that He will give it this Flesh and Blood, and all Grace, and
Spiritually dwell in Man, as the Sun dwells in the Plant, and makes the
fruit Ripe and Or, supple.
Tender.

So in like manner is the poor fallen Earthly Man, which perished in Soul and
Body, again renewed, and wrought out to be a heavenly fruit; where in the End,
only the Grossnesse of the flesh falls from him, and the Spirit together
with the Soul remains in Christ: and also here in this Life according to
this indwelling power, dwells in Heaven; concerning which St. Paul says; Our
Conversation is in Heaven, Phil. 3.20. But the Body is in the World; and of the
Worlds Essence: And now as the Heaven penetrateth the World, and gives it
Virtue and Power: so also Christ thoroughly penetrateth the outward Man with his
inward ruling power, and resists the vain Lust of the Earthly Nature.

Therefore say I; none understand any thing of God, except God work it in his
Mind and Or, senses.
Thoughts; for all Natural knowledge is outward in the World, and arises from
its Astrum, and runs on in surmisings, doubting whether a thing be so or no:
But the Spirit of Christ assures in the Soul and Spirit of his Faithful, and
witnesses in them that they are Gods Children, Romans 8.16.

Now how this present Essential participation is effected, and what the
Covenant of Grace between God and Man is, both of the Old and New Testament:
What Baptism and the Supper of Christ are, shall be declared in the following
Chapters.

The Second Chapter. Of the Institution of Baptism, what it is, who it is that
Baptiseth, and what is Baptized; And how the Or, Baptism of Water.
Water-Baptisme is to be understood.
1. WHen any will kindle a Fire, they must have some substance that will take
fire: it must be a substance, wherein there is an Oil and Water, or it burns
not. For if they cast a Stone, or the like into the Fire, it will not so burn
as to come to a Blazing.
shining Light: so also it is to be understood concerning the Soul; When it
brake its desire off from Gods Essence of Love and Meekness: which divine
Meekness in it was as a Spiritual Oil and fountain of Water, wherein it
Assuaged or refreshed.
allayed its fiery source, and therein its fire had a shining and Light: then
its own Seperator: viz: the Natural Fiat, Text. Impressed. Impression.
compressed it self, so that by such Text. Impressed. Impression.
compression its properties became as a hard Stone, or as a hungry source of
Fire, wherein there is indeed great heat, and yet cannot come to any kindling
[of Light] as a hard Stone which lies in the Fire, and yet Or, is not of a
light fire.
is not properly the same with Fire, because of the hard Text. Impressed.
Impression.
conpression of the Stone.

2. And yet a Man may understand that there is not only a Hots fire in the
perished Soul, as a hot burning Fire-source, but also a Cold Fire-source,
wherein Hot and Cold stand in Eternal Strife and Or, opposition.
Contrary Will: as the Cause of the true fire, viz: a dark fire-source of
Anguish, wherein there is always a desire of kindling, and yet no kindling may
be effected, because of the strong Text. Impression.
Compression: And that the Substance of the Oily and Watery Meekness is game,
and is she: up in such a hard indissoluble Death.

3. And this is now that which God said to Adam: The Day when thou shall Eat
of the Tree (or fruit) of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, thou shall die the
Death.

4. Thus the poor Soul is poisoned through false Imagination, and through its
own Text. Impression.
compression of its desire, is come to be such a hungry fire-source; which is
only a shutting in of the true Life, and a Ground of Darkness, a source of
Enmity and Contrariety, wherein there is no more any true Ens, wherein the Life
might bring it self into Light.

5. As a hard Stone is shut up, so the Soul was shut up, and was out of the
good Love-Life a Poyson-Life, after that manner as out of Angels there became
Devils: which now also are of such a horrible poisonous stinking fire source
in their Essence, and cannot attain the kindling of the Light: The cause is
this, that they are become Enemies of the Divine Love, that the Love is to them
a Death of their Evil Will and Essence, which would slay their false Life in
the twinkling of an Eye, if they did but come therein.

6. This Text. Impresseten.
compressed Substance of the Soul, perished as to God, and blind as to God,
the Great Love of God out of m^^re Grace came again to help, as soon as the
Soul together with the Body was thus fallen, and spoke in or breathed in it
self again into the Center of the Soul, viz: into the Compressed shut up and
vanished Heavenly Ens of the Soul, viz: into the source of Meekness which it
had, which was no more Moveable.

7. Into this [Soule] the Moveable power spoke in it self again to be a New
Center and Covenant, that God would in the fulness of Time in this inspoken
voice of Grace, and in Man's vanished heavenly Ens introduce and Manifest his
living Ens, viz: the Essential Word of his Power and Wisdom, with the Most
high Love, viz: the Name JESUS out of JEHOVA, and therewith make the vanished
Essence or Substance of the Heavenly part living and growing again: whereof
the Soul should Eat, and thereby its anxious fire-source would be transmuted
and changed into a Love fire.

8. This inspoken Grace-word of the Serpent-Destroyer, that is it now, which
the Souls of the Holy Children of God before the Incarnation of Christ, have
kindled, that they believed God and his promise, of the fullfilling that was to
come: And in this Faith have they sacrificed.

9. For their Sacrifices, especially of the first Fathers after Adam, were
only, that they represented an Image or Figure, how the Soul should be
sacrificed in the fire of GODS Wrath, and how through this inspoken-Grace-
Ground and Covenant, the Soul should be transmuted in the fire of Or, Gods
Wrath fire.
Gods Wrath, and changed into a Love. fire, and how it should enter into the
Death and Dying of its self-will with the false Imagination, and should burn
away the false will in the fire of Wrath, and in the power of this inspoken
Grace of the Love and Meekness of God, go forth through the fire into a
clear light, and so become a Newborn child, that is no more Dark but Light:
and how the Introduced poison of the Serpent must sever it self therefrom, as
the smoke severeth it self from the Fire and Light, so that then the Fire and
Light becomes a clearer Glance, and no more shut up, as in the Wood it lies
shut up in the Essence.

10. This Image, Type, or Figure, they set before them with their Sacrifice,
and introduced their Imagination thereinto, with the inspoken Grace of the
seed of the Woman, and Serpent-Destroyer, that so their Imagination might
Form, Mould or Image it self in the Figure of Christ, that so the spirit of
their Will might stand in a Or, Imaging.
Modelling, wherein it might work in the Grace.

11. For without Substance no working can be: therefore they Imagined or
typified to themselves the Regeneration, with the Sacrifices by fire, and
formed or Imaged in them the Serpent-Destroyer, in the fire, how HE would
change Gods fire of Wrath in the soules-fire into a Light- and Love-fire, and
how the Enmity would sever it self from the Soul: and how the Soul should
through Christ's Death, (where the Love of God gave up it self into this fire)
be changed into an Angel.

12. By this Immodeled Image or Type they pierced with their desire and earnest
Prayer, to God: and Gods Word of Grace also thus had modelled and inspoken it
self in Men: and Now there was a Conjunction between God and Man: for the
Humane desire went with this Image into God, and Gods Love-desire went into
this Image of the Serpent-Destroyer; and so the desire of Man brought this
Image of the Imagination into the Sacrifice: and so the Sacrifice was kindled
with the Holy fire.

And it was not a Common fire that they had. Note.
If thou Babell could understand this, it were well for thee, and thou were
delivered from the Fables wherein thou runnest on thy Course.

13. This Holy fire consumed their Sacrifice through Gods-Imagination and
kindling: to signify: how the Or, Animal Image.
Beastiall Image of Man should be preserved in the fire of God, and the
grossnesse of the Element be consumed: and out of the fires Consuming should
go forth the right true created pure bright Spiritual Image in Adam, which
through this Great Love shall be preserved and brought through into Clarity by
the Fire: In which New Image, the Love it self would be the fire of life, that
it might no more Imagine and Imprint falsehood.

14. Note.
With such an Imagination and Belief or Faith, the first Men before Christ's
time, (before he manifested himself in this incorporated Grace-Covenant, and
became Man) were apprehended and taken into the Living Word of God, viz: into
that Grace, wherein their Soul came into Divine Rest: until at the
fullfilling, that Christ fullfilled this process, and arose from Death: and
then He also with his Life and Substance in them, viz: in their Inward Ground
of the Heavenly part which vanished in Adam; arose; and they have put on
Christ, as to the Soul and spiritual Substance: and so now wait for their
Body, out of the Limus of the Earth, viz: the Third Principle; viz: the
Outspoken formed Substantial outward Word; with its Spirit of the Resurrection
at the Last Day: As also it is thus to be understood concerning Christians,
which here have put on Christ.

15. Note.
This Ground of the Holy Fire, began with Adam and Abel: When Abel and Cain
Sacrificed, God looked graciously on Abels Sacrifice: for the Image or Type of
Christ stood with his Imagination of Faith therein: therefore God kindled his
Sacrifice with the Holy Fire, and it was acceptable before him: for it was a
Conjunction with the Divine Desire: But Cains he looked not graciously on, for
he had not such Faith or Beleese, but stood in the perished Natures own Lust
and Desire, and had Imprinted or Imaged to himself the Kingdom of this World:
and therefore the Holy Fire would not kindle in his Image or Type.

16. For Cain stood in the Image of the perished Adam, as a right figure of
Adam after the Fall: and Abell stood in the figure of the New Regeneration,
viz: in Christ's figure [signifying] how Christ would with his Sacrifice go
into Death: and so the Image of the perished Adam stood near Cain [signifying]
how Christ was come to seek lost Man, and to Generate him a New with his
Sacrifice.

17. But as the vanity of Men gat the upperhand, and their Nature became still
more Evil and shameful, then was quenched this understanding of the Holy Fire
among them, till the Flood came upon them, and destroyed them: which was a Type
of the Baptism [signifying] how the water of Eternal Life, viz: Gods
Substantial Meekness, would drown and quench that false Fire, viz: the false
life of the Soul, and how the Soul would grow up out of the Holy Water in the
Meekness of God to a New Life of Light.

18. But when God renewed his Covenant with Abraham, which was Established in
Paradise, then HE gave him the figure of Christ again With.
in the Circumcision [signifying] how Christ with his heavealy Blood would cut
off Sin and vanity from our unclean Birth: And therefore the Masculine
Persons must be Circumcised in that same Member, whereby the Humane propagation
is Effected.

19. Further he sets before him the Figure of Christ by his Son Isaac, in
calling him to sacrifice and slay his Son on the Wood, how it would go with
the humane Redemption; how Christ would be a Sacrifice in our received
humanity: and he awakened again the Holy fire which devoured his sacrifice: to
signify how Gods Love-fire would swallow up into it self Gods Wrath fire in
Man, and turn it into Divine Love, and thereupon gave him the promise, that
the seed of his Covenant, which would through this Holy Fire, through the
Transmutation, through the dying of vanity, grow forth in the Love-fire, would
be so great and so many as the stars in the firmament: Thus would Gods
children through the Sacrifice and Death of Christ, through this changing grow
forth out of the Holy Fire.

20. This stood in the Old Testmen^t in the figure, and the Reconciliation.
atonement was done in the Sacrifice through the Holy Fire, which fire was an
Image of the Wrath of God, which would devour in it self the sins together
with the Soul: for the Fathers property in the Wrath was turned into this
Fire-noyse.
fire-smoak, and the Sons property in the Love and Meekness brought it self
Or, into.
in the Wrath for they sacrificed the flesh of Beasts, but yet they brought
their Imagination and Prayer into the Grace of God, and Imaged or Imprinted
themselves in the Covenant of the Grace of Love.

21. And with this Imaging or Imprinting they entered into the Sacrifice, as
into the fire of Gods Wrath, and Divine Love, wherein the atonement was done:
and so the Wrath-fire of their introduced desire took the Earthly vanity, and
consumed it through the beastiall property of the Sacrifice: to signify, that
Man outwardly has assumed to himself beastiall Properties, and awakened them
in him through false Lust.

22. Seeing then also such beastiall Properties hung to the Mande of Man, viz:
the Animale soul from the Constellation, so that their Prayer and Will were
not pure before God, therefore Gods Wrath-fire confumed this Beastiall vanity
of Man in the Sacrifice through Beastiall Properties, and their Immodeled Image
or Type of the Grace went with their prayer into the holy Fire: and there was
the soulish-desire received in: that same Holy sire, now pierced with the
received humane desire through the Fathers Wrath-fire in the Sacrifice.

23. And thus the Children of Israel in the Sacrifice and fire were A^^^ned.
released from their sins and vanity, in a spiritual manner, upon the future
fullfilling, till Christ would Come and assume our humanity, and give up
himself to God his Father (as a Sacrifice,) into his Wrath-fire, and with the
manifested Lovesource in the Name JESUS turn the Wrath into Love: where then
the Wrath swallowed up the humane own Will, and Gods Love-will, through
Christ's Love, grew forth through Death and through the Wrath, and the humanity
went through Death into the Eternal Life.

24. In this manner was Israel in the Type of Christ, through the Covenant of
God, through the sacrifice and fire, after a spiritual manner ransomed from
sins: for Isreal's Faith went through the Sacrifice into the Covenant of God,
viz. into the Grace-Attonement of the Woman's seed: and Gods Imagination went
also into his Covenant made with Adam and Abraham: and there was a Conjunction:
and the true atonement in the Covenant was done through the holy fire: which
holy fire afterward in Christ manifested it self in the humanity, and took
away the Strength from the Poison of the wrath of God, and turned it into Love,
and brake open the strong Impression of Death in the soul; fire, and brought
the Divine Love and Meekness thereinto.

25. But when the time drew near that GOD would manifest his Love-fire through
his Covenant in the Humanity, that the same fire should be kindled, in the
Humane Life, then God re^^wed the Type, and with St John began the Water
Baptism, and brought his Covenant out of the Circumcision into the Baptism.

26. But says Reason; What is or signifies Water-Baptisme? What does God
thereby? also what does it Effect?

Answer: As is mentioned above: The Soul had so hard Text. Impressed.
compressed it self in its properties in the wrath-full Anger of God, that
thereby it stood in Eternal Death: In it was no divine Love-Ens more manifest
or moveable, wherein it might be able to kindle the Holy fire of the Love of
God: and therefore God sent the Baptism before this holy kindling, and set it
in the first Covenant: For when the Word and the power of the Holy fire, became
Man, and manifested it self in Christ; then the Holy Word in the Holy fire
through the assumed Humanity, spoke in it self into its Fellow Members
according to the Humanity.

27. Now if this Inspeaking should take Effect in Man, and become Substantial;
then must the Divine Eintauchen, Soaking or steeping.
Infusion go before: for as the Word in the Covenant manifested it self in
the humanity, then the meek Love and Grace in the Covenant did flow forth:
with this flowing forth of the Divine Love was the Covenant set Instituted.
and placed in the Water-Baptisme: for seeing Man was Earthly and Elementary,
there must also be an Elementary Medium or Means for that purpose, wherein the
flowing forth of the Divine Love in the Covenant might take hold, that a humane
Natural Substance might be in the middle, whereinto the Divine and also the
Humane Imagination might enter, and Infuse it self in the humanity for a new
Ens or kindler, wherein the Holy Fire might kindle it self in the dry
soules-fire.

28. As was done under Circumcision, in the Sacrifices, there the Beastiall fat
was a Medium, wherein by such kindling, the humane desire through the Covenant
went to meet God, and Gods-Imagination went into the Covenant: Thus stood the
Holy Fire in the Covenant, opposire to the Wrath in the Introduction of the
humane desire in the Sacrifice: Gods Imagination in his Love-fire went into the
Covenant, and the Humane Imagination went also through the Sacrifice in the
Fire into the Covenant: for in the fire was Gods Wrath met opposite, where
through the humane Imagination must go into the Covenant, and so consume the
sin and uncleanness in the Humane desire, which pierced to God: Thus stood
in the Covenant the lov^r fire met opposite to the humane desire: and the same
took the humane desire in the Wrath-fire to it, according to its purity.

29. As may be seen by Moses on Mount Sinai, where first the Fathers Property
in the Covenant out of the Wrath-fire opened it self, and required Man's
Righteousness, that the same should walk before God in full obedience and
purity, and in purity draw near unto him through the Sacrifice in the fire:
And if not, then he would devour them in the Curse through this Wrath-fire:
which was an Image, Type or shadow: [signifying] how the humane vanity should
and must be purged through Gods wrath-fire: But in the same wrath-fire stood
the love-fire met opposite in the Covenant in the Sacrifice, as an Image of
Christ, and quenched the Wrath-fire, so that the souls- desire with its prayer
and Will, could pierce through this wrath-fire into God.

30. This Love-fire, that stood opposite to the Wrath in the Sacrifice, which
also the Wrath-fire kindled, so that it devoured the Sacrifice, that is it,
which in the limit of the Covenant, in the seed of the Woman awakened it self
with heavenly Substantiality, viz: with the Essential Wisdom, and gave it
self up into our Substance, vanished as to God, yet heavenly.

31. Our substance vanished and shut up in Death, was signified by the dry Rod
of Aaron, which Substance grew in this awakening and introducing of the
Heavenly Living Love: Or, Substance.
Essence, where Gods Substance became Man, in whom the Holy fire could Burn:
For, the Divine Ens, which vanished in Adam, which grew again with such
kindling, was the food of this Love-fire, as a Spiritual Holy Oil, wherein
the Love-fire could kindle and burn: and that same Love-burning was the New
Life of the Regeneration.

32. But seeing in By OTHER may be meant other men then the man Christ himself.
OTHER Men there should not be Effected such a supernatural kindling through
the special Moving of God: [but] that other Men should all be kindled through
this holy fire out of Christ; therefore went the Covenant through the
Water-Baptisme with the out flowne Grace first into the Heavenly Ens of Man,
viz: into the vanished Substance, wherein the Incorporated
Paradisicall-Covenant of the Serpent-Destroyer steed, and pierced into the same
Covenant.

33. Yet seeing the Humane Essence, which was become Earthly, should go
together with such piercing in, therefore there must also be such a Medium for
it; wherein the Humane Essence can take hold: for in Gods Holiness it cannot
take hold; for the will was rent off from that; therefore there must now be a
similitude, wherein the Imagination of the Humane Nature may take hold.

34. For Christ also had this similitude, viz: the Elements, received from us
Men; that the Divine Imagination might take hold in the Water: that so the
Divine and humane Imagination together, might awaken and kindle the
Incorporated Paradisicall-Covenant, in that manner as a Glimmering (Mother*)
fire or tinder-fire comes into the wood and Glimmereth.

35. After such a manner, through the Baptism was introduced a Divine
Mother-fire of the Holy fire, (a holy and Divine Glimmering fire) which
destroyed and brake sin and Death to pieces in the Inwardnesse of Man, viz:
in the vanished heavenly Ens: from which the dry withered Tree of the Inward
Ground might receive a life again, viz: a Spiritual Oil: In which new
Spiritual Oil of the Power of the Divine Light, the Love-fire, viz: the
New-Life should burn.

36. This is now the Water-Baptisme, to which the Holy Ghost in the Inward
Ground is the hand, which with the flowing forth of the Divine Love out of
Christ's suffering, Death, and Resurrection baptiseth with his Victory: That is;
He Infuseth Christ's Humanity, Suffering, Death, and Resurrection, into the
Inward Ground, and kindles the Incorporated Paradisicall Covenant with this
fire, that the dry Rod of Aaron buddeth forth.

37. For with this Infusion of the Holy Ghost, Christ is bestowed upon Man: he
is hereby incorporated to Christ, and the Heavenly Ens, which in Mary assumed
our humane Ens, with the whole process of Christ, is put on him, and imprinted
in his even heavenly vanished Ens, to a New Life which has overcome Death.

38. As a Tincture, tinctureth wholly and thoroughly penetrateth the Mettle, or
as fire gloweth quite through the Iron: so here it is to be understood
concerning those who are capable of such Infusion, as shall further be taught.

The Second Chapter. Of Gods Covenant after the Fall, what the Fall of Man is,
and how God has bound and united himself with him again. What the
Circumcision in the old Testament and the Baptism in the New are.
WHen any will kindle a Fire, they must have some Substance that will take
Fire: it must be a Substance, wherein there is an Oil and Brimstone, or it
burns not. For if they cast a Stone, or the like into the Fire, it will not
so burn as to come to a shining light: so also it is to be understood
concerning the poor Soul; When it brake its desire off from Gods Essence of
Love and Meekness: which Essence in the beginning was in it, as a Spiritual
Oil and Water, and it was as a Spiritual Brimstone, wherein the Light of God
did burn: then it brought it self into own Desire: whereby it was shut up as
a hard Stone, and lost all its Love and Meekness; and was as a burning
Brim-stone-spirit, which could not be remedied, unless the Oil of Divine
Meekness and Love did flow into it again.

To this flowing into the Humane property, there must be a Subject, as a
Medium, or Means, or Resemblance, or thing of the like nature.
Antitype, whereby it may be done: whereinto also the Humane Faith Entered, and
received the virtue or power through a Medium or Mean.

This Medium in the Old Testament is the Circumcision, together with the
Sacrifices; and in the New Testament it is the Holy Baptism, and Supper of
Christ, together with the Word taught, whereby the Divine Love and Meekness,
as the right Balsam or Unction.
Anointing Oil of divine power is again flowen into the Glauben, See Chapter 1.
v. 28. on the second side.
Faith: and so the shut Mouth of the soul is received into and comprehended in
the Covenant of God, and opened again by the sweet Grace, so that it can
again Eat of the heavenly Manna.

What signifies now this Anointing?

Answer: Nothing else, but that as Man is Tinctured again in Soul and Body,
and so thoroughly penetrated and healed that he is capable of the Divine Power
again, viz: of the Divine fire of Love: so must his Brimstone Spirit of the
Wrathful fiery Soul, perished as to God, be remedied again by the Covenant
of God by such an Anointing Oil: As with the Baptism there is powered into it,
the Water of the Eternal Life of Divine Meekness: and in the Supper is powered
into it, the fire-burning Love in the Life of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Reason says. Cannot God forgive Man his sin without a Medium?

Answer: The Matter was not about forgiveness: The Soul wanted not only
forgiveness, but a New Birth. It had brought it self into owne-will, and
quite broken it self off from Gods will, whence the Eternal Darkness existed
in it: For the source of its Life, viz: its own Seperator (understand the Cause
of its Creaturely Moving and Life) had lift up it self, and the properties of
Life were quite gone forth from their Temperature, and had brought themselves
into a strange burning fire, viz: into an anguishing heat and cold, into
Eternal hunger and thirst, into Horror and Despair: Where, in the Life of the
Body and of the Soul, all properties were against one another, and Man stood
in an Eternal dying source: He was become quite Blind and Dead as to God:
and the more he moved himself in his own ability to apprehend God, the
greater was his anxious source: For the poor Soul was by Lust gone into
Earthlinesse: wherein Satan and the Spirit of Error had captivated it, and
made it wholly Monstrous: And now the More it sought Rest therein, the greater
was its Pain.

And this now is that which God said to Adam: The Day when thou shall Eat of
the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, thou shall die the Death, Genesis
2.17.

Thus the poor Soul is poisoned through false Imagination, and through its
own Impression.
compression of its desire, is come to be such a hungry fire-source, which is
only a shutting in of the true Life, and a Ground of Darkness, a source of
Enmity and Contrariety, wherein there is no more any true Divine Ens, wherein
the Life might bring it self into Light.

As a hard Stone is shut up, so also the Soul was shut up, and out of its Good
Life there became an Evil Life: as out of Angels there became Devils, which
now also are of such a Horrible poisonous stinking fire-source in their
Essence, and cannot attain the kindling of the Light, and are an Enemy of all
Love and Truth.

This Compressed blind Soule-substance, and perished as to God, the Great Love
of God, came again to help instantly after that Fall, and spoke it self in
again into the Center of the Life, as a new Covenant, viz: into the source of
Meekness which it had, which Love-source in it was no more Moveable.

And did set into the Humane perished heavenly Ens, his new Grace-Covenant,
viz: the Destroyer of the Serpent; that God would in the fulness of Time in
this inspoken voice of Grace introduce thereinto, and manifest therein his
living Ens, viz: the Living Word of his Power and Wisdom, with the most high
Love, viz: the Name JESUS, and therewith make the vanished Essence or Substance
living and growing again: from whence the Soul should again Eat of the
heavenly Substance, whereby its anxious fire-source would again be changed
into a Love fire: Of which the dry Rod of Aaron, [mentioned] by Moses, which
grew again and bare Almonds, was a Text. Bild, Image or Type.
figure.

This inspoken Grace-word of the Serpent-Destroyer, is it now, which the Souls
of the holy Children of God before the Incarnation of Christ, have kindled,
that they believed God and his Promise of the fulfilling that was to Come: and
in this Faith have they sacrificed.

For their Sacrifices, especially of the first Fathers after Adam, were only,
that they represented an Image or Figure, how the Soul should be sacrificed in
the fire of Gods Wrath, and how the Soul should through this inspoken Ground
of Grace and Covenant, in the fire of Gods wrath be changed into a Love-fire:
how it should Enter into Death and a Dying to its self-will of false Desire:
how the false will should be burned off from it, and in the power of this
inspoken Grace of the Love and Meekness of God, spring up or go forth through
the fire into a clear light, and so become a newborn child, which is no
more dark but light: also did live no more in its own will, but in Gods will:
and how the introduced Serpents-Poyson in this transmutation does sever it
self there from, in that manner as the smoke severeth it self from fire and
Light, whereas then the fire and Light becomes a cleerer Glance, and is no
more shut up, as it lies in the Essence of the Wood shut up: Even as the
(Holy) Divine fire of the Soul was through sin thus also shut up, which none
could unshut and kindle, but only the Love of God in this incorporated
Grace-Covenant.

This Image, Type, or Figure, they set before them with the Sacrifices
[looking] upon the future fulfilling, and introduced their Faith, with the
inspoken Grace of the Womans-seede and Serpent-Destroyer, that so their Faith
might thus Form or Mould it self in the Figure of Christ, that the Spirit of
their will, might stand in the figure and Image of Christ, that their Faith
might Work in that incorporated Grace.

For without Substance no working can be: therefore they Imagined or typified
to themselves the Regeneration with the Sacrifices by fire, and formed or
Imaged in them the Serpent-Destroyer in the fire; [typifying] how HE would
change Gods Wrath-fire in the Soul into a Light and Love-fire; and how the
Enmity would sever it self from the Soul; and how the Soul should through
Christ's Death, (in which the Love of God would Give up it self into this
Wrath-fire) be changed into an Angel.

By this Immodeled Image or Type, with their desire and Earnest prayer they
pressed through the Sacrifice to God; and Gods Word with the Grace had thus
also with the Covenant Modeled it self in Men: and now there was a Conjunction
between God and Man, for the Humane desire went with this Image through the
Sacrifice in the Holy fire into God, and Gods Love-desire went into this Image
of the Serpent-Destroyer: For God kindled the Sacrifice with the Holy Fire.

And it was not a Common fire that they had in their Sacrifices, though they
used wood and Sacrifices thereto: yet their fire was not from a stone and a
steel, but from the highest Tincture of the Paradisicall ground, from whence
the fire of Life is sprung: If Man could understand it, and did not so run on
in blindness, it were well for him, and he were delivered from Babell and
Fables.

This holy Fire consumed their Sacrifices through Gods Imagination and
kindling: and there the humane introduced Will, which hangs to Earthlinesse
is cleansed and in the holy Fire purged, and ransomed from sin, upon the
future fullfilling. For the ground out of which this Holy Fire came, Manifested
it self afterward in Man's Life, in the Person of Christ.

Thus stood the figure in their Sacrifices [to shew] how the earthly Image of
Man should be preserved in the fire of God, and how the grossness of the
Elements should be consumed, and out of the Consuming of the fire should go
forth the right true created pure bright spiritual Image in Adam, which in the
fire of Gods Wrath through this holy fire of the Great Love should be brought
into Clarity: In which New Image, the Great fiery Love would it self be the
fire of Life, that it might no more Imagine falsehood.

With this Faith the first Men before Christ's time, (before Christ manifested
himself in this incorporated Grace Covenant, and became Man) were apprehended
and taken into the Living Word of God, viz: into the Grace, wherein their Soul
came into Divine Rest: Note: till Christ fullfilled this Type, and arose from
Death; and then he also with his life and Substance in them, viz: on their
Inward Ground of the Heavenly part, which vanished in Adam; arose, and was
manifested, and they put on Christ in Soul and Spirit: and so now wait for
their Body out of the Limus of the Earth, viz: the Third Principle of the
visible worlds property, viz: the formed Outspoken substantial word of the
Resurrection at the Last Day: As also it is thus to be understood concerning
Christians.

This Ground of the Holy Fire began with Adam, with Abell and Caine; when Abell
and Caine sacrificed, God looked graciously on Abells sacrifice, and kindled it
with holy Fire, and the sweet smell went up before the LORD: for the Image or
Type of Christ in his Faith stood therein, therefore God kindled his Sacrifice
with the Holy Fire, and it was acceptable before God: for it was a Conjunction
with the Divine desire; But Cains he looked not graciously on; for he had not
such Faith or belief, but stood in the perished Adamicall Nature of own Lust
and desire, and had imprinted or Imaged to himself the Kingdom of this world:
and therefore the Holy Fire would not kindle in his Sacrifice.

Cain stood in the Figure of the perished Adam after the Fall, and Abell stood
in the figure of the New Regeneration: [signifying] how Christ would with his
Sacrifice go into Death, and die for Man: and so the Image of Caine stood
near [signifying] how Christ was come to seek the poor fallen Man, and with
his Sacrifice generate him a New.

But as the vanity of Men gat the upperhand, and their Nature became still more
Evil and shameful, then was quenched this understanding of the Holy Fire
among them, till the Flood came upon them and overthrew them: which was a Type
of the Baptism [signifying] how the water of Eternal Life, viz: Gods
Substantial Meekness would drown and quench that false fiery life of the
Soul, and how the Soul would grow up out of the Holy Water in the Meekness
of God to a New Life of Light.

Now when the time came that God renewed his Covenant with Abraham, which He
had established in Paradise: HE gave him the figure of Christ again With.
in the Circumcision and the Holy Fire; as is to be seen by the Sacrifices of
Abraham, Genesis 15. how the Fire came forth between the Parts, and how at the
same time in a vision terror and great anguish fell upon him, all which
signify the Death of Christ, and the transmutation of Souls.

The Circumcision of the Member of the Humane propagation was a figure
[signifying] How the fleshly Man of Masculine and Feminine seed, should be cut
off from the Image Created in Adam, through the Death of Christ, with the Anger
of God: and through the bloodshed of Christ be again brought into the
Eternal Virginity: therefore must the Masculine Persons be Circumcised on that
same Member: to signify the unclean Birth after a Beastiall Manner, which is
a Abomination.
vanity in the presence of God: therefore God set his Grace-Govenant in the
figure of Christ on this Member, and so set Christ before him, whom he had set
up for a throne of Grace, that they might walk before him, and that his anger
might not eat them up, Genesis 17.

And he sets the figure of Christ forth with his process near upon Isaac
[signifying] how the Redemption of Mankind should be Effected. How Gods
Love-fire should swallow up into it self Gods Wrath-fire in Man: and turn it
into Love: and thereupon gave him the Promise, that this promised incorporated
Seed, which would through the Transmutation in the Fire, through the Dying of
Vanity, grow forth in the Love-fire, would be so great as the Stars in Heaven.

But when the time drew near, that GOD would manifest his Love-fire through
his Covenant in the Humanity, that the same fire should be kindled in the
Humane Life, then he brought his Covenant [typified] with Circumcision, into
Water-Baptisme, and with St John began the Water-Baptisme.

But says Reason; What is or signifies the Water-Baptisme? What does God
work thereby?

Answer: As is mentioned above: The Soul had so much enraged it self with
wrath, in its properties, that thereby it stood in Eternal Death: In it was
Gods Love-Essence no more manifest, wherein it might be able to kindle the Holy
Fire of God, viz: the Holy Life: therefore God sent the Holy Baptism before,
and set it in the Covenant. For when the Word, viz: the power of the holy Fire,
became Man, and revealed it self in Christ, then Christ with the holy Fire
through the assumed humanity inspake himself into his fellow Members,
according to the Humanity.

Now if this Inspeaking should take Effect, and become Substantial, then must
the Divine Eintauchen.
Infusion go before: for as soon as the word manifested it self in the
Humanity, then the Meek Love and Grace in the Covenant did flow forth: with
this flowing forth of the Divine Love in the Covenant was the Covenant set in
the Water-Baptisme: Seeing Man was of an Elementary Earthly kind, there must
also be an Elementary Medium or Means for that purpose, wherein the flowing
forth of the Divine Love in the Covenant might take hold; that a humane
Natural Substance might be in the Middle, whereinto the Divine and humane
Imagination might Enter, and Eintauchen.
Infuse it self in the humanity for an Ens or kindler, wherein the Holy fire
might kindle it self in the dry souls fire.

As was done by the Circumcision and in the Sacrifice, where the Beastiall fat
was a Medium, wherein the humane desire in such kindling with the Covenant went
to meet God: and Gods Imagination went thus to meet the Covenant in Man. Thus
stood the Holy Fire opposite to the Wrath, and Consumed the uncleanness in the
Humane Will, that it might pierce to God.

By Moses on Mount Sinai, we see this Image also, where first the Fathers
Property in the Fire manifested it self, and required Man's full obedience, to
live before God in Holiness, and draw near to him in purity through the
Sacrifice: If not then would he devour them in the Curse through this fire:
Which also was an Image, Type, or Shadow; [signifying] how the humane vanity
should and must be purged through Gods Wrath-fire: But Israel could not through
the fire come to salvation and the Love of God, and through Moses go into the
Promised Land, but through Joshua and Christ.

Therefore God brought his Heavenly Substance with his Covenant into the
Water-Baptisme, that there might be a tolerable Medium, whereby he might
introduce his Love-Essence into our vanished also heavenly Substance, wherein
the Holy fire might kindle it self again.

Even therefore, because the humane Essence was become Earthly; that Man might
bear or endure it: for there must be such a Medium, wherein the humane Essence
can take hold: for in Gods Holiness without a Medium it cannot take hold: the
will was rent off from it.

Therefore God became Man, that he might [cause to] flow in us his Deity with
the humanity, that we might comprehend or take hold of him: also that the
Divine Imagination might introduce and awaken it self in Man, and coworke with
the humane [Imagination]: and therefore he assumed the humanity, that he might
work in us with the Deity through the Humanity.

Thus with the Water-Baptisme, was a Glimmering Mother- holy-fire, imprinted in
Gods Love for a Subject or Object of Divine Imagination and working, whereby
Death according to the Inwardnesse of Man would be broken to Pieces, and a new
life spring forth: As fire in wood begins to Glimmer, so was this Infusion
or Baptising, an Or, Unction.
Anointing of the Holy Spirit, for a new Life's Oil, wherein the Divine Light
might kindle it self.

This is now, the Ground of the Water-Baptisme, to which the Holy Ghost in the
inward Ground is the hand, which with the flowing forth of the Divine Love out
of Christ's suffering, death, and resurrection, baptiseth with his victory: That
is; He Infuseth Christ's humanity, suffering, Death, and resurrection into Man,
and kindles the incorporated Paradisicall Covenant with this fire, that the
dry Rod of Aaron comes to Bud forth again.

For with this Infusion of the Holy Ghost, Christ is bestowed upon Man: he is
hereby incorporated to Christ, and the heavenly Ens, which in Mary assumed our
humane Ens, with the whole process of Christ, is put on and imprinted in him
to a new Life.

As a Tincture, tinctureth the Mettle, or as fire gloweth through the Iron: so
here also it is to be understood concerning those that are capable of this
Infusion, as it follows further.

The Third Chapter. A Briefer and more fundamental Instruction, how Man is
Baptized by the Holy Ghost, with Christ's Suffering, Death, and Resurrection in
Body and Soul.
1. WHen God would introduce his Covenant with the Circumcision into the
Water-Baptisme, then the Word of the Inspoken Grace, wherein the Holy Fire of
God was, First, before hand became a Man, and assumed first beforehand the
Woman's seed, as our soul and humanity, that he might baptize us with the
Living Covenant, which was become a Man.

2. For the Body of Man, to which the Baptism was necessary, was out of the
Elements: and now if it should be Baptized, the Covenant must first beforehand
give it self into an Elementary Medium, as in the Humanity of Christ, and
Sanctify that Medium, that Man might through this Medium be baptized.

3. For it was not to be done only for the Heavenly Substance of Man, which
vanished in Adam: in which the Covenant in Paradise incorporated it self, that
it alone should be baptized; No; but also for the Soul, and for the Body out
of the Limus of the Earth.

4. The whole Man needed the Baptism: All the Three Principles of all the
Three worlds in Man must be baptized: viz: The first Principle is the Eternal
Nature, viz: the true Souls Life, that came out of the Word of the Inspeaking,
into the Body; The Second Principle is the true Eternal Spirit; viz: the Holy
Power of the Light and Love (which I call in this little Book, the heavenly
vanished Ens and Substance in Adam) wherein Adam vanished, viz: the Souls will
departed out from it; The Third Principle is the Astrall Animal Soul, Ex
Spiritu Mundi, out of the Spirit of the World, with its Body out of the Limus
of the Earth, viz the whole outward visible Man.

5. This Threefold Man was wholly fallen; for as the Divine Light in the Spirit
of the Second Principle went out, he was quite blind as to God, and dead as to
Paradise; In this must a Divine Love- Ens be Infused again, in which Love-
Ens, the Divine fire and Light might again kindle to a new Life; but if this
must be done, then must the Holy Fire first beforehand manifest it self with
the Covenant in the Threefold Humanity, as in Christ's Humanity, that Gods
Spirit might baptize us out of, with, and through, this threefold Humanity;
that Each Principle in us might be baptized with its like or similitude.

For the Holy Ghost Baptizeth through Christ to the forgiveness of Sins.

6. The Holy Fire of the Divine Power in Christ Baptiseth his Temple in us,
which the Holy fire, viz: the Divine life in us would possess, viz: the
vanished Ens of the Heavenly worlds Substance, the Spirit of understanding, or
of Power, viz: the Second Principle, or Angelical Body out of the Angelical
worlds Substance, to which Substance Christ afterward gives his most holy
spiritual flesh for food, in which he himself dwells: This Divine Love in
the Holy fire baptiseth this Spirit, for it is an Ens of the Holy fire, wherein
it burns or lives: And the first Principle, viz: the fiery Soul out of the
Divine Science of the seperable speaking word, out of the Fathers Property, is
baptized with the fiery Spirit of the Fathers Property, as with the fire
burning Love.

7. Thus to be understood.

The Soul is of the Fathers Property, and in this Baptism with his Infusion
into the Soul, he gives it to the Son in his Love-fire: The Fathers Property
in the fire takes hold on the Soul, first with the Law of Nature, with his
Strickt Righteousness, with the Eternal Birth of the fire-Ground: whereby the
hard Impression.
Compressed Dead Soul in that Infusion of the fire is moveable, and its hard
Impression.
Compression of the false Magnetic Desire is broken in sunder and opened, in
that manner, as a Man strikes up fire.

8. Thus now the Divine Light of the Great Love is in the Opened Name JESUS out
of JEHOVA in the Center of the Fathers fire: When the Fathers fire, unlocketh
the fiery Soul, then the light of the Divine Love can shine into it, and
Introduce the Love Ens into it: for so soon as the Wrath-fire unlocketh the
Soul; iustantly it receives the Love-fire of the Son, and goes into it; as
fire Gloweth through Iron, or as a Tincture penetrateth Metrall.

9. And thus is the Soul given from the Father to the Son, and thus the
Son Gives it the Love-fire, viz the Eternal Life: for if the Fathers
Property did not move together in the shut up Soul, then the Soul would
remain in its Impression in Eternal Death, and the Light could not be
manifested in it.

10. The Commotion or Contrition.
shrill sounding and kindling of the Fathers fire, is the fountains of humane
Repentance, where man trembles before sin; for in the fire-glance is the
false compressed vanity of sins in the Darkness of the Soul, Manifest, and
the Love-shining in, of the Son, is the Meek Love-Oyle, that uniteth and
tempereth the Contrition or shrill sounding, again.

11. For the Son is in the Father, and the Father in the Son, and they
baptize together, The Father with fire, and the Son with Light: after that
manner as fire is struck, so that the meek Light-Glance is manifested out of
the fire, and so the fire burning is wholly turned and grown into a Light
Glance ^ The Fathers fire with its terror consumes the vanity in the Soul,
and the Sons Love heals it again.

Thus is the Baptism according to the Inward Ground of Man's Soul and Spirit,
to be understood.

12. The Third Property; of the Third Principle, Text. With.
in the Water-Baptisme, wherewith the body of the outward Worlds Substance, as
also the Spirit of the Constellation in Man is baptized, is thus to be
considered: By the Water, viz: by the Element of the Body of Christ, the right
Adamicall Man (which was created in Adam as to the Body, understand out of the
outward worlds Substance) is baptized, for here the Holy Ghost baptiseth, who
goes forth from the Father and the Son, his Going forth is the formation of
the world, and the world is the outspoken, formed Word, and the Spirit of God
it is that has formed it.

13. For He is to be understood in all the Three worlds, in each world
according to their Property: As in the Fathers wrath according to the
Darkness, he is the flame of Painfullnesse, and in the Eternal Light, he is
the Love-flame of God: and in this world in Spiritu Mundi, in the Spirit of the
world he is the formour and workmaster of every thing, in every thing according
to its property: As the Seperator of the thing is, so also is the outflowne
Spirit out of the outspoken word in every thing.

14. For in the outward worlds Substance, it is not to be understood, that the
Spirit of its Substance, is called God, but it is the outflowne Spirit in the
outspoken word of God, which with its ground stands in the Word of God.

15. The Outflowne Spirit of the Outward Creaturely and Natural Life, is
flowne forth out of Gods Love and Wrath, out of Light and Darkness, viz: out
of the first and second Principle, as out of the Eternal Nature, out of the
Speaking of the Word, and stands with its Ground in Gods Speaking, for the
Eternal Word Or, breaths forth that outspoken Spirit.
exhaleth it self with that Spirit into a Creaturely Life.

16. It, (that same Exhaled Spirit) is the outward Creaturely Life, in Every
Creature, according to its property.

It is the Soul of the Outward World, viz: the Inceptive Soul, a life of the
four Elements.

Its power is a fiery and lightish Constellation: What the whole outward
Constellation is in it self in its power; the same is that [Spirit] alone in
it self: yet as a shut up Constellation that lies in the Temperament, and yet
unfolds it self in Every Life, and makes it self Seperable, according to the
life's property.

Text. By.
In the Temporary Creatures with a Temporary Property, and Text. By.
in the Eternal with an Eternal Property.

In Man with a temporary and [fragile] Corruptible property, and also with an
Eternal.

Which Eternal hangs to the Eternal Exhaled Word (to the Eternal
Exhaling): wherein Man at the Last Day, according to the visible Image, shall
arise and come again, out of the Corruptibility, and be presented before Gods
Judgment (before The Judgment) and be put upon the Great Or, fiery Trial.
fires- Proba, where the Mortal shall separate it self from the Eternal.

17. Understand us now here rightly thus, concerning the Baptism of this
Outward Spirit: The Inward Holy-Spirit of Divine Love kindles the Outflowen
Spirit, and anointeth it with Divine Power: For, the humanity of Christ
according to our Outward Spirit was anointed of the Holy Ghost: and that same
outward Spirit of Christ, which in Christ's Person in the Elements of the Body
ruled after a humane Manner, that in the Covenant of his Testament in the
Water-Baptisme, anointeth the Inward ground of the Water; and the anointed
power in the water, in the word of the Covenant, anointeth the true Man, which
in Adam was Created out of the Limus of the Earth; and so also it anointeth the
Spiritus Mundi, the Spirit of the world; viz: the right Note.
Astrall Soul, which at the Last Day shall come again and be tried.

18. Now understand us dearly and well, it avails us much: This Anointing of
Water-Baptisme, is anointed with Christ's suffering, death, and resurrection; it
is anointed with Christ's shedding of his blood, with which heavenly blood, he
changed Gods Wrath into Love, and besprinkled Death in the humane Property,
wherewith he anointed the Earth, when he shed forth this his blood upon and
into it: Note also: It was anointed therewith, when Christ yielded his anointed
Life of the outward humanity received from us, in his Death, into this Spiritus
Mundi, this spirit of the world again, and anointed that also with his
Anointing in his Death: viz: where his outward mortal soul, received from us
(which dyed on the Cross, and yielded it self into the hand of God, as into
his Outspoken Word) went out of the Body into the Elements: Also: It is
anointed therewith where this his outward Soul with the Eternal Soul,
wherein the holy Ghost was; penetrated through Death and Hell: And also
therewith, where the Holy Ghost in the Word, received this his dead Astrall
Soul, our of death, and brought it through death with his resurrection into
Eternal Life, where Gods Love anointed it with the Eternal Life.

19. This Anointing of Christ is understood in the Water-Baptisme as in the
Covenant of God, for God anointeth in the humanity of Christ the Elements of
the Body, together with the Mortal and Immortal Soul, and brings Christ
with this anointing into his Death, and into the Wrath, and through Death into
the Eternal Life; And this Anointing (wherein Christ has overcome Gods Wrath,
Sin, Death, the Devil, and Hell) has God with his Covenant of the
Old Testament ordained in the Water-Baptisme, and offers it now to Every man.

20. And so now if a Man desires it, and inclines himself to it, as a Man,
and not a Beast, then the Holy Ghost baptiseth the inward Ground, viz: his
Temple, which himself possesses, viz: the true Eternal Spirit, together with
the Eternal Soul: And the anointing of Christ, out of his humanity received
from us, anointeth and baptiseth in us the true first Man Created in Adam out
of the Limus of the Earth, together with the Mortal Soul, (yet that a Man may
understand the Ground herein, is that) which shall arise and live Eternally.

21. This is done through Christ's suffering, Death, and Resurrection in his
bloody Or, Fight or combat.
Conflict; viz: the victory of his Death is the hand that baptiseth. Note; the
right Man is baptized unto Life, and the Serpent-Grosse earthly Man, is
baptized with Christ's Death and dying, so that he shall dye, and leave all his
evil lusts and desires to the Death of Christ, that that may kill it, and
bring a new will out of the Death of Christ, out of Soul and Body.

22. The Evil Man, viz: that Serpent-Monster, is taken with this baptism
(viz: where the hand of God, viz: his speaking Word it self, takes and
baptiseth) and is buried with Christ in his Death, and in that Hell, into which
Christ in his dying entered: understand, into the Darkness of Gods Wrath, viz:
into the Abyss of the humanity: and this anointing in the Baptism binds and
uniteth it self with the true Adamicall first Body, which was before the fall
of Adam, and generateth, through Christ's victory, a new will in soul and body,
which obeys God.

23. Thus then according to this anointing, the true Man stands in the
Anointing of Christ, and the Serpent-Monster stands in Gods wrath: and yet
during this time [of life] dwell in one body, but each in its Principle, viz:
in its own Property; concerning which St Paul says; Romans 7.20.25. Now if I
sin, it is not I, but sin in the Evil flesh that does it: Also: so then I
now serve God with the mind of the anointed Ground, and with the Mind of the
false flesh I serve the Law of sin.

24. And says further: Romans 8.1.28. Now then there is no condemnation to them
that are in Christ Jesus in his anointing, which according to this purpose of
God are called in the Word, or are thus comprehended in the Calling in the
Anointing: where he then means the right anointed Man, which in this time [of
life] sticks hidden in the Viz: Shell.
Scales of the Earthly Body, as fine Gold in a Gross stone, and yet according
to the Anointing dwells in Heaven; as St Paul also says; Phil. 3.20. Our
Conversation is in Heaven: Also Romans 6.15. Gal. 2.17. Shall we then that belong
unto Christ be yet sinners? that be far from us: where he means the
Anointed Ground, and not the beastiall Monster of Earthlinesse, full of Evil
inclinations, which stands in the wrath of God, the Condemnation; and shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God, which yet in this [life] time, hangs to the
right anointed Man.

25. The anointed Ground is the Christian, and not the outward Gross Beast:
The Anointing it is, which daily breaks the head of the Monster the Serpent,
viz: the Evil Earthly will, where the Strife in Man is, where one property
wills Evil and the other Good, and that which overcomes, drives Man on to
Work: Therefore shall and must Man's Works be Judged, and every one be gathered
into its barn: viz: that which is done in the power of the Anointing, into the
Kingdom of God; and that which is done in the power of the Monster the
Serpent, into Damnation, into the Darkness of Wrath and Death.

The Third Chapter. A Briefer and more fundamental Instruction, how Man is
Baptized by the Holy Ghost, with Christ's Suffering, Death, and Resurrection, in
Body and Soul.
WHen God would introduce his Covenant with the Water Baptism into the
humanity, then was the inspoken Grace-word of the holy fire of God, viz: the
fiery Love; First beforehand become Man, and took first beforehand the Woman's
seed on him, viz: our soul, spirit and whole humanity, that he might Baptize
us with the living Covenant, which was God and Man.

For the Body of Man, to which the Baptism was necessary, was out of the
Elements: and now if it should be baptized, the Covenant Would first beforehand
give it self into an Elementary Medium, as in the humanity of Christ, and
sanctify the same, that Man might through this Medium be baptized.

For it was not to be done alone, for the heavenly Substance which vanished in
Paradise; in which Substance, as in the most inward Ground of the humanity, the
Covenant in Paradise incorporated it self; that the same Ground alone should
be baptized: No; but also for the Soul, and for the Body out of the Limus of
the Earth.

The whole Man needs the Baptism: All the Three Principles, viz: all the
Three worlds Properties in Man must be baptized: The first Principle is the
Eternal Nature, The Mysterium Magnum, the Great Mystery, out of which the
visible world is sprung forth, a ground of the true Eternal Soul which
through Gods inbreathing came into the Body: The second Principle is the true
Eternal Spirit, viz: the Holy Lights-Power (which Power I call in this little
Book, the heavenly Ens or Substance vanished in Adam) which vanished in Adam
with the Fall, as the Soules-will departed out therefrom into Earthlinesse,
and brake its will off therefrom: The Third Principle is the Man from the
outward worlds Substance, viz: the Astrall soul with its Body out of the Limus
of the Earth, which stands in the four Elements.

This Threefold Man was wholly fallen; for as soon as the Light in the Spirit
of the Second Principle, went out, he was quite blind as to God, and dead as
to Paradise, in this must a Divine Love Ens be Infused or imprinted again,
wherein the Divine fire and Light might kindle it self to a new Life: and
therefore the Holy Fire of the Great Love of God in the Covenant must manifest
it self in the Humanity of Christ, that Gods Spirit might Baptize us out of,
with, and through, this Threefold Humanity; that Each Principle in us might be
baptized with its like or similitude: For the Holy Ghost Baptiseth through
Christ, to the forgiveness of sins.

How is this Baptism of the Holy Ghost Effected?

Answer: Gods holy Fire of the Divine Love power in Christ Jesus baptiseth his
Temple in us, which the holy fire Life, viz: Gods Spirit will possess, viz:
the vanished Ens of the Heavenly worlds Substance, the Spirit of power and
understanding the second Principle or Angelical Ground: to which Ground Christ
afterward gives his holy Spiritual flesh for food, wherein the true Own
very Reflect Image.
Express Image of God does Consist: The Divine Love and sweetness in the holy
fire, baptiseth this Spirit, for it is an Ens of the holy fire, wherein it
burns or lives: And the first Principle, viz: the fiery Soul out of the
Divine Science of the Seperable Eternall-Speaking word out of the Fathers fiery
Substance is baptized with the fiery Spirit of the Fathers Property, as with
the fire-burning Love.

Understand this thus.

The Soul is of the Fathers Property, according to the fiery omnipotency, and
in this Baptism, in which the Father cobaptiseth, He gives it to the Son
in his Love-fire: understand the Soul is of the Fathers fire, become a
wrath-fire: This wrath-fire with his Infusion he gives to his
fire-burning-Love: The Fathers Property in the fire, takes hold on the Soul,
first with the Law of Nature, as with his strickt righteousness of the
Eternal Birth of the fire-ground: whereby the hard Impressed.
Compressed dead Soul in that same Eintauchen
Infusion of the fire of the Divine life, is moveable, and its hard Impressed.
Compression of the false Magnetic desire is broken in sunder and opened, in
that manner as a Man strikes up fire: thus a new fire of God is kindled, which
Trembling or Contrition.
Commotion, or shrill sounding, is also the Ground of Repentance.

Now when the Fathers fire is stirred and kindled, then shines the Divine
Light of the Great sweet Love in the opened Name JESUS out of the Holy Name
JEHOVA in the Center of the Fathers fire, out of the unity of God, as the
Beams of Divine Grace in the Soul: for the Soul is with this Glimps
unlocked, and then suddenly the Light of Love takes in the unlooked ground,
and fills it with the substance of Love.

And thus the Son, viz: the Love of the Father, receives the Soul, and
sanctifies it, and thoroughly penetrateth it; as fire thoroughly penetrateth the
Iron. And that is it which Christ says: Father the Men were thine, and thou
have given them unto me: and I give them the Eternal Life: Also: Note.
This is the Eternal Life, that they rightly know thee Father, that thou art
the true God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ, Joh. 17.3.6.

In this inshining and indwelling Light, is the New Birth, and God is
Comprehended and known in the Spirit: whereupon follows instantly the true
Faith, which wills nothing but what God will; for thus is Christ the Light of
the Little World, viz: of Man, and gives the Eternal Light-Life of God, to
the Soul.

And thus the Soul lives in the Father, and yet with the Sons office is
governed and sanctified, and its anxious Fire-Life is a mere Love-burning: But
the Fathers Concussion or shrill sounding is necessary, that the souls
fire-source may be touched, that the Soul may find what it is: for it is
thereby brought into continual Repentance and humility, when the Beam of Gods
wrath often touches it, that it consider its fall, and is at no time secure:
(for it has a great Enemy near it in its flesh and blood, viz: Satan's poison)
that it may no more run-on in its own will as formerly: For the Soul in this
Beam of wrath trembles before sin, and so sin is manifested in the Light:
and then comes Sorrow and Lamentation over sin on a heap. And thus stands
this precious figure in the Inward Ground. For where the own will of sin is
shaken through Repentance, there the holy anointing Oil of Love penetrateth
instantly and heals these wounds. Thus the Father Baptiseth with fire to
Repentance, and the Son with Love, to Sanctification; and the Holy Ghost
manageth the office, who baptiseth with a New life: For the whole holy Trinity
baptiseth according to the Divine Manifestation; For without and beyond the
Manifestation there is only One Triune God in one only Good Substance or
Essence.
Being and Will, whereof a Man cannot say: the Father is wrath, this or that,
but is the Triune Good Being: But according to his Manifestation, out of which
the Souls and Angels, together with Every Heavenly and Hellish Being is
sprung, (viz: after the Manner of the Mysterium Magnum, the Great Mystery;)
from hence arises his Wrath or fire-source, and that from Eternity in Eternity.

Note: Thus now a Man may understand the Baptism according to the Inward
Ground, according to Soul and Spirit: viz: the Father Baptiseth with the
Concussion or shrill sounding to Repentance with fire. in which fire, the
bitter suffering and dying of Jesus Christ is impressed into the poor Soul:
for the Wrath-fire which holds the Soul captive, is overcome and softened
with Love: and this is impressed in the Soul as a victory: and the Son
baptiseth with the holy anointing-Oyle of Gods Love, and heals the poor
shaken Soul again: And the true Comforter the Holy Ghost, which goes forth
through Christ's Death, through Christ's Resurrection, through the Father in the
Son, he baptiseth with a new Life, and gives true Faith and understanding,
that we receive and know this.

The Third Property of the Third Principle, with the Water-Baptisme, wherewith
the body of the outward worlds Substance, as also the Outward Life is baptized,
that is considered as follows: By the Water, viz: by the Element of the body
of Christ, the Right Adamicall Man out of the Elements, which was created in
Adam, understand the outward worlds Substance, is baptized: for here the Holy
Ghost Baptiseth, who goes forth from the Father and the Son, his going forth
is the formation of the world, and the world is the outspoken formed Word, and
the Spirit of God it is, that has formed that outspoken Word.

He is to be understood in all Three Principles or Worlds, in each world
according to their property. As First in the Fathers wrath according to the
Darkness, He is the flame of painefullnesse: and Secondly, in the Eternal
Light he is the Love flame of God: and Thirdly, in this world in Spiritu Mundi,
in the Spirit of this world he is the formour and workmaster of Every thing,
in every thing according to its property: as the Seperator or Archaeus of the
thing is, from whence it arises, so also is the outflowne Spirit out of the
outspoken word, in every thing.

And it is not to be understood, that the Spirit of the Outward Substance, is
called God, but it is the outflowne Spirit in the outspoken Word of God, which
with its Ground stands in the Word of God.

The Outflowne Spirit of the outward Natural and Creaturely Life, is flowen
forth out of Gods Love and Wrath, out of Light and Darkness, viz: out of the
first and second Principle, out of the Eternal Nature, out of the Speaking of
the Word, for the Eternal Word, has breathed it self with that Spirit into a
Creaturely, Image-like Life.

It is the Soul of the Outward World, a Life of the four Elements. Its power
is as a fiery and lightish Constellation: What the whole outward Constellation
is in it self in its power, the same is that [Spirit] every where alone in it
self, yet as a shut up Constellation that lies in the Temperament, and yet
unfoldeth it self in every Life, and makes it self Seperable, according to
every Life's property.

Note.

Courteous Reader, this is what our Author, blessed in the Spirit of the high
knowledge, indeed readily began to bring to the easier understanding for the
simple, but has not finished it, for Anno.
A. O. 1624. in his Jubilee- year, or 50th year of his Age, he went,
according to the Mystery, again, into his Grave or Magic and Mental
Principle.

The Fourth Chapter. Of the Outward Water-Baptisme by Man's hand: who is worthy
to perform such Baptism? and what Baptized Infant does worthily receive this
Baptism; how it goes with the unworthy hand, as also with the unworthy
Baptized Infant.
In this time highly necessary to be considered.
1. WHen God established the Testament of his holy Covenant of Grace in
Paradise, out of the Type and Sacrifices, and would ordain the Circumcision
into Water-Baptisme: then he brings forth a Branch out of his Covenant in a
humane Manifestation, and began the Water-Baptisme thereby; As is clearly to
be seen in John the Baptist, who was proclaimed by the Angelical Message or
Embassy, and moreover of the stock of the high Priests.

2 His Incarnation or becoming Man, came not from the will of the flesh, for
his Father Zachary and Mother Elizabeth, which were ancient people full of
Days, who were clearly dead in the fleshly sperme or seed, where the ability
of Man was clearly gone: The seed of Zachary and Elizabeth, was raised up
through the moving of the Holy Ghost out of the Paradisicall Grace-Covenant in
their now quite vanished Spermatick Property.

3. Indeed he came out of the humane Ground, but not out of humane ability, for
the Anointing in the Covenant awakened it, so that their sperme, above the
course and power of Natures own ability was unlocked: which Holy Ghost raised
up a seed out of the humane sperme, and to that purpose chose The Seed.
it in its first beginning.

4. But the anointing of John was done in Mary's Salute, when she came to old
Elizabeth, and the divine anointing stirred in her (understand in Mary) out of
Christ's Incarnation or becoming Man: When Mary full of this anointing, saluted
Elizabeth, then the Incarnation of Christ, diffused with the anointing through
the salute of Mary in John in the Mothers womb: and not only in John, but also
in his Mother Elizabeth, so that she was full of this anointing, and both the
Mothers prophesied in the Spirit of this anointing.

5. And this is the Baptism of John, when as he was anointed with the
Incarnation of Christ, out of Christ, and received the Baptism of the Holy
Ghost out of the Covenant in the Mothers womb, so that he should be a
Forerunner and declarer, that the time of the Anointing, and fullfilling of the
Covenant of God, was at hand: that God has introduced his Covenant of the
anointing of Grace, into the humanity, and that the Covenant is become a Man:
that God will hence forward shed forth his anointing through the humanity of
Christ, through an Elementary Medium or Means, (that consists no more in
fire, as in the Old Testament, but in Love and Meekness of Water, so that the
time of Grace is at hand, wherein God has given his anointing into the
humanity.

6. And then we see that God there began no new Covenant, but only a New
Ordinance: for John suffered himself to be Circumcised, as also Christ: John
took the power and calling out of the Covenant of the Circumcision, out of the
Sacrifices of fire, and by the command of God brought them into the
Water-Baptisme: to signify that hence forward sin should be drowned by the
death of Christ in his Love and Meekness, and no more burn in the fire, as
was done by Israel in the Type.

7. Moreover we see by John, that he did not yet baptize with the forgiveness
of sins, but with Repentance, viz. with the Spirit of the anointing to
Repentance, which sounds through the hearts of Men, and prepares the way for
the Spirit of Christ, which unlocketh the Doors of Men's hearts and souls,
that after Viz. John the Baptist.
him, the King of Glory might enter in at those Opened Gates; concerning which
David says; Open the Gates wide for the King of Glory; that the King of Glory,
viz: Christ may enter in, Psalm. 24.7.9. And as John witnesses, He baptized
with water to Repentance and forgiveness of sins, yet he is not Christ, but
after him comes he that has the fan in his hand, who will baptize with the
fire of the Spirit, Luke 3.16, 17.

8. Also we see in John, that he must be the son of a Priest, who were
conversant about Circumcision and Sacrifices: he must come out of the Law of
the Covenant, and suffer himself to be Circumcised, and put on the Covenant,
that he might with the Spirit of the Covenant and of Circumcision, begin the
Water Baptism; viz: the Ordinance of Grace and forgiveness: for sin should
be destroyed now no more by fire, but by Love, which God manifested in the
Covenant through Christ; it [sinne] should be drowned and changed by Gods
Meekness.

9. Therefore also, God ordained for this destroying of sins this means of
the Water-Baptisme: to signify, that sin should be drowned in the blood of
Christ, in his Love and Grace, and that Man should henceforth have an open Gate
of Grace to God in the Love and Meekness, so that now with the Repentant
sorrow for sins, with the The absolution from sins.
forsaking of sins he may Enter through this Gate into Grace.

10. And we see here in John, the beginner of the Water-Baptisme, what Man is
worthy to baptize with this new Grace Covenant, viz: such a one, as also
beforehand, has been baptized with this Grace, as John was by Christ, who was
Baptized even in his Mothers womb: for flesh and blood without this anointing
cannot Baptize: for this Might, stands not in the Or, Power.
authority of Man, but in Christ's Or, Power.
authority.

11. Note.
A Christian, in whom is the anointing of Christ, baptiseth with the anointing
of Christ, for the Holy Trinity baptiseth with the Grace-Covenant of the
anointing, with Christ's Incarnation or becoming Man, with his suffering, death,
and victory: Now will any baptize, they must not only baptize with the Hand
and Water-Baptisme, but also with the Faith of the anointing.

12. An unfaithful, or unbeleeving Baptiser, does no more in this high work of
the Baptism; Then the Font-stone [or Bason] does, which holds the water: for
though he sprinkle or power water; and uses the words of Christ; yet he
Effects nothing therewith, but is dumb [or dead] in the working, except the
Covenant of Christ works and baptiseth: he is but merely a Medium or means,
like a worklesse [inanimate] Or, Thing.
Substance, that does not it self work together in this Covenant: but only
does the work, in which work God works in respect of his Covenant.

13. Not so to be understood, as if the work by the unworthy hand were
therefore wholly Or, Ineffectuall.
powerless: no, the Covenant of God, Absenteth or withdraws.
severeth not it self; for the unworthy hands sake, which is but a Medium or
Means: for faithful Parents, which stand in the anointing of this Covenant,
and have put on the Covenant, they have the anointing also in their seed; and
generate Children out of the property of their bodies and souls: now if they
be baptized in body and soul, and have put on the anointing of Christ,
wherefore then not also the Ens of their bodies? if they be the Temples of the
Holy Ghost, (who dwells in them;) and eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood,
so that Christ is in them and they in Christ; as Christ says; Joh. 6.56.
Wherefore then not also the fruit of their Bodies? For Christ says indeed (
Matthew. 7.18.) a Good Tree cannot bring forth bad fruit, and a bad Tree cannot
bring forth Good fruit: If the eye of the spirit be light, then is the whole
body light: If the Leven be Holy, then is the whole Lump Holy, Matthew. 6. Romans
11.

14. John was baptized in the Mothers womb through the Spirit of Christ out of
Mary's voice, as also his mother Elizabeth: and we see clearly, how it came to
pass, for as Elizabeth heard the Spirit of Mary, the Holy Ghost moved in her,
and also in her fruit alike; they received the Baptism of Christ out of his
humanity alike, the Mother with the Son: wherefore then not also now at
present, in holy Parents, in whom the anointing is, For such as the Tree is,
such is also its fruit: But the Covenant in the Baptism is therefore, that
every one should themselves with their own will, as a particular branch on the
Tree, and as a life of their own, put on the Covenant of Christ, as through
the outward Medium or Means ordained thereunto.

15. Not to understand; that a child of honest anointed Parents, which has
attained life, though it dye before the Baptism, that it is not in the
anointing of Christ; It has indeed put on the anointing of its Parents, for it
is existed out of their substance, out of their baptized souls and bodies
substance, and only needs, if it lives, to enter into the Image of the
visible Covenant, as a life of its own; and with its will give it self up
into that which it inheriteth from its Parents: But seeing a child
understands not this, therefore the Parents do it with their Faith, and
every one of those that are called to that work, viz: the Pathen Gossips.
Witnesses or Godfathers and Godmothers, who in their faiths-desire with
their Prayer Transfer or deliver over.
recommend the child to the Covenant of Christ, and present it in the Covenant
of Christ to the Holy Trinity, and desire the Covenant to be upon this Child.

16. All these, both the Parents and standers by: viz: the faithful Baptiser
and Witnesses, work with their faith in the property of the Child, and reach
out to it with their faith the Covenant of Christ: for the will of their Faith,
takes the Childs will being without understanding, into their faiths desire,
and so bear the childs will in their will, with their anointing into the
Covenant of Christ, viz: before the Holy Trinity.

17. When the Baptiser sprinkleth or powers the water upon the Child, then is
his faith together in the water, and fastneth it self in the words of Christ,
who says; Matthew 28.19. Go hence into all the world, Baptising all Nations, in
the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: Upon Christ's command they
Baptize Men, the Baptiser Baptiseth with the Hand, and with Faith: and the
Parents together with the Witnesses, baptize with their Faiths desire, with the
anointed will: they infuse it into Christ's Covenant; and Christ infuseth
himself therein, with his Blood, Death, and Victory, viz: with the victory of
his Death: and kindles the faiths- Ens of the Child, with his love fire.

18. Thus the Grain of Mustardseed of the love-fire, sows it self into the
Childs Souls and Bodies Ens, as a Glimmering Hatcher, breeder, or Ember.
Mother of Divine Love: which Mother afterward, when the child gets
understanding of its own, is more kindled through Faith, Repentance and
Prayer, and becomes a high shining Light: and when afterward the Mouth of
Faith eats Christ's flesh and drinks his blood, then this holy Mother
love-fire, atteineth holy Oil to the burning of its Life.

19. With the Baptism is implanted the humanity of Christ according to the
holy Love-water, viz: the Water of Eternal Life, in which water the holy fire
may burn: and with the Supper is participated the Holy Tincture in the blood
and flesh of Christ, viz: the true Love-fire burning, a spiritual Anointing
Oil out of the divine fire and Light, which the water of Love kindles, viz:
the Baptisme-Covenant: And though a Child be borne of Holy Parents, Note.
and in the Mothers womb be clearly in this Covenant, yet it ought also to put
on this Covenant in its own selfesubsisting person, in its own life's will:
for this Cause, that in the flesh, Sin and uncleanness is together
propagated and inherited, and therefore should it self put on this Covenant:
for it ought and must it self with the Covenant of Grace break the head of
the Serpent in the flesh, and therefore it ought also it self to put on Christ
with his victory: For Christ now offers himself, to it self, it ought
therefore in its own person to receive him with its own will, and give its
own will up to him.

20. For the Baptism is nothing else but a marriage or Contract with God Text.
auff: upon.
in Christ's blood and Death, wherein Christ binds himself to Man with his
victory and Resurrection, and places Man therein: And Man in the Baptism
gives up his Adamicall averse will to the Death of Christ, and desires to dye
to his own will in the Death of Christ, and to rise again through Christ's
Resurrection out of Christ's Death, with, and in Christ, to a new will, and to
live and to will with Christ: For we are through the Baptism with Christ's
victory, planted anew in the Word of God: for Man is the Outspoken Imaged Word
of God, which has brought his will in Adam from the speaking of God into an
own will and speaking, and is become treacherous to the Word of God: and with
the Baptism the Imaged Word promises and incorporateth it self again with
the Eternal Speaking of God, that it will speak and will according to God:
viz: Gods righteousness and truth.

21. The Baptism is an Oath which Man swears In or into.
to God, when he renounceth the Devil and his Kingdom, and gives up himself
to God for his proper own, viz: for a Temple of God: And though a child
understands not this: yet the Baptiser, as also the Parents and Witnesses
should understand it and introduce their faith into the childs will; and so
with their introduced will in the childs will, together plunge or sink
themselves down with this oath into Gods Covenant through the Word of Christ
upon his command in the Water-Baptisme: and apprehend the Command of Christ in
themselves, viz: in their Faith, and so in their understanding enter into the
Covenant with the childs Or, Ignorance.
not-understanding; and in the stead, and with the will of the child, in their
will make such a promise to God: for this the Parents may and ought especially
to do: seeing the child is sprung up out of their life and substance, as the
branch out of the Stock, Thus,
so they have also power, to comprehend the will of the child in the will of
their Faith, and with the will of the child to give up and bind or unite it
unto God.

22. Moreover the Baptiser has this in his power, who upon the Command of
Christ stands there in Christ's stead, and brings in his Mouth the Command
of Christ, and baptiseth with his hand upon the command of Christ: such a one,
should be the Anointed of Christ, and enter into that work through the Door
of Christ, or he is but as a piece of wood, or clod of earth, standing by as an
Earthly Medium, and himself does not baptize together with his Faith, but is
only an outward Instrument of the Covenant, as the Axe wherewith the Carpenter
heweth: though indeed he is not altogether as the Axe that cutteth, but as the
hand that holds the Axe: he neither cutteth nor coworketh in the work of the
Spirit, but is only the outward Instrument, and does only an outward thing:
He reaches not ^he Covenant, but only the Water, and brings a dead word in
his life, but the office of Christ is in the command.

23. The living Word in the Covenant which there baptiseth, has not its
original out of the power of the wicked mouth, but out of the Command in the
Covenant: The wicked Mouth brings the outward litterall Word, as a Minister
thereof, but the Covenant brings the Living Word in Power: If the Parents and
Witnesses be faithful, they reach forth the child with their Faith to the
Covenant, and the wicked Baptiser with his Mouth and Hand is but an Instrument
to it, in that manner and way, as a Clock strikes and sounds, and yet has
no life, but gives notice and understanding to the Living what it means: or
as a wicked Man in a show of Holiness, names and acknowledges the Holy Name
of God before a Holy person, where instantly the Holy Name of God is thereby
stirred and becomes working in the Heart of the Holy Man that hears it, and
yet the Hypocrite in his knowledge neither understands it nor finds it; and
this stirring of the good Heart does not proceed out of the wicked Mouth, and
enter into the Holy Heart, but it proceeds out of the Name of God.

24. Thus also the Holy Name baptiseth by the wicked Baptiser, and not the
evil Mouth, but he must be an Instrument, that pronounces the Holy Name,
which works not from his pronouncing, but from the Name and Covenant, through
the faithful Parents and Witnesses introduction of their Faith: Note.
For the Covenant is it self a Faith [or Beleeving] viz: Gods Word and Mouth:
The Covenant baptiseth them all, that give themselves up into it, whether
worthily or unworthily, whether the Faith of the Boptiser and of the Parents
and Witnesses be there or not, but with great difference, as the Scripture
says; With the Holy thou art Holy, and with the Perverse thou art perverse,
Psalm. 18.26. Also, such as the People are, such a God they have: and as St Paul
says of the Supper; Therefore they received it to Judgment, because they
distinguish not the Lords body.

25. For where Gods Love is present, there his wrath is also present: where
Light is, there is also Fire: The Ens of Faith presses only through the Fire
forth into Light: The Covenant stands firm, the child is baptized with the
Covenant, the Covenant receives it, although there were only a wicked
Baptiser, and also such Witnesses without Faith: But as the Mouth is, such is
also the food in the Mouth, as the Lord says by the Prophet; Wherefore does
the wicked take my Covenant into his Mouth, and hates Nurture or chastisement.
to be reformed? Psalm. 50.16, 17. Men should not misuse the Name of God, for
the Lord will not leave him unpunished that misuseth it, Deuteronomy. 5.5. He will
not cast the Pearl before Swine, Matthew. 7.6. The wicked Man that draws near
to his Covenant, is to God in his Covenant a Good savor to the Condemnation of
Death, and the Holy is a good savor to life, 1 Cor. 2.15, 16.

26. What else can be, if there are Evil Parents without Faith, but that they
also beget wicked children, for as the stock is, so also is the fruit: And now
if they convert not, and through true earnest Repentance and Prayer,
incorporate their fruit to Christ, and send them with faith to this Covenant,
but indeed invite such wicked Witnesses or Gossips, without Faith thereunto,
and there be also a wicked Baptiser, who shall baptize here? Shall the Love of
God in the Covenant of Grace baptize? May it not be as St Paul says of the
Supper; That the wicked receive it unto Judgment? Now if a Man make a mock of
the Covenant, how will Gods Glory appear among the Scorners? there it is
rightly said, With the Holy thou art holy, and with the perverse thou art
perverse: If the seed be Or, False.
bad, though a Man cast it into good Ground, yet there grows bad fruit from
it, for it draws from the good Ground, an Ens of its own likeness to it
self.

27. How then may it go there, where a child springs from Parents that are
quite wicked, and also wicked Witnesses are only called to it, which stand
there only for state and pride, or for humane savor, which are also for such
causes called to it, whereas there is no Faith nor Good will, much less an
Earnest Prayer, but only an Earthly Eucifer stands before the Covenant of
Christ, and the Baptiser is also a dead person: who awakeneth here the Holy
Covenant? As the Faith is that moves or stirs the Covenant, such is also
the Manifestation of the Covenant, and so is also the Baptism.

28. Christ says; Suffer little children to come unto me, for of such is the
Kingdom of God, Matthew. 10.14. Chap. 19.13. but he means children, not Wolves
and Beasts: He bids them to come to him, and Not to bring them to him in
the Devils pride and state, with stately high-minded false unfaithful People,
which do but despise the humility of Christ, and scorn Love; it must be in
Earnest if a Man will enter through the Wrath of God into Love.

29. Reason says thus; What is it to the child, that it is begotten of wicked
Parents and is brought by Evil People to the Covenant of Christ?

Answer: Yes indeed, what is it to God, who wills not the Death of a Sinner,
that wicked Parents beget wicked children, and that a Man does but scorn his
Covenant of Grace: shall he therefore cast the Pearl before Swine? The Parents
indeed know very well, that God says; He will punish the sin of the Parents
on the Children unto the third and fourth Generation, Deuteronomy. 5.9. Shall he then
power his Love into their wicked Wills, when as indeed they do not desire the
Love, nor is there any Earnestness there, but merely the performance of a
Custom, and they do it only with an hypocritical show without Earnestness,
and withal make use of such people about it, which do but scorn the
simplicity of Christ with their Pride.

30. To be conversant with the Testaments and Covenant of Christ, and to make
use of them, will require great Earnestness, not only in show but in power:
For the Covenant of God in Christ is made through his blood and Death, and to
that End, that whosoever will partake of this Covenant and Testaments, should
convert with his will and enter into Repentance, and dye to the Inherited false
Lust in the Covenant, through Christ's Death, and be Newborn out of the
Covenant of these Testaments.

31. For the Baptism consists not alone in Water, but in the Word of God,
and in the Faith: The water is but a Medium, wherein the Word of God and the
Faith, takes hold and works, and without the Word of God and Faith there is
no Baptism; the faith of Man must take hold on the promised Word, and in the
Water these two, viz: the Faith and the Word of God bring themselves into one
Or, Essence.
substance, and that spiritual substance is the Baptism, which is understood
under Water: Now if there be no Faith at this work; then is the Word without
Humane Substance, only in it self according to and in the Covenant, and that
baptiseth Man according to the Man's Property, but Faith in the Grace
apprehends the Grace in the Covenant and Word, and brings it self with the
Covenant into the Water; and so then the Word of God and the Faith and the
Water baptize alike.

32. For the outward Elementary water is not the Ground of the Baptism; but
the spiritual Water, which is united and tied with the Word in the Covenant,
and with the Faith: for the Word powers it self forth in a Water-source of
Life in Text. Eine.
great Meekness and Love, and the Faith takes hold of this promised Word of
Grace in the Covenant: This Grace in the spiritual water, comprehends it
self with the Elementary water, after the manner as the Invisible world has
made it self visible with this worlds substance, viz: with the Elements: and
as the Invisible Word of God works by the visible, and as the visible
substance of the Elements shall again go into the Invisible: Thus also in the
Baptisme-Covenant, the Invisible Element, viz: the heavenly substance uniteth
it self with the visible Elements of Man's body: viz: the substance of Eternity
with the substance of Time: the Eternal Speaking Word of Divine Love with the
Outspoken Or, Formed.
Imaged Word of the Humanity.

33. For the Pure Element, according to the holy spiritual World, out of which
the four Elements are sprung forth, is that which baptiseth through the four
Elements of Man's Body: The true Man created in Adam, which sticks in the
Gross husk of the four Elements, that is baptized to Eternal Life, for the
Pure Element soaketh or Infuseth it self again into the vanished Image of
Man, which Image was out of the Pure Element, but vanished in Adam; And to that
End God has Or, Instituted.
ordained his Covenant in the Water Baptism: and there belongs now Faith to
it, and Repentance to this Receiving: for Repentance is an unlocking or
stirring of the hidden shut up things of Man, whereby the Inward Spiritual
desire, viz: the Spiritual Mouth to such Receiving, is opened: and Faith is
the Opened Mouth which takes in the Holy Element.

34. And although a child without understanding cannot do this, yet those
with their Faith should do it, who baptize, and the rest that are present at
the Baptism, for their Faith must comprehend it self in the childs will, for
the child has not yet a willing, neither to Good nor Evil, but their Faith
comprehends it self in the childs Life, viz: in Soul and Spirit: which may
well be, being all souls, have their original from One, and so they are in
the Center, one only Ground, viz: in the Word of God, out of which the Soul
has taken its original, and wherein they all stand together in the Ground,
for this Comprehending in [the childe] is nothing else, but to introduce their
love-will into the child: and although a Man cannot do that in his own power
and Might, yet if the will of Man comprehends it self in Gods Word and
Promise, and takes hold of the Promised Grace, together with the command that
we should do this thing, then is the Possibility there: For the Promised Word
gives and works the ability in Man's Will, and gives the Deed: Gods will
takes Man's will resigned up to him, and does it through his Might with Man's
will.

35. Therefore say I, it is a dangerous thing, to baptize children without the
Faith of the Parents, and of them that Baptize, and the rest that are present
to the work: The Scripture says, Heb. 11.6. Without Faith it is impossible to
please God: But this Faith is not a History or Knowledge, that a Man only give
assent to it, and believe that it is Gods work: No, it is an Earnest,
desirefull co-working, a pressing in to the Promised Grace, an Earnest
consideration of our inherited sin, and of the Great earnestness of God, and
how he through this Grace-Covenant receives us again as children, and powers
his Grace into us with this work.

36. Those that are present should with Great humility and Turning into God.
inversion to God, with Earnest prayer, apply themselves to this Covenant, and
well consider, what they there purpose to do, for they stand even before the
Covenant of the Holy Trinity, before Gods open Face, and have to deal with God
and Man, and should well imprint in them the bitter sufferings, and dying of
Jesus Christ: into which a child is baptized, of which they are co-working
Witnesses according to the Faith: and not stand before this Covenant, as a
Whore before a Glass, with proud Hearts, as if it were a worldly honor which
a Man should make use of, about it: such People which have no understanding and
Faith toward it, and only come to it with proud hearts, are not Or,
Furtherance.
profitable to this Covenant, but a hinderance, they hinder others, who Gape
upon the Pride and bravery, and therewithal forget the Earnestness.

37. And although the Baptism may be performed without such Persons, through
the Parents and the Baptisers Earnestness and prayer; yet the Christian Church
has so ordained, that living Witnesses should be present, which with their
prayer attend this Earnestness, and it was well ordained: but it is come to
such a Misuse that it were many times better that such children of Infidelity
were not present: for, the Devil belongs not to this work: Now if the Devil
have the chief Dominion in a Man, what is then such a Man profitable at it? As
is mentioned before; The Funt-stone or Basin, and the unfaithful Stander-by is
one as good as the other, but that the Proud Man is a hinderance to others.

38. The Baptism is a substantial working, not a mere sign or Or,
signification.
symbol of the Testament of Christ: The Holy Ghost baptiseth the Soul and the
Spirit, from Christ's blood and Death, with his victory: and the Holy Element of
the spiritual Water baptiseth the Body of the four Elements to the
Resurrection of the Dead, and baptiseth the Serpents Ens, and awakened
introduced Poison to dye, [or for Dead].

39. It is a substantial working Infusion of the Covenant of God: therefore if
the Infant baptized should worthily receive it, there must be Earnestness: A
Christian, who is a Christian in Christ, Note.
in whom Christ works, lives, and Text. Is It.
dwells, he should Baptize; for he must enter into this Sheepfold by the
Door of Christ: viz: through Christ's Spirit, and not climb up otherwhere,
else he is a Thief and a Murderer, and comes only that he may rob and
steal the honor of Christ, Note.
and deceive Men, he should be A true Shepherd and not a hireling: Here
avails no babbling and making a show, but there must be Earnestness, for it
is an Earnestness with God: All Jangling and disputation about this work, is
an unprofitable thing, and moreover hurtful, Men should lay hold of it with
Earnestness, and follow the Command of Christ, and believe what Christ has
said.

40. There belongs no more to this work, but Faith and Water, and Earnest
Prayer in true Repentance, with such a Will, that one Man would help to
release another from Death, the Devil and Hell, and (help) to introduce him
with himself into the Kingdom of God: that is the whole process that
belongs heereunto: Every one that is a true Christian in Christ, Note.
is worthy to be a Stander by and present at this work: but he that is not such
a one, is unworthy, whether he be Baptiser or Stander-by, one as well as the
other, there is no respect of Persons with God: In Christ we are ONE, He is
the Stock, we are the Branches: He works his work through his fellow
Members, as the Stock of the Tree generateth its fruit through its Twiggs and
Branches: The Stock uses no strange Tree for its Twigges, so also Christ only
uses his Members to his work of his fruit.

The End of this first little Book Concerning The Holy Baptism.
The Second Book, Concerning The Holy Supper of our Lord Jesus Christ; What
kind of Participation it is, and how that is to be understood.

Also concerning the Contention of the Learned about Christ's Cup: what they do
about it, also what is to be held concerning it.

Wherein Babell, the Great City upon Earth, with her form and Wonders,
together with the Antichrist, stands quite naked and manifest.

To the Comfort of the simple Children of Jesus Christ, and to the building up
of the true Christian Religion, in this confused troublesome Time.

All very Earnestly and sincerely discovered from the knowledge of the Great
Mystery.

LONDON; Printed by M. S. and are to be sold by H. B. at the Castle in
Cornhill. 1652.

1 COR. 11.28.

Let a Man Examine himself, and so let him Eat of this Bread and Drink of
this Cup.

An Intimation or Instruction to the READER.
THough indeed I here dive and search sublimely and Deep, and set it down
very clearly, yet the Reader must be told thus much, that without the Spirit
of God, it will be a Mystery to him, and not apprehended.

Therefore let every one look well to it, what he judges, that he fall not
into the Judgment of God, and be captivated by his own Turba, and that his
own Reason distract him; this I say, meaning well, and give it to the Reader
to Ponder [in his Minde].

JACOB BEHM of Old Seidenberg.

The Contents of the Chapters in this Second little Book, Concerning the Holy
Supper of Jesus Christ.
1. OF the Ground of the Old Testament, how this Testament was clearly in the
Type among the Jews.

2. Of the Supper of the New Testament, how the Type is come into Essence [or
Substance].

3. How the Disciples did eat and drink the flesh and blood of Christ.

4. Of the difference in the Participation of it, what the wicked receive with
this Testament: and how a Man should so prepare himself, that he may be truly
worthy.

5. Of the Contention and Strife in the high Schools or Universities, about
Christ's Testaments: how that Strife that has filled the face of the Earth, is
a vain and very hurtful thing, and arises in the Anger of God, from the
Devils desire and will, whereby all brotherly Love and unity is destroyed, the
highly precious Name of GOD blasphemed, and the Holy GHOST in his Divine
Wonders is Judged and despised by Reason.

The First Chapter. Of the Ground of the Old Testament; how this Testament was
clearly in the Type among the Jews.
1. WHen God sent Moses to Pharao, and commanded him, to let the Children of
Israel go into the Wilderness and sacrifice to him, and Pharao would not do
it, then God sent great Plagues and punishments upon him; and lastly, the
Stifling.
destroying Angel, which slew all the firstborn in Egypt; and there he
commanded Israel the Passover, or to slay and eat the Paschal-Lamb, viz: a
Lamb of a year old, and besprinkle the Doors and upper Poasts with the Blood
thereof, that the slaying anger should there Pass by.
pass over, and kill none in the House, Exodus 2.12.

2. Which was a Type of the New Testament, [shewing] how the Poasts and Doors
of our Life should be sprinkled with the Blood of the Lamb Christ, that Gods
Anger in soul and body may not swallow us up into his wrath: And as they must
Eat up that Lamb wholly or quite and leave nothing over, so would the Lamb
Christ, give himself in his Testament wholly for food to his Christendom, and
not divided; and would besprinkle the Poasts of our Life with his Blood of
Love, that the destroying Angel in Gods Anger might not take hold of us and
slay us.

3. Also we have an Image or similitude thereof in the Unleavened Cakes, which
they must Bake and Eat, [shewing] that they should through this Paschal-Lambs
Figure, which signified Christ, be a New and sweet Dowe.
Lump, when they should eat the right Paschal-Lamb Christ, in his Testament:
all which was a Figure of the New Regeneration: [signifying] how the same
should be borne through the right Paschal-Lamb Christ, 1 Cor. 5.7. and how the
same (New Birth) would Eat the sweet food of the Divine Grace.

4. This is a Powerful Figure of the terrible Fall in Adam, and then in the
New Birth or Regeneration in Christ, for in Adam the first Birth, viz: the
first Angelical Life, was slain by Gods Anger, and by the Grace-Covenant in
Christ, was the same brought back again, and spoken [or inspired] into Adam
and Eve: thus now the Spirit of God signifies by this figure of Moses in
Egypt, how that same inspoken Grace should be fullfilled with heavenly and
divine Substance, also how Man should be Smeared or streaked.
marked and sprinkled by that Mark, viz: by the blood of the Lamb of God: and
how God would give him the substance of his sweet Love for food, whereby the
Natural foulish fire-Life should be again quickened, and attain a Divine Ens
in its Lifes-Essence, and thereby be transmuted and changed again into the
Angelical Image.

5. Also we see this Image very clearly in the Sacrifices of Israel: How they
must slay and sacrifice Beasts and burn the Fat: For when God gave the Law to
Moses, that Israel should live in full obedience in the Covenant of this Law,
then he gave him also the figure, [shewing] how this Law should be fullfilled,
and how Man should be Released or reconciled.
attoned from Sin, and the Anger of God: as we may clearly see this, in the
Levit. 8.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
third Book of Moses in the Eighth Chapter, where the Image of the
reconciliation or atonement stands.

Where it stands thus.

Sacrifice.
And Moses caused an Heifer to be brought for a Sinne-Offering, and Aaron with
his Sons laid their hands upon his head: there it was slain, and Moses took
the blood, and with his finger put it round about upon the homes of the Altar,
and Cleansed it from sin.
cleansed the Altar, and powered out the blood at the foot of the Altar, and
sanctified it, so that he made an atonement on it: And took all the fatt upon
the Inwards, and the Kall upon the Liver, and the two Kidneyes with the fatt on
them, and burned it upon the Altar: But the Heifer with his hide, flesh, and
dung, he burnt with fire without the Host, as the Lord had commanded him: And
brought a Weather or Ram for a Burnt Sacrifice; and Aaron with his Sons laid
their hands upon his head, and it was slain there: And Moses sprinkled the
Blood round about upon the Altar, and clave the Ram in pieces, and burnt the
head, the pieces and the Rump: and washed the Inwards and the legs with water,
and so burnt the whole Ram upon the Altar; this was a burnt sacrifice for a
sweet savor, a fire to the Lord as the Lord had commanded him, Leviticus 8.14,
15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.

6. This is a true figure of the Sacrifice of Christ with our assumed humanity:
how he has offered our humanity, through the sacrifice of his body, to the
Anger of God, and how God in this sacrifice, has smelt his sweet love in the
Humanity of Christ, and reconciled his wrath in the fire.

7. The Figure of Christ stands thus.

Levit. 8.10.11.12.
When Moses should make this sacrifice, he took first the anointing Oil, and
anointed the Tabernacle.
dwelling place, and all that was therein, and sanctified it, and sprinkled
therewith seven times upon the Altar, and anointed the Altar, and all its
implements, the Laver with its foot, so that it was sanctified; and powered the
anointing Oil upon Aarons Head, and anointed him, so that he was sanctified.

Moses stands here in the figure of God, and Aaron stands in the figure of
Christ according to our Humanity, and the Heifer stands in the figure of the
earthly, perished Adam, according to his Beastiall property; and the Ram
stands in the figure of the true Man created in Adam [shewing] how the same
should be offered up to God again in the humanity of Christ: Moses anointed
Aaron, that is, God anointed our Humanity in Christ with his highest Love, viz:
with the substantial Wisdom, and Divine substance in the Name JESUS.

8. And that is it, that Moses first anointed the Tabernacle, which signifies
the Body of Mary, in which GOD became MAN, and therefore the Angel called her
the Blessed among all women, Luke 1.28. For God first sanctified the
Tabernacle, and sprinkled with his anointing oil of Love upon all the seven
properties of the Natural Life: which life in the humanity of Christ, the
Altar of Moses signified, which God anointed, when JESUS assumed Man's Life: The
Laver with its foot signifies: How God has anointed the humane Hand or
desire in the humanity of Christ, with which he should do wonders: The
anointed Head of Aaron signifies, how the humanity of Christ, viz: our humane
Science, should be anointed with the Holy Ghost.

9. This, God set forth by Moses in the Type; for when Moses had anointed Aaron
together with the Tabernacle and the sons of Aaron, and established the whole
buisines; then he caused a Heifer to be brought for a sinne-offering: which
Heifer signified the Gross Earthly Man impressed through Adams Lust: On this
Heifer must Aaron and his sons lay their hands upon his head, which
signifies, how God in Christ, and then the Priests or Pharisees would lay
their hands upon our, in Christ assumed, Mortal humanity and flay that is put
to death, our humanity according to this Worlds Substance: and how his humane
Blood should be sprinkled round about on the Horns of the Holy Altar, with
the finger of God, viz: as with the laying hold of Gods Anger: and how God
would thus cleanse his Altar in the Humanity; upon which Altar, viz: the humane
Life; should holy Sacrifices be offered to God again.

10. But that Moses did burn the fatt of the Liver and Kidneys, upon the
Altar, signifies, that our true Adamicall Man out of the Limus of the Earth,
according to its right Inward Ground, should not be cast away, or thrust out
from God, but be kindled in the fire of Gods Anger with the fire of Love, and
be offered to God. As this then was done in the humanity of Christ, when he
sacrified our humanity to the Anger of God, but yet did introduce it with his
Love through Death into Life, as out of the fire there springs up a clear
Light, as out of the-fire dying, a new Life, which consists in power and Love.

11. But that Moses did burn with fire the Heifer with his hide, flesh, and
Dung, without the Host, and only sprinkled the blood of the Heifer upon the
horns of the Altar, and kindled the fatt, it signifies, that the gross
beastiall body of our flesh with skin and bones, shall not come upon Gods
Altar, and inherit the kingdom of God, but it shall be consumed with the
Essential fire of the Earth without the holy Fire of God: as Moses must burn
the Heifer without the Host, so also should and must, the Gross beastiall Man
be burnt up without the City of God, viz: in its own Principle, by that same
Nature-fire: as it is done before our Eyes: But this Earthly Man's Blood,
wherein the Astrall soul ^^veth, should be sprinkled upon the Horns of the
Altar: which signifies the right Man created in Adam out of the Limus of the
Earth with the right Astrum, whose blood or power shall come again at the Last
Day: that same blood was in Christ's humanity, with the inclusion of the
Heavenly blood, sprinkled upon the horns of the Altar in his suffering and
dying on the Note.
Tree of the Cross; for a sign, that our blood, after a right humane manner,
is with Christ come upon Gods Altar, and that God in Christ has therewith
Marked us in the Eternal Heavenly Altar.

12. But that the other blood must be powered at the foot of the Altar,
signifies, that our humane blood, wherein our outward humane life consists,
which here dies, is in its dying powered out at the foot of the Altar, viz:
into the [foure] Elements, and reserved to the bringing again of the first
true Man, that the right life shall be kept at the foot of the Altar, that is,
in its own Principle, as in Mysterio Magno in Spiritu Mundi, in the Great
Mystery in the Spirit of the world, till God shall purge this Altar of the
four Elements, and bring forth again the same pure virtue and power of the
blood, together with the Elements, and bring them into the Temperature, and so
then the humane blood shall again come to the Soul, according to the property
of the Spiritual World.

13. For this cause must Moses and Aaron in the figure power out the Heifers
blood at the foot of the Altar: for God had not to do about the blood of
Beasts, but he set forth the figure of Man's restoration, and signifies under
it, that We Men according to the outward Gross Earthly Man were but such
Beasts, which Gross beastiall property had swallowed up the true Man into it
self: Thus he signifies, how he would with his power bring again and new
Generate that same inward devoured Ground: And as the power and virtue of our
Mumia, of the oily property shall be kindled again through the fire of God, as
Moses kindled the fatt; so shall the power of the inward Ground, here even in
the time of this life, be kindled with the Divine fire, and burn upon Gods
Altar, which through the Unction or anointing of the Spirit of God should be
done in us: Even as Moses kindled the fatt, so should also the spirit of Christ
kindle our Inward Ground even in this [lifes] Time: And when this comes to be
done, then should the Heifer, viz: the beast-Man be slain; that is, he should
be daily Mortified, and with his will and beastiall desire be cast forth
without the Host of God: for he is but Earth and a Beast, and not fit for the
Kingdom of Heaven, Joh. 6.

14. But the Ram now signifies the right anointed Man in the humanity of
Christ, as also our inward Ground, which with Christ's anointing in us becomes
living again. As God through Aarons sons, viz: through the high Priest, would
lay the hand of his Anger upon it, and slay it, that our humane will might be
slain; so shall in this slaying the blood of this Ram, viz: the right
humanity, be sprinkled every where upon the Altar of God, and the humane will
shall be split in pieces, and quite forsake the own will, and the Head, viz:
the humane senses or thoughts be kindled with Gods fire: Even as Moses kindled
the Head of the Ram, as also the pieces and the Rump, so must also our humanity
in Christ, be washed with the water of Love, and afterward be sacrificed upon
the Altar of God, viz: on the Tree of the Cross.

15. Note. But that the Ram must be kindled with fire, Note.
and be offered to the Lord, for a sweet savor to the Lord: therein Lies the
Great Mystery: The Ram is the right Man Created in Adam, which Christ, as the
Word, or the power of God, took on him, from our Adamicall Humanity, in the
Body of Mary: and signifies by the Ram, that God in Christ would thus anoint
our right Adamicall Humanity, with the holy anointing Oil, and bring it to God
again.

16. But seeing the humane will was departed from God, and had brought it self
into Earthly beastiall Lust: therefore should this Ram, viz: the Humanity of
Christ be kindled with Gods fire of Anger: for the Anger of God was become
manifest in the humanity: and therefore God anointed first the humanity with
the Spirit of his Love in Christ's humanity, and afterward offered this Ram,
viz: the right Adamicall humanity to the fire of God, that in the Anointing of
the Love-Oyle, the anger-fire might be kindled, and the anger fire in the
anointing of the Love, viz: through the Oil of its holy substance, be
transmuted, and wholly turned into a Love burning.

17. For our humane soul was become an Anger fire, viz: an Enmity against God,
and therefore thus God reconciled it in the Love of its substance: That is,
Gods anger in the humane life was thus econciled, for Gods power smelt, or thus
drew, in the fire, the humane life again into the Eternal Word, viz: into
God. Gods Anger-fire was the Mouth, which received the humane Life again into
it, and swallowed up the humane averted will into it self.

18. But when this Great love had given up it self into the humane Life in
Christ, then was Gods Anger-fire with its devouring in the souls fire, turned
into mere Love, viz: wholly into a Love-fire: and thus Death in the fire of
Gods Anger, which holds the soul captive with its Impression: wherein the
soul was a darkness, viz: a dark fire; was broake open, and again turned
into the Light Life.

19. And that is it, which God with this Sacrifice sets forth in a Type, of the
Coming of Christ: for Moses says: This was a sweet savor to the Lord: Now
God does not savor the beastiall Life; for that shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God: Gods buisines which he had to do by Moses, was not about the
Ram and the Heifer, but he set forth the humanity under them before him: Gods
Imagination went into the Humanity in his inspoken Grace-Covenant, viz: in that
inspoken Grace word of Love, which stood as a Goal or Limit in Man, even unto
Mary, where it manifested it self in the Humanity: Into this went Gods
Imagination, and Man's Imagination went into this Type, viz: into the Sacrifice
in the fire: Thus went also the Incorporated Grace-Covenant with Man's
Imagination into the Sacrifice of the fire, as into the Type [signifying] how
Christ should reconcile Gods anger in the humanity.

20. And thus was the humane will in the Type of Christ ransomed in the fire;
for the Incorporated Grace-Covenant, went with the humane desire, in their
prayer (which through this Sacrifice in the fire pressed into God) together
into the fire of the Sacrifice, and reconciled (that is, destroyed) the Earthly
Beastiall property of the humane will, in the fire, with the Love: For with the
fire God formed an Image before him, as a substance, in which fire substance
Gods fire Imaged it self, and reconciled the Elementary fire in Man: his
Eternal Love-fire, savoured the humane will, through the incorporated Grace,
through that Medium of the fire, for Moses had holy fire, wherewith he kindled
the Sacrifice.

21. Thus was the Elementary fire of Man reconciled in the Holy Fire, and yet
must a Beastiall Medium, viz: Beasts flesh, come into the Holy fire of Moses,
seeing Man was become Beastiall: that the beastiall kind be burned away in the
Holy fire through the Fathers anger-fire; and that Gods Love-fire might kindle
the humane soule-fire in its introduced desire in the Sacrifice and so Gods
desire in the Word smelt Man's desire through the fire; for in the fire, the
Beastiall vanity of Man's will, burnt away in the anger-fire: and so then the
clear humane will, pressed into Gods Love-fire, as a sweet savor: for the
incorporated Paradisicall inspoken Grace, pressed with the clear will of Man,
into God.

22. And that is it which Moses says; It was a sacrifice of a sweet savor
unto the Lord: For God desired to smell nothing there, but only Man's will,
viz: the humane Life, which before the times of the world, was in the Word of
God: indeed without Creature, but yet in power, which was inbreathed to the
Created Image: That same did God smell through the Sacrifice in the Ens of
Christ viz: through the inspoken Grace, and reconciled the averted will through
the Grace in the Fire, so that the humane will became divine again: and
brought (1) the humane Life's fire, and (2) Gods Love fire, into one fire, as
into one life's burning: and that was a right Sacrifice of Reconciliation, or
sinne-offering, when sin was offered to the fire of Gods anger to be consumed.

23. And thus also the beastiall flesh, which they offered and ear afterward,
was sanctified to Man: for Gods Imagination in the Covenant went thereinto;
therefore Moses calls it; Holy Flesh: also, Holy Bread, such was the Show
bread, sam. 21.6. Matthew. 12.4. All which, stood in the Type [signifying] How
that same incorporated power of the Grace-Covenant, would manifest it self
with Heavenly Substance in Christ, and give it for food of the humane soul,
viz: to the souls fire: in which food, the soules-fire should be turned into a
Love-fire.

24. For in the Old Testament this sweet Grace Covenant gave it self into the
Sacrifice of the fiery souls desire, for sood, as to the Souls Mouth in the
fire: For the Soul, viz: the Soulish Faiths Mouth, did in the Sacrifice of
fire, eat of this sweet Grace, not in the Substance, but in the power, upon
the fullfilling that was to come, till the power was manifested in the flesh:
But their Body did under it, eat of the blessed bread and flesh, Note.
wherein also the power of the Grace, viz: the Imagination of the Covenant,
was. Thus the Jews did eat Christ's flesh and drank his blood in the Grace
Ens, in the power, in the Type; where the power was not yet flesh and blood:
but yet that same word of Grace, which afterward became Man, was therein.

25. But when the time came, and was fulfilled, that the same incorporated Word
of Grace (which received their Soul in the faiths-desire in the fiery Essence)
became Man, then it gave it self to this faiths Mouth, viz: of the fiery
soulish Essence, according to the Divine and humane property, for food: Of
which we will here following write more at large, and set down the true
Ground, how Christ's flesh and blood it to be eaten and drunk: not out of a
Conceit or Opinion, but out of the Ground of the Scripture, and true certain
knowledge through Gods Grace.

The Second Chapter. Of the Supper of the New Testament, how the Type is come
into Substance.
1. WHen the time was fullfilled, that this Grace-Covenant should manifest it
self, and assume the Humanity with Soul and Body, then the Type ceased; For
the Anger-fire of God in the Soul and in the flesh of Man, was together Or,
Immodeled.
imprinted in the Substantial Word, viz: in the Divine Ens: which Divine Ens
out of the Divine power, assumed also the Divine Ens of Adam, which vanished as
to the Kingdom of Heaven, viz: to the Holy Working Fire, when the Soul Imaged
it self into Earthlinesse; and made it living, that is burning in it self
again, through the Holy Fire, where then the Divine Sacrifice in the fire was
manifested in the Humanity.

2. For the Soul was of the Fathers property, according to his fires might,
and was become a mere fire of Anger: This the Father gave to the Son, as to
the Manifested Grace-Covenant, and brought the Fathers Anger-fire in the Soul,
into the Sons Love fire, so that the Fathers anger-fire and the Sons Love
fire, in the humane Substance stood in one Ground: the Love-fire became
Substantial, that is, a heavenly flesh, and gave it self to the anger-fire of
the Father in the humane Life's property, for food to a fire-burning, after the
manner, as a Man puts a pleasant Oily Balsam to a fire, and then the fire in
its burning gives forth out of it self, a pleasant smell and virtue out of
this Balsam Oil.

3. Thus the Father now smelt this pleasant savor in the Humanity in the
Souls fire, which savor he formerly smelt in the Sacrifice in the Type: for
Christ was now the right high Priest, which offered to God his Father the
acceptable Sacrifice of the sweet savor in the Humanity, and reconciled the
Anger in the Humanity: The Altar of God upon which Moses sacrificed, was now in
the Humanity of Christ, who offered up to God the sweet humanity out of the
heavenly Ens, with the Adamicall humanity into his Anger-fire, which burned in
the Adamicall humanity: Sin in the Adamicall flesh was destroyed through the
sweet heavenly flesh: viz: through the Substantial Word of Love, through
JESUS, viz: Gods greatest Sweetness.

4. God brought the Sacrifice of Moses, viz: the reconciliation in fire, into
the humanity, and made of Moses, Christ; viz: the right high Priest, who with
his holy blood besprinckled the Altar, viz: the fire- Life; as Moses did with
the blood of Beasts in the Type.

5. And we see this Eminently in the Supper of Christ, which when at last he
would enter into his sufferings, and kill sin in our humanity, with the
substantial Love fire in his blood, then at last he Eat the Paschall Lamb
with his Disciples: for he had given himself up into the Type with his
Grace-Covenant, with the heavenly flesh, and would fulfill the Type with the
flesh of Love, and bring forth the Adamicall humanity through Death; viz:
through Gods Anger, through the enclosure of the Adamicall Life into Gods
Love-fire, and break open the Prison of Death.

6. So now in the Type of the Paschal-Lamb he began the New Testament, viz: the
fullfilling of these Types: and lead his Disciples to the Sacrifice of the New
Testament; viz: to the Altar of God, in his flesh and blood, that they should
eat the fullfilling of the Old Testament in the Sacrifice of the New
Testament: for he brought the Old Testament, viz: the figure, into the New,
viz: into his flesh and blood, which was the Sacrifice of reconciliation for
the sins of the World; and gave them the Or, Reconciliation.
atonement in his flesh to Eat, and in his blood to drink.

7 For the reconcillation should be no more done in fire, where the Fathers
anger burnt away the vanity in Man's Faith, but it should be done in the
Love-fire, in the flesh of Christ: they should now with their faiths desire,
viz: with the fiery life's Mouth of the soul, eat and drink the reconciliation
with Christ's flesh and blood: No more with Faith in the Type, but in Substance,
no more in power without Substance, but with Substantial Divine and humane
power, wherein the humanity of Christ himself should be the Paschal Lamb: Not
Deity without Humanity, but Deity and Humanity alike.

8. For the Paschal-Lamb must be eaten quite up, and so also he would not give
them only a piece of his humanity, but (Note) gave himself to them wholly and
altogether, into their souls fire-mouth, viz: into the Faiths-desire: The
souls fiery Mouth was now the fire of God which devoured the Sacrifice: as
common fire devoureth Oil, and gives a clear light out of its consuming:
Thus also Christ gave to his Disciples, viz: to their faiths desire,
understand, to the fiery Mouth of the Soul, as to the true Life; his heavenly
Body and his heavenly Blood, in that manner and way, as the heavenly Ens in the
limit of the Covenant gave it self, into Mary, into the vanished Ens, and
became one Person, wholly undivided.

9. Note; He gave his whole heavenly humanity to them into their Adamicall
Humanity, understand to the Paradisicall Ground: for every Life desires an Ens
of its likeness, viz: every fire desires an Ens for its burning, which is
like that fire.

10. The foolish fire-life was become dark through the Impression of Death, and
therefore needed a light Ens, out of the Divine Light, as a Substance of Light:
as a holy anointing Oil: wherein the dark painful Souls fire changes it
self into a Light- and Love-desire: This now conceived upon Christ's Altar,
viz: out of Christ's humanity, the Substantial Love, viz: the Substantial
Wisdom of God: that same fire in this Substance was the Name and the power
JESUS, viz: Gods greatest holiness, which changes the Souls fire into a
Light: whence Christ said; He was the Light of the world, Joh. 8.12. For in
his power, has the Soul again attained eyes of Divine Light, so that it
beholds God again.

11. And as a Man gives Oil to common fire, out of which arises a Light, so
in like manner is to be understood concerning the dark Souls fire; which
receives into it self, Christ's heavenly Ens of the Divine Substantial Love,
in this Testament, and kindles again, the vanished even heavenly Ens in Adam,
and burns in its likeness: wherein the Kingdom of Heaven, viz: the City of
God is again unlocked, where the Divine Light in that same unlocked
Paradisicall Ground shines again: which is the City of God in Man, where the
Holy Ghost dwells; of which Christ says; He that Eats my flesh and
drinks my blood, he continues in Me and I in him, Joh. 6.56.

12. In this Paradisicall unlocked Ground, Christ, viz: the Divine Love- Ens,
continneth dwelling in the Light: for the power in the Light is the Divine Ens,
viz: the Supernatural heavenly flesh, a Tincture of Life, which Tincture
tinctureth the Soul, and gives the heavenly fire-Glance to the Soules-fire;
But yet that a Man may rightly understand it: The Soul is the Fathers fire,
which receives into it self (viz: into its fiery desire) the Sons
Substantial Love, viz: the holy Love-fire, which has turned it self into the
humane Tincture, viz: into flesh and blood, understand, into that same humane
Life's power: Thus is the changing of the Souls Will Effected.

13. Thus we see first this figure in Moseses Sacrifice of reconciliation,
that the Soul, viz: the Faiths desire of the Soul brought it self into the
Sacrifice, as into a Substance, and with the Substance went into the fire,
where the reconciliation through fire, was made in the introduced Covenant of
the Love-fire, in that manner and way, as the Substantial Love of Christ
should give it self up into the Soules-fire, wherein Gods anger did burn, for
food and reconciliation: Secondly, we see also by Moses, not only how the
Soul is ransomed from sin through fire, and with the Love in the Covenant
became fed with the holy fire of Grace, but they blessed also the bread and
flesh through the reconciliation of the Grace-Covenant, and did eat the same,
viz: the holy bread and flesh, as God also commanded them.

14. Which signifies the Orall eating and drinking of the Substantial Grace;
where not only the Soul is fed, but (Note) also the right Adamicall Man,
which shall arise from Death again: for the Earth was cursed through Man's
sin, and Man must from the Curse of Gods anger Eat of the Earthly fruit: but
with this Sacrifice and blessing of the Covenant, God erecteth now a new
blessing, so that Israel did eat of Blessed food again, where the Grace
pressed through the Curse again, as the Sun presses and penetrateth through
Water.

15. All which was a Type of the Testament of Christ, which would not only
feed the Soul with Substantial fiery Love; But (Note) also the right
Adamicall Body: and that when he would ordain his New Testament under Bread
and Wine, [signified] how the inward Grace of Love would press through the
outward Man, as the Sun penetrateth through the Water, or as fire penetrateth
through Iron.

16. And by the Orall eating and drinking of his New Testament is signified the
Paschal Lamb in the Old Testament, where the Grace-Covenant of the Divine
blessing gave it self into a visible Elementary Substance, viz: into a Medium,
wherein the humane Body received the Grace: And it points at the New Testament,
where Christ, viz: the Substantial Grace, would with his Love, with the power
of his flesh and blood, of Divine and humane property, give himself into his
Fellow Members the Christians, through an Elementary Medium of blessed Bread
and Wine for-foode and drink: where-through, the accursed Body out of the Limus
of the Earth, (which has eaten the Curse into it self) is blessed again.

17. This we see clearly by the Last Supper of Christ, that Christ with the
Institution of the New Testament, would not ordain any strange or new thing,
but only fulfill the Old Testament; and with the Substantial Grace, which in
his Soul and flesh was become MAN; give himself up into the Covenant of the
Old Testament: and himself be the fullfilling, viz: the Paschal Lamb, and the
Holy bread and flesh, where-through our right Adamicall Man is to be blessed:
For he first eat the Paschal Lamb with his Disciples, and incorporated
himself with them in the Covenant of the Old Testament: and washed their feet
for them: Afterward he took the Bread, gave thanks, and brake it, and gave to
them, and said: Take and Eat, that is my body, which is given for you: In like
manner also he took the Cup after the Supper and gave thanks, gave to them and
said: Drink ye all thereof, that is my blood of the New Testament, which is
shed for many for the forgiveness of sins: I say unto you, I will now
henceforth drink no more of this fruit of the Vine, till at the day that I will
drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom, Matthew. 26. Mark. 14. 1 Cor. 11.23.

18. This is now the true Ground, and signifies first how the sweet Grace of
Gods Covenant, has given it self up into our humanity: and secondly, how that
same Grace-Covenant, (which in the Old Testament with the Sacrifices and
Paschal-Lamb, gave it self to Israel under that same food for a blessing,)
does now with the assumed humanity give it self to Man also under a Medium,
viz: under Bread and Wine, to be eaten and drunk: and Thirdly: how he would not
take away the first Covenant, and begin some new thing; but how he himself
would be that very Grace-Covenant, and now present himself as a Man, and now
give himself into Man after a Divine and humane way; that as they had
participated of him heretofore, with his Grace in the Covenant, in the
Sacrifice, in a spiritual way in power, through a Medium, so now they should
participate of him also in a corporeal and spiritual way through the Medium
of Bread and Wine, and Substantially participate of that same incorporated
Grace in the Covenant.

19. For the cause was this; that he would give himself to them to be
participated both in a humane and also in a Divine property, alike; that they
should participate of the Grace (which had given it self into the humanity,
and slain Death, and opened the humane Life again, and brought it through
Death) in a new humane Life: that the same New Life out of Christ's Death and
Resurrection, might unlock even their Life which was shut up in Death,
therefore he gave them this new unlocked humane Life of his assumed humane
Life, with his flesh and blood, even under an Elementary Medium, that the Faith
might conceive it through a Medium.

20. Therefore there must be a Medium, that (first) Gods Imagination of his
Love, and (secondly) Man's Faiths desire might come together, and take hold one
of another by a Medium; for as the participation of the Old Testament was done
in a Spiritual way, so now it should be both in a Substantial and Spiritual
way alike: for the Deity has now presented the Paschal-Lamb in the humanity of
Christ; and Gods Imagination (which went formerly into the Sacrifice) went now
into the humanity of Christ: and the Imagination of the humanity of Christ went
with Divine power into the Medium of Bread and Wine, and through the same, in
the participation thereof, into the humane Life.

The Third Chapter. How the Disciples of Christ have Eaten and Drunk Christ's
flesh and blood: and how that is properly to be understood.
1. REason should here go out from the Image likeness into that which is
unimagelike, and forsake the folly which Men strive for, for it was not an
Imagelike participation, but is understood under an Imagelike one; Christ gave
not his Disciples the Imaged Creaturely outward palpable fleshly humanity, as
some piece thereof: No, that is not consistent, for he sat by them at the
Table, and did not rend the Imaged substance of his body, but he gave them the
spiritual humanity, viz: the power and virtue of his body and blood, his own
Mumia, wherein the Divine and humane power is understood: which Mumia is a true
humane Substance of flesh and blood, and is a spiritual flesh, out of which
the visible Image grows, and is wholly one with the visible Image.

2. See a Similitude in the Sun, which stands in its Orb, but presses with
its Luster, power, and whole Substance, with all whatsoever it is in Essence,
power, and Substance, forth out of it self into the whole world, and gives it
self to every Element, Substance, and Creature, to all herbs, and Trees, also
to every Creaturely life, and works in all things, whatsoever it will
receive, and yet teareth not it self, when it goes forth from it self, and
gives it self to the other Creatures, it continues always whole, and goes
not away from its Substance.

3 So is also the Supper of Christ to be understood; as we see a Similitude of
it in the herbs and grass of the Earth, which neither does, nor can do any
thing without the power of the Sun, it sets the Jaws of its Essence wide
open toward the Suns power and virtue; that is, it hungereth only after
that, and into that hunger the Sun shines in, and kindles the Spirit, viz:
the Brimstone, Salt, and Oil of the Herb: and as soon as that is done, that
the Suns virtue finds or perceives it self in the Brimstone, Salt and
Oil of the Herb, then it works therein, whence the Herb attaineth a
perceptible warmth, and conceives and impresseth the Suns virtue in it
self, so that the Suns virtue and power becomes Substantial in the Herb,
and grows with the Herb, and tinctureth the same, whereby the Herb becomes
Sunney or Solar, and works, to [the bringing forth] fruit.

4. So in like manner we are to understand concerning Christ's Testaments: for
He is the Sun of Life, and the Light of the world, Joh. 8 12 He according
to the Deity, is the Eternal Speaking Word, viz: the power and ver^ue of the
Deity, the power of the Divine Light, and according to the humanity, he is, the
formed outspoken Word which is wholly one with the Eternal Speaking Word: for
he has introverted our received humanity with the Eternal Word, viz: turned
the outward inward, viz: the Substance of Time; and turned the inward outward,
viz: the Substance of the Eternity: and is with the Divine Substance, through
our humane Substance received from us, become pressing forth; as the Sun
presses forth from it self, and gives forth it self, so the Divine
Substance gives it self forth through the humane: Note: The Divine Substance
brings the humane forth with it self; for the Divine Desire goes forth
toward the humane Essence, and the humane Essence goes in toward the Divine
out-pressing delight or desire.

5. Note: But, being the Divine power and virtue excels the humane,
therefore is the humane brought forth through the Divine power, so that the
humane power and virtue gives it self, together with the Divine, through the
Divine power: for the humane power and virtue is a perception or invention of
the Divine, wherein the Divine finds it self in something, viz: in the
formed Substance of the word of power, wherein the Divine power loves it
self, as in its perceptible Substance, as the Soul loves it self in its
Body.

6. Note: And thus has God powered his love through the humane Substance in the
humanity of Christ, into the Disciples of Christ, with the humane Substance; in
that way and manner, as the Suns power and virtue in Spiritu Mundi, in the
Spirit of the World; as with the Effluence of the power and virtue of the
Stars, mingleth it self with the Spiritual Brimstone, Salt and Oil in the
upper Elements, so that it comprehends their power and virtue in its Glance,
and gives it self to them, and it (the power) gives it self into the Suns
power and virtue, and [so they] work together, whereby the light of Nature is
unlocked, and with such working give themselves into the Earth, Herbs, Trees,
and all Creatures: so that in an Heath or Tree such a virtue does exist; whence
the vegeration or budding forth of Creatures does exist: where always in such
growing or life, a man is to understand (1) an Elementary Substantial power
and virtue, and then (2) a super-Elementary Sunney or Solar and Starry or
Astrall power and virtue, where the Sunney and S^arry with their strong power
press forth with the Elementary.

7. Note: Now we see in herbs and all things that grow out of the Earth, when
they take hold of and Eat this power and virtue of the Sun and Stars, in
them, that they do not rend themselves and make or use a severed Mouth to do
it withal, but the Essence of their desire (viz: even the Natural Br^mstone,
Salt and Oil in the Herb) is the Mouth, which takes hold and eats in it
self the Influence of the upper Elements of the Sun and Stars: Thus also
in like manner it is to be understood concerning Christ's Disciples and all
other Men: they have Eaten and drunk Christ's flesh and blood, under Bread and
Wine, as through a Medium, with the ^ssentiall desirous Faiths-Mouth: not with
a circumscribed creaturely comprehension, but with the Faiths desire.

8. Note: Yet that a Man may rightly understand it [he is to know]: (1) the
outward Mouth with its comprehension, apprehends the outward Elementary
Substance, Bread and Wine: The Mortal t^ansitory Substance of Man, viz: the
Gross Flesh (which shall not, nor cannot inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, Joh.
6.63. 1 Cor. 15.50.) that apprehends and eats Bread and Wine, for Bread and
Wine is also an earthly transitory Substance, which goes into the Belly, and
out from thence again, as all natural sood, Matthew 15 17. And (2) the right
true Man, which was created in Adam, which before the beastiall grossness,
was a right Man and Image of the visible World, according to its inward
Spiritual Ground; the same eats Christ's flesh, which is even such Spiritual
Substantial flesh; with the Essential desire: Note: understand the flesh that
he took on him in Mary, viz: our humane, but not the outward Ground of the
Corporal four Elements, but the Inward holy Element, viz: the Ground, out of
which the sour Elements proceed: Not Fire, Air, Water, and Earth, but the
Eternal pure Element, which is a Substance of Paradise, which is hidden in the
four Elements, understand the Substance of Eternity, out of which time is gone
forth into a vision Substance: that same flesh as a spiritual Mumia, out of
which, Man as to the visible body has taken its original in verbo Fiat, in
the word Fiat, which in Adam became blind as to the Kingdom of Heaven, when
he went with the desire into the four Elementary grossenes: which fleshly
Substance in Christ's becoming Man was filled with heavenly living Substance,
and made living again; Note; that is it which the right Adamicall Man eats,
which sticks hidden in the Gross shell of the four Elements: and in that
Substance, the right Man Eats Christ's Passion, Dying, and Death, which death
of Christ is in his victory become an Eternal Life, which Life so risen out of
the Death of Christ, breaks our Earthly evil will, and is become a Death to
our Death, which the outward Nature holds for a Life.

9. Note: Note: And here is Christ's Passion and Dying put on to Man,
altogether Essentially, Workingly, Effectually.
Operatively, which Lifes-Death of Christ, swalloweth up our Death, wherein the
Body when it here dies according to the four Elementary Substance, rests;
and the four Elementary becomes dust and ashes: this same power and virtue of
the true humanity rests in its Principle to the coming again of the
Corporeal Substance.

10. But (2) the Soul which is a spiritual fire, in its desire, as with the
true Faiths Mouth, eats the Supernatural Substantial Love of the Name
JESUS: which (Name) is become a Substantial Power and virtue, viz: the
Supernatural Wisdom of God, wherein the whole Deity is understood workingly.

11. The Souls Mouth eats of this Holy Substance, whereby the Soul is
turned into a Love-fire-burning, for the Love of Christ gives Ens and
Substance to the Souls Fire; the fiery Life of the Soul takes this Love
Substance into its Essence, and by this Love-burning the Temple Or, Sophia, The
Wisdom of God.
Soph-JAH is again unlocked, viz: the Substantial Holy powerfull-Light, the
true Spirit which vanished in Adam: As a Light goes forth out of fire, so
through the Soules-fire, another Principle, viz: the property of the Divine
power and virtue goes forth, and in that out-going power and virtue dwells
the supernatural unsubstantiall God in Trinity: for this is the Divine
Principle, where God in Man dwells, works, and wills, wherein the Divine
Light is understood, which Penetrateth.
diffuseth it self through the true Man, as fire through Iron.

12. Note: Understand it aright thus; Man stands in Three Principles, viz: in
Three Beginnings: (1) the visible Man is the visible World, which is outward
and inward, viz: a transitory and an untransitory, viz: the Pure Element, and
the Efflux, viz: the sour Elements: (2) the Gross Man, with outward flesh and
blood, is the foure-Elementary Body, and the Spiritual Body in the
Quintessence or fist Essence, is the Holy Element which is hidden in the four,
which is neither hot nor cold, neither dry nor moist: But the Soulish Ground,
is not the Element, it is grounded in the Eternal Word, where the fiery Word
of the Fathers property has inbreathed it self into the Created body, as
another Principle of an Eternal Nature.

13. Now the Third (3) Supernatural Ground of Man is the true Spirit,
understand the Substantial Light, the Substantial Wisdom, which with the
Souls breathing in came into Man, but yet vanished when the Soul brought it
self from the breathing Word into own Will, into the visible Substance, with
the desire; for the Souls fire-Life out of the Fathers property, could no more
attain that, therefore was this ground vanished as to the Creature, and not in
God, but only to the Creaturely Soul.

14. And when this holy Ground of the soul and body was hidden, then was soul
and body a dark Dale or Valley.
Dangeon, sull of Pain and Torment: for God was hidden to it, and instantly
the Principles according to their properties began to qualify and operate; as
(1) the Soul according to the Anger property of God the Father, which as to
the light shining in it was hidden: And (2) the outward Body, began to qualify
in the four Elements, viz: in hot and cold, and in all other properties of the
Stars power and virtue, and every awakened property impressed it self into a
substance, whence the body became gross, hard and beastiall, and the true
Image of God, a Visard and Monster: And that is the sin, for the sake of
which Gods power and virtue went again into the Humanity and received the
Humanity, and overflowed into us again his divine power and virtue through and
in a right Humanity.

15. Seeing then Man stands in Three Principles, as an Image according to
time and Eternity of the visible and invisible Substance, and that Christ true
GOD and MAN, has also put on to himself the visible and invisible Substance
in one undivided Person, so also is the participation of his Substance in his
Testaments to be understood, as that every Principle in Man eats and drinks
of its likeness again; viz: Note: (1) The outward right Adamicall Image out
of the Limus of the Earth, eats again of the same humanity of Christ which
he received from Man; and (2) The Soul eats of the Divine Love-fire; and (3)
the Heavenly Divine Substance vanished in Adam, eats of the Substantial
Wisdom, and yet wholly unsevered through one only Faiths Mouth alike: But:
Note: (4) The gross Beast of the Gross flesh, which is but a Husk, receives
only the outward husk of the Testament, viz: Bread and Wine, and under them
the Judgment of God, that breaks and kills the Lust of the body of this
Grossness; therefore Man should distinguish the body of the LORD, and his
blood, from the Animal Man [that is] without Faith, which receives only the
Judgment under Bread and Wine, for as the Mouth is, so is also the food in the
Mouth.

16. Christ said, Joh. 6. My flesh is the right food, and my blood is the right
drink: Also: I am the Bread that is come from Heaven, that Gives Life to the
World: He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, he continues in Me
and I in Him: but he that eats not the flesh of the Son of Man, he has no
life in him: Then the Jews contended one among another and said: How can this
Man give us his flesh to eat, and were offended at this saying: But he said:
My words are Spirit and Life: Note: To signify, that we should believe his
words, and he that comprehends and receives his word in himself, he
comprehends in himself that word which is become flesh and blood; which word
is become a true humane Substance, and that the Faiths Mouth comprehends in
it self, viz: the right hunger or desire of the right true humanity, after a
spiritual way and manner: Note: As the word of the Divine power is become Man,
so is it also comprehended by the Faith, and is Man in his Members also.

17. That same Spiritual Substantial Word takes on it our Humanity,
understand the spiritual humanity, and gives it self into the same, and
works and dwells therein substantially after a spiritual manner; as he
dwelt and wrought in the Body which he received from Mary: where Men saw on Him
outwardly our flesh and Blood, viz: the spiritual Worlds substance, and yet in
the visible was the invisible substance: of which he said; Joh. 3.13. He was
therewith come from Heaven.

18. Thus also that same invisible spiritual substance of Christ, which has
united and introverted it self with our Hu^^nity; into our Faiths desire; in
that manner as a spark of fire falls into Tinder, and kindles the Tinder,
and consumes the substance of the Tinder, and makes it altogether fire: so
also the Substantial Power and virtue of Christ consumes in his Tinder, viz:
in the humane spiritual Ground; in the Mind, Se^ses.
Thoughts and Will, and evil influxes in Thoughts and Will: whether they were
from the desire of the Earthly flesh, or from the Devil, and from the Lust of
the world cast thereinto, yet that same spiritual fire, consumes all, for it
takes in the Life of Man, and rules it.

19. It is a Light, viz: a Spiritual Oil in the Life of Man, wherein the true
Spiritual Life, viz: the soulish Life burns, and without this Spiritual
Oil there is no true Light or Life in Man, but only an Astrall Light; and the
true soul stands in the dark Dungeon in its Essence, and helps it self
with the Astrall Light of the Sun, in which regard it has also vain earthly
Desires and Lust in it.

20. But that soul which attaineth this Holy anointing Oil of Christ in it
self, turns its longing and desires away from the vanity of the World, into
Gods word and power, and is as a new young child, that lies in the Mothers
womb, and suffers the Mother to nourish it: Thus it hangs to Christ's
Essence, Substance and power, and eats of the Stock of the Vine Christ, as
the branch eats of the Stock of the Vine, Joh. 15.

21. Reason should understand us right, It is not so to be understood, that
Christ has with his flesh and blood, with the gross mortal flesh and blood,
introverted himself into Man, which flesh and blood is of no profit, but is
only as a receptacle or shall of the right spiritual Man: Much less does the
Divine Substance mingle it self with Bread and Wine; so that when I behold the
blessed Bread and Wine, and receive it into the Earthly mortal Mouth, I should
think, that I comprehended Christ's flesh and blood with my fleshly Mouth, as I
comprehend Bread and Wine therewith.

22. No: That cannot be, Bread and Wine is but a Medium or means thereunto,
even as the Earthly Mouth is a Medium or means of the Spirit: the Spiritual
Faiths Mouth of Man comprehends Christ's flesh and blood under Bread and Wine:
not inherent in Bread and Wine: for Bread and Wine changes not it self into
Christ's flesh and Blood, but it is a means thereto ordained, which Medium
belongs to the visible Man, through which Medium, the Invisible gives it
self into the Invisible Spiritual Man.

23. In Bread and Wine two properties are understood, as (1) the Gross
Elementary Earthly Substance, that belongs to the Mor^all Man; and then (2)
the power and virtue therein, wherein the Tincture of the Bread and the Wine
lies, which (Tincture) is above the Elementary Substance, wherein the four
Elements lie in the Temperature, which is a heavenly Paradisicall power and
virtue; that same Tincture of Bread and Wine is the true Medium wherewith
Christ the humane Tincture gives himself as into the humane Life: for, Man
lives not By Bread only.
from the four Elements only, Matthew. 4.4. The Gross food which enters into
the Mouth, does not alone sustain Life, but the Inward power and virtue, viz:
the Quintessence or fist Essence, wherein the Tincture lies as a spiritual
fire.

24. The Elementary food Works, or Effects.
produces only mortal flesh, and gives a Source or moving of the Mortal
Life, but the Spiritual Man takes his Nutriment from the Tincture, for it
self is a Tincture, viz: a Spiritual Fire: therefore Christ powers or
over-floweth his heavenly flesh and blood, viz: the Holy anointing Oil, into
the Life of Man, through and with the Nutriment of the true Life, viz: through
the Tincture of Bread and Wine: Not to understand, that the Tincture of Bread
and Wine is able to apprehend such a thing, but it is only a permissive Medium
thereunto, as the Outward Mouth of a Man is but a Medium, where-through the
power and virtue of the Tincture in the food is over flowed into the Spiritual
Man: and, because in Bread and Wine there lies the highest Tincture; which is
nearest to the Life of Man, which most of all susteineth the Life of Man,
therefore also has Christ ordained this Testament under it.

25. But (1) we should not be earthly minded, and suppose, that after the
Bread and Wine is blessed with the words of Institution, that then Christ's
flesh and blood is inherent in the Bread and Wine, and that every wicked Man
may partake of it without the right Mouth; No, if that were so, then could
Bread and Wine comprehend the divine power and virtue in its own capacity, and
Christ's Spiritual flesh and blood were become Bread and Wine, and it would no
more continue to be as Christ said; My words are Spirit and Life, Joh. 6.63.

26. Man's spiritual Mouth, takes with the Faith Christ's words and Life, which
words are a power of his flesh and blood, where the divine word is become a
humane Substance: That same humane and divine substantial word is given to Man
with the Tincture of Bread and Wine, as through a Medium, that there may be a
visible sign, of what is done in the inward Ground.

27. Note, Note; (2) we should not depend on this means or Medium alone, and
think, that Christ's flesh and blood is only and alone Participated in this use
of Bread and Wine; as reason in this present time miserably erreth therein: No,
that is not so, Faith when it hungereth after Gods Love and Grace, always
eats and drinks of Christ's flesh and blood, through the Medium or means of
the blessed food, and without the Medium or means of the food: Christ has not
bound himself to Bread and Wine alone, but has bound himself to the Faith,
that he will be in Man, He will continue in him, and Man shall continue in
Christ: His powerful living Word would continue substantially in the Faith, of
which Substance, the Faith may always (as also it ever might) eat, for it is
the Faiths Nutriment, wherein the Faith does subsist and is a Substance: Note:
The Faith in such participation becomes a substance; viz: a spiritual flesh
and blood of Christ, in which the Living GOD in Trinity, dwells, works, and
wills.

28. The Substantial Faith in Man is Christ himself, who continues in Man,
who is the Life and Light of Man: That is, the Temple of the Holy Ghost, who
dwells in us; as Paul says; Know ye not, that ye are the Temple of God,
that the Spirit of God dwells in you? Also, the Temple of Christ is Holy,
which ye are, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. Also, Shall we that belong unto Christ, be yet
Sinners? that be far from us, then were Christ a servant of Sin, in us,
Galat. 2.17. This same substantial Faith is also the branch on the Vine of
Christ, which power and virtue penetrates through the whole Man (as the Sun
does an herb) and kills the Lust and works of the flesh.

29. The Mortal flesh is not the Substantial Faith; that flesh comprehends
not Christ's flesh and blood, but suffers it as a Gross stone suffers the
Tincture of Gold: and as fine Gold lies and grows in the Gross stone; so
also the love of Christ grows in the true Life of Man, and penetrateth
through the Life, as fire does through Iron: Not that such power stood in Man's
Life, that it could receive the substance of God in its own power and virtue;
No, it is given him of Grace; as the Sun of its own will gives it self to
the Herb: And the Herb cannot therefore say, I am the Sun, because the
Sun works in it: so also can Man not say: Note.
I am Christ, because that Christ dwells and works in him as in his
Express Image: But the Creature is the Passive wherein the Creator dwells
and works.

30. We are Members of Christ according to his humanity, and are therefore
called Christians, because Christ dwells and works in us, in that we are
in our Life his twiggs and branches, in those in whom he brings forth fruit
through his power and virtue: O little Children, it is a Great Mystery! Note,
Note; the use of this Testament, where we especially under Bread and Wine
should partake of Christ's flesh and blood; is therefore ordained, that so we
should come together, and eat of One Bread, drink of One Cup, and thereunder
receive Christ, that we should Instruct one another, what he has done for us,
and declare his suffering Death and bloud-shedding one among another, and teach
it to our children, and should bind our selves therewith in Love, and exhort
one another, that we in Christ are Members of one Body, that we in Christ are
all but One.

31. Even as the One only Christ gives himself into us all in Common to be
one only Life, and loves us all in his one only Humanity, and reaches forth
that same only humanity with his great Love and Grace to us all in Common,
under one Bread and Wine, and so binds himself to us in one only
participation: Thus should we also in such coming together and participation,
as members of one body, bind our selves together in true Love and
faithfulness, and seriously Consider, that in such participation we are all
but one in Christ: for we partake all of one only Christ, and in that same
one Christ we are one only Body, which is Christ in his Members: O little
Children, what a depth of Mystery is this if we did rightly consider it!
Satan in the Anger of God, has rent us asunder, and made us at odds, so that
we have Opposite thoughts: and here comes Christ with his Love, and makes
us all, in himself, one only Man again, which is he himself in us: so that
all of us together are become branches rooted in his tree, which he himself
is; and all live from his virtue and substance, and stand in one stock, which
is himself.

32. Therefore we should rightly consider this, and not with unworthy hearts
and Mouths draw near to this Communion, and suppose it is enough, that we
partake of Bread and Wine: No, it is a brotherly, memberly Band and Covenant;
we bind our selves therewith in Christ to be one only Man, and that same one
only Man, is every one himself in Christ: therefore our purpose in such
coming together should be, that we as Members of one Body, will bind our
selves fast with such participation, and forsake Satan with his Opposite will,
and heartily love one another, as Christ has loved us, and has given his life
into Death for us.

33. To this End is this Testament of participation under Bread and Wine
ordained: Not to understand, as if it were a participation apart and asunder,
whereof a Christian without the use of this could not partake: for if we are
in Christ, and he himself be in us, and is our Life and Light, and we thus
rooted in him in the Substantial Faith; which Faiths Substance he himself is:
Wherefore should not then that same Life's desire, be able always, if it but
turn it self thereinto, to eat thereof: this Ordinance is only a memberlike
Band of Love; that we might thereby instruct one another what Christ has done
for us, till he shall visibly come to us again in his assumed humane
Imagelikenesse; and as our right High Priest be ever with us and in us.

The Fourth Chapter. Of the difference of such Participation, what the wicked
receive by this Testament: and how a Man should rightly prepare himself for
it; that he may be rightly worthy.
1. AS is abovementioned, it lies not in the conceit or supposition that one
need only draw near with the Body to such Communion, and think: when I have
participated of Bread and Wine with others: then I have received the true
Testament of Christ, whereby my sins are forgiven me: No, St Paul says: He
that distinguishes not the Body of the LORD from Bread and Wine, he receives
it to his own Judgment, 1 Cor. 11.29. Bread and Wine cannot apprehend this
Testament, much less the Faithless, who come to it only out of Custom, and
that he will have the Name of a Christian.

2. So also it stands not in the Priests power, with his blessing to bring
the Body and Blood of Christ into the Bread and Wine; but it stands in the
Divine Institution, which Institution is hidden from the wicked Mouth, and it
is done to him as to Judas, who though indeed he also eat and drank of the
Bread and Wine of the Supper; and was invited to the Testament; yet he did not
receive Christ's flesh and blood, viz: the Love of God; for after the Supper
Satan went into him: which is as much as to say: the power and virtue of the
Testament touched him, so that his inward false Faiths Mouth, was thus stirred
and opened, but as his Faiths Mouths was, so was also the Testament in his
participation, as the Scripture says: With the Holy thou art Holy, and with
the perverse thou art perverse Psalm. 18.26, 27.

3. He received the Testament of Christ, but [it was] the Judgment only:
which Judgment in the Holy or Saints kills the Earthly Will of the Serpent:
that is, when the Soul is capable of the holy power and virtue; so that it
has a Mouth of Faith, which receives the Love in the Testament, then it
receives also herewith in like manner Christ's suffering. Death and
Resurrection, which kills Sin in Soul and Flesh; but the wicked Mouth is
not capable of the Love; therefore it receives only Christ's suffering and
Death, and Not his Resurrection, for with his false opinion, he lays his
desire, viz: the false Faiths Mouth, to Christ's Flesh and Blood, and kills
Christ in this participation in his Testament, in himself: he is thereby
Guilty of the Death of Christ, for with his false participation, and false
Faiths desire, he touches the severe Judgment of God in Christ's Agony,
Wounds, and Death.

4. Therefore, in that he is only capable of the Judgment, the Judgment of
God which killed Christ for our sins sake, in this Testament is moveable in
the Soul and property of the wicked; which Judgment, touches or stirs
Christ's wounds and Death in his Testament, in this participation of false
property, for the false Serpents-seede with this touch Or, pierces.
stingeth Christ in the Heel: for Christ offers the Soul his Testament, and
would slay the Serpent: but while Satan has the chife Dominion in the Soul,
he will not receive it, but through the Souls Essence casts his false
Poisonous rays Or, against.
upon the wounds of Christ, and desires to kill Christ.

5. Understand; he desires to poison and infect that Ground in Man, where
Christ's Blood and Death, with his Resurrection, should be possessed, and
stirs it self so much the more in the false Soul, as he did in Judas: when
he received this Testament, then he was Stirring in Judas, and took his life
in: Therefore says the Scripture; After the Sop, Satan entered into him, Joh.
13.27. For his false Heart had stirred the Judgment of God, therefore it came
also into him, for it was within him aforehand, but not manifest, till he
touched the Covenant in the Testament; so it went with him as with Vzza, Who
unworthily touched the Ark of God, 2 Samuel 6.6, 7. 1 Chronicles. 14.9, 10. which a
wicked Man ought to observe, that he do not without repentance for his sins
touch this Testament, else, he lays his hand of false property, on Christ's
Wounds, Agony and Death, and will in the End receive Judas wages therefrom.

6. It is not so to be understood, as if the wicked, who applies himself with
others to the Covenant of the Testaments of Christ, did receive nothing, as
also is to be understood in Baptism; for the Testament stands firm, the
Institution continues in power and virtue, for the Faithless does not take
away the Covenant and power; The Covenant goes with such participation and
use, into all, but as the Mouth is, such also is the participation: Gods great
Love and Grace, viz: the Substantial Love, gives not it self into the wicked
Soul, but the Process of Christ, with his pain, Or, Anguish.
Agony, Scorn and Death, goes indeed into the wicked soul, for therein the
Man-Devill, viz: the wicked Heart, pierces Christ in his wounds, and makes it
self Guilty of the Death of Christ.

7. The wicked indeed participateth on Christ's Going into Hell, on his Anguish,
and Death, but he is not capable of his Resurrection, wherein Christ rules
over Death and Hell: for his wicked will desires not to dye in Christ's Death
with Christ, to his wickedness and false matters and conversation, but
desires only to arise and Live with sins in Christ's Spirit; he will rule in
the Resurrection of Christ with his Earthly Lucifer, therefore he treads the
Death of Christ with the feet of his false desire, and does the same which the
Pharisees did to Christ: therefore it were better for him not to boast himself
to be a Christian, and that he did not touch or meddle with Christ's Testament.

Of the Ground of Absolution. What forgiveness of Sins is.

8. The false conceit and gross Or, Ignorance.
misunderstanding, when Men teach, Christ's Testaments destroy sin, needs yet
a more Or, Sharp.
acute exposition, that the wicked Man may not thus hide himself under it, and
so cover himself with Christ's purple Mantle, and wear it as a Badge upon him
in falsehood: Christ's Bloudshedding, as when he destroyed Gods Anger therewith,
and turned the Anger into Love, is that which destroys sin: He that
worthily participateth of Christ's Bloudshedding, in him sin is destroyed
through his victory and resurrection with his blood and Love; He that comes
to it with a Penitent heart for his bypast sin, and is angry at it, and has
a strong purpose in himself, no more to enter into it, he lays hold with the
Faith on the Testamentary Grace.

9. It is false for one to defer his repentance till the participation of the
Testament of Christ, [and then to think] that the same will take away his
sin: There is no forgiveness of sins, either by Testament or Absolution,
unless a Man convert from sin, and be renewed through earnest sincere
Repentance and turning in to the Grace of God in Faith on Christ in the Holy
Ghost: that he takes up another will and resolution to go out from falsehood
and wickedness.

10. For, the forgiveness of sins in Christ's Testaments, and without the use
of them is nothing else but this: when Christ in the Converting Sinner arises
from Man's Death, into Man's Faith; and a New obedient will arises out of his
Death, and becomes a Light in Man's Life, so that the Eternal Night is turned
into a clear Day, then Sin is forgiven: for if the Eternal day of Love
dawneth, then is the Night of the Eternal Darkness of Gods Anger turned into
Love, and there is the Wedding of the Lamb rightly kept; and not with the
unworthy Heart, which without repentance and forsaking of its sins runs to
the Testament, and supposes, that its sins are forgiven through the laying
on of the Priests Hand, and participation of the Testaments.

11. The Priest has no power to forgive sin, it stands not in his own
might and power, the might is in the Ordinance of Christ: Christ in Man, and so
far also as he is in the Priest himself, forgiveth sin to the Repenting
Conscience: The Absolution is but a Medium, viz: an outward sign thereof, that
we should receive one another in Love and hearty forgiveness, and bind and
reconcile our selves in the Love of the bands of Christ, in his Bride, and in
Love receive one another into the Communion of the body, viz: of the Bride of
Christ.

12. The Minister of Christ, takes the faithful Penitent Man, through an
Outward Absolution, in Christ's stead, into the Church.
Communion or Congregation of Christ: He is with his Absolution a Medium or
means, of that which Christ himself through his absolution does Workingly.
Effectually in the inward Ground, and so Man is through such a a Medium
outwardly confirmed: But if there be no Faith and conversion there; but only a
Custom, then there is also no Absolution; for the Priests Absolution without
Christ's co-working, is powerless and dead, for the power sticks not barely
in the outward Ordinance and in the Priest, but in the Communion of the Saints
in Christ, viz: in the Bride of Christ, the same takes the Repenting Man into
their Memberlike fraternity, in the Faith of that which is to come, the Spirit
of Christ in his members receives him.

13. A wicked Priest, in whom the Spirit of Christ is not, cannot absolve him,
nor receive him, but the Office of Christ through the word of his Promise,
receives him: A false Priest is but an outward worklesse instrument as to
himself, and does no more with this than the wicked Priest with the
Water-Baptisme, which only powers the water, and speaks the words without
co-working; But the Spirit of the Office looks not upon the unworthy Minister
of the Office, but upon those that come to the Office with Faith: He absolveth
him through his Office, and receives him with the Bride of Christ in whom He
works, into the Church or Congregation, and not by a wicked Pharisee, who
himself is not capable of the Office, and only sits there as an Idol,
which Man worshippeth, and is himself but a Devil full of falsehood, and
attributes that to himself, which he himself has not.

14. There must be earnestness used in going about with such an Office of the
power of God, or else Christ is but mocked therein: Therefore no Man should
rely upon the Ordinance and think, that the Ordinance absolveth him, or that
for the Ordinance and Institution sake of Christ he receives the Testament: If
any will receive Christ into himself for a lodger; he must then bring the
Temple of Christ, wherein Christ absolveth him, with him into the Ordinance;
The absolution is but a receiving into the Communion of the Members of Christ;
the Priest receives him outwardly with the Congregation, and Christ receives
him in the Faith, and binds himself workingly with him; which cannot be done
without Faith and Earnest turning into God: and now as Christ works inwardly
in him, so also the Congregation or Church, viz: the Bride of Christ, work
membrally in him with their prayers, and they all are but one in Christ.

15. But it is a snare of the Devil, that the wicked think, that he is a
sinner indeed, but he will at last go to the Office of Christ, to the
Communion of Saints; and will be absolved and receive Christ's Testament, that
his sins may once be forgiven him, and then will sin a new, when his old
sin is done away: as it comes to pass, that many begin to hang their heads
a little and make a show, and presently afterward enter into their old Custom
again, into all abominations and Blasphemy: These Crucify Christ, and Note.
pierce him in his wounds; and it goes with such a one as with Judas, who
after he had eaten, Satan entered into him, it were better he continued
altogether from it, so long as it is not with him in Earnestness, if that he
thinks to be and remain a true Christian

Of true Christianity. What a right Christian is.

16. Christianity is not a bare conceit, that a Man need only to acknowledge
with the Mouth and believe, that Christ dyed for us, and has satisfied for
sin, that a Man need only to give assent to the Gospel, and hold the History
of what was done by Christ, to be true, and that a Man need only and balely to
go to his Testament, and there receive the Grace which he left behind him,
and comfort himself therewith, and account it as a Merit and imputed Grace: It
is not enough for a Man to hear Sermons preached, and to be Baptized to
Christ, and go to the Supper, so that a Man do but keep the Custom: this by
far makes no Christian, it must be Earnestness, none is a Christian,
unless Christ live and work in him; as Christ himself says; Without me ye
can do nothing: Joh. 15.5. Also: He that gathers not with me scatters,
Matthew: 12.30.

17. A Christian must be one Spirit in and with Christ, and will and work in
the power of Christ: it is a living active working Grace, in a Christian; a
continual burning fire, a feeling power and virtue, which though it be often
covered with the Lust of the flesh, and the vanity of the world, yet it Gloweth.
glimmereth and burns in the Heart, as a fire, and reproves the flesh, and
the vain lust of untruth, rejects the false way, and wills it not: that
same inward fire is the Spirit of Christ, which without ceasing breaks the
head of the Serpent; viz: the Lust of the flesh: The flesh has the will of
this world; but that same kindled ground, has the will of God: If any be a
Christian, then he will hate and be angry at the will of the flesh, he will be
an Enemy to his evil fleshly Lust, and constantly complain and hold himself
to be unworthy, Note.
and continually with his inward will of the soul sinck himself, into the
Purest.
meerest Grace, into Gods mercy, and not say of himself, I am a right
Christian, but will continually press with his Desire into Gods Mercy, and fly
to Grace, that he might be but a right Christian, and will account himself in
all his conversation always too unworthy of such Grace, and in continual
resigned humility with weeping and prayer; only press into Grace, his whole
life will be a ^all Repentance, and [he will] evermore desire to apprehend
Grace, as it has apprehended him.

18. A right Christian is affrighted at sin, when the Lust of the flesh would
work sin: also when he sees others work sin, then he groaneth in himself
at it; and wishes that such evil were not committed, it is an abomination to
him in his Eyes, he loves truth and righteousness, and hates the false way:
and although the Earthly flesh often unawares without any purpose of will,
falls upon him with a sudden false Lust, and many times brings him to fall,
as has been with David, and Solomon; and Many Saints, and is still done, yet
such a Man in whom the Spirit of Christ is, does not lie in sin; but the
Inward Ground, viz: the Incorporated Grace in the Spirit of Christ, comes
quickly with Gods Strict.
severe righteousness, in the Anger, and enters into him in the Conscience;
as the Prophet Nathan entered into David's conscience, and touched his
conscience, and awakened the fire of Anger: when David suddenly began with
great sorrow to repent and acknowledge his sin, and entered into such Earnest
Repentance, that he would receive no comfort from all his friends, and would
not suffer his Ears to be filled with comfort, and the tickling of Grace, till
he felt the Grace of the Lord in his Conscience; no flattery would set his
heart at peace, till the Lord spoke into him with his Grace^ 2 Samuel 12.7.

Of the worthy preparation to the holy Testament of Christ.

19. If any will call himself a Christian, and comfort himself with the
Merits of Christ, and approach to his Testament, and worthily receive the same,
let him consider his ways well, and look to his heart, and see how it is
framed, 1. Whether he stands in such a desire, as to be willing to dye wholly
from vanity; 2. Whether it be in his purpose, to go out from all falsehood,
unrighteousness, lying and deceit; and that he be resolved never to enter into
them again: 3. Whether he desire the Grace of God in Christ, with a clean
pure will 4. Also whether he is sorry for his sin: 5. Whether he find and
feel such a will in himself, that from henceforth he will wholly go forth
from his former Sins and Blasphemies: 6. And also whether he be so minded,
that he will yield up his whole heart and will to Gods Mercy: 7. Also whether
he finds feels and knows a place in himself where he will lay up this
high Testament, viz: the flesh and blood of Christ with his Grace: 8. Also
whether or no he has made room in his heart and whole soul for the Spirit of
Christ, that he may there enter in as a Living Conqueror over Death and Hell,
and may erect his Kingly Palace in his heart and soul: 9. And whether he be
capable of this, where Christ says; We will come unto you and make our
dwelling in you, Joh. 14.23. 10. Also whether the Temple of the Holy Ghost in
him be swept and purged with right repentance: 11. Also whether there be a
right Mouth in him, that can rightly receive Christ's Holy flesh: 12. Also
whether the Essence of his Life be so framed, that Christ with his Substance
and with his Love may continue therein? For Christ says, He that Eats my
flesh and drinks my Blood, continues in Me and I in him, Joh. 6.56. 13.
Also whether he find in his Mind that the Stream of the Living Waters of
Divine Love flow from him, that he love his God, and his brother and Neighbor
as himself: 14. Also whether he wishes and desires to do Good to his
Enemies. 15. Whether he accompteth any thing in this world as his own, of
which he says; This is mine own only: 16. Or whether in that which he has
and possesses he accompteth himself but a servant of God, and a Steward to
him and his brother therein: and Consider that he is but an Officer and Servant
of God in his state and condition, and in his temporal Goods, that none of it
is his own, but Gods and his brothers? 17. Also whether he trusts God in his
conversation, and keep and esteem his Life as his Lord Christ did; who was
but a Pilgrim in this world, and had nothing for his own, and also willingly
left his Life for his brethren? 18. Also whether he finds a sparkle of such a
will in himself.

20. Now if he find all this in himself, then he is rightly worthy and very
fit for such a Testamentary participation: but if not, and yet finds such a
hunger in himself, that he would willingly be and will so, then he is in the
drawing of the Father to the Grace in Christ, then he should not long parley
with Reason, and frame doubts in himself, but should that very hour enter
into such an Earnest purpose, that he will enter into Earnest sincere
Repentance, and continually fly to the Grace of God in Christ, and pray, that
he will give him such a heart and will, and not attribute to himself, as if he
would attain it in his own power and virtue, but barely and merely sinck into
the most pure Grace, into the Mercy of God, and be in himself as a young
child, which only has a desire after the Mothers Milk, that cannot help
himself, but flies to the Mother for her to help him.

21. His going to the Communion of Saints should be in Humility: with a right
reconciliation with all those, whom he has wronged, or who have wronged him,
and should forgive all his Enemies, and wish the same to them which he desires
for himself: With the fear of God, and a penitent Heart, in a right Earnest
purpose, he may approach thereto, and bring no own desire to the Testament of
Christ, nor willing to apprehend and comprehend such Grace by his own ability,
but only sinck himself down, and wholly give himself up into the Grace as
unworthy: and cast himself upon the Grace, to do with him what it will; and
not at all will to desire the Spirit of Divine Joy; understand, as a propriety;
but give himself up to it, and sinck down in the Grace, that the same (Spirit
of Grace) may be in him how and when it will.

22. The Heart and Mind should say in it self before the Testament of God,
thus: O thou Great Grace of God, I unworthy sinful Man, come to thee upon thy
Call, whereas thou have bidden us poor Men to come and thou will refresh us,
Matthew. 11.28. Be it done unto me according as thou say, how thou will, I
give up my self herewith wholly and altogether, do thou with me poor
unworthy Man according to thy Grace, how thou will; I will Eternally be thy
own: Break now my will, and govern it with thy will, I can and am able to do
nothing but sinck now wholly and altogether into thy Grace.

23. Such a Man as so wholly gives himself up to God, and continues standing
in such resignation with his will, he will in the End when the Grace moves in
him, find and feel, what Grace and Divine Love is: When the Divine fire is
kindled in his life, then he will seele and taste what Christ in him is, and
find quickly how he is become another Man of other thoughts and will.

24. And then he is a Christian, when Christ's Love-fire striveth with Gods
Anger in the Conscience, and it will be set before that Man in Christ's process
in this world, that he must follow after Christ, in his suffering, anguish,
pain, scorn, and persecution, and must take the Cross of Christ upon him,
and be conformable to Christ's Image: where there is Inwardly Strife against
Sin, and fleshly Lusts that are in him, so that he despises himself and
hates the evil Lust; and outwardly he has contempt, scorn, trouble, and
misery: whereas the world accompteth him for a stranger and a fool, where
reason looks upon it self as foolish, and he himself as to the matters and
conversation of this world will be a fool, and hates every thing which his
flesh loves: where there is none that flattereth him, but all his good
friends, shun him and withdraw themselves, except only a few of the children
of God, who take notice of it, and whom God sends him for his comfort: Then
may he think, that he at that time with Christ, hangs to the Cross, and he
so behaveth himself, that he would willingly even dye with Christ, for the
profession sake of the True h, in hope that he also in Christ's victory and
overcoming shall arise with Christ, and live Eternally in Christ.

25. This is a Christian and worthy for the Communion of Saints, who is entered
into this process, and converseth therein: All others who go only out of
Custom, and account Christ's Testament, for an outwardly imputed Grace, and as
a work done beleevingly appropriate it to himself, and will receive it as a
Gift, but will not be newborn, and be another Man of other thoughts and will,
and keep the defiled Cloak of sin in the Conscience in him, and pass
quickly again into the old footsteps: All these are unworthy and unfit, and
incapable of the Testament, and receive it only unto Judgment, as before is
mentioned.

The Fifth Chapter. Of the Contention, Disputation, and Strife of the Learned
about Christ's Testaments: what they Effect therewith, and what is to be held
concerning it.
1. NOt out of an affection to meddle with any one in his good Conscience, will
I add this Chapter, but for the comfort of the simple children of Christ,
which Men so lead into Error, and shut them up in opinions, and seduce them
from the true understanding in contention, and make of Christ's Testaments a
mere Den of Murder, and bind and shut up the Conscience in Snares and Bands,
to them I will signify what they should hold concerning the contentious
Disputation of the Learned in Reason, and what they set up thereby.

2. Christ's Testaments are nothing else, but a Band and Covenant between God
and Man, a Memberlike union of the children of Men, where God with the humanity
of Christ has bound himself with Man again after the fall, to be their
loving God: Now all that without this Memberlike Band and Covenant of Love,
contend and dispute about conceits and opinions, about knowledge, that goes
into own self without Christ, and there is no true understanding in any such,
for none knows Christ, but the Father only, and those to whom the Father
will reveal him, Matthew. 11.27.

3. Now if Christ be revealed to and in a Man, then he has no contentious
Disputation, nor Strife with any Man about that knowledge and skill, but he is
lowly, and accompteth himself unworthy of any such knowledge; he despises
none for the difference sake of his Gifts, but is in Love with all Men, and
lets every Man have his own, and gives to his Neighbor only his Love
will, and considers how he may be a Member of Christ and of his Brethren and
Sisters.

4. But that Men run into so many Opinions, and strive, contend, and dispute
about them, and despise one another for the Letter sake, and scorn, and give
them to the Devil: there the simple Christian is to know, that in all such
Strife there is no true understanding, but mere Pride and Antichristian
Matters.
doings, or miserable confounding of the words of Christ, where nothing arises
from it but disunion, unsafety, Enmity, and nothing else is effected therewith
but the Devils will.

5. And that is, because they give out themselves to be Teachers of the
Kingdom of Christ, and yet are not sent or known of God; they take their
matter all from others, and exchange words and letters, and contend and dispute
about the Art, how Men may artificially set letters together, and make
opinions, which composure is most artificial, and compel the Consciences into
that Art; but they themselves understand not what they do: their knowledge
sticks barely in the letters, and yet have not the Living word CHRIST in
them, who gives testimony to the Literal word: Had they Christ in the Love in
them, then they would impart that same Love, and would show men Christ in
themselves, and would so walk that Men might see they were Christ's children:
But while they only contend and dispute, and will not so love and live,
themselves, it is false and but an hypocritical show.

6. But that this is true, let Men look upon their supposition, about which
they contend: One heap of them says, Christ is substantially under Bread and
Wine: Also, Bread and Wine is changed into the Testament of Christ, and there
is a change of the Bread and Wine; and so will receive Christ into the
Beastiall and Mortal Man, which Beast yet is not profitable Text. In the
holiness.
as to Holiness: The other Party says; It is only a sign and signification
of the Body of Christ, that he was broken or dyed for us: and denies the
All-present, presentiall.
present substantial participation, and understand nothing concerning Man,
what and how he is, what he wants and stands in need of, that he may
attain the salvation of God again: The Third Party will handle the matter
best, and keep to the words of the Institution, but say; That Christ is
participated with and under Bread and Wine, that is, Christ's flesh and blood is
eaten and drunk under Bread and Wine; but yet have no understanding how that
comes to pass, what is in Man that is capable of such a Gift, and will know
nothing of the inward Ground and right Adamicall humanity, and deny also
moreover the Substantial inhabiting of Christ, and is as far from
understanding as either of the other two: Neither will they know how the
participation is wrought, but depend barely on the dead letter, but lay about
them, lash and thunder, with railing, scorn, Heresy, and Blasphemy.

7. Every party striveth only about a literal Image, and will have Christ
bound to their Imaginary.
Imagelike opinion, and will be Patron of that same Image, and do it upon no
other ground, but that they will attain Glory, honor, and high Esteem by it:
which may be known in that they all of them disgrace and contemn one another,
that each of them may but maintain his Imaginary.
Imagelike opinion, and be called and esteemed Or, Masters and Dispencers.
Lords of the Mysteries of Christ; and yet in the ground of their hearts
respect nothing but the Earthly Lucifer, with temporary honor and self-will;
and will be Venerated.
worshipped as Christ: Every party would have it so, that Men should worship
their Image, viz: their framed literal Opinion.

8. With Christ's Testaments they distinguish their Images, and make them a Sect
therewith: and cry; Here is the Church of Christ, there is Heresy and
Seduction: cleave unto me, here is Christ: and therewith imbitter the hearts
of Kings and Princes, as also the Minds of the People, so that one brother,
for an Image-like opinion sake, despises, disgraceth, slandereth, and
blasphemeth another, and accounts him and cries out upon him for Devilish,
and will raise wars and bloodshed, and desolation of Land and People, for the
sake of such Idoll-Images: all which are a mere empty shell without fruit, and
belong to the fiery World for Separation.

9. Men have brought it to this pass, that the people think they are saved, if
they do but cleave to the opinion [of such men] and allow it: whether they
understand it or no, when they do but honor a Sectarian Name thereby, and
hold the Patron of their opinion to be right; so that when one hears the name
of him, he cries; Yes, yes, that is right: and yet knows not what it is: so
altogether have men blinded and seduced the simple, that Men look only upon
Men's Names, and think Christ is in the Opinion; and that which is yet worse,
men so compel the people with power into such Image-like Opinions, and have so
blinded Men, that they forsake even body and Goods for an Opinion sake, which
yet they understand not in the ground of it, and persecute, hate, and kill one
another for it.

10. Every one of them cries Men will take away the true Doctrine, viz: the
true Faith, from them, and yet they have it not, neither is it in their
Opinion; thus altogether is the world filled and blinded with Opinions: Men
suppose, if a Man use but Christ's Testaments according to the opinion of his
Patron, then there is blessedness and salvation therein, else there can be no
salvation: and whosoever imagines not according to the same opinion, and
hangs and cleaves to them, cannot be saved; also he is no true member of the
right Christendom.

11. Men do so miserably contend about such Image-like opininions, that the
Churches are made nothing else but mere houses of contentious Disputation, and
spiritual Dens of Murder: which Murder in the End comes to wars and
bloodshed, and mere disgrace and dishonor is done to Christ for his holy
Gifts and Testaments sake: and nothing else in truth is thereby erected, but as
Israel danced about the Golden Calfe, and made an Idol-calfe to be their God,
and joyed in their own handiworke; viz: in their Idoll-Image, and lost their
God: and therefore also the anger of God was wrath against them, and devoured
them all in the Wilderness, so that such Idol and Image Servants could not
come into the promised Land.

12. Loving brethren, contend not about Opinions, all contentious Disputation
is an Image of an Idol: Christ has concerning his Omnipresence, told us of no
opinion, where he says, He will be with us every day to the End of the world,
Matthew. 28.20. He says not, in such or such an opinion, but where he signifies
his presence, he says thus; as the lightening goes forth and shines to the
going down thereof, so shall also the Ever enduring coming of the Son of Man
be, Matthew. 24.27. And says; The kingdom of God is inwardly within you, Luke
17.21.

13. Christ's Light and power rises up in his children in the inward Ground,
and shines to them through the whole course of their life, and in that
wellspring of Light is the kingdom of God in M^n: Now if he have not this,
let him contend and dispute as much as he will, yet he will bring it into him
by no opinion; but if he has it, out of the same wellspring flow even streams
of Love; it needs no Opinion, let him only look that Christ's kingdom be
borne in him, that Christ be Man in him: else he is no Christian, be he how he
will for opinion, he must stand as a branch in the vine of Christ, Joh. 15. The
Opinion helps him not, but the true Faith, which through the breaking forth
of Love is active, and works good works, Gal. 5.6. if he have not the works
of Love, then he has also no Faith: the opinion makes no salvation, but is
Babell, a confusion of the Tongues of the one only Love: None is a Christian,
unless he love his neighbor, and desires to do him good.

14. The outwardly imputed Grace, without the innate Or, childelike.
filial Grace is all false; when Christ works in a Man, then he is a
Christian, and then the sufferings, merits, and satisfaction of Christ avail
him: when he has him in himself for an Advocate, who has done it, that he
do it also in him, and attracteth his merits to him, then is the kingdom of
God in that Merit, otherwise all Imagelike Opinions are faise: No work pleases
God but what he himself works in Man through his Spirit, therefore let us be
the children of Christ, and not the children of Images.

15. Christ has imparted his kingdom to us in his Testaments, he that will
receive it must be his child, else there is no Inheritance: to work Repentance
is better then to desire to know much: Is not the knowledge given from God to a
Man, then he will not [be able to] understand the Ground of the divine secret
Mystery, but if it be given him, he need no Image: to continue in the humility
and simplicity of Christ, and to cleave to his love and Grace without despising
of any one, is good Christianity: All whatsoever speaks of it self is
Babell; in Christ we are all Members, and all one. AMEN.

The End of the second little Book concerning The Holy Supper.
The Table of the Two Testaments.
Angels. Book 1. Ch: 1. THe End why God Created the Angels and Men; also of
Reasons Misunderstanding of the Testaments of Christ. Verse. 23. Book 1. Ch: 2.
How Angels became Devils. Verse. 3, 4, 5

Anointing. Anointed. Book 1. Ch: 3. How Christ's anointing is understood in the
Water Baptism. Verse. 19 Book 1. Ch: 3. How the Body and Soul is anointed by
Christ in the Water-Baptisme. Verse. 19.20 Book 1. Ch: 4. John Anointed when
Mary saluted Elizabeth. Verse. 4 Book 1. Ch: 4. A Baptizer should be the
Anointed of Christ. Verse. 22

Antichristian. Book 2. Chapter 5. Of Antichristian doings. Verse. 4
Arise. Book 1. Chapter 3. What that is, wherein Man at the last day shall Arise
and stand before the Judgment. Verse. 16.17.20
Baptism. Baptized. Baptize. Baptiser. Book 1. Chapter 2. How the Deluge was a
figure of Baptism. Verse. 17 Book 1. Chapter 2. Why God sent the Baptism and
Divine Infusion in an Elementary Earthly Medium. Verse. 26.27. Book 1. Chapter 2.
What is the Ground of that Water- Baptism, to which the holy Ghost is the Hand
that Baptiseth. Verse. 36 Book 1. Ch: 3. How the whole Man needed Baptism.
Verse. 4 Book 1. Ch: 3. How the Baptism of the holy Ghost is effected. Verse.
6 Book 1. Ch: 3. What it is in the Water- Baptism, wherewith the Body from the
Outward World and the Spirit of the Constellation in Man is Baptized. Verse. 12
Book 1. Ch: 3. How we are buried with Christ in Baptism. Verse. 22 Book 1.
Ch: 4. John the Baptist the Beginner of Water- Baptism. Verse. 01 Book 1. Ch:
4. Circumcision changed into Water- Baptism. Verse. 6 Book 1. Ch: 4. Why God
Ordained the Water- Baptism. Verse. 9 Book 1. Ch: 4. Why the Outward Baptism
is requisite to those that live to have it. Verse. 14.15.19. Book 1. Ch: 4. We
are through Baptism planted anew in the Word of God. Verse. 20 Book 1. Ch: 4.
How God is with the Holy, and with the Unholy in the Baptism. Verse. 24 Book
1. Ch: 4. What required to Baptism in them that are present. Verse. 33.34.40
Book 1. Ch: 4. Wicked people at the Baptism, a hinderance to the work. Verse.
36 Book 1. Ch: 4. Baptism not a mere sign, but a substantial work. Verse.
38 Book 1. Ch: 3. What was done that the Three Worlds properties in Man might
be Baptized. Verse. 5^ Book 1. Chapter 3. What it is in Man that is Baptized into
Death. Verse. 21 Book 1. Chapter 4. Faithful Parents Baptized in Soul and Body,
generate Children in that Baptism. Verse. 13 Book 1. Chapter 3. How the Father
Son and Holy Ghost Baptize together. Verse. 11 Book 1. Chapter 4. Who it is that
is worthy to Baptize with Water. Verse. 10.11.39 Book 1. Chapter 4. Holy Parents
Baptize their Offspring in Spirit, yet why the Outward Baptism is requisite in
those that live to have it. Verse. 14, 15.19 Book 1. Chapter 4. The unfaithful
Baptiser is dead in that work, though God always works in respect of his
Covenant. Verse. 12

Beasts. Book 2. Ch: 1. The Image of Reconciliation in the sacrificing of
Beasts, and burning the Fat of them mentioned Levit. 8.14. etc. Verse. 5
Body. Book 1. Ch: 1. How we came to have this Beastiall Body. Verse. 20 Book
1. Ch: 2. What Body the Saints, before (and since) Christ, put on; and what
Body they wait for in the Resurrection at the Last Day. Verse. 14 Book 1. Ch:
3. The Body of Man necessary to be Baptized. Verse. 2.3 Book 2. Ch: 3. Why the
Bread and Wine cannot be turned into the Body and blood of Christ. Verse. 25
Book 2. Chapter 4. How it is, not to distinguish the Lords Body. Verse. 1

Children. Book 1. Ch: 4. Christ bids; Suffer little Children to come to
him. Verse. 28
Christ. Christ's. Christian. Book 1. Ch: 2. Why God must become Man; and why
Christ must receive the Elementary part from us. Verse. 34 Book 1. Ch: 2. How
Christ is bestowed upon Man. Verse. 37.38 Book 1. Ch: 3. How Christ is the
Light of the (little) World. Verse. 10 Book 2. Chapter 2. How Christ is the Light
of the world. Verse. 10 Book 1. Chapter 3. How Christ penetratrated through Death
and Hell. Verse. 18 Book 1. Chapter 3. How Christ descended into Hell. Verse. 22
Book 1. Chapter 4. John the forerunner of Christ. Verse. 5 Book 2. Chapter 2. How
Christ was the right High Priest. Verse. 3.4 Book 2. Chapter 2. Christ gave his
whole Humanity to his Disciples. Verse. 8.9 Book 2. Chapter 2. What the City of
God in Man is, and how we continue in Christ, and be in us. Verse. 11 Book 2.
Chapter 2. Christ, by the last Supper, fulfilled the Old Testament. Verse. 17 Book
2. Chapter 3. Man cannot say I am Christ, though Christ dwells in him. Verse. 30
Book 2. Chapter 4 Who they are that Crucify Christ now, and wound him. Verse. 15
Book 2. Chapter 4. How a Man shall feel and Taste what Christ in him is. Verse. 23
Book 2. Chapter 5. None know Christ, but those to whom, and in whom the Father
reveals him. Verse. 2, 3 Book 2. Chapter 5. How Men say, here is Christ. Verse.
8 Book 2. Chapter 5. How Christ is with us Every Day to the End of the World.
Verse. 12 Book 1. Chapter 3. What was effected by Christ's shedding forth his blood
upon the Earth. Verse. 18 Book 1. Chapter 3. What in Man is the Christian, and why
Man's works must be Judged. Verse. 25 Book 2. Chapter 4. The whole life of a
Christian should be continual Repentance, and flying unto Grace and the mere
Mercy of God. Verse. 17.20.21 Book 2. Chapter 4. A right Christian is afraid of all
Sin. Verse. 18 Book 2. Chapter 5. None is a Christian but he that desires to do
his neighbor good. Verse. 13

Church. Churches. Book 2. Chapter 4. Faithful Witnesses about Baptism, well
ordained by the Christian Church. Verse. 37 Book 2. Chapter 5. How the Churches are
made spiritual Denns of Murder. Verse. 11

Circumcised. Book 1. Chapter 2. The Covenant and the Holy Fire, renewed with
Abraham, and why Masculine Persons must be Circumcised. Verse. 18
Communion. Book 2. Chapter 3. It is not enough to partake of Bread and Wine in the
Communion. Verse. 32 Book 2. Chapter 3. What our purpose must be when we go to
the Communion. Verse. 32 Book 2. Chapter 3. How a Christian partaketh of the
Communion without Bread and Wine. Verse. 33 Book 2. Chapter 3. The usefulness of
the Ordinance of the Communion. Verse. 33 Book 2. Chapter 4. We must desire the
same to all our Enemies that we desire for our selves, if we will worthily
go to the Communion of Saints. Verse. 21

Contention. Book 2. Chapter 5. The Author shows the Contention of the Learned
for the Comfort of the simple. Verse. 1
Covenant. Book 1. Ch: 2. Why God transferred the Covenant from Circumcision
into Baptism. Verse. 25 Book 1. Ch: 2. Why the Covenant of the Water-Baptisme
was first brought into the Heavenly Ens of Man. Verse. 32 Book 1. Ch: 4. The
Covenant of Christ's Testaments is always powerful. Verse. 6 Book 1. Ch: 4.
The wicked Man in Gods Covenant is a sweet savor unto condemnation. Verse. 25
Book 1. Ch: 4. What it is to a child, that it is begotten of wicked Parents,
and brought by wicked people to the Covenant: also what it is to God. Verse. 29
Book 1. Ch: 4. Why the Covenant of God is made in Christ's Blood and Death.
Verse. 30 Book 1. Chapter 4. Baptism a Spiritual Substance brought with the
Covenant into the Water. Verse 31.32.33

Creature. Book 2. Ch: 3. What it was that vanished as to the Creature when
Man fell. Verse 13
Dead. Death. Book 1 Ch: 5. What is baptized to the Resurrection of the Dead,
or for Dead. Verse 38 Book 1 Ch: 1. How Christ became Death to Death. Verse 24
Book 1 Ch: 2. How the Soul dyed the Death, was poisoned and came to have an
Evil Life: How Angels became Devils. Verse 3.4.5 Book 1 Ch: 3. What it is
that is baptized into Death. Verse 21 Book 2. Chapter 1. How Death was broke open
18. Chapter 2 verse. Verse 13 Book 2. Chapter 3. What it is that is Death to Death,
which Outward Nature holds to be a Life. Verse 8.9

Dispute. Book 2. Chapter 1. The cause why Men Dispute about Divine things. Verse
7.11, 12 Book 2. Chapter 1. VVat Men should do, that they need not Dispute about
God. Verse 14, 15 Book 2. Chapter 1. Men should confer and instruct one another,
not Dispute. Verse 16

Father. Book 2. Ch: 4. How we are in the Drawing of the Father. Verse 20
Faith. Book 1. Ch: 2. How the Spiritual Oil and Water of the Soul has
flowed into the Faith, and made the fallen Soul capable of the New Birth.
Verse. 1.2 Book 1. Chapter 2. In what Faith the Children of God before Christ's
Incarnation Sacrificed, and why they used those Types Verse. 8.9.10.11 Book 1.
Chapter 4. Parents have power, to give up the Childs will, to God, in their Faith.
Verse. 21 Book 1. Chapter 4. A dangerous thing to Baptize without Faith. Verse. 35
Book 2. Ch: 3. How the Invisible Substance of Christ falls into our Faith, as
a spark into Tinder. Verse. 18 Book 2. Ch: 3. The Substantial Faith in Man is
a Branch on the Vine Christ. Verse. 28 Book 2. Ch: 5. Of Men's crying, the true
Doctrine and Faith, will be taken away from them, and yet they have it. Verse.
10

Fire. Book 1. Ch: 2. How the Sacrifice was kindled with Holy Fire. Verse. 12
Book 1. Ch: 2. How the understanding of the Holy Fire came to be quenched.
Verse. 17 Book 1. Ch: 2. How the Divine Holy Fire was introduced through
Baptism. Verse. 35 Book 2. Ch: 1. Moses had holy Fire for the Sacrifice.
Verse. 20

Flesh. Book 1. Ch: 1. How Christ gives us Eternal Life, how we Eat his
Flesh, and drink his Blood, how he gives us the water of Eternal Life. Verse.
28.29 Book 1. Chapter 3. To what in Man, Christ gives his holy Spiritual Flesh
for food. Verse. 6 Book 2. Chapter 1. How there was holy Flesh, and holy Bread.
Verse. 23 Book 2. Chapter 2. Of holy Flesh. Verse. 13 Book 2. Chapter 2. How Christ's
flesh and blood is the Sacrifice of the New Testament. Verse. 6.7 Book 2. Chapter
3. Christ gave his Disciples his Spiritual Flesh and Blood. Verse. 1 Book 2.
Chapter 3. In what manner we eat and drink the Flesh and blood of Christ. Verse.
6.7. Book 2. Chapter 3. Christ's mortal Flesh but the shell of the Spiritual
Flesh. Verse. 21 Book 2. Chapter 3. How Faith always eats Christ's Flesh and
blood without a Medium as well as with it. Verse. 27.33 Book 2. Chapter 3. Why it
was so ordained that we should partake of Christ's Flesh and blood under Bread
and Wine. Verse. 31

Food. Book 2. Chapter 2. How Israel did eat blessed Food, notwithstanding the
Curse. Verse. 14
Forgiveness. Book 2. Chapter 4. No Forgiveness of sins without Conversion and
Resolution to depart from wickedness. Verse. 9 Book 2. Chapter 4. What the
Forgivenes of sins is. Verse. 10 Book 2. Chapter 4. The Power of Forgiveness is
in Christ's internal Ordinance, not in the Priest. Also of the Bride of Christ.
Verse. 11.12

Forms. Book 1. Chapter 1. VVerein the seven Forms of Nature take their
Beginning. Verse. 6
God. Book 1. Chapter 3. What in the Outward Worlds Substance is called God.
Verse. 1 Book 1. Chapter 3. How with the Mind, Paul served God, and with the flesh
the Law of sin. Verse. 23 Book 1. Chapter 3. Who are called according to the
Purpose of God. Verse. 24 Book 2. Chapter 3. Where it is that God dwells in Man.
Verse. 11

Grace. Book 1. Chapter 1. How Grace (the New Covenant) came into the Soul to
help it again; of which Aarons Rod was a Figure. Verse. 6.7 Book 1. Chapter 4.
John declared that the time of Grace (the Kingdom of Heaven) was at hand.
Verse. 5 Book 2. Chapter 3. Man's Life cannot in its own Power receive the Substance
of God, but it is given of Grace. Verse. 29 Book 2. Chapter 4. The true imputed
Grace, is to live in Christ. Verse. 16 Book 2. Chapter 4. The whole Life of a
Christian should be continual Repentance, and flying unto Grace, and the mere
mercy of God. Verse. 17.20.21 Book 2. Chapter 5. The Innate Filial Grace is the
true imputed Grace. Verse. 14

Ground. Book 1. Chapter 1. What searching cannot reach the true Ground whence
every Being takes its Original. Verse. 3.4
Heaven. Book 1. Ch: 1. How Divine understanding is attained and the Kingdom
of Heaven. Verse. 8.9 Book 1. Ch: 1. Of the Misunderstanding where Heaven is.
Verse. 24 Book 1. Ch: 1. How Christ dwells in Man; and Man in him, in Heaven;
and witnesses in the soul infallibly, that we are the children of God.
Verse. 28.29.30 Book 1. Ch: 3. How we dwell in Heaven, and have our
Conversation there. Verse. 24.

Hell. Book 2. Ch: 4. The wicked partaketh of Christ's going to Hell: It were
better the wicked did not meddle with Christ's Testaments. Verse. 7
Humanity. Book 1. Ch: 3. Why Christ assumed our Humanity. Verse. 1 Book 2.
Ch: 3. The Substantial Word takes on it our Humanity, the Spiritual
Humanity, the Invisible Substance, with which Christ came down from Heaven.
Verse. 17

Image. Book 1. Ch: 2. The Beastiall Earthly Image of Man is preserved in the
Fire of God. Verse. 13 Book 2. Ch: 4. How we are made conformable to Christ's
Image. Verse. 24 Book 2. Ch: 5. How Three Parties strive only about a literal
Image of Christ's Testaments. Verse. 7

Infant. Book 1. Ch: 4. How the Faithful Baptiser, Parents, VVitnesses, and
Standers by, work to the Baptising of the Infant, though it has no
understanding of what is done. Verse. 15.16 Book 1. Ch: 4. How the Command of
Christ, Matthew. 28.19. is effectual in the Baptising of an Infant. Verse. 17
Book 1. Ch: 4. What a wicked Baptiser does, and how the Infant is
notwithstanding baptized with the Living Word. Verse. 23 Book 1. Ch: 4. How it
is with an Infant of wicked Parents, that is baptized by a wicked baptiser, and
wicked People standers by. Verse. 26.27

John. Book 1. Ch: 4. John the Baptist, the son of a Priest. Verse. 8
Lamb. Book 2. Ch: 4. How the wedding of the Lamb is rightly kept. Verse. 10
Law. Book 1. Ch: 3. How the soul is laid hold on by the Law of Nature, and
what is the Ground and fountain of Repentance. Verse. 7.10.11
Life. Book 1. Ch: 1. Where the Book of Life is to be found. Verse. 18 Book 1.
Ch: 2. What is the New Life of Regeneration. Verse. 31 Book 1. Ch: 3. How the
Son Gives the Soul Eternal Life, and what Eternal Life is. Verse. 9.11
Book 1. Ch: 3. What the Creaturely Life is. Verse. 15 16

Light. Book 1. Ch: 3. When, the Divine Light in the Name Jesus is received
into the Soul. Verse. 8 Book 2. Ch: 3. The Invisible Substance of Christ is a
Light and Spiritual Oil in the Life of Man. Verse. 19

Medium. Book 1. Chapter 2. Why there must be an Earthly Medium, to Enter into the
Covenant of God by. Verse. 33 Book 2. Ch: 1. Why the Beastiall Medium in the
Sacrifices must be used. Verse. 21 Book 2. Ch: 2. Of the Elementary Medium of
blessed Bread and Wine. Verse. 16 Book 2. Ch: 2. How through the Medium of
Bread and Wine, we participate of Christ in a Corporeal and Spiritual way.
Verse. 18.19 Book 2. Ch: 2. Why there must be a Medium in the New Testament as
well as in the Old Testament. Verse. 20 Book 2. Ch: 3. Bread and Wine a Medium
to the visible Man. Verse. 22

Mumia. Book 2. Ch: 3. Of the Humane Mumia, and what it is. Verse. 1
Opinion. Book 2. Ch: 5. How Men cleave to an Opinion, whether they understand
it or no. Verse. 9
Ordinance. Book 2. Ch: 4. None should rely merely upon the Outward Ordinance.
Verse. 14
Participation. Book 2. Ch: 5. The Three Contenders about the presence of
Christ in the Supper, have no understanding how the true Participation is
wrought. Verse. 6
Passover. Book 2. Ch: 1. Of the Paschall Lamb, the Passover, and how it was
a Type of Christ. Verse. 1.2
Power. Book 1. Chapter 1. How the Soul comes to loose the Divine power and
knowledge. Verse. 5 Book 2. Ch: 3. What the Humane Power is to the Divine
Power. Verse. 5 Book 2. Ch: 3. What that Sin was, upon which Gods Power went
into the received Humanity again. Verse. 14 Book 2. Ch: 3. Man lives not by
Bread only, but by the inward Power thereof. Verse. 23 Book 2. Ch: 3. Man's
Life cannot in its own Power receive the Substance of God, but it is given of
Grace. Verse. 29

Presence. Book 1. Ch: 1. How Christ's Presence, Office, and Kingdom are to be
understood. Verse. 25.26.27
Principles. Principle. Book 2. Ch: 3. Of the Three Principles in Man. Verse.
12 Book 2. Ch: 3. How each Principle in Man eats its like in the
Participation of Christ's Testaments. Verse. 15

Reason. Book 1. Ch: 1. How the Body, and Reason, and Soul of Man, is
distinctly fed with Nourishment. Verse. 13.18
Redemption. Book 1. Ch: 1. How Christ effected our Redemption, and through
Death brought the Soul into Eternal Life, and how the Soul is become Lord
over Sin, Death, the Devil and Hell. Verse. 25.26.27 Book 1. Ch: 2. Of Isaac
a Type of Our Redemption. Verse. 19

Repentance. Book 1. Ch: 3. How the Soul is laid hold on by the Law of Nature,
and what is the Ground and Fountain of Repentance. Verse. 7.10.11 Book 1. Ch:
4. John baptized but with Repentance: only prepared the way, and Opened the
Gates for the King of Glory to Enter in. Verse. 7 Book 2. Ch: 4. Repentance
must not be deferred till the participation of the Testaments. Verse. 9

Sacrifices. Sacrifice. Book 1. Ch: 2. How the Sacrifices were effectual, and
how God and the Soul wrought with the Sacrifice. Verse. 20.21.22.23.24 Book 1.
Ch: 2. The Fat of Beasts a Medium in the Sacrifices. Verse. 28 Book 1. Chapter 2.
What the Sacrifice Typified. Verse. 29 Book 2. Ch: 1. How the Sacrifices were
a figure of Christ's Sacrifice. Verse. 6

Seed. Book 1. Ch: 2. Of the Seed of the Woman, and Destroyer of the Serpent.
Verse. 8.9.10.11 Book 1. Ch: 2. Of Abraham's seed as the Stars. Verse. 19
Book 1. Ch: 2. The Love-fire awakened it self in the Seed of the Woman.
Verse. 30 Book 1. Ch: 4. The Parents of John Dead in their fleshly Seed.
Verse. 2.3 Book 1. Ch: 4. How the Grain of Mustard- seed is sown in the Ens
of the Child. Verse. 18 Book 2. Ch: 4. How the Seed of the Serpent stingeth
Christ in the Heel. Verse. 4

Signified. Signifies. Book 2. Ch: 1. What the unleavened Cakes signified.
Verse. 3.4 Book 2. Ch: 1. What Moses, Aaron, the Heifer, and the Ram signified
in the figure. Verse. 7.9 Book 2. Ch: 1. What the Tabernacle signified: why
Mary was called the blessed among all women: what the Altar, the Laver, and
anointing the Head of Aaron, signified. Verse. 8 Book 2. Ch: 1. What the
Burning of the Fat, signified. Verse. 10 Book 2. Ch: 1. What the Burning of the
Heifer without the Host signifies, and that the blood sprinkled upon the
Altar, signifies that our blood shall come again to the Soul in the power of
it at the Last Day. Verse. 11.12 Book 2. Chapter 1. What the powering of the blood
at the foot of the Altar, signifies. Verse. 12.13 Book 2. Chapter 1. What the Ram
signified; how it was a sweet Savior to the Lord. Verse. 14.15.16.17.19.22 and
Ch: 2. verse 3.

Son. Book 1. Ch: 3. Of the Souls being given to the Son, and how the
Son gives it Eternal Life; and what Eternal Life is. Verse. 9.11 Ch: 2. v.
2
Sop. Book 2. Ch: 2. How it was with Vzza; and with Judas after the Sop. Verse.
5
Soul. Book 1. Chapter 1. How the Soul came to be helped again after the Fall.
Verse. 21.22 Book 1. Chapter 1. How the Soul is become Lord over Sin, Death, the
Devil, and Hell. Verse. 25.26.27 Book 2. Chapter 3. The Soul eats of the
supernatural substantial Love of the Name Jesus. Verse. 10

Spirit. Book 1. Chapter 1. How the Spirit leads into all Truth. Verse. 18 Book
1. Chapter 3. How the Spirit of God is to be understood in all the Three Worlds.
Verse. 13

Supper. Book 2. Chapter 3. A resemblance between Christ in his Supper, and the
influence of the Sun in herbs. Verse. 2.3.4.6 Book 2. Chapter 3. Why Christ
Ordained the Testament of his Supper under Bread and Wine. Verse. 24 Book 2.
Chapter 5. How all the Three Contenders and Disputers about the Presence of Christ
in the Supper, have no understanding how that participation is wrought. Verse.
6

Teachers. Book 2. Chapter 5. Of Teachers not sent. Verse. 5
Testaments. Testament. Book 2. Chapter 4. Christ's Testaments destroy sin in the
Penitent receiver. Verse. 8 Book 2. Chapter 4. XVIII enquiries into a Man's own
heart, to find whether he may worthily receive the Testament of Christ. Verse.
19 Book 2. Chapter 4. How the Mind when it comes to Christ's Testaments must
acknowledge it is able to do nothing. Verse. 22 Book 2. Chapter 4. He that will
not be a Man of New thoughts and will, receives the Testament unto Judgment.
Verse. 25 Book 2. Chapter 5. He that will receive the Kingdom of Christ in his
Testaments must be his child. Verse. 15

Types. Type. Book 1. Ch: 2. How Cain and Abell differed, and of their several
Types. Verse. 15.16 Book 2. Ch: 2. Why the Type ceased. Verse. 1

Thoughts. Book 1. Ch: 1. What is the Ground of the understanding and Thoughts.
Verse. 1.2 Book 1. Ch: 1. How the Thoughts come to be fed with divine food,
which is the Essential wisdom of God. Verse. 19

Variety. Book 1. Ch: 1. The cause of the changing and variety in Nature.
Verse. 17
Vine. Book 1. Ch: 1. How Man becomes a Branch on the Vine Christ. Verse. 27
Book 2. Ch: 3. How the Holy Man is a Branch on the Vine Christ. Verse. 20

Understanding. Book 1. Ch: 1. How Divine Understanding is attained, and the
Kingdom of Heaven. Verse. 8.9 Book 1. Ch: 1. Of the Three Touch-Stones of the
Divine Understanding. Verse. 18

Wicked. Book 2. Ch: 4. The wicked Priest and Pharisee is not capable of being
in the Office of Christ. Verse. 13
Will. Book 2. Ch: 2. How the Souls will comes to be changed. Verse. 12
Word. Words. Book 1. Ch: 1. Why the Eternal Word is become Man. Verse. 24
Book 2. Ch: 3. What signifies to us Christ's saying; My words are Spirit and
Life. Verse. 16 Book 2. Ch: 4. Man's spiritual Mouth receives Christ's words
and Life. Verse. 26 Book 2. Ch: 5. The Living Word gives Testimony to the
Literal word. Verse. 5

Works. Book 1. Chapter 3. What in Man is the Christian, and why Man's Works must be
Judged. Verse. 25
FINIS.
REader, pray cause these faults to be mended with a Pen. Page 21. on the
second side, line 10. for, unlooked, read unlocked. Page 50. line 2. for,
foolish read soulish. page 55. line 31. for vision read visible.


