THE TRVE BOVNDS OF CHRISTIAN FREEDOM: Or a Treatise wherein THE RIGHTS OF THE
Law are vindicated, THE LIBERTIES OF Grace maintained, And the several late
Opinions against the Law are examined and confuted. Whereunto is annexed a
Discourse of the Learned John Camerons, touching the threefold Covenant of God
with man, faithfully Translated, By Samuel Bolton Minister of the Word of God
at Saviours-Southwark.

Plane dicimus decessisse legem quoad onera, non quoad justitiam. Aug. 1 Pet.
2.16.As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as
the servants of God. LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Philemon Stephens, at the
Golden-Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1645.

I Have perused this Treatise, entitled, The true bounds of Christian
Freedom, together with the Translation of Learned Camerons Tractate, Of the
threefold Covenant, and finding them both to be solid and judicious, pious and
very profitable for these times, I do approve and allow them to be printed,

John Downame.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDWARD Earl of Manchester.
Right Honorable,
TImes of trouble have ever been times of trial, they are sifting times;
wherein God sifts us, as he tells us, Amos 9.9. and men sift us; But with a
great deal of differrence, God to preserve the flower, Men to discover the
bran; the object of Gods trial is our graces, of man's our corruptions; that
which God aims at is to evidence our good, that which men, to discover our
evil; your Honor has passed Gods trial, who tries the heart, and the good
he has discovered, has rendered you truly honorable: And you have suffered
man's, I say suffered, and to say no more, have endured the temptation. And
indeed your Honor has been a rock in greater storms, and acquitted your
self in greater trials then these are; what are the trials of these times to
the siftings of former years? Then the trials were more close, Religion being
more abstracted from other considerations; now more gross being complicated
with other respects; then few would appear for Religion, though now many stand
up to assert it; then it was under contempt, now it honors them, who honor
it. We read while judgments accompanied the Ark of God, while they who had
it were smitten with Emrods, every one thought it a burden, and were desirous
to turn it off; they sent it from Gath, to Ekron, from Ekron to Askalon, and
he was the happy man that could rid his hands of it; But afterward when it
came into the house of Obed-Edom, and they saw that God blessed him and his
whole house for the Arks sake, then every one could look upon it as worthy
entertainment. While Religion and the truths of God are dangerous and undoing
to them who own them, every one is shie to receive them, and as ready to reject
them; But when once the ways of God come to be thriving, enriching and
ennobling ways, and that religion comes to be of common reception, and
reputation, then every one is ready to give entertainment to it; It is
something for a man to own the Arc when none will own it; indeed many will
own a prospering truth, a blessing Arc; but he is an Obed-Edom indeed, that
will own a persecuted, a tossed, banished Arc.

My Lord, you are this Obed-Edom, who have owned the Arc, when few would own
it, that have esteemed it a blessing, when have apprehended it a curse, that
have looked upon it as your greatest honor when others have eyed it as their
disgrace, that have sided with religion not when you might live on it, but when
it was to live on you, and upon the best of your interests and emjoyments. None
that knows your Honor, but knows this, that in the worst of times, when
Religion was under most contempt, and it seemed crime enough to be godly, when
your Honor was not only a careful practiser, but a zealous promoter of the
ways of God, a faithful contender for purity of doctrine and worship, a
shelter to the godly, a refuge to the oppressed, a fence to religion, and
counted godliness great gain, when there was (if we look downward) no gain
to be made of godliness. And for the public they are strangers in our
Israel, that do not know your constant and unwearied labors and layings out
for it: And before ever the public was thought upon in public, even as one,
resolved to run that hazard, either to live in the public, or to die for the
public. And how God has carried on your spirit, and made you serviceable in
these times of common calamity, not Epistles, but Chronicles, without
sufspition of partiality shall report to future generations, when all clouds
of mistake shall vanish, and nothing but impartial truth shall be revealed.

To you my honored Lord, as to one who has been so zealous an Assertor of
liberties, this small Treatise of Christian Liberty flies for protection, not
that it fears injury, if innocence may secure it, but desires Patronage of
them who are worthy: It contains chiefly some friendly debates of some
opinions, which have been maintained against the Law, wherein I have so
endeavored to hold up the Law, as not to entrench upon the liberties of Grace,
and so to establish grace, as not to make void the Law, nor to discharge
believers of any duty they owe to God or man. And this discourse though weak,
yet such as it is, I make bold to present to your Honor with your virtuous and
noble Lady, and should only convey it into your bosoms by prayer, did not my
native Country and place to which your Honor is related, Manchester.
engage me to add a few words. A place it is which above many others God has
honored both in strengthening them to do their duty, and preserving them in
it, making them not only a Rock against their enemies, but a refuge for their
friends, the releevers of many places in danger, and the recoverers of many
lost; It is my earnest request to your Honor as bearing relation to them, that
while they are in conflict, they may be eyed and relieved; And when it shall
please God the storm is over, your Honor would look upon that place, in
helping to add to the honor of your name upon it, some further name of honor
to it; And the God of all grace and mercy be still a tower of protection to
them, and a star of direction to you, that you may know how to walk in
wisdom under all the changes of his providence to you, and make your Honor
yet further isntrumental, to advance his cause, and promote his glory, and
when you have served him in your generation here, take you to his glory
hereafter; which is the earnest and hearty prayer of him,

Whose all is but to serve you in Christ, SAMUEL BOLTON.

To the Christian Reader.
THou art not I conceive such a stranger to these times but thou know, that
as God has communicated many truths; so has Satan sought to vent many errors;
Hereby laboring to prejudice and weaken the reception of the one, if he could
not prevail to the entertainment of the other. Indeed it is his best season
for merchandising, at such a time he finds most Chapmen, and in the heat of the
Market while men are buying truths, he may hope to put off some of his own
wares; which that he may make more vendible, he will seek to pass them under
as honorable notions, and not stick to language them into your hearts under as
spiritual conceptions, as truth it self. He has a long time walked as a
prince of darkness, and because he can deceive no longer in that shape, he now
transformes himself into an Angel of light. He went a long time barefaced,
and was successful; when he was discovered he put on a mask, under which he
has walked many generations. And that being taken off also, he now dissembles
the very visage of truth: Of all errors, none are more seductive then such
which are handed to men under the notions of Free Grace, and none more
destructive, they are poison in the heart, poison in the fountain. I need not
tell thee how many of this kind have been vented, and entertained. For the
reducing of those who are carried away, the establishing of those who stagger,
and the building up of those who are in some measure settled in the truth; this
following Treatise being first preached (through the long and earnest
importunity of many friends) is now Printed.

The subject Whereon this Discourse is founded, Dr. Crisp in his Christ alone
exalted: weth others.
is the same which is made the foundation of theirs, which I chose the rather,
that it might be evidenced to all whose super-structure did most resemble the
foundation; the Discourse it self is partly Doctrinall, wherein the received
truth is laid down and confirmed; partly Controversall, wherein the contrary
Opinions are examined, and confuted.

First I say examined, and we have given them a fair trial, being willing to
hear the utmost they could say. This examination lies in six Queries. viz.

1. Query. Whether this be any part of our freedom by Christ to be freed from
the Law.

2. Query. Whether this be any part of our freedom by Christ, to be free from
all punishments or chastisements for sin.

3. Query. Whether this may consist with our Christian freedom, to be tied to
do duty because God has commanded.

4. Query. Whether the free men of Christ, may not sin themselves into bondage
again.

5. Query. Whether this may consist with our Christian freedom, to do duties
with a respect to the recompense of reward.

6. Query. Whether this be part of our freedom by Christ, to be freed from
obedience unto men.

These are the maine inquiries, in which thou may also read the contrary
Doctrins which are now held forth by many, as plainly confuted, as friendly
debated; In which Work my maine end has been to convince the judgment, not to
irritate the affections, lest while I sought to be helpful to grace, I might
be serviceable to sin, and whilst I endeavored to cherish men's holiness, I
should but draw out men's corruptions, and so run in vain. And therefore I have
desired to deal with things, more then persons; and rather to discover errors
by Arguments, then by names. And it is my earnest desire that what is here made
obvious to thine eye, the God of truth would make evident to thy heart, and
give unto thee and me sound judgment, that we may be able to discern of
things that differ, guide us in the ways of faith and obedience, enable us to
serve him while we live, smile upon us when we die, and after death take us to
himself; which is the all I can desire for my self, and the least I will
desire for thee, who am

April 23. 1645. Thine in the service of Christ to advance faith and obedience,
SAMUEL BOLTON.

A Table of the main things contained in this following TREATISE.
THe cohaerence of the text, and the doctrines contained in it. 1, 2, 3, 4. The
maine doctrine propounded, viz. That there is a true and real freedom which
Christ has purchased, and into which he has instated all those who are true
believers. 5. In the prosecution of which, 3. things are insisted on. 1. The
quality. 2. The nature. 3. The parts of Christian freedom. 6. 1. The nature:
and here are 4. kinds of freedom set down. 6, 7. 1. Natural. 2. Political.
3. Sensual. 4. Spiritual. 7, 8. 2. The quality of this freedom is set
down. 9. 1. It is a real. 2. An universal. 3. A constant freedom. 9, 10 3.
The parts of this freedom are two: 1. In grace. 2. In glory: and those 1.
Privative: 2 Positive. 11 The particular branches of our inchoate freedom, or
for our freedom here in grace. ib. 1. We are freed from Satan. ibid. 2. We are
freed from sin. 1 the guilt of sin: 2 the defilement of sin: 3 the dominion
of sin. 12 1 We are freed from guilt of sin, and this is laid down in two
particulars. ibid. 1. That none of our sins shall condemn us. 13, 13 2. That
none of our sins shall bring any fruits of wrath upon us. 14, 15 2. We are
freed from the dominion of sin. 17, 18 3. Belevers are freed from the law. 21
1. From the ceremonial. 21 2. From the moral law. 1. As a covenant: where
diverse opinions are propounded what kind of covenant it was. 22 2. We are free
from the maledictions and curses of the law. 28, 29 3. We are free from the
indictments and accusations of the law. 36, 37 4. We are freed from the rigor
of the law. 47 Some particulars wherein the rigor of the law did consist. 47
1. It commanded impossible things. ib. 2. It required obedience in our own
persons. 49 3. And this obedience universal, actual. 50 4. It enforced it
self upon the conscience with threats and terror. 52 4. Believers are freed
from obedience to men. 54, 55. 5. Believers are freed from death. 56, 57 And
how said to be free from death. ib. 6. Believers shall be freed from the grave.
57 This laid down in 3. conclusions. 58, 59 2. The positive part of our
freedom, or what we are freed unto. 59. This is briefly laid down in 7.
particulars. 1. We are freed from a state of wrath, to a state of mercy. 59 2.
We are freed from a state of condemnation to a state of justification. ibid. 3.
We are freed from a state of enmity to a state of friendship. 60 4. We are
freed from a state of death, to a state of life. ibid. 5. We are freed from a
state of sin to a state of service. 60 6. Freed from a state of bondage and
spirit of slaverie, to a spirit of sonship and liberty. 61 7. We are freed from
death and hell, to life and glory. ibid. The first maine Query propounded, viz.
whether this be any part of our freedom by Christ, to be freed from the law.
64 After different Scriptures are alleged, 65, 66, etc. Two things are
required. 1. What is meant by this word Law. 68 2. In what senses this word is
used in Scripture. 69 These two things being cleared, the former question is
set down more distinctly, viz. Query. Whether are believers freed from the
Moral Law as a Rule of obedience. 73 Some different opinions of it. 73, 74 The
truth laid down. 74, 75 Two maine Positions propounded, which speak the
continuance of, and obligation to the moral Law. 76 1. Pos. That the law for
the substance of it, does remain as a rule of walking to the people of God. 76
2. Pos. That there was no endor use for which the law was given, but might
consist with grace, and be serviceable to the advancement of the covenant of
grace. 76 The first Position is confirmed. 77, 78 1. By the concordant
Confessions of Reformed Churches. 78, 79 2. By clear Texts of Scripture 80, 81
3. By diverse Arguments, or demonstrative reasons. 83, 84 Answer is made to some
Objections, and it is proved that the law is a binding rule. 87, 88 Some
application of this first Position. 1. Use. To blame the Papists who charge us
that we make this a part of our Christian liberty to be exempted from all Law.
95. 2. Use. To blame them among us who do labor to make void the Law. 98, 99
3. Use. To exhort us to judge of the law aright, and so maintain it. 103, etc.
The second Position laid down. viz. 2. Pos. That there was no end or use for
which the Law was given, but might consist with grace, and be serviceable to
the advancement of the covenant of Grace. 108 First, the chief ends for which
the law was given. 109 1. To restrain transgression. 110 2. To reveal
transgression. 114 3. To humble men for sin. 115 4. For a direction of life.
118 5. As a glass to discover our imperfections. ibid. 6. As a reprover and
corrector of sin. 119 7. As a spur to quicken us to duty. ib. Secondly, that
none of these ends but might consist with grace, and be serviceable to the
advancement of the covenant of grace. ibid. This is proved in the review of the
former particulars. 120, 121, etc. 1. Object. We read the Law was set up as a
covenant, and if so it could not stand with grace, therefore was there some
ends and uses for which the Law was set up that could not consist with grace.
127. Diverse distinctions of covenants 128 The Law was not a covenant of works;
this proved by nine arguments. 130 2. Object. But it is said to be a covenant,
and if so, either a covenant of works or of grace; or else there is some third
covenant: but there is no third covenant, nor is it a covenant of grace;
therefore it must needs be a covenant of works. 135 To the answer of this, two
opinions are laid down. 136 1. That it was a third covenant, or a covenant
distinct from the covenant of nature and grace, and may be called a subservient
covenant. ibid. Where the differences and agreements that this subservient
covenant has with the covenant of nature and of grace is set down. 139, 140
The reason which this opinion scemes to hold forth. 143 2. The second opinion
that the law was the covenant of grace, though more legally dispensed. 146 This
second opinion is drawn up in five particulars. 148 3. Object. That whichstood
upon opposite terms to the covenant of grace, cannot be said to be a covenant
of grace; nor yet subservient to the covenant of grace, but must needs be a
covenant of works: but the law did thus, Ergo. 150 The law stood not upon
opposite terms to grace. 151, 152. Do this and live, which were the terms
upon which the law did stand, is interpreted. 154, 155 Though the law stood
upon opposite terms, yet it had its subservient end to grace. 157, 158 2.
Query. Whether this be any part of our freedom by Christ to be free from all
punishments and chastisements for sin. 163 Scriptures alleged to prove God may
chastise believers for sin. 163 Some objections against the validity of those
Scriptures which prove Gods punishing for sin, alleged and answered. 164, 165
Other objections, that these were examples in the Old Testament, and therefore
not sufficient to prove, because they were under a different covenant;
answered. ibid. 167 Other objections upon some places alleged out of the New
Testament for Gods punishing for sin; answered. 173, 174 Diverse cavils against
Gods punishing for sin answered. 176, 177 Their maine arguments against Gods
punishing for sin answered. 181 And diverse reasons are laid down why God may
pardon sin, and yet chastise for sin. 185 Some considerations propounded for
the fuller answer to the Query. 188 The whole answer is shut up in four
Positions. 193 3. Query. Whether this may consist with our Christian freedom,
to be tied to do duty because God has commanded. 195 1. It is answered in the
general; that it is no infringement to our Christian freedom to be tied to
the performance of duty. 196 2. It is queried, Whether this be no infringement
to our liberty to be tied to duty because God has commanded. 197 Diverse
mistakes about this laid down. 198 1. Some think they are not to do duty but
when the spirit of God does move them to it. 198 1. Answ. It is good to go
when the Spirit moves: Its showed how in some cases, and at sometimes Satan may
put a godly man on duty, when yet he thinks it is the Spirit moves him. 199,
200, etc. 2. Answ. Though we are to go when the Spirit moves, yet are we not
to neglect when we do not perceive such sensible movings of the Spirit. 202 2.
A second mistake, Some think they are to do nothing else but pray, because God
has commanded, and who those are. 204, 205 3. A third mistake, Some think
they are not to do duty, because God commands, but because their own spirits
incline them. 205 Answ. We must do duties because God has commanded them, but
it is not sufficient to do them merely because God has commanded them. 205
For the clearing of this, there is a distinction laid down, between positive
and natural laws. 206 In what senses we may be said to be freed from duty.
209 The difference between a gracious heart and another in the performance of
duty laid down in 9 particulars. 212, 213, 214, etc. The Query further resolved
and concluded. 219 4. Query. Whether the freemen of Christ may not sin
themselves into bondage again. 223 Bondage is distinguished into universal,
and partial. 223, 224 Partial bondage, is either a bondage in respect of
comfort, or in respect of the manner of obedience. 226 The Query answered in
two Conclusions. 226 1. Conclusion. The freemen of Christ shall never sin
themselves into that universal and state bondage again. 226 2. Conclusion. The
freemen of Christ may sin themselves into a partial, a graduall bondage. 227
1. They may sin themselves into a bondage in respect of comfort. 227 Some
Objections against this Answered. 230 Some distinctions of peace. 234 A
five-fold peace a godly man may sin away. 236 2. They may sin themselves
into bondage in respect of the manner of their obedience. This is proved. 239
5. Query. Whether this may consist with our Christian freedom to do duties
with respect to reward. 241 Three opinions laid down. ibid. 1. Some say we are
to do duties to merit heaven and glory. This is cast out. 241, 242 2. Some say
peremptorily, that we must have no respect to heaven and glory in our
obedience. 243, 244 3. Others say, that we may do holy duties and have respect
to the recompense of reward in the doing of them. 244 The reasons whereby these
two last opinions are each of them maintained. 245, 246 There things examined
in the Query. 1. What is meant by rewards. 249 2. What is meant by eying of the
reward. 250 3. Whether the eyeing of reward be any infringement to our
Christian liberty. 251 The Query is taken in pieces, and first it is Queryed.
1. Whether a man may not do duties and obey God in reference to Gods bestowing
of outward mercies on him in this life. 253 The Query is stated, and terms
explained. 256 Some particulars laid down in way of answer. 257 1. That the
inioyment of the things of this life is not the ground of a Christians
obedience. 257 2. They are not the mere end of our obedience. 258 3. They are
not the main ends. 258 4. And whether they may be said to be subordinate ends,
diverse reasons propounded against it. 259 This last is debated modestly, and
diverse objections answered. 262. to the 274 2. Query. Whether we are not to do
duties with reference to the obtaining of spiritual good things. 274 The
reasons of those who hold we are not to have respect to the obtaining of
spiritual good things in our obedience. 275 Those reasons examined and
answered. 276, 277 1. Though Christ have purchased all good things for us, yet
will God bestow them in a way of seeking. 278 2. Though God will bestow them in
a way of seeking, yet are they not the purchase of our prayers, but the gift of
his own mercy. 279 Qualifications of our bringing, when first of God bestowing
do no way entrench upon the freeness of grace. 279, 280, 281 Some maine
considerations propounded touching precedent qualifications. The nature of
faith and justification. 285, 286, 287, etc. 3. Query. Whether we may not obey
God with reference to eternal rewards. It is denied by some, on diverse
grounds. 293, 295 It is affirmed by others with diverse Cautions. 296 2.
Positions laid down in Answer to the Quere. 301 1. Position. We may obey God
with respect to heaven and glory. 301 The reason why this has been denied is,
because men have made false draughts of heaven, they have not conceived of
heaven under the right notion. 302 What heaven is, is darkely shadowed out in
five particulars. 1. It is the enioyment of God. 2. Of Christ. 3. The Spirit.
4. Fullness of Grace. 5. An eternal Sabbath. All which are desirable and may
be eyed. 304, 305 2. Posit. That we ought to have respect to heaven and glory
in our obedience, 312 -- this is proved by Scripture and diverse instances. 312
to the 319 6. Query. Whether this be part of our freedom by Christ, to be free
from obedience unto men. 319 Diversity of Scriptures alleged. ibid. A twofold
subjection, whereof one may, the other cannot be yielded without impeachment to
Christian liberty. 321 Some Queries answered, whether it be lawful for a
Magistrate to impose such things upon men's practice which concern the
conscience. 323 The Application of the whole. 328 1. Use. The fearful
condition to be an unbeleever: the Son has not yet made you free; you are yet
in bondage. 1. To sin, which is set out in diverse sad particulars. 328 2. To
Satan, which is also illustrated in some particulars. 333, etc. 3. To the law.
1. The Curse. 2. The rigor of it. 335 The curse of the law set out in four
particulars. 335, 336 The rigor of the law set out in ten particulars. 337,
etc. 2. Use. You whom Christ has instated into this glorious privilege of
freedom. 1. Maintain it. 340 1. Maintain it against the Law. 342 2. Maintain
it against men. 344, etc. 2. Beware of abusing it. 348 Six ways whereby
Christian liberty is abused. 1. When we use it to the scandal of others. 349
2. When we use it to superstition. 350 3. When we make void the law of God. ib.
4. When we give too much scope to our selves in things lawful. ibid. 5. When
we use it undutifully. ibid. 6. When we will be bound to nothing. 351
Reader,
NOtwithstanding all our care, I see some few faults have escaped both in the
margin, and page; Yet I hope none will be found so great as to disturb the
sense, when thou have done me the favor to correct these few ensuing.

For Semitura, read Semiruta, page 18. for decepisse, r. decessisse, p. 25.
(...) deleatur, p. 26. for (...) r. (...). 69. for and, r. of 280. l. 23.

THE TRVE BOVNDS OF Christian Freedom; or, A Discourse showing the extents and
restraints of Christian Liberty, etc. Wherein the truth is settled, many
errors confuted, objections answered: And the whole applied, upon this place of
Scripture.
Ioh. 8. verse. 36. If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free
indeed. --


IT is set down as a part of the sufferings of Christ, Hebr. 12.3. that he
endured the contradiction of sinners. And among all the Chapters in the Gospel,
there is none that sets down so great a part of the sufferings of Christ in
this kind, as this 8 of John. from the 12 verse. to the 59. which is the end of
the Chapter, almost every verse shows you how the Jews set the pride of their
obstinate and rebellious wills, against his Divine and infinite wisdom. There
was nothing that Christ could speak but their rebellious hearts did cavil at
it, and thwart and contradict him in it. Yet there were some among them, that
the word had better effects upon, you see in the 30. verse, that though there
were many contradictors, yet some were wrought upon, some believed: To those in
particular, Christ directs himself, by way of Caution and encouragement, and
tells them, if they did continue in his word, they should know the truth; yea,
and the truth should make them free.

Whereupon the Jews answered (not those that believed, as appears by the 37.
verse. for the same persons that thus answered, sought to kill him) We are
Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage to any man, how say thou, we shall
be made free? Christ might have returned this impudent Cavil on them, Beza in
locum. 32. ver.
by giving them to review their former state under the Egyptians, Babylonians,
and present condition under the Romans, Romans 18.
but passing by their corporal bondage; he proves them to be in Spiritual,
and soul bondage to sin. 34. verse. He that committeeth sin, is the servant
of sin, but you commit sin. And having showed them their present sinful
condition, he comes to tell them what shall be their future doom, they must be
cast out of the house, though they were now in the Church of God, yet they
should not continue in it, they must be cast out, as the Apostle says, Gal.
Lege Cameron. Myrothe. in locum.
4.30. Cast out the bondwoman and her son. And this he proves by setting
down the condition of a servant and a son, the servant abides not in the
house for ever, but the son abides for ever. 35. verse. And yet he leaves
them not here under their sad doom, but propounds them a way to prevent it,
and that is by endeavoring to get free, and then sets down the means how this
freedom may be obtained, and that is by the Son. Conditionem filii
subjungit, ut credant fieri posse ut per eum liberentur. Rolloc. 530.
Though the work be difficult, yet he that abides in the house for ever, he
that is the Son can effect it: for if the Son shall make you free, you
shall be free indeed.

And thus have I carried you down to my Text; and showed the respects that
these words have to, and the dependence they have upon the former words.

We shall now come to look upon it as entire, of it self. If the Son shall
make you free --

In which you may observe an Antecedent, and a Consequent; or, first, a
Supposition, if the son shall make you free: secondly, a Concession, then
shall you be free indeed. But give me leave to branch it forth in these four
particulars.

First, Here we have a Benefit expressed. Freedom. If the Son make you free.

Secondly, We have the Qualities of this freedom. It is a true and real
freedom, free indeed.

Thirdly, We have the Subject of it, which sure are Believers. If the Son
shall make ye free.

Fourthly, We have the Author of it, Christ. If the Son shall make you free.
That which is expressed, and that which is employed, would afford four
Conclusions.

1. 4. Conclusions from the Text.
That every man by nature, and in the state of nature is in Bondage,

2. That there are some, who are set free from this Bondage.

3. That those that are set Free, are set Free by Christ.

4. That such as Christ has set Free, they are Free indeed --

I shall not speak distinctly to all these which I have propounded; It will
not suit so well with my design in this work. The first Doctrine might
challenge something by way of Introduction to what shall follow: and it might
be serviceable to set off, and command this high privilege of Spiritual
freedom. Contraries, Contraria contrariis illuscescunt.
they do inlighten one another. Something of heaven might be known from hell,
and something of the excellency of our Spiritual freedom, from the
consideration of our natural bondage: A bondage, 1. to Sin; 2. to Satan; 3.
to the Law. All which is first a Soul-bondage; and that Universal bondage:
secondly, a Cruel bondage: thirdly, a willing bondage: fourthly, a bondage out
of which we are not able to redeem our selves by price, or deliver our selves
by power.

But this first Doctrine we shall let go for present, and what I might here
speak of it, I shall reserve to some Application. The other four I will sum
up into this one.

Doct.

And in this you have the whole Text. The Benefit freedom: The Quality of it,
true and real: The Subjects of it, true Believers; and the Author of it,
Christ. If the Son shall make you free, then -- All which makes this one
Conclusion, That there is a true and real freedom.

Now in the prosecution of this, we shall endeavor to do these three things.
And so come to the Answer of those Queries which induced me to enter upon this
Discourse.

1. We will show you the Quality of this freedom here spoken of.

2. We will show you the Nature of it.

3. We shall discover the parts of it.

And this briefly, that so we may come to that which I have chiefly intended.

1. For the nature of it, what freedom that is for kind, of which Christ does
here speak, and into which Christ does instate Believers. For the clearing of
which, it is needful to tell you that there are four kinds of freedom.

1. A natural freedom. 2. Political. 3. Sensual. 4. Spiritual.

First, A Natural freedom, such a freedom as is in every thing by nature,
every thing in nature injoyes a natural freedom: but of this it is not spoken.

Secondly, There is a Political freedom, which is freedom of such a Nation,
such a State, such a Commonwealth, and Corporation; and of this the Jews
thought Christ spoke; they were Abraham's seed, and therefore free; but of this
Christ did not speak.

Thirdly, There is a corrupt and sinful freedom, which we express under the
word Libertinisme: and the Apostle sets down in the 5. Gal. 13. Brethren ye
are called unto liberty; but use not liberty as an occasion to the flesh;
that is, as an occasion to sin; this is fearful, to turn the grace of God
into wantonness, of whom the Apostle speaks in the fourth of Jude, There are
certain men creept in unawares, who were of old ordained to the condemnation,
ungodly men, turning the grace of God into lasciviousness.

Who perhaps did reason with them, 6. Romans That they might abound in sin
because God has abounded in grace; which was fearful, no reasoning of a
child of God. And of the same men the Apostle speaks in 1 Pet. 2.16. As free,
and not using your liberty as a cloak of maliciousness; that is, a pretense,
or a color to sin. But as the servants of God, etc. It is evil to sin, to
do any act of maliciousness, but much more to cloak it, cover it; and much
more again to make Christian liberty the cloak of sin, that is most
damnable; to make Religion, to make the truth of God, to make Christian liberty
so dearly purchased, a cloak or pretense to sin; or to take occasion to
sin by it, is a fearful sin.

But of this Christ does not here speak, this is our bondage, and not our
freedom as I shall show you.

Fourthly, There is a spiritual and heavenly freedom; a freedom purchased by
Christ, revealed in the Gospel, conveyed to the Saints, as the great dowry of
Christ to his Church and Spouse.

There are two great things Christ has entrusted into the hands of his Church:
First, Christian faith. Secondly, Christian liberty. And as we are to contend
earnestly for the maintenance of the faith, as the Apostle says, Jude 3.
Jude 3. So also for the maintenance of Christian liberty, Gal. 5.1.
against all oppugners and underminers of it. Gal. 5.1. Stand fast in the
liberty wherewith Christ made you free. And much like to this is that of the
Apostle, You are bonght with a price, be no more the servants of men, 1 Cor.
7.23. 1 Cor. 7.23
But of this more hereafter.

In the general then I say, the freedom into which Christ has instated
believers, is a spiritual, a divine freedom; a freedom in opposition to our
former bondage. Which clearly understood, would discover what our freedom is.
We come to the second.

Secondly, What is the quality of this freedom?

There is one quality in the Text: I shall but add two more to it.

First, It is a real freedom, not an imaginary, not a fancied freedom; there
are too many who are imaginary free, and really in bondage: But this is no
imaginary freedom; it is a freedom indeed, a true and real freedom, whom
the Son makes free are free indeed.

Secondly, It is an universal freedom: a freedom which leaves us in no part
of bondage: that look what ever was any part of our bondage before; in our
liberty now, we are freed from it. But we must take heed of taking any part of
our liberty for our bondage; or of our bondage for our liberty; too many do:
as I shall show hereafter.

We were then in bondage to Satan, to sin, to the law, to wrath, to death, to
hell, etc. And by this privilege are freed from all, etc. It is an Universal
freedom. Universal in respect of persons; all believers: and universal in
respect of parts. We are free from all that was, or is any way part of our
bondage: we are free from Satan, from sin, from the law: as I shall show
anon, etc.

Thirdly, It is a constant freedom: you are instated into a condition of
freedom; a state of freedom, as you were before in a state of bondage.

If ever the Lords Jubilee was proclaimed and pronounced in the soul, you shall
never hear of a return to bondage more; you shall never more return into
bondage to Satan; never come under the bondage to the Law more, etc.

And this Christ implies in the 8. of John 35. The servant abides not in the
house for ever, but the son abides for ever. The Apostle expresses the same
under an allusion, Gal. 5.22. where he distinguishes between those who are
under the law, and under the Gospel; the children of the bondwoman, and those
of the free; the heirs of the promise, and the servants of the law; the one
must be cast out, says Paul, and so Christ here: The servant abides not in the
house for ever; they shall not inherit, but the Son abides in the house for
ever; they shall inherit, they shall enjoy a perpetual freedom, never again
to return to bondage.

3. We come now to the third thing propounded, the parts of this freedom.

Before I come to tell you what are the parts of our Christian freedom, I must
necessarily tell you that freedom in general is divided into these two
branches.

First, inchoate freedom. Secondly, consummate freedom, or the freedom we
enjoy in the way, and the freedom of our Fathers house: the one in Grace, the
other in Glory.

We shall speak chiefly to the first: the freedom of Saints here in Grace,
which is our inchoate freedom. And we will briefly lay down the parts of it,
which are two 1. Privative. 2. Positive.


We will begin with the first.

First, They are free from Satan: I say, believers are freed from Satan. Christ
has wrest us, and delivered us out of Satan's hands. We were prisoners to
Satan, even in his chains, but Christ has delivered us. This is set down by
way of parable in Luke 11.21, 22. When the strong man keeps the house, all is
in peace: But when a stronger shall come, he shall spoil him of his armor
wherein he trusted, etc. But plainly in Heb. 2.14, 15. Christ came into the
world, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, the
devil.

Christ freed us from the wrath of God by purchase, Non pretio dato sed manu
potenti.
but from the devil by strong hand. Indeed he bought us out of the hands of his
Fathers justice by price; but he delivers us from Satan, as he delivered the
children of Israel out of Egypt, not by price, but by power; not by purchase,
but by strong hand. And this is the first.

Secondly, Reatus. Regnum. Macula.
we are freed from sin. There are said to be three things in sin. 1. The
guilt of sin. 2. The dominion of sin. 3. The defilement of sin. I shall only
speak unto two of them, viz.

First, Christ has freed us from the guilt of sin: yea of all sin: which
appears in this.

1. That none of our sins shall condemn us.

2. That none of our sins shall bring any fruits of wrath upon us.

First, that none of our sins shall be able to condemn us; Christ interposeth
himself between us and wrath, that none shall be able to condemn us, Romans
8.1. There is no condemnation to such as are in Christ. Deo et legi
satisfecisti in Christo, qui in Christo es. Piscat.
Christ himself shall as soon be called to account for thy sin as thou; if
thou have an interest in him, sin shall never condemn thee, Christ has
satisfied for sin.

It were no justice for God to require the payment of Christ; nay to receive
the full satisfaction of Christ, and to require any thing of thee. This God
did, He laid on him the iniquity of us all, Isa. 53. and this has Christ
done; he paid God till he said, he had enough; he was fully satisfied, fully
contented: This is my well-beloved Son, Mat. 12.18. (...). in quo complacui,
in quo placatus sum. Lege Bez. in Matthew. 3.17.
in whom I am well pleased; in whom I am fully satisfied and appeased. So the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.1. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself,
etc. He was paying himself out of the blood, scourges, and sufferings of
Christ; and in that Christ made a full payment. Hence Christ says, Joh. 16.10.
I send my Spirit, and he shall convince the world, as of sin, so of
righteousness, because I go to the Father, and ye shall see me no more; that
is, you shall see me no more in this kind; you shall never see me again as a
sufferer, as a satisfier of Gods Justice for sin more; I have done this.
Indeed we should have seen Christ again if he had not satisfied Justice; if
but the guilt of one of those sins he bare had lien on him unsatisfied for,
it would have held him under chains of death, the power of the grave, for ever;
he could never have risen, much less have ascended, and gone to the Father, if
he had not answered Justice to the full. And therefore the Apostle makes a
challenge, he sets the death of Christ against what ever Sin, Satan, Justice,
or Law can say, Romans 8.33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
elect? It is God that justifies: Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that
dyed, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God,
who also makes intercession for us. He says not, Who shall accuse, but, who
condemn? Indeed we may have accusers enough, Sin, Satan, Conscience, etc. but
none can condemn: the issues of life and death are not in their hand. And as
none of our sins shall condemn us, so none of our sins shall put us into a
state of condemnation more; none of our sins shall ever put us under the
curse, under wrath again. And that is the second.

2. None of our sins shall bring any fruits of wrath on us. We are freed from
all miseries, calamities, afflictions, punishments, which yet are the fruits of
sin, as they may be conceived to be fruits of wrath, or have wrath in them.

If you take away the body, the shadow must needs be removed; sin is she
body, punishment the shadow that does attend it and follow it: take away sin,
and then the punishments are also taken away, all Gods dispensations are in
mercy.

1. For eternal punishments. All do agree, those can never lay hold of any of
those whom Christ has freed from sin, those whom he has justified.

2. For other punishments that have part of eternal punishments in them, any
thing of the nature of wrath, from those we are freed.

3. And from all that bear relation, subordination, to any eternal
punishment: these certainly believers are for ever freed from.

I grant, that God does afflict those whose sin he yet pardons, but there is a
great deal of difference, both in the hand whence they come, the person that
bear them, the grounds of inflicting; the ends that God aims at in the
inflicting them on us. As I shall show afterward.

God does not afflict his people for sin.

First, As afflictions are part of the curse for sin; so he cannot do: So we
all agree.

Secondly, Afflictiones piorum non sunt satisfactoriae, sed castigatoriae.
As they are payments for sin, satisfactions for sin, as if Gods justice were
not full enough satisfied for sin by Christ, but he had left something for us
to bear in way of satisfaction; So the Papists say, (and therefore they
penance and punish themselves) but so do not we.

Thirdly, God does not afflict his people for sin, as afflictions are the
mere fruits of sin; for as they are the mere fruits of sin, so they are
part of the curse. Affliction upon wicked men are merely penal part of the
curse: there is nothing medicinal in them, they are the effects of mere
vindictive justice, and not of fatherly mercy, etc. but afflictions on the
godly, they are medicinal to cure us of sin.

And this is the First. Christ has freed us from the guilt of sin, by which
we can understand nothing else but that wrath, that punishment which is due to
sin. Temporal, Spiritual, Eternal. And

1. From Eternal punishments, we all agree God has freed us.

2. From Spiritual, as they have relation to eternal: So we must needs
conclude.

3. From Temporal, so far as they have relation to either spiritual or
eternal punishments; or, as they have any thing of wrath in them.

God has thoughts of love in all he does to his people: the grounds of his
dealings to us is love, though the occasion may be sin, the manner of his
dealings are love, and the end of his dealings are love. 1. Our good here, to
make us partakers of his holiness; As the Apostle says. 2. Our glory
hereafter, to make us partakers of his glory.

But now it is not so in Gods punishments of wicked men. Neither is the ground
love, nor the manner love, nor the end love, all his dealings with them in this
kind, they are parts of the curse, and parts of their demerits for sin. And
that is the first particular branch, he has freed us from the guilt of sin.

Secondly, Christ has freed us from the Dominion of sin, Romans 6.14, Sin
shall not have dominion over you. Why? for says he, You are not under the law,
but under grace. Indeed while we were under the law sin had full dominion; it
had not only possession in us, but dominion over us. And that dominion a
voluntary, a willing, a free subjection and resignation of our selves, to the
motions and services of sin. Then we went down stream, wind, and tide; there
was both power of lust, and lustful inclinations to carry us: this was the
tide, the other was the wind.

But now being under grace, a covenant of grace, interessed in Christ, and set
free by him; we are freed from the dominion and power of sin.

Though still we have the presence, nay the stirrings and workings of
corruptions, which makes us to have many a sad heart and wet eye. Yet Christ
has thus far freed us from Sin, it shall not have dominion; Plus Romae
negotii cum semitura Carthagine quam cum integra.
there may be the turbulencie, but not prevalency of sin: there may be the
stirrings of corruption; as it was said of Carthage, that Rome was more
troubled with it when half destroyed, then when whole. So a godly man may be
more troubled with sin when it is conquered, then when it reigned. You shall
still hear of its workings, but they are checked workings; rather workings for
life, Operat peccatum sed fractae operationes. Non dicet paulus ne tyranidem
exerceat sed neregnet. Theod.
then from life: they are not such uncontrolled workings as formerly. Sin is
under command; Indeed it may get advantage and have a tyranny in the soul, but
never soveraigntie more: I say, it may get into the throne and play the tyrant
in this or that particular act of sin, but it shall never be as a king more. It
shall never reign more, you shall never yield a voluntary willing obedience to
sin. Sin is conquered, though it still have a being in you. Saint Augustine
set down man under four conditions; that is, Homo consideratur ante legem,
sub lege, sub gratia, in pace. Ante legem non pugnamus, sub lege, pugnamus sed
vincimur, sub gratia pugnamus et vincimus in pace ne pugnamus quidem. Aug. in
Romans Vbi non est bellum, ubi pax perverse
before the law we did neither fight nor strive against sin; under the law we
fight, but are overcome; under grace we fight and conquer; but in heaven there
is all conquest, and no combats more to all eternity. It is our happiness
here in grace, that there is a conquest, though daily combat: we fight, but we
get the victory, sin shall never have more dominion over us: those sins that
were kings are now captives in us; they that were in the throne, are now in
chains. And what a mercy is this, where others are under the authoritative
commands of every passion, of every lust: every sin has command over them, no
temptation comes but it conquers, A sinful heart stands ready to entertain
every sin, if it comes on with power, It is taken captive at pleasure, and
with pleasure.

But thou art free from it, sin is broken in the tempting: there is no allowing
of sin in the understanding, the soul is not willing to allow of sin as
sin under any notion; no closing with it in the will, no embracing of it in
the affections; the workings of sin are broken and wounded, etc. You will
never be willing captives to sin again: you may be captives, never subjects;
sin may tyranize, never reign. The reign of sin does denominate a soul
under the power of sin, and under a state of sin. But Sin rather dies
then lives in you. As you know a man that lives sickly; a man that is consuming
daily he is said rather to die then live; to live implies a getting strength,
and so sin does not: It is in a Consumption, dying daily.

It is dead iudicially, Christ has sentenced it, Christ has condemned sin in
the flesh, Romans 8.3. it had its dead blow in the death of Christ. And it is
dying actually: As the House of Saul. It is in its decreasing every day. But
only God has chosen to put sin to a lingering death, a death upon the Cross;
for the greater punishment of sin, that it might sensim mori, and for the
further humiliation of Saints, that they might be put upon exercise of prayer,
and cast upon the hold of their faith; and exercise their faith for the daily
breaking of the power of sin and corruption in them. And so much shall serve for
the second. Christ has freed us from sin, --

Thirdly, Christ has freed us from the law; that is another part of our
freedom by Christ. We are freed from the law, Romans 7.3.6. We are delivered
from the law, that being dead to it, we should serve in newness of spirit, and
not in the oldnesse of the letter. Gal. 2.19. I through the law am dead to the
law, that I might live unto God. Gal. 5.18. If ye be led by the Spirit, ye are
not under the law. Romans 6.14. Ye are not under the law, but under grace.

And this is another part of our freedom by Christ; we are freed from the law:
But what this is we shall show at large.

1. We are freed from the Ceremonial law, which was a yoke which neither me,
nor our fathers were able to bear, Act. 15.20. But this is not all, here is
but a small part of our freedom.

2. We are freed from the Moral law. First, as a Covenant say our Divines. It
would save a great deal of trouble to say we are freed from the law, as a
condition upon the obedience whereof we expected life. But take it in those
words, we are freed from the law as a Covenant; the enquiry will be then, what
Covenant it is?

1. Some would have it a Covenant of works, and yet will not have it opposite
to the Covenant of grace.

2. Some would have it a Covenant of grace, but more legally dispensed.

3. Some again would have it a mixed Covenant, mixed of the Covenant of Nature,
and of Grace.

4. Some again would have it a subsurvient Covenant; a Covenant given to them
in way of subserviencie to the Gospel and Grace.

5. And others would have it no Covenant, but rather the repetition of the
Covenant of works made with man in Innocence. And that God in giving of the
law, did but repeat the Covenant under which we did, and do stand, till we
come over unto Christ.

And this God did with merciful purposes, to drive us out of our selves, and
to bring us over unto Christ: As the Appostle seems to speak when he demands
this Question, Gal. 3.19. But if the inheritance be not by the law, wherefore
then serves the law? the Appostle answers, the law was added because of
transgressions till the seed should come, that is, it was added to the promise,
to discover transgressions, Lex datur ut gratia quaeratur.
to make sin and wrath appear, to sentence and humble us for sin. In short
to make us to see the terms under which we stood; that so we might be brought
out of our selves, and brought over to Christ; that we might expect nothing in
relation to life from the law, or from our obedience to it, but all from
Christ, who is our righteousness and peace.

I shall not in this place debate these things, I have referred it to another
place; only I say, that the Scripture seems not to hold forth, that it was
the repetition of a Covenant, but that it was a Covenant it self, Exodus 19.4.
and 6. and expressly in Deuteronomy. 4.13. And the Lord declared unto you his covenant
which he commanded you to perform; even ten Commandments, and he wrote them
upon two Tables of stone.

So that you see it is in express terms called a Covenant. And it is
generally laid down by Divines as one part of our freedom by Christ, to be free
from the law as a Covenant. And therefore I conceive they do not understand it
to be a Covenant of grace, only legally dispensed; because then it would be
better said, that we are free from the legal administrations of it, then from
the thing it self. But they conceive it to be a Covenant of works; yet not of
life and death, that we should stand or fall upon our obedience or disobedience
to it: So it were opposite to Grace, and could no way be consistent with it: so
it would speak God contrary to himself, (...) Posita, pro apposita, hoc est,
promissioni adjecta. Bez.
and to repent of his own mercy, seeing he had given the promise four hundred
and thirty years before, and the law was added to the promise; and therefore
cannot be conceived that it was opposite to it; this were not addition to, but
the destruction of the promise. Besides, It is said to be given in the hands of
a Mediator, which a Covenant of works so understood will not admit of; that
will not bear with a Mediator: As I shall show at large afterward. So that
when they say, that the law was a covenant of works, they do not understand
thereby that it was a Covenant of life and death; then should it be opposite to
Grace: But that it was such a Covenant of works which might in the dispensation
of it consist with Grace. Foedus operis et foedus Gratiae sunt subordinata et
opposita. Alsted.
And though it stood upon opposite terms to Grace, as the Apostle shows in
his Epistle to the Romans, in many places; I will name but one, Romans 10.5, 6.
Moses describes the righteousness of the law, that the man that does those
things shall live by them; but the righteousness which is of faith speaks on
this wise, verse. 9. That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus,
and beleeeve in thy heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved. But though it stood upon opposite terms to Grace, yet had it its
subservient ends to it: as the Apostle shows at large in the third of the
Galatians, in many places: take but one verse, the 21. where the Apostle says,
Is the law against the promises, God forbid? implying that though it stood upon
opposite terms, yet had it its subservient ends to the promise, and Covenant
of Grace: if which be their meaning, whether it were not better for
distinctions sake, expressed by some other word, I leave you upon the sequel to
determine.

We will now return to the first particular laid down, viz. that we are free
from the law as a Covenant. It is the distinction which is laid down usually in
answer to the objections against the obligation to the law. The Law may be
considered as a Rule, and as a Covenant, when you read the Law is still in
force; Plane dicimus decepisse legem quoadonera non quoad justitiam.
It is to be understood of the Law as a Rule, not as a Covenant; Again, when
you read the Law is abrogated, and that you are freed from the Law, It is to be
understood of the Law as a Covenant, not as a Rule. But yet in all this it is
not expressed, what Covenant it is, the Apostle calls it the old Covenant.
(...).
Heb. 8.13. Under which they were and from which we are freed. It could never
give you life, it shall not now inflict death on you. You are dead to it, and
it is now dead to you; you have an expression in the 7. Romans 3.6. The law has
dominion over a man so long as he lives, and his Argument is this, for the
woman that has a husband, is bound by the law to her husband, so long as he
lives, but if her husband be dead, she is loosed from the law of her husband,
Beza in Romans 6.14. and in locum citatum.
etc. Among other interpretations, which might be set down; I shall only
suggest this one, which yet is submitted to better judgment by nature or
covenant, the law is your husband; you are under subjection to it, as looking
by your subjection to it to be justified and saved; And till the law as a
covenant, or husband be dead to you, and you to it, for the Apostle makes them
both one. verse. 4. you will never look for righteousness and life in another;
Till the law do kill you, and you are dead to it, you will look for
righteousness and life in obedience to it. But when once the law has killed
you, and showed you it is dead to you, and can do you no good, and you are
dead to it, and can expect nothing from it, then will you look for life alone
by Christ.

And this was the Apostles case, he was once one that expected, (as well he
might) as much good from the law and his obedience to it as any man, Romans 7.9,
10. I was alive, says he, without the law once, that is, without the knowledge
of the law once: But says he, when the commandment came, then sin revived
and I dyed, and the commandment which was ordained to life, I found to be unto
death, that is, I found in stead of saving me, it killed me. It gave death
instead of life. For says he, sin taking occasion by the law, deceived me,
and by it slew me, that is, the law came in with an enlightening, convincing,
accusing, condemning power, and laid me on my back, did clean kill me, I saw
I could expect nothing there, nothing from it as a covenant. And as the law was
now dead to him, and could afford nothing to him, so was he now dead to the
law, and expected nothing from it after. As he tells you afterward, Gal.
2.19. I through the law am dead to the law, that I might live to God. That is,
the law having now slain me, I am for ever dead to it, I expect nothing from
it as a covenant, all my life is in Christ. I look now to live by another. I
through the law, that is, through the convincing, enlightening, condemning
killing power of it, see that it is dead to me, and I to it: and can expect
nothing from it, that is, as a covenant of life and death. It is dead to me,
and I to it, and I look for all from Christ, -- but thus much shall suffice to
have spoken of the first. We are freed from the Law as a Covenant. Of which we
shall speak more largely in the Answer to the Queries: We will come to other
branches of our Christian freedom from the Law; which will hang upon this, if
we look upon it, as a Covenant of life and death.

Secondly, You are freed from the maledictions and Curses of the Law. The Law
requires two things of them who are under it. Either, that you should obey the
precepts which was impossible, in that strictness and rigidnesse the law
commanded them. Gal. Gal. 3.10. Abrogata est ex quoad maledictionem non quoad
directionem. Cheami.
3. or that we should bear the penalties of the Law which are insupportable.
Either you must obey the commands, or suffer the Curses of the Law; either do
Gods will, or suffer Gods will, in forfeitures of Soul and body: And in that
sad dilemma those are who are under the Law, as a Covenant. Ioh. 3. He that
believes not is condemned already, the wrath of God abides on him, etc.
Therefore must needs be under the Curses of the Law.

But now those that are believers, they are freed from the law, as a covenant
of life and death. And therefore are free from the curses and maledictions of
the Law, the law has nothing to do with them, as touching their eternal
estate and condition.

Hence the Apostle, Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ, that is, to them who are not under the law.

Were you indeed under the law as a covenant, there were condemnation, nothing
else but condemnation. Though the law be not able to save you, yet it is able
to condemn you, though not able to bestow the blessing; yet it can pour the
curse upon you, Gal. 3.10. As many as are of the works of the law, (that is
under the law, as a covenant that look for life and justification thereby) they
are under the curse. And he uses this Argument, For it is written: Lex nos
reos facit jubendo, and non adjuvando, Aug.
Cursed is he that does not obey in all things, declaring he must needs be
under the curse; because it is not possible to obey in all things, and to fail
in any, you are left under the curse.

So that I say, were you under the law, the law is able to condemn you: though
it cannot save you, Romans 8.3.

But now being in Christ, Christ has freed you: from the curses of the law,
and that by bearing this curse for you: as the Apostle, Christus justus long
fortior ad servandum per gratiam quam injustus Adamus, ad perdendum per
naturam, Beza.
Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, by being made a
curse for us: he does not only say by bearing the curse for us, but by being
made a curse for us. For it is written; Cursed is every one that hangs on the
tree. And this is another benefit flows from it. You are freed from the Law as
a Covenant, and so from the curse of the Law, the Law cannot pass sentence
upon you, it cannot condemn you. 1. You are not to be tried in that court. 2.
Christ has satisfied it to the full.

And this privilege is not only for present, but for ever, though you should
sin, yet the Law cannot pronounce the curse on you; because you are not under
the Law, because ye are freed from the curse of the Law: And the curse can
never take hold on thee. A man will never be afraid of that Obligation which is
made void, the Seal torn off; Fuso sanguine sine culpa omnium culparum
Chirographa deleta sunt. Aug.
the writing defaced, nay, not only canceld and crossed, but torn in pieces: why
thus has God dealt with the law to believers, as touching its obligation to
the curse; its power to sentence and condemn, the Apostle tells us, Col. 2.14.
Non contentus eo quod dixerat Superiori versu omnia peccata condonata,
Subnectit ipsum Chirographum esse deletum. Sed fortasse non ita deletum quin
possit lis nova suboriri, addit igitur e medio in super esse sublatum, sed
fortasse servatur alicubi absconditum and proferetur inposterum, imo inquit est
cruci affixum, i. e. delaceratum, etc. Daven. in locum. Abrogata lux quoad vim
damnatoriam, non quoad vim directoriam. Dav. 2. lib.
He has blotted out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which
was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross; By
handwriting of Ordinances, I conceive is not meant the Ceremonial Law alone;
but the Moral too, so far as it was against us, So far as it did bind us
over to the curse. And the Apostles Gradation is here observeable, he has
blotted out, but least this should not be enough, least any should say, it is
not so blotted out, but it may be read, therefore he adds, he has taken it
away. But least this should not be enough neither, least some might say; yea,
but it will be found again, and put in suit afresh: therefore he adds, he
has nailed it to his cross, he has torn it in pieces, never to be put
together more. The Law shall never have any thing to show for the sins of
believers. Indeed it has black bills, bloody inditements against such who are
under it: but it shall never have any thing to produce against thee, who have
an interest in Christ; I may say of such, as the Apostle does in another sense,
against such their is no law. As there is no law to justify them, so there is
no law to condemn them.

This the Apostle shows plain, Romans 8.34. Who is he that condemns, it is
Christ that died. He sets the death of Christ against all that can be brought.
And it is evident.

First, That Court cannot condemn, because that Court is condemned, the
curses, judgments, and sentences of it are made invalid, and of no power
Damnati linguam non vocem habent.
men that are condemned, they have a tongue, but no voice. So here, though the
Law have a tongue still to accuse, yet has it no power to condemn, it cannot
fasten condemnation on you.

Secondly, That Court cannot condemn you, because you are not under it as a
Court, you are not under the Law as a Covenant of life and death. If you be in
Christ, you are under a Covenant of grace.

Thirdly, That Court cannot condemn you: because you are not under the
condemnation of it, you are under the conduct, but not under the curses of it,
you are under the precepts (though not as the Law does hold them out, upon
these terms do this and live,) but you are not under the penalty of it.

Fourthly, again, that Court cannot condemn you, because Christ in our person
and stead was condemned by it, that we might be freed. Gal. 3.13. Christ has
redeemed us from the curse of the law being made a curse for us. Lex retinet
aliquam vim condemnandi, quia peccatum arguit, et condemnat in ipsis fidelibus,
quamvis non fideles. Ames. Luke 18.
It may condemn sin in us: but cannot condemn us for sin.

Fifthly, that Court cannot condemn, because you have appealed from it: you see
this in the Publican, he was arrested, dragged into the Court of justice,
sentenced and condemned: but this takes no place because he makes his appeal;
God be merciful to me a sinner: he flies to Christ, and says the Text, he
went away justified. So that Court (provided your appeal be just) cannot
condemn, because you have appealed to the Court of Mercy.

Indeed there be many who make a false appeal: they appeal in part, not
wholly; they will trust part on Christ, and part on themselves. Many that
appeal to Christ for salvation, who do not appeal to him for sanctification:
this is false.

Many who appeal to Christ before they be cast in the former Court; before
they be humbled, convinced, condemned in the law.

You may read what kind of appeal will do you good in the poor Publican; he
seems a man cast and condemned in the Court of the law, and thereupon makes his
appeal to Christ in the Gospel: Read the words, it is said of him, He stood
afar off, Luke 18.13.
and would not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven; but smote his breast,
saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. Here was a threefold demeanor, and
it answers to a threefold affection in him. First, he stood afar off; and
this answers to his fear and consternation: He would not so much as lift up
his eyes; this answered to his shame and confusion: He smote his breast; this
answered to his sorrow and compunction: and being thus cast he then appeals:
God be merciful to me a sinner.

In brief then, if thy appeal be right, and such as will do thee good; 1. It
must be a total, not a partial appeal; you must not come to Christ for some
relief only, but for all. Christ must have the honor of all. 2. It must be
an appeal for grace as well as mercy; for sanctification, as well as
salvation; to be made holy by Christ, as well as to be made happy by Christ.
3. It must be the appeal of a man humbled and cast in himself. No man will
appeal to another Court, till first he be cast and condemned in the former. So
here we cannot appeal to Christ, till first we be cast, condemned by Moses.
And this the Apostle shows, Romans Romans 3.9.
3.9. We have proved both Jews and Gentiles to be all under sin. As it is
written, There is none righteous, no not one; there is none that understands,
none that seeks after God.

There is the indictment, and the accusation of the Law: and in ver. 19. you
have the sentence, or judgment upon it; and there the Apostle tells you the
reason, why the Law says this; it is that every mouth might be stopped, and
all the world may become guilty before God. Now when the law has accused, when
it has sentenced us; stopped our mouths, and we become guilty; now comes the
sinner to make his appeal from the law as a Covenant, to Christ as a Savior:
he looks for nothing from Justice, but all from mercy.

And having thus appealed, the Law has no more to do with him; he is not
under the sentence, the penalties of the law: he is out of the reach of it. The
law can take no hold of him for condemnation: he is fled to Christ, he has
taken sanctuary in him.

And what a privilege is this, that you are free from the curses and penalties
of the law; that if the law threaten, Christ promises; if the law curse,
Christ blesses? this is a high privilege: if God did but let one spark of
his wrath and displeasure fall upon your consciences for sin, you would then
know what a mercy it were to be thus freed.

Thirdly, You are freed from the Indictments and accusations of the law, Romans
8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? One would think,
this a strange question, Who shall? why there is enough will lay to their charge.

1. Satan, he is ready to lay things to their charge; he is called, Revel.
12.10. the accuser of the Saints night and day; he is the great Calumniator,
ever preferring Bills of indictment against the Saints: sometimes he accuses
God to man, as you see he did with our first Parents, where he charged God with
envy to his creature, as if he had forbidden them that tree, because they
should not be wise enough: and you see how ordinary it is with him, either to
accuse Gods mercy, when he tells them they may sin, and yet God will be
merciful; or his justice, that if they sin, there is no mercy for them. As
he stretches Gods justice above the bounds of the Gospel; so he stretches
Gods mercy above the bounds of his truth.

And as he accuses God to man; so man to God. 1. Either by way of complaint,
as you see in Joshua, Zach. 3.1, 2, Zach. 3.1, 2, 3, 4.
3, 4. And thus he is ever laying crimes, and preferring Bills against the
Saints. So that in all his temptations we may say, as the man to Ioab, when he
asked why he killed not Absalom; 2 Samuel 18.12, 13.
Thou thy self heard what the King commanded, that Absalom should not be hurt;
and if I had done this thing thou thy self would have been the first would have
accused me to the King. So may we answer Satan; Thou thy self do know that
God has forbidden this thing: and if I should have done it, would not thou
have been the first that would have accused me to God? This is Satan's way, he
is first a tempter to draw us to sin, and then an accuser to accuse us to God
for sinning. 2. Or by way of suspicion and conjecture; as it was with Job. God
commends him, Satan condemns him; as if he knew Job better then God himself.
Nay, Job 1.
and though he could not condemn his actions, yet he would quarrel with his
affections. Surely, what ever his actions are, yet Jobs intentions are not
good; which was as much as to tell God that he was deceived in Job, for
certainly, what ever thou think of Job, yet Job does not serve thee for
naught; he is a mercenary fellow, one that serves thee for loaves, belly
blessings: thou have heaped outward favors on him, and have made a hedge about
him; Job 10.
fenced him in thy favors that nothing can annoy him. So that you see there
are those that will lay to the charge of Gods people. Satan will accuse.

But now Satan cannot condemn; the issues of life and death are not in his
hands, nor shall his accusation take place with God against us. Vocem habet,
vim non habet damnatus.
A man condemned himself though he have a voice, yet he has no power; his
testimony is invalid against another, etc. Satan is a condemned wretch, and all
his accusations shall take no place with God against his Saints. You see in
Joshua; though his accusation was true, Joshua was in his filthy garments, yet
God would not own it, Zach. 3. The Lord rebuke thee, Zach. 3.4.
Oh Satan. Is not this a brand plucked out of the fire?

2. Yea, but not only Satan, but wicked men may accuse us too: Sometimes
justly, of sins committed, but forgiven; and herein they show their malice and
want of Charity; not forgetting that which God has forgiven. Sometimes
uniustly, of things they never did; as Potiphars wife accused Joseph of
incontinency, because he would not be incontinent. And David complains,
Quantum ille accusat vitiummeum tantum ego laudabo medicum meum.
They laid to his charge the things he never did: the like in Daniel. But none
can condemn us.

3. Yea, but not only Satan and wicked men, but conscience it self may lay
things to our charge. Conscience may accuse, and then how can we say, Who shall
lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? Conscience, I say, may accuse: 1.
Sometimes bringing true light. 2. Sometimes false information. 3. Sometimes
returning old Bills cancelled, and crossed long ago.

In the first we are to listen to the accusations of conscience when it does
charge us truly; Joseph's Brethrens, conscience accused them when they were so
evil entreated in Egypt, and tells them, They were verily guilty of the wrong
done to Joseph. Si non monendo, mordendo.
So David, after he had numbered the people, his heart smote him. Conscience was
not a bridle, but it was now a whip; it was not a curb, and therefore now a
scourge: he did not hearken to the warnings, and therefore feels the lashings
of conscience: and when conscience does justly accuse us; when it comes in with
evidence according to the Word, we must hear; for there God speaks. If a Dial
be not set by the Sun, it is no matter what it says; but if it goes by the
Sun, we must hearken to it: So if Conscience do not speak according to the
word, we need not matter its accusations: but if it speak according to evidence
there, it is good to listen to it. 2. Sometimes Conscience brings in false
informations; it will perhaps tell you those things to be sin which are not:
and here it is an erroneous conscience; we are not to hear it. 3. Sometimes it
will bring in old cases, answered and satisfied long ago: then it is a
quarrelsome Conscience: Conscience in this case is like a contentious
troublesome fellow at Law, and God will deal with it as an honest Judge does
with such a contentious quarrelsome fellow; he casts all out of Court, as
matters not worth hearing; or things that have been determined long ago.
These accusations shall not take hold of the soul. In this case I may say,
when conscience condemns, God is greater then conscience to acquit and absolve
the soul.

4. Yea, but there is a fourth, which is ready to lay to the charge of Gods
people; and that is the Law: The Law may accuse, etc. And how then is it said,
Who can lay any thing to the charge of Gods people? and if the Law may accuse,
we cannot be said to be free from the indictments and accusations of the the
Law?

I answer: If we speak of sins pardoned; neither has Conscience, nor Satan,
nor the Law any right to accuse the people of God. God has justified, and who
then shall accuse?

Indeed while we are under the Law, before faith; we are both under the
accusations, judgments, and sentences of the Law. The Law does not only
accuse us, but the sentence and curse takes hold of us.

1. It accuses us, Ioh. 4.45. as Christ told them that would not believe in
him, but looked for justification by the Law; Joh. 5.45.
Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father, there is one that will
accuse you; even Moses in whom you trust: that Law which they looked to be
justified by, should accuse them.

2. It does not only accuse us, but sentence us; yea and the sentence and
curse takes hold of us, Ioh. 3.18. He that believes not is condemned already.
And in the 36. verse. He that believes not, the wrath of God abides on him.

So that while you are under the Law, before faith and interest in Christ, the
law does not only accuse; but the law does condemn.

But now those that have an interest in Christ: 1. The law cannot accuse them
of sin before grace; because they are pardoned; and this accusation is made
void. 2. The law cannot accuse of sin after grace, sin after a pardon. They
are not under the accusations, arrests, sentences of the Law.

1. I say, the law cannot so accuse us of sin, as to call us into that Court,
as the word does signify Romans 8.33. (...); of (...) quod fignificat, accusare,
in jus vocare. Pass.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? Or rather, who shall call
into Court. The word does not only signify to accuse; but in ius vocare, to
call into Court? And so neither the Law, Justice, Conscience, Satan, can accuse
us, to call us into Court; the Court of the Law. For we are (when believers)
freed from it as a Court, as a Covenant, and so from the judgments, sentences,
condemnations, curses, and accusations of it. If it send any of its Officers
out to accuse us, and attach us for sin, we may refuse to obey, to come in
and appear; because we are to be tried by another Court: we are to be tried by
the Gospel. And did Gods people, when they have sinned, go to the right Court,
they might both sooner get sorrow for sin, and assurance of pardon of sin;
they would find more sorrow and less horror for sin.

2. When I say, we are freed from the accusations of the law: I mean
accusations of it as subordinate to condemnation.

There is a twofold accusation.

First, An accusation to conviction and humiliation for sin.

Secondly, An accusation to sentence and condemnation for sin, the Law
accuses and condemns also, all the accusations of the Law to them who are
under the Law, they are subordinate to Sentence, Judgment, and condemnation
for sin: the Law accuses and also condemns all them under it. But all the
accusations of the godly for sin they are in subordination to conviction for
sin, and humiliation for it, and so subordinate to life and salvation, etc.
And so I conceive the Law may accuse those who are yet the Freemen of Christ.
It may discover to them how far they come short of the glory of God, how
far they have erred and wandered from the paths of righteousness, etc. and
accuse them for it, but this accusation is to humiliation, not to condemnation.
As I shall show hereafter: either this must be so, or else you must deny the
Law from being a Rule.

But here two Queries are propounded.

Whether the Law may justly accuse us,

In brief I Answer, curses, but we are under the commands of it; we are not
under the Law for judgment, but we are under the Law for conduct. So far as
we walk not according to it, as a Rule, it has an accusing power, though we
are taken out of the condemning power of it. There is no further power left in
the Law then for our good, our humiliation, our edification. And this is only
a power for our good, and our furtherance in grace.

Whether the Law is just in its accusation of us, seeing we do not sin. D.
C. Seems to speak to this purpose in his, Christ alone exalted. p. 245.
if no Law for us, then we do not sin in the breaking of it, no more then we
do, if we break now the Laws of Spain, or any other Nation, which is no law
for us: as some do seem to exemplify this.

These two Queries the invalidnesse of them, and danger of them, we shall show
afterward; in the mean I must tell you, that the Law in its directive power
does remain to us. And this must needs be plain from Galathians 3.17. The Law
was given 430. years after the Promise.

1. Arg. If the Law was given 430. years after the Promise, then either as a
Covenant, or as a Rule.

But as a Covenant it could not be given; for then were God contrary to
himself, first in giving a Covenant of Grace, then of Works. And therefore he
gave it as a Rule, to discover to us after Justification by the Promise, a Rule
of walking with God to all manner of pleasing.

2. Arg. That can never be said to be part of our Freedom, which is a part of
our Bondage: or that can never be said to be part of our Bondage, which is part
of our Holiness. But conformity to the Law, and subjection to the Law of God is
part of our holiness: Therefore it can never be said to be part of our Bondage.
Indeed there is a Twofold subjection, The Subjection of a Son, and of a Slave.
We are freed from the one, the subjection of a Slave, this was part of our
Bondage; but not from the other, the subjection of a Son, it is part of our
Freedom. But I will not anticipate my Discourse, we shall come to speak to
this at large in our following Discourses.

Fourthly, Lex moralic electis abrogata est quantum ad rigidum suum postulatum,
adeoque quantum attinet ad iustificationem, and maledictionem Alsted. Opera
renatorum non exiguntur ad severum legis examen. Calvin. Lex reos faciebat
iubendo, and non adjuvande: gratia adjuvat ut quisquis sit legis factor. Aug.
Lex jubet tantum, nihil operis affert. Theophil.
We are freed from the rigor of obedience required in the Law, we are not
freed from exact obedience; but from that rigor of obedience which the Law
required unto salvation.

First, The Law did not only command difficult, but impossible things of us; it
laid a yoke upon us which we could not bear, and it would not, nor could it
give us the least assistance and concurrence. Like the Scribes and Pharisees,
who laid heavy yokes and burdens upon men's shoulders; but would not touch
them with one of their fingers: So the Law, it laid heavy yokes upon us, but
gives us not the least assistance and concurrence of strength for the doing of
it. Iubet, sed non iuvat, it commands, but it gives no strength, no grace. And
therefore Divines have compared this rigor in the Law to the bondage of Israel
under Pharaoh, who required the tale of brick, but afforded no straw; So the
Law requires the full tale, it abates of nothing in the command, but it gives
no assistance and concurrence for the doing of it; It answers us there as the
Priests did Judas, See thou to that.

But now in the Gospel we are freed from impossibilities, here omnia
possibilia, all things are possible, not in respect of us, but in respect of
God, who has undertaken to work all our works in us; Isai. 26.12. Quod a me
requiris ipse donasti prius. Chrysostom. Iubet, and juvat: litera jubetur, spiritu
donatur.
and for us; Chrysostom blesses God, that that which God required of him, he
had given to him. Indeed the works of the Gospel are as great as any works
of the Law, nay, greater, viz. to believe, which is a greater work then to do
all the duties of the Law; But God has given us more strength, we have
Communion with the power and strength of Christ. As without whom we can do
nothing: John 15.5. Phil. 4.13.
So with whom we shall be able to do all things. A weak Christian, and a
strong Christ shall be able to do all; Nothing shall be too hard for that man,
that has the strength of Christ to enable him, and the Spirit of Christ to
work with him; If God command the works of an Angel, and give us the strength
of an Angel, all will be easy. The works commanded may be difficult in
respect of divine imposition; Decalogus est lex spiritualis, Evangelium lex
Spiritus.
but yet they are easy in respect of divine cooperation: the Law was a
spiritual Law, but the Gospel is the Law of the Spirit, Romans 8.2. Decalogus
est lex spiritualis, Evangelium lex spiritus.
and does therefore enable to do, what it commands to be done: take one
instance, Romans 6 12. the Spirit enjoynes that we should not let sin reign in
our mortal bodies. There is the command, and read the 14. verse. Sin shall
have no dominion in your mortal bodies. There is the promise, and he
alleges this reason; for you are not under the Law, but under Grace: as if
he had said, had you been under the Law you could not have expected such
assistance, but you are under grace, and therefore shall have that power.

Secondly, This was the rigor of the Law, that the Law required obedience in
our own persons, it would not allow of any to do or work for us, nor any to
help us in the doing of it, we are now freed from this rigor, and God will
accept of our obedience by another.

There was a twofold debt we owed to God, 1. The debt of sin. 2. The debt of
service.


These two, The debt of sin and service, were both transacted upon Christ,
and he has fulfilled all righteousness, legis and crucis, for us, 2 Col. 10.
hence we are said to be complete in Christ, though we be im perfect in our
selves.

Thirdly, This was the rigor of the Law, that it required universal, actual,
as well as personal obedience, yea and with that rigor, that if you failed in
one tittle, you were gone for ever, 3 Gal. 10. Cursed is he who obeyes not
every thing written in the book of the Law to dee it. Lex perfectam
obedientiam and dilectionem exigens omnem imperfectionem damnat, nisi rigore
mitigate. Calv.
Here was 1 obedience, and 2 personal obedience, and 3 universal obedience
required, and 4 that universal actual, nay and 5 that constant and
perpetual, if he failed in any tittle, nay and at any time, he comes under the
curse. All your desires, all your endeavors would not serve the turn; if you
failed in the least tittle, Non relinquitur poenitentiae locus in lege. Camer.
you were gone for ever; no repentance, no tears, no prayers, no future care
would make it up. Though the Gospel do admit of repentance, yet the Law will
not own it. It looks for exact obedience to every tittle: From this rigid
obedience has God freed you. And God is pleased for universal actual, to
accept of universal habitual obedience. Psalm 119.6. Even respect to all his
Commandments. Though there be failing in action, yet where there is truth of
affection, God can own it. In the Gospel God accepts of affections for
actions, of endeavors for performance, of desire for ability. Here is all, a
Christian he is made up of desires, of mournings, thirstings and bewaylings. Oh
that my ways were directed; and oh miserable man that I am! here is Gospel
perfection. Adams want was rather will then power, ours rather power then will;
there is will to do, but wants power to do: Not that the will is perfect; for
as we cannot do the things we would do, there is flesh in our members: so we
cannot will the things we should will; there is flesh in our wills: but yet I
say, the failing of Gods people is more for want of power then want of will;
there is will to do, but there wants power to do, as the Apostle, To will is
present with me, etc. Romans 7.18. but how to perform that which is good I find
not. And God has mercy for can nots, but none for will nots: God can
distinguish between weakness and wickedness While thou art under the Law,
this weakness is thy wickedness, a sinful weakness, and therefore God hates
it. Under the Gospel he looks not upon the weakness of saints as their
wickedness, and therefore he pitties them. Sin makes those who are under the
Law the objects of Gods hatred: Sin in a Believer makes him the object of Gods
pity. Men you know hate poison in a toade, but pity it in a man. In the one
it is their nature, in the other their disease: Sin in a wicked man is as
poison in a toad; God hates it and him, it is his nature; but sin in a child is
like poison in a man; God pitties him, he pitties the Saints for sins and
infirmities, he hates the wicked. It Is the ones nature, and the others disease.

Fourthly, This was again the rigor of the Law, that it enforced it self
upon the conscience with threats and with terror; but now the Gospel comes
otherwise, with beseeches and love. I beseech you brethren by the mercies of
God, Romans 12.1. In the Gospel the spirit is not a spirit of bondage and fear,
Non (...), vel (...), sed (...). Abrogata est Lex non quoad obedientiam, sed
quoad modum obedientiae. Abrogata Lex quoad justificationem, accusationem,
condemnationem, coactionem, etc. Chemni.
but a spirit of power and love, as you see Romans 8.15. 2 Timothy 1.7. The Law
urges obedience upon pain of eternal death, Deuteronomy. 27.16. Gal. 3.10. and it
inforceth it by terror, but the Gospel by sweetness and love, all terror is
gone. The book of the Law was placed between the Cherubims, and upon the
Mercy-seat, to tell us under the Gospel; that every Law comes now to the
Saints from the Mercy-Seat.

All rigor is now gone, Liberamur a coactione logis, Deus exigit obedientiam,
sed non cogit minis, and terriculis, ut prius, quoniam Spiritu Dei sic scripta
est in cordibus justificatorum, ut spontaneam gratitudinem Deo juxta Legem
praestare parati sunt, Pareus in Romans 6.14
and nothing but sweetness is the motive to it, and the principle of your
obedience. It is the Love of Christ which constraines, as the Apostle, 2 Cor.
5.14. And nothing more powerful then Love; things impossible to others, Mat.
11.30. Eo quod jugum grave, quod tuum leve. Filiis Dei lex non tam imperat,
quam monstrat obedientiam, quam gratiae auxilio spontanea gratitudine Deo
praestant Sicut dicitur in lege Domini voluptas, Psa. 1.3. jugum meum leve,
Mat. 11.20. Pareus in Romans 6.14. Distin. 8. Amor meus, pondus meum, eo feror,
quocunque feror, Aug.
are easy to them that love; Love knows no difficulties, My yoke is easy,
my burden is light; Love is an affection that is not to be posed with duties
or difficulties to the person beloved: Jacob served a hard prentiship for
Rachel, and yet says the Text, He esteemod the time little, because he loved
her. Love does shorten time, and facilitate labor. When Achilles was demanded
what enterprises he found the most easy of all he had undertaken in his life,
he answered, those which he undertook for a friend. This is the spirit which
God implants in his children, not a spirit of fear, but a spirit of love;
which is the spring of all their actions, and makes those things which
otherwise would be tasks and burdens, refreshments and delights. A Godly man
takes in what ever concerns his happiness by faith, and lays out what ever
concerns his duty by love: Faith and love are the all of a Christian,
Iustificati sunt potius in lege, quam sub lege.
the Apostle says so, Gal. 5.6. For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision
avails any thing, nor uncircumcision; but Faith, which works by Love.
Filiis Dei ultroneis mandata eius gravia non sunt. Par. in loc. cit.
Faith like Mary sits at the feet of Christ to hear his word, and Love like
Martha does compass him about with service. Faith is the great Receiver, and
Love is the great Disburser; we take in all by Faith, and lay out all by Love.
And this is another privilege Believers enjoy, they are freed from the rigor
of the law. There are some more, which because I would hasten, I shall but name.

Believers are not only freed from Satan, freed from obedience to men. We have
no Lords over us, men are our brethren, and our Lord and Master is in heaven.
We find in Scripture a double charge. 1. Not to usurp Mastership. 2. Not to
undergo servitude.

First, for the first, viz. not to usurp mastership. You have it in Matthew.
23.8.9, 10. Be not ye called Rabbi; for one is your Master even Christ, and all
ye are Brethren. Neither be ye called masters; for one is your Master, even
Christ, etc.

Secondly, for the second, not to undergo servitude, 1 Cor. 7.23. Ye are
bought with a price, be not ye the servants of men: But the meaning is, that
we are not to acknowledge any our supreme master, nor are we to give our Faith
and Consciences, nor inthrall our judgments to the sentences, definitions, or
determinations of any man, or men upon earth, because this were to make men
Masters of our Faith, which the Apostle so much abhorred, 1 Cor. 3.1. We are
not masters of your faith, but helpers of your joy. There are twofold masters,
1. Masters according to the flesh, and 2. masters according to the spirit. The
first you read of in the 6. Ephesians. 5.7. Servants be obedient to your Masters
according to the flesh; the second we read of in that 23. Matthew. 9.10. We are
to be obedient to our masters according to the flesh, so far as appertains
to the outward man in all outward things: But of our souls and consciences, as
we have no fathers, so we have no masters upon earth, only our Master and
Father which is in heaven, and in this sense Christ speaks, that we must not
absolutely yield up our selves to be ruled by the will of any, nor inthrall our
indgements, and submit our faith and consciences to any power below Christ. It
were high usurpation for any to require it, it is to enter on Christ's
Prerogative Royal, and it is no less iniquity for us to render it. And so
much shall serve for the fourth branch, I may speak more unto it, when we come
to the query on it.

Fifthly, we are freed from death. There is a threefold death. First, A
Spiritual death, the death of the soul in the body. Secondly, a natural
death, the death of the body from the soul. Thirdly, an eternal death, the
death of soul and body for ever. Two of these you do not doubt of, all the
question is about the third, viz. natural death, of which I shall say no more
but this, First, that it is the body only dies, the worser part, and our dust
and bones are still united to the Son of God. Secondly, you are freed from
death as a Curse. Bonus sopor in Jesus. Sancti habent vitam in patientia, mortem
in defiderio.
The nature of death is taken away, and therefore the name is changed; it is
but called a sleep, and a sleep in Christ, and a gathering to our fathers, a
change, a departing. Death is the Godly man's wish, the wicked man's fear.
Aristippus being demanded in a storm why he feared not as well as others, he
answered, there is great odds, they feared the torments due to a bad life; but
he expected the rewards due to a good life. Thirdly, this is another part of
our freedom from death, that we shall not die till the best time. Indeed none
shall die till Gods time, the wickedst man in the world shall not die till Gods
time. What David said to his enemies, so may any man say, My times are in thy
hands. Psalm. 31.15.
But this is not ever the best time: thou may die with Baltasar carousing, with
Ananias and Saphira lying, with the Nobleman unbeleeving, with Julian
blaspheming: But this is the privilege of Saints, they shall not die till the
best time, not till that time, when if they were but rightly informed they
would desire to dye.

Men cut down weeds at any time, but their corn they will not cut down till
the best time, you are Gods husbandry says the Apostle, you are his wheat, and
when you are ripe, when you have done your work, then, and not till then shall
you be gathered into your Masters Garner. So much for the fifth.

Sixthly, we shall be freed from the Grave, and this comes under our Consummate
freedom. We will but touch it, We shall be freed from the Grave, we will give
you this in three conclusions.

First, Though our bodies do die and be consumed to dust, yet they shall arise
fresh, heavenly and Glorious, in these four qualities.

First, they shall arise perfect bodies, freed from sickness and all
imperfections.

Secondly, they shall arise spiritual bodies, 1 Cor. 15.44. which must not be
understood in regard of substance, but in regard of qualities.

Thirdly, they shall arise immortal bodies, never to die more.

Fourthly, they shall arise glorious bodies: Every one filled with brightness
and splendour, shining as the Sun in the firmament, Dan. 12.3. Mat. 13.43.

The same bodies shall arise, the same soul shall be united to the same
individual body again. And this is a mystery, the Philosophers dreamed of a
transformation of bodies, or bodies transformed into new shapes, and a
transmigration of souls, or fouls slitting into new bodies, but could never
apprehend the truth of this the resurrection of the body, that the same
individual numericall body after it is corrupted in the water, consumed by
fire, converted into earth, vanished into air, nay caton up by fishes, and
those fishes eaten by men; it was above them to think this same individual and
numericall body should rise again. When Paul disputed this point at Athens,
the great Philosophers of the Epicureans laughed at him; What will this babbler
say? they looked upon this as Babbling; but the Scripture tells us, That we
shall see him with these same eyes, Job 19.27. And it suits with Gods justice,
that the same bodies which have sinned or suffered, shall be punished, or
rewarded.

The soul and body shall never be parted more to all Eternity. When you die,
union there shall never be separation more.

Thus I have done with the Privitive part of our freedom, what we are freed
from.

I should now speak something to the Positive part of it, what we are free
unto. I will but name a few particulars.

First, we are freed from a state of wrath, Ephesians. 2.
to a state of mercy and favor.

Secondly, Romans 8.1.
you are freed from a state of Condemnation, to a state of Justification:
before you were under the condemnation of the Law, because you had sinned, and
of the Gospel because you believed not. Romans 8.1. (...). Non una condemnatio.


But now there is no condemnation, not one condemnation: The Law cannot
condemn you, because you have appealed: the Gospel cannot, because you do
believe. God condemned sin in Christ, that he might justify the sinner by
Christ, and cast out condemnation for ever, as one does Criticize upon that
place, (...), in aeternum. (...), eijcio. (...), condemnatio. Vid. Ludovic.
dedem. in loc.
Mat. 12.10. He will bring forth judgment into victory, he renders it, he will
cast out condemnation for ever, and so it will bear.

Thirdly, you are freed from a state of enmity, to a state of friendship And
you that were enemies has God reconciled, Col 1.21.

Fourthly, you are freed from a state of death to a state of life. You that
were dead in your trespasses and sins has he quickened, Ephe. 2. begin.

Fifthly, you are freed from a state of sin, to a state of service. He has
redeemed us from our enemies, that we might serve him. Luke 1.34. Therefore did
God discharge the debt of sin, that we might render him the debt of service;
he freed us from the bonds of misery, that we might take on us the engagements
of duty. Romans 8.12. The Apostle inferres this after all the benefits expessed
by Christ; Therefore brethren we are debtors. Tibi servire est regnare.
And he that thinks not service his freedom, thinks not sin his bondage, and
therefore is in bondage.

Sixthly, you are freed from a state of Bondage, a spirit of slavery in service,
to a spirit of sonship and liberty in service: as by his blood he redeemed us
from being slaves; so by his Obedience and Spirit he has redeemed us to be
sons. Now you are drawn to service, not with cords of fear, but with the
bands of love; not out of compulsions of conscience, but propensions of Nature.
As the love of God to us was the Spring of all his actions to us, so our love
to God is the rise of all our obedience to him.

Seventhly, In a word, for we cannot stand to name all, you are freed from
death and hell, to life and glory; heaven is your Portion, your Inheritance,
your Mansionhouse. It was made for you, and you for it; it was prepared for
you, and you for it; you are vessels prepared for glory, Romans 9.23, And this
is called the glorious liberty of the sons of God, Romans 8.21. Ephesians. 1.14. And
to tell you what you are freed from, and what you shall enjoy hereafter; for to
take you to the top of Nebo, and show you all this Canaan, would make you
willing to lay down your bodies there, and go up to enjoy it. I say, to open
this privilege alittle, which yet is far above man to do. Eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, nor can it enter into the heart of man to conceive what
God has reserved for us, 1 Cor. 3.9.
and yet that is spoken of Grace, and therefore what is Glory? Could we but
open this to you, it were even enough to put you into heaven, while you are
here upon earth. It is called the new Jerusalem, glory, joy, Masters joy,
Fathers house, Kingdom, Kingdom of glory, Heaven, Light, Life, Eternal life.
Look but on that one place, 2 Cor. 4.17. For our light afflictions which are
but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory. It is one of the nerest expressions we read of. 1. Glory, 2. Weight of
glory, 3. Exceeding weight of glory, 4. More exceeding weight of glory. 5. A
far more exceeding weight of glory, 6. Nay, a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory, and this is the glorious liberty of the sons of God: But we
must shut up this, because I would not willingly keep you off, from that which
is the chief I intended in this discourse.

Thus have we as briefly, as the largenes and concernment of the subject would
suffer us, finished those three Generals which we proposed in the handling of
this Doctrine: I should now come to the application of what I have said, and
the largeness of the subject would afford much for comfort and for caution:
for direction and encouragement to the people of God. But I have other work to
do first.

This Text is the maine Basis whereon this Doctrine of Christian freedom is
built: and in regard many have endeavored to build their own superstructures,
hay and stubble on it, which the foundation will never bear; I say, in regard
there are so many Opinions which plead patronage from this Doctrine, I conceive
it is my great work to vindicate so excellent a Doctrine as this is of
Christian freedom, from those false, I may say, licentions doctrines which are
fastened and fathered on it: And to show you that neither this Doctrine, nor
yet this Text, will afford countenance, or contribute any strength to such
positions, and opinions, which they would seem to deduce from it, and build
upon it.

The work is great, for I am to deal with the greatest knots in the
practical part of Divinity, and men's judgments are various, Scripture is
pleaded on all hands: The more difficult the work, the more need of your
prayers, that the Father of light, would go before us, and by his own light
lead and guide us into the ways of all truth Primium toto pectore precor ut
Dominus noster Jesus Christus, qui factus est nobis a Deo patre, sapientia,
justitia, sanctificatio, and redemptio, and in quo sunt omnes thesauri
sapientiae and cognitionis absconditi, ut spiritu sancto suo sanctificet, et in
omnem veritatem ducat, ad divinae suae gratiae gloriam, and aeternam nostram
salutem. Aug. de ord. et modo praedestin.

Cupimus enim investigare quid verum sit, neque id solum sed quod cum veritate
pietatem quoque praeterea erga Deum habeat conjunctam. C. Sadol. in 8. Romans


.

In confidence of which we shall adventure to lanch into these deepes, and fall
to the examination and trial of those Doctrines, which are deduced from, and
would seem to be built upon this Text.

The first Doctrine and the maine that they would seem to build upon this Text
is, That Believers are freed from the Law. And this shall be the first Query we
will propound and examine.

1. Whether this be any part for freedom by Christ to be freed from the Law? I
set it down in this largeness and wideness, but shall gradually fall into the
closer handling of it.

Answ. For the answer of this in general as it is propounded, we must confess
we are not without some places of Scriptures which declare the Law to be
abrogated: nor without some again that speak it yet to be in force. We will
give you a taste of some of them.

1. We will begin with those that seem to speak the abrogation of it, Ier.
31.31, 32, 33. Behold, the days come, says the LORD, that I will make a new
covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: 32. Not
according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers in the day that I
took them by the hand, to bring them out of the land of Egypt, which my
Covenant they brake, although I was an husband to them, says the LORD. 33. But
this shall be the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; After
those days, says the LORD, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write
it in their hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Romans
7.1, 2, 3. Know ye not, brethren, (for I speak to them that know the Law) how
that the Law has dominion over a man as long as he lives? For the woman which
has an husband, is bound by the Law to her husband so long as he lives, but
if her husband be dead, she is loosed from the law of her husband. And that the
Apostle does here speak of the Moral law is evident from the seventh verse,
And that we are freed from it, see the sixth verse, etc. See also, Rom 6.14.
Let not sin reign, for you are not under law. Gal. 3.19.24. The law was
added because of transgression till the seed come. Gal. 4.4, 5. Christ was made
under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, etc. Romans 8.2. For the
law of the spirit of life has made me free from the law of sin and death,
etc. Gal. 5.18. But if you be led by the spirit, you are no more under the law.
Romans 10.4. Christ is the end of the law, etc. 1 Timothy 1.8, 9, 10. The law is
good if used lawfully, but the law is not made for the righteous, etc.

So that you see there seems to be a great deal of strength in the Scripture
to prove the Abrogation of the Law, that we are dead to the Law, freed from the
Law, no more under the Law. Which Scriptures we shall have to deal with all
afterward; for the present I do only name them, to let you see the strength
which the Scriptures seem to hold out for the first Opinion, the Abrogation of
the Law.

2. Now secondly, there are some Scriptures again which seem to hold up the
Law, and say, the Law is still in force: I say, some which seem to speak the
Obligation, as the other the Abrogation of it, Romans 3.31. Do we make void the
Law through faith? God forbid: yea we establish the Law: this seems to be
contrary to the former: the other seems to speak of the abrogation, this of
the establishment, and obligation of the Law. So

Matthew. 5.17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets, I
am not come to destroy but to fulfill: for verily I say unto you, till heaven
and earth pass away, one jot, or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the
Law, till all be fulfilled, etc.

Upon these varieties of Texts, men have grounded their variety of Opinions
for the Abrogation of, and Obligation to the Law. There is no question but the
Scripture speaks truth in both, they are the words of Truth; and though they
seem here to be as the accusers of Christ, never a one speaking like the
other; yet if we were able to find out the meaning, we should find them like
Nathan and Bathsheba, both speaking the same things.

Now for the f^^ding out the truth under these seeming contrarieties, and for
the answer to the Quaere, lest we should beat the air, and spend our breath
to no purpose; it will be necessary to inquire two things.

1. What is meant by the word Law.

2. In what senses this word is used in Scripture. And when this is done there
will be a way opened to the clearing of the truth, and answer of the Quaeries.

1. For the first: What is meant by this word Law Legis nomen est (...), et
variae sunt legis species. Beza. Vide Minsh. in verb: Decalog.
?

Passing by others; the word which is of frequent use for the Law, in the Old
Testament is (...) Ex radic. (...) in Hiphil. (...) docuit, instituit, etc.
hinc nomen (...) doctrina, institutio.
Torah; which is derived of another word, which signifies to throw darts; and
in a second signification to teach, to instruct, to admonish; Lex sagitta quae
collimet in Christum tanquam scopum suum. Pssaor.
and so it is used for any doctrine or instruction which does teach, inform,
direct us; as in Prove. 13.14. (...)
The law of the wise is a fountain of life to depart from the snares of death.
Here law is taken in a large sense for any doctrine or direction, which
proceeds from the wise. So Pro. 3.1. and 4.2.

In the New Testament the word (...), a verbo (...), tribue, distribue, etc.
vid. Passor.
Law is derived of another word which signifies to distribute; because the Law
does distribute, or render to God and man their due.

And in brief, this word Law, in its natural signification, both in the Old
and New Testament, does signify any doctrine, instruction, law, ordinance,
statute, divine or humane; which does teach, direct, command, or bind men to
any duty which they owe to God or man. And so much for the first.

2. In what senses this word Law is used in the Scriptures.

I shall not trouble you with all the acceptations of it; only name some of
the chief to you.

1. It is sometimes taken for the Scriptures of the Old Testament, the Books of
Moses, Lex aliquando late sumitur pro universa religionis aeconomia ante
Christum, proque universis libris V. T. Chamier. 5. T. l. 15. c. 3. sect.
5.6.7. Sumitur aliquando pro universa doctrina. Vet et Nov. Testa. Litera
jubetur, spiritu donatur. Lex imperat, sed fides efficit. Beza in loc.
Psalms, and Prophets. And so the Jews understood it in the 12. Ioh. 34. We
have heard out of the Law that Christ abides for ever. So Ioh. 15.25. This
comes to pass that the word might be fulfilled which was written in their
law, They hated me without a cause, Psalm. 35.19. The like you have in 1 Cor.
14.21. where the Apostle repeating the words of Isaiah, Isa. 28.11. says it is
written in the Law.

2. It is sometime taken for the whole word of God, Promises and Precepts,
Psalm. 19.7. The Law of God is perfect converting the soul: You know conversion
speaks the promise; neither justification nor sanctification are the fruits of
the Law alone; The Law commands, but gives no grace. So that either by Law must
be meant the Promise too; else that by this conversion is not meant
regeneration.

3. It is sometimes taken for the five Books of Moses, Gal. 3.21. If there had
been a Law given which could have given life, verily righteousness should
have been by the Law. John 1.45. We found him of whom Moses in the Law did
write. Luke 24.44. All must be fulfilled written in the Law of Moses: Lex
sumitur contractius, pro ea doctrina quae et operum justitiam explicat, et ei
justitiae salutem pollicetur; quo sensu opponitur Evangelio, Chamier. in loco
citato.
meaning the five Books of Moses, Gal. 4.21.

4. It is taken for the Paedagogy of Moses in his four last Books, John 5.46.
Had you believed Moses, you would bave believed me; for he wrote of me. Josh.
1.7, 8.

5. Sometimes for the Moral Law alone, the Decalogue, Romans 7.7. and Romans
7.14.20.

6. Sometimes for the Ceremonial, Luke 16.16.

7. Sometimes for all the Laws Moral, Ceremonial, Judicial, Ioh. 1.17. The
law came by Moses, but grace and truth by Jesus Christ. Chrysostom. in locum. Lex
ceremonialis data fuit usque dum veniret semen illud Abrahamo promissum. Gal
3.16. Grotius. Nihil opus fuit legem ceremonialem antiquari, quae ad tempus
constituta ipsa temporis maeturitate evanuit. Idem.
Grace, in opposition to the Moral; Truth, in opposition to Ceremonial; which
was but the shadow.

Now also the controversy lies in this last; the law as it is taken for the
Moral, Judicial, Ceremonial Law; and yet in two of them we find more
clearenesse of agreement: the great difficulty is of the first.

First, for the Ceremonial Law which was an Appendix to the first Table of the
Moral Law; and is an Ordinance containing precepts of worship to the Jews when
they were in their infancy; and that

1. To keep them under hope.

2. To preserve them from will worship.

3. Cum venisset tempus quo gentes aliae cum piis Judaeis in unius very dei
cultum coalescerent, impleta circumcisionis promissione, legis causa cessante,
aequum erat legem cessare. Grotius.
To be a wall of separation between them and the Gentiles. And this all agree
to be abrogated both in truth, and in fact.

Secondly, for the Judicial Law, which was an Appendix to the second Table;
and was an Ordinance containing Precepts concerning the government of the
people in civil things.

1. That there might be a rule of common and public equity.

2. That they might be distinguished from others.

3. That the government of Christ might be typified.

And so here as this was typical of Christ, so far it is ceased; Ex legibus
judicialibus illae sunt perpetuae quae sunt juris communis, five quae habent
aliquid morale, illae vero abrogatae quae sunt particularis, etc. Alsted.
but that which is of common and general equity remains still in force. It
is a Maxim, Those judgments which are common and natural, are moral and
perpetual. But in these two we find few dissenters. All the controversy will
be in the third.

Thirdly, the Moral Law which is scattered throughout the whole Bible, and
summed up in the Decalogue. And for substance contains such things as are good
and holy, and agreeable to the will of God, being the image of the Divine will;
a beam of his holiness: the sum of which is love to God; love to man.

And here is now one of the great Disputes in these days: Whether this be
abrogated. Or to hold to the Query: Whether Believers are freed from the Moral
Law. Lege pareum in 6. Romans 14.
All agree that we are freed from the curses and maledictions; from the
indictments and accusations; from the coactions and irritations, etc. and other
particulars which we named before. -- But the Question is, if you will have it
in plain terms:

Quest. Whether are Believers freed from the obedience to the Moral Law; or
from the Moral Law as a rule of obedience?

Some there are that positively, or peremptorily affirm that we are freed from
the Law as a Rule, and are not, Legem quidem Christus pro nobit implevit, sed
non ut illam irritam faceret, etc. Beza.
since Christ, tied to the obedience of it.

Others say, It does still remain in force as a Rule of Obedience, though it
be abolished in other respects. We are still under the conduct, and commands of
the Law, though not under the curses and penalties of it.

Others say again, Liberavit a maledictione legis, a non directione legis,
Beza in Mat. 5.17.
that we are freed from the Law, as given by Moses, and are only tied to the
obedience of it, as it is given by Christ. And though they are subject to those
commands, and that Law which Moses gave, yet not as he gave it, but as Christ
renewes it; And as it comes out of the hand, and from the authority of Christ,
John 13.34. A now Commandment I give unto you, that you love one another; it is
a commandment, for Christ is both a Savior and a Lord; Novion, non quoad
institutionem, sed restitutionem
and it is a new one, not that it was not before, but because now renewed, and
we have it immediately from the hands of Christ. I shall not much dislike this,
acknowledge the moral law as a rule of obedience and Christian walking, and
there will be no falling out, whether you take it as promulged by Moses, or as
handed to you, Lex moralic est (...) justitiae regula. Alited. Est norma confer
vitatis quam Deus a nobis requiris. idem.
and renewed by Christ.

And indeed the Law as it is considered as a rule, can no more be abolished or
changed, then the nature of good and evil can be abolished and changed. The
substance of the Law is the sum of doctrine concerning piety toward God,
Vsus legis moralis est in statu innocentiae, miseriae, gratiae, gloriae. Alst.
and charity toward our neighbors, temperance and sobriety toward our
selves. And for the substance of it, it is Moral and Eternal, and cannot be
abrogated. We grant the circumstances, they were but temporary and changeable,
and we have now nothing to do with the Promulger Moses, nor the place where,
Mount Sinai, nor the time fifty days after they came out of Egypt, nor yet as
it was written in Tables of stone, delivered with thundering and lightning, etc.
We look not to Sinai the hill of bondage, but to Sion the mountain of grace;
And we take the Law as the Image of the divine will of God, which we desire to
obey, but from which we do not expect life and favor, nor fear death and
rigor; and this I conceive the concurrent opinion of all Divines. The Law is
Abrogata est Lex, quoad vim justificandi valet tamen and viget quoad vim
dirigendi.
abrogated in respect of power, to justify or condemn; but it remains still
of force to direct us in our lives. Et peccatum condemnat in ipsis fidelious,
quamvis non fideles.
It condemns sin in the faithful, though it cannot condemn the faithful
for sin. Observatio Legis est necessaria Christiano homini, atque a fide
separare non potest. Zanch. Facessat long ex animis nostris profana ista
opinio legem non esse regulam; est enim inflexibilis vivendi regula. Calvin.
Far be it from us, that profane opinion, to take away the Law as a rule,
which is an inflexible rule of living, and by teaching, admonishing, chiding,
reproving, prepares us to every good work, as Calvin.

The Law is void for the damnatory, Quoad Justificationem, accusationem,
condemnationem, coactionem, tamen non quoad obedientiam, Chemni.
not its directory power, we are not under the curse, but yet the commands.
Another.

The Moral Law is perpetual and immutable; this is an everlasting truth, that
the creature is bound to worship and obey his Creator, and so much the more
bound, as he has received the greater benefits; and we confess to be free
from obedience, is to be servants unto sin.

But these things we shall speak more largely unto in the following discourse.

And therefore against that opinion which holds forth the abrogation of the
Law, and says that we are freed from the obedience of it; I shall lay down,
and endeavor to make good these two Positions, which will serve fully to
answer the Query, and to refute them. The Positions are these:

1. That the Law for the substance of it (for we speak not of the
circumstances and accessories to it) does remain as a rule of walking to the
people of God.

2. That there was no end or use for which the Law was given, but might consist
with Grace, and be serviceable to the advancement of the Covenant of Grace.

And if these two be made good, those Doctrines of the abrogation of the Moral
Law, and freedom from the Law, will fall to the ground.

We will begin with the first, That the Law in the substance of it does remain
in force, as a rule of walking, to the people of God. I shall not need to stay
long in this, for the second Position being made good, does hold forth and
establish this also, by the Law, you know is meant the moral Law comprehended
in the Decalogue or ten Commandments, by the substance of it, I mean, the
things commanded and forbidden, which are morally good and evil, and cannot be
changed or abolished: Deus in prima Creatione, legem suam inscripsit cordi
hominis, and ab ipsa lege, Lex moralis non re, sed ratione differt. Alsted.
For what is the Law in the substance of it, but that law of nature engraven in
the heart of man in innocence? and what was that, but the express Idea, or
representation of Gods own image; Even a beam of his own holiness, which
cannot be changed or abolished no more then the nature of good and evil? And
that the law thus considered in the substance of it, does remain as an
unchangeable Rule of walking to Believers, I am now to prove.

In which proof 1. to say nothing of single Authorities, which might be
alleged, even as many almost as men, we have a cloud of witnesses if we look
upon the concordant Confessions of Christian and Reformed Churches; the
Helvetian Church has this Confession. Hactenus itaque abrogata est lex Dei,
quatenus nos amplius non damnat, nec iram in nobis operatur, etc. Attamen legem
ideo non fastidientes rejicimus, damnamus omnia quae haeretici veteres, et
Neoterici contra legem Dei dederunt. Helvetica Confessio Artic. 12. page 38.
Thus far is the law of God abrogated, in that it has not power to condemn
Believers, etc. Notwithstanding we do not disdainingly reject the law, but
condemn them as heresies which are taught against the law, that it is not a
rule of walking. The French Church has this. Credimus omnes legis figuras
adventu Christi sublatas esse, quamvis earum veritas, et substantia nobis in eo
constet in quo sunt omnes impletae, legis tamen doctrina utenda est, tum ad
vitam nostram confirmandam, tum ut ea magis in promissionibus Evangelicis
confirmemur. Gal. Confess. Artic. 23. page 106. Concordat cum Belgic. confess.
Artic. 25. page 175.
We believe all the figures of the law to be taken away by the coming of
Christ, although the truth and substance of them do continue to us in him, and
are fulfilled to us in him; but the doctrine of the law is both used in them to
confirm our life; As also that we may bethe more confimed in the Promises of
the Gespel, and agreeable to this is the Belgic confession. The Church of
Wittenberg. Agnoscimus legem Dei, cujus Epitome est Decalogus, praecipere
optima, justissima, et perfectissima opera, et hominem obligatum esse ad
obediendum moralibus praecept is decalogi. Wittenbergica confessio. page 145.
neque praecepta legis, quae continentur in scriptis Apostolicis, sime nova lex,
sed sunt veteris legis, etc. p. 148.
We acknowledge the law of God, whose abridgement is in the Decalogue, to
command the best, most just and perfect works, and man to be bound to obey the
moral precepts of the Decalogue. Neither are those precepts which are
contained in the Apostles writings a new law, but are branches of the old law.
Another. Necesse estdocere homines non solum quod legi obediendum sit, sed
ctiam quomodo placeat haec obedientia. August. confess. art. 6 p. 12.
It is needful to teach men that they must not only obey the law; but also how
this obedience pleases God. The Scottish Church. Non existimamus nos ita
liberate donatos, quasi nullam legi obedientiam debeamus, contrarium enim ante
confessi sumus. Scoticana confess. Art. 15.147.
We do not think we are so freed by liberty, as if we owed no obedience to
the law, we confess the contrary: And our Church holds out the same. Quamvis
lex a Deo data per Mosen quoad Ritus et Ceremonias Christianos non astringat,
neque tamen ab obedientia mandatorum, quae moralia vocantur, nullus quantumvis
Christianus est solutus. Confess. Anglic. p. 127.
Although the law given of God by Moses in regard of the Rites and Ceremonies
does not bind Christians, neither is any, although a Christian, loosed from
the obedience of the commandments which are called moral. To these might be
added many more.

But it may be all these are of no authority, In doctrinis quorumvis mortalium
admittendis, adhibendum est examen. Daven. Ad ipsum verbum Dei oportet nos
omnes disciplinas et opiniones tanquam ad lydium lapidem examinare. Corn.
Agrip. de van. scienti. Isai. 8.20.
they are of no power with them, and indeed if these things be not Evinced out
of the word of God, they shall be of no power with us; we reverence them and
their writings, but we must not Iurare in verba, build our faith upon them as
a sure foundation; this is against our Christian liberty, to be inslaved to
the judgments of any. To the Laws and to the Testimonies if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them: We will
therefore give you some proofs out of the word, and then draw them into
Arguments, or draw Arguments from them. Matthew. 5.17.18. Think not that I am
come to destroy the Law, or the Prophets. I am not come to destroy, but to
fulfill; Cum dogma aliquod proponitur credendum, aut agendum, si me hominem
praestare velim examinare oportet quicquid proponitur, etc.
for verily I say unto you, (...), non censemus hic respici tempus (...). ut in
Petri Epistola, 2. Pet. 3.10. sed dictum esse (...), quasi latin dicas, usque
dum coelum ruat: Grotius in locum. Lucas habet, faciltus sit coelum et terram
perire, in quo loquendi genere non dei potentia, sed naturalis ordo respicitur.
Lege Capel. spicileg. in locum, (...), etc. de his verbis. Lud. de dieu in loc.
Capel. Spicileg. et Grotius, multa dicunt.
till heaven and earth shall pass away * one jot or one tittle shall not pass
from the Law till all be fulfilled. The place seems to be very full and very
plain, for the continuance of and obligation to the Law, and yet there are
(...). Recensetur haec lectio inter sacrilegia Marcionis, in Evangelio suo.
Heinsius in locum.
corrupt readings of these words, and as sinister interpretations, some would
have it to be understood that Christ would not abolish till he had fulfilled
it. Indeed he was the end of the Law, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 7.14. But
finis perficiens, non interficiens, the perfecting and consummating end, not
the destroying and abolishing end thereof; the Law had an end of perfection and
consummation in Christ, not an end of destruction and abolition. You see here
Hoc autem vult Christus, vos putatis me venisse ut ego legem solvam, atque
aboleam, at vero tantum abest, ut doctrina mea eam solvam, ut contra, sensum
legis intimiorem et pleniorem longeque perfectiorem, et exactiorem ejus
intelligentiam ego tradam quam solitum est bactenus vobis proponi a doctoribus
vestris. Capel. Spicileg. in Mat. 5.21. Quod accuratius Christus exposuit,
magis ad Christianos pertinere creditur. Chamier. Vnde potestis perspicere quam
long absim a dissolvenda lege, qui absolutiorem ejus intelligentiam vobis
tradam quam hactenus unquam edocti esti. Capel. Spicileg. in ver. 18. eiusdem.
cap.
Christ gives a stricter exposition of the Law, and vindicates it from the
corrupt glosses of the Pharisees, which surely speaks the continuance, not the
Abrogation of it. And agreeable to this place is that of the Apostle, which
speaks the same language, Romans 3.31. Do we make Illud, (...) Mat. 5.17.
apertum est ita sumi, ut, (...), in hoc loco, Grotius, in Mat. 5.17.
void the Law through Faith? God forbid, yea, we establish the Law. How? not
for iustifiction; for so Faith makes it void, but as a rule of obedience, and
so Faith will establish it. The Apostle tells us, Romans 7.13, 22, 25. That the
Law is holy, just, good, and he delighted in the Law of God, etc. Yea with his
mind he served the Law of God. So James 2.8. James 2.8.
If you fulfill the royal law of liberty, ye do well, and what law that was,
he she was in the 11. 1 John 2.4.
1 John 2.4. He that says I know him and keeps not his Commandments, 1 John.
3.4.
is a lier. 1 John 3.4. Sin is the transgression of the Law.

Now then since Christ who is the best expounder of the Law, does so largely
strengthen and confirm the Law, witness this Sermon on the Mount: and in Mar.
10.21. Since faith does not supplant, but strengthen the Law; since the Apostle
does so often press and urge the duties commanded in the Law; since Saint Paul
acknowledges he did serve the Law of God in his mind, and that he was under
the Law to Christ, 1 Cor. 9.21. I may warrantably conclude, That the Law for
the substance of it, does still remain a rule of life to the people of God.
But to all this give me leave to use these Arguments.

1. Argu. rule of walking, then it is still a rule of walking: this is clear;
either it is still, or we must show some time when it was abrogated. But there
can be no time showed wherein it was abrogated: Ergo.

Min. prob. If any time, then in the time of the Gospel by Christ and his
Apostles: But not by Christ or his Apostles: therefore not in the time of the
Gospel.

Min. prob. If Christ and his Apostles did command the same things which the
Law requires; and forbid and condemn the same the Law forbids and
condemns; then they did not abrogate it, but strengthen and confirm it, etc.
But this they did: 1. Christ as you see, Matthew. 5.19. He that breaks the
least of these Commandments and teaches men so, shall be least in the
kingdom of heaven; but he that shall teach and observe them, shall be called
not legal Preachers; but great in the Kingdom of heaven.

Now in that Triplici modo Christuc implevit legem. 1. Ejus sensum explicando.
2. A glossis phari saeorum vindicando. 3. Perfectam obedientiam ei praestando.
Alsted.
Christ himself did expound, Lex non fuit a Christo mutata, sed confirmata, et
Christianis proponitur tanquam morum regula. Chamier.
and establish the Law, by his Word and Authority, as in the 5, 6, 7. Chapters
of Matthew. it shows us the continuance of it; for had it been to be utterly
abolished, he would rather have declared against it, or have suffered it to
have died of it self; and would not have Si lex moralis ad Christianos non
pertinet, quare dominus tam accurate illam exponeret, et praescriberet, number
evangelium Christi ociose in rerum in utilium explicatione consumi debuit?
vindicated it, and restored it to its purity from the glosses of the
Pharisees, which doings, It clearly speaks to us the continuance of, and
obligation to the Law.

And as Christ, so the Apostles, in stead of abolishing, they did in their
Doctrine establish it; frequently urging the duties of the Law to the Churches
and people of God, Romans 12.19. Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves; Why?
For it is written, vengeance is mine. So in Romans 13.8, 9, 10. There the Apostle
repeateth the Commandments of the second Table; not to repeal or reverse any;
but to confirm them as a Rule of walking to the Saints: and he comprehends
them all in this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, for love is the
Charitas non est perfecta; sed vera legis impletio. Beza.
fulfilling of the Law. So also in the 1 Thessalonians. 4.3, 4, 7. This is the will of
God -- that you abstain from fornication; that no man go beyond and defraud
his brother; because the Lord is the avenger of all such. The like in Ephesians.
6.1. Children obey your parents; and he presses this duty from the authority
of the precept, and persuades to it from the graciousnesse of the promise, for
this is the first commandment Adjuncta est promissio, sed conditionalem
promissionem intellige, cujusmodi sunt omnes quae a legis praestatione pendent
Beza in locum.
with promise. And as full and plain is that of the Apostle, in Romans 3.31. Ille
ipse Apostolus quo nemo constantius libertatem Christianam defendit, idem de se
dici quod magister dixerat. Grot.
Do we abrogate the Law? no we establish it by faith: though it carry another,
yet it bears this sense also, that though we lay down the Law in point of
justification, yet we establish it as a rule of Christian conversation.

And there are some learned and holy Divines that tell us, Comminationes
continentur in evangelio, quatenus evangelium sumitur late pro praedicatione
doctrinae, non quatenus sumitur pro lege fidei.
that those threats and comminations which we have in the Gospel, viz. Matthew.
3.10. The axe is laid to the root of the tree, every tree which brings not
forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire: And that in the fifth
of Mat. 22. Whosoever shall say to his brother, Thou fool, shall be in danger
of hell fire. And so in other places, they tell us that the Comminations and
threatenings in the New Testament, they are not of the nature of the Gospel,
Negamus co^minationes esse in evangelio quatenus evangelium est, five ab ipsa
evangelii natura, sed a legis confirmatione. Chami. Tom. 5. l. 15 c. 4. sect.
10. Istae co^minationes in 3. Matt. and 5. Mat. etc. ad legem operum, non ad
legem fidei pertinent. ibid. 12. sect. Evangelium distinguitur in doctrinam et
gratiam, vel in praedicationem evangelii et legem fidei. 3 cap. 2. sect. and
sect. 10. Praelicatio evangelii continet, 1. Promissionem gratiae. 2.
Confirmationem legis. cap. 4. sect. 13.14.
but are the confirmation of the Law, and do plainly demonstrate to us the
continuance of the Law under Grace. You may read the Author in the place
cited, where he does distinguish the Gospel into the Doctrine of the Gospel,
and Grace of the Gospel; into the preaching of the Gospel by Christ and the
Apostles, and the Law of faith or spirit of life in Christ. The preaching or
doctrine of the Gospel, he tells us contains two things: first, the promise of
Grace; and secondly, the confirmation of the Law. And he shows that all those
comminations and threats which we read in the Scriptures of the New Testament,
are no way of the nature of the Gospel properly so called; but they are the
confirmation of the Law; and declare the continuance of it now under the Gospel
to be an exact rule of Christians walking and obedience.

And so much might satisfy for the clearing of the first Argument: Nay the
confirmation of the position it self, if our adversaries would be satisfied.
We will hear what they can say therefore, and answer it; and then proceed to
the rest of the Arguments.

Object. Some say, Though it be a rule, yet it is a rule at our liberty
whether we will obey it or no: It is not a binding rule.

And there are three several Opinions of this.

1. Some say, That it binds us no farther then as we are creatures, not as we
are Christians, but as we are creatures: But why then are not they bound? I
hope they are creatures as well as Christians.

2. Others say, It does bind the flesh, but not the spirit; it does bind the
nuregenerate part, but not the regenerate to obedience, for that is free: and
here is a dangerous Gap opened to all licentiousness: witness the Opinions of
David George, and the Valentinians.

3. Others say, That it is not a binding rule at all; believers are no more
under the Law, then England under the Laws of Spain: nor no more bound to the
obedience of the Law, then any man is bound to the obedience of the Laws of
another Commonwealth: this overthrows, say they, Christian liberty.

Now if this be true, it strikes down all: if it be a rule, but not a binding
rule; a rule binding to obedience, it will be of small use. And therefore we
will take off this cavil before we go any further, and show you that the Law
is a binding rule, and binds Christians, not as men, but as Christians: And I
will but produce five Arguments for the proof of this: they are managed by
another: I shall only strengthen them with some additions.

That which does cause the Conscience of regenerate men to Excuse, Accuse,
being transgressed; that does bind the conscience of regenerate men, for that
it is to bind the conconscience to accuse or excuse. But the Law of God does
cause the conscience of the regenerate to excuse, being observed; and accuse,
being transgressed. Ergo, does it bind the conscience.

That which has power to say to the conscience of the regenerate Christian,
ought to be done, and that ought not to be done, does bind the conscience: but
the Law of God has this power, etc. Ergo. Though it cannot say, this ought not
to be done on pain of damnation, or on pain of the curse: or this ought to be
done in reference to justification, or life, etc. yet it shows it ought to be
done as good, and pleasing to God: and this ought not to be done, as
displeasing to him.

That Authority by which the Apostles urged Christians to duty, Ergo. For
this look Ephesians. 6.1, 2. Children obey your parents in the Lord, for this is
right; honor your father and mother, etc.

If the Law of God do not bind the conscience of a regenerate man to
obedience, more then his duty; and so either merits or sins, being guilty of
will worship: but in obedience to it he is not guilty of will worship, nor does
he merit, Luke 17.10. When you have done all that is commanded, say that ye are
unprofitable servants, etc.

Either the Law does bind the conscience of Christians to obedience; Christians
do not sin in the breach of it. But they sin in the breach of it, 1 Ioh. 3,
4. Sin is the transgression of the Law, Ergo, the transgression of the Law is
sin.

Or take it thus.

If Christians be bound not to sin, then they are bound to keep the Law: but
Christians are bound not to sin: Ergo, etc. I know the consequent will be
denied, that though Christians are bound not to sin, yet it follows not they
are bound to keep the Law. I will prove it thus.

If he that breaks the law does sin, Conseq. Prob.
then Christians are bound, if not sin, to keep the law. But he that breaks
the law does sin, so the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 3, 4. sin is the transgression of
the Law. And where there is no law, there is no transgression. Ergo.

And now being driven against the wall, In pessimis aliquid boni, et in optimis
nonuihil pessimi; solus homo sine peccato Christus. Tertul.
they have no way to maintain the former error, but by another. And that is
to tell us plainly, that believers do not sin: Be in Christ, and sin if thou
can: but that you see the Apostle tells them they sin in saying so, 1 Ioh.
1.8. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us. Nay, (...), Non modo inquit se ipsos fallunt, sed etiam in deum sunt
blasphemi, qui deo contrarium testificante sibi puritatem arrogant. Beza. in
loc.
we make him a liar, v. 10. If [we] say, Apostles, as well as others; for there
is no man which sins not, Ioh. 8.46. And in many things we offend all, Iam.
3.2.

But if this will not hold, then they say, That God sees no sin in those that
are believers: But what is this? It is one thing to sin, and another for God
not to see sin: Indeed he sees not sin either to condemn believers for
sin, or to approve, or allow of sin in believers. He sees not sin, that
is, Semper debemus nos confiteri peccatores, nam quisquis se immaculatum et
sine peccato diceret, aut superbus, aut stultus est. Cyprian.
he will not see sin to impute it to us when in Christ. But if this will not
hold, then they say, Though they sin, and though God do see it, for he sees
all, and brings all to judgment; Why then they say, God is not displeased with
the sins of believers. Certainly perfect good must for ever hate that which
is perfect evil: and the nearer it is to him, the more God hates it. In a
wicked man God hates both sin and sinner, but here he hates the sin, though
he pities and loves the poor sinner, etc. He is displeased with sin, though
he pardon sin in Christ. But we will follow this no longer. So much shall
suffice for the proof and vindication of the first Argument: -- we will come
to the rest.

If the same sins are condemned and forbidden after Christ, rule of
obedience, still in force: but the same sins are forbidden, etc. That which was
sin then, is sin now; I speak of sin against the Moral Law, and therefore
is the Law still in force to believers as a Rule of obedience.

If the same duties which were enjoined in the law, commanded believers under
the Gospel, then the law does still remain as a rule of direction and
obedience, etc. But there are the same duties commanded under the Gospel which
are enjoined in the Law: As I have showed at large, Romans 13.9, 10, etc. To love
God, fear God, etc. Obedience to Parents, Ephesians. 6.1. And therefore the law
still remains a rule of obedience under the Gospel.

If the things commanded in the Law, part of our holiness, and conformity to
God; and that this conformity to the law is required of us, then is the law
still in force: But the things commanded are part of our holiness, and
conformity to the law is required of us. Ergo. That the things commanded are
part of our holiness, I suppose is granted; and that this conformity to the
law, is required of us, is easy to prove. That which we are to aspire up unto,
and labor, and endeavor after both in our affections and actions, our
principles and practices, that surely is required of us. But to this conformity
to the law of God we are thus to aspire unto, and endeavor after in our
affections and actions: Ergo.

1. That we are to aspire up to it in our affections; take but that 7. Romans
22.25. where the Apostle shows you that he did delight in the Law of God: and
he served the law in his mind: -- Nay it was his purpose, aim, desire,
endeavor of heart, to be made conformable to that law, which he says, is
holy, just, and good; though he fell short of it, yet he aspired after it:
which shows we are to aspire after it in our affections.

2. And that we are to endeavor after conformity to it in our actions, it is
as plain: take them both together, Psalm. 119.4, 5, 6. Thou have commanded us
to keep thy precepts diligently: Oh that my ways were directed to keep thy
statutes. Then shall I not be ashamed when I have respect unto all thy
Commandments: he had respect to them in his heart and affections; and he
indevours conformity to them in life and actions. And this was his duty,
because God had commanded: Thou have commanded us to keep thy precepts. Oh
that my heart were directed to keep thy statutes.

That cannot be part of our freedom by Christ to be freed from obedience to
the law; holy, just and good: and surely that is not part of our freedom, to
be freed from that which is holy, just and good. I will give it you in this
form.

That cannot be part of our freedom which is no part of our bondage. But
obedience and subjection to the Moral law in that sense I have showed, was
never part of our bondage. Ergo, cannot be part of our freedom.

That it was never part of our bondage I prove.

That cannot be part of our bondage which is part of our glory; but obedience
and conformity to the law, both in principle and in practice is part of our
glory. Ergo, cannot be part of our bondage.

Again: That cannot be said to be part of our bondage, which is part of our
freedom; but to obey the Law is part of our freedom, as you read in the first
of Luke verse. 74. That being delivered from the hand of our enemies, we might
serve him in righteousness and holiness all the days of our life. I shall
proceed no further upon this, you see it plain enough; that the law in the
substance of it does remain a rule of walking, or obedience to them in Christ.
We will give you two or three Applications and come to the second Position.

This may then serve to blame the Papists, for their unjust charge of us, Lege
Chamier: de necessitate operum. l. 15. c. 2. Tom. 5. Fideles liberati sunt a
maledictione, non obligatione legis. Ibid.
that we make this a part of our Christian liberty to be exempted from all
law, to live as we list; and that we are not bound to the obedience of any law
in conscience before God. We appeal to all the Reformed Churches in the
Christian world, whether ever any of them did hold forth such an Opinion as
this. It is the concurrent Opinion of all Reformed Churches, that Christians
are subject to the rule and the direction to the authority and obligation of
the Moral Law.

We preach obedience to the Law, Operamur non in justificationem, sed ex
justificatione.
but not as they do; they preach obedience to justification, and we preach
justification that we may obey.

We cry down works in opposition to Grace in justification; and cry up
obedience as the fruits of grace in sanctification: he that walks not in
obedience is a stranger yet to Christ; and he that rests in his obedience knows
not Christ. Indeed many are too like the Jews still; God set up a law for a
rule of walking, and they look for justification by it: poor men like Oxen in
the yoke; they draw, and toil, and spend their strength, (as who do more
then they who think to merit?) and when they have done their labor, they are
fatted up for slaughter: so these, when they have endeavored hard after their
own righteousness, O nos miseros, si vel tantillum nostra salus, basi tam
infirma nitatur! Beza in 1 John 1.8.
they perish in their just condemnation. These men Luther fitly calls the devils
martyrs; they suffer much, and take much pains to go to hell; the Apostle tells
them what they are to expect, Gal. 3.10. Who ever are under the works of the
Law, are under the curse, that is, who are under the works of the law for
justification; and he gives the reason, because cursed is he that does not all
things written in the book of the Law. These men they seek life in death,
that seek righteousness in sin. And alas, we are all too apt to it; it is
hard to do all righteousness and rest in none; hard to be in duties in
respect of performance; and out of duties in respect of dependence. We are apt
to weave a web of righteousness of our own; to spinne a thread of our own to
climb up to heaven by; otherwise what need so many exhortations, admonitions,
to do all righteousness, but rest in none? The Scripture does not use to kill
flies with Beetles; to cleave strawes with wedges of Iron; nor to spend many
admonitions and exhortations where there is no need.

Alas, Quae in lege dicta sunt facienda; per fidem ostenduntur facta. Amb.
there are a thousand in the world that make a Christ of their works, and here
is their undoing, etc. They look for righteousness and acceptance, more in
the Precept then in the Promise, in Law, then in the Gospel, in working then
believing, and so miscarry, and there is some touch of this in us all,
otherwise we should not be so up and down in our comforts and believing as we
are still, and cast down with every weakness, we should be all in Christ in
weak performance, and nothing in our selves in strong performances.

This blames them who are called Antinomians. Papists do set up the law for
Justification, Lege Daven. in 2. Col. 14
so these cry down the law for Sanctification: we say we are freed from the
curses; they would have us freed from the conducts, from the commands of the
law: we say we are free from the penalties, but they would abolish the
Precepts, etc. They tell us we make a false mixture together of Christ and
Moses, and we mingle Law and Gospel together. How unjustly this charge is cast
upon us, let understanding men judge. We cry down the Law in point of
justification; Absit ut ego tibi assentiar, qui dicis legem iis esse mortua^
quibus maxim vivit. Beza.
but we set it up as a rule of Sanctification: The law sends us to the Gospel,
that we may be justified, and the Gospel sends us to the Law again to inquire
what is our duty being justified. What ever they say of the Law, though they
cast contempt and disgrace on it, and upon those which preach it; yet you see
for the substance of it, it is the image of God, a beam of his holiness, the
things commanded and forbidden, are things Morally, and therefore Eternally
good and evil, nothing can alter the nature of them. Things positively good or
evil, Lex est perfectissima et absolutissima regula justitiae moralis, cui
nihil addi, nihil detrahi potest. Chamier.
are alterable by him that commanded them. But those things which are Morally
good or evil, God can no more alter them, then make good evil, or evil good.
That which was Morally good then, is Morally good now and to be pursued and
followed. That which was Morally evil then, is Morally evil now, and to be
shunned and avoided. We have a Gospel rule which turns us to the obedience of
the Law. You shall see the rule, Phillippians 4.8. What ever things are true,
what ever things are honest, what ever things are just, what ever things are
pure, what ever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report: If
there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think of these things. And I hope
the Law is of this number, the Apostle tells us that the Law is holy, just and
good, certainly there is nothing commanded but what is good: if wear to learn
of the Ant, the Pismire, of brute beasts, of inanimate things, certainly much
more are we to learn of the Law, which is the image of God in man, and the
will of God to man. We have nothing to do with Moses, nor do we look to Sinai
the hill of bondage, but to Sion the mountain of grace; and we take the Law as
the eternal rule of Gods will, and desire to conform our selves to it, and
breath out with David, Fides et lex mutuo se juvant, mutuo sibi dant manus.
Pet. Martyr.
O that my ways were directed to keep thy Statutes! Certainly the Law and
Gospel do help one another, they lend one another the hand.

The Law that is subservient to the Gospel, to convince and humble us, and the
Gospel that inables to the the obedience of the Law. The Law sends us to the
Gospel for our justification, the Gospel sends us to the Law to frame our
conversation; and our obedience to the Law is nothing else but the expression of
our thankfulness to that God, who has so freely justified us, Lu. 1.74. That
being redeemed, we might serve him without fear. Though our service was not
the motive or impulsive cause of Gods redeeming of us, yet it is the end of our
redemption, the Apostle shows at large in the sixth to the Romans. And it is
the Application he makes of the Doctrine of free Justification, the 8. Romans 12.
Therefore brethren we are debtors, if Christ has freed you from the penalties,
how ought you to subject your selves to the precepts? if he have delivered you
from the curses, how ought you to study the commands? if he paid our debt of
sin, certainly we owe a debt of service.

This was the great end of our redemption, Tantum abest, ut been et sancte
vivendi studium fides extinguat, ut etiam illud creet, et inflammet in nobis,
etc. Confess. Gas.
he redeemed us from bondage to freedom, from slavery to service: that which
Christ has redeemed us to, he cannot be said to redeem us from; but he has
redeemed us to service, and therefore cannot be said to redeem us from
service. Indeed he has freed us from the manner of our obedience, but not from
the matter of our obedience, etc. We now obey but it is from other principles,
by other strength, to other ends, then we did before.

The principles of obedience, legal and servile, now they are filial and
Evangelicall. As the Law was given with Evangelicall purposes; so it is kept
with Evangelicall principles; principles of Faith, Love and Delight, which
causes the soul to obey, and facilitates all this obedience; the love of
Christ constraines, 2 Cor. 5.14. 2 Cor. 5.14
yet is the obedience free. Love knows no difficulties; things impossible to
others, are yet easy to them that love.

The grounds of obedience that differs before the ground was fear,

The strength before was our own, Ioh. 3.21. our works are said to be wrought
in God by Union with him; and by Communion with him, as we can do nothing
without him, so we can do all things through him strengthening us. And this
strength he has promised, Deuteronomy. 26.18. The Lord has avouched thee to be his
people, as he has promised, and that thou should keep all his Commandments,
and he tells us, Isa. 26.12. That he works all our works in us, and for us,
all the required works of Grace in us, and of duty for us.

The ends before were for instification and life; Justificati potius in lege
quam sub lege. Aug. Justificati amici legis efficiuntur. Ambros. Renati sunt
sub lege, non invite, sed voluntarte.
now they are for other ends, to glorify God, to dignisie the Gospel, declare
our sincerity, to express our thankfulness. Before they obeyed but out of
compulsion of conscience; now out of propensions of nature, which so far as it
works, works to God, as naturally as stones move downward, or sparks fly
upward. Thus you see how we preach the Law, not in opposition, but
subordination to the Gospel, which we shall show at large afterward.

Let it be then in the last place to exhort you all, aright, and then let it be
your care to maintain it. Let not Moses take place of Christ; but yet make a
right use of Moses. When works and obedience come in the right place, the Law
in the right place, then is it holy, just, and good: But if we use it as our
life, then we trample the blood of Christ under foot, and make his life and
death in vain; let the servant follow the master, Moses Christ, the Law Grace,
obedience faith, and then all act their proper and designed parts. You know
what Zachariah says, Luke 1.74, 75. You were redeemed that you might serve,
that you might live unto him that died for you. Reason from mercy to duty; not
from mercy to liberty. Oh beware that the great things of Christ do not make
you more careless! take heed of abusing mercy. It were a sad thing if we
should abuse the Grace of Christ. The Justice of God prevails with others, oh!
but God would have his bowels, his mercies to prevail with you, Romans 12.1. I
beseech you through the mercies of God, offer up your souls and bodies a
living sacrifice. Saints reasonings are from engagements of mercy, to
inlargements in duty, 2 Cor. 5.14. and 2 Cor. 7.1. Having such precious
promises, let us purge our selves from all corruption of flesh and spirit. None
but venomous spirits, will spider-like suck poison from such sweets, draw such
consequents from mercy, as may be encouragements to sin.

It were a sad thing, quicken, does slacken our hands, when a man shall say in
his heart, Christ died, I need not pray so much, Christ has done all,
therefore, I need do nothing: this should strengthen, and does this weaken your
engagements? this should heighten, and does this lessen your engagements? this
should quicken, and does it dead your hearts? it should inflame, and does it
cool your spirits? what a sad thing is this? but worse,

2. Shall we sin because grace abounds? Romans 6.1. There is mercy with thee that
thou may be feared, says the Psalmist: not that I may sin, but serve. You
that the Law has sent to the Gospel, let the Gospel again send you to the
Law; study now your duty: abundance of mercy calls in for abundance of duty.
If God had not abounded in mercy, what had become of us? And has he abounded
in mercy? Oh then let us abound in duty; obey for Gods sake who gives his
Son; for Christ sake who has given himself, that you might give your selves
to God. Obey for faiths sake, which is dead without obedience. It is the cry of
faith, Give me children, else I die. Obey for professions sake: adorn the
Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Non praestat fides, quod
praestitit infidelitas.
What a shame it should be said of us, that faith cannot do that which
infidelity is able to do? What will Turks and Mahumetans say, Ecce quales
sunt qui Christum colunt! Behold, these are the servants of the crucified God!
they profess Christ, and yet will swear, yet will sin against Christ. What
will Papists say? These are they which preach faith, and yet strangers to
obedience, and live in sin. Romans 8.4.
Let the righteousness of the law be fulfilled in us; not walking after the
flesh, but after the spirit, Romans 4.8. The law is a Royal law; James 2.8.
(...). Lex regia est via Regia, quae obliquis viarum diverticulis opponitur.
Beza.
If we observe the royal law according to Scripture, says James, you do
well, James 2.8. It is a royal law; live royally above the rank of men in
obedience. Receive not the grace of God (...). frustra. hoc est, nullo fructu,
vestro damno.
in vain, 2 Cor. 6.1. If ye receive it not in vain, you will have power to
will, and power to do; you will prize grace, and walk thankfully. It was
wittily spoken of one, there is some truth in it; Live as though there were no
Gospel; die as though there were no law; pass the time of this life in the
wilderness of this world under the conduct of Moses; but let none but Joshua
bring thee over to Canaan the promised Land.

It agrees thus far with Scripture, Moses was a man of the law, he gave the
law, and he is often taken for the law; they have Moses and the Prophets, Luke
16.29. And there is one that shall condemn you, even Moses in whom you trust,
Ioh. 5.45. Joshua was a type of Christ; his name signifies so much: he was
Jesus, so called, Heb. 4.8. If Jesus, that is, Joshua, could have given them
rest: Moses must lead the children of Israel through the wilderness; but
Joshua must bring them into Canaan. So while you are in the wilderness of this
world, you must walk under the conduct of Moses; you must live in obedience to
the law, but it is not Moses, but Joshua; not works, but faith; not obedience,
but Christ must bring you into Canaan. Do what you can while you live; but be
sure to die upon Christ's score.

And thus much shall serve for the first Position; That the substance of the
law is a rule of obedience to the people of God, and that to which they are to
conform their lives and walkings, now under the Gospel.

And this we have proved by Scriptures, by a cloud of witnesses, the concordant
testimony of some, and might of all the Reformed Churches: we have strengthened
this by many Arguments, and given you some Applications of it.

We are now come to the second Position which we laid down in Answer to the
Query which will be more knotty; but if we shall be able to make it good, it
will at once vindicate the Law, and strike down those many erroneous Opinions
that are on foot against it.

The Position is this.

That there was no End or Use for which the Law was given, but might consist
with grace, and be serviceable to the advancement of the Covenant of grace.

And this I hope you shall see made good, and then you will see Gospel in the
Law: And that the Law is not that which men give it out to be; opposite to the
Gospel and Grace: but may consist with Grace, and be serviceable to the
advancement of Grace.

Now in the prosecution of this we will observe this Method.

1. We will show you the chief and principal ends for which the Law was
promulged, or given.

2. We will show you how those ends may consist with Grace, and be serviceable
to the advancement of the Covenant of Grace; and therefore may remain under
Grace.

3. We will answer those Objections which may be made against this Position.

4. We shall in a few words sum up all in some brief Application.

1. My first work is to sum up the chief and principal ends for which the
law was given or promulged.

There are two maine ends for which the law was promulged. Duplex usus legis
Politicus. 1 Timothy 1.8. Theologicus.


1. One was political. Vsus Theologicus, vel est


2. The other Theological or Divine. in justificandis. vel in justificatis,
etc.
de quibus consule Chem. de usu legis.




1. The first, viz. the political use of it, which the Apostle seems to hint
at in the 1 Timothy 1.8, 9. Knowing this that the law is not made for a righteous
man; but for the lawless and disobedient; for the ungodly, and for sinners,
for unholy and profane; for murderers of fathers and mothers, and for
man-slayers: that is, it was made for them; if not their rule, that it should
be their punishment. This is the political use of the Law.

2. A second great end, and that is Divine, or Theological: and the Divine end
and use of the law is twofold.

1. In those who are not justified. 2. In those who are justified.
1. In those that are to be justified, or the use it has in reference to
justification. First, to discover sin. Secondly, to humble for sin; and by that
drive us to Christ.

2. In those that are justified.

First, it is a Doctrine to direct to duties.

Secondly, as a Glass to discover the defects of them, that so we might be
kept humble and fly to Christ; where there is mercy to cover, and grace to
cure all sin.

Thirdly, as a restrainer and corrector of sin.

Fourthly, as a reprover of sin, 2 Timothy 3.16.

I shall for the present but lay down the principle and maine ends, for which
the law was promulged.

1. To restrain transgression; to set bounds and banks to the cursed nature of
man fallen; not only by discovering sin, but the wrath of God; tribulation and
anguish to every soul who does evil, Romans 2.8, 9. We read in Gal. 3.19. That
the law was added because of transgression. And this place Hierome and
Chrysostom understand of the restraint of transgression. The law may restrain
sinners, though it cannot renew sinners; it may cohibit and bridle sin,
though it cannot heal and cure it. Before God gave the law sin had a more
perfect reign; by reason of the darkness of men's understanding, and
security of their hearts, Romans 5.13, 14. Death reigned, and so sin from Adam
to Moses. As the Apostle shows. And therefore God might give the law to
discover, not only that they sinned in such courses wherein they walked; but
to discover to them also that heavy wrath of God which they drew upon
themselves by sin, which might work so far as to restrain men in the
course of sin; and to hinder sin that it could not now have so complete,
and uncontrolled a dominion and reign in the soul. Though it did still reign,
for restraining grace does not conquer, though it does suppress and keep
down sin; yet it should not have so full, so complete, so uncontrolled a
dominion in the soul: the sinner should be in fear, and that will serve to
restrain men in ways of sin, though not to renew the sinner.

If God had not given a severe and terrible law against sin, such is the
vileness of men's spirits, they would have acted all villainy: the Devil would
not only have reigned, but raged in all the sons of men. And therefore as we
do with mad Beasts, Wolves, or Lions, etc. we bind them up in chains, that
they may not do that mischief, which their inclinations carry them to: so the
law chains up the wickedness of the hearts of men, that they dare not fulfill
those lustful inclinations which are in their hearts to do.

And blessed be God that there is this fear upon the spirits of wicked men;
otherwise there were no living in the world; one man would be a devil to
another; every man would be a Cain to his brother, an Ammon to his sister, an
Absolon to his father, a Saul to himself, a Judas to his master: for what one
man does, all men would do, were it not for restraint upon their spirits.
Naturally, sin is past both sense and shame too: there would be no who, no
stay, no bank or bounds to sin; every man would be as a devil to another;
and therefore we have cause to bless God, that he has given a law to
restrain transgression; that if men will not be so good as they should be, yet
they might be restrained, and not be so bad as they would be. Were it not for
this, and that awe that God has cast upon the spirits of wicked men by it,
there would be no safety; the fields, the streets, your houses, your beds,
would have been filled with blood, uncleanness, murder, tapes, incests,
adulteries, and all mischiefs. If therefore no law, Thou shall not murder; men
would make every passion a stabbe: if no law, Thou shall not steal; men would
think theft, cousenage, cheating oppression, good policy, etc. and the best
life ex rapto vivere, to live on other men's sweat: if no law, Thou shall not
commit adultery; men would defile their neighbors bed, and commit all
wickedness.

And therefore has God given a law to set bounds and banks to defend us,
against the incursions, and breaches that sin would make upon us. He that
sets bounds and banks to the raging Sea, which otherwise would overflow the
Land, does set also bounds and banks to men's sins, and sinful affections.

It is no less wonder that the deluge of lust and corruption in men, does not
break forth to the overflowing of all banks, then that the Sea does not break
forth upon us, but he that sets bounds to the one, does also bound and
restrain the other. That Is the first end.

Secondly, The Law was given to discover and reveal transgressions, and that I
conceive is the proper meaning of that place, Gal. (...). etc. H. e. ut homines
intelligerent patefactis transgressionibus, sola Dei gratia quam Abrahamo
promiserat, servari, ac proinde omnes in Christum respicerent. Beza. in locum.
3.19. The Law it was added, because of transgressions, that is chiefly, that
the Law might be instar speculi, like to a glass to reveal and discover
sin, and so the Apostle, Romans 7.7. Is the Law sin? God forbid. Nay, says
he, I had not known sin but by the Law, for I had not known lust, except the
Law had said, Thou shall not covet. And this the Apostle seems to speak also,
in Romans 5.20. The Law entered that the offense might abound, that is, that sin
might appear exceeding sinful.

This is another end, God gave the Law, to open, reveal and convince the soul
of sin. And this was with reference to the promise to grace and mercy.

And therefore God gave the Law after the promise, Lex morbum manifestat,
evangelium medicum monstrat. Alst.
to discover sin and to awaken the conscience, and to drive men out of
themselves, and bring them over to Christ. Before he gave the Law, men were
secure and careless, did not esteem of the promise, and the salvation the
promise offered; they saw not that necessity of it. And therefore God gave the
Law to discover sin, and by that our need of the promise, that so the promise
and Grace might be advanced. God in giving the Law did but pursue the purpose
of mercy he had in giving the promise, by taking a course to make his Gospel
worthy of all acceptance, that when we were convinced of sin, we might look
out for, and prize a Savior; when we were stung with the fiery Serpent, we
might look up to the brazen Serpent -- and in this God did but pursue the
design of his own grace.

Thirdly, The Law was given to humble men for sin, and this is a fruit of the
former, Romans 3.19, 20. Now we know what ever thing the Law says, it says to
them that are under the Law, that every mouth might be stopped, and all the
world might become guilty, that is, sensible of their own guilt, for we were
no less guilty before, but now by the Law men are made sensible of their own
guilt, for says the Apostle, By the Law is the knowledge of sin, Per legem
peccati agnitio, per evangelium peccati aboliti^. Alsted.
etc. So in Romans 4.15. Where there is no Law, there is no transgression, that
is, no transgression does appear, where no law to discover it, or no
transgression will be charged upon the conscience, where no Law to discover
sin; And this seems to be excellently set out in Romans 5.13, 14. Until the Law
sin was in the world but sin is not (...). Beza, non putatur: alii, non
consetur, non aestimatur: vetus interpres, non imputatur.
imputed where there is no Law, nevertheless, death reigned from Adam to
Moses, etc. The meaning is, there was no less sin, or guilt and death before
the Law then after, sin reigned, and death reigned over all the sons of
men, and it reigned the more, because it reigned in the dark, there was no Law
given whereby to discover and reveal it to them, and to help to charge sin
upon them. And so he says; Cum aperte proponeretur lex, clarum fuit peccatum,
cum tacit, peccatum minus compunxit conscientiam. Ante legem propositam nemo
peccavit ad similitudinem Adae, qui de fructu commedit ipsi externa voce
prohibito. Cham. myro. in loc.
Sin is not imputed where there is no Law, that is, though sin and death
did reign, yet men were secure and careless, and having no Law to discover
sin to them, they did not charge their hearts with sin, they did not impute
sin to themselves. And therefore God renewed the Law, and promulged the Law in
Mount Sinai, to discover and impute sin to men, to charge them with sin. I
will give it you in this similitude. Suppose a Debtor to owe a great sum of
money to a Creditor, and the Creditor out of mere mercy should promise him to
forgive him all the debt, yet after this should send forth Officers to Attach
and Arrest him, one would think surely this man is contrary to himself, he
has repented of his former promises, when yet he is the same and repents of
nothing, only desires that his mercy might be more conspicuous and advanced in
the thoughts of the Debtor, and therefore suffers him to be brought to these
extremities, that mercy might more clearly appear, that he may be more
thankful. The case is the same between God and us, We are deeply indebted unto
God; And to Abraham, and us in him, God made a promise of mercy, but men were
secure and careless, and though they were guilty of sin, and so liable to
death, yet being without a Law to evidence sin and death to their
consciences, they could not see it such a mercy as it was to have a pardon.
Thereupon God published by Moses, a severe and terrible Law, to discover,
accuse us, and condemn us for sin, not that he intended the sentence should
take hold, for then God should be contrary to himself; but that hereby guilt
being made evident, our mouths stopped, we might fall down and acknowledge the
greatness and riches of free grace and mercy. And thus it was in Job: as you
see fully in Job 33.16. to the 31. Gal. 3.22. The Scriptures concluded all
under sin, that the promise by faith, etc. might be given to them that
believe.

4ly. The Law was given for a direction of life, a rule of walking to
believers. And this I showed you at large in the former Position, That the law
was a rule of walking, Plane dicimus decessisse legem, quoad onera, non quoad
justitiam. Aug.
though the law for burden is taken away, yet not for obedience; And if it
were needful I might pursue to strengthen this to you.

The moral Law is perpetual and immutable, this is an everlasting truth, the
creature is bound to worship and obey his Creator, Lex est inflexibilis vivendi
regula. Calvin.
and so much the more bound as he has received greater benefits. And this is a
truth as clear as the light, and surely to be free from obedience, is to be
servants unto sin, as I have showed at large.

Fifthly, The Law was given not only as a Director for duties, but as a glass
to discover the imperfections of them, that so we might be Kept humble and vile
in our own eyes, and that we might live more out of our selves, and more in
Christ, that we might fly to Christ upon all occasions, as a defiled man to
the fountain, to be washed and cleansed, in whom there is mercy to cover, and
grace to cure all our infirmities.

Sixthly, Lexdocendo, admonendo, objurgando corrigendo ad omne bonum opus nos
format. Calvin.
The law was given as a Reprover and corrector of sin, even to the Saints,
Isay, to discipline, and reprove them for it, 2. Tim. 8.16. All Scripture is
profitable for doctrine and reproof, and this part of Scripture especially for
these ends, to be instar verberis to correct and chastise wantonness, to
reprove and correct for sin.

Seventhly, The Law was given to be a spur to quicken us to duties; The flesh
is sluggish, and the Law is instar stimuli, of the nature of a spur, or goad to
quicken us in the ways of obedience. And so you see the first thing, the ends
wherefore the Law was given.

2. I am now to show you that there was no end wherefore the Law was given; but
might consist with Grace, and be serviceable to the Covenant of Grace, and
therefore may remain under Grace.

1. It was given to restrain transgressions, and it is of the same use now;
and takes place to restrain wicked men in sin, though it have no power to
renew and change them; fear may restrain, though it cannot renew men; fear
may suppress sin, though alone Faith does conquer and overcome sin, etc.

The Law may chain up the Wolf, but the Gospel changes the Wolvish nature,
the one stoppes the stream, the other heales the fountain; the one restrains
the practices, the other renewes the principles. And who does not see this the
ordinary fruit of the Law of God now? It was the speech of a holy man, That
our Caine has not killed his brother Abel; that our Ammon has not defloured
his sister Tamar; that our Reuben has not gone up to his fathers couch; that
our Absolon has not conspired the death of his father. It is because God
restrains them, therefore was the law added, and therefore for this use it
continues, to restrain wicked men, to set bounds and banks to the rage of
men's lustful hearts.

2. The law was given to discover and reveal transgressions, and this might
stand with grace, nay, it serves to advance it, and it still continues for this
end, even to discover and reveal transgressions to us, to make sin and misery
appear, and by that to a waken the conscience to fly over to Christ. Hence the
Apostle, Gal. 3.19. Wherefore serves the law, why says he, it was added
because of transgression, till the seed should come, unto whom the Promise was
made. Some take seed here for the faithful, and make this the meaning, that so
long as there are any to be brought unto Christ, so long there will be use of
the law to discover sin, both 1. in the unregenerate, Qui ex lege Mosis
conscientiam pungit ut Christo praeparet, is non pro fide legem, pro Christo
Mosen, aut quicquam Evangelio contrarium docet, sed is tantum qui legis
operibus hominem justificari docet. Chamier.
that they may fly to Christ, and 2. in those who are renewed, that they may
learn to cast all their faith, hope, expectation, on him still; but whether
that interpretation will hold or no, yet this holds firm; that the law does
remain for this use, to discover sin to us, Rom 4.15. Where no law is, there
is no transgression, that is, none discovered, where no law to discover sin,
sin does not appear: So Romans 5.20. The Law entered that the offense might
(...). Erasm. ut abundare, ut amplificaretur. Beza. ut auctior firet quam priut.
abound, not only to discover sin, but to make it appear exceeding sinful. And
the Apostles words put all out of question, Romans 7.7. I had not known sin but
by the Law, which was the revealer of sin to him, and in the 13. verse. But sin
that it might appear sin, working death in me by that which is good, that sin
by the commandment might appear exceeding sinful.

So that you see the Law does still remain in this use to discover sin to us, I
had not known concupiscence, and so of any other, if the Law had not said,
Thou shall not covet. And this it does after grace too, that which was sin
before, is sin now, grace does not alter the nature of sin, though it do
free us from the fruits and condemnation of it.

3. It was added to humble us for sin. And this also consists with grace; and
it still remains in that use, though this be denied by some: sin is the great
ground of humiliation: and that which is a glass to discover sin, must needs
upon discovery of it, humble the soul for it.

And for this you may read, Lex inservit evangelio ut indicata certissima ex
operibus damnatione, praeparet quemque ad quaerendam gratiam. Chamier.
Romans 3.19, 20. Gal. 3.22. In which regard it may be said, the law is not
against the promises, Gal. 3.21. Is the law against the promises? God forbid.
But the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise through
faith might be given to them that believe. Mark you: there the Apostle says,
the law is not against the promises; for those affirmative interrogations, are
the strongest negations. And he shows why the law is not against the promise,
because it is subservient to the promise: why how that? he shows, because it
concluds us under sin: that is, it does humble us, convince us of sin, that
so the promise might be given: and hence it is said in the 24. verse, Lege
pareum in locum.
The law is our Schoolmasters to bring us unto Christ; he speaks of the same
law of which he did before, which seems by the 22. verse, to be the Moral
law: and how is this the Schoolmasters, but by lashing us, humbling us for
sin, and driving us to Christ? Or admit that it were the ceremonial law
which were said to be the Schoolmasters; yet the Moral law was the rod: the
Master does little without the rod, nor the Ceremony except the Moral law did
drive them to the Ceremonial, which was then Christ in figure, as it does now
drive us to Christ in truth.

And thus the Law still remains, as an instrument in the hand of the Spirit to
discover sin to us, and humble us for it, that so we might come over to
Christ. If the avenger of blood had not followed the murderer, he would never
have gone to the City of refuge: if God should not humble us, we should never
go to Christ. A tender of Christ, and pardon before men be humbled, is worth
nothing. Men do by this as those who were invited to the Supper; they made
light of it: so they make light of a pardon, of the blood of Christ; but when
once God has discovered sin; when the law has come upon us as on Paul, with
an accusing, convincing, humbling, killing power: Oh then Christ is precious,
the promise precious, the blood of Christ precious. And I conceive this was the
maine end God gave the Law after the promise, to advance the promise. Men had
not known the sweetness of Christ, if not tasted of the bitterness of sin.

4. The law was given for a direction of life, and so it does still remain; as
I have fully proved to you.

Though we be sons, Abrogata lex non quoad obedientiam, sed quoad
maledictionem. Chamier.
and are willing to obey, yet we must learn how to actuate this willing
disposition. I say, though we are sons and are guided by the Spirit, and in our
love to God are ready to all services; yet we need that the Word should be a
light unto our feet, and a lantern unto our paths: God has made you sons,
and he has given you an inheritance; and now he gives you a Rule to walk by,
that you might express your thankfulness to him for his rich mercy. Your
obedience is not the cause and ground of his adoption; but the expression of
your thankfulness and duty you owe to God who has adopted you. Lex opermn
exigit impletionem legis, tanquam conditionem antecedentem, lex gratiae opera
non admittit, uifi ut conditiones consequentes. Lege Chamier. ad finem. cap. 3.
l. 15. Tom. 5.
God therefore did not give the Rule, and afterward the Promise; but first the
promise, and then the Rule, to discover that our obedience was not the ground
of acceptance; but a declaration of our thankfulness to God who has accepted
us. So that as it does remain a Rule of walking, yet in Christ: It must be our
rule in Christ; we must obey by the strength of Christ: you must begin
obedience from Christ, you are not to work for your interest, but get an
interest that you may work.

The law, say some of our Divines, was given with Evangelicall purposes, that
is, with purposes subservient to the Gospel; and I say, it must be obeyed with
Evangelicall principles; principles from Christ. The Law shows us but what is
good, it gives no power to do it. It is lex spiritualis, a spiritual law;
holy, just, and good; but it is not lex spiritus, the law of the spirit; this
is alone in Christ, Romans 8.2. The law shows you what is holy, but cannot make
you holy, while it is a rule without us; it cannot make us holy, it must be a
rule within us.

The law is a principle within us first, and then a pattern without us: we are
not made holy by imitation, but by implantation. But that principle within
sends you thither as to the rule without; after which you should conform your
lives without: when the law is once your principle, it then becomes your
pattern.

5. It was given us as a glass to discover our imperfections of duty, and
that remains; there you see the imperfections of your duties, of your graces,
and obedience; and by that you are kept close to Christ; you are kept humble:
this casts you out of your selves, and casts you upon the hold of Christ and
the Promises.

And thus in brief you have seen two of these things propounded, done; you
have seen the maine ends and uses for which the law was set up: you have seen
how these ends were not only consistent with Grace, but might be serviceable
to the advancement of Grace.

We are now come to the third thing propounded, to answer Objections; and then
we will shut up this first and maine Query with some Application.

We are now to deal with the third thing, the answering of Objections.

1. Object. We read that the Law was set up as a Covenant, and in that use
certainly it could not stand with Grace, and therefore there were some ends and
uses wherefore the law was given that are not consistent with Grace.

Now that it was set up as a Covenant, these places seem to declare, Exodus
19.4.6. Now therefore if you will obey my voice indeed, and keep my Covenant,
then you shall be a peculiar people; -- But yet more plainly in Deuteronomy. 4.13. And
the Lord declared to you his Covenant, which he commanded you to perform, even
ten Commandments; and he wrote them upon two Tables of stone. Ier. 31.31,
32. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new Covenant
with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah. Not according to the
Covenant I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to
bring them out of the land of Egypt. But this shall be the Covenant: I will put
my laws into their hearts. So Heb. 8.7, 8, 9. For if the first Covenant had
been faultlesse; then had there been no place for another. These places seem
to speak very plainly, that the law was given as a Covenant of works to the
Jews. And as a Covenant of works it could not consist with Grace; and
therefore there were some ends wherefore the law was set up, which were not
consistent with Grace.

Now then for the clearing of these places, there has been laid down by
Divines diverse distinctions of Covenants. Some have set down these three.

1. A Covenant of Nature.

2. A Covenant of Grace.

3. A mixed Covenant consisting of Nature and Grace.

Others set down these.

1. Foedus naturae. The Covenant of nature: or, that Covenant which God made
with man in Innocence.

2. Foedus promissi: or the Covenant of the promise, as some; the Covenant of
grace, as others; which was made with Adam after his fall, in those words; The
seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head, and renewed to Abraham in the
15. of Genesis but more clearly in Genesis 18.18. In thy seed shall all the nations
of the earth be blessed. And this is the same in substance with the Covenant of
grace.

3. Foedus operis. The Covenant of works which was made with the Jews, as they
interpret those places, Exodus 19.4.6. Deuteronomy. 4.13.

Others again, that make these three Covenants.

1. Foedus naturae. The Covenant of nature made with Adam.

2. Foedus gratiae. The Covenant of grace made to us in Christ.

3. Foedus subserviens. Or the subservient Covenant, which they say, was the
Covenant made here to the Jews, merely in way of subserviencie to the Covenant
of Grace in Christ. A preparing Covenant, to make way for the advancement of
the Covenant of Grace in Christ: which as a Covenant is gone, though the
subserviencie of it does still remain.

Others there are that say, There were never any but two Covenants made with
man: one of Works, the other of Grace. The first in innocence, the other after
the fall. But yet this Covenant of grace was so legally dispensed to the Jews,
that it seems to be nothing else but the repetition of the Covenant of works.
In respect of which legal dispensations of it, the same Covenant under the law
is called a covenant of Works; under the Gospel, in regard of the clearer
manifestations of it, it is called a covenant of grace; but these were not two
distinct covenants, but one and the same covenant diversely dispensed. And that
the law could not be a covenant of works properly taken; I will give but these
Arguments.

That I conceive cannot be said to be a covenant of works whereby a holy God is
married to a sinful people; Ier. 31.31, 32. And therefore could not be a
covenant of works.

That can never be said to be a covenant of works, mercy in it to sinful men,
but this had: it was set up with merciful purposes, with subserviencie to the
Gospel, as the Apostle shows at large in Gal. 3. Ergo.

If the law were given as a covenant of works, opposite, and contrary to the
promise; but that the Apostle shows it is not, Gal. 3.22. Is the law against
the promise? God forbid. But if it were set up as a covenant of works, then
were it diametrically opposite to it; for if of works, then not of grace. --
Ergo.

That can never be a covenant of works which was added to the covenant of
grace: added to the promise, Gal. 3.19. Now if it had been added as a
Covenant, then it would overthrow the nature of the promise; it was so added,
as that the nature of the promise might be preserved: but if any thing of works
were here, it would clean overturne grace, and overthrow the nature of the
promise. Therefore it was not added as a covenant, nor was it added by way of
ingrediencie to the promise; as if we had been to be justified partly by
working, partly by believing; for that overthrowes the freeness of the
promise, If of works, then it is not of grace. But it was added by way of
subserviency to the promise, as the Apostle says here it was added because of
transgression. It was so added to the promise, or covenant of grace as to help
and advance, not to subvert and destroy it. And therefore could not be added as
a covenant of works.

The fifth Argument may be taken from Gal. 3.17. that the law which was four
hundred and thirty years after the promise, could not disanull or make the
promise of none effect. But if God had set up the law as a covenant, it would
have disanulled the promise; nay and it would have declared God changeable,
which cannot be; for says the Apostle, Gal. 3.20. God is one; he is the same
in his grace and purpose to sinners, though he seem by giving the law after
the promise, to repent of his former mercy, and by this to cancel, or repeal
what he had done: yet it is no such matter, God is one, he is the same in all.
This covenant was established by oath, Heb. 6.17, 18. Psalm. 110.4.
Heb. 6.17, 18. And when God swears, he cannot repent, Psalm. 110.4. Now if God
set up this as a Covenant after he had given the promise; either this would
have showed mutability in Gods will, or contradiction in his acts, which cannot
be. And therefore it could not be a covenant of works.

If it were Gods purpose to give life and salvation to the lost sons of men
by a covenant of Grace, Gal. 3.18. If the inheritance be by the law, then it is
not by the promise; but God gave it to Abraham by promise, etc. As if he had
said, It was never Gods end to give life by the law, for he had given it before
another way, namely, by promise. And therefore never intended this the way.

If the law were a covenant of works, different covenant from us, and so none
were saved, which the Apostle gain-saies, Act. 15.11. We believe through the
grace of Christ to be saved, (...), even as they: or else they are both under a
covenant of works, and a covenant of Grace. But that they could not be, they
are utterly inconsistent. Ergo.

God never appointed any thing to an End, unserviceable and unsuitable: but the
law was utterly unserviceable and unsuitable to this End, to give life and
salvation: the Apostle tells us, the law could not do it, Romans 8.3. And in Gal.
3. If there had been a law given that could have given life, which implies it
could not do it, and therefore God never set it up for that purpose.

It could never suit with Gods heart to sinners to give a covenant of works
after the fall; because man could do nothing, to the nature of a covenant, man
was impotent, and could not stand a party in covenant with God. --

Besides, if you do but consider the nature of a covenant of works, you will
see plainly an impossibility that the law should be a covenant of works.

1. Lege Ames. de applicatione Christi. Faedus operis est faedus amicitiae,
faedus gratiae est faedus reconciliationis, -- Ames.
The covenant of works is a covenant between two friends. It is a covenant of
friendship; but God could not make such a covenant with fallen man: we were
enemies, we were guilty sinners: and therefore a covenant of friendship could
not be made: Indeed there might be a covenant of Grace made with him, for that
is a covenant of reconciliation, and such a covenant might be made with
enemies; but there could not be a covenant of works made, for that is a
covenant between friends; and such we were not after the fall.

2. The Covenant of works was a Covenant, wherein each party bad his work; It
was a conditional Covenant we had something to do, if we expected that which
was promised. But now such a Covenant God could not make with man after his
fall; because man was not able to stand to the lowest terms, to perform the
meanest condition. And therefore.

3. The Covenant of works was a Covenant no way capable of renovation; if you
once broke it, you were gone for ever. But now this Covenant which God made
with them was capable of renewing, and they frequently renewed Covenant with
God. And therefore this could not be a Covenant of works. So that by this which
has been spoken, you see plainly that this could not be a Covenant of works
which God made with the Jews.

Object. But you will say; datur tertium, there is some third, some middle
Covenant: but there is no middle Covenant, nor is it a Covenant of Grace, and
therefore it must needs be a Covenant of works.

If by a third Covenant, middle Covenant, consisting partly of works, Medium
participationis.
and partly of Grace, under which the Jews were, and by which they were saved,
I utterly deny any such Covenant. For there was no such Covenant ever made with
man fallen, neither can there be any medium, between works and Grace, the
Apostle speaks that plainly, if of works, then not of Grace. If they had been
to do any thing in relation to life, though never so small, and though the
Gospel had been to do the rest, yet had it been a Covenant of works, and had
been utterly inconsistent with the Covenant of Grace. For Gratia nullo modo
gratia, nisi omni modo gratia. Aug.
Grace can no way be called grace, if not every way grace: if there were any
thing of man's bringing, which were not of Gods bestowing, though it were never
so small, it would overturn the nature of grace, and make that of works which
is of grace. If a man should ask but a penny of us, to the purchase of a
kingdom, though he should give us the rest, yet would that penny hinder it
from being a mere gift and grace. So it is here, etc. And therefore a middle
Covenant I cannot allow it.

There are two other opinions which I will propound to your thoughts: Some that
think it neither a Covenant of works, nor of Grace, but a third Covenant
distinct from both; others that think it a Covenant of Grace, but more legally
dispensed.

1. Some there are that do think it to be a third Covenant; A manuductory,
preparatory or subservient Covenant. Chameron. de triplici faedere.
A Covenant, I say, that was given by way of subservency to the Covenant of
Grace. For the better advancing, and setting up of the Covenant of Grace; and
those who hold this, do say there are three distinct Covenants, Foe^us. 1.
Natural. 2. Gratuitum. 3. Subserviens.

which God made with mankind. 1. The Covenant of Nature. 2. The Covenant of
Grace. 3. The Subservient Covenant.

1. The Covenant of Nature, and that was whereby God required as the Creator of
a creature, perfect obedience to all his Commandments, with promise of a
blessed life in Paradise if he obeyed, threatening eternal death if he
disobeyed the command, and to this end, to declare how virtue pleased, and
sin displeased him.

2. The Covenant of Grace, whereby he promises pardon and forgiveness of
sins, and eternal life, by the blood of Christ, to all those that should
embrace him, and this to declare the riches of his mercy.

3. The Subservient Covenant, which is called the old Covenant, whereby God did
require obedience of the Israelites, to the Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial
Laws, upon promise of all blessings in the possession of Canaan, and
threatening curses and miseries to them that did break it, and this to this end,
that he might raise up their hearts, to the expectation of the Messiah to come.

And this subservient Covenant, or old Covenant, is that which God did strike
with the people of Israel in Mount Sinai, to prepare them to faith, and to
inflame them with the desire of the Promise, and the coming of Christ, and to
be as it were a bridle of restraint, to cohibit them from sin, till that time
that he should send the Spirit of Adoption into their hearts, and govern them
with a more free spirit.

This Covenant, of which the Moral Law is said to be a part, and which is
called here the subservient Covenant under which the Jews were, is shevved
at large (by the Author named) to be a third and distinct Covenant, betvveen
the Covenant of Nature, and the Covenant of Grace. And who ever will have
recourse unto that Tractate of his shall see he lays down both the agreements
and differences it has from the Covenant of Grace and that of Nature. And in
regard it may be the thing has not been observed by all, and many who have
not the Author by them, And others if they had it could make no use, neither
receive any benefit of it, for their sakes chiefly. I will lay down not all,
but the main heads of agreement, and difference, that this Subservient Covenant
has with the Covenant of Nature and Grace. And we will first show you its
agreements and disagreements with the Covenant of Nature. The agreements are
these.

1. In both these Covenants, one party Covenanting is God, the other man.

2. That both have a condition annexed to them.

3. That the condition for the general is the same; Do this, and Live.

4. That the promise in the general is the same too; Paradise and Canaan.

These are the agreements. We will now show you their disagreements.

1. The Covenant of Nature was made with all men, this subservient Covenant
alone with the Israelites.

2. The Covenant of Nature does bring us to Christ, but not directly by it
self, but obliquely and per accidens: but the old Covenant, or the subservient
Covenant, does properly, and per se, bring unto Christ, for it was the true and
proper scope which God aimed at in giving of it. God did not make the Convenant
of Nature with man, that he being burdened with the weight of it should go to
Christ. In giving that, God aimed at this, to have that which was his due from
man. But in this subservient Covenant, God does require his right for no other
end, then that man being convinced of his weakness, and impotency might fly
to Christ.

3. The Covenant of nature was made with man, that by it men might be carried
on sweetly in obedience; for it was engraven in their hearts. But the
subservient Covenant was made that men might be compelled to obedience; for it
did naturally beget to bondage, Gal. 4.24.

4. The Covenant of nature was to be eternal, but this subservient Covenant
was to be but for a time.

5. The Covenant of nature had not respect to the restraint of outward sins,
neither in his principal use nor less principal, but the old Covenant in his
less principal end had, Exodus 20.20.

6. The Covenant of nature was engraven in the heart, but the other written in
tables of stone.

7. The Covenant of nature was made with Adam in Paradise; this subservient
Covenant in Mount Sinai.

8. The Covenant of nature had no mediator, but this subservient Covenant had a
mediator, viz. Moses.

9. The one was made with man perfect, the other with a part of mankind fallen.

And these are the maine agreements and differences between the Covenant of
nature, and this subservient Covenant: We come now to show you the differences
and agreements that it has with the Covenant of Grace.

1. They agree that God is the Author of both.

2. That both are contracted with fallen man.

3. That both do discover sin.

4. That both do bring to Christ.

5. That both are contracted by a Mediator.

6. That in both is life promised.

2. They differ 1. That in the subserviint Covenant God is considered as
condemning sin, and approving alone of righteousness: But in the Covenant of
Grace, as pardoning sin, and renewing holiness in us.

2. They differ in the stipulation or condition; the condition of the old
Covenant was this, Do this and live, of the new, Believe and thou shall be
saved, etc.

3. They differ in the Antiquity. The Promise was more ancient then the Law.
It is said the Law was added to the Promise, and that 430. years after the
Promise was given, Gal. 3.17.

4. The subservient Covenant does restrain, but with Coaction and servility;
but the Covenant of Grace by a willing and Child-like inclination of spirit, by
more freeness and naturalnesse of soul.

5. In the subservient Covenant the spirit of bondage is given; but in the
Covenant of Grace, the Spirit of Adoption.

6. The old Covenant did terrify the conscience; this does comfort it.

7. The object of the old was man asleep, or rather dead in sin; of the other
is man awakened, and humbled for sin.

8. The one shows the way of service, but gives no strength to service; this
does both show the way, and give power.

9. Both promise life, but the one in Canaan, the other in Heaven.

Thus you see the first opinion of the two, which seems a Rational opinion,
though it want the number of maintainers. The Reason in this opinion seems to
be this. The Law is said to be a Covenant, as I have showed in diverse
Scriptures, and if so, either a Covenant of Works, or of Grace, or some third
Covenant; but not a Covenant of Works, nor a Covenant of Grace, Ergo, some
third Covenant.

1. Not a Covenant of works, that I have showed at large; because there was a
former Covenant, a Covenant of Grace made, and this was but added to it, and
not in way of opposition, but subserviency: besides, this broken was capable of
renovation, which a Covenant of works is not capable of: besides, when they
had broken this, they were not to be cast by it, but had liberty of appeal
from the Law to the Gospel, from Gods Justice offended, to Gods Mercy pardoning
and covering, as you see they frequently did, when they implored mercy and
pardon, for his names sake; For thy name sake for give, and for thy name sake
cover: under which Expositions Christ was darkely shadowed out.

Again, if it were a concluding Covenant of life and death, then could they
have had no mercy, no pardon, they must needs have perished; but against that
the apostle speaks act. 15.11. We believe through the grace of Christ to be
saved even as they: Nay, and then it had been utterly inconsistent with the
Covenant of Grace. Then were there some ends and uses for which the Law was
promulged which could not stand with, but were utterly destructive to the
Promise and Covenant of Grace. But I have showed you there were no such ends,
-- And therefore it must be concluded, that it was such a Covenant under which
they stood, as notwithstanding that they did stand under a covenant of Grace,
and therefore it could not be a Covenant of works. This seems to be the reason
of the opinion against the first, that though it be called a Covenant, yet it
could not be a Covenant of works: And if so, then must it be either a Covenant
of Grace, or some third Covenant. Now,

2. It will be said it could not be a Covenant of Grace; Because that our
Divines do generally reckon up this as one part of our freedom that we have
by Christ, to be freed from the Law as a Covenant, and if the Law were a
Covenant of Grace only more Laegally dispensed, and under more Legal
administrations; it might seem better to say, we are freed from the Legal
administrations of it, then to say, we are freed from it as a Covenant. And
therefore they saying we are freed from it as a Covenant, cannot possibly hold
it to be a Covenant of Grace. I only propound you the reason this opinion
holds out.

And if it be neither a Covenant of works, nor a Covenant of Grace, then must
it of necessity be a third Covenant. And yet this such a Covenant as does not
stand in opposition to Grace, neither is inconsistent with the Covenant of
Grace; for then God should have contradicted himself, overthrown his own
purpose, repented of his own promise which he had given before; and therefore
it is called a subservient Covenant, which though it stand upon opposite
terms, yet it has it is subservient ends to the Covenant of Grace; and was
given by way of subserviency to the Gospel, and the more full revealing of the
covenant of grace, and was temporary, and had respect to Canaan and Gods
blessing there, in obedience to it, and not to heaven, for that was promised by
another Covenant which God made with the^ before he entered this. And this is
the reason that this first opinion holds forth, which I desire modestly to
propound, not yet seeing wherein it may be injurious to holiness, or
disagreeing to the mind of God in Scripture.

2. There is a second opinion, in which I find the greatest Number of most Holy
and learned Divines to concur, and that is, that though the Law be called a
Covenant, yet was it not a Covenant of Works for salvation; nor was it a third
Covenant from Works and Grace: but it was the same Covenant for nature and
kind under which we stand under the Gospel, even the Covenant of Grace, though
more Legally dispensed to the Jews; and it differed not in substance from the
Covenant of Grace, Foedus vetus et novum differunt,

1. Tempore continuationis,

2. loco,

3. cla^itate,

4. facilitate,

5. suavitate. Foedus vetus non quia prius, sed quia inveterascere, et
succedenti praestantiori foederi decedere, et aboleri debuit. Cham. de 3. foed.
Heb. 7.43. Oeconomia foederis Gr. in v. T. fuit onerosa, operosa. Alst.


but in degrees, say some, in the Economy and external administrations of it,
say others, the Jews were under infancy, therefore Paedagogy. In which regard
the Covenant of Grace under the Law is called Foedus vetus, or the old
Covenant, and under the Gospel, Foedus novum, or the new Covenant, Hebr. 8.8.
And the one was called Old, the other New, not because it was before the other:
For the Law was added to the Promise 430. years after, and therefore the
Promise was before it; but it is called old, because those administrations did
now wax old and decay, Antiquatum quid et senescens.
(...). Heb. 8. ult.
were nigh to vanishing, ready to disappear, and were to give place to more new
and excellent administrations. That was more obscurely administered, shadowed,
and darkened with shadows, this more perspicuously and clearly; that was more
Onerous and burdensome, this more easy and delightful; that in respect of
the legal administrations did beget to bondage, this to Son-like freedom. As
you may clearly see in those places, Colos. 2.17. Heb. 10.1. Mat. 15.10. Gal.
3.24. Gal 4.1, 2, 3. Non sunt parallelae distinctiones foedus vetus et faedus
novum, foedus operis, et foedus gratiae, foedus legis et foedus Evangeliis
utrumque enim foedus, et vetus, et novum, est foedus gratiae et Evangelii.
Alsted. At cotra Chamier. 151.3. c. sect. 10.5. T.
Hence one says, the new and old Covenant, the Covenant of works (so he calls
the law) and this of Grace, the Covenant of the Law and Gospel, are not
parallel distinctions; for both these Covenants, are Covenants of Grace, only
differing in the Economy, and diverse administrations of them. That they were
the same Covenant for nature and kind, is alleged that in the 1. Lu. 72.74,
75. To perform the mercy promised to our forefathers, and to remember his holy
Covenant. What was that? you see that in the 74. verse for substance the same
with ours; That he, would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the
hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life.

I will give you for brevity, the full draught of their thoughts, who maintain
this second opinion in these five particulars.

1. There was never any more then two Covenants made with mankind, which held
out life and salvation: The first was the Covenant of Works, in innocence; the
other is the Covenant of Grace, after the fall.

2. There was never but one way of salvation since the fall, and that was by a
Covenant of grace: God never set up another covenant of works since the fall,
he puts us now to believe without working for life.

3. That yet all Adams posterity they lie under the Covenant of works, as Adam
left them after his fall, till they come over to Jesus Christ.

4. That the law was never given as a Covenant of works, but added to the
promise, by way of subserviencie to the covenant of grace.

5. That though the law was given with merciful purposes, and subservient to
the covenant of grace; yet it seems to come handed to us, as though it were
the repetition of another covenant of works under which we stand.

Or rather the covenant of grace under the Old Testament seems to be so legally
represented as if it were a covenant of works still to us. And it is worth our
observation to see how the covenant of Grace like the Sun in the firmament,
has risen up still to further and further clearness; from Adam to Moses it
was very dark and obscure; from Moses to the time of the Prophets the light
began to appear. After the Prophets when John began his Ministry, then the
light was more clearly revealed, under the Ministry of Christ, Chameron.
who revealed the bosom counsels of his Father, there were more clear and
glorious manifestations of it. After Christ's resurrection and the sending of
the Spirit, the book before clasped, was now fully opened, that he that runs
might read. In so much that some have called the covenant of Grace before
Christ, foedus promissi, the covenant of promise; and now under the Gospel the
covenant of grace, in respect of the full, clear, and ample discovery of it:
the shadows which before obscured it being taken away; and the whole platform
of Gods design of saving man by mere grace so clearly discovered, that he
that runs may read it.

That which stood upon opposite terms to the covenant of grace, subservient to
the covenant of grace; but must needs be a covenant of works.

But the law stood upon opposite terms to the covenant of grace, Ergo.

That it stood upon opposite terms it is manifest, Lex proponit justitiam et
salutem cum condition totius legis implendae, evangelium vero promittit candem
fine ulla condition. Chamier.
the one commanding doing, the other believing: if you do consult with these
places, Levit. 18.4, 5. Ye shall keep my statutes, and my judgments, which if
a man do he shall live in them. Ezekiel. 20.11. I gave them my statutes which if
a man do he shall live in them. Gal. 3.12. The law is not of faith, but he
that does them shall live in them.

But these may be eluded, he shall live (in) them, but he does not say he shall
live (by) them; we live in obedience, but we do not live by obedience: there
is much difference between them.

Therefore lest this might put it off, see more plainly, Romans 2.13. For not the
hearers of the law, but the doers of the law shall be justified. And that the
Apostle speaks here of the moral law he shows after, verse. 21, 22. where he
discourses of some branches of the Moral law: So Romans 10.5, 6. For Moses
describes the righteousness which is of the law (yet he does not say which is
by the law) that the man which does these things shall live by them, but the
righteousness which is of faith speaks thus: Whosoever believes on him, shall
not be ashamed, verse. 11. So that the law you see by these places seems to
stand upon opposite terms to grace. And this is the Objection which you see I
have raised to the height: and if this be cleared, then all is done, etc.

Now against these I might oppose diverse other Scriptures, which seem to
speak against it. Gal. 3.11. But that no man is justified by the law it is
evident, for the just shall live by faith. Again, Gal. 3.21. If there had
been a law given that could have given life, verily righteousness had been
by the law: that is, if the law had been able to justify or save any man, it
should have done all men: God would never have sent Christ, but by the works of
the law shall no flesh living be justified, Gal. 3.10. Who ever are under the
works of the law, are under the curse: and if under the curse, who ever look
for life by obedience to the law, then surely God did not set up this with this
end, that we should have life by obedience to it. The law entered that sin
might abound, says the Apostle, and if the Law was given to show the
wideness, greatness of sin; then surely not that we should be justified by
obedience to it, etc. Besides, It was given four hundred and thirty years
after the promise: God gave the promise of life and justification before to
faith; and had he after given the law that we should have life by working, then
had God been contrary to himself, changeable in his purpose, and repented of
his former mercy; but not this, therefore not the other.

Besides, God could not expect that we should do, that we might have life;
because we were to have life before we could do: Christ says, Quod moveor
exiliter ad te, non nisi a te Domine. Chrysostom.
Without me ye can do nothing. We have no life but of Christ, he is our life,
He that has the Son has life, and he that has not the Son has not life:
and dead men cannot work: we could not do that we might live, seeing we were
to be made alive that we might do.

Again, God never purposed life upon obedience, because he had decreed another
way to confer life upon men; this you see plain, Gal. 3.11. where the
Apostle debates the same thing, But that no man is justified by the law it is
evident; Why, how is that evident? because, says he, the just shall live by
faith: as if he had said, God has decreed another way to life; and therefore
surely the former is not the way.

But yet you will say, It seems as if the law did require us to do, and
promise life to doing: and if so, certainly the law stands upon opposite
terms to grace; and therefore can neither be a covenant of grace, nor
subservient to it. And if they do not stand upon opposite terms, how shall we
understand this, Do this and live? For the reconciling of this opposition, and
unfolding the meaning of Do this and live, I will lay down six or seven
particulars to be considered of.

1. Do this and live, has not reference to the moral law only, but to the
ceremonial also (as in Levit. 18.4, 5.) which was their Gospel; especially if
you look upon the ceremony, not as it is an appendix to the Moral law, but as
it carries a typical relation to Christ, as every lamb slain did point out to
Christ, and say, Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
world. The Gospel was darkely administered and shadowed out by the Ceremony.

2. This was not spoken of the law abstractly, and separately considered; but
of the Law and Promise jointly; not of the Law exclusively, but of the Law
inclusively, as including the Promise; as having the Promise involved with it.

3. He does not bid them Do and live by doing; but do and live in doing; we
may live [in] obedience, though we do not, nor cannot live [by] obedience. We
could not live by them, till we had life; but that is not by doing, but by
believing, as Christ says, You would not come to me that you might have life;
that was not by works, but by grace. If there had been a law given that could
have given life, either life that we might obey, or life upon our obedience;
verily righteousness should have been by the law.

4. Some think that God after he had given the promise of life, and tendered
life upon believing, he repeated the covenant of works in the law, to put man
to his choice, whether he would now be saved by working or believing. And this
the rather to empty them of themselves, and answer them in these thoughts,
which perhaps they might think that they were able to come to life by
obedience, and therefore God puts them to the trial: and lest they should
think that any wrong was done to them, he gives them a repetitition of the
former covenant; and as it were, puts them to their choice whether they would
be saved by working or believing; that when they were convinced of their own
impotencie, they might better see, admire, adore, advance the mercy of God who
has given a Promise, sent a Christ, to save those that were not able to do
any thing toward their own salvation.

5. Others think that Do this and live, has reference only to a temporal
and prosperous life in the Land of Canaan: if they would be conformable to that
law which God had given them, and obey him in his commands, then should they
live, and live prosperously in the Land of Canaan which he had given them: he
would bless their basket and store, Deuteronomy. 28.
etc.

6. There is another interpretation, and that is, that Do this and live,
though it was spoken to them immediately, yet not terminatively, but through
them to Christ, who has fulfilled all righteousness for us, and purchased
life by his own obedience.

Some of these I reject, and I can close with none of these, only I propound
this tariety. I will give you my own thoughts of it in brief.

I grant that in the external view of them (what ever it is in truth) the Law
and Gospel do seem to stand upon opposite terms, but yet these opposite
terms on which the Law seems to stand, had its subservient ends to Christ and
Grace. For all this was but to awaken them, and convince them of their own
impotency, to humble them for it, and to drive them unto Christ. If indeed we
look upon the Law separately, so it seems to stand upon opposite terms, and
we may answer the question, which yet the Apostle concludes, Is the Law against
the Promises? God forbid, and say, yea it is against the Promises, as it says,
Do this and live; for if of works, then not of grace. And therefore we must so
interpret this; Do this and live, that we may not make it against the
Promises. Now I say, Lex and Evangelium mutuo sibi dant manus. Pet. Mart. Lex
and Evangelium sunt subordinata and opposita. Alst.
if you look upon the Law separately, so it stands upon opposite terms and is
against the Promise. But if you look upon it relatively, as it has respect to
the Promise, so these opposite terms have their subservient ends to the
Promise and Grace. And that by convincing us of our own impotencie and
weakness, that we might go over to Christ and the Promise for life. I showed
you this was the difference between the Covenant made with man in Innocence,
and between Gods requires in the Law: In the former, God did not require
obedience, that man being burdened with the weight of his work should go to
Christ, but this was it God aimed at there to have that which was his due from
man. But now in the Law God does require his right for no other end, then that
man being convinced of his weakness, and impotency, might fly to Christ. And
therefore though do this and live be against the promise, yet if you look upon
the end wherefore God said so, to discover our weakness, to humble us for it,
to drive us out of our selves; so you will see sweet agreement and subserviency
to the Promise. Lex docendo and jubendo, quod sine gratia impleri non potest,
homini demonstrat suam infironitatem, ut quaerat demonstrata infirmitas
Salvatorem, a quo sanata voluntas possit, quod infirma non posset. Lex igitur
adducet ad fidem. Aug. epist. centes. quadrag.


There is a seeming contradiction of Ieromes, true on both parts. Cursed is he
that says, God commands impossibilities. And cursed is he that says, the
Law is possible. This seems strange, did not God command the Law, and is not
the Law impossible? It is true it is so. And therefore God did not command the
Law with expectation we should fulfill it; we were not able to obey it, nor it
to help us, as you see both, in Romans 8.3. But God commanded the Law, God says,
do this and live, to discover to us our impotency and weakness, and stir up
our hearts to look out after Christ, who has fulfilled all righteousness for
us, both legis and crucis, he has undergone the penalties, and obeyed the
precepts, borne our curses, done our services.

The course that Christ takes with the young man is very observable, and fully
proves that which I have said to you, you shall read it in Matthew. 19.16. and so
on. Good Master, says he, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?
Here was his question, etc. You shall see Christ's answer in the latter end of
the 17. verse. If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments. This was a
strange Answer, was the Law a way? wherefore did he then come into the world?
or was the young man able to keep it? that is impossible, Romans 8.3. and does
not the Apostle say, Who ever are under the works of the Law, they are under
the curse, because cursed is he that obeys not in all things in the book of
the Law, and that is impossible. This was therefore a strange Answer that
Christ made to his Question, he does not say, as in other places, If thou will
enter into life believe, but here, keep the commandments, yet if you look now
upon the person to whom Christ spoke, and the end wherefore, you will see the
meaning. The person to whom, was a proud iusticiary, one that swelled in a
fleshie opinion, that he had kept the whole Law, and therefore should be saved
by it, as he tells you afterward. All this I have kept from my youth, and
therefore Christ sets him to the Law, not for an instrument of justification,
for he answered the same Question otherwise, in Ioh. 6.28, 29. but he sets him
to the Law as a glass to discover his imperfections, that being convinced of
his impotency, and being humbled for it, he might come over to Christ for life
and salvation.

When men will be Saviors of themselves, when they look for righteousness by
the Law; Christ bids them go and keep the commandments, servanda mandata, and
this to humble them, and to bring them to him. But if men be once humbled, and
broken in the sight of sin, then Omissa legis mentione gratiae promissione
solatur, says Calvin. 3. lib. Instit. cap. de merced.
without mention of the Law at all, he comforts them with the free promises of
grace: Then he says, Come to me all that are weary and heavy laden and I will
ease you. And the Spirit of the Lord is upon me to preach liberty to the
Captive, etc.

So then to conclude; I conceive the opposition between the Law and the Gospel,
was chiefly of their own making, they should have been driven to Christ by it,
but they expected life in obedience to it. And this was their great error and
mistake, it was as hard to bring them from seeking life by their own
righteousness and obedience to the Law, as to force the Sun from the sky. Not
that I think they did imagine righteousness by the Moral Law alone, for
there they could not but see they were cast and gone, but by the Ceremonial
Law with the Moral, God had given them these Laws, and often said, Do this and
live. Therefore they thought by subjection to them to have life. And what they
wanted in the Moral, they went to make up in the Ceremonial, they would do
something the Moral Law commanded, and go to the Ceremonial for what they
could not do, not that all did so, yet many of them. But this was far from
Gods end, It was their own error, and mistake, as the Apostle seems to imply,
in Romans 10.3, 4. They have a zeal to God, but without knowledge: for they
being ignorant, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God, but
went about to establish a righteousness of their own; they went about it, but
could not attain it, all this was but setting a dead man on his feet, and this
arose from their ignorance, their error and mistake. They did as poor
ignorant souls do with us, we bid them pray, we bid them obey, do duties, and
poor souls all they do they do in reference to justification by them, they
spin a thread of their own righteousness to apparel themselves with all. Poor
souls they can think of nothing but working themselves to life: when they are
troubled they must lick themselves whole, when wounded, they run to the salve
of duties, and streams of performance, and Christ is neglected. So hard it is
to be in duty in respect of performance, and out of duty in respect of
dependence; this is a thing beyond their reach, to do all righteousness, and
yet to rest in none but Christ's. Domine memorabor iustitiae tuae solius, Lord I
will make mention of thy righteousness only, and that is mine too, for Christ
is made to me, wisdom, righteousness -- 1 Cor. 1.29.

And thus I have Answered the first great Query, and those objections that
depended on it. And may lay down these two Positions as firm Conclusions.

1. That the Law for substance of it, does remain as a Rule of obedience to
the people of God, and that to which they are to conform their walking under
the Gospel.

2. That there was no end or use for which the Law was given, but might consist
with Grace, and be serviceable to the advancement of the Covenant of Grace.

I come now to the second Query.

Whether this be any part of our freedom by Christ,

If we do consult with the Scriptures, people, such whose sins are yet
pardoned, may yet bear chastisements for sin. That they have been under the
rod, under the corrections, and chastisements of God, that is plain; Abraham,
David, Moses, and all were, and the Apostle tells us, Heb. 12.6. If we be not
chastised, we are bastards and not sons, for he scourges every son he
receives. And that these corrections have been inflicted on them for sin, the
Scripture seems to hold forth Lam. 3.34. Wherefore does a living man complain,
a man for the punishment of his sin? Let us search, etc. Micah 1.5. For the
wickedness of Jacob, and for the sin of Israel is all this -- Micah 7.9. The
Church says, She will bear the indignation of the Lord, because she had
sinned against him. Nay, it is laid down as a precedent condition, to go
before Gods removal of calamities from them, that they were to humble
themselves for sin, and turn from sin before God did deliver them, 2 Chronicles.
7.14. and in Levit. 26.41. If their uncircumcised hearts shall be humbled, and
if they shall accept of the punishment of their iniquity, what is that? that
is, if they would justify God in his proceeding against them, if they would
lie down in the dust and own their punishment, and say, that their sins
have deserved it, and acknowledge Gods Justice in afflicting them, then would
he remember his Covenant and help them. And all this you see was done by the
Princes of Israel, when they were punished by the hand of Shishak, 2 Chronicles.
12.6. It is said, They humbled themselves under the mighty hand of God, and
said, the Lord is righteous, that is, he does justly afflict us for our sin we
have committed. So that this proves that they were punished for their sins. For
if they were to humble themselves for sin under affliction, if they were to
justify God in his dealing, then sure God did afflict them for sin.

But now against this it may be it will be said, whole Church, and not of them
alone who were godly.

I grant it was spoken to the whole Church, godly themselves were to do the
same duties with them, they were not to be exempted, they were to humble
themselves for sin, as you see Daniel, Ezra did: and if that sin was not the
cause, and those calamities inflicted on them for sin, then were they to hold
forth an untruth, for to humble themselves for sin as the cause why Gods hand
was gone out against them, and to accept of the punishment of their iniquity,
and to declare God is righteous in it; if God did not chastise them for sin,
was certainly to hold out an untruth, which cannot be allowed of.

But admit this, that this was spoken of the whole Church, yet we have places
to evidence, that God has punished his own people for sin, such as was his
dear ones. Moses and Aaron they were shut out of Canaan, God would not suffer
them to enter into the Land of Promise. And this was a great affliction: and if
you look into Numb. 20.12. you shall see that this was for sin, because they
sanctified not God at the waters of Meribah. As he tells them; Because you
believed not to sanctify me in the eyes of the children of Israel: Therefore
you shall not bring the Congregation into the Land.

So David, of whom God professes, that he was a man after his own heart, yet
you see how God did chastise him, his child dies, the Sword should not depart
from his house, his own son rose up in rebellion against him: these were
great calamities; and if you look into the 2 Samuel 12.10. you shall see the
cause of this to be his sin, his murder and adultery. Now therefore the Sword
shall never depart from thy house because thou have despised me, and have taken
the wife of Vriah to be thy wife.

But now against this it may be it will be said, Old Testament, and therefore
will not prove, for they were under a different covenant to the godly now.

I told you in the answer to the former question that some Divines did
distinguish of a threefold covenant: Sinai, contained in the Moral,
Ceremonial, Judicial laws: a covenant which though it stood upon opposite
terms, yet had it is subservient ends to the covenant of grace. A covenant
which God made with israel when they were to enter into Canaan, and had chiefly
respect unto their good or evil in it. Wherein God promised blessings upon
obedience, and threatened calamities and judgments on them if they disobeyed.
As you see them at large annexed to it, in the 28. and the 29. Chapters of
Deuteronomie. And all this by way of subserviencie unto the covenant of grace,
that when they saw they were neither able to obtain life, nor outward mercies;
nor keep off death, and temporal evils, by their obedience to it, they might
look out for the promise of grace, and long for the Messiah, and expect all
these upon better grounds: And into this covenant they did all enter with God,
and bound it with an oath, and a curse, as you see in Deuteronomy. 29.12.19. God for
his part engaging himself to bless them in the Land of Canaan whither they
went, if they obeyed his commands; and threatening to punish them there if they
did not obey him. To all which they did subscribe, as you see there, and bound
it with an oath and a curse. And therefore some interpret those words, Do this
and live, to have respect alone to their well-being in the Land of Canaan, and
in this life. I have read a story of the Sadduces, who you know denied the
resurrection, and consequently, I suppose, the immortality of the soul: they
were men skillful in the law, and observant of it, though they held this great
error: upon consideration of which, one demanding of them wherefore they kept
the Commandments, seeing they denied the resurrection: they answered, That it
might go well with them in this life; that they might inherit temporal
blessings by obedience to it. I will not say that they served the end of the law
in this, for certainly God gave the law for higher ends; But this, I may say,
that it may be they served the end of it better then they that asked the
question. It might be, they who asked the question, kept the law for
justification: you read of such a spirit in them, Romans 10.3, 4. some there were
that looked to be justified by obedience to it: and that was farther from the
end of God in giving of it, them to keep the law that it might go well with
them in this life: of the first (...), there is not one tittle in the Book of
God, but for this second there seems much: You read of something to this
purpose in the fifth Commandment, Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy
days may be long in the land whither thou go to possess: and something of
it in the second Commandment; and a great deal more in the 26. Deuteronomy. 16, 17,
18, 19. and wholly in the 28. of Deuteronomie: though under these temporals,
spiritual things were shadowed and apprehended by those who were spiritual.

It is true, the things that were commanded and forbidden, were morally good
and evil, and so of perpetual observance; yet the terms on which they seem
to be commanded and forbidden, and they obeyed, are gone, which were
prosperity or calamities, good or evil, in the Land which God gave them. And
hereupon they are said still upon their disobedience to break Gods covenant,
which could not be the covenant of grace, for that is not broken, It is an
everlasting covenant, like that of the waters of Isa. 54.9.
Noah. A covenant that shall not be broken; it depends not upon our walking and
obedience, it is not made upon our good behavior; Obedience might be the end,
but not the ground or motives God had in making it: nor could it be a covenant
of works with reference to life and salvation; for that broken, is not capable
of renovation, and renewing; but it is spoken of this subservient covenant,
which God made with them, and under which they stood. This I only suggest; And
I do not see any dangers it leads us into; yet am I not peremptory in it: But
admit this (which yet is the greatest advantage can be given to them) admit,
Suppositio nil ponit.
I say, that the Jews were under a different covenant; and that it was such a
covenant as is expressed: wherein God promised and bestowed temporal good upon
them, upon their obedience, and threatened and inflicted temporal evils upon
them for their disobedience; yet were they under a covenant of grace also as
well as we; that sure all grant: and the Apostle speaks plainly in Act. 15.11.
We hope through the grace of Christ to be saved as well as they, (...).

And there were such as were Gods choice people, who were not only under, but
in this covenant of grace, that yet were chastised and afflicted for sin;
Moses, David, Hezekiah, Isa. 38.17.

And therefore this will not be of moment to overthrow this Position, viz. That
God does afflict his own people for sin.

Though it should be granted they were under a different Covenant, yet that
covenant was not a covenant of works, as I have showed; notwithstanding this
covenant, yet were they under the covenant of grace also: yet were they his
children, his choice ones; and they were afflicted for sin. And therefore
notwithstanding this, the position is firm, That God afflicts his people, his
children for sin.

But to take away the occasion of that simple Cavil, that these are places
alleged out of the Old Testament, and therefore prove nothing to them, though
I am far from allowing of any such exceptions, because they are full of
danger, and lead you upon more rocks then you can yet discern. The Harmony of
Scripture must be preserved, it is one way to find out truth in doubtful
points; and it is the work of the Ministers of the Gospel; the great work, to
discover and preserve the Harmony of them; and not to make one piece of
Scripture to quarrel and clash against the another. Certainly there is a sweet
Harmony, and agreement between the Old and New Testament; God is the same in
both, And had we wisdom, we should see the mutualnesse, subserviencies, and
agreements, even in those places that seem opposite.

But that you may not have, or rather take an occasion of exception; we will
from the Old go down to the New Testament, and see if the same position be
not confirmed there also: I think we shall find them both to speak one
language in this point.

Look into 1 Cor. 11.30. the Apostle having before told them of the fearful
sin of profaning the Lords Table, and unworthy partaking of this Ordinance;
he tells them at last; That though they did not take notice of it, yet this was
the great cause of that sickness, weakness, death, which God had inflicted on
them, and now reigned among them -- for this cause, viz. unworthy partaking,
many are weak and sickly among you, and many are fallen asleep. Can you have
a clearer place? here is affliction and punishment set down; here is the sin
set down: and lest all this should not be enough, he tells them, for this sin
is this punishment: For this cause many are sick. --

But you will say, people; those of whom this is spoken, were unworthy
partakers of the Sacraments; but Gods people cannot be unworthy pertakers of
it, Ergo.

For the answer of this we must know there is a twofold unworthiness: 1.
Duplex indignitas, 1. personae, 2. tractationis.
the unworthiness of the person: 2. the Unworthiness of present disposition.
1. Unworthiness of the person, and that is when a man comes without his
wedding garment, unjustified, unsanctified, and thus Gods people cannot be
unworthy, this is state-unworthines. 2. There is unworthines of present
disposition, or the manner of partaking, when we come not with those present
dispositions and affections which are required to such an ordinance; habitual
preparation there may be, and yet want actual, which lies in examination,
excitation of our graces, as the Apostle speaks, Let a man examine himself,
and so let him eat, etc. the want of which may make a man an unworthy receiver.
As may be seen in the prayer of Hezekiah: 2 Chro. 30.18, 19.
Good Lord pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek the God of his
fathers, 1 Cor. 11.32.
though he be not prepared according to the preparation of the Sanctuary: they
had habitual (their hearts were prepared to seek God) but they wanted
actual, they were not prepared according to the Preparation of the Sanctuary.
Gods people may have habitual, yet may want Sacramental preparation.

2. But secondly that they were Gods people you may see in the 32. verse. you
are chastned of the Lord, that you may not be condemned of the world.

It was not a punishment, but chastisement: A phrase peculiar to Saints, and
the end is that they may not be condemned with the world; So that you see this
place speaks plain enough, etc. Let us see further. Romans 8.10.
Look into the 8. Romans 10. If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of
sin, where the Apostle shows, that death is the effect of sin, and though
you be in Christ, yet you must die because of sin, sin brings death, etc.
And that also in the 12. Heb. Heb. 12, 6, 7, 8.
6.7.8. speaks some thing, He scourges every son whom he receives: what
son is he whom he chastises not? And wherefore does he chastise them?
because they are sons? that cannot be the reason but because they are
sinners; correction though not ever, yet here sure implies offense. So 1. Pet.
4.17. 1 Pet. 4.17
Judgment must begin at the house of God. Revel. 2.12. Reve. 2.12. to the 16.
to the 16. where it is said to the Angel of the Church of Pergamus, of whom
God gives this testimony, that he had kept the Name of Christ, and had not
denied the Faith of Christ; but yet there were some sins among them, that God
bid them repent of, least otherwise he come against them, where he shows their
sins should bring calamity if they repented not. 1 Cor. 1 Cor. 10.5, to 12.
verse.
10.5 to the 12. Let not us be idolaters as some of them were, etc. All these
they happened to them for examples and admonitions to us: And why admonitions
to us, if that we must not share with them in the same strokes, if we went on
with them in the same sins?

Thus I have given you a taste of some places that seem to hold out this
truth firmly to us, That Gods people may be chastised for sin, or that God
does chastise his people for sin.

Now we will come to draw forth their strength, and see if they be able to
stand out against the strength and clearenes of this truth: we will first
begin with some of their Cavills, which are their Forlorn hope, and then we
will come to the maine body of their Arguments, and shall leave a Reserve of
strength to come up after all, and make the victory of truth more complete and
perfect. First, to begin with their Cavills.

God, Dr. Cr. in his Christalone exalted 33.34. pa.
say they, does not afflict his people for sin, but chastise them from sin:
The father does not give his child Physic to make him sick, but to take
away bad humors, to prevent or remove diseaseases.

Now this I call a mere Cavil. respect both to time past, and time to come.
God does both afflict his people for sin, and chastise them (to use their
phrase) from sin; the father does not only correct his child to make him
beware of the same fault, but for the fault already committed; to bring him to
repentance and sorrow for it, and to work out that disposition in him: or to
use their own similitude; he gives him physic not to increase his bad
humors, but remove them; We grant it and say, God does chastise for sin, not
to increase sin, but to remove sin; but yet say, as the bad humors are the
cause, he gives him the physic, for if there were no bad humors, there were
no need of physic: So sin is the cause of the affliction, if there were no
sin, there might be no affliction. And if the father may give physic for
the purging out bad humors, before they do break out, much more for the
correction of them, and cure of them when they do break out: So if God may
afflict men for the purging out a sinful disposition, much more may he
correct them for the breaking out of this disposition. Indeed their mistake is
here, they look upon afflictions, merely as Physic, which yet you see does
not stand them in great stead. Afflictions they are medicines and rods; Micah
6.9. Job 9.34. Lam. 3.1.
they are Rods so called to correct us for sin committed, and medicines to
prevent sin to come: or if you do look upon them as Physic only, Physic
has a double respect, 1. to our present distemper, to purge out that, and so
afflictions are for sin: 2. to our future health, to recover or gain that,
and so afflictions are from sin.

A second Cavil is this. confound things, and set down that for a cause which
is but an occasion, God may take occasion from sin to chastise his people,
when yet their sin is not the cause wherefore they are chastised. For
instance; David's sin of numbering the people, upon which God did bring a
pestilence upon Israel; David's sin was not the cause of it, Isreal's sin was
the cause; David's sin was but the occasion; It is said, in 2 Samuel 24.1. The
anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moved David against them,
to say, Go number the people; God had displeasure against Israel, and David's
sin was not the cause of procuring, but the occasion God took of inflicting
this judgment on them.

The like may be said of Hezekiah his sin in glorying in the riches of his
treasure, and the strength of his Magazine, as you see in Isa. 39.2. He shows
all his riches to the Ambassador of Babylon, upon which act of his pride and
vain glorying, God sends the Prophet to tell him, that as he had tempted God;
so he had but tempted an enemy, and showed him where he might have a booty if
he would come fetch it: And that should be the issue of it, for all this
Treasure and strength which he had discovered, should be carried into Babylon.
Now this particular sin of Hezekiah, for which God seems to threaten this
calamity, it was not the cause of it, at the utmost it was but an occasion.
And therefore it is a great mistake in these and other places, to lay down
those things for causes which are but occasions.

Now to Answer this charge: guilty of confounding things then we are.
Certainly, the want of clear conceptions of things has been the ground of
those mistakes, and erroneous opinions which they have vented -- But we will
not recriminate, we will come to the Answer. And we say,

1. By way of Grant, that this or that particular sin, may sometimes be said
rather to be the occasion, then the cause of an affliction.

2. That yet we say, Sin is not only an occasion, but it is oftentimes a
cause, not only of chastisement in general, but of this or that particular
Castigation. As you see, 1 Cor. 11.30. For this cause many are weak, and many
are sick, and many are fallen asleep. So Psalm. 39.11.

3. And for those Allegations, I conceive they will but afford them little
succor. As for the last, that of Hezekiah, we are so far from thinking that
particular sin of his to be the cause, that we will not admit it to be the
occasion of those calamities threatened. We grant it to be an occasion of the
prediction, but not of the punishment. By his sin God takes occasion to
foretell the calamity which he had decreed, but this was no occasion either of
the decree it self, or of the evil decreed. And for the other, that of David,
it was not merely an occasion taken, but there was an occasion given by David's
sin. It was not only an occasion, but a cause too; if Isreal's sins were the
deserving, David's sin was the appearing cause; if Isreal's sin did procure
this, yet David's sin gave the finishing and concluding stroke. Not only his
sin in numbering of them, but the omission of that duty which God required,
when they were to be numbered, which was, Every head that was numbered to give an
offering to the Lord, that there be no plague among them when they were
numbered, as you see, Exodus 30.12, 13, 14, 15. which being omitted, God brought
a plague on them.

This is all I shall say for Answer to these Cavils which are made, we will
come to their maine body of Arguments.

The first Argument, that God does not punish for sin, is this, If God do
take away the cause, then he takes away the effect also. Sin is the cause of
all punishment, punishment is the effect of sin; now if God do take away the
cause which is sin, then the effect which is the punishment of sin: if the
body be removed, the shadow must be gone too: sin is the body, and punishment
the shadow, take away sin, and the punishment must needs be taken away. And
this seems to be employed in that phrase which is used in Scripture for pardon
of sin; I will remember your sins no more, that is, never to condemn you
for them, nor to object them against you, nor yet to punish you for them; where
he pardons sin, there he forgives the punishment.

And this seems to be granted in the thing it self, pardon of sin: what is
pardon of sin, but a removing of guilt? what is guilt, but an obligation and
binding us over to punishment: Spiritual, temporal, eternal? And therefore
if God take away the guilt of sin, then does he take away the punishment also.

For the Answer of this, distinguish of punishments. 1. Temporal. 2.
Spiritual. 3. Eternal punishments.

1. For Eternal punishments, so all agree, that they can never lay hold on
those whom Christ has set free, those I say, whose sins he has pardoned.

2. For Temporal punishments as they have relation or subordination to
eternal punishments, so we are freed from them also.

3. Nay, thirdly, we are freed from all Temporal punishments.

1. Quamvis Deus absolvit vere poenitentes propter Christi mortem ab omni poena
satifactoria, non tamen illos liberat ab omni poena medicinali and
castigatoria. Dave. in 1. col. 24. p. 127.
As they are parts of the curse for sin.

2. As they are satisfactions for sin; eithersatisfaction by way of purchase,
or satisfaction by way of punishment. We say Gods justice, yea, and both parts
of it, his vindictive and rewarding, his commanding and condemning justice is
satisfied.

3. We are freed from them, as they are the mere fruits of sin, or as
merely penal, for so they are parts of the curse, and so inflicted upon
wicked men, but not so inflicted upon the Godly, all their troubles are
fruitful not penal troubles.

4. As they are the effects of vindictive justice, and not of fatherly mercy,
so we are freed from all temporal punishments for sin; God has thoughts of
love in all he does to his people. 1. The ground of all his dealing is love. 2.
The manner of his dealing is love. 3. And the ends of his dealing are love. 1.
Our good here, to make us partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12.10. 2. Our glory
hereafter, to make us partakers of his glory.

If Christ have born what ever our sins deserved, satisfied Gods justice to the
full, then cannot God in justice punish us for sin, (that were to require the
full payment of Christ, and yet to demand part of us) But Gods justice is fully
satisfied in Christ, etc. Ergo.

I grant Gods justice is fully satisfied in Christ, require no more then what
Christ has done and suffered, he has abundantly satisfied; And therefore,
far be it from any to say that God does chastise his children for sin, for
satisfaction of his justice, Christ has done that, and has left nothing for
us to bear by way of satisfaction, the Papists say indeed that our sufferings
are satisfactions, and therefore they penance and punish themselves. But I know
none of ours to say it, we say God does not chastise us for satisfaction for
sin, but for castigation and Caution, to bring us to mourn for sin
committed, and to beware of the like.

But secondly, punishment of sin, Concedo fideles post peccatorum remissionem
multa Dei flagella sentire; sed nego haec illis infligi, ut per has passiones
divinae justitiae satisfaciant. Daven. Medicina, non poena, castigatio, non
damnatio. Aug.
yet may God fatherly correct his people for sin. Christ endured the great
shower of wrath, the black and dismal shower of displeasure for sin; that
which falls upon us, is a Sunshine shower, warmth with wet, as wet so warmth,
of love, to make us fruitful and humble, he drank the dregs of that bitter
cup, so much as would damn us, and left so much for us, as to humble us. That
which you suffer for sin, is not penal, arising from vindictive justice, but
medicinal, arising from a fatherly love. It is thy medicine, not thy
punishment, thy chastisement, not thy sentence, thy correction, not thy
condemnation. In brief then, God may chastise the Saints for those sins for
which Christ has satisfied, and he himself has forgiven for many reasons.
Tribus de causis fideles castigantur. 1. Ad demonstrationem debitae miseriae.
2. Ad emendationem laebilis vitae. 3. Ad exercitationem necessariae patientiae.
1. In terrorem malorum.
S. Augustine names three. For the demonstration of our due misery, for the
amendment of our life, for the exercise of our patience. I shall name these
five.

1. God may do it for the terror of wicked men, that they may read their
destiny in the Saints miseries. If it be thus done with the green tree, what
shall become of the dry tree? if it thus befall the Sheep of Christ, what shall
become of Wolves, of Goats? If he deal thus with friends, what shall become of
enemies? If judgment begin at the house of God, where shall the wicked appear?

2. For the manifestation of his justice, 2. In manifestationem justitiae.
that he might declare to the world that he is just: if he should punish others
for sin, and spare his own, wicked men would say he were partial, he
respected persons, and therefore to declare he is just and impartial, he will
chastise his own.

3. To remove scandal. 3. Ad removenda scandala.
The sins of the Saints, they bring scandal upon Religion, their sins are
the sins of public persons, every one stands for many. God was more
dishonored by David's uncleanness, then by all the filth of Sodom, the ways
of God were blasphemed thereby, as the Prophet tells him, and upon that ground,
because he had given the occasion, therefore God would chastise him, 1 Samuel 12.

4. 4. In Cautionem alioman.
For Caution to others: others woes should be our warnings; others sufferings,
our sermons; and standing sermons to us to beware of the like: thus God does
chastise, ne in alios grassetur peccatum, lest sin should spread: the Apostle
sets down this at large in the 1 Cor. 10. from the 5. to the 12. Lots wife was
turned into a pillar of salt, ut te condiret, to season thee. 2 Cor. 1.13, 14.

5. 5. In salutem illorum.
For their own good here, and furtherance of their salvation hereafter: their
good here, 1. To humble them more for their sin: when sin comes clad and
arrayed with a cross, or sad affliction, then it works deeper for
humiliation; afflictions draw men's thoughts inward, as the wicked, so the godly
have sometimes a careless care, that can hear the indictments of sin, and
yet not lay sin to heart; and therefore God opens their ears by discipline;
In their month you shall find them: Schola crucis, est schola lucis: Gods
house of correction, is his school of instruction: when an affliction is upon
us, we are then ready to listen to the indictments of sin, the checks of
conscience, the reproves of God; and will be ready to lie down, and humble
our selves under them: that is one end. 2. To work the heart at further distance
with sin. 3. To prevent the like: Ictus piscator sapit: our (...), will be
our (...), our sufferings will be our warnings. Men that have felt the sting of
the Serpent, in affliction for sin, will beware of the spawne of the Serpent,
in the pollution of sin. We read that before the Babylonish captivity, the
children of Israel were ever and anon falling into Idolatry, and the whole
Creation was scarce large enough for them to make Idols of; they could scarce
find creatures enough to make Idols of. But after God once carried them
captive into Babylon, and scourged them soundly for their Idolatry; of all
sins to this day, they never returned to Idols: even to this day they abhor
pictures. Many other reasons might be laid down. In sum here is the maine;
God does chastise us to make us partakers of his holiness here; of his glory
hereafter. And indeed, to sweeten heaven and glory to us. The Philosopher Zeno
sought out torment to help him to taste pleasure; Per angusta ad augustum, per
spinas ad rosas, per motum ad quietem, per procellas ad portum, per crucem ad
coelum contendamus.
and said, Pleasures were nothing worth if they were not thus seasoned: those
light afflictions you have here for a moment, will be a mighty set off to that
far more exceeding, that eternal weight of glory. --

I will proceed no further.

Unto all this give me leave to add thus much in this unhappy difference, and
we will conclude this Answer. I will but give you a few thoughts to consider of.

1. Sin does naturally bring evil on us: as there is peace and good in the
ways of holiness, so there is evil and trouble in the ways of sin; they
are never separated: trouble is the natural and proper fruit of sin, that
which it naturally bears. Nay it is in the very bowels of it: Sin is malum
Catholicum: It is a big bellied evil; all evils are the births of sin: if
you could rippe up sin, you should find all evil in the bowels of it: there
may be evil of punishment where there is no evil of sin in it; but all evil
of punishment lies in the evil of sin: all the Commandments were given for
good, and your good lies in obedience to them. And he that breaks Gods bounds,
does necessarily run upon evil and trouble: Sin is the birth of our
hearts, and trouble is the birth of sin; and trouble is as true a child of
sin, as sin is the natural issue of our souls. This is the first: sin
does not only by consequence and Gods ordination, but naturally, bring evil and
trouble.

2. Secondly, the evil that sin brings, or the trouble that comes by sin;
either it is by chance, or by providence, and by Divine dispensation: But not
by chance. Job 5.6.
Job tells us so; and sure he tells us truth; Afflictions they do not arise out
of the dust: And Christ says, Dispouit membra pulicis et culicis. Aug.
There cannot a hair fall from our head, without a providence: And if not a
hair, if not the smallest thing without a providence, then much less the
greater. So then the evil that comes by sin, is not by chance, but by
providence, Divine dispensation.

3. If from providence, then either from Gods active, or from his passive
providence: or if you will, take it thus; either by his permissive providence,
or by his active ordaining providence. To say by his permissive providence
only, this cannot so well suit with God who is all act, nor with the words of
the Prophet, Is there any evil in the City which I have not done? You know it
is meant only of the evils of punishment; not of the evil of sin, there God
has no hand.

There are many things which God permits in the world, which he does not do;
those are the evils of sin. But the evils of punishment these he permits and
does too. Is there any evil in the City which I have not done? And in Isa.
42.24, 25. where the Prophet makes the same question; and gives the same
answer. Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? Did not the
Lord, He against whom we have sinned? -- So that you see all these come from
divine dispensation. God brings this evil, and he tells us for sin too.

4. If God do in providence bring any evil upon his people, then either out
of love, or out of anger, or out of hatred.

1. Not out of batred; so we grant that cannot be: there is nothing that God
does to his people, that is any fruit or effect of hatred. Indeed afflictions
on the wicked are fruits of hatred; some droppings before the great shower of
wrath fall upon them; but it is not so with his own people.

2. Then secondly, either out of love or anger. Certainly not out of anger
merely without love; for the principle, the ground, the end of all his dealings
with his people is love; there is nothing he does to them separated from love,
there is love in all; Nay, and I say, from love they proceed: for all his ways
are ways of mercy to them that fear him, Psalm. 25.10. But because
afflictions, and chastisements are evils, and do seem to be the effects of
one angry and displeased; therefore I say, though they come from love, yet
from love displeased, from love offended. Paul says, Phil. 2.27. Phil. 2.27.
God had mercy on him in restoring Epaphroditus to health. Why? had it not
been a mercy to Paul if he had died too? Are not all his ways, ways of
mercy? and therefore though he had died, had it not been a mercy too? What
shall we say to this? shall we say it had been a mercy in the issue, and event,
as God would sanctify it to him, and do him good by it, as he himself says,
All things shall work together for good to them that love God, Romans 8.28.
Indeed this is good, but this is not all; sin it self may be a mercy in the
issue. But the Psalmist says, all his ways, are ways of mercy, not a step
God takes toward his people, not an action that God does, not one dispensation
of providence, but it is out of mercy. And therefore what is the meaning, God
had mercy on me in restoring of him? what needs he to say so? seeing it had
been a mercy if he had been taken away? and God had showed mercy to Paul if
he had died? why then does he say, God had mercy upon me in restoring of him?
Indeed it had been mercy to Paul if he had died, but a correcting mercy, mercy
in chastisement; The Apostle seems by this phrase to imply a medium, or at
least a difference between mercy restoring, and mercy depriving of him. It had
been mercy, but a correcting mercy, had God taken him away. -- So I say here,
though afflictions and chastisements are out of love; yet because they are in
themselves evil, therefore I say, they proceed often (not always) from love
displeased, from love offended.

We say indeed, that God is angry, not that we are to conceive there is anger
in God, he has no passions or affections in him; but we say he is angry, Ira
non est affectus, sed effectus in Deo.
because he deals with us, as men use to deal with such with whom they are
angry; they withdraw from them, they chide them, they rebuke them, correct
them; and so does God, in a paternall displeasure, with them he dearly loves.

But we will come to shut up this Query in a few particulars which we will lay
down for your full satisfaction in it.

God does not ever chastise his people for sin. I say, prevention of sin;
as Paul's temptation was. Some for the trial of Graces, as Jobs affliction
seems to be. 1. (...). 2. (...). 3. (...).

Divines do distinguish of diverse kinds of afflictions. Some are castigations
for sin; some are testifications to the truth; some are probations of our
faith, and exercitations of our Graces. So that though it be granted God does
chastise for sin, yet all the afflictions with which God does exercise us,
they are not for sin: though it might be said, that sin is the general
ground of all calamities; yet it may be said, that this or that affliction,
has not any particular sin the procuring cause of it. As you see in Job and
Paul's trials.

God does sometime take occasion by the sins of his people to afflict and
chastise them. occasion, who will not grant sin the cause wherefore God
afflicts his people. I say, many will not grant sin the cause, who yet will
admit of sin an occasion why God does afflict his people. And indeed, this or
that particular sin does often rather seem to be an occasion, then a cause
of the punishment. Sin may be the cause, and yet this or that particular
sin may be but the occasion: As I have showed before.

God does not only take occasion by sin, for sin chastise and afflict his
people: For sin I say, not only for the preventing and cure of sin; Psalm.
39.11. 1 Cor. 11.30.
but for the punishment and correction of it: As I have showed at large. God
makes us to see sin in the effects, when we will not see it in the cause, to
see sin in the fruit of it, when we will not see it in the root. God
discovers sin to us in his works, when we will not see it in his Word; That
which we will not learn by faith, he will teach us by sense, A rod is for the
back of a fool. Pro. 10.13.


When God does chastise his people for sin, Wrath, or parts of the Curse,
there is no wrath in them; 2. they are not satisfactions for sin; 3. they are
not out of vindictive Justice; 4. they are not merely poenall; but medicinal;
5 the ground is displeased love, and the end is fuller embraces.

And this shall suffice for the answer to the second Query, which I hope may
satisfy. We will come to the next, the third Query.

Whether this may consist with our Christian freedom, to be tied to do duty
because God has commanded. The question might have been parted into two, 1.
whether it may consist with our Christian freedom, to be tied to the doing of
duty; and then 2. whether to be tied to the doing of them because God has
commanded.

And we shall find both these opinions held. 1. That it is an infringement to
our freedom we have by Christ, to be tied to the performance of duty at all. 2
And it is far below the free spirit of Saints to be tied to the doing of duty
because God has commanded. So that you see they might have been separated, but
for brevity sake, we will fold them up together in one Question; but yet shall
answer both parts distinctly.

And first for the first part; Whether it may consist with our Christian
freedom to be tied to the doing of duty. I say it is a Question out of
Question. It is no infringement to our Liberty in Christ to be tied to the
performace of duty: It was the great end of our freedom and redemption that we
might serve him. Christ redeemed us from sin, but to service; As Zachary in
his song, Luke 1.74, 75. That we being delivered from the hands of our enemies
might serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness all the days of
our life. Christ has not redeemed us from the matter of service, but from the
manner of service: he has redeemed us from a slavish spirit in service, Eo
quod jugum grave, quod tuum leve.
to a son-like; from a spirit of bondage, to a spirit of liberty; he has
broken the bonds of subjection to other Lords, that we might take on us the
yoke of service to him, whose * yoke is easy, whose burden is light, Mat.
11.30. And therefore the Apostle inferres, after he had set down the main
privileges which we enjoy by the redemption of Christ, as Justification,
freedom from the guilt and power of sin, he says, therefore we are debtors
not to the flesh, to live after the flesh, but to the spirit, to live after the
spirit, etc. Romans 8.12. A truth so plain, Romans 8.12.
as if it it were written with a Sunbeame. It is as easy to separate the light
from the Sun, as holiness and obedience from the person justified, etc. The
grace of God which has appeared to us, says the Apostle, teaches us to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live piously godlily, and soberly in
this present world, 2 Titus 11.12. 2 Tit. 11.12
So that of the first part there is no controversy, it does consist with our
freedom to be tied to obedience or performance of duty, nay, it is part of
our redemption, and part of our freedom: And indeed that is true and real
bondage, which is not joined with sincere and true obedience.

But now there is some controversy about the second part of it; Whether this
be any infringeme^t of our Christian liberty to be tied to duty, because God
has commanded. Many (though they would do duty, yet they would not be tied to
it, they would rather do it upon the inclinations of their own spirits, then
upon the impositions of God. There are three mistakes about this.

Some think they ought not to do duty, Spirit of God does move them to it.

Indeed when the Spirit moves, spread your sails when the wind blows, open
when he knocks. As it was said to David when he heard the noise in the
Mulberie trees then he should go out, 2 Samuel 5.24
for God was gone out before him: So when you find such strong movings upon
your spirits, it is good to take those hints of the Spirit, it is good to close
with the season. Many are like harlots that will murder the child in the womb,
to avoid the trouble of childbirth: So they will murder the births of the
Spirit, because they would not be at the trouble of the work. That is a
fearful sin, to cast water, and quench and cool any motions of the Spirit
of God. When God moves, he comes with power too, for the performance of the
duty, then we go full sail, and it is good to take those hints. But good
hearts do often here mistake to their own perplexing, and think if they do not
go with every motion how unseasonable soever they have quenched, and rejected
a motion of the Spirit. I conceive it therefore not amiss to tell you that
sometimes Satan may put us upon duty, when we think the Spirit of God does it,
and that you will think is strange, but yet it is a truth. And there are
four times when Satan does usually put men on duty.

1. When our spirits are much sunk and down, either oppressed with temptations
or troubles, then he may put you on to do duty: not but that I say God does
at these times put us upon duty; but yet sometime Satan too. He deals with
us, as the Babylonians with the Israelites, when they were in Babylon,
oppressed with their captivity, then they say, Come now sing us one of the
songs of Sion; so when the spirit is oppressed and overwhelmed, when he thinks
we are upon some great disadvantage, and we shall but torture our selves, and
discourage our selves more, then it may be he puts us to pray, not to believe,
like them who dealt with Christ, blinded his eyes, Mar. 14.65.
and then bid him prophecy who strikes him; so when he has blinded our eyes,
he bids us now see, now prophecy, now pray, when he has disturbed our
spirits, when he has troubled the sea, that it casts up nothing but mire and
dirt, distrustful and unbeleeving thoughts, then he bids us go and pray:
which yet sometimes helps to lay the storm, and quiet the spirit too, and Satan
loses by it; it proves his own disadvanage, unexpected Grace comes in which
he was not aware of, nor could foresee.

2. A second time when Satan may put us on duty is, When we are called by God
upon other employments, either natural or spiritual. 1. Spiritual, either to
hear, to confer, or to do other duties, then he bids thee go pray, he loves to
make duties interfere, 2. or when we are called upon natural employments, it
may be to eat, drink, to sleep, and sometimes he has carried a poor soul out
of his bed, or from his meat, and he must now go pray, which perhaps has not
been for Satan's advantage neither. Thus he sometimes deals with poor souls
in temptation, and if they do not do it upon his instigation, then he tells
them they have resisted a motion of the Spirit. If they do, why it is for their
trouble too; perhaps he will charge them after all with Popery and
superstition, and voluntary penance, that they must rise in the night to go to
prayer, etc. Who requires this at your hand? It were good in such cases to say
with a Godly man, who was thus moved to prayer when he was to go to sleep, Get
thee hence Satan, I will go to duty when God calls, not when thou suggests, I
have committed my soul into the arms of Christ, and in his arms I rest and
sleep. --

3. A third time when Satan may put us on duty. When we are weak in body, and
not able to perform it, when we want natural spirits to do the work, then
will he put on to it, he knows that if we do it, then he shall by reason of our
natural weakness get advantage of us. When he puts us to lift loggs, he knows
we are weak. When he moves to duty, he knows we have no strength.

4. A fourth time when he puts us upon duty is, When he thinks he puts us upon
a snare, when he thinks duty will be a snare to us, he puts us on it not as
Gods work, but as our snare, he moves us to it merely as a scruple, and to
scruple us further, whether we do it, or do not do it; he puts us on duty, not
to comfort us, but to torment us and vex us, not to raise us when we are
dejected, but to cast us lower, though he be often mistaken.

But yet though Satan does sometime as you see, yet Gods Spirit does often move
and stir up the heart to duty, and when he moves indeed, he moves
effectually, he puts you on the duty, and gives you strength to do it, he
carries you through it, etc. And it is good to observe Gods times, the hints of
the Spirit, and go with them, which is the first Answer to that mistake.

But though we are to go when Gods Spirit moves, neglect when we do not
perceive such sensible motions of the Spirit. Grace moves us, or should move us
to converse with God every day, and if so, the Spirit moves, the Spirit
regenerated, though the Spirit regenerating does not appear, and Gods Spirit
may move secretly, though not apparently, and sensibly to thy soul.

Besides, if you look for an immediate call upon the duty, then you will not
do duty out of obedience to the command. We must do duty sometime out of
obedience, although we want both a heart to it, and a heart in it. That duty
is esteemed of God which is gotten and wrested out of the hands of the flesh,
which is done against temptations and gain-sayings. Besides, if you will never
go to duty but when the Spirit sensibly moves, you would often want that
communion with God which you do enjoy; How often have you gone to prayer with
a dead heart, and rose with a quick heart, with a strait, and rose again with
an enlarged heart, with a dejected, and rose comforted? How often when you
could find no such motion of God before to it, have you yet met with God in
the duty, and enjoyed God, in a prayer, in a glorious sweet way? Isa. 64.5.
Thou meetest him that rejoices, and works righteousness, them that remember
thee in thy ways: God loves to meet those that are in his way. Though the
Millar be not able to command a wind, yet he will spread his sayls, be in the
way to have it, if it come. Though the lame man could not get into the waters,
nor command the movings of them: yet he would lie 38. years by the waters
side, and no question with a deal of longing every time the waters moved; Oh
that some would throw me in! So though we cannot bring the Spirit to us, yet
let us set our selves in the way for him to meet with us. Hold up the
performance of duty: by them you come to see the face of God, to have
converses with him, you keep head against sin, you get supplies of strength
from Christ, you get above the world, they that speak against performance of
duty, might as well speak against the actings of faith, (...).
and exercise of Grace: for prayer is nothing else but the communication of the
soul with God, the actings of faith, and exercise of Grace. But we will shut
up this. So much for the first mistake, which was that some think, they are
not to do duty, but when the Spirit of God moves them to it.

There is a second mistake. commanded us to pray, and they think they are to
do nothing else, and therefore ever and anon they run to their knees, drop as
it were a bead, say over a Pater Noster, and too much with a Popish spirit too,
even as so much done to compass life; so much laid out for the purchase of a
pardon, and heaven. There are too many such.

They are especially two sorts of persons.

1. Such who are blind and ignorant, they would feign go to heaven, and they
hear they ought to pray, and therefore they go to prayer every moment: they
will not lose heaven for want of prayer.

2. Such who are in humiliation, and wounds of spirit: poor souls! they go
ever and anon to their knees, which yet in some is the dawning of faith, (...).
faith climbing up to Christ, but others they go upon these, as the salve to
heal their wound; or, as so many bribes for a pardon, as so much good money
laid out for the purchase of glory.

Naturally, men run to a Covenant of works, but it must be another work to
bring us to Christ: A convinced man runs to a Covenant of works. But he must be
a converted man, that comes over to the Covenant of Grace. So much for the
second mistake.

A third mistake. hearts incline them to it.

To which I Answer, and say, because God has commanded us, yet it is not
sufficient to do them merely, because God has commanded them. You must pray,
you must hear, and do other duties; because God has commanded, but it is not
sufficient you do them merely, because God has commanded them.

For the explication of this, you must know there are twofold laws. Positive,
and Natural.

1. Lege Grotium in 5. Matthew 17. verse. 63. p.
Some that are positive. 2. Some that are natural Or there are some commands
which are founded upon Gods will; and some that are founded upon Gods nature.
Those that are founded upon Gods will, are such as are good, because God
commands them; and such were many under the Old Testament, viz. their
Ceremonies, and their meats forbidden, which were things neither good nor evil
in themselves, but as God had commanded, or forbad them.

Some again which were founded upon Gods nature, and were intrinsecally and
inherently good in themselves; and not only good because God commanded them,
but in themselves good.

1. Now for the first of these, those which were founded upon Gods mere will,
as those laws before mentioned; it was sufficient that we obeyed them merely
because God has commanded them: Act 15.10.
the Apostles called them a heavy yoke, which neither they nor their fathers
were able to bear: In calling them a heavy yoke, it demonstrates their
obedience to them was more because God commanded them, then out of any inherent
intrinsecall goodness which was in them. In calling them a heavy yoke, it was
a sign that they obeyed them not out of love of the things commanded; but out
of love of that God who commanded them: They were a heavy yoke, but yet they
bare it till God took it off; they were hard laws, but yet they submitted to
them, till God pleased to repeal and disanull them. And indeed, I may call it
submission, for their obedience was more out of submission then delight. And
for these laws it was sufficient that they obeyed them merely because God
commanded them.

2. But now the other, those commands and things which were founded upon Gods
nature, and were in their own nature good and holy; those it is not sufficient
to obey, because God has commanded them; but there must be an inward principle
agreeable to them; an inward loving and closing with them, which arises from
the sutablenesse of the heart to them. These commands must not be esteemed a
heavy yoke, not a burden, but a delight; and principles of love are required
in the doing of them.

When I say, you are commanded to love God, to fear God, honor God; it is not
enough you do this because God commands; but there must bean inward principle
bred in us whereby we do all this: he that loves God merely because God has
commanded, etc. he loves not God at all; and if that be all, then if God had
not commanded he would not do this. But a Christian is to do this though
never a command to bind him to it. And he fees so much beauty and loveliness
in God, his heart is so much taken with him, that he must needs love him.

So for prayer, it is not enough that he pray merely because God has
commanded; but he is to go to duty out of desires of communion with God; he
goes upon duty not as a duty commanded: so carnal hearts do say they do,
who have no love to the duty; but he goes upon it as a means of converse and
communion with God; and thinks it his happiness when he can enjoy a little
communion with him in a duty. He goes upon converses with God, not as a
servant to his master, but as a child to his father; not as his duty, but as
his nature; not as his service only, but as his privilege; esteeming access
to God, and communion with him, as one of the top privileges of a Christian.

Indeed Christians are by their freedom by Christ free from duty. But these
ways.

1. We are free from duty as our task; for so it was a burden to us; we are
not like to day-labourers in the ways of God, that are to earne every penny we
have at the hands of God; we are free from duty as our task.

2. We are free from duty merely as our trade: though we walk in the ways of
duty, yet we walk not in them merely as our trade; for that is not for love
of the work, but love of the gains which come in. A Christian will do duty
though he see no gains coming in by it, because he loves the work; the work
is reward and wages to him. As a man who loves sin, whose nature is
vassalized to sin; he will drink, and sin, though to his utter undoing: so
a godly man he will serve God, he will hold up in the ways of obedience,
though he find no incomes: such a sutablenesse there is between a godly man
and the work, that he will do it, though he see nothing comes in by it.

3. We are free from slavery of spirit in duty, and do duty out of a
childlikenesse of Spirit, where the one he does duty because of fear of
blows, fear of the cudgel: were it not for fear of that, that God would
punish him, he would not do the duties. But now the other he would do duty,
although there were no punishment followed the omission of it. He counts this
his greatest punishment to be denied communion with God, converses with him;
this is enough to him. You have a childlike speech of Absolon will serve a
little to exemplify this: 2 Samuel 14.34.
Absolon had been banished from the Court, and Jerusalem; but afterward,
through the mediation of Ioab, was received again to Jerusalem, but yet denied
admission to the Court, he was denied communion with his father, whereupon he
sends Ioab to mediate for him. The pardoning of his fault was not apprehended
so great a mercy, as the banishment from his fathers sight was esteemed a
misery, and therefore he says, Let me see his face though he kill me: he
thought no punishment for his fault to be so great an evil, as to be denied
access to his father, and communion with him. So it is here with the soul, he
thinks this the greatest punishment to be denied access to God, and communion
with him. Oh this he esteems the top of misery, rather would he be killed in
communion and accesses to God, then to enjoy all freedom in the want, and
denial of it: a corrupt heart he does duty because of the punishment if he do
not do it; a holy heart he does esteem this the top of punishment, to be
denied communion with him: he esteems access to God and communion with him,
to be his top happiness. Blessed is the man whom thou causest to approach to
thee, says the Psalmist, and herein he conceives his blessedness to consist,
in approaches to God.

4. He is free from duty upon the tenders and terms commanded in the law; he
does not do duty that it might go well with him here; nor does he do duty,
to compass glory hereafter; he looks upon communion and converses with God
happiness enough; his spirit does not act thus, do thou pray, do thou obey,
and it shall go well with thee here, and thou shall have heaven hereafter; but
he esteems this a piece of his heaven, to have communion with God; this is
coelum extra coelum; he needs not be drawn to it by any promises; there is
enough in the thing it self, communion with God, to induce him and make his
soul desire it.

And he goes upon the duty, as a piece of reward; which if he can but find God
in, and have converse and communion with God in it; Oh there is heaven enough,
glory enough to his soul. As for other prayers wherein his soul has no
communion with God, he has thus much comfort from them; that his soul did in
such a duty set it self in sincerity to converse with God, to have communion
with God, though miserable poor man he wanted it.

Give me leave to give you the difference of these two spirits, Legal, and
Evangelicall, in nine or ten particulars, it may be worth your observance.

1. The principle that carries the one upon duty is slavish; the other
childlike; one does these things with a Legal spirit, Lege Chamier. l. 15. c.
2. sect. 25.
either hopes of rewards by it, or fear of punishment if he do it not: the
other goes upon this, for communion with God, and sees that his reward and
happiness, to have communion with him; and the want of it, the greatest
punishment.

2. The one does these things as his delight, the other as his burden; and
indeed it must needs be burden to them who find not God in prayer, Multi Deo
serviunt non filiorum spiritu sed mancipiorum animo, metu poenae, aut spe
mercedis Cameron.
either something of God going out from them to him, or something of God coming
down from him to them. He that has to do with nothing but duty, in duty, to
them duty is tedious; but they who have to do with God, with Christ in duty,
to them duty is delightful. Now such though they pray, they have nothing to
do with God in prayer, they have no converse with him; they have to do with
nothing but duty in duty; yea and not with that neither, they have to do with
the world, with sin in duty, not duty in duty, much less with God in
duty: therefore it is tedious.

But the other has to do with God, that is, he labors, he breathes, his heart
gaspes after him; he it is whom he has in his eyes, whom he labors after in
prayer, though he cannot enjoy him.

3. The one he does duty out of convictions of conscience, the other he does
duty out of the propensions of Nature. Many men whose obedience is their
precept, not their principle, holiness their law, not their nature; many men
who are convinced, who are not converted, many that are convinced this they
ought to do, they ought to pray, who yet want hearts to close with those things
they are convinced of, and do. Mere conviction is rather a tyrant then a king;
it constraines, it does not persuade; Conscientiae renatorum non legis
necessitate coactae legi obsequantur, sed legis ipsius jugo liberae, voluntati
Dei ultro obediant. Calvin.
it forces, it does not move and incline the soul to obedience, it is but a
daring, not a reforming light, it dares a man not to sin, it dares a man to do
duty, but inables not a man either to hate sin, or love duty, all that they
do is out of mere convictions of conscience, not out of propensitions of
nature. Conscience tells you, that you ought to do these things, but gives no
strength to do them. Mere conviction does but discover the way, tell you what
to do, but it does not carry the soul in it; Like a stone set up in the way,
it shows the way to the traveller, but gives no strength to walk it. But now
where there are principles, where there is grace, it is in the soul as a pilot
in the ship, who does not only discover the way, but steers us and carries us
that way it does discover.

4. The one he looks for satisfaction in the duty by the duty; the other he
looks for satisfaction in the duty by Christ, he works above the duty for
his satisfaction.

5. The one contents himself with the shell, the other no content without the
substance; the one goes upon duty, as the means of Communion with God, to see
God and enjoy God, and have converse with God in it, the other goes upon it
merely to satisfy the grumblings and quarrels of his conscience.

6. The one does them, but he looks to live by them: ask many a soul, that
prays how he thinks to come to heaven, he will tell thee by prayer; But now
the other does them, and overlooks them, looks alone to live by Christ; he
lives in duty, but not by duty, he lives in obedience, but yet above his
obedience. I live, yet not I, but Christ in me. He looks for as much by Christ,
and from Christ, as though he had never prayed a prayer, shed a tear; Though
he have done this abundantly, yet he looks up to Christ in respect of
acceptance, as if he had done none himself.

7. The one does these things coldly and formally, the other fervently; and yet
I question not, but there may be coldness in a godly man, and earnestness in
another. If Baals Priests prayed to their Idol so earnestly, much more a
natural conscience to God. A natural man may pray earnestly; there is no
question but Ahab was earnest, etc. A condemned man may cry earnestly for a
pardon. A natural man may pray earnestly at times, when in fear and horror,
under pangs of conscience, he may now cry earnestly, but not beleevingly. There
may be much affection in a prayer when there is but little faith, fleshy
affections, natural affections, raised affections, either from convictions,
fears, horrors, these are but the cries of nature, of sense and reason, the
cries of flesh not of faith; the affections which faith raises, they are not
loud, yet they are strong; though they are still, yet they are deep; though
not so violent, yet more sweet, more lasting.

8. Again, one does duties by way of subserviency to other ends: that which
makes duty desirable to one, is some respects, duty is desirable but only
in a case: And you know things which yet otherwise are looked upon as evil may
be desired in a Case. As the Merchant casting his goods out of the Ship, he
looks upon the thing no way desirable, he casts away his heart with them, but
yet in this case he submits to it, to save his life. So they desire duty, and
holiness but only in a Case, they look upon prayer, upon obedience,
mortification of their lusts, etc. but as so many hard taskes, and impositions
which they must submit to undergo if they will come to glory; But the other
does close with these as his heaven, as a part of his happiness, a piece of
his glory -- he does not close with these things out of submission, but out of
delight, these are not his penance, but his glory, his desire: As the one he
parts with sin, not because it is not desirable, for he weeps after them, but
because it is damning, he parts with sin as Jacob with Benjamin, because
otherwise he should starve: or as Phaltiel, with Michol, because otherwise he
might lose his head: or as the Merchant with his goods, because otherwise lose
his life. And so he closes with holiness, not out of love and desire to it,
but because this he must endure if he will come to heaven. But now the other he
parts with sin as poison, as an accursed thing which he desires to be rid
of, and closes with holiness as his happiness, which he thirsts to enjoy,
and to be swallowed up with it.

9. The one he does duty, as the sick man eats his meat, not out of desire
and delight, but out of reason, it is more out of conviction he must die if he
do not eat, then out of desire or stomach to it. The other does duty, as a
healthful man feeds, not merely out of reason, but out of desire and delight
in it, Or the one he closes with duty, as with physic, not food, as with a
medicine, not with meat: there is reluctance against it, it is no way
desirable but in Case, Si quid boui triste feceris, fit de te, potius quum a
te, Prospe.
in case of health; but the other closes with it as a healthful man with his
meat, there is delight, desire, pleasure in feeding, etc. These are the newborn babes that desire the sincere milk, -- The one cries, The good that I
would do, I cannot do, and the evil that I would not do, I do; the other,
The good that I have no desire to do, I do, and the evil that I desire to do
I dare not do: he would sin, and dares not, because of wrath, he does duty
and has no heart to it, because he wants a spirit suitable.

All delight in duties does arise from a sutablenesse of spirit in the doing of
them, if there be not grace within, as well as duty without, if there be not
principles agreeable to precepts, the heart can never delight in them. Here is
the ground that a godly man does walk in duty, not merely because it is
commanded, but because he acts his nature, in his obedience.

The Law of God which is in the book is transcribed into his heart, it is his
nature, his new nature; so that he acts his own nature renewed, in acting
obedience. The eye needs no command to see, or the ear to hear, it is their
nature, the command is in it self, the faculty of seeing is the command to
see: so far as the heart is renewed it is as natural for it to obey, as for
the eye to see, the ear to hear; and to live in obedience, as the fish in the
water, the bird in the air.

And therefore we do not obey merely, principle in them, but we obey out of
principles which God has implanted in us suitable to the commands of God.
Indeed the command is the rule without of our obedience, but grace is the
principle within; the heart and command answer one another: As face answers
face in the water, or in a glass, so the heart and the command; the command is
transcribed into the heart. Hence it is that there is so much delight in
obedience, because it is natural to obey, so far as the heart is renewed; As
it is natural for the eye to see, the ear to hear; so for the heart to obey,
so far as it is renewed; And hence comes delight, Psalm. 40.8.
Psalm. 40.8. I delight to do thy will oh my God, and wherein was this delight,
he shows in the words following, thy law is in my heart, etc. There was the
ground, the law was not only his command, but his nature; so long as the law is
your command only, you cannot delight to do the will of God; you do duties,
but you cannot delight in them, unless it be looking upon them, as something
for glory, something for heaven; but when once the Law of God becomes your
nature, then you come to delight in obedience, and in the ways of God.

Actions of nature they are actions of delight; the eye is never weary of
seeing, the ear of hearing, neither the heart of obeying; that is so far as
it is renewed, so far as sanctified, because it is his nature. God has
promised in his Covenant, to write his laws in the tables of the heart: poor
men you have the Law in tables of stone, and write after it as after a copy, a
thing without you, and you have work indeed, but he says he will write them
in the tables of the heart, he will transplant them into the soul, whereby
they shall become our nature, and then obedience shall not be a foreign
command, a Law without you, but obedience shall be a natural thing, a Law within
you, your nature; hence is that abundance of delight in the Law, as you see in
the 119. Psalm. up and down. Hence is that delight in obedience to it, because
all this is now your nature, and so far as that acts it acts with delight.

I grant there may be a kind of irkesomenesse and tediousness in us at times,
to do those things which yet are natural and full of delight; though it be
natural for the eye to see, and that wherein it delights, the eye is never
weary of seeing, as Solomon says, but that is to be understood of an eye that
is sound; for if the eye before, it may breed a tediousness in the eye to do
that which it delights so much in. So though it be natural for the soul to
obey, and that wherein it delights, as the fish in the water; yet if the
principles within be disturbed, if wounded, it may breed a kind of
irkesomenesse, wearisomenesse, and tediousness in the soul, to do that which
yet it had so much delight to do.

And this may arise from diverse grounds.

1. Either their hearts may be damped with carnal affections, 2. or they may
be pulled back with the prevails of corruptions, 3. or they may drive heavily
under some vexing, and long temptation, 4. or in case of the spirits
withdrawment either in Poenall, or Probationall trials, 5. or in case of
Relapsing into sin. Yet in the greatest unwillingnesse, take a Saint at the
worst, he has a stronger Byas to God, then any others have, when they are at
best, because in the one there is some will renewed, though a will now
obscured, or in conflict, in the other there may be some passion, some mood to
service, but no will.

And thus much shall now serve for the answer of this third Query. Wherein I
have plainly showed you, that it is no infringement to our Christian liberty
to be tied to the performance of duties, nor yet to obey and do duties,
because God has commanded them; only this is the freeness of a Christian
spirit, though he do the duties which are commanded, and do them because God
has commanded them, yet not merely because they are commanded, but out of
principles of love, delight, and agreablenesse to the things that are
commanded: he prays because God has commanded him, but not merely because of
the command, but because there is a sutablenesse between his heart and the
work, his soul and the duty, and as he desires after, so his soul delights in
his approaches and converses with God. I have spoken to it at large: We come
now to the fourth Query.

Whether the freeme of Christ, brief. There is a twofold bondage. 1.
Universal. 2. Partial, or graduall.

1. An universal bondage, or a state-bondage; which is a bondage properly so
called: and that is threefold.

1. A bondage to sin, which is expressed in the 3. Tit. 3. We which were
sometimes foolish and disobedient, serving diverse lusts. So in the 6. Romans 20.
For when you were the servants of sin, you were free from righteousness. And
John 8.34. He that commits sin, is the servant of sin. 2 Pet. 2.19.
While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption.

2. It is a bondage to Satan; who is Gods Iaylor, and holds down poor souls,
under brazen bars, and iron gates, not to be broken. Ephesians. 2.2. He is said
to rule in the hearts of the children of disobedience.

3. It is a bondage to the Law. 1. the rigor. 2. the curse of the Law.

1. A bondage to the rigor of the Law, which requires, 1. hard things: 2.
impossible things: 3. yea and that in such severitie that it will not accept of
the most eminent indevours without performance: 4. Nor of obedience in much, if
you fail in a little: 5. Nor will it admit of repentance after all this
failing; one breach is never made up again, neither by double diligence, nor
by repentance. That is the rigor of it.

2. It is a bondage to the curse of it: which is, 1. An extensive and
universal curse; cursed in soul, body, estate, silver, gold, relations, as
you see in the 29. Deuteronomie.

2. And it is an unavoydable curse; thou art not able to obey in all things,
and therefore unavoydably concluded under the malediction and curse; as the
Apostle reasons, Gal. 3, 9, 10, 11. As many as are under the works of the law,
they are under the curse; and how proves he that? For it is written, Cursed is
every one that does not obey in all things written in the book of the law to
do them. Where there is the impartialitie of the curse, to every one, and the
severitie of it. 1. Who ever obey not. 2. Obey not in every thing; nay though
he should, yet one omission and failing in his life, would conclude him under
it. 3. Who ever continues not to obey in all things -- And this is the first,
the state-bondage, or bondage properly so called.

2. There is a partial or graduall bondage, a bondage in part; or a bondage in
degrees, which is a bondage improperly so called.

And that is 1. A bondage in respect of comfort. 2. A bondage in respect of the
manner of obedience.

And so we shall answer this in two conclusions.

That the freeman of Christ, free by Christ, shall never sin themselves into
the first bondage again; they shall never sin themselves into that
universal and state-bondage; he that is once Christ's freeman, shall never
again become Satan's bond-slave. 1. He shall never more be a servant to sin,
the promise is, Romans 6.14. You are not under the law, but under grace;
therefore sin shall have no more dominion over you. Sin may have a tyranny, but
never a soveraigntie: you may be carried captive, as the Apostle says, Romans
7.23. -- leading me captive -- but you shall not be willing captives; you may
fall into sin, but you shall never be servants to sin more; your ears
shall never be boared in token of willing and voluntary subjection to sin.

2. Again, he shall never be a slave to Satan more, Satan may get the
advantage of him, but he shall never become his willing servant more.

3. So he shall never come under the law more. 1. Not under the rigor of it.
2. Not under the curse of it; the law can take no hold of him to condemnation.
And this is the ground, he is not under the law, but under grace; if he can
sin himself from under grace, then indeed he is again under all this: But
this is impossible, therefore the other; and so much for the first.

Though the freemen of Christ cannot sin themselves into a state of bondage
again, into an universal bondage; graduall partial bondage, which we will
show in two particulars.

1. The freeman of Christ may sin himself into a bondage in respect of
comfort. Thus you see David did, Psalm. 51. Restore to me the joys of thy
salvation: men that will not follow the direction of the Spirit, shall want the
consolation of the Spirit; if they will do works of darkness, they must
look to walk in darkness. Though promises of grace are absolute, yet
promises of peace and comfort seem to be conditional, not that our walking
has any meriting or deserving power to the procuring of our peace: but that
this is the way in which God will bestow it, and continue our peace and
comfort. In the ways of duty we hold up our communion with God, our converses
with him, our actings of faith and grace; and so in these ways comfort and
peace as they are procured, so are they continued. Grace is as the fire,
comfort as the flame that comes from it; but as it is with green wood, if it
be not continually blowing, there will be no flame; so grace is in us, as fire
in green wood, which will quickly gather an ash and deadness, if you do not
continue in blowing, if you do not exercise your graces, you can look for no
flame, look for no comfort without the exercise of faith, of grace, and
suitable walking in obedience. Though promises of grace are absolute, yet
promises of comfort, I say, they are conditional, Psalm. 50.23. To him that
orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God. Isa. 32.17.
The work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness
shall be quietness and assurance for ever. Isa. 64.5. Thou meetest him that
rejoices and works righteousness, him that remembers thee in thy way, etc.
Ioh. 14.15, 16, 21. If you love me, keep my Commandments, and I will pray the
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, who shall abide with you for
ever. verse. 21. He that has my commandments and keeps them, is he that
loves me; and he that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love
him, and manifest my self to him. Where you see it seems all to lie upon
condition: so Gal. 6.16. As many as walk according to this rule, peace be upon
them and mercy, and upon the whole Israel of God. So that if men walk not in
the ways of obedience, they may want comfort, they may want peace.

The freemen of Christ may sin themselves into a bondage by sin, though not
into the bondage of sin: They may sin themselves into a bondage of fear; yea
and a bondage of trouble; their sin may cost them brokennesse of bones,
though they shall not sin themselves into a state-bondage again. Though you
cannot sin away your grace, yet you may sin away the evidence, the sense,
the comfort of it: Though you cannot sin away your pardon, yet you may sin
away the sense of it; nay the comforts of it; though you have it, yet you have
no comfort from it; it is as though you had no pardon in respect of you;
otherwise you must say a man may have fullness of peace, of assurance, and of
comfort even in the highest acts of sin, as some have said. Nay, and you may
not only sin away the sense and comfort of it, but the evidence and
knowledge of it; as that place of Peter seems to imply, 2 Pet. 1.9. He has
forgotten that he was purged from his old sins; new sins bring new fears,
new guilts and troubles: All the former foundations and resting places of the
soul seem to be shaken, new doubts arise whether I am justified and pardoned,
yea, or no; and these new doubts bring new troubles and fears on the soul.

But you will say this is our weakness, loose to enjoy the free Spirit of
Christ, that is say Doctor Cr. in his Christ alone exalted. p. 246.
they, to have free discourse, and free society with the Spirit of God, and
may hear all the gracious language of Gods thoughts, yea and with application
and comfort, and that say some, as soon as he comes warm out of sin.

This is our weakness indeed, weakness which is a chastisement of former
wickedness.

There are threefold desertions. 1. Cautionall, for prevention of sin, as
Paul's seems to be. 2. Probationall for trial, and exercise of grace, as Jobs.
3. Penal, for chastisement of some way of wickedness, as David's.

In the former it is our weakness indeed, and so is the other, but yet with
much difference, for in this it is a weakness which we have contracted on our
selves, or a weakness inflicted in chastisement of former wickedness, as it
was in David, his sin had brought this on him.

The Spirit of God is a tender and delicate spirit Ita nos tractat ut a nobis
tractatur.
if you grieve him, he will grieve you; if you will not follow his counsel and
commands, you shall want his comforts and joys: Your iniquities have separated
between you and your God. Though sin make not a total separation, a final
separation, between us and God, yet it may cause a withdrawment, and breed a
distance between God and us, it may cast up such a cloud, that all the faith we
have will not be able to see through it, as you see in David: you have a
passage in Isa. 57.17. proves this, For the iniquity of his covetousness I was
wroth, I smote him and hid my face -- And you see how frequently upon the
admission of sin, though perhaps of an ordinary nature too, what troubles the
soul has, all the former resting places for the soul are no rest to a man,
all his former evidences are beclouded, and hid in the dark, he cannot discern
them. But all this you will say is his weakness too, as David says, Psa. 77.10.
This is my infirmity, -- I grant it is our weakness to question former titles,
if ever God did grant us a grounded evidence of a pardon, and our interest in
Christ, to call it in question again. But it is such a weakness as does
accompany wickedness, such a weakness as sin will bring on you; and God
suffers it to be so, for his fatherly ends to humble us the more, and therefore,

1. God does not look now on us as he was wont.

2. Conscience does not now give in evidence as it was wont.

3 It may be Satan is let loose to tempt us too.

4. It may be the Spirit of God is withdrawn too, because you have grieved the
holy Spirit, and then no marvel if there be trouble, if the soul want comfort.

But you will say; work at this time, even after commission of sin to
believe, and if to believe, then to be comforted.

1. Comfort is the fruit of faith, work to believe. And a man may be able to
believe, and yet not able to take comfort; A man may rest upon Christ for
pardon, and yet upon reflection is not able to evidence he does rest on him,
and a man may be able to discern of his own acts, and yet comfort may be
suspended for a time.

2. Though it be our work to believe, Per lachrymas venimus ad canticum.
yet is it not so properly our work to take comfort; God would have us to take
comfort in an orderly way, go from believing and mourning, to joy and comfort.
Gods workings are orderly workings; It is now your work, as you have sinned
afresh, so to believe afresh, and mourn afresh, and then to receive comfort.

Yet 3. you may be comforted, first, in respect of your former justification;
this new sin does not overthrow your former pardon, though interrupt and
disturb your present peace and comfort, and secondly, you may be comforted in
this, that there is mercy enough in God to cover, and Grace enough in Christ to
cure this fresh sin: thirdly, and in this you are to be comforted that God
does not suffer you to lie in sin but has discovered it to you, humbled you
for it, and brought you over to Christ, in whom you may renew your peace, and
regaine your comforts.

But then you will say, that if our peace may be interrupted by our walking,
then our peace and comfort does not depend upon Christ, but upon our selves,
not upon Christ's doing, but upon our walking.

1. Some distinguish between a peace with God and a peace with our selves; the
peace with God cannot be lost, but peace with our selves may be forfeited.

2. Others distinguish between a peace of conscience, and peace with
conscience. As wicked men may have peace with conscience, but no peace of
conscience: So the Godly may have peace of conscience, and yet want peace with
conscience, Conscience may object and quarrel, and dispute, when yet the soul
is truly at peace.

3. Others distinguish between a real peace and an apprehended peace: the
godly may have real peace in respect of their state and condition, and yet
want the sense of peace in respect of their own apprehension.

4. Others distinguish between the peace of Justification, and peace from
Justification; the former remains say they inviolate and uninterrupted, even
when the soul does neither see nor feel its wonted consolations, 2 Cor. 5.7.
Psalm. 49.5. but the other may be interrupted and disturbed by our walkings.

5. Others say, there is a peace of Justification, and a peace from
Sanctification; the former, say they, does depend no more upon our walking,
then our Justification it self does; but the other does depend upon our exact
walking: God does not maintain peace whilst we neglect to walk in the ways of
peace, Psalm. 58.6, 7, 8. Gal. 6.16. As many as walk according to this rule,
peace be on them. God does still carry on all his work both of peace and
holiness in a near proportion together, the one cherishing, and helping the
other. --

In a word, I conceive we may distinguish between the foundation and being of
a Christians peace, and the flourishing and welbeing of it. The foundation of
our Christian peace, is not in us, but in Christ; not in our holiness, but in
his righteousness; not in our walking, but in his blood and suffering, who is
the spring of our peace, and in whom we have peace, John 16.33. and who is said
to be our peace, Ephe. 2.14. But the flourishing and wel-being of this peace
does much depend upon the exercise of our Graces, and exact walking with God.
It is purchased by the obedience of another, but must be cherished by our own
obedience: And indeed it does so far depend on us, that if we do not walk
exactly, though we cannot sin away our former pardon, yet we may sin away
our present peace. There is a 5. fold peace that a man may sin away, the
least of which is worth a world.

1. There is a peace which flows from the witnes-bearing of our conscience in
our integrity and exact walking, such a peace as Hezekiah had when he said,
Lord remember how I have walked before thee in sincerity -- and Paul had the
same, 1 These. 2.4, 5, 6. Romans 1.9. and that peace we may sin away, when we
fall into fresh sin, the comforts of our former walking will not bear us up.

2. There is a peace which flows from the souls Communion and converses with
God in duty. There is peace as well as sweetness in every piece of holiness,
and this peace a man may sin away. All that sweetness and adaptation of
spirit in duty is now gone upon fresh revolts into sin, and now the soul
formerly comforted, is interrupted and disturbed in all its approaches and
converses with him.

3. There is a peace which flows from the exercise of Grace implanted in you:
you cannot exercise any Grace, but there is some peace and comfort in the
exercise of it. When you exercise your faith to believe and close with Christ,
your repentance to mourn for sin, -- there is some peace, some comfort, that
is the result of these exercises. Now a man may sin away this comfort, your
fresh sin does wound and disturb you in the exercise of your Graces, and
therefore your comforts which flow from such exercises must needs be
interrupted. Nay if a man may sin away some measures and degrees of Grace,
those measures which are gotten of a man's own improvement, much more may he
sin away his peace which should flow from them.

4. There is a peace which flows from the sense and knowledge of Gods grace
implanted in the soul, when a man is able to evidence the works of Grace
implanted in the soul, there must needs be peace and comfort in it. Now this
also a man may sin away, he may sin away the sense and knowledge of a work of
Grace in him, he may so darken and obscure his evidences by sin, that he is not
able to read them, nor discern that work of Grace in him, he may now find
so much grace as to afflict him, but not so much as to comfort him, his light
was not directive before, and it is afflictive now.

5. There is a peace which flows from the assurance of God at peace with the
soul: A peace which flows from the sense of Gods favor, from the assurance
of God at peace with us. And this peace may we forfeit and lose, though we
cannot sin away our former pardon, yet may we sin away our present peace;
nay and sin away the sense and comfort; yea the knowledge of our former pardon;
which may be implied in that of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.9. He has forgotten that
he was purged from his old sins.

And thus much shall serve for the Answer to the Objections, and the settling
of the first particular, that the freemen of Christ may sin themselves into
bondage in respect of comfort.

2. A Christian may sin himself into bondage in respect of the manner of his
obedience: Though he do now serve God, yet not with that measure of
willingness; not with that measure of freedom, cheerfulness, and delight;
not with that inlargednesse of heart which formerly he has done. David after
his sin desired that he might have the free Spirit of God restored to him; he
had not lost it, the free spirit was in him; but he wanted that former freedom
of spirit; he wanted those operations and workings of it; he wanted that
comfort in service, and that freedom to service which he had before; the wheels
were now taken off, and he went heavily, and sadly on in the ways of life.
Though it be natural to the eye to see, and ear to hear, and that wherein it
does delight; for actions of nature they are actions of delight: yet if that
the eye be soar, it may breed a tediousness and burden in the doing actions
of nature: So here, if the principle whereby he obeys be wounded, it may work
an irkesomenesse in the doing those things wherein formerly a man delighted.
Though sin cannot set him into the state of a slave; yet it may disable to
serve fully as a son. And this servilenesse of spirit may be caused either
by, 1. Fear: or 2. by Doubts, and unbelief: or 3. Grace is weakened in the
operation by the prevailings of sin: or 4. The soul wants those former
apprehensions, and so is disheartened in all its approaches unto God. Indeed
now he serves God, but it is more out of obedience then out of delight; he
dares not but pray, and yet he finds little heart in prayer: he is now wounded
in all his approaches to God; that adaptation, and sweet connaturalnesse which
was between his heart and duty is now gone; that complacency and delight which
his soul had in all his approaches unto God, and walking with him, is gone,
and the soul drives heavily in the ways of obedience; he goes now to duty, as
a sick man to meat; not as a hungry healthful man to his food; he does duty
rather out of spiritual reason, then out of natural delight; and thus it
befalls many of the Saints in their relapses into sin; they sin themselves
into bondage in respect of the manner of their obedience. And this shall serve
for the answer to the fourth Query, viz. Whether the freemen of Christ may not
sin themselves into bondage. We come now to a fifth Query.

Whether this may consist with our Christian freedom,

There are three opinions concerning this Question.

Some say that we are to do duty, obedience, to merit heaven and glory; we
must fast, pray, and do good works; and all this with an eye to glory, as
Merces non est debita, sed gratuita, non (...). Romans 4.4. Council. Trident.
Sess. 6. Can. 33.
wages for work, and as desert of obedience. And therefore do they do all
their works; they fast, pray, penance, and afflict themselves, in reference to
the purchase of heaven and glory by all this.

The Council of Trent do denounce a curse upon those who say, That a justified
person does not merit eternal life by his obedience. And what would not the
proud heart of a man do, if by doing he might merit heaven? what torments have
the very heathen endured, out of an opinion that they should come to happiness
by them? And what would not others there is do? Cum Deus coronat merita nostra
(vult opera nostra) nihil aliud coronat quam munera sua. Aug. Sua dona coronat,
non merita tua. Aug.
I have read it was the speech of one, I would swim through a Sea of Brimstone,
says he, that I might come to heaven at last. Men would be at great pains,
and spare for no cost, if what they did might be looked upon as layings out for
heaven, as the purchase of glory, or as wages for work. The proud heart of man
would feign have that of debt, which God has decreed to be of grace; and
desires that to be of purchase, which God has intended to be of free gift.

But these are to be cast out of the inquiry. Certainly though we may do good
works, and walk in the ways of obedience, with an eye to the recompense of
reward; yet none of us hold, that these things are to be done with reference to
our meriting of it. The Apostle tells us, that it is not of Quia tu dignatus es
facere, non quia ego dignus cui facias. Aug. in 43. Psalm.
debt, but of grace, Romans 4.4. And in Ephesians. 2.5. By grace we are saved. So in
the 8, 9, 11. verses. And the gift of God is eternal life, Romans 6.23. Regmon
coelorum non servorum stipendinus, sed filiorum hareditas. Calv. de Merced.
Glory is not the wages of a servant, but the inheritance of a son.

And indeed, Quid sunt omnia opera ad tantam gloriam? Bern. Quid possumus
dignum facere praemiis coelestibus? Amb. in Psalm. 118. ser. 20. Non sunt
condignae passiones ad praeteritam culpam, neque futuram mercedem. Bern.
what are all our works to that glory, if all our sufferings are not worthy to
be compared to the glory that shall be revealed, what then are our doings? It
was the Si homo mill annis serviret Deo etiam ferventissime, non mereretur ex
condigno dimidiam diem esse in regno caelorum. Anselm. de mensuratione crucis.
Bern.

Non valent vitae praesentis obsequia, aeternae vitae gaudiis comparari,
flaccescant licet membra vigiliis, pallescant licet era jejuniis, non erunt
tamen condignae passiones hujus temporis ad futuram gloriam. Eusebius. Emis. Tua
peccata sunt, merita Dei sunt. Aug.


speech of Anselme, If a man should serve God a thousand years, he could never
by that service deserve half a day: I say, not one moment of time in that
eternal glory.

And therefore we will cast these out of the inquiry, it is too gross for
Christian ears: the Apostle tells us plainly, Tit. 3.5. Not by works of
righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saves us. --
Not by works of righteousness, that is, our own works, though we say of them,
as some of the more moderate of our Adversaries do; our own works Opera
nostra sanguine Christi tincta. Gratia nullo modo gratia, nisi omni modo
gratia. Aug.
sprinkled with the blood of Christ. All are injurious to grace. For by grace
we are saved; and grace, is no ways grace, if not every way Grace. But let us
leave them. --

There are two other opinions which are to be debated.

2. Some say peremptorily, that we must have no eye, nor no respect to heaven
or glory in our obedience: But we must walk in all the ways of obedience,
with this freedom; carrying no respect to the recompense of reward at all: and
that it is utterly inconsistent with the free spirit of a Christian, and
destructive to our Christian freedom, to do duty with respect to reward.

3. There is a third opinion, that says, we may do holy actions, and we may
walk in the ways of obedience; and may also in this doing cast an eye, and
have respect to the recompense of reward.

These two last come to be examined by us; we have cast out the first, as
inconsistent with the nature of grace, and the freedom of the Gospel; but both
these two are held up as consistent with grace and Christian freedom. And yet
these two last seem to stand upon opposite terms.

1. One says, we are to do holy duties, and may not at all cast an eye to the
recompense of reward.

2. The other says, we may have respect to the recompense of reward in the
doing of them.

For the first of these, that we are not to have respect to the recompense of
reward: It seems to be strengthened by these arguments or reasons.

1. Because this overthrowes the nature of our obedience, and makes that
mercenary and servile, which should be sonnelike and free; for if we do obey
God in reference to heaven and glory, then we do not obey freely, not God for
himself, but servilely, and mercenarily, that obedience being servile in the
principle which is mercenarie in the end.

2. Because if so; then we overthrow the nature of grace, and make that man's
purchase which yet is freely bestowed of God, which must needs overthrow the
nature of grace.

3. Because all these things they are the parts of the Covenant made to us: I
will pardon your sins, I will give you grace, I will give you glory. Now we
do not obey that we may have pardon; nor obey that we may have grace; and why
the other? why should we say, that we obey, that we may have glory, seeing
these are alike promised?

4. Because all these are fully purchased by Jesus Christ, and provided for in
Christ. Therefore they are not the purchase of us: we do not obey, that we may
get this, but because these are purchased for us, and we are persuaded thereof,
therefore we do obey, etc.

Thus may the first Opinion be managed.

2. The second, that we may have respect to the recompense of the reward in our
obedience.

It may be thus managed and defended.

That which God has propounded as an incentive to obedience, propounded: Ergo.
Or thus. If motives may be taken from them to quicken us to obedience, then may
we eye them in our obedience. But motives may be taken from the^ to quicken us
in our obedience. Ergo.

The second proposition seems the main to be cleared; and it is proved thus.

That which God has used as a motive to quicken to obedience, Min. probat.
that may be used as a motive, and consequently we may eye it in our obedience.
But God has used glory and heaven as a motive to quicken us to obedience: this
is proved, Romans 8.13. If you live after the flesh you shall die, but if you by
the spirit do mortify the deeds of the flesh, then you shall live. And in the
1 Cor. 15. last. Therefore be steadfast, always abounding in the work of the
Lord, for as much as you know your labor is not in vain in the Lord. So 2
Pet. 1.5. to the 12. and 2 Pet. 3.14. Seeing ye look for new heavens and new
earth, be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot and
blameless. And Gal. 6.8, 9. He that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh
reap corruption; but he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap
life ever lasting: Be not weary in well doing, for in due season ye shall reap
if you faint not. So 2 Timothy 2.12. If we suffer with him, we shall also reign
with him. And therefore God having propounded this as an incentive of
obedience; we may eye it, and have respect to it in our obedience.

That which the Saints and people of God have eyed in their obedience, eye
also. But the Saints in their obedience have eyed the recompense of reward:
therefore, -- etc. That they have eyed it, you see Moses Heb. 11.25, 26. He
chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater
riches then all the treasures of Egypt, for he had respect (...).
to the recompense of reward.

But you will say, Moses was a man under the law, and he had not so free a
spirit in service, as those now under the Gospel.

But to this may be answered.

1. He was a son, though under age, and had the free spirit of grace; else he
could have had no glory.

2. Paul commends this act of Moses, showing the greatness of his faith and
obedience, and so makes it imitable to us.

3. But thirdly, we shall find those who were under the Gospel, who enjoyed
abundance of Gods free Spirit, that yet had an eye to the same recompense of
reward in their obedience. You see Paul who had as free and ingenuous
principles in him as ever man had; yet he says of himself, in Phil. 3.13, 14.
I forget all things that are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which
are before, I press hard to the mark, for the price of the high calling of
God in Jesus Christ. And see Heb. 12.1, 2.

Thus you see the several opinions, and and the chief strength whereon they
stand.

Now in way of reconciliation, and setting down that which I apprehend the
truth in this Controversy:

1. I will first show what is meant by reward.

2. What by eyeing of the reward.

3. Whether the eyeing of it be any infringement to Christian freedom.

For the first, what is meant by Rewards. Rewards may be said to be of a
threefold nature. 1. Temporal. 2. Spiritual. 3. Eternal.

1. Temporal, and those are all kind of mercies we enjoy in this life,
whether personal, or relative, and those positive, or privative, health,
comfort, food, raiment, house, harbor, riches, freedom, deliverance. --

2. Spiritual, and those are all kind of blessings concern the soul:
Justification, sanctification, Grace, increase of grace, victory over our
lusts, comfort, peace, joy, communion with God. --

3. Eternal rewards, and that is the maine in controversy; glory,
immortality, life, as the Apostle sets it down, Romans 2.5, 6, 7. Who will
render to every man according to his works, to them who by patient continuance
in well-doing seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal life. In
a word, this eternal reward is the enioyment of God, of Christ, of the Spirit,
it is perfect freedom from sin, it is perfect holiness, it is indeed, grace
glorified, this is that eternal reward. And this shall suffice for the first.

2. What is meant by Eying of the reward. It is the phrase which the Apostle
uses of Moses, Heb. 11.25, 26. He esteemed the reproach of Christ greater
riches then all the treasures of Egypt, for he had respect to the recompense of
reward. We will a little explain what is meant by it.

There is a threefold eye.

1. There is an eye of knowledge, whereby a man sees and knows the excellency
of a thing.

2. There is an eye of faith, whereby he believes the truth of it, and his
interest in it.

3. An eye of hope, and thereupon of patience, and waiting or expectation for
the enjoyment of it.

In these respects, Moses might be said to eye the recompense of reward.

1. He eyed it by knowledge, he knew those things which were laid up for him,
he saw him that was invisible, as the next verse tells us; and he saw those
rewards which God had laid up for his people, far to be preferred before the
pleasures of sin.

2. He had an eye of Faith; Whereby he was persuaded both of the truth of it,
that such things were reserved, and of his part in them, and that he should
possess this glory.

3. He had an eye of Hope, to wait and expect the enjoyment of all this with
patience. Heb. 10.36.

And now hereupon he esteemed the reproach of Christ above all the treasures of
Egypt, for says the Text: He had an eye to the recompense of reward. What Is
that? shall we say, he had respect to that glory which he should purchase or
enjoy, by doing of this, or for doing this. No. But because he knew the glory
that was reserved for him, because he did believe that he should possess it,
because he did hope for it, and expect it. Therefore he did despise all the
riches and pleasures of the world, as not worthy to be compared with it.
Agreeable to which are those places, Col. 3.23, 24. and Heb. 10.34. And thus
much for the second, we come now to the third.

3. Whether to do duties with an eye, to the recompense of reward be any
infringement to our Christian freedom.

1. I answer, if you take it thus as I have said, for knowing, believing,
hoping; expecting of that glory God has promised to us; then I say, it is no
infringemen of Christian liberty, to do duties with an eye to the recompense
of the reward. But rather contrary I say, that herein our liberty does consist,
upon knowledge, faith, persuasion, hope, and expectation of that glory, which
God has reserved for us, thereupon to be encouraged and quickened in our
obedience, and thereby made free indeed in our obedience of him.

In brief then if you take this eyeing of the recompense of reward as I have
said, then a man may do duties with an eye to the recompense of reward. And
indeed we ought to do them with such an eye to the recompense of reward. 1.
Upon knowledge, faith, persuasion, that God will bless us, and never depart
from us, from doing us good. 2. And upon knowledge, faith, persuasion, that God
is our Father, that our sins are pardoned, etc. 3. And upon the like
knowledge, faith and persuasion that God will glorify us at last, thereupon we
are to obey and give up our selves to all the ways of obedience, love and
service of God, as the Apostle says, Col. 3.23, 24. And what ever you do, do
heartily to the Lord, knowing that of the Lord you shall receive the reward of
the inheritance. But if by eyeing of the recompense of reward you mean thus,
whether we are not to do duties, in reference to the obtaining of spiritual,
temporal and eternal mercies, then I must pause, and answer you by some
distinctions.

If then the question be demanded, 1. of temporal good things. Whether may not
a man do duties and obey God in reference to Gods bestowing of outward mercies
and inioyments upon him in this life. The affirmative whereof, viz: (that a man
may obey God with an eye and respect to Gods bestowing of outward mercies, and
good things in this life) is held up and maintained by holy and learned men,
such as I believe do carry as little eye to these things as any do, in their
obedience. And this is maintained upon the former grounds, because God has
propounded these things as motives and incentives to obedience, and the best of
Saints have eyed them in their obedience, Ergo, we may do it also. And to take
off all suspicion of mercinarinesse of spirit in so doing, they use to
distinguish between Supreme grounds and ends, and Subordinate grounds and
ends, and say, though the things of this life may be the Subordinate ground and
end of our service, yet they are not to be the ultimate and Supreme grounds or
ends of service. Matt. 6.33.
We may eye them with reference and subordination to Gods glory and our good
and salvation, but not primarily before, or supreamely above the glory of God
and our salvation: These are the usual cautionall distinctions which are added
by such as affirm the position.

I reverence their persons and judgments, and what I speak though it may be
different, yet I suppose it will not be contrary to that which has been
maintained by them.

The Query is, Whether a man may not do duties and obey God, in reference to
Gods bestowing temporal good things on him. For the right stating of the
Query, I conceive first, that (man) in the Query, must be taken for Christian
man, or man in Christ; for if it be spoken of Carnal man, he does neither obey
from right principles, upon right grounds, after a right manner, or for right
ends: we may say of all his obedience, Vix quaeritur Jesus propter Jesum. Aug.
that it is but carnal, he has carnal principles, and grounds and ends in
all he does. It may truly be said of him, what God said of the Jews, when they
fasted and prayed, they did not at all do this to God, They assembled
themselves for Corn, and Wine, and oil, belly blessings, self is the ground,
and self is the end of all. Principes regionem potius quam religionem quaerunt
pauperes, panem potius quam Christum. Chem.
They serve not God either merely, or mainly for himself, but for themselves;
they seek not him, but his; they follow him not for the miracles, but for the
loaves: Many thousands, who are moved by no inward spring, only these outward
weights, which taken off, like a clock they stand still and cannot stir. It is
the voice of a carnal heart, Who will show us any good? they count godliness no
gain, if they can make no gain of godliness; if in stead of gain, they have
loss, in stead of advantage, they meet with persecution; if in stead of a good
name, they meet with reproach, for Christ, then they presently cast off
religion and obedience, they owned it merely to serve their own ends, and for
their ends do disclaim it. He that will serve God for something, will serve
the devil for more, if he can mend his wages he is for any master.

And therefore by [Man] in the Query, I conceive is meant [Christian Man] or
Man in Christ.

2. By [good things] here I conceive is meant, outward good things, and those
such as the world do reckon and esteem to be good things, as riches, honor,
greatness, applause; at least, a competency and sufficiency of temporal and
outward good things.

3. And by [serving God] I conceive is meant all the acts of obedience, not
only outward conformity, but inward subjection to the laws and commands of
Christ.

4. And by [eying] of these temporal good things in service, I conceive, is
not meant the making these things either the mere or maine grounds of his
obedience, nor the supreme and primary ends and aims of his service, for that
were abominable, but carrying a respect unto the inioyment of these things, as
a subordinate ground to set him on work, and a means to quicken him in
working. And thus I have rendered the best sense I can, of those particulars in
the Query, and the question being thus stated; I shall now come to the Answer.
In which I conceive I shall have the grant of three particulars following.

1. That the inioyment of these good things of this life, is not the ground of
a Christian man's obedience; they are not that which does put us on work,
though they should be admitted to quicken us in working, they are not the
spring of motion, at the most they are but oil to the wheels to keep on and
quicken motion. I conceive there are these grounds of obedience.

1. The binding grounds: and those are because God has commanded, as Psalm.
119.4, 5. Thou have commanded us to keep thy precepts, oh that my heart were
directed to keep thy statutes.

2. The inabling grounds. Those are two.

1. Our implantation into Christ; As without him we can do nothing, so in him
we are created to all good works, and I can do all things through Christ, etc.

2. Christ's implantation into us, which is called the forming of Christ in the
soul, the new man, the law written in the heart, the new creatures, faith and
love, whereby we are enabled to obey his precepts: our faith inables. By faith
Abraham obeyed -- and our love constraines.

3. Impelling grounds, and those are motives rather; 1. because God is good, 2.
because he has been good to us. Gods goodness is a motive, and his grace is
our strength.

2. The inioyment of these things, they are not the mere end of a Christians
obedience, then would it render us to be servile, and mercenary in our
obedience, and not Son-like and free. Indeed these may be the mere ends of the
obedience of carnal men, but not of the godly, they have higher ends then
these: These are too low for the noble and royal spirits of Saints.

3. They are not the main ends of their obedience, they have higher ends then
these are; A Christian has a more noble spirit, a more freeborn soul, then
to make any thing out of God himself, the maine end of his obedience to God.
And so far all agree.

All the controversy is about the next, which I desire to propound in modesty,
to those who are of different judgments.

4. Whether it can be said to be the subordinate end of a Christians obedience
Seeing,

1. It seems to be the paedagogy of the Law, in which time they seemed to be
carried by temporal promises in the ways of obedience, and God seemed to
propound to them as men under age, the promises of temporal good things to
tempt them on to obedience. As you see in Deuteronomy. 29. Certainly, the enjoyment of
these temporal things was not the mere end of their obedience; though some of
them might have the spirit of the Sadduces, who said, they kept the Law, and
observed it, that God might bless them, and that it might go well with them
in this life; yet all were not of this spirit: nor was the enjoyment of these
things, the maine end of their obedience no more then of ours: It was but a
subordinate end, God never propounded it, nor did the godly eye it, as the
maine end of their obedience. But God deals with them as in their infancy, as
under age, and leads them on, and allures them by such respects as these;
because they had not that measure and abundance of spirit which he has
bestowed on his people now under the Gospel.

2. Because it seems to prescribe God, and limit God, not submitting to his
wisdom in desposals to us.

3. Because it seems to propound that which God has not propounded.

4. Because this end may fail, and so our obedience too, at least, so much as
these things were the end of our obedience, so much obedience will fail in the
failing of them.

5. It is hard to carry an eye to things of this nature, and yet our service be
free.

6. I conceive it is safer to take up arguments to quicken us in our obedience
of God, from the mercies of God bestowed, or made ours in the promise to faith,
then for to take up arguments to obey from the expectation of mercy to be
bestowed, or to gain mercies by our obedience. It seems better to say, that
we are not to obey that God may bestow blessings on us, but rather upon the
knowledge, faith, persuasion of Gods blessing of us here and for ever, to be
quickened from that to obey him. And the Apostle seems to speak after the same
manner to us, 2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these precious promises, let us
cleanse our selves from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God. He argues from mercy to duty, not from duty to
mercy here. He reasons here from the enjoyment of promises to the performance
of obedience; having therefore such promises, let us obey. So in Col. 3.23, 24.
And whatsoever you do, do it heartily as to the Lord, and not to man; Knowing
that of the Lord you shall receive the reward of the inheritance: where you see
he takes up the argument, to enforce the duty from the knowledge, or faith and
persuasion of that reward which God will assuredly bestow on them. So Heb.
10.34. They took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing in themselves
that they had in heaven, a better and an enduring substance. But I am not here
to deal with eternal, but with temporal rewards, and urge these places no
further then to strengthen what I said before, that it seems better to say,
that we do not obey that God may bestow these outward blessings on us, but
rather upon the knowledge, faith, persuasion of Gods blessing us here, and for
ever, we are quickened to obey him, and in our obedience of him. And certainly
the less eye that we carry to these things in our obedience, the more eye will
God carry to our obedience, the less regard and respect you have to these
outward things in your service, the more will God respect and regard your
service, the less you make them the end of your working, the more will God
make the^ the end of your work; Indeed the enjoyment of outward things seem to
be too low for a Christian to eye them in his obedience, the Apostle says, 2
Cor. 4.18. We look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which
are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things
which are not seen are eternal.

But you will say, promised all good things to obedience, as he tells us, 1.
Tim. 4.8. Godliness has the promise of this life, and of that which is to
come, and therefore we may obey with respect to the enjoyment of them.

Before I come to the answer of this, propound one thing, and query two.

1. That which I propound is this, Whether it were not better expressed, to say,
God promises to the obedient all good things, rather then to say, he promises
it to obedience. Especially if that be a truth, that Gods Promises under the
Covenant of Grace are not made to the work, but to the workman; not to the
action, but the person. I am sure our Divines have made this one difference,
between the Covenant of Works, and Grace; that in the Covenant of Works,
made with Adam, the Promise was made to the work, and not to the person. But
in the Covenant of Grace, the Promise is made to the person, and not to the
work. This I only propound: Now I will query two things.

1. Whether that which the Apostle calls [the Promise of this life,] and that
which is expressed in the Objection under the name of [good things] be
Symbolicall phrases, both expressing the same thing.

2. Whether by [good things] be meant those things which are good in the
account of men, or those things which are good in the esteem of God: or if you
will, whether those things which are good in themselves, or those things which
in Gods wisdom he knows good for us.

If good things be taken at large indefinitely, the first part of the Objection
is granted; that God has promised to the obedient, or to the obedient in their
obedience all good things. It is his promise, Psalm. Psalm. 84.11.
84.11. No good thing will he withhold from them who walk uprightly. Nay and
his Covenant, Ier. 32.40.
Ier. 32.40. I will never depart from you from doing you good. But if you do
determine and restrain good things, either to those things which are
positively good, those which the world esteems good, and do not take in,
wants, Divitiae dantur malis, ne pucentur bona; bonis, ne putentur mala;
multis, ne putentur magna.
as well as inioyments, straits as well as fullness, poverty as well as
prosperity, to be of the number of those good things; then I say that God has
made no such promise to us, nor can we truly interpret this promise after
that manner. If it were a promise made unto obedience, and Godliness, and the
promise were to be interpreted after that manner, then surely the Apostles
should have been sharers in it. But Christ tells them, That they should be
hated of all men for his Names sake, Mat. 10.22.
and should be brought before Princes, Mat. 10.18.
cast into prison, Luke 12.11.
persecuted, and those who did this should think they did God good service.
John 16.2.
And the Apostle tells us, That bonds and afflictions did abide for him every
where Acts 20.23. Acts 20.23.
And if their hope were in this life, they were of all men most miserable, 1
Cor. 15.19. 1 Cor. 15.19.
And it is the same which we are to expect and reckon on, according to that of
the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.12. 2 Timothy 3.12
He that will live godly must suffer Persecution. And Acts 14.22. Acts 14.22
Through many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of heaven. And
Christ himself tells us, That if we will follow him, we must take up our
cross daily and follow him. -- Luke 9.23. Luke 9.23.
And therefore certainly if by the promise of this life, be meant the good
things of this life: and if by the good things of this life, be meant outward
inioyments, then I say there is no such promise made here to obedience.

If it be said, that the Scripture says, If you will be willing and obedient,
you shall eat the good of the Land. And therefore temporal blessings are
promised upon condition of obedience.

If it be admitted that the Jews (though they were under a Covenant of Grace)
were yet under a different Covenant from us: a subservient covenant, as I have
showed, wherein God promised outward mercies to obedience; and threatened
afflictions to the disobedient: then the Answer is soon made: -- And David
might well say, He never saw the righteous forsaken; nor their seed begging
their bread: for outward mercies which were the conditions annexed to their
obedience and Gods part in the covenant, used not to fail the^ that walked in
them. But what ever it was then, it is not so now; those who are willing nd
obedient do not eat the good of the land: no, it may be they are in greatest
outward trouble and necessity; and they who do wickedly, do prosper.

And where is it that God has made such a promise now under the Gospel? If so;
why is it not universal and infallible? why do not those who are willing and
obedient enjoy it? and not only some of them, but all of them? for promises
are not made to particular members, but to the whole body of Christ. Indeed God
tells us now, He that will live godly, must suffer persecution. And, through
many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of heaven. But yet this is
firm in all, that God will never depart from us, from doing us good; he will
never leave us, nor forsake us. In blessing he will bless us. All things shall
work together for the good of them who love God. And this stands firm and
unmovable to all Saints; Heaven and earth shall sooner pass away, then one
tittle of this promise shall fail. Debita redditur poena damnato, indebita
gratia liberato, ut uec ille se indignum queratur, nec dignum se iste
glorietur. Aug.


Object. But you will say, If blessings be not promised to obedience; and if
God rewards not obedience, then by the rule of contraries, punishments are
not threatened against sin, nor does God punish for sin.

Answ. Not to speak much to the Connection here, which lies open enough to just
exception: Lex obligat ad obediendum et obedientem debita mercede compensat,
transgredientem vero punit, quanquam non tam necesse fit obedienti suam
mercedem esse, quam transgredienti poenam, quia lex imperat ea, quae jam ex
officie dehentur, sed hoc nunc nihil ad nos. Chamier.
for God may punish sin, and yet not reward obedience. In our obedience (if
it were perfect) we do but what we should do, as Christ hints it to us, in
Luke 17.10. When you have done all which is commanded you, say, you are
unprofitable servants, and have but done that which was your duty to do. But
when we sin, we do that which we should not do: and therefore may God punish
the one, and yet not reward the other. The punishment of our sin is but the
just demerit of our evil; but the reward of our obedience is the gift of his
own mercy: Romans 6.23. (...) Photius apud Occum. in locum.
the Apostle speaks so much when he tells us, The wages of sin is death; but
the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord, Cui redderet
justus judex coronam si non donasset gratiam misericors pater? et quomodo esset
justitia, nisi praecessit gratia quae justificat impium? quomodo ista debita
redderentur, nifi prius ista indebita dare^tur? Aug. Multum invenies domine
unde damnes, nihil unde salves. Aug. Amat deus, non aliunde hoc habet, sed ipse
est unde amat, et ideo vehementius amat -- Bern. Quomodo censeret deus opera
nostra mercede digna, nifi quod in illis quod poena dignum est immensa
benignitate aboleret? Aug.
Romans 6.23. Man may provoke God to justice, but cannot tempt God to mercy; our
sins draw out his justice, but his mercy is the issue of his own heart. We
can do that for which God may damn us; but we cannot do that for which he
may save us: and therefore you see though the parts be granted to be true, yet
the connection lies open to just exception. But secondly, it is granted that
blessings are promised to obedience, and punishments are threatened to sin:
but shall we judge nothing blessings but the enjoyment of temporal and outward
good things: may not losses be blessings as well as enioyments? and may not
enioyments be punishments, when yet losses are blessings? Certainly they may be
so in truth, though not in name; they may be so in Gods intention, though not
in our apprehension. Si vera loqui velimus, quid est adversum, nifi quod nobis
obstat ad aeternam foelicitatem properantibus? quid prosperum. nisi quod eo
conducit? Consul. Epist. (ad Synod. Land) ab Eccles. Walach. conscript.
And to speak truth, nothing is adverse but what does obstacle our eternal
happiness; and nothing prosperous, but what is advantageous to it. Thirdly, it
is granted again that God does reward obedience, and punishes sin: but it
is one thing for God to reward obedience, and another thing for man to eye
reward in his obeying. It is granted to be the end of the work; but this is
disputed, whether it should be the end of the workman, and upon those
considerations propounded. And though God does reward obedience, and punish
sin, yet as we do not avoid sin, because of temporal punishment; so we do
not perform duty because of reward: -- I say, reward, as it is restrained here
to temporal enjoyments. I would have nothing to come in as a motive to the
obedience of a godly man which is either unsuitable, too low, or uncertain: but
temporal rewards seem to be such: 1. unsuitable and below his work it self;
and sure below his spirit in working: and 2. uncertain they are, for we have
no absolute promise of them: if there be such a promise, why is it not
universal and infallible? --

But thus much shall serve for the first part of the Objection. We come to the
second, which is inferred upon it; that if God have promised all good things to
obedience, then may we obey with respect to the inioyment of them, etc.

I Answer by way of denial of the consequence, and say, Though it should be
admitted that God had promised all good things (so interpreted as before) to
obedience; yet does it not follow that we are to obey God with respect to the
inioyment of them. Should we grant that by [godlinesse] in that place of the
Apostle, were meant obedience, or godliness in practice, and [by things of
this life] were meant all good things: and those good things were things
positively good, etc. yet must we not obey that we may have this promise: but
rather having this promise, we must be quickened to obey. Certainly the
Apostles reasoning is the best reasoning, and he reasons thus, 2 Cor. 7.1.
Having therefore such precious promises, let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness, both of flesh and spirit: he does not say, let us do this that we
may have such promises; but having such precious promises let us obey. Do not
think that I would lessen a Christians deed, nor would withdraw the fuel,
much less cast water upon that which should quicken him to obey. But first, I
say, I conceive that this is not in the deed, riches is not there, prospiritie
is not there; but mercy, but a blessing is there. And for the other, I conceive
that it will be a far greater advantage to obedience, and incentive or spur
to quicken us in it, and to it; to consider the promise is made, and we are not
to obey that we may have the promise; but having such promises, how ought we to
obey?

Object. But though we are not to obey that we may have the promise of them;
yet may we obey that we may have the possession of them.

Answ. The things of this life they are no part, not so much as a pin of the
workmanship of a gracious soul; they are too low to move one wheel of a
Christians frame: to say the most of them, they are but oil to the wheel, Nec
propter te incepi, nec propter te desinam. Bern.
which is not the spring of motion, but a help in motion; the things of this
world can neither be the ground, nor the end of the obedience of a gracious
heart, they neither set us on work, nor do they continue us in working; the
inioyment of them may come in to quicken us to work, and in work; but these
must not be the end of our working, neither must we work for the inioyment of
them, If the eye be single, the whole body is light, -- And so on the contrary,
if the eye be double, if our aims and ends be God, and our selves, if they be
double, the whole man is darkness. In brief, the lesle respect we have to
these things in our obedience, the more free and noble is our obedience. Qui
hoc dosiderat propter aliud, non hoc defiderat, sed aliud. Kecker.
As we say of desire: he that desires this for that, does not desire this, but
that; he that desires one thing for another thing, does not desire this one
thing, but the other; or not this, but for the other thing. So he that obeyes
with respect to outward things, either would not obey, or would not so
cheerfully obey, if there were not such respects to be enjoyed. --

Object. But you will say, we may pray for these outward things, and therefore
we may do duty with respect to them.

Answ. It does not follow. It is one thing to be the matter of our duty,
another thing to be the ground of it. We grant that outward things may be the
matter of our prayer, but yet not the ground of our praying. Besides, it is one
thing to be the ground or the end of a particular duty, another thing to be the
spring of the whole frame. Some outward respect may be the ground or end of
this or that particular duty; we may lawfully go to prayer for this end, to
make known our temporal necessities; nay, and our present wants may be the
maine and particular ground of doing this particular duty at this time; but no
outward respects must be the hinge upon which the whole frame moves: I say,
they may be the ground of particular acts, but not the spring of the whole;
they may be the particular end of this particular duty, but not the general end
of the whole course of our obedience.

And this shall suffice to have spoken of the first branch of the Query;
Whether a man may not obey God in reference to Gods bestowing of outward
mercies and enjoyments here. And I say, in a word, it seems most agreeable to
the Gospel, and to the frame of a Christian soul, to say, that upon the
knowledge, faith and persuasion God will bless us, and withhold no good thing
from us; we ought to be quickened in our obedience of him; then to say, we are
to obey God, that we may gain these temporal good things by our obedience;
certainly the good things of this life, even the assurance of them, so far
as they are made over to us, and are good for us, they are not the grounds of
our obedience, though they should come in as encouragements in our obedience;
they are not the spring, though the oil; they are not the grounds of motion,
though we should admit them to come in as helps in motion; and if not the
assurance of them, then how can the hopes of them which are more uncertain, be
laid down as the ground of our obeying? though the ground of this particular
act of obedience, yet surely not the spring of the whole. I shall prosecute
this no further; if in that I have said, I have differed from others, it is not
out of disrespect to others whose judgments I honor, and I hope an allowance
may be afforded unto me, if I have dissented with reason.

We come now to the second branch of the Query propounded, viz. Whether we are
not to do duties with reference and revpect to the obtaining of spiritual
good things?

And there are some that say, Doct. C. in his Christ alone exalted, page 300,
301, 302, 303, etc. --
We are not to propound any respects or ends at all in the doing of duty: by
which they do not mean base ends, or carnal respects, or secular advantages:
but they intend the highest and noblest ends: and tell us plainly, that we are
not to humble our selves, fast, and pray, for the prevention of any evil, or
the procuring of any good: nay yet higher; that we are not to do duty with
respect to the obtaining of any spiritual good: either pardon, peace, joy,
assurance, the light of Gods countenance, the subduing of lusts; or for any
other end; which though it be an irrational opinion, and does denude men of
reason (for take away the end which every reasonable creature, as reasonable,
propounds in actions, and you level him with a beast) yet that they might
seem to be reasonable in this paradox, they give us two grounds of it.

1. Because we must not think to purchase that by our prayers and duties which
is the purchase of Christ; But Christ has fully purchased all this for us,
viz. pardon, peace, joy, and every good thing. Ergo.

2. Because all these are sufficiently provided for us in Christ: and God has
decreed all these good things for us in Christ; and therefore we must not think
to compass them by our prayers.

These are the reasons that this, shall I say, without offense, unreasonable
and destructive opinion seems to be founded on.

Certainly I need not say much against the opinion, for if it be but twice
repeated it will be as good as a confutation to it --. Indeed if this be a
truth, we must have another Bible to countenance it: What is more frequent then
this? Psalm. 50.15.
Call on me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee -- Ask, Luke 11.9.
and you shall have; seek, and you shall find; knock, and it shall be opened:
does not the Apostle desire them to pray for him, and for what end? he tells
you; that utterance might be given him: 2 These. 3.2.
Does he not desire the like, that he might be delivered from unreasonable men?
Does not Saint James bid us, James 5.14, 15.
if we be sick, call for the Elders of the Church; but for what end? to pray
for us; and why pray? that the sick person may be healed; pray one for another
that you may be healed. But I am weary with this: where almost can you look
upon any place where a duty is commanded, but there is an end propounded? And
what can be more destructive to grace, to reason, then such an opinion? It
would be no more absurdity to reason, to say, we must not eat to satisfy our
hunger; drink to quench our thirst; feed to nourish our selves: but we are to
feed out of mere instinct, and then as beasts; and not out of reason, as we
are men. But what, are we to do duty for no end? may we not confess sin
that we may be humbled, and made sensible of it? may we not hear the Word,
that our understandings may be bettered, our affections quickened, our faith
strengthened? Sure they themselves propound these ends in their preaching,
otherwise why do they take so much pains to persuade (I do not say,
convince) men's understandings that they are in an error? And may we not use
Ordinances for the increase of our graces? for the abatement and weakening of
our corruptions? And may we not do works of charity, to refresh the poor? to
relieve them who are in extremities? And are not these ends? And are not the
other duties? But if all this should be denied, yet this you will grant, that
we may do duty, and walk in the ways of obedience, to adorn our profession,
to dignifie the Gospel, to glorify God, to benefit the Saints, to win
others: and are not these ends? and were not these as much purchased by Christ,
and provided for by God as the other? Sure much more God has no need of us,
though we have of him; his glory, his Gospel, his cause does not depend upon
us: God could advance this, and maintain the other without us: and therefore
how little of men, how little of God, how little of reason, how little of
Scripture there is in such a tenent, I leave to all to judge.

But yet that their show of reasons may not go without an answer, I shall say,
and it is all I shall say, to them in a word.

1. Though Christ have purchased all good things for us, yet will God bestow
them in a way of seeking: Ezekiel. 36.37.
you see this in Ezekiel. 36.37. which is subscribed at the foot of the most free
and absolute promises; yet I will be inquired to concerning this, -- though God
promised to bestow all this, and promised like himself to bestow all this
freely without any respect to man, Verse. 32.
as he tells them verse. 32. Not for your sakes, be it known unto you, Oh house
of Israel, will I do this. No, it was for his own Names sake. And yet he tells
them, I will yet for this be inquired of by the house of Israel to do it for
them, -- which plainly shows that though God had promised, and promised freely
to bestow these things on them, yet will he bestow them in a way of seeking.

2. We say yet again, that though God will bestow these things in a way of
believing and praying, yet they are not the purchase of our prayers, but the
gift of his own mercy, And I appeal to any, whether ever they heard any
conscientious Minister to say, that prayer was the meriting cause of any mercy.
Did every any say that duty had any Causal influence into the compassing of any
mercy? Has it not still been held up as a Subservient means, and no procuring
cause of any mercy from God? When God has a purpose to give, he stirs up the
heart to seek, and his stirring up the heart to seek, is an evidence he has
a purpose to bestow: who loves to bestow his mercy in a way of seeking, that we
might be encouraged to come, and to look upon our incomes as the fruits of
prayer, and performance of promises to us.

But it may be it will be said, freely promised, why is there then a condition
required to the bestowing of them?

1. Some there are that say, promises are free in fieri, in respect of the
making of them, yet they are conditional in facto esse, in respect of the
performance of them, though they are made out of mere mercy, yet they are
performed in relation to our subservient duty; And if we do but subioyne this
to it, that the subservient condition or duty which is prerequired to the
performance of the promise, is nothing of our bringing, but first of Gods
bestowing; I do not see how this may any way entrench upon the freeness of
Gods grace, either in making or in performing the promise; he tells us, he
will give to him that is athirst, Reve. 21.6.
Revel. 21.6. Here is a condition or qualification, and yet this does not
entrench upon the freeness of Grace: Deus dat gratiam defideranti, et dat
gratiam defiderii.
Notwithstanding this qualification, he tells us he gives to him that is
athirst, and what can be freer then gift? gift you know implies freenes of
Grace; And lest any should object and say, how is it a gift when God does
require thirst? Sure this qualification does imply it to be no gift, it
discovers it is not of Grace; therefore is God pleased to adioyne to the former
word [gift] this other [freely] I will [give] to him that is athirst of the
fountain of the waters of life [freely.] And therefore does not this entrench
upon grace, Bonus es Domine animae quaerenti te, quid tum invenienti? sed hoc
mirum est, quod nemo te quaerere valet, nifi qui prius invenerit. Vis igitur
inveniri, ut quaeraris, quaeri ut inveniaris. Potes quidem quaeri, et inveniri,
non tamen praeveniri. Bern. dedillig. domin. p. 951.
because that which God requires as subservient to the promise, is not of our
bringing, till first of Gods bestowing; not of our purchasing, but of Gods
giving, who has engaged himself by Covenant, not only to give the promise,
but also what ever is required as necessary and subservient to the promise; if
indeed there had been any thing required which was of our bringing, and had
not first been of Gods bestowing, it would have entrenched upon Grace, and
altered the nature of the thing, and made that of purchase which is of gift,
though what we brought did carry no proportion with that we had for it; if but
one penny were required of us for the purchase of a kingdom, though this fall
infinitely low and short of the worth of the thing, yet this alters the nature
of the thing, and makes that a purchase, which without that would be a gift. So
here, if there were any thing required of our bringing and compassing, which
were not of Gods giving and bestowing, though the thing were never so small,
yet it would alter the nature of the gift, and entrench upon the freenes of
Grace; but when that which is of our bringing is truly of Gods bstowing and
giving, this does still hold up the nature of the gift, and does no way
entrench upon the freenes of Grace, if God does require faith to close with the
promise, and gives us faith whereby we may be able to come to the promise,
certainly this is no Prejudice to Grace. In the Lord is righteousness and
strength, says the Prophet, Isai. 45.24.
Isai. 45.24. Righteousness to those that come over to him, and strength to
enable us to come; As the sea sends out waters to fetch us to it, so God does
issue out strength from himself, to draw us to himself: And so all is of
Grace, which can no way be Grace, if it be not every way truly Grace. --

And if promises of Grace (though absolute and free in themselves, yet are
conditional in respect of the performance of them) much more may I say this of
promises of comfort, peace, joy, -- if which were acknowledged, men certainly
would not run upon these rocks, that a believer immediately upon the act of sin,
may take comfort and hear God speaking peace in the promise, and all the
gracious language of heaven, as though he had not sinned; the want of the
acknowledgement of this, does unavoydably carry men upon such rocks; certainly
what ever the promise is, yet the performance of these promises are
conditional; I say these kind of promises they are conditional, in respect
of the performance of them, what ever they are in the nature of them. And
therefore we are to do duties as subservient means for the compassing of
them; not that duty is the Cause, or that it has any Causall influence to the
procuring of these things, but that it is a subservient means for the
obtaining of these things which God has so freely promised: God has promised
these things to his people, and this is the way wherein God will perform them,
as he tells us, Isai. 64.5. Isai. 64.5.
He meets him who rejoices and works righteousness, and Psalm. 50.23.
Psalm. 50.23.
To him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of
God, and in the 6. Gal. 16. Gal. 6.16.
As many as walk by this rule peace be upon them. So that you see the way in
which God performs these promises, is in a way of duty and obedience: And
therefore may we do duty with respect to the inioyment of these promises.

Object. But it may be it will be said, that can be no precedent condition to
grace and justification, which is a subsequent fruit of grace and
justification: But to perform duty acceptably is a subsequent fruit of our
justification, Bona opera non praecedunt justificationem, sed sequuntur
justificatum. Aug. Quamvis bona opera fiunt ab homine, fides tamen qua fiut fit
in homine. Aug.
and work of grace in us, and therefore cannot be said to be a precedent
condition. That it is a subsequent fruit of our justification, we have the
co^current opinions of all our learned and holy Writers against the Papists, in
their Treatises against justification by works; and among other arguments this
is used for one. If we be justified before we can work, then we are not
justified by our works, but we are justified before we can work, therefore --
And that we are justified before we can work, the Scripture seems to hold
forth plainly. When it tells us. Joh. 15.5.
That without Christ we can do nothing. And that we are created in Christ
Jesus to good works. Ephesians. 2.10.
And in our selves we are dead men, and all our life is from Christ, and we can
have no life from Christ till we have union with him; Ephesians. 2.2, 3. 1 John 5.12.
For he that has the Son has life, and he that has not the Son has not
life. And as soon as there is life and union, there is justification, for they
are simultaneous both at the same time, though in order of nature one may be
conceived before the other. Operamur ex justificatione non in justificationem.
Brum.
And it will be said, if this argument be true which we oppose against the
Papists, then must we not work that we may be justified, but we must be
justified that we may work. And if to them the performance of duties cannot be
said to be the precedent conditions, seeing they are the subsequent fruits of
grace and justification. Thus I have raised up this objection to the utmost
height I can; And in this height, I had thought to have dealt with it, but that
I see it leads into so many intricate disputations, which are fitter for a
particular Treatise, then for the Answer to one objection; yet if better and
more able hands do not undertake it, (which is my earnest desire) then
possibly God may afford an occasion to me, one who is the meanest of those that
labor in the Gospel, to speak something to such a subject as this is. In the
mean I shall propound a few things to be seriously and thoroughly considered on.

1. Whether these things laid down may not be both precedent conditions, and
also subsequent fruits of grace; Especially, if you look upon them as
conditions of Gods bestowing, before of our bringing, and so qualifications to
grace, as yet they are qualifications from grace, and grace themselves, and
presuppose some existence of faith?

2. Duplex qualificatio, qua, and quae.
Whether those be good and safe distinctions of qualification; 1. The
qualifications in which or by which a soul comes to Christ, (which are said to
be sense of need, Matthew. 11.28. and hunger and thirst; spiritual poverty,
Matthew. 5. beg.) 2. The qualification which brings the soul to Christ, viz.
faith. And then this the qualifications of grace, and the qualifications to
grace; especially, if admitted, that those qualifications to grace are not of
man, though in man.

3. Whether there be not some works in order to grace, which may be said to be
from the Spirit, but yet are not with the Spirit. I say from the spirit of
sanctification, and yet not with the sanctifying spirit? As the light of the
morning is from the Sun, yet not with the Sun.

4. Whether Christ come not to us, before he come into us, and we have some
kind of life from Christ, before we come to live in Christ, or Christ in us --
and if so, whether [before] in order of time, or in order of nature only, or
whether before in respect of manifestation to us, or before in realitie and
truth.

5. Whether those distinctions will hold of negative and positive, active and
passive preparations to Christ; by the one the Spirit of God emptying us of our
sins, and selves: by the other begetting in us desires, hungering and thirsting
after Christ; or whether both these do not presuppose some existence and being
of faith, and Christ in the soul, who has entered the soul, as the light
enters into a dark room, which does rather dispell, then expel the
darkness; rather drives out darkness in entrance, then throw out darkness
before it enter --

6. Duplex receptio Christi, passiva and activa.
Whether that be a safe distinction laid down by Learned men of a passive and
active Reception of Christ. And whether that in the one we receive Christ, as
a dead man receives life; in the other, as the living man receives food; and
whether the one may be called the souls interest in Christ, and the other the
manifestation of that interest; and if so, whether many of those which are said
to be preparations to Christ, Receptio Christi activa est receptio in foro
conscientiae.
do not presuppose Christ in us; and go not before the souls interest, though
the manifestation of that interest?

7. Whether Gods order of working may not differ from that which is to be our
order of preaching; and whether there be not some use to be made of that
distinction, of Gods ordinary and his extraordinary workings on man.

8. Whether upon the same ground upon which all preparations, previous
workings, precedaneall acts of God to justification are denied, viz. convictoin
of sin, and discovery of Christ, even upon the same ground faith it self may
not be denied as precedent to justification; if so, then certainly both, faith
and justification, are capable of another sense, then the Scripture seems to
hold out, and also then they have been thus long received.

And therefore it would be also worth our pains, to spend some thoughts about
the settling of the true nature of faith and justification; and therein to
inquire; 1. of the nature of faith. And that,

1. Whether faith be properly or truly the instrument of justification, or only
the evidence we are justified; whether it do truly give us interest in Christ,
or is only the manifestation of our interest; and as that which may be useful
to such debates; whether that faith which does justify us be an act of
recumbency and resting on Christ for interest; or a persuasion and assurance of
our interest in him; And those places would be well weighed, where we are said
to be justified by faith -- Romans 5.1. -- Romans 3.28.

And for justification, It would be cleared;

Whether it be a foreign, or an immanent act in God; whether it be an act of God
in time; or whether that which is done in time be not improperly called
justification, and is rather the manifestation to us of what God has done from
all eternity. And it would be examined by them, who hold this latter; whether
a distinction of the several periods of justification might not be admitted
for the further clearing of this truth. As 1. we may be said to be justified in
decree, and so we are justified from everlasting. 2. meritoriously, and so we
are justified in the death of Christ, he laid down then the full price for the
payment of our debt. 3. Actually, and so we are justified when we do come to
believe. 4. In the court of conscience, and so we are justified to our selves;
when we come to be assured. 5. Perfectly, and so we are justified when we are
glorified, when Christ shall present his Spouse without either spot or wrinkle
or any such thing; when the Church shall be tota pulchra, all fair without
spot or sin -- if which be not admitted, the order of Scripture will seem to
be inverted; and we shall run from Gods revealed will to Gods secret will; yea,
and a man may stand actually justified by this opinion, while he stands
actually under the power, reign and rage of Satan and sin -- These things I
have only suggested now to consider of, but had intended out of these to have
framed the Answer to the Objection, which in regard it would have been too
large I have purposely waved. Leaving this to some more particular Treatise, if
better hands (which is desired, and of which there is need) do not undertake
it.

For the present, I say no more then that those dispositions and qualifications
which are prerequired do no ways entrench upon the freeneffe of grace, seeing
they are from grace; and are of Gods bestowing, not of our purchasing; they are
not of our bringing, but first of Gods giving. And we say that no
qualifications on man's part from man are required, but yet there may be
something on man's part from God. And I will not say that those who do deny
preparations to Christ, do in a kind deny the necessity of the means of
grace to them not brought in: what if we should thus argue?

If preparations to Christ are not necessary, means of grace are not necessary
to such. But the means of grace are necessary. Romans 10.17.
It is said faith comes by hearing, and if the means be not necessary, then may
men believe and be justified before ever they have heard of Christ. But I know
the consequent will be denied: which may be thus proved.

If by the means of grace, Conseq. Prob
God does prepare such for Christ; then take away preparations to Christ, and
take away the means of grace to such. But by the means of grace God does
prepare us for Christ. In them he opens and discovers our misery: In them he
makes us see our sinfulness, and need of Christ: In them he opens and
discovers Christ and the promises to us, and kindles in the soul a desire and
thirst after him, earnest seekings for him; which is the morning of grace, the
dawnings of faith and conversion; and such as are the harbingers of Christ. It
is said of John, who was the prodromus or harbinger of Christ, both into the
world, and into the heart. It is said of him, that he was to make ready, or
prepare a people for the Lord. Luke 1.17. and how was that, but by his
ministry? Christ will have some go before him to prepare for his entrance. It
is said of the seventie disciples whom Christ sent out to preach, that he sent
them to every city and place whither he himself would come: and wherefore
did he send them before, but to prepare their hearts to the receiving of Christ
when Christ should come? as was seen by the Text he gave them to preach upon.
Go and say unto them, the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you, as you see,
Luke 10.1.9. verses. It is with Christ in his entrance into the soul, as it is
with a Prince coming to a place, who you know has his harbingers such as go
before, his court or such as go with him, and his attendants, or such as are
his followers and come after him: So has Christ, the harbingers of Christ,
they are those preparatory workings, conviction of sin, discovery of Christ
and the promises; earnest longing, thirsting and seeking after him: his court
are all the graces of his Spirit, which he works in his first entrance into the
soul. And his attendants or followers they are that peace which passes all
understanding; Phil. 4.7. that joy unspeakable and glorious in the holy Ghost,
1 Pet. 1.8. Christ may be entered into the house before his followers come in:
there may be faith without assurance, and grace without joy; there can be no
true joy without grace, but there may be true grace without joy -- I will
proceed no further upon this. This shall suffice for the second branch of the
Query, we come now to the third and last branch.

3. Whether we may not do duties and obey God, with reference and respect to
eternal rewards.

And this is denied upon a double ground.

1. Some that deny it upon this ground, because that Christ has purchased, and
God has fully provided heaven and glory for us: and therefore we are not to
have respect to it in our obedience. Indeed it is true, we are not to have
respect to the purchasing of it by our obedience, but we may have respect to
the possession of it in our obedience. We may have respect to the inioyment of
it in our obedience, though not to the obtaining of it by our obedience. To
have an eye to our inioyment of it in our obedience is one thing, and to have
an eye to our obtaining it by our obedience is another thing. Certainly those
who preach obedience and holiness, they do not preach them as the Cause, Bona
opera sunt via regni, non causa regnandi. Bern. Bona opera ut media
amplectimur, ut merita detestamur. Bona opera sunt neceessaria respectu medii
vel ordinis, non respectu causalitatis. Consule Daven: de justitia habitual.
cap. 31. page 400. Bona opera sunt necessaria, necessitate praesentiae, non
efficientiae, ut precursoriae conditiones, non ut causae meritoriae.
but as the way, and tell us of the necessity of them, not in respect of
Justice, but in respect of presence, to make us meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1.12. Necessary they are, but not in
respect of Causality, but in respect of Gods order, means, ordination: who has
called us to virtue and glory, as the Apostle, 2. Pet. 1.3. to virtue as the
preparation; to glory as the fruition. In respect of presence, we say works of
righteousness and holiness are required; for certainly God makes none happy
hereafter, but whom he makes holy here, he brings none to glory, but those in
whom he works Grace; he gives grace and glory, Psalm. 84.11. he brings
heaven into the soul, before he brings the soul to heaven.

But in respect of Justice and Causality, we cry them down, and say with the
Apostle, Tit. 3.5. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his mercy he has saved us. Is not this ever in your ears; Do all
righteousness; and learn to rest in none, be in duty in respect of
performance, but out of duty and in Christ in respect of dependence?

And this shall suffice for the first ground, why doing duty with respect to
reward is denied.

2. Others there be that deny that we are to have respect to these eternal
rewards in our obedience, but it is upon another ground: Because this (say
they) savours not of a Gospel and ingenuous spirit, but rather of a mercenary
and servile spirit in service: we are to serve God though there were no
heavens, nor hells, no rewards nor punishments: And to this end I have heard
alleged a story of a woman, who being met with fire in one hand, and water in
the other, and being asked what she would do with it; She answered, with this
water I will quench all the fires of hell, and with this fire I will burn up
all the joys of heaven; that I may serve God neither for fear of punishment,
nor hope of reward, but singly and only for himself. Here were good
affections, but it will appear before I have done, that certainly here wanted
clear conceptions of heaven and glory, if she had conceived aright of that,
there had not needed this expression. There is nothing in heaven that a
glorified soul can tell how to part withal: there is nothing to be burned up
there; there is nothing but God in Grace, and in Glory, as I shall show anon.

2. There is a second opinion, and that is, That a godly man may do duty, and
walk in the way of obedience with a respect to the recompense of reward. But
this opinion is so modified, so tempered and allayed, that it is a wonder that
any should take offense at it.

As 1. though we may have respect to heaven and glory and our salvation, yet
these must not be the supreme and primarie respects, but only secondary and
inferior respects.

2. These must not be respected singly and solely, but coniunctively and
jointly with Gods glory.

3. These must not be absolute respects, but respects with subordination to
Gods glory. It was the meditation of one. Not heaven, Oh Lord, but God and
Christ: rather ten thousand times Christ without heaven, Non coelum domine, sed
Christum et te defidero, etc.
then heaven without Christ: but seeing thou have joined them together that I
cannot enjoy one, except I have the other, then both Oh Lord, but not Christ
for heaven, but heaven, Oh Lord, for Christ. Non amat te domine qui aliquid
amat praeter te quod non propter te amat. Aug.
And as they say for respects, so they say for grounds and ends: that heaven
and glory are not to be the sole grounds and ends of our obedience: nor are
they to be the supreme grounds and ends of our obedience; we may carry an eye
to them to quicken us in our motion; but these are not to be the ground of our
moving: this may be the refreshment in our way; but this is not to be the sole
ground of the undertaking of our journey: the Apostles phrase may seem to
speak something for this, Heb. 11.26. He had respect to the recompense of
reward. It is not (...), but (...), he cast an eye, when he was on his journey,
to cheer him in his way, to encourage him in his journey, lest he should think
of the great things he had refused, and by that the flesh should reason and
tell him, he had a hard bargain, therefore he steals a look from Glory; he
goes to his Cordial, he casts an eye to the recompense of reward, and by this
he renews his strength, gets new and fresh encouragement to go on in his way:
he makes not this the ground of the undertaking his journey, but a means to
quicken him in his way; not the spring of his motion, but the oil to the
wheels whereby he might move more cheerfully.

And yet some there are who distinguish between young beginners, and grown
Christians. At the first entrance of a soul into the ways of Grace, say they,
a man looks upon heaven and hell; the one to drive him out of sin, the other
to persuade him, and draw him into the ways of holiness: but when once a
soul is entered into the ways of life, he finds so much sweetness in God,
and his ways, that now he serves him with a more free and ingenuous spirit. As
the Samaritans said, Joh. 4.41, 42.
Now we believe, not because thou have said it, but because we have heard him,
and know this is the Messiah that should come, Ioh. 4 41, 42. So now we serve
thee, not for fear of punishment, or hope of reward; but because we see those
beauties in thy self, that sweetness in thy ways, that if there were no
other heaven this were heaven enough. -- And there seems something to speak
for this in the prodigal, Luke 15.18, 19. When first he was awaked and
convinced of his misery, Luke 15.18, 19.
he says, He will return to his father, and say, Father, I have sinned, and
am not worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy [hired] servants:
Now he would be a hired servant; but after he came to his father, and saw the
mercy and indulgence of his father, how he runs to meet him, and embraces him;
he talks no more of a hired servant; he was now overcome with love, and
therefore he only remembers the wickedness he had done, and abhorres himself
for it, Luke 15.21.
and says, Father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee; he names
hired servants no more. So when first the soul is awakened to see sin, and
misery by sin, then he says, Oh make me as one of thy hired servant: fear
of hell, and desire of heaven, are the two great plummets which move him: But
when once the soul comes over to Christ and the promise, when once it has
tasted of his mercy in pardoning, his goodness in receiving of him; then does
he fall down and abhor himself, as it is said there of those whom God
settled the promises upon, Ezekiel. 36.31. And now all he desires is to serve God
for himself; he sees so much beauty, has tasted so much mercy, that if he had
the strength of an Angel, it were all too little to be laid out for him: It is
not the blood within his veins, the spirits within his arteries, the life
within his body, that can be too dear to be laid out for him: now all the
contest is, not what will God give me, but what shall I give God? What shall I
render to the Lord for all his goodness? he is willing to go through a sea
and through a wilderness, through any difficulties, any duties; and all he can
do it falls infinitely short of his heart and good will to God; all his
expressions they are but a little of his larger affections in him; and though
God should never do more for him, yet his heart does burn with such
affections to God, that he counts all he can do for him, but a little of that
much he could beteeme him.

And now though I did not need to proceed any further in this, yet give me
leave, because this is the maine in Controversy, yet to proceed a little
further in the clearing of it to you. For answer then to this third branch of
the Query, Whether a Christian man may not do duties with an eye to the
recompense of reward: or with respect to heaven and glory. I answer
affirmatively, and in opposition to that contrary opinion, I shall lay down
and evidence these two positions to you.

1. Position. That we may obey God with respect to heaven and glory.

2. Position. That we ought to have respect to heaven and glory in our
obedience.

These two positions I shall endeavor to establish to you, though not upon the
same grounds whereon the lawfulness of eving reward in our obedience is
usually built: I shall labor to settle it upon such spiritual and yet true
grounds, as therein you shall see the reason of our dissenting to the first
branch of the Query. We will begin with the first, which is this.

1. Pos. That it is lawful, and we may obey God with respect to eternal
rewards, heaven and glory.

In the handling of this, in regard I find that those who have maintained the
contrary opinion, have grounded that opinion upon mistakes, and false
conceptions of what heaven and glory is: I find they have made false draughts
of heaven, and have too much pensild it out after a carnal manner; a way far
below heaven and glory. And thereupon I conceive, have grounded this opinion,
that we may not eye it in our obedience. I shall therefore in the first place
(having in the entrance upon the Query cleared what was meant by respect, or
eying of the reward) set down now what we conceive is truly meant by heaven
and glory.

And here I must first tell you, that if you do abstract or separate that from
heaven which a carnal heart does conceive to be heaven, that is heaven to a
godly man. Carnal men do fancy heaven under carnal notions; they look upon
it as a place where there is freedom from all misery; and where there is
fullness of all pleasures and happiness: but both these, the misery and the
happiness, the freedom and enjoyment; they fancy in a way suitable and
complying with their carnal or natural hearts. This indeed is a Turkish
heaven, but this is not a Christians heaven: indeed we read heaven set out
sumptuously to us in the Scripture, Revel. 21.18, 19, 20, 21.
Revel. 21.18, 19. The walls thereof are Jasper, and the City is of pure gold,
and the foundations thereof are garnished with all manner of precious stones;
the first foundation was of Jasper, -- and the twelve Gates are twelve Pearls,
-- thus God is pleased to pensil it out, as if he would tempt a worldling, and
even corrupt sense it self which shall never come there, to seek the
inioyment of it. But these you must know are metaphorical speeches, because
the glory of heaven cannot be pensild and lim'd out as it is: therefore God
does condescend here to our weakness, and even to sense it self; and pensils
out heaven and glory by such things as are known to men to be precious. Not
that we are to conceive that heaven is any such thing; nay, or that there is
any such thing in heaven; if you think so, I shall spoil your heavens before
I have done; certainly,

1. God needs not to be beholding to stones, though precious stones, to make
heaven glorious, no more then the Sun needs to be beholding to the Stars to
make the day. God himself fills heaven with Glory, and makes it infinitely
glorious. God in heaven is the glory of heaven.

2. To what purpose should there be such poor beggarly sensitive things, to
those who are all spirit and glory? these things are below the spirit of a
godly man here; he has a more noble spirit, he can now trample upon gold and
silver, Pearls and Diamonds: and if his spirit be above these things here;
what are these to him in heaven? if these be below him while he is here below;
what are they then, when he shall get above?

3. Besides, these are but beggarly glory, to the meanest glory in heaven; you
shall turn your eyes no whither but behold a far greater glory then these
are; every glorified soul shall be more glorious then the Sun in its glory:
alas, what are precious stones, but pebble stones, if compared to the glory of
a glorified Saint?

But to proceed no further, upon the mistake. I conceive in brief, that by
eternal rewards, is meant what ever ought to be the utmost of the desire of a
renewed and sanctified soul: Not to speak of it in that largeness which
Burrows, Moses choice. 529.
others have excellently done.

1. It is the fruition and enjoyment of God.

2. It is the inioyment of Christ, that Pearl of price.

3. It is the inioyment of the Spirit, the only Comforter.

4. It is the perfection and fullness of grace.

5. It is an eternal Sabbath; a rest, and a rest in Jehovah, in whom there is
all rest: it is a rest after all motions; all pantings after him, are now rests
in him, and in him as in your center, your proper place of rest; it is a rest
with glory, though here they seldom, yet in heaven they perfectly meet, and
that for all eternity. --

And tell me now in this little I have said of it, whether a Christian may not
desire all this? whether a Christian may not eye this, and have respect to this
in his service and obedience?

1. May we not desire and have respect to the inioyment of God in our service?
David could say, Whom have I in heaven but thee, and in earth I desire in
comparison of thee? Psalm. 73.25. The enjoyment of God was the utmost of his
desire in heaven: and it is set down as the top privilege by Christ, to bring
us to God, 1 Pet. 3.18. and may we not eye it here? Certainly the more respect
we carry to the inioyment of God in our obedience, the more noble is our
obedience; the more eye you carry to the inioyment of God in a duty, the more
noble are your spirits in duty: and may we now pray and do duty with respect
to get a little communion with God and Christ, without which respects your
duties are not sound: and may we not serve God then with respects to the full
inioyment and communion with him? how absurd is this?

2. And may we not desire Christ, and obey God, and follow after him in the
ways of holiness with respects to the enjoyment of Christ? Indeed not to
purchase him by our obedience; but to journey to him in our obedience: yea, and
to walk in ways of service with respects to the inioyment of him; not as the
merit of our service, but the end in our serving.

3. And thirdly, may we not desire the Spirit, who is the only Comforter; yea,
and serve God with respects to the enjoyment of him, who is the comforting, who
is the sanctifying Spirit, who is now in us; but we shall hereafter be in him:
As it was said of John, which was the preoccupation of glory, he was in the
Spirit on the Lord day, Revel. 1.

4. And may we not obey God, and serve him with respect to perfection and
fullness of Grace. May we here serve him with an eye to the additions of grace,
and may we not obey him with respect to fullness of grace? may we now pray,
walk in the use of Ordinances, and in all the ways of duty with respect to
the getting a little more grace, a little more faith, more love, more
brokennesse of heart? -- How much more may we serve God, and obey him with
respects to the fullness and perfection of grace: this is that we breath after,
we pray for, we hope for, even perfection, satisfaction: When I awake, says
David, I shall be satisfied with thy likeness, Psalm. 17.1. And certainly that
which is Saints satisfaction hereafter, is Saints desire here; that which they
breath after in all their services as their satisfaction, may be respected and
eyed here as our duty in all our services: if those duties are not well done
wherein you have not carried respects to the communion with God and Christ, and
improvements of grace in the doing of them; then surely we not only may, but
it is our duty, and we must eye these things and have respect to them in our
doing of them.

5. And fifthly, may we not have respect to a perfect Sabbath in the doing of
duty? Omnis motus tendit ad quietem.
what is it but a rest? is not rest the end of all labor, does not labor tend
to rest? And is not this a rest? nay a rest from sin, a rest in God, a rest
with praises and admirings, glorifyings of God to all eternity? and may we not
labor with respect to this rest? may we not do service with an eye to the
obtaining of such a Sabbath? where we shall rest for ever, and rest from sin.
Nay, rest in service, rest in God. Even for this cause we labor and faint not,
2 Cor. 4.16.

And tell me now by this little that has been said, Whether we may not serve
God with respects to eternal rewards? May not a Christian serve God with
respect to these things? Nay, is he a Christian who does not hold up these
respects in the service of him? Why, what is salvation, what is heaven, what is
glory, but all this? I wonder what draughts you make of heaven, what you think
of glory, and salvation, when you say, we are not to eye these things; nor to
have respect to these things in our obedience: certainly you conceive of these
things under false notions; you make false draughts of these things: you look
upon them as the world does, carnally, not spiritually; I know none will own
that heaven as his happiness, which he may not have respect unto in his
service; nay, make his scope, his aim in his service: the Apostle seems to
imply so much in the 2 Cor. 4.18. 2 Cor. 4.18.
We (...) -- A them: (...) considero, collimo: hinc (...), meta ad quam
Sagittarii collimant et tela sua dirigunt.
look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen:
the word implies, we make these things which are not seen, our scope, our
aim; and if so, then certainly we may have respect to them: let us be ashamed
to pensil out that for heaven, which a godly man may not be admitted to eye,
and have respect unto in his obedience; nay, make his scope and end in obeying:
that is, not heaven so much which comes by God, as that is heaven indeed which
lies in God: if we speak of heaven abstractively, it is but a notion; this can
never make a man happy: but if you speak of heaven coniunctively, heaven with
God, and heaven in God, as it is our happiness, so it is our holiness; and to
this we may carry an eye and respect in all our obedience.

And by this may a poor Christian be satisfied in those doubts which are
usually the results of a jealous misgiving spirit. service is hypocritical and
out of self-love, for I aim at my self; I do service with respect to heaven
and glory. To which I might say,

1. read that God charged any for hypocrisy who had respect to this. Indeed he
has charged them who have had respects to the world, and to these things here
below, as he says to the Israelites, You have not fasted and prayed to me, you
assembled together for corn, and wine, and oil; but never charged any with
hypocrisy and doubleness of spirit who had an eye and respect to heaven and
glory: but

2. I say, conceive of heaven under the right notion, make true draughts of
heaven; look upon heaven as I have set it forth; make this thy heaven which I
have laid down to be a Christians heaven, and then thou may carry an eye and
respect to it in thy obedience; nay, the more eye and respect thou carriest to
heaven thus described, certainly the more spiritual, the more heavenly thou
art. In this thou do not aim at thy corrupt self, but thy best self: and
not thy self in opposition to God, or separated from God, but thy self in
God; thou losest thy self in him to find thy self in him, when thou shall be
swallowed up with his likeness.

And here will be the answer to another scruple too: desires are not true; for
I desire not grace for it self, but grace for glory, grace for heaven.

To whom I might also say, conceive aright of heaven; look not upon it with a
carnal eye, a place of freedom from a sensitive misery, and inioyment of
sensitive happiness and pleasure: but look upon it as a place wherein thou
have communion with God, inioyment of Christ, perfection and fullness of grace,
freedom from all sin, from every corruption, and spiritual imperfection;
and thou may desire grace for heaven. Indeed if you should look upon grace
and heaven as two diverse things, you might err in desiring grace for heaven;
but look upon heaven as it is fullness of Grace, -- and then thou may desire
grace for heaven. Thou may desire Grace here as the beginning of heaven, the
earnest of glory, and as that which may entitle thee to perfection and fullness
of Grace hereafter. --

In brief, he who desires grace merely for glory; and looks upon that glory,
as diverse from Grace, Nic aternitatis semina jaciuntur. Sanctificatio est
gloria inchoata; gloria est sanctificatio consummata. An.
his desires are not right; but thou may desire grace merely for heaven, so
long as thou desire heaven merely for Grace: And the more enlarged thou art
in those desires, the more gracious and spiritual are thy principles. -- And
thus much shall serve for the first Position. That we may obey God with respect
to heaven and Glory. And indeed we cannot conceive of heaven so meanly if we
conceive aright of it; but it may be eyed even under the meanest notion of it.
But we come to the second.

2. That we ought to have respect to heaven and glory in our obedience. In the
former, I told you only that you may; here I tell you that you must; you may
obey God with respect to heaven, but you must respect heaven in your obedience:
It is that which God has set down to fortify our hearts against fear of any
troubles, and to bear up our hearts under the sense of any calamities. You see
when Christ would arm his Disciples against all fears and evils they should
meet withal in this life, he takes the encouragement from hence; because God
would give them a kingdom, Luke 12.32. Fear not little flock, for it is your
Fathers will to give you the kingdom: he brings the harbor into the sea; the
rest into the labor; the glory into the trouble: and this incourageth a soul
to go through all. And should we not eye it, and have respect to it, we should
be found to slight the encouragements of God. As it is a sin to slight the
consolations of God, Job 15.11. So it is no less to make light of the
encouragements of God. All these God affords to help faith against sense, to
furnish faith with arguments against the carnal reasonings of the flesh; and
to encourage us in the greatest straits and distresses the world can bring upon
us. And you see it was that which the Saints have eyed for their encouragement
in the greatest straits. It is said of Moses, Heb. 11.25. That he chose rather
to suffer afflictions with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of
sin for a season: Looking, says the Text, to the recompense of reward: that
glory, that happiness which was made real and visible now to the eye of his
faith, did encourage him to slight all the greatness of the world: (...).
Bafil.
It rendered all treasures on earth too little for his spirit, and his spirit
too big to be daunted with all the discouragements in the world. And it was
that which was Paul's encouragement too, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. He was troubled on
every side, -- but yet labored and fainted not; Consul. Bez. in loc.
why? Because our light afflictions which are but for a moment, works for us
a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, while we look not unto
the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen. So that you
see from hence the Apostle took his great Cordial, and encouragement to go
through all his troubles and distresses; he looked above those things which are
seen, and considered those things which are not seen. --

And to be brief, 1. would you walk thankefully, 2. would you walk
cheerfully, 3. would you be strong to do, 4. and able to suffer, 5. would you
submit to all Gods disposals, 6. would you rejoice in your sufferings, then you
must carry an eye to the recompense of reward. Briefly, to speak to them;

1. Would you walk thankefully? The considerations of this will make us burst
out into praises in our lowest conditions. Here is matter enough of praises,
the Apostle bursts out, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4.
1 Pet. 1.3, 4. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
has begotten us again unto an inheritance immortal and incorruptible, which
fades not away, but reserved in heaven for us. Indeed the thoughts and
considerations of this, will fill us full of heaven and glory, and make us Si
coelum venale quantum pro illo daretis, and quando gratis datur ingrati estis?
Col. 1.12.
break forth into songs of thanksgiving for his great goodness; Who has made
us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light. Col. 1.12.

2. Would you walk cheerfully? Would you be filled with joy, 1 Pet. 1.8.
with comfort in the midst of all your sad conditions? Would you joy in
tribulations? fetch considerations from heaven, Heb. 10.34. They took joyfully
the spoiling of their goods, knowing in themselves that they had in heaven a
better and an enduring substance. It is reported of Caesar, Cogita te Caesarem
esse.
that when he was sad, he used to say to himself, Think that thou art Caesar:
Did he think his earthly greatness was enough to bear up his heart in any
trouble? how much more should the consideration of these great things reserved
for us, cheer up our hearts, and comfort our spirits in the sadest condition?
He that lives much in the thoughts of heaven, lives much the life of heaven,
that is, thankefully, and cheerfully. The Philosophers say, if men were above
the second Region, they were above all storms; there is nothing but serenitie
and clearness. It is true of those souls who can live in heaven, they have
rest in labor, calmes in storms, tranquillity in tempests, and comforts
amidst their greatest distresses --

3. Would you be strong to do the will of God? You must fetch strength and
encouragement from the consideration of these things; the Apostle brings in
this as an encouragement, Col. 3.23, 24.
Col. 3.23, 24. What ever you do, do it heartily -- knowing that of the Lord
you shall receive the reward of the inheritance. 1 Cor. 15. ult.
So in the 1 Cor. 15. ult. Be always abounding in the work of the Lord, for
as much as you know, that your labor is not in vain in the Lord: 2 Pet. 1.10,
11. 2 Pet. 3.14.
and you may read the like in 2 Pet. 1.10, 11. and and in 2 Pet. 3.14.

4. Would you be able to suffer and rejoice in sufferings? Heb. 11.25, 26. Heb.
10.24. Heb. 11.35. Heb. 12.1, 2.
Why, the considerations of heaven and glory will be great encouragements and
inablements to you, to under go any thing. You see this in Moses, Heb 11.25,
26. In the Primitive Christians, Heb. 10.24. and in Heb. 11.35. Heb. 12.1, 2.
To which I might add abundance more. He who eyes heaven and glory, Pericula
non respicit, qui coronam respicit.
will be able to walk through any conditions: while Peter held his eye upon
Christ, he walked safely upon a stormy and tempestuous Sea, but when he took
off his eye from Christ, and looks upon the storminesse of the Sea then he
sinks: while we have an eye upon eternals, we are able to walk upon the most
tempestuous Sea, we can go through any storms, we are too big for any
trouble; but if we once take our eye off Christ and heaven, then the least
trouble is too big for us -- It was the speech of Nihil visibilium moror,
nihil invisibilium ut Christum acquiram: ignis and crux, incursus bestiarum,
dissipatio ossium, convulsio membrorum and supplicia diaboli in me veniant,
modo Jesum Christum acquiram. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 39.
Basil. I care for nothing visible or invisible, that I may get Christ; let
fire, let the cross -- let breaking of bones come: nay, let the torments of
the devil come upon me, so I may get Christ. Such a blessed magnanimity did
the consideration of these things put into him, that he could slight and
contemn all the evils of the world. This is certain, he that considers those
eternal weights of glory, will not think these light afflictions which are but
for a moment worthy to be compared to them: he that sees visions of glory will
not matter with Steven, a shower of stones: he that considers eternity at the
end, does not dread to go through any troubles in the way. Qui aeternitatem
mente concepit, nullos horret exorcitus. Sen.
-- The consideration of these things will render all the good and evil of the
world too little for that soul, either to tempt or threaten out of the ways
of life.

5. Would you submit to all Gods disposals of you? The considerations of heaven
and glory will make the soul submit to any thing here; he can be content to be
poor, he knows he shall be rich: to be reproached, he knows he shall be
honored; to be afflicted, he knows he shall be comforted; to be imprisoned, he
knows he shall be brought into a large place; to sit at Dives door, he knows
he shall sit in Abraham's bosom; to lose all, he knows he shall find all at
the other side, God will be all, and more then all to him. He knows it is but
for a little season, a day, an hour, a moment, and a small moment; hereafter
there are eternal embraces; Domine hic ure, seca -- ut in aeternum parcas.
he can submit to God to work his own work, and work it his own way, and
work it after his own manner, so he will please to bring him to glory at last;
and he can say, well-come that sorrow that tends to joy; that trouble that ends
in comfort; those crosses that prepare for crownings; and that death which
ushers in eternal life. And all this he can do by the consideration of the
great and glorious things which God has reserved for him. And therefore you
see the necessity of having respect unto heaven, and glory in our obedience.
And thus I have established these two Positions.

1. That we may obey God with respect to heaven and glory.

2. That we ought to have respect to heaven, and glory in our obedience.

And in these two, I have sufficiently answered the third Branch of the fifth
Query, viz. Whether a Christian may not do duty with respect to the
recompense of reward. I shall now hasten the rest --

We are now come to a sixth Query, which is; Whether this be part of our
freedom by Christ, to be free from obedience unto man; or whether to obey men,
be any infringement of our liberty by Christ.

Now before I come to the Answer of this; I must tell you, There are some
places that seem to speak, that it does not stand with Christian liberty to
be obedient to man. We find in Scripture (as I showed you in the beginning of
this Treatise) a double charge, 1. See the 54. page.
That man should not usurp mastership: 2. That we should not undergo servitude.

The first you may read, Matt. 23.9, 10.

Be you not called Prohibemur hominem vocare magistrum ut illi principalitatem
magisterii attribuamus, quae deo competit. Aquin. Attamen haec est fides
Papistica, Praelati hoc decreverunt credendum, ergo ego credo: hinc illud
Bellarmini, debetis fine examine recipere doctrinam ecclesiasticorum, and non
dubitare utrum ita se habeant neene, quae vobis proponuntur; non enim more
doctoris, quatenus ratio suadet, sententiam suam vobis proponunt credendam; sed
more judicis illam ut necessario tenendam imponunt.
Rabbi, for one is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are Brethren; and the
like in the tenth verse.

The second, that we should not undergo servitude: you read in 1 Cor. 7.23. Ye
are bought with a price, be ye not the servants of men.

Now contrary again to this, we read Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject to
the higher powers, for there is no power but of God; the powers that are, are
ordained of God: and in 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15. Submit your selves to every
ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the king as supreme. --
As free, and yet not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as
the servants of God.

Now how shall these two be reconciled? One says, be ye not the servants of
men; The other says, submit your selves to every ordinance of man. But the
meaning is, we must so submit our selves to the authority of man, as that we
do not thereby impeach our Christian liberty which we have in Christ, and we
must so maintain our Christian liberty, as that under color of it, we
neglect not our Christian duty. Submit your selves, says the Apostle, but as
free, not as slaves, but as freemen still submit, he teaches no submission
which may impeach our Christian freedom. In brief then, there is a twofold
subjection to man.

1. There is a subjection which may be yielded with the preservation of our
Christian liberty.

2. There is a subjection which cannot be yielded, without impeachment of it.

For the first, That there is a subjection that may be yeerded, with the
preservation of our Christian liberty: That you see is employed in the 13. Romans
1. and 1 Pet. 2.13, Romans 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.
14.

And there is a subjection which cannot be yielded without impeachment of it,
as is seen in the contrary places. 1 Cor. 7.23 Matt. 8.10.
Be ye not the servants of men: and, call no man your master on earth.

The one is the subjection of the Oportet nos ex ea part quae ad hanc vitam
pertinet, subditos esse potestatibus; ex illa vero part, qua credimus Deo, et
in regnum ejus vocamur, non oportet nos esse subditos cuiqua^ homini id ipsum
in nobis evertere cupienti. Deo enim potius obtemperandum quam hominibus. Aug.
in exp. ep. ad Romans propos. 72. Potestates suo loeo humanas fuscipimus, donec
contra Deum suas erigunt voluntates.
Non tenetur subditus obedire superiori suo contra praeceptum majoris
potestatis; neque si praecipiat allquid in quo non subdatur. Aquin. 2.^. 2r. q.
104. Art. 5.
outward man in things lawful, the other is the subjection of the inward man,
the soul and conscience, and in things unlawful. The one is a subordinate
subjection, a subjection in subordination to God, and for the Lords sake, as
the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 2.13. The other is an absolute subjection, a
subjection of our souls and consciences for man's sake, or upon man's authority
we may be subject in respect of the outward man in things lawful: but for our
souls and consciences, as we have no fathers, so we have no masters, but only
our Father and Master in heaven.

You may see both these plainly if you compare these two places, the one is
23. Matthew. 10. Be not called masters, for one is your Master Christ. Ephe. 5.7.
Servants be obedient to your masters according to the flesh. Which two places
being considered, do furnish us with this distinction. There are masters
according to the flesh, and masters according to the spirit: we have masters
according to the flesh, that is, so far as appertains to the outward man in
outward things; But we have no masters according to the spirit, we have none
to whom we are to subject our souls and consciences, but only Christ; as in
this sense we have no father, so we have no master upon earth.

Ob. But you will say, Is it not lawful for a Magistrate to impose such things
upon men's practice, which do concern their consciences?

Answ. 1. It is not lawful for a Magistrate to impose any thing Quando
dicimus, regum est in divinis aliquid praescribere, id semper intelligimus,
hanc illorum praescriptionem ac jussionom fundari opertere in verbo divine, a
quo si abberraverint, illud Apostoli valebit, Deo potius obedire oportet, quam
homini. Daven. de Iudic. et Nor. 75. p. Impium est et sacrilegum quicquid
humano furore instituitur ut dispositio divina violetur. Cypr. Coactiva
principis potestas non absolute ligat subditum, sed solummodo sub condition
liciti. Subditi enim non debent illis contra Deum obedire, et qui abusui
potestatis resistit, non resistit ordinationi divinae. Gersom. Consid. de pace.
part. 1. Quando reges contra veritatem constituunt malas leges, probantur vere
credentes, et coronantur perseverantes. Aug. Is qui praest, si aliquid
praecipit praeter voluntatem dei, vel praeter quod in sacra scripturis
evidenter praecipitur, pro falso rest habebitur.
unlawful to be obeyed: this is to set up an authority against Christ's
authority, the power of man against the power of God.

2. But yet a Magistrate may require those things at our hands, which are
clearly revealed to be the will of God, and in that we obey God in man, and
not so much man as God. In this case we may say as the Samaritane did. Now we
believe not because of thy sayings, because we have heard him our selves. I
conceive, there may be a distinction made between supreme masters, and
subordinate masters, and so between subjection in order to another, and
obedience to one as the supreme. Those are subordinate masters to whom we obey
in subordination, or in order to another; and those are supreme masters, in
whom our obedience rests, and into whom it is finally resolved: Vos rudes et
imperiti estis, ergo si salvi esse velitis, uihil jam reliquum est nisi ut
caeca obedientia nostro judicio subscribatur. Bellar. Hoc uno scelere meritos
esse praelatos Romanenses ut Ecclesiae caetu tanquam lupi et tyranni
pellerentur. Luther. Ephesians. 6.7 Col. 3.23.24.
for this last kind, which is the Romish doctrine, surely neither Men nor
Angels may usurp without high treason to Jesus Christ. It is treason for any to
usurp it, and wickedness for any to give it; if God will not allow a supreme
master, nor absolute obedience in temporal things, but requires us to serve
men, as in subordination to Christ, Ephesians. 6.7. Col. 3.23, 24. Much less will
he allow of a supreme master in spiritual things. Omnis homo dimittens
rationem propter authoritatem humanamincidit in insipientiam bestialem.
Certainly it is the highest piece of slavery and vassallage in the world to
yield up our consciences to the will of any, or surrender up our judgments to
be wholly disposed by the sentences, determinations of any; but now in the
other sense I conceive that men may be masters, and we may be subject to them
in subordination to God and Christ. And surely if you look into the old
testament, it does plainly hold forth this Quismente sobrius dicat regibus, Non
ad vos pertinet, quis in regno vestro velit esse sive religiosus sive
sacrilegus. Aug. de co. Do. c. 13.
subordination of obedience in spiritual things, Si sacras scripturas V. T.
inspiciamus, reges laudantur qui rectum dei cultum suprema authoritate sua
observandum sanciebant, qui idolatriam evertendam curabant, et in N. T. reges
terrae taxantur quod cum meretrice Babylonica scortati sunt, debuerunt
ergoidolatria^ evertere, veramque religionem omnibus imperare. Daev. de jud. et
Nor.
the people were bound to obey their Magistrate when he commanded obedience to
that which God had commanded; and to obey them I conceive not as they were
types of Christ, (as some imagine, who say their power was to cease, and to end
in Christ, as the great King of his Church, and in whom alone all authority
over his people was to be shut up) but to them as they were temporal
Magistrates, and were the fences of the worship of God: So that I conceive a
Magistrate without any impeachment to the authority of Christ, or infringement
of the liberty of conscience may require those things to be obeyed which are
clearly revealed to be the will and mind of Christ, yet in this he is but a
subordinate, and Christ is the supreme Master, he tells you what is Gods
will, not what is his: if he tell you it is his too, it is because it is Gods
first.

But it may be objected again, though it should be granted, that a Magistrate
might command or impose such things as are clearly evident to be the mind of
Christ; yet why should he impose things doubtful?

For the Answer to this. inquired, Si extiterit dubium circa dogmata fidei, aut
opera cultus divini, neque possunt fideles, ad nudum imperium aliorum contra
propriae conscientie judiciumcredere, neque debent judicium suum (nifi illato
novo lumine ex verbo Dei) commutare and ad voluntatem aliorum conformare, Dav.
In dubiis circa dogmata fidei subditi nequeum suas sententias quamvis erroneas
relinquere, nisi instruantur, and novum judicium in illis formetur, etc. Daven.
de judic. and norm. fid.
whether the things imposed are doubtful in themselves, or only doubtful to
me; If indeed they be doubtful in themselves, I humbly conceive, either they
should not be imposed at all, or imposed with all tenderness: But if they be
only doubtful to me, they may yet be lawfully imposed, though as yet not
lawfully obeyed by me. And that shall be my second Answer.

2. As some things may be lawfully obeyed, which may not lawfully be imposed:
so there are some things which may be lawfully imposed, and yet not lawfully
obeyed. Hezekiahs command of breaking down the brazen Serpent when he saw men
to Idolatrize to it; it was a lawful command; it might be lawfully imposed,
and yet if there had been some who had reverentiall thoughts of it, as a thing
which had been set up of God, so famous in the wilderness, and which is more,
a type of Christ; Si impium, vel dubium aliquod proponitur, patiendum potius
quod rex minatur, quam faciendum quod ab illo jubetur.
and therefore doubted, whether they might obey this command or no; I say, in
this case it had not been lawfully obeyed by such, though it might be lawfully
commanded by Hezekiah. Certainly, there are many things which may be commanded,
and if you have respect only to the things commanded, may be lawfully obeyed,
which yet if you have respect to the person who is to obey, may be unlawful to
be obeyed. A man in this kind may both sin in doing, for an erroneous
conscience binds, and he may sin in not doing, and be guilty of
disobedience.

We might run into a large dispute upon this subject; but it is not my intent
at this time; another occasion may be afforded in some other Discourse to treat
more largely upon it; wherein this question may be rightly stated, faithfully
examined, and satisfaction may be endeavored to be given to the multitude of
Scruples and Objections, in which this, point above many, I had like to have
said any other, is abundant and fruitful. In the mean time, I shall shut up
this Answer. And having spoken to the maine Queries which are in controversy
concerning Christian freedom: In stead of raising any more Questions, I shall
now conclude the whole Discourse in some brief application.

In the first place then. purchased and instated believers, and believers only
into such a privilege? then what a fearful condition to be an unbeleever?
you are still in bondage.

1. You are in bondage to sin. 2. In bondage to Satan. 3. In bondage to the
Law: and who can express a more miserable condition then this is? We will
discover it to you.

1. You are in bondage to sin, not only in bondage by sin, that is, by
sin exposed; nay, and bound over to all evils, spiritual, temporal, and
eternal, but you are in bondage to sin, you are under the commands of every
lust. Every sin is a tyrant in the soul: Christ tells us, Ioh. 8.34. Who ever
commits sin, is the servant of sin. First, you entertain sin as your
friend, and afterward it becomes your master; you are the servants of sin,
Romans 6.20. You are sold to sin, as the Apostle says of his natural condition,
Romans 7.14. I am carnal, and sold under sin. Indeed we are all of us sold
under sin by nature, but here we sell our selves to sin; As it was said of
Ahab, He sold himself to work wickedness: so it may be said of us, we are
not only passively content to be vassals to sin, but we do actively endeavor
to vassal our selves, we are actively willing to be sins slaves, rather then
to be Gods servants. It is set down as the character of a man in his natural
condition, He is disobedient serving diverse lusts. -- Tit. 3.3. his obedience
to sin is not forced, but free, not involuntary, but natural and with delight.
Hence it is said, that sin reigns in them; Sin has a soveraigntie, not a
tyranny in them; they are the professed servants to sin. 2 Pet. 2.19. Like
those who chose their Masters after the Lords Iubile was proclaimed; whose
cares were boared in token of perpetual subjection.

And this is your condition, you are in bondage to sin. And this is a fearful
bondage, if you consider but these particulars.

1. It is a soul slavery. The condition of the Israelites under Pharaoh, and
those who are now under the Turkish Gallyes, is very sad, but that is but the
bondage of the body; but this is a soul slavery, the bondage of the soul.
What is it to have our bodies vassal'd, A meipso me libera Domine, Aug.
our estates inslaved, in comparison of our souls? Better to be under the
tyranny of the most imperious man, then under the vassalage and slavery of
sin and our own corruption. This is the utmost, the finishing concluding
stroke of God to give a man up to his sins; to say, You that are filthy, be
filthy still; and therefore the worst of judgments.

2. It is a senseless slavery; a slavery that we were not sensible of: we say
in nature, that those diseases are most mortal, that deprive us of sense: now
this is a senseless slavery, we are in chains and feel it not, we are under
the weights of sin and are not sensible of it; God does often bring us in
bondage by sin, he claps us under the fears and terrors of a selfcondemning
conscience, and all this that he might deliver us out of the bondage to sin.
We say a burning Fever is more hopeful then a Lethargy; Miserius nihil est
misero se non miserante.
the Physician does sometimes cast his Patient into a Fever to cure the
Lethargy: So a wounded and troubled condition, is better then a secure and dead
condition; The strong man keeps the house when all is at peace. And this is the
misery of this bondage, you are unsensible of it.

3. It is an active slavery: A man vassald to his lusts, will drudge or take
any pains to satisfy them: such a man will spend his pains, his strength,
his health, his estate too, to satisfy his lusts: though they think every
thing too much laid out for God and Christ; yet they think nothing too much to
spend upon their lusts -- It is an active slaverie: and yet more,

4. It is a willing slavery: they count their slavery freedom, their bondage
liberty; their chains of brass, to be chains of pearl; they are
voluntaries, willing servants to sin. How often has the Lords Iubile been
proclaimed? how often has Christ tendered to set us free, and yet we have
chosen to return to our old masters? and therefore just with God that he
should boar our ears in token of eternal slavery to sin and Satan.

5. It is a bondage out of which we are not able to help our selves.

1. Neither can we redeem our selves by price.

2. Nor deliver our selves by power or conquest.

1. We cannot redeem our selves by price. A man may be in bondage to men, and
able to ransom himself; if not by his own power, yet by the helps,
collections, and contributions of others. But no man can redeem his own
soul. Nay, all the contributions of men or Angels fall too short; Mat. 25.9.
they have but oil to serve themselves: It is set down not only as the
proper work of Christ, but the greatest work which Christ has done, to
redeem his people from sin: Indeed he did it by price, (...).
Gal. 4.5. he bought us out, but it was not by silver and gold, as Peter tells
us; 1 Pet. 1.18.
the redemption of our souls is more precious, Psalm. 49.7, 8. but it was by the
blood of Christ.

2. As we were not able to redeem our selves by price, so we were not able to
deliver our selves by power: to be a sinner, and to be without strength, they
are all one in the Apostles phrase, Romans 5.6.8. And therefore he tells us there,
While we were sinners, and yet without strength, Christ died for us. Indeed we
could do nothing to help our selves out of this bondage; we were not able to
weep, to pray, to work our selves out of this condition. -- It is with us as
men in the quicke-sands, the more they strive, the deeper they sink
themselves: so the more we strive by our own strength, by our own power, the
more we do entangle and chain our selves in this condition. And by this you
may see something into this miserable condition; but yet this is not all: and
therefore

2. We are in bondage to Satan, not that we owed him any thing; we were only
indebted to Gods Justice; but he is Gods Iaylor, who holds poor souls down
as under brazen bars, and iron gates not to be broken; if a man were in
bondage, it is some relief to have a merciful jailer; but this adds to the
misery, thou have a cruel jailer, the jailer of hell is like Nebuchadnezzar
who will take no rewards, he will not be bribed, nor persuaded to set thee
free. Satan is a cruel Tyrant who rules in the hearts of the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. And you are taken captive at his will, as the Apostle
tells us, 2 Timothy 2.26. Indeed he has some that are more royal slaves then
others: Some he keeps in arcta custodia, close prisoners; holds them down
with many weights and chains, under the raging power of many lusts and
corruptions; and some he keeps in libera custodia, prisoners at large; he
suffers them to walk about; they have the liberty of the prison, but yet are
clapped up at his pleasure; they are taken captive at his will: though he may
suffer them to do many actions; Herod to hear, Judas to preach, yet he has
hold of them by their lusts, he can bring them back when he pleases. And that
is a second particular, you are in bondage to Satan. And this,

1. It is a cruel bondage; a merciless bondage: What is the bondage of Israel
to Pharaoh in comparison of this to Satan? And

2. It is an universal bondage. 1. Universal in respect of persons, for you
were all born slaves. 2. It is universal in respect of parts, you have no part
free; the judgment, will, affections, mind and conscience, they are all in
chains, all inslaved to Satan.

3. And it is universal in respect of actions and performances; thou can not
perform one action as a free man; thou may perform the actions of a free
man, such actions as free men do; but thou can not perform them as a free
man: thou prayest as a slave, not a son; thou weepest as a slave, not as a
free man: It is more for fear of the lash, then for hatred of sin and love of
God: all thy actions are actions in bondage; thy very spirit is in bondage,
thou have no spirit of freedom, of naturalnesse and delight in any thing thou
do.

And this is a sad condition: In this condition thou art till Christ set thee
free: but yet further,

3. Thou art in bondage to the Law, and that 1. To the curse: 2. To the rigor
of the Law.

1. Thou art in bondage to the curse of the law; to the penalties and
forfeitures of the law: the Apostle tells us, Gal. 3.10. As many as are of the
works of the law they are under the curse. And why so? For it is written,
Cursed is every one who does not continue in all things which are written in
the Book of the law to do them, and that is impossible: and therefore you
must needs be unavoidably under the curse. --

And if we should now take this in pieces, and show you how much lies in the
bowels of this curse; you would then see your miserable condition. It does
comprehend all miseries temporal, spiritual, and eternal. It is

1. A comprehensive curse, an universal curse; you are cursed in every
condition, in your gold, silver, relations; in your very mercies; where others
are blessed in their afflictions, you are cursed in your mercies. As there is a
blessing hid in the worst things to the godly; a blessing in sickness, in
poverty, in crosses, losses, death it self. -- So there is a curse in the best
things to wicked men; a curse in your gold and silver, in your comforts and
enjoyments. -- It is an extensive curse.

2. It is an unavoydable curse; as thou art a son of Adam, so thou art borne
an heir to this curse.

3. It is an unsupportable curse, which men nor Angels are able to bear: you
see the Angels themselves they lie under it, and cannot help themselves: the
wrath of man may be borne, at least undergone. It is but a wrath reaches to
the body; Parce precor Imperator; tu carcerem, ille Gehennam.
but who can bear the wrath of God? it is a wrath reaches to the soul, and
who knows, much less who can bear the power of his wrath?

4. It is an unremoveable curse: if we look upon any thing we can do; if God
lay it on, it is not all the power and wit of men or Angels that can take it
off. As none can take believers out of the hands of Gods mercy; so none can
take unbeleevers out of the hands of his justice. And that is the first
particular: you are in bondage to the curse of the law.

2 You are in bondage to the rigor of the law: which requires in the rigor of
it,

1. Hard things, difficult things: look over the duties commanded, and see if
they be not difficult things: Nay,

2. It requires impossible things in the station wherein we are: It is a yoke
we are not able to bear, Act. 15.10. We might as well be set to move
mountains, to stop the Sun in its course, to fetch yonder Star from
heaven, as to do what the law commands.

3. And yet all this it requires to be done of us in the exactness, and
according to the exactness of the command. It requires perfect obedience, both
in respect of the principle, and in respect of the manner, and in respect of
the end: it will abate nothing.

4. Yea and all this it requires in our own persons. It will not admit of
obedience by a surety: not of performance by another, that is Gospel; it
requires all in our own person, Gal. 3.10.

5. Nay, and it will not accept of the most eminent indevours, if there be any
failing in the performance. It will not allow of affections for actions, of
indevours for performance: this is Gospel.

6. It requires constancy in all this: the whole man, the whole law, the whole
life; if you do obey never so many years; if you fail but in one tittle at
last; but in a thought, a motion, you are gone for ever: the law says, Cursed
is he that does not continue to obey in every thing. --

7. Notwithstanding all this exaction from you; yet it will not afford you any
strength, nor suffer you to get help of another; you must bear your burden
alone: It lays load on you; imposes duty and considers not your strength; nor
will afford none to you: it bids you look to it as well as you can; it will
have it either by you, or out of you.

8. And here again is the rigor of it; that upon the least failing, all the
hopes you had of good by the Law is gone; you are disinabled and made incapable
from ever expecting any good by it: you are split for ever. Upon Adams first
sin all his hopes of life by the law was gone; that if God had not propounded
a Christ, he had been lost for ever. Why but you will say, might he not be
able to do twice as much good as he had done evil, and so make amends for his
former fault? No, here was the further rigor of it.

9. If once thou had offended, though in the least particular, thou could
never make amends for it; thou can never outdoe the law: if thou could
outdoe what the law required, yet all thou could do would never make
amends; it would never make up the former fault: if thou should go about to
redeem every idle word with an age of prayers; every act of injustice with a
treasury of alms; every omission with millions of duty; yet all this were too
little, all this would not do to make amends for thy former failing. Why but
you will say, what then? will not the law accept of my tears, my repentance
for my fault? No, here is a further rigor of the law.

10. If ever thou have offended, though in the least particular, yet thou art
gone for ever: here is no place for repentance: It will not admit of tears, or
repentance to come in; this is Gospel, not Law. If thou fail in the least
particular, and should weep seas of tears; tears of blood; even thy eyes out
of thy head; yet all this will be no relief to thee here: the Law will admit
of no repentance.

And thus you see the miserable condition to be in bondage: which I have spoken
the larger unto, to heighten and commend this great privilege of freedom to
you. We use to say, contraries do illustrate one another: I hope then by
seeing the miserable condition of being in bondage, you will be better able to
conceive of this blessed privilege of being set free by Christ. All which I
have set down at large in the entrance into this discourse: And showed you
how Christ has freed us from Sin, from Satan, from the Law; to which I refer
you. -- And say yet further.

You whom Christ has instated into this high and glorious privilege,
maintain it, Gal. 5.1. Stand fast in the liberty where with Christ has made
you free.

There are two great things which Christ has entrusted unto us, and we are to
preserve them inviolate.

1. The first is Christian faith, verse. 3. of Jude, See that ye earnestly
contend for the maintenance of the faith, which was once delivered to the
Saints.

2. The second is Christian liberty, Gal. 5.1. Stand fast in the liberty
wherewith Christ has made you free: Every man should be faithful in those
things wherein he is entrusted; God has entrusted you with precious things,
Christian faith, and Christian liberty: and how careful should we be to
maintain them? Civil and Corporal liberties they are very precious; how do
we engage our selves now for our liberties, and our freedoms, against those
who would deprive us of them? And indeed they may justly be esteemed they are
men of abject minds, that would for any consideration forgo their freedoms
and liberties.

Leo the Emperor made a severe Constitution, wherein he forbade all men the
buying, and all men the selling of their freedoms; esteeming it madness in
any to part with his freedom. And if Civil freedoms are so precious, and to
be maintained; how much more our spiritual freedom, the freedom by Christ? A
freedom so dearly purchased by the blood of Christ. You esteem your Civil
freedoms the better, in that they cost so much of the blood of your Ancestors
to compass them. It is baseness to be careless of that, which they endured
the loss of so much blood to compass. How much more should we esteem our
freedom, which was purchased by the blood of Christ? You are redeemed not by
silver and gold, but by the blood of Christ, says the Apostle. So that it is a
freedom dearly purchased; yea, and freely bestowed; and mercifully revealed;
fully conveyed unto us by the Spirit of Christ; and therefore how should we
endeavor the maintenance of it? To stand fast in the liberty wherein Christ
has set us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage, Gal.
5.1.

1. Maintain your Christian liberty, or your liberty you have in Christ
against the Law, neither looking for Justification from it, nor fearing
Condemnation by it. Live in respect of your practice and obedience, as men not
to be cast and condemned, or acquitted and justified by the Law; It is a hard
lesson to live above the law, and yet to walk in the law. This is the lesson we
are to learn, to walk in the law in respect of duty, but yet to live above
the law in respect of comfort, neither expecting favor from thence in point of
obedience, nor fearing rigor from thence in point of failing. Let the Law come
in to remember you of sin if you fail, but suffer it not to arrest you, and
dragge you into that Court to be tried and indged for your failings, this is to
make void Christ and grace. Indeed we too much live as though we were to expect
life by works, and not by grace. We are too big in our selves when we do
well, and too little in Christ in our failings: oh that we could learn to be
nothing in our selves in our strength, and to be all in Christ in our
weakness. In a word, how to walk in the Law as a rule of sanctification, and
yet to live upon Christ and the promises in point of justification. The Law is
a yoke of bondage as Ierom calls it, and they who look for righteousness from
thence, are like oxen in the yoke, who draw and toil, and when they have done
their labor are fatted for slaughter: So these when they have endeavored hard
after their own righteousness, do perish at last in their just condemnation.
Luther calls these men the devils Martyrs, they take much pains to go to
hell, Romans 10.3. They being ignorant go about to establish their own
righteousness, and will not submit themselves unto the righteousness of God.
Proud nature would feign do something for the purchase of Glory, God will have
it of Grace, and we would have it of Debt; God would have it of Gift, and we
would have it of Purchase, and we have too much of that nature in us; we go
to prayer and look upon our duties and tears, as so much good money laid out
for the purchase of heaven and glory, nay though we bring no money, yet we
would bring money-worth, and plead our own qualifications and dispositions to
interest us in the promise. This utterly crosses Gods design, he will have
all of Grace, and thou would have all of Debt. It is not now, Do this and
live; but believe, and thou shall be saved: walk in the duties of the Law, but
with a Gospel spirit, let the Law come in as a rule of Sanctification, but
keep it out in point of Justification, any thing taken in here, one flaw here
spoils all. It was well said of Luther, Walk in the heaven of the promise,
but in the earth of the law; In the heaven of the promise, in respect of
believing, and in the earth of the law, in respect of obeying, and so thou
shall give the law its honor, and Christ his glory.

2. Maintain it against men, Christian liberty is a precious jewel, suffer
not any to rob you of it. Let us never surrender up our judgments or our
consciences to be disposed according to the opinions, and to be subjected to
the sentences and determinations of men. Let neither power or policy, force or
fraud rob you of this precious jewel. I shall speak only to this latter. Let
not fraud and policy; the Apostle says, stand fast and be not entangled, let
us not return like willing slaves into our chains again. In doctrinis
quorumvis mortalium admirtendis adhibendum est examen, et judicium
discretionis, ut possimus tanquam probi argentarii adulterinam a legitima
doctrina discernere. Dav. de jud. ac nor. (...). ne implicemini.
It is a greater evil of a freeman to be made a slave, then to be a slave
borne: Therefore take heed, be not tempted into slaverie, as the fish into the
net, be not ensnared and overwhelmed by the policies of men, we are warned to
take heed none deceive us, Ephesians 5.6. 2 Col. 4.8. 2 These. 2.3. Gravius
malum ex libero servum fieri quam servum nasci. Ambr.
as if it were in our power to prevent it, and so it is, we cannot be ensnared
but by our own default. We often betray away our liberty when we might
maintain it, and so become the servants of men. And this arises either, 1.
from weakness of head, or 2. from wickedness of heart; It is my exhortation
therefore that those who are the freemen of Christ, would maintain their
Christian freedom, as against the law, so against men: be not tempted or
threatened out of it, be not bribed or frighted from it, let neither force nor
fraud rob you of it, we often keep it against force, and lose it by fraud; to
what purpose is it to maintain it against those, who are the open oppugners of
it, the Papists, and such as would take it from us, and give it up by our own
hands, to them perhaps that seek not for it? Nothing is more usual, and
therefore beware; Give not up your selves to the opinions of other men, though
never so learned, never so holy, because it is their opinion. It is the
Apostles direction, Try all things and hold fast to that which is good, 1 These.
5.21. It often falls out that a high esteem of others for their learning and
piety, makes men to take up all upon trust from such, Omnibus piis incumbit ut
sibi caveant, et quamvis doctrinam diligenter examinent ne falsa forsan
proveris suscipiant, quisque debet niti sua fide, suoque judicio divinitus
inspirato, non exaltertus nutu and arbitrio pendere. Whitak. contr. 1. q. 5. de
interp. Scrip. Consul Dav. de judic. et norm. fid. cap. 25. etc.
and to subject their judgments to their opinions, and their consciences to
their precepts, men will suspect a truth if a liar affirm it, and therefore
Christ would not own the devils acknowledgement of him, when he said, Thou art
the Son of God; but they are ready to believe an error, to give credit to an
untruth, if an honest and faithful man affirm it, what ever such men say, it
comes with a great deal of authority into men's spirits; And yet it is possible
for such men to mistake; It is a most dangerous thing to have men's persons in
too much (...). In doctrina investiganda non solum alienis, sed suis utendum
oculis.
admiration, as the Apostle says, Jude 16. You know who tells us, That we know
but in part, 1 Cor. 13.12. The best are imperfect in knowledge, the most
learned, Quanto ingenio Origenes et Tertullianus, quanta doctrina, quam
singulari eloquentia imbuti fuerint, omues intelligunt; adeo ut alter
Graecorum, alter Latinorum Princeps habitus: atqui isti in errores multos
inciderunt, et qui pertinaciter eorum sententias defenderunt, haeretici habiti
sunt, et Tertullianistae, Origenistae appellati. -- etc. Reinolds cont. haeres.
c. 11. etiam cens. Apoc. praelect.
and holy Martyrs every man has need of his allowance, they are but men, and
in that subject to error, though these things may afford probable conjectures,
that what they hold forth is a truth, yet these are not infallible evidences.
Indeed there is much to be given to men of learning and piety, but we must not
tie our boat to their ship, we must not, as the phrase is, pin our faith upon
their sleeves, we must not subject our judgments, resolve our faith into
their authority, this is to make men masters of our faith, this is a shread of
that garment, whereby Babylon is distinguished, a mark of the Roman
Antichristian Church, to resolve our faith into the authorities of men, and
though it be not required of you, yet it is no less done (though more finely
done) by many, then by those of whom such implicit faith, and blind obedience
is required.

It is my exhortation and your duty, to labor to maintain your Christian
freedom: It was dearly purchased, and mercifully bestowed on you; and
therefore should not be weakly lost, nor yet wilfully maintained. It was given
in mercy, and must be kept in judgment; you ought to use the judgment of
discretion in rejecting and embracing doctrines, yet with discretion; we must
neither subject our selves to the doctrines and determinations of men, though
learned and Sancti quidem fuerunt, sed tamen homines, affectus suos habuerunt,
and (...) passi sunt. Whitak. contr. 4. q. 4. p. 396, 397. Vid. Daven. de
judic. and norm. fidei. cap. 25. De judicio privatorum quod practicae
discretionis vocatur.
holy men, with a blind judgment, nor are we to reject them with a perverse
will; And this is all I shall speak to the second branch of this exhortation,
and of maintaining of our Christian liberty. We come to a third, which is no
less necessary, and that is,

3. Be ware of abusing of it. Christian liberty is a precious thing; and the
more precious, the more care not to abuse it; precious things do use to be
commended to us with words of Caution; Christian liberty is a precious thing,
you see it was dearly purchased, and mercifully bestowed upon us, and
therefore let me subioyne this Caution, and so conclude. Beware of abusing of
it. Now that I may not speak in the air, there are six ways whereby
Christian liberty is abused.

1. We abuse Christian liberty, when in the use of it we scandal others:
liberty was purchased for the comfort of our selves, not for the affliction of
others; they abuse it indeed, who so use it, as to others affliction. We read
of some young Christians of Corinth would eat meat offered to Idols, to that
end only to show their liberty: But the Apostle tells them, 1 Cor. 10.24. All
things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient. And Saint Paul is
frequent in instructing them, how to exercise Christian liberty in case of
scandal. Gal. 5.13. Brethren you have been called unto liberty, only use not
liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another. Christ
has taken off our former yoke of bondage, not that we should be more Wanton,
but more careful: Indeed for the comfort of our selves, but not to destroy
another, as the Apostle argues, 1 Cor. 8.11. Through thy knowledge shall thy
weak brother perish for whom Christ dyed, etc.

But I will hasten to a conclusion, and therefore will shut up all in a word.

2. There is a second way, whereby we do abuse our Christian liberty; and
that is when we use it to superstition, many will say they have Christian
liberty; and therefore dare venture upon any observations, customs and
gestures, although never warranted by the Word; this indeed is Christian
licenciousnesse, not Christian liberty; Christian liberty is yet a bounded
liberty, bounded with Laws and Rules; but these are men within no bounds, and
therefore Libertines.

3. We do abuse it when we make void the law of God; as I have showed you at
large, when we shall judge it our liberty to be exempted from duty; which
indeed is true bondage, no Christian liberty. The liberty of a Christian lies
not in exemption from service, but in service; surely that man is yet in
bondage who does not judge service his liberty.

4. When we give too much scope to our selves in things that are lawful. It is
an easy thing to run from use to abuse; of such men Jude speaks in the 4.
verse of that Epistle: There are certain men turn the grace of God into
wantonness.

5. When we do use it undutifully; denying obedience to lawful Authority in
things lawful upon pretense of Christian lihertie; which is indeed to make the
world level; and throw down all lawful Authority.

6. When we will be tied to nothing, bound to nothing but what our own spirits
incline us to; of which I have spoken at large: and therefore I shall conclude
all with the words of the Apostle, in the 1 Pet. 2.16. You are free, yet use
not your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants of God.

FINIS.
A Preface to the ensuing Discourse of the Learned John Cameron.
Christian Reader,
Goodness and light are of a diffusive nature; Bonum est diffusivum sui.
Birds when they come to a full heap of corn, Invidendo alienum bonum suum
faciunt supplicium, qui gaudendo fecissent suum peculium: nam toll invidiam,
and tuum est quod habeo; toll invidiam, and meum est quod habes, Aug. Charitas
est fur fidelissimus et innocentissimus, quia omnia bona proximorum sua facit,
neque tamen illi adimit. Paris.
will chirp and call in for their fellows; After much search I think I have
found a full floor, and have unlockt the doors; yea brought it forth to
invite others to feed upon it. It is a Discourse of that Learned and famous
Divine Mr. JOHN CAMERON, Concerning the threefold Covenant of God with man. It
is the Key to the Gospel, and the best resolver that I have met with all of
those intricate Controversies, and Disputes Concerning the Law; we read often
in Scripture that the Law was a Covenant, and more frequently among Divines,
that we are free from the Law as a Covenant, but to tell us what Covenant this
was, has not been the work of many; that it was not a Covenant of works, I
have showed at large in the foregoing Discourse; and if a Covenant of Grace,
how are we said to be freed from it; in this ensuing Discourse this doubt is
resolved; and being thereby in some good measure satisfied my self, I have
here annexed it to do the like for thee. It was first written in Latin, and
for their sakes who understand not that Language, I thought good not only with
Sampson, to impart the sweetness, but, which was more then he would do,
unfold the Riddle also; and to render to you these excellent labors (too
precious to be any longer concealed, or hid under the shell of an unknown
tongue) in your own native language. In which (so far as that restraint would
not darken the sense) I have kept me to the propriety of the Language. I will
keep thee no longer off, but shall now give thee leave to feast thy self upon
his plenty, by which (as by all the labors of the Saints) that thou may grow
up in light, and love; Grace and life; is the earnest prayer of him

who is not his own, if not thine in the service of Christ, S. B.

CERTAIN THESES, or, Positions of the Learned JOHN CAMERON, Concerning the
threefold Covenant of God with Man.
1. Thesis.
COvenant in Scripture, Twofold Covenant. 1. Absolute.
does sometimes signify the absolute promise of God, without any
restipulation; as was that Covenant which God made with Genesis 9.11
Noah presently after the flood, freely promising never to destroy the world
again by water; of this kind Heb. 8.10
is that Covenant, in which God promises to give unto his Elect, faith and
perseverance: to which promise there cannot be conceived any condition to to be
annexed, which is not comprehended in the promise it self.

2. Thesis. 2. Conditional.

But it often falls out that the name of Covenant is so used in holy
Scriptures, Gods love is twofold, antecedent, and consequent.
as it is evident thereby is signified the free premise of God; yet with the
restipulation of our duty, which otherwise, though there were no such
intervening promise, it might both be required of God, and also (if it so
pleased God) ought to be performed of the creature.

3. Thesis.
This distinction of the Covenant, does depend upon the distinction of the love
of God, and for there is love of God to the creature; from whence every thing
that is good in the creature has wholly flowed, and there is the acquiescent
love of God in the creature; and this the creature has received; not for any
thing from it self, but from God, as it was loved with that first love of God;
that love, for better understanding, we call Gods primary or antecedent; this,
Gods secundary or consequent love: from that we say, does depend both the
paction and fulfilling of the absolute Covenant, from this depends the
fulfilling of that Covenant, to which is annexed a restipulation, not so the
paction, for that we say, depends on the first love.

4. Thesis.
For in the absolute Covenant, there is nothing in the creature that does
impell God either to promise, or to perform what he has promised; But in that
Covenant to which a restipulation is annexed, God does fulfill what he has
promised, because the creature has rendered what is required; And although God
has made such a Covenant, wherein he has promised so great things, upon
condition of man's performance, yet all this proceeds from the antecedent love
of God.

5. Thesis.
So great things, I say, because to prescribe a Matthew. 20.15.
measure of reward, is an action of a most free will not of Gods nature, when
yet Heb. 6.10.
to render any thing in reward of due service from the creature, and to promise
that, does altogether belong to the consequent love of God, which is not only
voluntary love, but a natural property in God, who of his own proper nature
does incline to the reward of good, as to the punishment of evil; when the
antecedent love of God is altogether voluntary.

6. Thesis.
We are here to Treat of this Covenant, to which is annexed a restipulation;
and because it is not one simple Covenant, we shall distribute it into its
several kinds, and we shall strictly examine what does agree to every kind,
and in what manner they differ among themselves.

7. Thesis.
We say therefore there is a Covenant of Nature, Conditional Covenant is
threefold.
another Covenant of Grace, and another Subservient to the Covenant of Grace;
(which is called in Scripture, the Heb. 8.13.
old Covenant) and therefore we will deal with that in the last place; giving
the first place to the Covenant of Nature, and of Grace; because they are the
chief, and because they have no respect to any other Covenant: although we do
not deny the Covenant of Nature, in this corruption of our nature, to be
subservient to the Covenant of Grace, as it does inflame the minds of men with
the desire of it; which thing yet it does by accident: Seeing this is not the
Scope of that Covenant, of which we shall speak more largely 48. These. etc.
hereafter.

8. Thesis. The agreement between the Covenant of Grace and Nature.

The Covenant of Nature, and the Covenant of Grace do agree,

1. In the general end; Gods glory being the end of both.

2. They agree in the persons Covenanting, who are God and Man.

3. They agree in the external form, in that a restipulation is annexed to
the^ both.

4. They agree in the Nature, in that both are unchangeable.

9. Thesis.
They differ, 1. In the special end; The difference.
for the end of the Covenant of Nature, is the declaration of Gods justice, but
the end of the Covenant of grace, is the declaration of his mercy.

2. They differ in the foundation; for the foundation of the Covenant of
Nature, is the Creation of Man, and integrity of man's nature; but the
foundation of the Covenant of Grace, is the redemption of man by Christ.

3. (...).
They differ in the Quality and manner of the Persons Covenanting; for in the
Covenant of Nature, God the Creator does require his due, or right, of man pure
and perfect; but in the Covenant of Grace, God as a merciful Father does offer
himself to a sinner, wounded with the conscience of sin.

4. They differ in the Stipulation; In the Covenant of Nature, natural
righteousness is required, but in the Covenant of Grace, faith alone is
required.

5. They differ in the promise; In the Covenant of Nature, eternal and blessed
life is promised, but yet an Genesis 8.9.
animal life, to be lived in Paradise: but in the Covenant of Grace a heavenly
and spiritual life is promised.

6. They differ in the manner of Sanction or ratification. In the Covenant of
Nature there was no Mediator; hence the Covenant of Nature was not promised
before it was published. But the Covenant of Grace was first promised, and long
after was published and ratified in the blood of the Son of God.

10. Thesis.
Justice and Faith do differ; The difference between justice and faith.
as giving, and receiving, for Justice gives to God [his due], Faith receives
[from God what is not our due]; Justice is placed in the mutual Love of God,
Faith in the persuasion of the love of God. But yet these are joined in an
unseparable tie; yet so, as Faith does precede, Love does follow; Faith is the
Cause, Love the effect; Initial and weak faith, begets love, though less
fervent: Perfect and complete faith, begets burning affections; therefore
righteousness, or justice presupposes (as they say) faith: and on the
contrary, faith does necessarily conclude [or presuppose] love, as the
consequent of it.

11. Thesis.
Whence there arises a threefold question, neither unprofitable, nor difficult
to unfold. 1. Why in the covenant of Nature God does not in express terms
require faith, but odedience and love? 2. By what right faith and justice, or
righteousness are opposed in the covenant of Grace, seeing they cannot be
separated? 3. Whether, and how that faith which exact justice does presuppose
in the covenant of Nature, does differ from that faith which God requires in
the covenant of Grace?

12. Thesis.
To the first Question we answer. Why God does not require faith from Adam.
That God never did require faith of man, save only by consequence.

First of all, because there was not any so much as probable cause given unto
man, of distrusting, in the least, the love [and favour] of God; for as much as
sin had not as yet set footing in the world: And why he exacteth it of us.
quite otherwise it falls out in the covenant of Grace, which is made with a
conscience terrified with the sense of sin, and which is able no otherwise to
raise up her self, then by earing that there is nothing at all that is
required of her, but only faith; that is, only to persuade her self, that
she is precious unto God, and accepted of him.

Secondly, in the covenant of Nature is considered what it is that man is
indebted unto God, and that is exacted of him (...).
according to the strictness and rigor of justice (for it is Justice and
Holiness, that he owes). But now in the covenant of Grace [is considered
onely] what God reconciled in his Son, is willing to make tender of to man,
and that he tenders freely.

13. Thesis.
To the second Question we answer; How faith and righteousness [or justice]
are opposed in justification.
that faith in the covenant of Grace is not therefore opposed to the
righteousness of man; Because formerly they were not able to consist together;
or for that they could not be together (yea verily as has been said, they
mutually grant and deny each other) but because in one and the same Court (as
we may so speak) they cannot concur together to the justifying, or acquitting
of a man; for in the Court of Justice, in which it is so called Justice, from
the covenant of Nature; either the just man is acquitted, or the unjust man is
condemned: Neither is it here directly questioned, whether have thou believed
that thou art precious unto God; but whether have thou loved God? Whereas in
the Court of Mercy this is not [primarily] and properly demanded, whether have
thou loved God? but, whether or no, have thou believed? and if thou have
believed, thou shall thereupon be acquitted; and if not, thou art then
immediately bound over to the Court of justice [there to answer it.]

14 Thesis.
To the third Question we answer: [The agreement] of the faith of Adam, and of
ours. The disagreement.
That faith, which the exact justice of man in the Covenant of Nature
presupposes, in this agrees with the faith which is required in the covenant
of Grace, in that both are from God; both are a persuasion of the love of God;
both do beget in man the mutual love of God; because faith abounding, Love
also abou^deth; and faith languishing, Love does languish; and faith
extinguished, Love also is extinguished. But they differ, first, in the
foundation; for the faith which the justice of Nature does presuppose, is
founded upon the title of a perfect Creature, and therefore, now it has no
place since the fall of Adam; for although God does love the Creature in it
self; yet as it is corrupt with sin, so he hates it: no one therefore is able
to persuade himself that he is beloved of God, upon this title as he is a
creature, (for as much as all have sinned) and so [by consequence] neither can
he truly, nor set so persuade himself that he loves God. But the faith of
which mention is made in the covenant of grace, is founded upon the promise
made in Christ. Secondly, not withstanding both are from God, yet the faith
which exact justice in the covenant of Nature presupposes, is from God (as the
Schools speak) by way of Nature: whereas the faith which is required in the
covenant of grace, is from God too; but so as by way of supernatural grace.
Thirdly, the justice which the faith of Nature does beget was mutable; because
the faith from whence that Justice or Righteousness did flow, did depend upon
a principle of nature, mutable: But the holiness which the faith of the
covenant of grace does beget, is eternal and immutable, as proceeding from an
eternal and immutable principle; to wit, the Spirit of grace. Fourthly, the
justice which the faith of Nature does beget, notwithstanding it was perfect in
its kind; yet in the nobility and excellency of it, it fell much below that
holiness which is begotten by the faith in Christ. And whereas even the most
holy in this life do fall far short of that original justice [or
righteousness,] this so comes to pass from the penury and scantnesse of
faith; but here in this place, we do understand faith in the most eminent [and
superlative degree of faith, such as it shall be hereafter] in the life to come.

15. Thesis.
Here again two Queries may be propounded, the first is this: 1. If the
holiness and faith of Adam was mutable, how might he be said to be secure? And
then in the second place: 2. After what manner holiness may be said to be the
effect of faith so united to it, that it can be by no means separated from
faith; seeing that [hereafter] in the life to come, there is no place for
faith, in which yet there is the greatest holiness.

16. Thesis.
To the first Query we Answer. It was not possible that any thoughts of that
kind should once steal into the mind of Adam, who was wholly taken up with
the sense and admiration of the Divine goodness.

17. Thesis.
To the second Query we Answer. The persuasion of the love of God (which in
this place we call faith) was either founded upon a Promise, but such as was
not yet fulfilled; or else it was founded upon the sense of a Promise that was
fulfilled already: This latter has its place chiefly in the life to come; the
former in this life also; which therefore the Apostle calls Heb. 11.1
the (...).
substance of things hoped for; the (...).
evidence of things not seen; and this is properly called faith, and is that
which is required in justification.

18. Thesis.
Although that be true which we have said concerning the difference of the
promise annexed to the Covenant of Nature, and the Covenant of grace, yet for
some obscurity that is in it, there is need that we explain it.

19. Thesis.
We do therefore define beavenly life to be that, The difference betwixt an
animal life and a heavenly.
which Christ now lives in the heavens; which is therefore called heavenly,
because the first author of it is 1 Cor. 15.47, 48.
the heavenly man: and that [on the other hand] we call an animal life, which
Adam lived before his fall, in Paradise; not differing at all in intension, but
in extension only, and duration from that life which was to be perpetnated
according to the perpetuating of his obedience; and so would have redounded
unto all his posterity; like as that heavenly life, the possession whereof
Christ is now entered into, does belong, by right of adoption, unto all us who
believe in Christ.

20. Thesis.
The covenant of grace either is considered as being promised, The Covenant of
Grace is considered two manner of ways.
or as being openly and fully promulged and confirmed; it was promised to the
Fathers; first, to Adam Genesis 3.15.
, then to the Patriarchs Genesis 12.15.
, and afterward to the people of Israel; but it was openly and fully
promulged, Now when the fullness of time was come, Gal. 4.4. 1 Pet. 1.12.

21. Thesis.
Which we do [thus explaine]: How Christ was a Mediator under the Old
Testament.
The foundation and the Mediator of the Covenant of grace is our Lord Jesus
Christ; but either as one to be incarnate, to be crucified, and to be raised
from the dead; or as one being incarnate, being crucified, and being truly
raised from the dead, Act. 4.12.
for never any had his sins remitted, but in him alone, Heb. 13.8.
who is yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Jesus Christ, true God and true
man. Therefore although he was God only before his incarnation,
notwithstanding hitherto he was no othertherwise a Mediator, then as God about
to take upon him our flesh, and in it to perform the whole mystery of our
Redemption; and hence it is, he is called the Lamb of God, slain from before
the foundations of the world; and the Fathers were saved by his grace, even as
we our selves are. The difference of the Mediation of Christ under the Old
Testament, from that under the New.


22. Thesis.
But although the Son of God, before he manifested himself in the flesh, was
in Gods account (to whom future things are present) therefore a Mediator
because to come, and therefore truly through him were sins remitted; by his
Spirit did men both teach, and were taught; the Church by him was rightly
governed; howbeit the way and manner of his mediation was propounded at the
first more darkely; afterward the force and efficacy of it became yet less:
and lastly, it redounded but to very few.

23. Thesis.
To these we will speak severally. The way of it under the Old Testament was
most obscure.
Before the first coming of Christ. That the way and manner of his mediation
was propounded more obscurely, does appear from hence, viz. The reading of the
Books of the Sacred Volume, called the Old Testament; in which are handled
[those things] concerning the person of Christ, concerning the way and manner
of his execution of his Office of Mediatorship; and herein also is handled
concerning the Office it self of Mediator-ship, and the benefits that flow
from thence.

24. Thesis.
That his person is described obscurely, For his Person is described more
obscurely.
appears herein; that although it was clearly signified, that he should be
true man, and that also he is true God; yet the conjunction of these two
Natures, into a unity of Person, and the special designation of him from the
circumstances, is not so openly propounded, as that it could be an easy matter
for the faithful, hereby to be able to attain to such a [distinct] knowledge
of Christ, as we, who live under the New Covenant, now promulgated and ratified
in the death and resurrection of Christ, do now attain unto; hereto belongs
it, that his Person is so frequently shadowed out unto us under Types and
Figures. Neither is it held forth to be looked upon, but as through a vail.

25. Thesis.
So also, The way of his Mediation.
the way and manner of his Mediation; we have it sometimes laid down, only in
general terms, seldom have we it described more particularly; we have it
very often shadowed [out unto us] but in Types and Figures.

26. Thesis.
The same course has the Spirit of God taken, The offices and the benefits.
in describing his benefits and his office; often are they signified by words,
but [then] more darkely, often are they shadowed out unto us, but by Types.

27. Thesis.
The Types whereby the Person of Christ is described unto us, are either men or
things; but those whereby the manner of his Mediation is described, are the
Sacrifices; and the Benefits, they are signified out unto us by earthly
benefits, [as namely] by freedom from the Egyptian bondage; by entrance into
the Land of Canaan [and the like.] And so the Prophets by the shadows of
earthly blessings did express all things; yea verily our Lord Jesus Christ
himself to his Sermons made an addition of miracles, (that they might serve)
not only to the confirmation of his Doctrine Mat. 8.17.
, but also to the figuring out of those things unto us, in the cures that he
wrought upon the body, which he was ready to confer upon us, in the procuring
the welfare of our souls.

28. Thesis.
But in that obscurity, The diverse degrees in this obscurity.
it will be behovefull for us to observe the several and distinct gradations.
Before the Law given by Moses, the promise was more obscure; and when the law
was given, unto the times of the Prophets, it was somewhat clearer; from the
times of the Prophets, unto John the Baptist, clearer yet; upon the preaching
of John the Baptist, it was now manifest; and most of all manifest, when once
our Lord Jesus Christ succeeded John [in person] who did both execute and
promulge the counsel of the Father, concerning the restoration of his Church;
whilst he was in the executing of it, less clearly; after he had executed
it, most clearly; first to his Apostles after his resurrection, and then after
his ascension into heaven by the solemn mission of the Holy Ghost, Vid. infra,
These. 36. and sequ.
of which in its place.

29. Thesis.
But here it will be demanded, In the first place, why those things were
propounded more obscurely: secondly, why so much the more obscurely, by how
much the times were farthest distant from the coming of Christ. Thirdly, in
what sense the faith of the Fathers might be said to be saving faith, seeing
that Christ was more unknown to them, then unto us.

30. Thesis.
To the first we Answer; Why that Mediation was propounded more obscurely.
That those things were propounded more obscurely. First, because they were to
come; and prophesies, before the completion of them, ought to be more obscure,
at least as respecting their manner of fulfilling, especially when it is done
amongst those by whom they were to be fulfilled. Secondly, Gal. 4.3.
the Church was then raw and in her infancy; she had not as yet attained to
her ripe age, God so ordering the matter as best seemed him, in his great
Wisdom. Thirdly, for that it was meet to refer the clear manifestation of
this Mystery, for Christ the great Prophet. Fourthly, Gal. 3.23.
for that their minds were to be held up in expectation of Christ; but now the
hope which is seen is not hope: in a way not much unlike to this, is our
condition in the life to come, propounded to us here more obscurely.

31. Thesis.
To the second we Answer: Why the more obscurely by how much more remote
[farther distant] from the time of the fulfilling of it.
This mystery was by so much the more obscurely propounded, by how much the
time was farthest distant from the coming of Christ. First, because by how much
nearer the coming of Christ was at hand, by so much the more earnestly ought
the minds of men be stirred up in expectation of his coming. Secondly, because
by how much those times were farthest off from the coming of Christ; by so much
was God pleased more clearly to manifest himself for other reasons also; he
called upon them from heaven, he spoke unto them by his Angels, etc. And by how
much nearer yet the times approached to the coming of Messiah, by so much the
less clearly for those very reasons, was he pleased to manifest himself to
men, and therefore they were to make up this defect (as I may so speak) after
some other manner. Thirdly, the Church, look by how much she is the nearer to
her beginnings, so much the more imperfect is she; and therefore to be
instructed after a more imperfect manner. Fourthly, before the law given, the
sense of sin was not so sharp; the law once given, it became now sharper, yet
so as it was to be most of all sharp and piercing then at length, when the law
was to be expounded by the Prophets; and when the truth of those threats,
annexed to the law, should by experience it self, be more evidently made good
upon them by so many calamities. Fifthly, for that, before the Law given, the
people had not as yet undergone the yoke of the law; ( which, what it is, we
shall afterward declare in These. 60. and those following.) After that the law
being given, they had undergone it, being but as yet newly entered into the
covenant, they were not sensible of the burden of it, [on the sudden;] until,
in process of time, having by experience learned, as also having been warned
by the Sermons of the Prophets, at length, when it was late first, they felt
the weight and burden of it: whence we conclude, that the Doctrine concerning
the mystery of our Redemption, as much as concerns the perspicuity and
clearenesse of it, was not so necessary before the law given, as now that the
law was given; nor now the law was given, as in the times of the Prophets; and
neither yet so necessary was it, in the times of the Prophets, as it was in the
time of John the Baptist. Sixthly, in as much as it was but agreeable [unto
nature] that those times should be so much the more obscure, and dark, by how
much farther they appeared at distance from the rising of the Sun of
Righteousness.

32. Thesis.
To the third we Answer. The measure of faith to be the Word of God: and so,
that to be true and saving faith which believes all those things, that have
been revealed, and in the same manner as they have been revealed, and
therefore the faith of the Fathers to have been saving faith, as being that
which did believe all those things, which in those times it pleased God should
be revealed; and it did believe them also after the same manner, wherein they
were by God revealed unto them, and we count [not that faith, but] a
sacrilegious audaciousnesse, for any man to be wise above the word of God; and
to attempt to know those things which God on set purpose has propounded to us
more hidden and obscurely.

33. Thesis.
That the efficacy of Christ promised, The efficacy of Christ promised, was
less then of Christ bestowed.
was less then of Christ exhibited by many degrees. First, remission of sins
although it was certain with God, yet it was less perceived by reason of the
cloud of the law, hanging [as it were] between. Secondly, though it was
perceived, it afforded less comfort, by reason of the weak sense of sin
(which needs must be supposed to be in them, to whom there does not as yet
appear so great a necessity of hearing of it expiated by the death of the
Son of God) I say, less comfort by reason of the weak sense of sin, and
the dimmer knowledge of that glory and life which does attend upon remission of
sins. Thirdly, the Spirit was powered forth in scant measure on the faithful
[of old,] as being a benefit to be referred till the times of Christ, Ioh. 3.34.
who, it was meet, should first of all, receive into his humane nature all that
boundless measure of the Spirit Ioh. 1.16.
, and should from thence derive it unto all us. Moreover, seeing the benefit of
Christ, was in those times less known unto them; needs, by so much the less
inflamed must they be with the love of God and Christ. Fourthly, the spirit of
bondage then reigned, because the yoke of the law was yet untaken off. Fifthly,
they were not carried on in a direct course to remission of sins, as appears
by the form of the Covenant, first entered into at the Mount Sinai; afterward
so frequently rehearsed in the Sermons of the Prophets. Sixthly, then the sense
of a life to come was more obscure; as is evident, from the more obscure
mention that is made of it in the Old Testament, and from the horror of Death,
which seems to have reigned in them who lived before the sanction of the New
Covenant in the blood of Christ. Seventhly, it seemed not the Fathers had
attained to that same pitch of glory we do now attain unto who die in Christ.
First, for it was behovefull, Heb. 10.20. Heb. 9.8.
that Christ should himself first enter in thereat. Secondly, because while
the first Tabernacle was standing, the second was not yet unlocked. Thirdly,
for that there ought a certain proportion and respect to be had, between the
sense of the life to come, in this life, in those that are grown up, and
between the fruition of the same in the life to come; but this sense now in
them was weaker and much more obscure, then at this day it is under the New
Testament. Fourthly, Heb. 11.39, 40.
they were not to be made perfect without us: even as we our selves are not to
be made perfect before that blessed day of the second coming of Christ;
(wherein the body of Christ, that is, the Church, shall be all over absolutely
perfect) although we do constantly affirm that the Fathers, now that they are
set at liberty, out of this prison of the body, do now participate of a
blessed life; yet this we Heb. 8.6.
do affirm moreover, it to be far less excellent, then was that, whereof
our Lord Jesus Christ himself did first participate.

34. Thesis.
The effioacie of the mediation of Christ extended unto fewer, Those that were
partakers of Christ in the old Testament, were fewer then those under the New.
being at the first restrained and shut up in the family of the Patriarchs,
afterward, as that grew to be enlarged. It was shut up in the people of the
Jews, this we conceive was done, for many reasons. First, that thereby the
coming of Christ might appear the more excellent and conspicuous, And why.
in the calling of the Gentiles. Secondly, that God might show mercy upon all,
Romans 11.32.
for he has concluded all under sin, therefore that he might have mercy upon
all. Thirdly, that he might stand forth a most famous Type of election in the
Jews, and reiection [or reprobation] in the Gentiles, to wit, of the Church of
God, and of Satan.

35. Thesis.
But yet as our Lord Jesus Christ, by taking upon him at times man's shape, was
pleased so to appear unto the Fathers, that hereby he might as it were fore-act
his future incarnation: so in like manner, but few of the Gentiles, before the
coming of Christ, were received into the Church of God, that hereby he might
stand forth a Praeludium also, of the future calling of the Gentiles.

36. Thesis.
Thus much concerning the Covenant promised. At what time the Covenant of Grace
was promulgated.
The beginning of the Covenant promulged is to be fetched from that time,
wherein Christ had fulfilled all things, which either in the Law were shadowed
out, or had in the Prophets been foretold concerning him, that is to say,
from the time of his Ascension; at what time, being lifted up to heaven, he
entered with his body thereinto, and declared that he had sent into the hearts
of his Apostles his Spirit, the Comforter, at the feast of Pentecost, in a
visible shape with fiery cloven tongues.

37. Thesis.
This will plainly appear to him that observes the matter and form of the
promulgation.

38. Thesis.
1. This is declared.
For seeing this is the sum of the Gospel, or new Covenant, that all
Mosaicall (...).
law-giving of Ceremonies is now ceased, use of the law (under whose custody
we were detained even to the Faith, which should afterward be revealed) was
abolished: Christ being now Crucified, dead and buried, and after that received
into heaven. First, that remission of sins in his blood should be clearly and
openly propounded, offered, and bestowed upon all, as many as by true faith
believe that this Christ is both Lord and Savior. Secondly, that the Spirit of
Adoption should be sent into their hearts, who do this, with firm confidence
of mind acquiesce in and rest upon this Redeemer, that they no more now stand
in need of the Pedagogie of the law, seeing they are (...).
taught of God: certainly that doctrine concerning faith in Christ, could not
properly be called Gospel (though called by that name) the Mosaicall worship
reigning, and that too by the allowance, and approbation of Christ, and those
things not yet fulfilled, which are declared in the Gospel.

39. Thesis.
2. appears so to be from the form of the promulgation; For like as that Old
Covenant (of which we shall speak somewhat by and by) Exodus 19.20.
was promulgated, not without great pomp in the Mount Sinai, the people of
Israel both hearing and beholding it, Exo. 19.8.
and swearing to it: so this New Covenant also fell out to be promulgated upon
a set and solemn day, in a convention of almost all nations, with great
splendor, so as it was, upon the feast day of Pentecost.

40. Thesis.
3. Doctrine of faith was such, as men did seem rather to be called to the
Kingdom of God which should come, then to be commanded to rest satisfied in
the present state of things: That we ascend no higher (for the thing is clearly
without all controversy) Ioh. 1.26.27. Luke 3.17. Mar. 1.7, 8. Mat. 3.11, 12.
John the Baptist sends his hearers unto Christ, Mat. 4.17 Mar. 1.15.
Christ invites men unto the Kingdom of heaven (that is, the Evangelicall
administration of his Church,) as being that, that was even now at hand, and
should shortly be, but as yet was not present; yea verily, seeing he was even
now raised from the dead, although you hear him openly professing to his
Apostles, Mat. 28.18
That all power was given him both in heaven and in earth, and commanding them
to preach the Gospel unto every creature, yet he does so command this, Luke
24.49.
as he bids them to expect at Jerusalem, the fulfilling of the promise
concerning the solemn Mission of the holy Ghost [unto them] as being indeed
designed already, but then at length to be installed and publicly received
with extraordinary signs, whilst many should both hear it, and stand lookers
on.

41. Thesis.
Here [now] would be a fit place wherein to speak more at large concerning the
excellency of this Covenant, but seeing the matter otherwise in it self is not
obscure; and in comparing it with the Covenant of Nature, we have already
touched many things belonging to this place, we will for so long defer the
matter, until we shall undertake to show you the comparison between this and
the Old Covenant, (which we call by this name a subservient Covenant) of which
I am now purposed to speak.

42. Thesis.
The Old Covenant, The old Covenant what it is.
or the subservient Covenant, we call that, which God entered into with the
people of Israel in the mount Sinai, that he might prepare them for faith, and
that he might inflame them, with a desire of the promise, and of the
Gospel Covenant, which otherwise had died and languished in their minds,
[hearts,] and that withal he might, as with a curb restrain them from their
impieties, even until that very time: wherein he was purposed to send the
Spirit of Adoption into their hearts, and to govern them by the law of
liberty.

43. Thesis.
Hence we suppose, that it is not obscure, Why it is called subservient.
why it is by us called a subservient Covenant, wel-neer in the same sense,
wherein it is called by the Holy Ghost, the old Covenant, not because it is the
first (as some do surmise) but in that it ought to wax old, Heb. 8.13
and to give place to a better Covenant, which is to succeed it, and so it
self at length to be abolished.

44. Thesis.
The nature and condition of this Covenant, cannot be more certainly sought,
or more easily found [out,] then by comparing it, first with the Covenant of
Nature; and after that, with the Covenant of Grace; for it will so come to
pass, by this search, that all those things being weighed, wherein it does
agree with those other Covenants, all its properties will be brought forth to
light.

45. Thesis.
It agrees with the Covenant of Nature. The agreement of the subservient
Covenant, and the Covenant of Nature.
First, for that in both [these Covenants] the one part contracting, [or
Covenanting] is God, the other is man. Secondly, that both have their
stipulation or condition annexed. Thirdly, that the stipulation is the same, as
touching the Moral law. Fourthly, that the promise is the same in the
general. Fifthly, for that both of them do lead us unto Christ.

46. Thesis.
But they differ. The difference.
First, in that the Covenant of Nature was made altogether with all men, this
only with the Israelites. Secondly, in that the Covenant of Nature was
presently made with man, at the instant of his Creation, and had no
praeparatories at all unto it; the old Covenant long after, and had many
praeparatories. Thirdly, that the Covenant of Nature does only bind us by the
law of Nature unto due obedience. The old covenant does oblige us farther, unto
ceremonies. Fourthly, seeing life is promised in both Covenants, in this, it is
designed us, by the fruition of the land of Canaan, in that of Paradise.
Fifthly, seeing both covenants do lead us unto Christ, the covenant of nature
does not this by it self, but by accident, the old covenant does this by it
self; for it is its true and proper scope: For God made not the Covenant of
Nature with men, for this end, that being oppressed with the weight of it, they
should breath after Christ, but the last and maine end of it is this, that men
should render up unto God that which is his due; but in the subservient
Covenant, God requires not his right, for any other end then this, that men,
upon conviction of their own weakness, should fly into the arms of Christ.
Sixthly, the Covenant of Nature, is founded upon the Creation and general
Conservation, the subservient Covenant is founded upon the Election of the
people of Israel. And lastly upon their freedom out of Egypt, and their
conservation in the land of Canaan. Seventhly, the Covenant of Nature was
therefore made, that by it men might be drawn sweetly, for it was written in
their hearts, but the subservient Covenant for this end, to compel men, Gal.
4.24.
for it did beget unto bondage. Eighthly, the Covenant of Nature is eternal,
the old Covenant is but temporary. Ninthly, the Covenant of Nature had no
regard unto restraint from outward impieties, neither as touching the
principal scope of it, nor yet as touching the less principal. Ex. 20.20.
The old Covenant as touching its less principal scope hereunto has regard.
Tenthly, the Covenant of Nature was engraven in the heart, whereas the old
Covenant only in tables of stone. Eleaventhly, the Covenant of Nature was made
in Paradise, the subservient Covenant in the Mount Sinai. Twelfthly, there was
no Mediator, of the Covenant of Nature; the subservient Covenant had a
Mediator, that is to say, Moses. Thirteenthly, the Covenant of Nature was made
with man, perfect and in innocence, the Subservient Covenant, only with some
part of mankind being lapsed.

47. Thesis.
Here it may be asked, first of all, how we are drawn by the Covenant of nature
unto Christ, by accident, for we said, but now, that it was not ordained mainly
for this end. Secondly, how the Covenant of Nature may be said to draw men
sweetly, since it does compel rather? Thirdly, seeing then it does compel, in
what sense or consideration, as touching this part of it, it may be
distinguished from the Subservient Covenant.

48. Thesis.
To the first I Answer. The Covenant of Nature leads unto Christ.
The Covenant of Nature brings men by accident unto Christ, in that it showed
what man is indebted unto God, and how sore punishment abides him, who does
not pay this debt; whence it compels a man to look to the Mediator, seeing he
beholds himself both unable to discharge the debt, and as unable every whit to
undergo the punishment.

49. Thesis.
Nevertheless, This it does diverse ways.
it does not this alike in all men, for in those who are guided only by the
light of Nature, by reason of that ignorance which is ingenerated in the mind
of man; it performs this more superficially and slightly: but those now who in
the word of God do read this due of nature; or hear it deciphered; it does
urge more strongly: But most of all strongly, those, whose minds it does Luce
perfundit.
besprinkle or inlighten with a singular and extraordinary light, to discern
clearly how much it is they owe, and how little they have paid; as also how
sore a punishment they have, upon that account, demerited.

50. Thesis.
Yet this was not the end of this Covenant; By the Covenant of Nature, men are
restrained from sin.
never thelesse, in that the knowledge thereof was not wholly blotted out of
the mind of lapsed men, it was so ordained of God for this end, that thereto
it might be serviceable, both to restrain men, and to lead them unto Christ.

51. Thesis.
And also those very things, which by accident the Covenant of Nature does
effect, yet it does effect them after another manner, then the Subservient
Covenant does.

52. Thesis.
For first, And by the Subservient Covenant.
in that the Covenant of Nature does restrain men from external vices, this
it does, not for any want of the Spirits being powered forth, under the New
Testament, (whereto the restraint, that flows from the Subservient Covenant
did refer) but this it did, before that fullness of times, for want of the
Spirit, which those times did partake of; and since the promulgation of the
Gospel, it does the same thing also, for want of the Spirit, which was promised
in the new Covenant. But in what the Subservient Covenant did restrain, that
it did, because the time was not as yet come: wherein God would send the Spirit
of Adoption into the hearts of his faithful ones.

53. Thesis.
For like as under the New Testament, the measure of the Spirit is one in this
life, another in the life to come; so under the Old Testament, the measure of
the Spirit was far different then from what now it is under the New: and like
as in that measure of the Spirit, which is bestowed under the New Testament,
seeing in this life it is not bestowed perfect, there is need of a curb
whereby the flesh might be restrained, which is the Covenant of Nature; so that
measure which could be afforded us in the Old Covenant, for as much as it was
never afforded us perfect, had need also of a like curb.

54. Thesis.
For this cause the Jews, both by the Covonant of Nature, like unto us, and
also by the Subservient Covenant, different from us, were restrained from
external sins.

55. Thesis.
In like manner also does the Covenant of Nature lead us unto Christ one way,
Men are otherwise drawn unto Christ by the Covenant of Nature, otherwise by the
Subservient Covenant.
the Subservient Covenant another: for the Covenant of Nature begets and
stirs up thirst in men; which by Christ applied, either in the promise, or
the Gospel, is assuaged; but the thirst which the Subservient Covenant did
excite, could be no otherwise assuaged, then by the coming of Christ himself
in the flesh.

56. Thesis.
Therefore men, so far forth as being pressed on by the Covenant of Nature,
they are disquieted with the desire of a Mediator; yet before he was
exhibited, they desire only an Application of Christ promised, but after he was
exhibited, they desire the bestowing of him exhibited. But the Subservient
Covenant did not suffer men to rest satisfied in Christ, as one that was
promised, but further, it did inflame them with a mavelous desire of his
coming in the flesh. Just thus under the Gospel, the Covenant of Grace does
cast in a desire, not only of that measure of Jesus Christ, which will be
afforded us in this life, but it does also excite and stir up, in the minds
of the godly, a mavelous desire of the dissolution of this body, and of the
second coming of Christ.

57. Thesis.
Therefore the Jews were brought unto Christ by the Covenant of Nature, after
another manner from what they were by the Subservient Covenant.

58. Thesis.
To the second, I answer, Whence it is that the Covenant of Nature does compel.
that we consider the Covenant of Nature, according to its first institution,
when it was instituted with man, entire, and incorrupt, and not according to
its accidentary use, the Nature of man being now wholly corrupted and depraved.

59. Thesis.
To the Third we have already answered, (above, in Thesis 52, 53.) where we
explained how men might one way be restrained from sin, by the Covenant of
Grace, and an other way by the Subservient Covenant.

60. Thesis.
But because we have already spoken somewhat of the Coaction, that does
proceed, both from the Covenant of Nature, as also from the Subservient
Covenant; it will, not unlikely, quit the labor, to explain what and how
manifold that coaction is.

61. Thesis.
By Coaction here we understand, Coaction what it is.
not that whereby the members of man are hurried on impetuously to the doing of
those things, which by no means willingly they would do, but such a kind of
Coaction [to] which there does concur some consent of will, indeed that
consent not absolute, and perfect, neither yet such as is compelled, for as
much as to assent, and yet to be compelled, are repugnant.

62. Thesis.
This so comes to pass, when what we hate in it self, our wills do yet
embrace, either for the avoydance of something, which we more hate; or for the
achievement of something, the love of which does more earnestly enslame us,
then did the hatred of that; which we yet desire, for the achievement of this.

63. Thesis.
This kind of Coaction they feel who ever are restrained, It is one in the
godly, another in the ungodly.
by the Covenant of Nature, or by that which is Subservient, from their outward
impieties; yet so, as different sorts of men, after a diverse, and a different
manner; for verily wicked men, are only scared from evil, by the fear of
punishment, denounced in the Covenant against them, whereas the godly are also
drawn by the love of God Covenanting with them; notwithstanding, of themselves
they are enclining unto evil: now that, a man may call a servile, this a
sonlike filial coaction.

64. Thesis.
But the diversity of this Coaction has its dependence not so much upon the
Covenant it self, either of Nature, Whence that diversity proceeds.
or of that, that is subservient, as it has upon the condition of the persons
concerned in the Covenant.

65. Thesis.
For the very Covenant it self, in this corruption of nature, inforceth, yet
so, as it does it by a servil coaction, in them who are destitute of faith; but
by a filial, in them who are endued with faith.

66. Thesis.
It now remains, that we compare the subservient Covenant (which is the Old
Testament) with the Covenant of Grace.

67. Thesis.
They agree first of all, The agreement of the Subservient Covenant, with the
Covenant of Grace.
in this, That God is the Author of them both. Secondly, that both of them are
made with man considered as he is a sinner. Thirdly, that both of them do
reveal sin. Fourthly, that both of them do restrain from sin. Fifthly,
that they both do lead to Christ. Sixthly, that either is a badge of the
Church of God. Seventhly, that both of them were made through the Mediator.
Eighthly, that in both of them life is promised.

68. Thesis.
But they differ. The disagreement.
First, in the quality (...).
and condition of the Author; for God in the subservient Covenant is
considered as reproving sin, and as one approving only righteousness: but
here now he is otherwise considered in the Covenant of Grace, as one remitting
sin, and repairing a new righteousness in man. Secondly, they differ in the
stipulation, for this is the stipulation [or condition] of the old Covenant,
Gal. 3.12.
Do this and live; of the new, Joh. 3.18.
Believe, and thou shall not come into judgment. Thirdly, they differ in their
antiquity; for the subservient Covenant was added Gal. 3.16, 17, 19.
to the Promises of Grace, which preceded. Fourthly, they differ in the manner
of discovering sin, for the subservient Covenant does not discover sin
primarily Romans 7. throughout.
, but by experience of man's weakness in the keeping of that Covenant; but the
Covenant of Grace does it primarily; Romans 3.9. et seq. v. 23.
for it does teach (...).
expressly that man is a sinner Romans 4.6. et seq.
, and that his happiness is placed in remission of sins. Fifthly, the
subservient Covenant does restrain from sin Romans 7.22, 23, 24.
, but by coaction Romans 6.
, the Covenant of Grace, by a spontaneous and voluntary inclination of the
minds of men. Sixthly, in that either does lead unto Christ: the Covenant of
Grace, does this directly; the subservient Covenant, indirectly. Seventhly,
whereas both are a badge of the Church: the old Covenant is a carnal or
outward badge only of the Jewish Church; but the Covenant of Grace is a
spiritual badge of the Church of the Jews, and also of the Gentiles.
Eighthly, whereas either Covenant was made by a Mediator; the Mediator of the
old Covenant is the man Moses, but the Mediator of the new, is not a (...).
mere man, but Christ (...).
God man. Ninthly, Gal. 4.24, 25.
in the old Covenant the spirit of bondage is given; but in the Covenant Romans
8.25.
of Grace, the Spirit of Adoption. Tenthly, the old Covenant was the mean
unto, the end; but the Covenant of Grace the end it self. Eleventhly, the old
Covenant did terrify the consciences; the new does comfort them. Twelfthly,
the object of the old Covenant is man dead in sin; of the new, a conscience
terrified for sin. Thirteenthly, the old Covenant did indeed declare the manner
how to worship God in, but performed nothing; the new Covenant does discover
and perform. Fourteenthly, the old Covenant is a (...).
handwriting against us, Col. 2.14.
but the new Matt. 11.28.
is a (...). Oxus excussum.
burden cast off. Fifteenthly, Heb. 12.18. to the 24.
the old Covenant is from Mount Sinai trembling; Psalm. 2.6.
the new from Sion which is heavenly, delectable, lovely. Sixteenthly, the old
Covenant does shut out the Gentiles: but the new receives them in. And last of
all, by some this difference is further added; that whereas in either life is
promised, in that it seems that life is only promised to be lived in the land
of Canaan; but in this is promised a life to be lived in heaven.

69. Thesis.
Furthermore the old Covenant was [a meane] unto Christ; The Old Covenant is a
mean to the New.
considered either as it did redargue and reprove men of sin; or as it did
restrain men from sin, or as being a Type, and a similitude of the new
Covenant; the two former have been explained already, the latter yet remains.

70. Thesis.
There are two parts of the old Covenant, the Law Moral, and Ceremonial, The
use of the Law, Moral and Ceremonial.
to which also may be added their Polity: [namely, the Judicial Law] these, if
considered in themselves, did redargue and reprove man of sin; and indeed the
Moral Law, as through the weakness of the flesh it is impossible; so it
declares a man not to be spiritual, and it does restrain him from outward
impieties, through the intervening of the spirit of bondage Heb. 10.3.
; but now the Ceremonies did set forth man's impuritie contracted by sin. But
and if we consider them as Types, so the Moral Law was the Copy of our
holiness: the Sacrifices some of them, did set forth the death of Christ as
expiatory; the rest of them did figure out Romans 12.1.
the reasonable sacrifice of our body and mind, in respect whereof, Rev. 1.6.
and 5.10. and 20.6.
we are called Priests: and those other cleansings did note out unto us the
real sanctification of our souls in the blood and Spirit of Christ.

71. Thesis.
Here two things will be demanded: First, how Moses could be said to be a
Mediator of that covenant, seeing he himself was one included in the party on
the one side covenanting. Secondly, why the Sacrifices, [Sacraments] and
Ceremonies of the Old Covenant, are called carnal Heb. 9.10.
; the Sacraments of the New Covenant not so; whereas Christ, or the benefits of
Christ were represented as well in those, [of the Old Covenant] as in these
they are.

72. Thesis.
To the first, How Moses could be a Mediator.
I Answer. It is not absurd, that both one and the same, under a diverse
consideration, may be both a Mediator, and may yet be one included in party of
the one side, Covenanting. For in the New Covenant, Christ, though he be a
Mediator; yet as God, he likewise is the other party covenanting; so in the
Old Covenant Moses, seeing he was an Israelite, and a part of that people with
whom God did enter into covenant, after he had taken upon him the Office of a
Mediator, appointed him by God; he is no longer now simply to be considered as
an Israelite, but as a Mediator; making intercession between God and the
people of Israel; and this we conceive was done, that so he might appear to be
a clearer and more manifest Type of Christ.

73. Thesis.
But from hence a greater and more weighty difficulty seems to arise: for
seeing God is infinite, it may not absurdly be demanded, In what respect could
Moses be a Mediator between God and man, seeing he himself was but a man? To
this we answer: that Mediation is twofold. The one, by the benefit whereof men
are truly and effectually united unto God; and this Mediation we confess,
belongs to no other then to a person endued with infinite virtue and power;
and so that the New Covenant could admit of no other Mediator then of one, who
must be God, we constantly affirm; but then we say, again, there is another
Mediation, whereof this only is the use; to show what the way and manner is,
how God is to be worshipped in, and not to inspire into men a strength and
power to perform it; nor to reconcile men unto God; but only it propounds
those things whereby it easily appears what need they have of reconciliation:
This is the Mediation of the Old Covenant: wherefore we say not that the
Mediator of it ought to have been of infinite power, seeing those things are
not of a power infinite, but finite, and such, as may belong unto a creature.

74. Thesis.
To the second, Why the Sacraments of the Ancients are called Carnal.
we Answer: That the Sacrifices and Sacraments of the Old Testament are
deservedly called carnal, etc. Those of the New Covenant not so; because,
notwithstanding these as well as those, as respecting the matter, may both be
called carnal, and both spiritual, in respect of the signification; yet here
falls in a twofold difference whereby they are distinguished each from other.

75. Thesis. A twofold disagreeement between the Sacraments of the Ancients
and ours.

The first difference is this, for that the Sacrifices, Sacraments, and
Ceremonies of the Ancients had their carnal use, over and besides the
spiritual signification. But the Sacraments of the New Covenant have, by Gods
appointment, no carnal use at all, now, but merely spiritual.

76. Thesis.
1. Nevertheless we deny not, Sacraments of the New Covenant, by the
institution and custom of man, may have a carnal use, but not any such
prescribed them by any Word of God.

77. Thesis.
2. difference is placed in this: That the Sacraments, Sacrifices, and
Ceremonies of the Old Testament did set forth Christ, and the benefits by
Christ; not primarily, but secondarily, and that too, but darkely; but the
Sacraments of the New Covenant do show forth Christ primarily, and that
clearly.

78. Thesis.
So Circumcision, primarily, did separate between the seed of Abraham and the
rest of the Nations; it did seal unto them the earthly promise: secondarily,
it did signify out sanctification. In like manner the Passover, primarily,
the passing over of the destroying Angel; secondarily, Christ: so also the
sacrifices, and the cleansings, they represented, primarily, a certain carnal
holiness: secondarily, they figured out Christ, and the benefits of the New
Covenant.

79. Thesis.
And now I conceive lastly, The Definition.
it will not be amiss, in the place of a conclusion, to subjoyne here, the
Definitions, of those three Covenants, concerning which we have raised this
dispute.

80. Thesis.
The Covenant of Nature is that, Of the Covenant of Nature.
whereby God, by right of Creation, does require a perfect obedience of all
mankind, and promises a most blessed life to as many as do give it him, to be
lived in Paradise: but against those that deny him this perfect obedience, he
does denounce eternal death; and that for this end, that it may appear to
all, how greatly he is in love with virtue, and how infinitely he hates vice.

81. Thesis.
The Old Covenant is that, whereby God does require from the people of Israel,
obedience of the Moral, Ceremonial and Judicial Law; and to as many as do
give it him, he promises all sorts of blessings in the possession of the land
of Canaan; on the contrary, to as many as deny it him, he denounces, most
severely, curses and death; and that for this end, that he might bring them to
the Messiah which was for to come.

82. Thesis.
The Covenant of Grace is that whereby God, upon the Condition propounded of
faith in Christ, promises remission of sins in his blood, and a heavenly
life; and that for this end, that he might show forth the riches of his Mercy.
And thus much concerning the Covenant.

Glory be to thee, O Lord Jesus.
FINIS.

