MEDITATIONS OF THE MIRTH OF A CHRISTIAN LIFE.

And The VAIN MIRTH of a WICKED LIFE, with the SORROVVES of it.

By ZACH: BOGAN of C.C.C. OXON.

Psalm. 32.11. Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice ye righteous: and shout for joy
all ye that are upright in heart.

OXFORD, Printed by H. HALL for R. DAVIS. 1653.

To my honored Mother Mris IOANE BOGAN.
I Have at length, upon your earnest desire, adventured to publish those
unworthy lines long since scribled, concerning the Joy of a Christian life. If
any ask you wondering, how I, that have spent whole years altogether in
Sadness, came to talk of Mirth: you may answer them, that I speak not of
what I have my self (the Lord knows, I have little cause to have any,
considering my many sins (but what I think, other Christians better then I
am, may have. Before you, or any one else, do read me, I desired much to be
cleared in two things 1. That I have not the least meaning to favor any
carnal merriment. The mirth which I speak of, is the mirth only of a Christian
life. 2. That I never thought my self better able to do this work, then other
men. My heart knows, I am too little a Christian, to do it, as it might be
done. Only I supposed, that there had not been much done this way already. If
my doing it ill, may anger any one to do it better; I shall be exceeding well
pleased. I had been larger in the last part of the book, had I not been hindered
by a troublesome, and dangerous sickness, which began upon me when I began to
print, and continued in it is extremity almost till I ended. Whatsoever is not
much enough, or well enough; I hope the Lord will make amends for it, in the
blessing: to whose protection I commit you, and rest

C.C.C. June 3. 1653. Your Obedient Son ZACHARY BOGAN.

The First Book.
Phil. 4 4. Rejoice in the Lord always: and again I say Rejoice. Psalm. 32.11.
Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye righteous, and shout for joy all ye that
are upright in heart.
IT were as easy for me to do, as any thing that I know, to show my reader
what a deal of mischief is done by Mistakes and Prejudices: how many godly
actions, and profitable designs are hindered by them. But because I think it
needles to go so largly, I will take a narrower compass, and confine my self
to the naming only of some of those mistakes and prejudices which attend a
godly life; the chief whereof my endeavor shall be in my ensuing discourse to
remove. They are such as these: That there is a necessity of Monkery and
beggary, because it is said, It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of
a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. Math:
19.24. That there is a necessity of exposing ones self to all manner of
injuries, because it is said, that If a man smite me upon one cheek, I must
give him the other. Math: 39. That there is a necessity of starving with hunger
and cold, and perishing for want, because I must take no thought, what I shall
eat, or what I shall drink, or wherewithal I shall be clothed. Math: 6.31.
That there is a necessity of denying my self necessary rest and recreation,
because I must be continually watching and praying. Mark 13.33. 1 Pet: 4.7.
etc, That there is a necessity of being mine own enemy, because I must deny my
self. Math: 16.24. That there is a necessity of casting off natural
affection, because I must hate father and mother, If I will be Christ's
disciple. Luke 14.26. That there is necessity of allowing Rebellion and
disobedience to magistrates and parents, because I must obey God rather then
men. Acts 5.29. That there is a necessity of being strange, and peevish and
phrantique (and many other such things, as unsuitable, and inconsistent, and
reproachful, as they are thought to be requisite and graceful to the
profession of Christianity) because the hypocritical sort of professors use to
be so, and the honester are and have been many times counted so, (as that
prophet was by Jehu 2 Kings 9.11: and the rest of the prophets Jer: 29.26.) I
could name you up a great many more mistaks of the like nature, which like so
many bugbeares, or lions in the way, either do Indeed affright the Ignorant,
who know not what it is to be godly: or are used for pretenses of fear by the
slothful and malicious, who are unwilling to travel, in the wilderness where
people do not use to travel, although they might have manna from heaven for
meat, and water out of the rock for drink, which are helps sufficient to make
the journey easy: and although it lead to the land of Canaan, where there is
milk and honey enough to make sufficient recompense, were the journey never so
painful. And indeed, I know not any thing that suffers so much from mistake
and prejudice as a Godly life; and it were easy to make more complaints of this
nature. But I will name only one more, that which I think does as much
mischeife as any, and that which I shall endeavor in this discourse to remove,
viz: A necessity of being sad, and unsociable, and cynically malancholick,
because it is said, Woe unto you that laugh Luk 6.25. And Blessed are they that
mourn. Math: 5.4.

Now of this necessity, Godliness has ever had the luck, not only to be falsely
accused, but unjustly condemned by too too many. So that (pity it is to see it)
thinking they shall meet with nothing but storms and tempests, to disquiet
their heads with; nothing but rocks of offense, to break their hearts upon;
nothing but gulfes of despair, to swallow up their souls in: they resolve a
thousand times rather, to lie at anchor in the haven, and sleep in a whole
skin, and never put forth at all, then upon such terms.

And no wonder. For doubtless the thought of Sadness, which is a thing most
avoided of all, must needs have a very great power to affright and deter; as
the thought of Joy, which is the thing most desired of all (being the fruit,
and end of all desires) has the greatest power to entice and persuade. Sorrow,
and sadness, being against our natures, even as their causes are; we cannot
choose but fear and shun them, or whatsoever we think either may be a cause
of them, or uses to be attended with them.

No wonder, I say, that men are so loath to venture upon a godly life, when
their Judgments are forestald with fears of a sad life. I can never be willing
to do that which will make me sad: no more, then that which will make me sad,
can agree with my will: which if it did not disagree with, I should never be
sad. I can not possibly will now, to have that thing, which I know, when I have
it, will make me will that I had it not. If there can be no Joy in the having,
there may not be a will, or a desire for the having; will, and desire looking
forwards, and Joy, and content looking backward each of them upon the same
object. Can I but make a man believe, he shall be merry, when, he has done a
thing, I shall not be long in making him willing to do it. To be joyful, it is
life, and more: for it is the very life of life. If a life be never so long,
and high in honors and preferments; Called (...) Ex: 6, 9 So (...) to be
straightened, is usd for, to be grieved Jud: 10 190: 16 16. Job. 21.4.
if it be not large too, i: e: if there be any (...) straitness either of body
or spirit (but especially of spirit) no free breathing, and no enlargment of
heart to enjoy what a man enjoyes; it is but to be in a prison in green fields
that are a man's own; where it is so much the worse, because he is so much the
more vexed, to see so much the more of that which he has, and cannot enjoy. If
therefore. I will leave the men, that use these pretenses, altogether without
excuse; I must make it appear that their pretenses are false, and that there
is no such thing as they fear, or believe, or would willingly have to be true.
Now that it is false, and that it is no way necessary for a christian to be
more sad then other men; if there were no other argument, it were sufficiently
proved by this, that it is (in the Scripture above written) enjoined as a duty
(or at least exhorted unto as a possibility) to rejoice. Now if God command a
thing to be done, it may be done and it is not necessary to do the contrary.
But yet because you are apt to think his commands grievous; and to look upon
him as an austere man, that takes up where he laid not down etc: to make it
appear to the contray, and that there is good reason for it, we will consider
a little how the case stands with a godly man; what he is, or what he has,
that it should be expected he should be always rejoicing; or what cause he
has, why he should be merrier then other men.

My method therefore shall be this. First I shall show you the grounds, and
causes of his mirth. Secondly I shall answer the maine objection concerning
Affliction. After that, I shall show you the Nature of his mirth; when I shall
tell you, that he has not only better causes of mirth, then a wicked man,
(whom you think to be the only man that lives a merry life) but better mirth,
when he has it. And lastly I shall speak somewhat to show, what cause there is
of sorrow, and what sorrows there are in a wicked life, and how imperfect,
and vain the joy is, that wicked men have.

Now the causes that a godly man has to be joyful, and the helps and means
he has to make him merry, are either from the goodness of the Condition in
which he is, or the goodness of the Conditions, and habits, and graces, which
are in him. For the state and Condition in which he is; First First ground,
Good Company.
it is such, as, let him be where he will be, he can never be without good
company; and that, every one will say, is a very good help for a merry life.
Now the company which I mean, is, First, God the father: who By adoption out
of love. See View of Threats the last words. et p 914.
is his father, and therefore willing; and God all sufficient, and therefore
able, to comfort him. He is the God of Consolation from whom all comfort comes.
In his company and presence even upon earth, while we are at his left hand (or
while we sit on his footstool) is joy, as long as the time lasts; but at his
right hand are ravishing delights and pleasures, and that for evermore. Psalm:
16.11. What an extraordinary comfort must it needs be, to have the enjoyment of
such good company, of which a man can never be deprived, nor be weary, nor so
much as fear that he shall be! Such company God is. But you will say perhaps,
this is but a fancy of yours, that a man can have joy in the company of God.
For, if he go down to Hell, he will find him there also. Psalm: 139.8. And upon
what ground can I take delight in his countenance, who sees all things? I
answer, It is true indeed, It is possible, God may be with thee, and yet
notwithstanding all the while, he may not be with thee, but against thee. He
might be present with thee, not as a companion, or a friend, to watch over
thee, that no other thing may do thee hurt: but as an observer, and an enemy,
to watch for; and spy thy faults to do thee hurt himself. But if he be
present with thee indeed, so as thou art also present with him, (which can
hardly be said of a wicked man) and if thou art not only under the sight of his
Countenance, so as to be seen by him; but also in the light of his Countenance
too, so as to see him again, and enjoy communion and fellowship with him,
through his spirit; certainly if any condition in the world will make thee
merry, this will. Job, when he speaks of the comfortable condition, of a man
that God has delivered from going down into the pit from his bed of sickness;
after the mention of other blesings given him to recompense his misery, adds
it as a complement of his happiness, that He shall see the face of God with
joy ch: 33.26. (Happy sickness, that is attended with such a consequent.)
David speaks more then once, and more then twice, of God's countenance; as of
that wherein he took more comfort, then in all the world besides. There be many
that say, who will show us any good? Lord lift thou up the light of thy
COUNTENANCE upon us. Ps: 4 6. For thou have made him most blessed for ever,
thou have made him exceeding glad with thy COUNTENANCE. Ps: 21.5. See how he
magnifies it Ps: 42.5. Ps: 44.3. Ps: 89.15. (For though it be metaphorically
used for, favor, yet is the speech not all metaphor; and that well experienced
Christians will tell you.) when a man would think his sighs would have been
many, and his heart would have fainted for sorrow by reason of trouble; what
course takes he to make himself merry? He sets the Lord always before his
face. Says he, I have set the Lord always before me; Because he is at my
right hand I shall not be moved. Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory
rejoices: my flesh also shall rest in hope. Psalm: 16.8.9. The words are cited
by Peter Act: 2, 25: and other words joined with them verse: 27, 28: where also
in the end of the 28 verse it is said, Thou shall make me full of joy with thy
COUNTENANCE.

Job speaks of seeing God's sace; and David speaks of setting the Lord before
him. And indeed, it would be small cause of joy for a man when God is with him,
to have his back toward him: to be in his presence so as not to enjoy his
company. If my friend see me, and I cannot see him again; what comfort is it
to me that he sees me? It Is rather so much vexation. It Is not what another
thing does to me: neither is it what another thing is, if that be all; that can
make me merry. I must do somewhat my self, Use, and enjoy, and improve that
which I have. For what is the noone light to a blind man? or the most
nourishing food put into a dead man's mouth? I must see God, as well as he see
me. And I must see him in love, and peace, and so enjoy him; or else, I shall
never be the better; as I can never be better, then when I do so. And even so
Godly men do through the spirit. For as God sets them before his face, as a
father does his child, to look to it that it take no hurt, Ps: 41, 12: And set
test me before thy face for ever.
so they again like little children not able to stand alone, keep continual
looking upon him; smiling, and rejoicing, because though they themselves are
weak, yet he, they know, can and will stretch forth an almighty hand
whenever they are ready to fall, Psalm: 16.8. Because he is at my right hand I
shall not be moved.
Now do but consider. Can it be less then unspeakable comfort, for men to be
still in the presence of a just and powerful God, who will not see them
wronged; of a bountiful God, who will not see them want, and of a loving
tender hearted God, who cannot endure to see them sad, but to prevent it, will
continually Lev: 26.11, 12. 2 Cor: 6.26.
walk in them, and dwell in them, and never leave them alone. But what do I
tell you of having God's presence (so as all the creatures have: only they want
the enjoyme^t of him) when I might tell you of being hid in the secret of his
presence. For thus David speaks of those that fear God, Thou shall hide the^
in the secret of thy presence from the pride of man, thou shall keep them
secretly See Psalm: 91.1.
in a pavilion from the strife of tongues. Psalm: 31.20. Hereupon he calls them
God's Hidden ones, Psalm: 83.3. Godly men are God's Jewels: Mal: 3.17.
which he bought with a high price, even the Highest priests own blood. And
therefore, doubtless, they are higly prized, and curiously kept, and sure to
be safe. He is as tender of them, as a man can be of the apple of his eye.
Zach: 2.8. They are his anointed and consecrated ones, whom he has set apart
for himself. Psalm: 4.3. So that he will not have any thing else to have part
in them: much less will he allow them to be touched by the hand of violence.
Touch not mine anointed etc. Psalm: 105.15. Little do the men of the world
think, how near the Saints, even while they are here on earth, are to God that
dwells in heaven. David says of the children of Israel that they were a
people near unto him. Ps: 148.14. They were as near to him, as a man's girdle
is to his loins Jer: 13.11. As a girdle cleaves to the loins of a man, so
have I caused to cleave unto me the whole house of Israel.
They cannot want any thing, but he will be sure to know of it: and they shall
not desire any thing, but he will be ready at hand to give it. He has so much
power for them, and so much love toward them; that in what condition so ever
they are, he is able, and willing to be what they stand in need of, even all in
all. They are his sheep: And he is their shepherd in the wilderness, to lead
them to the green pastures. Psalm: 23.1. A shadow to hide them from the heat of
persecution. Psalm: 91.1. A hiding place to run to from the wolves. Psalm: 31.20.
They shall not want help, nor protection, nor any thing else, so long as they
are like sheep harmless and quiet; and desire but to defend themselves: for I
must confess, I know of but little help they have promised them in offending
others. Neither is it a thing they ought, or do desire to have. If others
offend them, they are told, that God will be their buckler and their shield.
Ps: 3.3: and their fortress. Ps: 31.3. Ps: 144.2. But If they will offend
others, he does not say, he will be their spear, or their sword. Now a man
that is of a peaceable disposition, (as a true Christian certainly is, above
any in the world) if he can but be defended and protected from harm himself,
I Will warrant you, he will be merry enough, and trouble no body. And how can
there be be or protection desired then, what a godly man has? For (as I told
you) God himself is his fort. And he is such a fort, as cannot be scaled: for
he is higher then the highest, and there is not a higher then he. Eccle: 5.8.
And such a fort, as is Be thou my strong habitation whereunto I continually
resort. Psalm: 71.3.
never shut to him, let him come when he will; And always near to him, let him
be where he will; for being every where he must needs be a very present help in
trouble. Ps: 46.1. The u^godly are nothing so. But are like a Cony, that being
a great way off from his bury, knows not which way to take, and shifting some
times to this bush, and sometimes to that, and sometimes to a shallow hole,
imagines himself safe enough, (though doubtless if it ever come to his
remembrance, he thinks he should be more safe in his bury.) But all these
refuges prove but so many traps, and he is so much the more easily taken.

Farther yet. The godly are not happy only with the secret of God's presence,
in which they are hid: but with the presence of his secrets; which they are not
concealed. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him. Psalm: 25.14. O
the glorious ravishing things, that are to be had in God, for the souls of
those that follow after him; zealous, unwearied souls, not entertaining only,
but with incessant workings of affection maintaining communion with him. I know
the men of the world, because there is nothing that they know of, (having but
the Spirit of the world, which cannot discern the things of God) think think
there are no such things at all as godly men usually talk of; and take them
but for phancies. But I am confident, and I can guess somewhat, by what I my
self have tasted, that they (...).
are things which neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, and that have not
entered into the heart of man, which God has prepared for them that love him.
1 Cor: 2.9. Now he reveals many of these things unto the godly by his Spirit.
For the spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God; that they
might know the things that are freely given them of God, verse: 10.19: of the
same chapter. God is not such company to the Saints, as they are many times to
one another, i.e. strange, and as if he knew them not. No, he is free, and
familiar, and opens his very herat to them,

Now seeing it is so, how can it otherwise be, then that the voice of
salvation, should be in the tabernacles of the righteous? Psalm: 118.15. Nay, I
will say with the Prophet (whose words these are) without any doubting, that,
were there nothing else, upon this ground that God is theirs, The righteous
shall (or, will) be glad in the Lord, and all the upright in heart shall glory.
Ps: 64.10. I say, upon this ground, that God is theirs; For if I could not say
this of them, I could say but little else to the purpose. Neither can they say
any thing else for themselves, why they should rejoice, but either this, or in
relation to this. For what ever joy they have in other things (wherein in I
deny not but they have a great deal, which the carnal man knows not of) it
is not so much in those things, as in God by them, that they rejoice; who is
still the gladness, or the life and soul of their joy. Psalm: Unto God my
exceeding joy. Heb: the gladness of my joy.
43.4. Without him their joy would either dye of it self in the birth, or be
destroyed in the cradle by some outward crosses. Whether it be joy or content,
or any other thing, he is In Gen: 33. where according to our translation, Esau
told Jacob. I have enough, in the Hebrew it is only (...) much v. 9: but where
according to the same trans: Jacob told Esau so much, it is in the Heb. (...)
all.
enough without any thing else, and any thing else is too little without him.
Happy indeed are the people that have their garners full, and are in peace, and
worldly prosperity, says David, Psalm: 144.12.13, 14. And so every one will
count them. But yet however, says he in the same Psalm verse. 15, I say, Happy
are the people which have the Lord for their God. As if he had said, This is
something indeed, but all this is nothing worth, unless men have the Lord for
their God. Or, this is no matter of joy to a people, but as it is a sign that
they have the Lord for their God.

Such is the goonesse of God, and so delightful is he to the soul that
enjoyes him, that even his very name is enough to make him merry but to think
of it. In thy name shall they rejoice. Psalm: 89.16. With what grief does
Hezekiah repeat his name, Jah! I shall not (says he) see Jah Jah in the Land
of the Living. Isa: 38.11.

But then in the second place, besides the company of God the father, they have
also the company of God the Son, who is their elder brother and their spouse,
and their Advocate, always ready to plead their satisfaction made by his death
upon the Cross. There is cause enough for mirth, upon less relation to a
Bridegroom, then to be the bride herself. For (says our Savior) can the
children of the bride-chamber mourn, as long as the Bridegroom is with them?
Mat: 9.15. Our Savior said so in the time of his abasement, when he was a man
of sorrows. And may it not be much more rather said now, (now that be is
exalted far above all principalities and powers, and where there is nothing
but joy,) Can the spouse of the bridegroom mourn as long as the bridegroom is
with her? For with us he is; and in a more comfortable manner, then he could be
with those, to whom he spoke those former words. He is much more Immanuel now,
then he was then. His coming the second time, must needs be much more joyful,
then his first coming. Then he himself only was come. Now he is come, and the
Spirit too (who is now come with greater grace God did work by his Spirit
before.
and manifestation, as Princes use where they come in person.) And now his
coming is altogether to the heart, (by the Spirit: (...). 2 Cor 3.18. The Lord
is that spirit, verse: 17.
) where he cannot come, but he must needs make the party to whose heart he
comes exceeding joyful. The Comforter was not then come neither could he come
till Christ was gone, Joh: 16.7. (For what need of comfort, for the absence of
a friend till the friend be gone?) And our Savior himself told his disciples;
And ye now therefore have sorrow: but I will see you again, and your heart
shall rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you, verse: 22. Christ's coming
the second time is after he has been with his father and our father. Joh:
10.17. And who is there, that loves his father, but will be exceeding joyful
to receiv one that coms from him? His disciples that were with him before his
death, might have joy while he was with them: but not without sorrow, and fear
of sorrow and for his going away from them. But we have no cause of such
fears. For with us he will be always to the end Mat: 28.20. His presence we
have; but indeed it is invisible. and therefore his last coming is usually
called appearance, (...). 1 Timothy: 6. (...) Revelation, 1 Cor: 1.7. (...)
manifestation, Col: 3 4.
of the world. (not only to the end of the world, but till that time without
intermission.) Well if thou say that Christ is absent,) as I confess he is
in his body, for the heavens must receive him till the times of restitution of
all things;) yet even so would he afford matter of joy in abundance, to him
that considers what he is doing in his absence. We are never troubled at the
absence of a friend, when he is about a business necessarily to be done, and
to be done for us, and which none but he can do: especially, if we know the
time of his absence will be very short. The business which I mean, is the
business of an Advocate: and who will be sorry, (though his advocate be his
brother) because his brother is absent, if he be absent about his business,
and that business be a business of life and death. But as I said before,
Jesus Christ is present by the Spirit. And by help of that Spirit to enjoy
communion with the father and him, is matter of joy beyond expression. John had
this opinion of it, and therefore as it were in a boasting manner of speech,
'tells those to whom he wrote his Epistle, after he had exhorted them to
communion with himself, And truly our fellowship (...).
is with the father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. And these things write I
see no reason for Beza's, sit (communio) let it be, because of these words.
I unto you that your joy may be full. 1 John: 1.3.4. Now the Spirit is a third
person, whose company Christians enjoy, and upon the account whereof their
condition affords them matter of rejoicing. For although they enjoy the Father
and the Son by the Spirit, yet may I well put this for a third enjoyment,
because they enjoy the two first but by hope, and desire, and by means of the
Spirit, (which they shall not have such need to do when they come to Heaven;)
but the Spirit they enjoy immediately, (and it works immediately upon them, and
not by objects only: for that is rather the business of God's providence, then
the Spirit.) Now can it be imagined that a man can live a sad life, that has a
Comfortour not only with him, but within him; as our Savior told his
disciples, He dwells with you and shall be in you, Joh: 14.17. Must it not
needs be a great help to joy, to one that is traveling to Heaven, I say not
to be led by the hand, but in a manner carried on toward his home? To have a
word constantly behind him saying, This is the way, walk in it, whenever he
shall turn either to the right hand or to the left? Isa: 30.21. When there is
so great danger of error, and the danger of error is so great, to have for
his guide the Spirit of truth within him? Joh: 14.17. chap: 15.26. chap: 16.12.
Is it nothing think you, for one that was once under the law of sin and
death, now to live, and be led by a Spirit of life? Rom: 8 2. Is it so slight a
cause of joy, think you, for one that was once a poor ignorant soul, and
sees millions round about him remaining in that condition, perhaps for ever;
to have the Spirit of wisdom and revelation: to have the eyes of his
understanding enlightened, so as to know what is the hope of God's calling, and
what the glory of his inheritance in the Saints: and what is the exceeding
greatness of his power toward believers, who believe according to the working
of his mighty power, Ephesians: 1 17.18.19. Can there be a more joyful thing, to a
man that was once only under the law, a mere servant, and continually in
fear; Heb: 2.15. Luke 1.74.
not only to be adopted, and to have his condition changed; but to have a
Spirit of Adoption within him, to give him an enjoyment and sense of his
condition, and enabling him to look boldly upon God and call him Abba father?
Rom: 8.15. Is it so small a matter of comfort, think you, for one that is in
continual need, and has occasion to pray to God, but knows not how to pray
as he ought: to have such a one within him as the Spirit himself, to make
intercession for him? Rom: 8.26. Is it not matter of joy, think you, for one
that has a great burden of sin lying upon him, and would feign be eased;
while others by insensibility, and death in sins and trespasses, lie still, and
stir not at all: to have the Spirit himself (who is set opposite of Gal: 5.17.
(...).
purpose to sin and the flesh to keep them in subjection) continually within
him enabling him to mortify the deeds of the body; that he may live? Rom:
8.13. Has not he by much the start of the men of the world, for mirth; who in
times of persecution, and scandal, when fear, and love of the world carry
others that are hypocrites clean away, has continually within him a Spirit,
not of fear, but of power, and love, and of a sound mind to hold him fast? 2 Timothy: 1.7. Is this comfort of God small, for men not only to have eternal life
given Job, 15.11.
them in a free bargain, or covenant of grace; and not to have earnest only;
but to have for earnest, the earnest of the 2 Cor. 5.5. Perhaps best
interpreted appositively, The Spirit for an earnest. As said (...), the seal
of circumcision, Rom: 4.11. A manner of expression in most languages: as in
Hebr. Gen: 15.18: Ezekiel: 3.13. etc:
Spirit? You may judge what sweet cheerful company the Spirit is, by his
fruits, The fruits of the Spirit are love, joy, peace, long suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meeeknesse, temperance, Gal: 5.22.23. I know
that carnal men, who are yet in the world, and not chosen out Joh: 15.19.
of it, will be ready to laugh at you, if you tell them thus much, and will not
by any means be brought to believe what I have said of the Spirit, (which is a
thousand times too short, and I am too young a Christian to speak sufficiently
of it) because they see him not, neither know him. Joh: 14.17. But the godly
know him: and though they see him not, yet they do find continually by
experience, that he dwells with them and is in them, (as it is in the same
place.)

4ly, Besides the company of God (lest he should complain of too great
distance, betwixt him and his company.) A godly man has the conpany of
ANGELS; Creatures, as well as himself: and though in their nature his
superiors, yet in their office (...) merely ministering spirits, sent forth to
minister for them, who shall be heirs Or, that shall inherit (...), they are
heirs already, To: 8.17.
of salvation, Heb: 1.14. For the number, how many every Christian See more in
the View of Threats in the ch: of Enemies of God's Church
has; I dare not undervalue their condition, and respect with God, to say they
have but one a piece: But rather think, they are so far from having the
number stinted so low, that it is not stinted at all, but they may have more
and more, as their need increases, even to Mahanaim, enough to make a camp,
if there be occasion; as well as Jacob Gen: 32.2.
and 2 Kin. 6.17.
Elisha. It Is true, we read of but one Angel for all the Israelites, Exodus 23:
But that Angel was (...) the Angel of his presence Perhaps, meant by, presence,
Ex: 33.14. otherwise interpreted by Moses v. 15.
(or face) Isa: 63.9. his chief Servant (Zach: 3.8.) who was next to him, and
continually saw Esh, 1.14.
his face: nay he was the express Image of his person (and so the fitter
Angel of his face or presence.) and although he be called by occasion an
Angel, for what he did; yet he had another name from what he was, by
inheritance, the name of a Son, Heb: 1.4.5. If God sent his Son, it is likely
he sent the more Angels to attend him. But David absolutely says, that The
Angel For Angels An enallage of the singular number for the plural; usual in
the Heb: as Exodus: 33.38. Lev: 11.2. etc.
of the Lord encampeth round about them that fearchim, and delivers them,
Psalm: 34.7. I will not rub the questions, whether these Angels can contract
themselves, and whether they can subsist in a point, and so stand together the
better in so great a number, neither: will I trouble my self to examine,
whether they are in such or such a place in their substance, or only in their
virtue and operation. But this the godly man may assure himself of: that
whenever he shall want their help; in spite of doors, and locks, and bars,
he may have it in a moments warning. For there is no impediment, either for
want of power, because they are Spirits; or from want of good will, both
because it is their duty, and because they bear an affection to him; not only
rejoicing at his first conversion, Luk 15, 10; but (I dare confidently affirm)
always disposed with abundance of cherfulness, to do any thing for him. I
cannot let pass some words I remember of Origen's Hom: in Ezekiel: 1.
to this purpose, as I have them from his interpreter. He brings in the Angels
speaking after this manner, Si ille descendet and descendet in corpus: Si
mortali indutus est carne, and sustinuit carnem, and pro hominibus mortuus est;
quid nos quiescimus? quid parcimus nobis? eia, omnes angeli descendamus e
Coelo. If he (meaning the Son of God) went down, and went down into a body,
and was clothed with flesh, and endured it is infirmityes, and dyed for men,
what do we stand still for? Come let us all down from heaven together.

Well, you see by this time, what good company a godly man always has to
converse with: even no worse then the eternal Trinity, and the immortal
Angels; such company as he enjoyes most, when the world thinks he is alone. I
might have mentioned the company of Saints also, (exceeding comfortable
company: especially at such time as they meet together, either for the worship
of God; or for holy conference, and communicating to one another their
experiences of the love of God.) But, because the greatest part of his life, he
is without it; I had rather, he should make his boast of the other; which
unless by his own default, he may always enjoy, and there is nothing that can
deprive him of it. Now if a man have such company, and yet cannot be merry; I
will impute it to the highth of his folly, and negligence in improving his
privileges; rather then to the depth of his melancholy, as if he had no remedy
sufficient to remove it. For my part (and I wonder no more are of my mind.) I
can at no time think of the godly man's condition upon this account, but
presently, I admire his unspeakable happiness herein. If a Psalm: 4.4.
Heathen were able to say, Scipio.
he was never less alone, then when he was alone: how much more he? For,
besides that he can commune with his own heart 1 John: 3.20.
(that which a wicked man is as loath to do, as a malefactor can be to
commune with the Judge: for his own heart judges, and condemns him) he can
commune with God also, through meditation, and by the exercise of his graces,
love, and faith, and hope. When the night comes, and all other company leaves
him; having made peace with God, and his conscience, he quietly betakes
himself to his bed, troubling himself with nothing, and having nothing to
trouble him. Whereas the wicked man, being forced thither by want of
opportunity, or strength, or some other means of practicing wickedness,
seldom gets into it without either fretting and vexing himself, or being
vexed with one thing or other. Either he is sick in his body with pain, having
followed his pleasures too much: or he is sick in his mind with sorrow, for
having had none, or not so much as he would. It is seldom that a wicked man
goes to bed, without having done himself, or his neighbor some hurt, one way
or other: either of which is enough to make him vex and be angry to the
purpose, (so that he must needs be sad) though he have not the grace to repent.
But of the wicked man's life I shall speak more hereafter, in the end of my
discourse; and therefore to return to the godly man, of whose happiness I can
never speak too much. With what confidence, and security of spirit upon the
thought of his company, does he enter into his chamber? He has no more to do,
but to lay him down and let God alone to care for him. When others are
rejoicing (after their manner) and making merry, because their corn and their
wine is increased He, although he should have never so little, and although the
persecution, and malice of his enemies, be never so hot; is able to make use of
the words of the Prophet, I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep; for
thou Lord only (if I had nothing else) make me dwell in safty, (or in
security. (...)
) Psalm: 4 8. He has no need to trouble himself to set sentinels, and bar
doors, so long as God is his guard, whose charets are twenty thousand, even
thousands of Angels, and he himself is among them. Psalm: 68.17. If he sleep,
he sleeps safely; as in the everlasting arms of the watchman of Israel, who
never sleeps, nor so much as slumbreth, Psalm: 121.4. When thou lie down
thou shall not be afraid, Prove: 3.24. Nay and sleeps sweetly: for that is
wisdom's promise in the chapter last cited, -- Yea thou shall lie down, and
thy sleep shall be sweet. I say his sleep (or his rest: for such his sleep
truly is; whereas many a sleeping is much more unquiet, then waking) is sweet.
Even as sweet as the sleep of a laboring man: Eccl. 6.7.
for such a one commonly he is; not only hating idleness as a sin it self,
but fearing it is an occasion of other sins. Gluttony does not make him draw
his breath short, A (...), Ecclus 31.20.
having had too much of what he loves; neither does Ambition make him draw it
long into sighs for want of his desire. He has none of the vapors of a
stomach oppressed by gluttony, to distemper his head: nor any of the fumes of a
conscience affrighted with sin, to distract his heart.

Such is a godly man's sleep by reason of God's presence with him. And every
man knows, that sleeping well is of great consequence to make a man lighter,
and merrier all the day after; if there were nothing else. But then how is he,
when he awakes? no doubt, well enough. For God has not left him; When I awake,
I am still with thee, Psalm: 139.18. As soon as his eyes are open, he finds
himself present with God, and God present with him; and they have presently
communion one with the other. And this his first communion is not without
abundance of joy, (as friends use to have, when they meet after some time of
absence:) usually a great deal more then he had the last night: For God's
mercies are new every morning; and new things do most take us. Besides this,
for the most part, when a godly man awakes out of sleep, he is so much lighter
with joy then a wicked man, as he is less heavy with sleep. The wicked man,
either out of sluggishnes, or by reason of cares, and fears, and distempers,
always sleeps too little, or too much: and is full of tumblings, and
tossings to and fro till the morning. Job 4.7.4.
While he, having given nature her due and no more, receives of nature again
as much as is fitting and no more: and so neither suffers. The godly man's joy,
comes in the Psalm: 30.8.
morning, when the wicked man's goes: for to him the morning is as the shadow
of death, Job, 24.17. He is not only afraid of reproof and punishment, but he
grieves and suffers sufficiently, though no body should know of his actions,
for the impair and loss and mispence of his strength, and his time and his
money.

If a godly man do not sleep; he need not fear the terrors of the night, for
want of protection: For David says, He shall not be afraid of the terror by
night, nor of the arrow that flies by day, Ps: 91.5. Neither need he fear the
terrors of a melancholic fancy for want of company; having such company, as
I told you of before: Upon the comfort whereof at such times, he is able to
comfort himself at other times. My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and
fatness, and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips, When I remember
thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night-watches, Psalm: 63.5.6.
Besides the company of his law; which he loves Psalm: 119.27
above gold, and which is sweeter to him then the honey; of which he has this
promise, When thou go it shall lead thee, when thou sleep it shall keep
thee, and when thou awakest it shall talk with thee, Prove: 6.22. Nay, he is so
far from being sad in the saddest nights; that he is able (as David Psalm.
149.5.
says) to sing aloud upon his bed, and not care how long the night lasts. On
the contrary, the wicked man, if he be not able to sleep, how do Terrors take
hold of him as waters? Job 27.20.
how fearfully, and sadly does he spend the night, tumbling and sighing and
wishing for the day? It Is all one to a godly man, night or day. For what night
can there be to him, who has God always with him, who is a Sun (to comfort
him, The light is sweet and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the
Sun.
as well as a shield to protect him, Eccl: 11.7.) and the light of whose
countenance, if it be but very little, is more comfortable, then all things
else whatsoever, that the day can bring with it. He can say, When I sit in
darkness, the Lord shall be a light to me, Mic: 7.8. And The Lord my God will
enlighten my darkness, Psalm: 18.28. To tell you the truth, I think the night
is the merriest time that the godly man has: and the saddest for the wicked
man: (who though he make use of darkness to hide his sin; yet is he afraid,
because of that very thing in which his safety consists.) For if a man be merry
in good company; he must needs be more merry, when he enjoyes it better, and
there is less to disturb his mirth. So as it is with a godly man in the
night; when the greatest part of his hindrances are removed, and he can
delight himself Job 27.10.
in the Almighty without disturbance. David says, that the Lord would (indeed)
command his loving kindness in the day time: but in the night (says he) his
song shall be with me, Psalm: 42.8. His song] (as I think) not of thanksgiving,
but of joy, and exultation; such as God Job 35.10.
uses to give at that time. In the daytime, the soul is so taken up with base
employments, so distracted with variety of sensible objects, and so busied in
work for the body; that either she has no leisure at all to do her own work
(such as this joy is, as much as any thing) or she cannot do it so well as she
would: or so well as she could in the night, when she has less to do. I doubt
not but the worldly and carnal man, now that I am talking so much of night,
and sleep, will be ready to say that I do but dream; and to answer me, as the
fellow did the hunter, when he bade him hear, what heavenly music his dogs
made. For I know, he counts the music, and songs that we speak of, nothing
but a frenzy, or a fancy at the least, such as mad, and diseased people have
indeed in their own brain, while they imagine it to be in the air. But, as
Peter said of those upon whom the holy Ghost fell, These men are not drunk, as
ye suppose: So may I reply to such men, no such matter. The godly are not mad,
as ye suppose. For their songs are not works of their own fancy, nor made of
their own head: but set for them by God himself, who gives songs in the
night, Job 35.10.

2ly, Second ground Peace.
A second cause the godly have to be merry, upon the account of their
Condition, is Peace. This in it is best sense, is a blessing peculiar to the
godly: for, No peace to the wicked, says my God, Isa: 32.18. c: 48.22. c:
57.21.
But indeed, they have it in all it is senses; so that they can delight
themselves in the abundance of peace, Ps: 37.11. For they have first, Peace
(...)
with God. This peace (seeing there ^^othing better then friendship to make
life comfortable; and there can not be better friendship then this) is the very
fountain of comfort and there is none without it. How galliardly does the
Phrophet cry out, upon the thought of this! I will greatly rejoice in the Lord,
my soul shall be joyful in my God; for he has clothed me with the garments
of salvation. He has covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a
bridgroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth her self
with jewels, Isa: 61.10. Secondly, Peace with the Conscience. (...)
This peace will keep the heart and the mind safe from vexation, and doubts,
against all the assaults of the Accuser. For being founded upon the former
peace, as upon a rock, it cannot be shaken. Thus will the godly man receive his
assaults, He is near that justifies me, who will contend with me? let us
stand together: who is mine adversary? let him come near to me. Behold, the
Lord will help me: who is he that shall condemn me? My conscience is purged
Heb: 9.14.
quite from dead works: God himself gives me quietness Job 34.29. When he
gives quietness who can make trouble (or condemn Heb: (...), Sept:)
by assurance of his love: who then shall cause me trouble by accusing or
condemning me. Job 34.29. When he gives quietness who can make trouble (or
condemn Heb: (...), Sept:)
Thirdly, Peace with the creatures, which do not a jot more groan under their
bondage, then the godly do under that thing which was the cause, Sin, abiding
still in them, but reigning only in the hearts of the wicked, whom therefore
they cannot be at peace with. Of this peace speaks Eliphaz in the book of Job,
chap: 5.22.23. At destruction and famine thou shall laugh: neither shall thou
be afraid of the beasts of the earth For thou shall be at peace with the
stones of the field: and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee.
It Is no small small peace this, what ever you think of it: and it is of God's
own making: a peculiar blessing of his, and out of a peculiar love to his
peculiar people. And in that day will I make a covenant for them with the
beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, and with the creeping
things of the ground: and I will break the bow and the sword, and the battle
out of the earth; and I will make them to lie down safely, Hos: 2.18. Our sins
being the cause of that curse (one would imagine so, did they know so much as
we do) had so enraged them, and put such an enmity in them toward us, that
none but God himself that made us both, and made them for us, was able to make
them friends with us again. Fourthly, Peace with men (with unreasonable men; 2
Th: 3.2.
which is harder to be believed, then that they should have it with
unreasonable creatures) by his peaceable and amiable carriage. Wicked men, many
sorts of them, are odious to one another; and especially the proud man, who is
an abomination to all men good and bad, Prove: 24.9. The Scorner is an
abomination unto men.
They are not beloved of one another: neither does any of them love another
truly; and therefore they can have no peace. For where there is no love of
another, there can be no peace in a man's self: and on the otherside, where
there is such love goes out, though there be none come in in return, that
party may have peace himself, and his peace will not be a jot the less, but
very much the more enriched with comfort at home, to recompense the loss of
success abroad. And therefore the godly man, who loves every body, can have
peace with every body, even the wicked, that are enemies to peace, in spite of
their teeth. Though they be not at peace with him, he is nevertheless in peace
with them. He will be sure to keep his own peace, though he cannot keep the
Kings, (as they use to call it.) He himself will follow peace with all men:
Heb: 12.14.
whether peace follow him or not; it is all one to him for that. Let men be, or
do what they will. or can; he can be what he will, and will do what he ought;
and all that while he is well enough. Suppose they take away his cloak: he can
afford to give them his coat too if that will content them: or any thing for a
quiet life. Let them smite him on the right cheek: he had rather sit still, and
turn to them the left; then trouble himself much to save either. He had
rather they should break his head in an hundred places, then he should break
the peace, in the least manner. And therefore the the Psalmist, Psalm: 119.165:
after these words, Great peace have they that love thy law, presently adds,
And nothing shall offend them. Nothing shall offend them,] Nothing that befalls
a godly man in this world; and nothing that the men of the world can do to
him, will offend him. Not false reports, not reproachful speeches, not
injurious actions. For though they offend him never so much, yet will he never
be offended, (so as to sin and offend again, and return evil for evil.) I
may say of him, that which the Stoics say of a wise man, that another may
wrong him, but he can never be wronged himself, i:e: be any way moved, or be
the worse for the wrong. He makes no reckoning of the wrong, because he does
not reckon it a wrong. And indeed (in some men's account of wrong) it is no
wrong to him if he be willing Volenti non fit injuria.
to take it; especially if he be so willing, as when the party has done one
injury, to give him leave to do another.

But what do I go about to make it such a matter, that he is not offended
with any thing; when as he is able to be glad at any thing, and even to triumph
over his conquering enemy, and rejoye the more for suffering so much.

Or (if you will) nothing shall offend them, i:e: they shall take no offense
(...).
at any thing, or nothing shall offend them so as to make them offend or
miscarry. There shall be no scandal, or stumbling block great enough to make
the^ fall, or fail, or turn out of the way which they walk in. Nor love, nor
hatred; neither injuries nor courtesies; nor hopes, nor fears; neither
mercies, nor judgments; neither adversity, nor prosperity, neither life nor
death, is able to separate them from their love of God (as well as God's love
of them: for there is a promise of both: and I think they are inseparable, as
long as God can do what he will) or make them leave that course of life which
they have taken, or disturb the peace which they enjoy thereby.

He that has this Abundance of peace, how sweetly does he go out when the
oil of his life is spent! What fair weather of serenity of Spirit is there in
himself! and so what a calm of quiet, in all the world without, for any thing
that they had to say to him if he had lived, or for any hurt they have to say
of him now he is dead. When his soul lancheth forth for another country, what
vollies of blessings? (as there are of curses when the wicked man dies.) What
gales of prayers and benedictions to blow him safe to the haven? what sweet
smell from the ointment Eccl: 7.1. Cant. 1.3.
powered forth (I mean the good name which he leaves behind him) is every where
to be found? Surely, it is not for nothing, that the Psalmist was so earnest to
have men take notice of the peaceable end of the godly man, Ps: 37.37. Mark the
perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of that man is peace. When a
wicked man dies, besides the unspeakable horror, and disquiet of mind,
wherewith he is possessed in his departure (or, if not, a comfortless,
senseless, groundless presumption of mercy, without any discovery of God, and
his love, any more then beasts have) either like a candle blown out with the
wind, he leaves a filthy snuff of a foul life to stink behind him (having the
love of no body:) or else, he passes away like the wind, or a ship in the sea;
and leaves no sign at all; his remembrance, and life being cut off together,
Ps: 34.16.

Now if a godly man have so much peace, who will offer to question it, whether
he may have so much joy; yea and much more then I speak of. For if there be
peace any where (spiritual peace, especially) it seems to me impossible, that
joy should be long a coming after: and so, if joy be any where, you may assure
your self, peace has been there before. See how joy, and peace go hand in
hand, Rom: 14.17: chap: 15.13. Gal: 5.23.

3ly, A third cause that godly men have to be merry, is, Redemption, and
Liberty. Liberty obtained: for we are not as others have been before us (to use
the words of the Prophet Zach: 9.12.) prisoners of hope. (we shall be so indeed
when we are dead in regard of our bodies, Why cannot the Papists in terpret the
verse before this, of the resu rection as well as those words in Mal: c.. 4.2.
the redemption whereof we must wait for.) But our maine captivity is turned
already; and God has brought us out of darkness, Romans 8.23.
and the shaddew of death; having broken our bands in sunder. And therefore
well might Moses say to us the Gentiles, who partake of this mercy, that which
the Apostle repeats, Rom: 15, 10. Rejoice ye gentiles with his people. Rejoyce]
(...) be merry. For can a man, if he be but as much as a beast, and have but
the use of a sensitive soul, be insensible of so great a good as liberty, when
he enjoys it: nay, refrain from skipping and leaping for it, when he thinks
upon it? Unless he can enjoy it without enjoying it. God has given thee rest
from thy sorrow, Luk 1.17.
and from thy fear, and from the hard bondage, wherein thou wast made to serve
(as he promised to do the captive Jews, Isa: 14.3.) Will thou be so froward,
as not to take it: or can thou be so senseless, as not to be glad for it?
That man that shall be any whit sad, when he tells me he is redeemed from a
miserable slavery in Turkey; I shall hardly believe what he says. Certainly,
one that is delivered, redeemed (oh the sweetness that is in the word!) and
snatched as a firebrand out of the fire, he cannot be sad, if he would. Says
David, P: 53.6. When God brings back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall
rejoice and Israel shall be glad. So Ps: 71.23. My lips shall greatly rejoice
when I sing unto thee: and my soul which thou have redeemed. As if there must
needs be the voice of rejoicing presently, where there is the least sound of
redeeming. Thus was it said of the redemption of the Jews, from their
captivity. But our redemption is more worth then theirs: our liberty is
greater: and better; and our bondage was worse: And shall our joy be less?

Let us but consider? We are freed from the slavery of having many masters (for
it is slavery enough to have them, let them use us never so well) and that
servant who has many masters, let him be merry if he can. I say many masters.
For many they are, and many sorts, and many of a sort, and all that are of a
sort such, as if we have but one of them, we shall find it hard service enough.
That sort I mean, is our Lusts; which are so numerous, and various every way,
((...), serving DIVERSE lusts, says Paul, Tit: 3.3.) which I could easily make
appear, were it not too much digression: and do purpose to speak somewhat of
it in another place. But we are not freed from the slavery of these masters
only. No, we are freed from the slavery, and delivered from the powof all the
masters, who had formerly the command of us: whom it is not barely service, but
misery, and slavery, to be subject to. I mean Sin, Death, The World, The
Devil. I may add Our selves, (for if God had not been a better friend to us,
then we are to our selves, I know what had become of us: I mean not of lusts
only; for we hurt our selves many other ways.) The fourth of these whom we
most fear; as dreadful as he is thought, is but the Prince of this world: and
therefore has no power over the subjects and heirs of another Kingdom: such
as Christians are, being translated Col. 1.13.
from his. They are dead as to sin; and what then is there left for thee, O,
thou destroyer of men, to carry away captive (...). 2 Timothy 2.26.
alive at (and for) thy pleasure? They are no longer captives, and
gally-slaves, as once they were; to work for thee, and for nothing. Thou
might have heard long ago of their releasment, and their joy thereupon,
which thou shall never be able to take from them, no more then thou can make
them slaves again, or make the prophecy false, or the promise of none effect.
Hear but what the Prophet's words are, Isa 61.1.2.3. The Spirit of the Lord
God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me, to preach good tidings unto
the meek. He has sent me no bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty
to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound. To
proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our
God; To appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for
ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of
heaviness, that they might be called trees righteousness, the planting of the
Lord that he might be glorified. Behold now the time is come; I tell thee again
the time is come, and those promises are fullfilled. For we who by that malice
and our own, were worse then bound to be sinful, and miserable, even fast
bound in misery an iron; are now out of out bands, and adopted for nothing into
the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, Rom: 8.21. Presume no longer upon
the strength of thy associates, Sin and the Lusts of our flesh. For they are
deposed from their regal power: their dominion and strength is ended. It Is
true their being is not ended: but that makes so much the more for a godly
man's joy: as it does for any other conqueror, to have his enemy led in
triumph, alive, or to have him lie vanquished before him, more then to have him
clean removed out of the way. Having sin thus laid at our feet, it may look
fiercely up upon us, and threaten to bite, and turn it is tail about our
heels; but the danger is gone: we have broken it is head, and struck out it is
teeth; and though we have not killed it, we have utterly disenabled it for
killing us. It Is but kept in life, to keep us in work, and to exercise our
graces: as the Canaanites were fuffered to live in despair, that the
Israelites might not live in presumption. We are freed from Sin, much after the
manner as we are free from the Law: (that which I might very well have put in
the number of those masters above mentioned being of it self (as I may say)
uncorrected with grace, a killing letter.) Sin now does not so command, as that
it cannot be obeyed: and the Law does not command so, as, if it be not obeyed,
we must presently dye for it. We are free, not as we use to take the word free,
when we say free of such a thing, (for without it) When we are said to be
(...), Rom: 6.18: and so (...), it is meant only that we are free from, (not
of) either Sin, or the law, that is, from the dominion of them. We are free
from the law, as that boy is from his Master, who as often as he comits a fault,
and is sorry for it; has a friend ready at hand to save him from whipping. A
Christian's liberty does not make him free from, but free to obedience. Free
from slavishnesse, both of condition, and disposition; and freely willing to be
tied to obey it; as an ingenuous disposition uses to be, to be under government
and discipline. For a man is nevertheles at liberty, for being (nay it is the
way to be most at liberty, to be) most in God's service, which is perfect Psalm:
119.32
freedom. The bands of Religion are never so strait as to wring. I will say
therefore, as St. Paul said comparing the ministry of the Gospel with the law
(or if you will the ministry of the law in the time of the gospel, with the
same in the time of the Law, 2 Co: 4.1.) Having recieved this ministry we
faint not. I delight in nothing so much as to be under the law of God, so long
as there is another ministry. I would not be without government, like a lamb
in a large Hos 4.16.
place for all the world.

But what did I talk to you a while since of a godly man's liberty from, when
I may boast of more Rom: 8.37.
then a conquest over all his enemies. Satan his accuser, by the
counter-pleading of the Prince Isa: 9.6.
of his peace, will be shortly trod under his Rom: 16.20.
feet. Christ has already spoiled Principalities and powers, and made a show
of them openly, triumphing over them, Colos: 2 15. The world (his enemy partly
open, and secret) by Christ that overcame it first, he has overcome also, Joh:
16.33. So that neither by enticing, nor mocking, nor oppressing, no nor
killing, shall a Christian be quite overcome: rubbing out in life by strength
of grace, and rising from death, by the power that raised Jesus Christ from the
dead. The Flesh his familiar and friend-like and bosom enemy, he has
crucified with the lusts thereof, Gal: 5.24. The enemy that has the longest
time to live, is Death. Yet that is already disarmed, and made harmless: so
that it is as good as killed, though it be not quite swallowed up into victory.
Upon the account of these things, I may very well speak to the Church in the
words of the Prophet. Sing o Daughter of Zion, shout o Israel, be glad and
rejoice with all thy heart, o daughter of Jerusalem. The Lord has taken away
thy judgments, he has cast out thine enemy. The King of Israel, even the Lord
is in the midst of thee; thou shall not see evil any more. In that day it
shall be said to Jerusalem, fear thou not: and to Zion, Let not thine hands be
slack. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty: he will save, he will
rejoice over thee with joy: he will rest in his love, he will joy over thee
with singing, Zeph: 3.14.15, 16, 17. Christian, I cannot but wonder exceedingly
what the matter is with thee, if notwithstanding these things, thou art still
sad. For to me it seems cause enough why a man should be merry, to have no
enemies (either to trouble him; or with whom he may trouble himself. viz: with
continual fears of provoking them, and thoughts and cares to have them
reconciled, which is a worse trouble then the other.) But for one that has
many enemies, as many almost as there be creatures in the world, and has them
all under his feet; who can forbear to wonder, and laugh, and be enraged, to
see such a one to stand drooping (as if he were beaten and overcome him self)
with his Crest down slat upon his head, and his wings about his heels? Who
would not wonder to see one that has his yoke broken off his neck, to hang his
head nevertheless as bad as the Roman Soldiers did, when they had been made
to pass under the yoke, and to walk in and out, and go to his long home with
less cherefulnesse, then the Ox does to his, when he has done laboring; and
rather look as if he were going to be yoked again, or indeed as if he were
going to hanging? Certainly, such a one must needs be ignorant of what he is;
or senseless of what he knows. For when enemies, and difficulties, and
sorrows themselves are vanquished, it seems impossible, if he knew his own
happiness (and can a man be happy and not know it?) that he should not lift up
his head, and wash his beblubbered face, and anoint it with the oil of
gladness. For shame, let him cease to shame his master whom he serves, to
disgrace the profession which he has undertaken, and to disparage his own
judgment and choice when he undertook it, with sadness, and sighs and
complaints, like an over labored servant that is hardly used. Tell me,
whosoever thou art, that art thus sad (for I know it must be for fear of some
thing) what kind of enemy is it that thou fear? Is it such as can hurt thy
soul, sin, or satan, or lust? such thou need not. Is it such as can hurt
but thy body; men, or any of the creatures? such thou ought not to fear,
Mat: 10.28. If thou art afraid then, thou art afraid both without cause, and so
thou show thy self foolish; and against command, and so thou show thy
self disobedient. Rather therefore resolve to be cheerful, and conclude with
me that thou have nothing to fear, but what thou have cause to love, and
rejoice in, thine own God.

It Is true, wicked men, like the drunken man who thinks every body else drunk,
because he is drunk himself; being very slaves themselves, account the
condition of the godly to be slavish too; and therefore though for a while they
may seem to be willing to keep themselves within the pale of the Church of
Christ, and to wear his yoke, yet they come quickly to cry out in the
Psalmist; Psalm: 2 3. Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast away their
cords from us. But we fear not that you will take any hurt by this, for we
trust we have compounded you a sufficient antidote against such poison, in what
has been already said: if not, we have choice of many ingredients more, which
we doubt not will make the physic strong enough.

4ly, Fourth ground Accepcion of actions
A fourth cause that a godly man has to be merry, may be, The acceptance of
his actions; whereof he has good assurance by the testimony of God's Spirit.
For we see amongst our selves, it is a very great cheering to a man, both in,
and for the doing of a thing, if the person for whom he does it, accept's of
it: as the contrary must needs be a great discouragemet. Go thy way, eat thy
bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart; for God now accepts
thy work, Eccles: 9.7.

I said, By the testimony of God's Spirit: for that must (...) Rom: 8.16.
witness together with his spirit; or else the witness of his own spirit, (or
conscience) is nothing worth. And therefore Paul, when he had commended the
truth of what he was to say to the Romans, by the testimony of his conscience;
as if he had said nothing if he had said no more: presently added, (...), in
the Holy Ghost: Rom: 9.1. I I say the truth in Christ, I lie not; my conscience
also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost. When I have spent hours in prayer,
or hearing, or meditation or fasting: nay, when I have well spent my whole
life; let me but have Enoch's testimony, Heb: 11.5. Fifth ground Experience of
God's love.
that I have pleased God; how will my heart rejoice!

5ly, A fifth ground may be Experiences of God's love: which a good Christian
has a great many more then he takes notice of: and that, I must needs tell
him, is his usual fault. Is it not of efficacy, think you, to make a man
merry, to have in his mind, when he is alone; and to be able to talk of, when
he is in company, such and such a mercy, recieved at such and such a time? How
such a time God hedged up his way into sin: how at such a time he hedged up
his way into misery. How signally and plainly God has carried him along in all
his ways by an overruling hand of providence; so that all things, even those
which in his best advised judgment he thought the worst, were made to work for
the best? How at such a time God opened his ear for instruction. Job 36.10.
How at such a time he gave him a most gracious meeting with warming e^bracings
of love; at such a time with strong sealings of the righteousness of faith:
and at another time with most lively quicknings of hope. If these consolations
be small, I know not what consolation is.

6ly, The sixth ground, The Scriptures.
The sixth thing that will afford the godly man matter of joy, is (that wherein
the wicked man can take no comfort, because it lays open his sin to him,
together with the punishment of it; which he has no assurance to avoid, for
want of faith and repentance) The written word of God, which we call the
Scriptures: even both the Testaments, left with us for this end, that we (as
the Apostle Rom: 15.4.
says) through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. How
many hundred most abundantly comfortable promises are there in those
Scriptures, not only of things able to make the godly joyful, (for such might
be, and they might be never the better; for they might take no joy in them.)
but, some of them, even of joy it self! The Spirit of the Lord is upon me etc.
To appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes,
the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the Spirit of
heaviness, etc. Isa: 61.1.2, 3. See also Isa: 51.11. ch: 60.20. The whole
Gospel, what is it else but joyful news? Not barely news, but joyful
news, glad tidings of great joy (as says the Angel, Luke 2.10.) Now when
godly men meet with such a treasure of rich treasures, as the Gospel is, which
they never labored nor paid for; and such a large crop of mercies and
benefits, as are contained in the Gospel, which they never sowed nor plowed
for; which Christ alone has purchased for them to their hands of his own free
love: when instead of walking in darkness, as they have done all their life
before: they shall see a great light: and though their lot was cast in the land
of the shadow of death, that even then the light shall shine upon them: how can
they choose but joy according to, (nay, beyond) the joy in harvest, and as men
rejoice that devide the spoil, In that verse whereas we read (...) not in
creased the joy, it is read also (...) (they are w rds usually changed) and
increased his joy, and so the Sept: read.
Isa: 9.3. He that keeps continual feasting upon such good cheer as the
promises; unless he be very stupid, and absurd (as it is an absurd thing to be
sad at a feast) his garments must needs be always white, and his head can
never lack ointment. Now in the Gospel, God has set before us (the table was
spread at Jerusalem, Isa: 25.5: though to the Jews it became a snare, Psalm:
69.22.) a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees well refined, Isa:
25.6. Nay not only the promises and benefits to come when Christ shall come;
nor the Gospel, or the news of their coming, either before, or after their
coming; but even all the commandments and laws of God and Christ contained in
the whole book of the Scriptures (as grievous as they are to a wicked man) are
to a godly man matter of infinite pleasure and delight. God's laws are so just
and righteous; that the virtuous heart of a just and righteour man, cannot but
delight in them (as all other things do in that which is most suitable to
them.) How many times does David tell you thus much? The statutes of the Lord
are right, rejoicing the heart, Psalm: 19.8. And Ps: 119.111. They are the
rejoicing of my heart, see at your leisure the: 14.16, 20, 27, 50, 54, 70 92,
143 verses of the same psalm. Indeed, God's Laws are such proper and wholesome
food for a man; that if the Stomach be clean, and the will be not disordered
with lusts and ill humors, they cannnot choose but relish them. The very nature
and constitution of the soul, neither corrupted, nor distempered with sin,
and lusts; will agree with it, and embrace it, with as much love and
complacency, as a healthy stomach does wholesome food. And indeed it is the
maine reason, why God's law is so pleasing and delightsome to a regenerated
person, viz: Because it is most agreeable to his nature; pleasure, Arist: Rhet:
l. 1. c: 11. defines pleasure, (...).
and pleasantnes, consisting mainly in the sense and being of such
agreablenesse. Both the statutes of God's law sprinkled here and there in his
book, and the exhortations out of the same, dropping out of the mouth of his
minister; are drunk in by the heart and ears of a godly man, with as much
thirst and greediness, (...) the law and (...) rain, comefro^ the same radix.
as the rain is by the thirsty ground. He waits for instruction, as the
ground does for theb rain; and as Job said the people did for him, Job 29.22.

Christ's commands are not grievous nor heavy, but to him that is unwilling to
bear the yoke, 1 John: 5.3. For to one that is unwilling, any thing is heavy,
if it be never so light. Believe it, if Christ's burden seem heavy to any, it is
not the heaviness or unwieldinesse of the burden, but of the bearer: not the
hardness of the task, but the softness of the labourer, that is most in
fault.

Certainly, the reading of most part of the Scriptures must needs be a very
comfortable thing; and I think a godly heart (disposed as it ought to be) can
hardly tell how to be sad, while it I do not rememb r that in all my
melancholy, any thing whatsoever had power to call in my distracting fancy, as
the Scriptures had; when I could be brought to read them.
does it. For what a comfort is it for a man to read an earthly father's
letters sent to him, though they were written long ago? With what care do we
keep such letters in our chests? with how much delight, do we ever and anon
take them out, and look upon them? and with how much sorrow do we loose them?
Is my love to my earthly father so great? and shall my love to my heavenly
father (who is my father for heaven; to which he adopteth me in the Gospel: who
being in heaven, that he will regard a worm on earth, is a sign of infinite
love,) be less? Can my heart choose but rejoice, and my bones flourish like an
herb, as often as I look upon my Redeemers last will and testament, whereby I
know that he gave me so much, and that he does so much for me continually, and
that it shall be for ever Christ was the author of life and immortality (or
immortal life) 2 Timothy: 1.10. I do not say therefore called, (...) I^: 9.6. but
the vulgar there reneders it pater futuri seculi: and Grotius upon Act: 3.15.
(whatever he had said before upon Isa:) will allow him such a name from raising
the dead.
what I have of him.

How is David (for I cannot choose but return to him again, having no example
like him in this thing, neither, that I know, was there any before or since his
time) ever and anon talking of his delight in the Laws of God, and in his
Statutes and Testimonies. It was to him instead of all other delights; standing
by him when all delights else left him, Unless thy law had been my delight
(or, my very great delight The Hebrew word not only is in the plural number,
(like deliciae) but has letters repeated ((...)) which some observe to be for
the increasing the signification So R. Kimchi Hos: 8.7. and Psalm: 33. such a
word is (...) Lam: 1.20.
) I should then have perished in mine affliction, Psalm: 119.92. Let Princes sit
and speak against him never so much; yet will he meditate in God's Statutes,
verse: 23. Let him have never so many persecutours and enemies; yet will he not
decline from God's Testimonies, verse: 157. Let him be in a strange place, there
shall God's Statutes be his Song verse: 54. Let him be a Stranger in the earth
all his life; so he may not be a Stranger to God's Commandments, he cares not,
v: 19. Although he should have never so much Contempt cast upon him, yet will
he not forget God's Precepts, verse: 143. Although his Soul should be
Continually in his hand, yet that should not make him forget God's Law, verse:
10.12. Yea although he became like a bottle in the smoke, yet will he not
forget God's Precepts, verse: 83. And therefore was it, that he rejoiced because
he had been afflicted, upon this account, that it made him Learn God's
Statutes. He cared for no other wealth. Thy Testimonies have I taken as an
Heritage for ever: for they are the rejoicing of my heart, verse: 111. Neither
cared he much for Life, but only to keep God's word, verse: 17. Deal
bountifully with thy servant that I may live and keep thy word, as verse: 17.
What ever he had said before, or meant to say next, he still cries, Teach me
thy Statutes, and, I have longed for thy Precepts etc: or some such expression
or other. He could not forbear to speak of them, for they were still before
him, verse: 30. No wonder then, that he meditated upon them so often, as he
says he did, O how I love thy law! it is my meditation all the day, verse: 97.
And, Thy testimonies are my meditation, verse: 99. God's commandments were to
David sweeter in his mouth then honey, to talk and discourse of them, Psalm:
119.103. And so it is possible they may seem to bet a hypocrite, for the time:
but then they were not bitter in his belly, It is sweet if thou keep them in
thy belly ( so Hebr:) Prove: 22.18.
when he came to meditate on them and digest them, (so as it hardly is with a
hypocrite) for then he would not have spoken so gladly, that the Law was in the
midst of his bowels* Psalm: (...)
40.9. But on the contrary, rejoicing the heart to think on them, Psalm: 19.8:
and pleasant in the hand to do them, Psalm: 40.8. I de light to do thy will O
God, yea thy law is within my heart.
The ways wherein they lead a man are so easy and pleasant (as I shall
hereafter more fully show) that if once the heart be enlarged, and set at
liberty from the chains of corruption, there will be no hinderance in the
members of the body, but they may run in them with cherefulnes, Ps: 119.32. I
will run the way of thy commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart. O for
ever blessed be the name of God, that at length he was pleased to make known
these his laws to the Gentiles also. Once indeed he did not deal so with any
nation Psalm: 147, 18
but the Israelites; the Gentiles knew not the judgments of God, Ps: 147.20.
But now all the world (every place in it is time) is all alike in God's account.
A sixth thing The Works of God


6ly, A sixth thing of special use to delight and recreate the hearts of the
godly, is The works of God, of all sorts: whereof both their duty and their
practice is to be frequently meditating: especially his wonderful works to
the children of men Many O Lord are the wonderful works which thou have done,
and thy thought; to usward, Psalm: 40.5.
(in their preservation and redemption) Ps: 107.21. David bids us declare his
works with rejoicing, Psalm: 107.22. And he speaks of it, as if it were a
thing, for which especially he desired to live, and wherein he should take most
comfort, I shall not dye but live, and declare the works of the Lord, Ps:
118.17. How can Believers choose but rejoice, to think upon that wonderful work
of the Redemption both of Jews and Gentiles by the Son of God, the Son of
Man, Christ Jesus, blessed for ever! to think of Gods's wonderful Love in the
purpose; The eterrnal purpose, Ephesians: 3.4.
his wonderful freenes in the price; his wonderful wisdom The manifold
wisdom of God. Ep: 3 10.
in the contrivance, and his wonderful faithfulness, and truth in the
performance after so long Psalm: 105.8. He has remembered his covenant for
ever, the word which he commanded to a thousand generations.
a time, and so much provocation by the sins of the world to desist from his
purpose. Neither can a godly man's heart choose, but be exceedingly taken with
the thoughts of God's power, and wisdom, in the first forming, and the
continual governing of such a world of creatures. Especially in the making of
himself For he is fearfully and (...) Psalm: 13.9.14.
wonderfully made. God has given him an excellent Soul, and of a divine
extract. He has most curiously (...) as with a needle Psalm: 139. v: 15.
wrought him, and most excellently Job 10.11.
clothed him with skin and flesh, and fenced him with bones and sinews: he
has endowed him with most excellent natural gifts, reason and judgment, which
he has not given to other creatures. But that which is the greatest of all, he
has bestowed on him most excellent spiritual gifts, faith, hope, and love,
and many many graces which he has denied to other men. The medication upon
these last only, Basil the Great in his Sermon of Thanksgiving upon those
words of the Apostle, Rejoice always etc: affirmed to be sufficient matter of
rejoicing, in the midst of the furnace of the hottest afflictions. David, who
in the day of his trouble, even when his soul refused comfort, had recourse
for comfort to meditation upon the works of God, as if it could not choose but
recieve comfort from thence; has abundantly testified, how useful the
meditation is for the purpose we speak of, and what an excellent antidote it is
against sorrow, See Ps: 77. In the second verse of that Psalm he says, My
Soul refused to be comforted. But in the tenth and twelfth verses, And I said
this is my infirmity etc. I will remember the works of the Lord. Surely, I
will remember thy wonders of old. As if he had said thus, I am very much
discomforted, insomuch that my soul refuses to be comforted: but I know what
to do to help it. I will remember the works of the Lord, surely I will
remember his wonders of old: And a thousand to one, but that if any thing will
cause me to rejoice, this will. To a wicked man the works of God, both of
power and mercy, are but matter of bare speculation, after a Philosophical
manner, wherein there is abundance of vexation. And many of the former sort
(the creatures) are unto him but objects, and instruments, and incentives, of
evil thoughts, and words, and actions, to his own hurt. Present any Creature
to a wicked man, and it will presently stir up in him Covetousness, envy,
lust, fear, or any thing, rather then joy. Whereas if you set all the Creatures
in the world before a godly man, he is able to look upon them, and think upon
them, without any perturbation at all: nay with comfort and delight.

7ly, A seventh ground God's Ordinances
Another thing from whence a godly Christian may fetch abundance of joy, is
God's Sacraments, and Ordinances. For, first, What Christian can choose but be
ravished with joy and consolation, to think, how by the baptism of water, and
the renewing of the holy Ghost, he is brought so near to the God of joy and
consolation, as to be taken into a covenant of salt with him? An everlasting
Covenant: such as he need not be sad to think it will end suddenly. A covenant
not of hard servitude and bondage, (the very thought whereof would never suffer
him to be merry) but of honorable service, and freedom: such as he need not
be sad, to think he shall never be able to keep, because God will not regard
Hebr 8.9.
him; For it is a covenant better then many of his forefathers had, and
established upon better promises, Heb: 8 6. What Christian can choose but be
ravished with joy, to think that he is made a member of God's own Ephesians: 2.19. c
1 Cor^ 12.27.
City: of his own ^ household: of his ^ body? nay that he is by this means
become even one with Christ (as much and more then a wife is with a Being dead
to the law by the body of Christ, Rom: 7.4.
husband) (as I may say) bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh? Ephesians: 5.30,
31.
I may add, spirit of his Rom: 8.9. 1 Cor: 6. He that is joined to the Lord is
one Spirit.
spirit; being baptized not only in, or to, but Thus Beza interpret's it and
the context requiers it.
into Jesus Christ; (as the Apostle expresses it, or, as we render it, Rom:
6.3.) 2ly, What a glorious life has he, and consequently what a merry life
must he needs have, who is not only taken into the Lord's own house so soon,
and so freely, and to be there for ever: but is also feasted so often at his
own table! (I am sure I should be able to say so: for if it be seldom, it is
the steward's fault, and not the master's, who allows freely enough,) I say,
what joy is it, to be feasted so often at the table of the Lord, (in the
Sacrament of Communion; where he can feed better on him then other where) upon
the Lord's own flesh and blood; which is meat and drink indeed, and whose
nourishment is to an everlasting life. 3ly, What a life for light and
knowledge, and consolation, (in case of trouble of Conscience) and consequently
what a merry life must he needs have, that has a door of Col: 4.3.
utterance for the preaching of the word, and a door of Act: 14.27.2.
says and Pet: 1.11.
entrance (into the everlasting Kingdom) for the hearing of the word,
continually open: banqueting houses continually open, Cant: 2.4. Feasts of fat
things continually provided, Isa: 25.6. And all this without any labor or
charge (for the Ye shall be redeemed without money Isa: 52.3.
things,) Wine and milk without money, or price, Isa: 55.1. Breasts continually
full of nothing but consolation, and sincere milk, of which he may suck when
he will and be satisfied! Isa: 66.11. 1 Pet: 2.2. 4ly, Lastly, what a
plentiful life has he, and consequently what a merry life is he most likely
to have; who has the privilege of Prayer? (which he and none but he is able
rightly to use.) Herein (I think) a godly man has, or may have more joy, then
in any thing else in the world; whether you respect successfulnesse, for the
obtaining of other good things which he wants, by prayer; or the joys of the
Spirit, and many other good things to be had in prayer; such as for the most
part a good Christian meets with more or less, and none but he. In the first
respect, If a godly man have a mind to any thing, and will pray for it; whether
he shall have it or no, he is exceeding fair for it. For he has the SPIRIT OF
GOD, who is the Comforter, for his spokesman to speak for him within him, with
groans that cannot be uttered; He has the Son of God, who is his Redeemer,
and his Mediator, Rom: 8.26.
for his Intercessor also, and his friend, to speak for him without him, with
merits that cannot be slighted: and lastly, he has God the father, (to whom he
makes his request, and who is able to give him whatsoever he desires) his own
father; whose bowels are so tender that he cannot deny him any thing: who will
not turn him off with a stone, when he asks for bread: nor if he ask for a
fish, will he give him a scorpion. It is not to be told what virtue there is in
the (...) actually effecting, not only of power to effect: neither is the word
so used any where in the Epistles: but instead thereof (...) though I know it
to be usual for Participle to turn Adjectives, both active and passive.
effectual fervent prayer of one righteous man, Jam: 5.16. He has no sooner
looked up, but God looks down. He can no sooner bow the knee, but God is ready
to bow his Psa. 31.2.
ear, and the Psalm. 144 5.
heavens also. He can no sooner pour forth his prayer to ask, and spread
abroad his hand to receive: but the Lord's hand is stretched out to give; and
even to pour down blessings, I say not, more then his hands are able to hold,
but very much more then he is able to (...)
ask, or think of, Ephesians: 3.20.

Then they cried unto the Lord, and he delivered them out of their distress,
says, David Ps: 107.6: all in one breath, They cried unto the Lord and he
delivered etc. What affliction so ever the people of God were in; it was no
more then cry unto the Lord, and presently he delivered them out of their
distress. You have the same words four times in that psalm. And indeed a
very comfortable psalm it is. Methinks the Prophet brings in his running verse
(speaking of God's deliverance, when he had spoken of the peoples distress)
with the like have that God wrought his deliverance: as if his meaning were to
show the speediness of God's deliverances when his people were distressed. He
has but three or four verses, and presently comes in, They cried unto the Lord
in their trouble, and he delivered them out of their distress. They that truly
seek God's face by praying, shall never have their own faces filled with shame by
denying, neither in this world, nor in the world to come: for such fruit of the
lips can never be fruitless.

Let a faithful man pray when he will, so he pray for what is fitting, either
to be given or erceived (and would he for shame be heard for other things?) he
knocks at the door of heaven (as I may say) with the key in his hand; as one
would do at his friends house, where he durst be bold to enter without
knocking, and when he finds the door open already; not so much because he
doubts whether he may be admitted: as because it is his duty, and because it is
the ordinary way and manner of entrance. What shall I say? Godly men have in a
manner had the command Prove: 15.29. (...) the word is used elsewhere: though
not for obeying: yet for, effectual hearing.
of Heaven. I can do nothing till thou be come thither, sath the Lord to Lot,
Gen: 19.22. (when he prayed, that the Lord would hold his hand till he was
escaped to Zoar.) I can do nothing] as if his hands were tied: or as if he
must needs continue hearing, so long as a godly man continued praying. The
godly by strength of faith, have the same power with God, as Jacob had Gen:
32.28. Hos: 12.3. And I believe, many times after long wrestling with him in
prayer; after a manner they bring him to say, as he did the Angel, let me go.
I say in prayer, as if that were Jocob's wrestling; and that it was with God;
because the Prophet Hosea so interprets, chap: 12. verse: 45. He had power over
the Angel and prevailed, he wept and made supplication unto him in Bethel and
there he spoke with us, even the Lord God of hosts.

How long will thou be angry with thy people that prays; says David. As if
it were such an impossibility, or such a disgrace for God's people to be
denied; and such a grief, and so hard a thing to God, to deny his people any
thing, when they set upon him by prayer. When God intended to inflict his
judgments upon the Jews, lest he should be hindered in the execution of his
purpose (so it sounds) he spoke to Jeremy aforehand, not to pray or intercede
to him for them: as if he were afraid of the efficacy of that man's prayer,
that he should not be able to withstand it, if once he heard it Jer: 7.16. In
the like manner, in another place, when he would declare his resolution to
execute hi^ firce anger against them, though they should use the most powerful
means in the world to hinder him, he expresses it thus, Though Moses and
Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not be toward this people; cast them
out of my sight, and let them go forth, Jer: 15.1. As if the prayers of such
godly men as they, were of greater power to prevail with him, then any thing
else in the world whatsoever. Now, there is never a truly religious man that
believes in God, though he be the least in the kingdom of Heaven, but is as
great as Jeremy, Samuel, or Moses. Be it the poorest wretch, the lowest shrub:
He will certainly regard his prayer, and no wise despise it, Psalm: 102. He will
regard the prayer of the destitute, he will not despise their prayer. the word
for destitute is (...) ashrub
17.

God is never so busy, that he cannot: nor so angry, that he will not hear the
cry of his children. (...) says Peter 1 Epist: ch: 3.12. His ears are to, or
for, their prayer: as if they were all together for hearing prayer, and for
nothing else; or as if it were his part, or his work to hear and answer, and
concede: as it is our part, and duty, and work, to call, and ask and entreat.
Says the Prophet Esaias, 58.9. Thou shall call, and the Lord shall answer; as
who should say, do thou do thy part, and the Lord shall do his. Nay such is
the goodness of God, and the freeness of his goodness; that he delights in
our asking (which one would think might be troublesome to him) as well as in
his own granting: therein being far more affable and kind, then the best and
freest givers among men: who are many times willing enough to give, when they
are loath to be asked; and like him best, and pity him most, that asks least.
It Is not so with God. No, clean contrary. In the old testament, you shall find
the complaint often, that the people did not call upon God. So our Savior in
the new Testament, Joh: 16.24. Hitherto have you asked nothing in my name. as
if he took it unkindly, that they would not ask of him: or as if it argued,
that they doubted of his love, or his power.

There is no limited time in the court of heaven for hearing petitions. It is
not like the court of earthly Princes. For there is a free access any day of
the week, any hour of the day, or the night, any minute of the hour. As the
Lawyer says of the King, for having his due, Nullum tempus occurrit Regi: so
may I say of the godly, for making his prayers and granting his requests,
Nullum tempus occurrit fidelibus. No time unseasonable; so the heart be
seasoned (with faith) No non term in God's court of Requests. He keeps
continually open house for all comers and goers: and indeed more for comers,
then goers. His eyes are always open, to behold our tears: his ears are
always open to hear our groans; his heart also and his bowels Where of he
has infinite many (...) Isa: 63.15.
are always open: and never shut up so fast, but they will yearn, and turn
within him, if our misery be never so little. For as we have not an high priest
to pray by that cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities: ( Heb:
4.15.) so neither have we a God to pray to, that shall see us in distress, and
hear us call, and cry; and never be moved. And here I call to mind what Origin
s Interpreter speaks of a Jewish interpretation upon those words of the King
of Moab concerning the Israelites, Number: 22.4. (And Moab said unto the Elders of
Midian, now shall this company lick up all that are round about us, as the Ox
licketh up the grass of the field.) That as the Ox With his lips and his
mouth makes clear riddance of the grass as he goes: so that people fought
most of all with their mouth, and their lips, and by the strength of their
prayers carried all before them.

Now what a comfort it is, to have God so ready to hear us, in our prayer, and
give us an answer; we may guess a little by the pleasure we take pleasure in
our talking with men. when they are attentive to what we say, and ready to
answer our question For indeed prayer is as it were a talking with God. And if
it be not such, it is but equivocally called prayer; as a dead man may be
called a man. Because (that which is most commonly the reason why prayer is no
communion) it wants that which is the heart and life of prayer; I mean the
heart; which is the principle of life, both for natural and spiritual
actions. Such prayer never has an answer. Or, if you will, he that prays so,
has no answer: though the thing which he prayed for, be granted. And so there
can be no discourse or communion with God in such a prayer. For the Spirit is
God's only spokesman, or Interpreter; by whom he speaks. Now he does never
speak to any one by his Spirit, whom he does not move by his Spirit to speak to
him; which he does not to the wicked: but to every godly man he does. And
therefore the prayer of a godly man, is as much a discourse to him, and much
more merry, then the best discourse in the world. It is called (...) Job 15.4:
a communing with God. For therein they commune with God, and God with them. And
they may do it as privately, as they may with their own heart (discourse with
friends you know, the more private it is, the more comfortable; as bread eaten
in secret is sweetest.) Thus God is said to have communed with Abraham, when he
prayed for saving of Sodom, Gen: 18.33.

Prayer, if it be true, is a discourse that is as pleasant and delightsome to
the Godly man, as it is painful and irksome to the wicked: whether it be used
by himself, or another. It is like vinegar to a wicked man's teeth, and as
smoke to his eyes, to be in sight or hearing of those that pray: or to have the
words of a prayer in his mouth (for that is the most that he has.) He stands
upon thorns as long as he is but in the company of such as are praying: and it
is worse to him to be in the house of prayer then in the house of correction.
And therefore on the other side (as those things are usually best which wicked
men most hate) certainly a godly man cannot but be all as much delighted in
prayer (or he may, if he be not less godly then he should be.)

The joy and happiness to be had IN prayer, it is not to be told, how great it
is, God being thus easy to be spoken to, and to give the soul a meeting. Judge
you what joys are in his heart, whose discourse with God is such as this.

Believer. I am unworthy.


God But my Son is worthy: and I have accepted thee in that my beloved.


B. But I have committed many sins, since I have believed in that beloved: and
how shall I do to make satisfaction for these sins?


G. I have made my Son a priest for ever, (...), Heb: 7: 5. (...) Heb 10.14.
and whom he saves, he saves (not for a certain time but) for ever.


B Lord I love thee: and I would enjoy thee. But it is impossible thou should
endure to be embraced by such an unclean wretch as I am.


G. But I will Ezekiel: 36.28.
sprinkle clean water upon thee, and thou shall be clean, and I will sanctify
thee 1 These: 5.23.
throughout.


B. My Lord, and my God. Now I embrace thee. And my joy is unspeakable. But
this happiness will not last long: and me thinks I have not a full sight of
thee.


G. Do but have a little patience for a few (...)
days: and thou shall see 1 Cor 12.13. 1 These: 4.17.
me as I am face to face, and shall be with me for * ever.


B. But, O Lord, I have a root of bitterness within me; and if I am suffered to
live any longer here in the flesh, I am afraid, I shall sin against thee, and
so loose thee.


G. But I that have called thee, am faithful; 1 Cor: 1.9. 1 These: 5.24. 2
These: 3.3.
and I will not leave thee.


B. Lord, I know, That I know whom I have believed; that he is faithful
enough, not to leave me; and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I
have committed unto him against that 2 Timothy 1.12.
day. But I shall leave thee; that is my fear.


G. Fear not that. I have given thee one heart; a a heart of flesh only, for a
heart of flesh, and a heart of stone. Jer: 31.18.
heart only to love me, and none to leave me. I will make an everlasting
Covenant with thee, that I will not turn away from thee to do thee good: and
I will put my fear in thy heart, that thou shall not depart from Jer: 32.32.4.
me. Seeing thou have confirmed the testimony of my Son, my Son shall also 1
cor: 16.18.
confirm thee unto the end.


Let any one judge what there is in prayer to comfort a Believer. 1. There is
no such way to remove his doubts. 2. There is no such way to confirm his
hopes. 3. There is no such way to exercise and satisfy his graces. Among all
the graces, that, whose satisfaction by the enjoyment of it is object, makes
most for joy, and content, is Love. Now a Christian's love, whose chief object
is God, never enjoyes it is ob ect so intimatly and closely, as it does in
prayer; wherein the embraces are mutual; and more sensibly so, then at any
other time, whatsoever. And that is the reason, that he that truly loves God,
is so frequently at that work, because therein he can delight himself in God,
(...) as in Isaih ^ 58 God complains of some that took delight in approaching
to him (...)
as Job's expression is, who after the expression presently speaks of praying
often, Will he delight himself in the Almighty, will he always call upon God?
Job 27.10. He does not only take * delight (or, is * Pleased) in approaching to
God (which a Hypocrite, such a one as Job speaks of, may do upon formal
principalls) but, he delights himself or makes himself (...)
merry in God, and feeds deliciously upon him; takes-pleasure in him, as the
mouth does in pleasant meat, and his Soul delights it self Isa. 55.1.2. My
soul shall be satified as with marrow and fatnes, and my mouth shall praise
thee with joyful lips when I remember thee upon my bed, Psalm: 63.
in fatness.

So you have seen in part, what mirth and joy godly men have in prayer. But
especially in times of trouble and persecution you will find the necessary use
of it: which made the Apostle, when he bade the Thessalonians, Rejoice
evermore, immediately to add, Pray without ceasing, 1 These: 5.16.

Hereunto add the speedines of God's answer to a godly man's prayer. At the
beginning of thy supplications the commandment came forth; and I am come to
show thee: for thou art (...)
greatly beloved, Said the Angel to Daniel, praying for the redemption of the
Jews out of captivity, Dan: 9.23. David says, he did but say, he would
confess his transgression to the Lord, and yet he says presently, God forgave
him the iniquity of his sin, Psalm: 32.5. In the Prophecy of Isaiah, you have
a slat promise to this purpose, ch: 65.24. Before they call I will answer;
while and they are yet speaking I will hear. Is there no comfort in this? I
know that men cannot hear me till I have spoken. But God does not only hear
me while I speak, but can answer before I ask. I have been the longer in my
discourse of prayer, because I would have you oftener in the use of it. For to
tell you truly (and I can say somewhat from my own experience) for a remedy and
preservation against melancholy; exercise, and company, and physic is not
worth any thing in comparison of it: and I know not any thing in the world,
except the frequent reading of the Scriptures, that can come nere it.

8ly. The eighth ground Salvation and Safety.
Another cause or ground that a godly man has for which he may be merry, is
Salus, both Salvation and Safety; or, his being in a state of Salvation, and
Safety. Of Salvation, because Salvation is alread come * to him in this world:
and he is sure to come to Salvation on in the world to come. Luk: 19.9. Rom:
11.11.
And of safety because every man that walks uprightly, walks surely, Prove:
3.23. 1. How can he be otherwise then safe, who lives in a city so strongly
fortified, as the city whereof he is, is described to be, Rev: 22.11.12, 13. 2.
How can he choose but be safe, who has no worse guard for his person, then God
himself has? (who has no need of any but for his use) I mean The Angels:
who (as poor a lump of clay as he is) will not think it much to bear him up
in their arms, rather then he shall dash his foot against a stone, Psalm:
91.12. Nay, lastly, how can he choose but be safe, who has no worse guard then
God himself is, who is the God of Safety, and to whom peculiarly belong the
issues from death, Psalm: 68.20.

But you will reply, you cannot believe that a godly man can be so safe, and
out of harms way: not only because of necessity he is exposed, having nothing
but naked innocence to carry about him: but that because of duty he must expose
himself to danger and violence: giving away his cloak when his coat is gone
already: giving the left cheek to him that has struck him upon the right
already: giving the way to every one: and giving all that he has, rather then
give the least offense.

To answer you, what you say, is true in part. And I confess, a godly man
would have but little safety, if he had no more then what is of his own
procuring, and if God himself did not undertake his protection. But having the
protection of God, who will say, he has not sufficient provision for Safety?
And then I must tell you also, that I do not allow him to presume so far
upon the help of God, as not to use any means at all of his own. Neither the
name of help is proper; neither does God use to give it, when men do nothing
themselves. Christians are commanded to be doves (Mat: 10, 16:) as if they must
not be quarrelsome: but they are withal allowed to be serpents; as if they
might be cautelous and wise: not harmfull, but when they cannot choose; as a
snake, they say, is not unless you bar up his way to his hole. But you will
say, In the Canticles they are compared to a dove only, (as if either they
would not fight: or could not well, if they would.) But what then? must they
needs be so much in harms way? what if they be hid in the clefts of the rock?
Cant: 2.14. What if God hide them in the secret of his presence from the pride
of man? and keep them secret in a pavilion from the strife of tongues? Psalm:
31.20. If God himself hide a man, 'Ile warrant you, he knows how to hide him
where he shall be safe. And that was it, that David in his trouble chose to fly
unto him, rather then any one else, to hide him. Psalm: 143.9. (For I fly unto
thee to hide me.) As our Savior said, If the Son of God make you free, you
shall be free indeed: So may I say to all those that are truly godly, If God
hide you, or if God make you safe, (as indeed he does) then are you safe
indeed; so safe, that not a hair of your head shall fall to the ground; and so
safe that you may be secure. Not secure without care of diligence, to look to
your selves; but only secure without care of diffidence (and distrust) not to
look unto God. Christians may not be settled upon their lees; but they may and
must be settled upon their faith. Secure they may be, not because they presume
of not leaving God, but because they are confident, God will never leave them.
So secure, as you may imagine the Israelites were, when they were in the sea.
Ps: 78.5. And he led them on safely, so that they feared not. So as Zophar
allows in the book of Job, If iniquity be in thy hand, put it far away; and
let not Wickedness dwell in thy tabernacles. For then thou shall lift up thy
face without spot; yea thou shall be steadfast and shall not fear: because thou
shall forget thy misery, and remember it as waters that pass away. And thine
age shall be clearer then the moon: thou shall shine forth, and thou shall be
as the morning. And thou shall be secure, because there is hope; yea thou shall
dig about thee, and thou shall take thy rest in safety. Also thou shall lie
down and none shall make thee afraid, Job. 11.14. Upon condition they set the
Lord always before them, as David did they may say as David did, Ps: 16.8.9. I
have set the Lord always before me; because he is at my right hand, I shall
not be moved. Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoices, my flesh also
shall rest in hope.

But to tell you a little more particularly, what Believers have to show for
their security. 1. They have promises, which are sure mercies. For they were
made by one that cannot lie, and strongly tied himself with an oath to
perform what he promised. So that they have (...) strong consolation, Heb:
6.18.20. They have the Spirit (which is Truth it self 1 John: 5.6.) for the
past, witnessing with their spirits, that they are the Sons of God, Rom:
8.16: And for the future, an earnest of their inheritance, Ephesians: 1.14; and a
seal of God's own putting, (...). 2 Cor: 1.21.22.
which he will never * deny nor resume, 2 Cor: 1.22. 3. They have our Savior's
word, Joh: 10.28.29. And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never
perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my and. 4. They have our
Savior's prayer to the father, Father I Will also that, Whom thou have given
me, be with me Where I am, that they may behold my glory, which thou have given
me, Joh: 17.24. And we doubt not that he was heard: nay we know it, Joh: 11.42.
5. Whereas the Arminian objects, that he denies not, but God will stick to
them; but the fear is that they shall not stick to him: this objection is
answered by what God promised long ago to his people, viz: not only not to
depart from them; but put his fear into their hearts, so that they should
never depart from him, Jer: 32.40. He that called us will ceratainly recall us;
seeing he cannot repent of his calling; as he is too good to repent of any
other Grotius and such as he would have all Gospel gifts to be (...).
gift, Rom: Bouum perseverant^ae daturum Deum vecatis suis ista vocatione de
qua dictum est, sine paenitentia sunt dona dei and vocatio, omni Christiano
consitendum est, August. De dono perseverantiae c. 14.
11.29. 6. The very nature and work of faith is to give Christ to them. Now he
that has Christ (or the Son) has life, Joh: 5, 12. And this life is
eternal, viz: because it is in that Son (ibid:) and the same life that he
has: only as yet hid with him in God, Col: 3.3.

Having therefore their salvation thus assured to them upon good grounds, and
being assured of their salvation because they build upon those grounds: and
having (...) things that accompany salvation, Heb: 6, 9: they can use the words
of Paul: 2. Cor: 5, 1. (Not, we think, but) we know, that if our earthly house
of this tabernacle be dissolved, We have a building of God, a house not made
with hands, eternal in the heavens. They are as good as in Heaven already,
being in Christ, who is there. As Paul says, And has raised us up together;
and has made us to sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians: 2.6.
It was John's ordinary language. WE KNOW. Hereby KNOW we that we are in him, 1
Epist: 2.3. We KNOW that when he shall appear we shall be like him, ch: 3, 2.
We KNOW we have passed from death to life, v: 14. We KNOW that we are of God,
ch: 5, 19: and verse: 13: that we may KNOW that we have eternal life See also
ch: 3.19.24. ch: 4.13. ch: 5.15. Those that would hinder Christians from this
comfort usually object that place, Phil: 2.12. Work out your salvation with
fear and trembling. To whom I answer, it is true indeed, though God have hedged
us in on every side, and supported us with props of everlasting love, which are
so fastened that they cannot slide, and so strong that they cannot be broken:
yet, like the man that stands upon a tower environed with battlements, so that
he cannot fall over, our legs shake, and our joints tremble, and our hearts
quake for fear, when we look down upon the ground from whence we came, and out
of which we were made, and consider our own frailty; and look not up to God
that upholds us, and his grace and loving kindness, with which we are
compassed about, as with walls and battlements. A man in such a place, though
he be not afraid of failing, yet he will not, nor may not walk so carelessly
there, as he would in another place. He may not run and play so in security
there, as if he were below upon the ground: neither may he lean too much upon
the battlements, and presume upon the strength of the work. And such
presumption Paul in that place meant to exhort the Philippians against, I mean
presumption upon God's love. Methinks a godly man, betwixt his fears, because
God withdrawes the light of his countenance: and his confidence, because he is
faithful, and will not suffer him to be tempted above his 1 Cor. 10.13.
power (whereof the former is always swallowed up by the latter) is like a
child shaken to and fro in the arms of a loving father, and threatened to be
thrown off. For though he only offer and but in jest; to do it, the child
being unable to help it self, cannot choose but cry, and tremble for fear.
But yet all this while, he is fast, and sure enough. And whereas when his
father lifts him out, he doubts whether he will hold him fast, or let him go;
when he takes him in again into his bosom, he is confident he will hold him
fast. Even so a godly man, when he is in the worst of his fears, does but
doubt whether God will leave him or not: but when he is in the best of his
hopes, he is confide^t that God will never leave him, nor forsake him.

The same men that urge that place in the Philippians against the certainty of
Salvation, urge the same place for the merit of works. And indeed, if I were of
their mind in that, I should quickly be of their mind in the other too. For
well may we work in fear and trembling, in the worst sense that can be, if we
are to fare as we work our selves: and not as he that shows mercy, works in
us and for us. But, the best of it is, by faith we are saved and not by works;
and we expect to be saved so, and no otherwise: and we doubt not of our
expectation, because the promise was of faith and not of works, to this end,
that the promise might be sure, Rom: 4.16. We fear our own weakness as much
as they, and more too: and that is it which drives us to prayer to God
himself, oftener then it does them to the Saints: which is a fruit of our not
doubting of the strength of God, who is able to keep us from falling (...)
Jude 24: and of the truth of God who cannot (...)
lie, and has promised us eternal life before the world (...).
began, Tit: 1.2. And were we not so assured, we had little hopes to be the
better for praying: in which we are certain not to be heard, if we doubt
whether we shall or no. I said, the truth of God, because having bound himself
by promise, his faithfulness and truth are engaged for him, to see it
performed: and therefore the Apostle says, 2 These: 3.3, The Lord is faithful,
who shall stablish you and keep you from evil. Though believers may be weak in
faith to believe his truth, yet their weak faith, (like the unbelief of the
Jews) Rom: 3.3.
shall not make the faith of God of none effect. And here I cannot but make a
stop and cry out, O the unspeakeable comfort, that does hence arise, viz: From
the faith (or faithfulness) of God; whose mercy and truth go so hand in hand.
In the Psalms they are often mentioned together. Take what the Psalmist in the
89 Psalm speaks of them, viz: I will sing of the mercies of the Lord for
ever, with my mouth will I make known thy faithfulness to all generations.
For I have said, mercy shall be built for ever; thy faithfulness thou shall
establish in the very heavens. I have made a Covenant with my chosen, I have
sworn unto David my servant: Thy seed will I establish for ever, and build up
thy throne to all generations, Selah. And the Heavens shall praise thy wonders,
O Lord, thy faithfulness also in the congregation of the Saints. For who in
the heaven can be compared unto the Lord, who among the sons of the mighty
can be likened unto the Lord? God is greatly to be feared in the Assembly of
the Saints, and to be had in reverence of all them that are about him. O Lord
God of hosts, who is a strong Lord like unto thee, or thy faithfulness round
about thee? Let any one judge, whether a godly man be to blame to be confident
upon his safety, having such security. What is there that can get through to
hurt him, who has the faithfulness of God for his shield to cover him? Ps:
91.4. He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shall thou
trust: his truth shall be thy shield and buckler.

Well then, having for a sure 2 Timothy 2.19.
foundation, the love of God in his election; (which as it never had any cause
to move it, so it will never have any to remove it) upon this they build their
hope, and the gates of hell shall never prevail against it, It is a far
better hope, then the chastest matron, that ever was, can have of the
continuance of her chastity; (that because she has been chaste hitherto,
(that I may take notice of the expression used by the Grotius in 4 Art:
consult: Cas: sand:
freest man of his tongue, that ever I knew in matters of Religion.) Even in
those very words which they urge against us (work out your salvation) by your
salvation is meant, that which is your Salready, not that which shall be.
((...), Salvation must be attained here, or it cannot be enjoyed hereafter)
only we are to work it out as a servant is, that has his wages aforehand. Or
God is to take it out in work more or less, as he thinks good. Working is a
condition required by God, to receive it, wherewith he is contented: and not a
sufficient price to buy it, wherewith he can be satisfied. Our working is not
so much to obtain it and get it; as to attain to it, or get to it. As if God
should say thus, You shall do me so much work and I am contented. It Is not
sufficient; but it shall be enough. I will make over to you an inheritance of
my kingdom: and since you cannot reach to a price great enough to purchase it;
you shall even do thus: you shall depend upon me, and but only do a little
work in consideration, (so the Lawyers say when a farthing is given for that
which is worth a 1000 pounds to make a lawful bargain.) Thus will Christians
comfort themselves, let their disco^forrers say what they will. 1. We have for
our Counselor, Isa. 9.6.
our Savior, who is insted of many; and in the multitude of Counselors there
is safety, says Solomon, Prove: 11.14. 2ly, We will never believe, that our
Savior will be less careful of a member of his body, then we are of one of
ours; which most certainly we will never suffer to perish, if we are able to
help it: and who can deny that our help is laid upon on that is Is: 89.19.
mighty to save? 3ly, God keeps all our bones, Psalm: 34.20. (And, the hairs
of our head are Mat 10.13.
numbered) and will he not care what becomes of our souls? Shall we that are
lying Isa: 30.9.
Children, be faithful to put our trust in him; and will not he that is truth
it self be faithful to answer our confidence?

If a Believer cannot stand of himself, he shall be held up: which is all as
good security from falling: nay it is the best, and it is the only security he
pretends to. (...), says Paul, Rom: 14.4. Yea he shall be holden up, for God
is able to make him stand. So (...), God's establishing the Saints, it is very
often mentioned in the Epistles, as Rom: 16.25. 1 Thessalonians: 3.13. 2 Epist: 3.3. 1
Pet: 5.10.

I will add one thing more of great consequence to comfort a godly man upon
the thought of safety. And that is, that he is preserved safe not in a way of
common providence, as wicked men are (for I should take little or no comfort in
that, because it may be for my hurt.) but out of special affection, out of
loving kindness and truth, Psalm. 40.11, and because he has a favor unto
them, Psalm: 44.3. Now then you that truly fear God, I will say to you, in the
words of Moses to the children of Israel, Deuteronomy: 1.31. You have seen what the
Lord your God does for you: how he does bear you about as a man would bear
his Son in his arms etc. And therefore do not provoke the Lord in this
thing, to be afraid, and to doubt whether the Lord will bring you into the land
which he has promised you. Let not your brethren Deuteronomy: 1.28.
discourage your heart. Rejoice in the Lord: and again I say (not any way
rejoice, but) rejoice in the Lord, viz: that he (and not one that is unable to
save; or one that will easily change his mind) is your Savior and preserver.
Rejoice no more, as the wicked sensually do, because thou have milk in thy
breasts and marrow in thy bones; or, because thou have honor in abundance.
Talk no more of trusting to thy legs, or the strength of a horse, or such like
things. A horse is counted but a vain thing for safety, Psalm: 33.17: and so
may any thing besides God. For shame, you that have the Lord for your God,
speak no more of such poor businesses. Behold a safeguard for you worth all,
as the Psalmist adds verse: the 18. Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them
that fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy.

9. Another cause or ground of a godly man's mirth, may be his having Plenty,
Ninth ground Plenty.
and all things to his mind; or, prosperity and good success: And he that is
in such a condition you will easily grant may be merry and wise. For success:
it is not to be told of what use the bare pretext (and bare it may well be, for
I know not any cloak so much worn) I say the bare pretext of Religion and
godliness is for the compassing of temporal ends: even as much almost as the
truth of either uses to be for spiritual. Now if Godliness beget such warmth
when it is worn outmost, like a cloak: why should it beget less, when it is
worn inmost next to the skin? Or how is it that a man must needs go the
colder, if he wear it so? (I speak of having truth in the inward parts.) As if
nothing might be worn upon godliness, but godliness might be worn upon any
thing. Believe it, the godly man is not so many miles behind the wicked, even
in the way of temporal happiness, as the world thinks he is. There is no
impossibility, that he who is rich Luk 12.21. (...).
toward God, should be rich toward men too. No, the godly man is rich enough
commonly in possession, as well as in expectation. He is comprehensor here also
(in many things,) as well as Viator. Godliness Is, (not WILL be) great gain,
and quick trading enough; however the merchandise Prove: 3.14.
of it be undervalued, and it is trade commonly counted dead, and tedious, and
far about. Godliness is profitable to all 1 Timothy 1.8.
things. It has promises of this life (i. e. of things belonging to this life)
and not only promises IN this life, viz: of things belonging to another.
Mention of such kind of promises, you shall meet with often in the Scriptures.
As first, in the Law and the Prophets. In Deuteronomy: ch: 29.9, you find Moses, when
he exhorted the people to obedience, speaking thus, Keep therefore the words of
this Covenant, and do them, that ye may prosper in all that ye do. David
spoke after the same manner, when he gave the same charge to his Son, 1 Kings
2.3. And keep the charge of the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, to keep
his statutes, and his commandments, and his judgments, and his testimonies, as
it is written in the law of Moses, that thou may prosper in all that thou
do, whithersoever thou turnest thy self. And you shall find his Son
Solomon after him, speaking in the same manner to his Son, Prove: 3.21. ch:
3.16, 17. ch: 8.19.21. A great many of the Psalms have some: and some have a
great many: and there is one that has nothing else but such promises. viz:
Psalm: 1 28. Out of the Prophets I could promise hundreds. But because I fear
you will say to all that I shall bring thence, This is nothing to us, these
promises were made under the law, to men under the law, and to be fulfilled
under the law, and what have we to do with the Law and the Prophets? I have
looked into the Gospel, to see if there be any such thing there: and behold in
two of the Evangelists these promises, Blessed are the meek for they shall
inherit the earth, Mat: 5.5. And he said unto them verily I say unto you, there
is no man that has left house or parents, or brethren, or wife or children for
the Kingdom of God's sake, who shall not recieve manifold more in this present
time, and in the world to come life everlasting, Luke 18.29, 30.

Whether godly men are more rich, and whether more godly men are rich, then
there are of the wicked, I know not. This I am sure, godly men have Both
spiritual and temporal
more and better ways for getting riches: I will add, and more ready ways
(though not seeming so) then the wicked have: unles they make have to be rich
by robbery and covetousnes and oppression, as they usually do: and then such
have will breed wast, or blind whelps, or nothing at all. Usually in these
things, the furthest way about is the nearest way home. Besides worse getting,
the wicked man is usually worse at keeping, (which is of as great consequencew,
hither in wealth or any other thing) The wicked man's wealth is as soon lost
as got: melting away like snow (as they say) against the sun. Their good things
quickly come, and quickly go: coming too soon like the untimely birth of a
woman, and going too soon like the morning dew. Eeither the vengeance of God,
or the justice of men, or their own vices make them suddenly poor. You may
wonder if you see them without one wasting vice or other, intemperance or
litigiousnesse, or prodigality, or gaming: any one of which, is able to set
going more in one hour then he has gotten or can get in an year. And if his
vice be covetousness; a hundred to one, but he has a son that is a
prodigal, which comes all to one: or else for his unlawful getting, or
uncharitable keeping, he has some calamity or other to deprive him of it.
Without question, the godly man, in regard he has none of those consuming
vices; can keep and increase riches, better then they can, if he have them. And
if he cannot get them himself, why he may not have them by descent (as if his
father has been wicked, as they are, and so might get wealth by their own
confession) I see no impossibility at all.

But though I grant their wealth to be less in quantity and bulk, or less to
look to, then the wicked man's: yet we know very well, that many times a little
Living in quantity; by the goodness of the soil, or the tenure, or by
freedom from ill services, or inconveniences in situation, or the like; is of
greater value, then one that is far greater. Even so is a godly man's estate,
Psalm: 37.16. A little that a righteous man has, is better then the riches of
many wicked. Be it more, be it less, he has it every way good. He has a good
title; no way litigious, from heaven or earth. And he has a good possession;
fast, and sure: he shall be Hebr: (...) It might seem to signify, feed upon
truth, (i.e. the truth and faithfulness of God.) in opposition to feeding upon
the wind Hos: 12.1. And upon ashes, Isa: 44.20. But perhaps the substantive is
used adverbially, (which is usual in Hebrew) not for truly, but in the sense
that the word is used 2 Chronicles: 31.12, 15.18. for liberal (...).
verily fed, Psalm: 37.3. He is pestered with no inconveniences of trouble, or
sorrow, either in getting, or keeping, or using; The blessing of the Lord
makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it, Prove: 10.22. or, the blessing of
the Lord, So the Hebrew.
THAT makes rich, as if that were the only thing that could make riches be
without sorrow. If his estate were never so little; and had no other
commendation, but this; yet it were enough to make it more worth (which is all
one, as if I said it will make it more) then the wicked man's, if it were never
so much. For what is it, to have both hands full of wealth (or, indeed how can
I have both hands full of wealth, that is enjoy it?) when I have my hands full
(as we say) of troublesome employment: my head full of troublesome thoughts,
and projects: my heart full of troublesome hopes seares and sorrows; and every
night my Eccles 12. The abundance of the wicked will not suffer him to sleep.
whole body full of troublesome tumblings and tossings to and fro till the
morning. Better is an handful with quietness, then both the hands full with
travel and vexation of Spirit, Eccles: 4.6.

Again how has he but a little, any more then another, that has much more
then he; who has as much as enough. For either the other has too much: and
then, I hope, you will not commend his condition, because he has too much; nor
will you discommend the condition of the godly man, because he has not too
much. Or else he has but enough; and then the godly man having but enough too,
has as much as he, let him have never so much. Indeed, no man either can have,
or be said to have enough, better then the godly man. For the first, he has
the Lord for his God, who is (...), Rom: 10.12. like (...) Isa: 32.5: and (...)
is used like it.
rich and bountiful to all that call upon him especially such as call upon him
to his mind, as he does. He alone is able (as Paul said to the Corinthians, 2
Epist: ch: 9.8.) To make all grace abound toward them, that they always
having all (...) 2 Cor: 9.8.
sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good work. For the second, he
has so many good qualities, that no quantity shall alter the case with him.
Whatsoever the godly man has, it is much to and for, and compared with
himself, though it be not so when it is compared with that which the other
has: which abateth nothing of the value, or the quantity of it, as to him: and
therefore it ought not to be counted the less for it. A godly man has as much
as another has; although that which he has, be not so much as the other has.
It Is the having (which is in the person:) and not the thing, (which is
indifferent) that makes the odds. The person qualifies the Mihi res non me
rebussubmittere conor.
estate; and not the estate the person; unless it be occasionally; no more
then combustible matter makes fire to burn. A thing which is otherwise much
and good; yet I may not have it so: or it may not be so to me: or while I have
the ordering of it. Things are not said to be much or good, so much from their
own quantity or quality: as from the quantity or quality of other things, with
which they suit or disagree. The same quantity of food is too much for the
little child (such a one as every Christian is) which is too little for an old
man (such as all unregenerat men are, who have not crucified the old Adam.)
Every one who is sed with food convenient Prove: 30.8.
for him, has much enough. God gives to one man as muh as he knows to be
fitting for him: and to another man as much as he knows to be fitting for him.
I hope, either of these is as good a man as the other: although one should have
never so much less then the other. I think if any were worse, it should
rather be he that has most given him, because he needs most, and was not
able to live with less. He that has a little meat, if he have but a little
stomach: and he that has a little cloth, if he have but a little body;
doubtless, are as well provided for, as he that has much meat, and a great
stomach to fill, and he that has much cloth, and a great body to cloth. If a
godly man's estate should be counted little, because another has more, or
because it is so in comparison of a greater: then I know not who has much. For
there is none that has so much; but either he himself may have more then he
has, or another have more then he.

Again, a man is not to be counted rich, for abundance of that which is
hurtful to him; but only of that which is profitable. Now the blessings of God
(such as all God's gifts are, if they are not abused) are blessings indeed,
only to the Godly; to whom curses themselves are blessings. But, the wicked, as
their curses are curses indeed: so their very blessings prove curses, and so
many coals of fire upon their heads. Punishments (which are made profitable to
the godly:) and outward blessings, (which are made harmless to him) come both
to the wicked man with a curse in their mouths (so that they have no cause to
rejoice) and a sting in their tails (so that they are never the better.) There
is a sore evil which I have seen under the Sun, namely riches kept for the
owners thereof to their hurt, Eccl: 5.13. It goes with men in regard of
temporal enjoyments, altogether as God goes with them. If a man have not God
for his portion: he had as good have no portion at all. For he will have his
portion, or something else for his God; and then his condition is bad, be it
never so good. But if God be given into the bargain: be it little, be it much;
it will fare with us, as it did with the Israelites, when they gathered Manna;
He that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little had no lack.

Again, he that has a little estate, and is not in debt; or has his debts
paid; will live merrier every day of the week; and we usual count him more
rich, then another that is richer then he. Daily experience shows, in how deep
melancholy men usually are, that are deep in debt. How do they wish above any
thing in the world that they themselves were out! and how do they bless above
any condition in the world, the condition of others that are not in their
condition! So many sins committed, so many debts. And as the godly man is
merry, because his creditour is satisfied: and is so far from being sad for
having been in debt; that he rejoices so much the more, that he was indeed the
servant of sin: so the wicked man being still dead in trespasses and sins; as
long as sin and the law lies at his door; and his debts are laid to his
charge; is as far from joy, as he is from a truly quiet conscience, and can
never be truly merry. A godly man will owe nothing to any man, but what debet
debere he ought to owe, what he ought to be still paying and never have paid
all, to love him. I here is none in earth therefore that can justly molest him.
Neither has heaven any thing at all against him. For he that paid his ransom
for him, to redeem him from hell; has also paid his debts for him to free him
from heaven: having blotted out all his sins against God, and blotted out all
God's hand-writings and bills against him. The thought hereof must needs make
him exceeding merry, in regard that his condition before was so exceeding sad:
it being as great a cause of joy to have been miserable, as it is of sorrow to
have been happy.

Now if this be the godly man's condition: though the wicked man should dip his
feet in oil, and wash his steps in butter; though he have heaped up silver as
the dust, and gold as the mire of the streets, or though he had never so much;
yet I would say of the other even with his little estate (if it happen so to
be) as Gideon said to the Ephraimites, Judge: 8.2. Is not the gleaning of the
grapes of Ephraim better then the vintage of Abiezer? But then if this be a
godly man's visible estate; what is his invisible estate, think you? (for
indeed as Paul says, 2 Cor: 4.18. We look not at the things which are seen,
but the things which are not seen. For the things which are seen, are
temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal. Certainly, you
cannot immagine, but his invisible estate must needs be great: in regard that
though his visible estate be little; or though he have little here that any man
can see; yet you may see him bear up his sails as stiffly, and live as
cheerfully, as the best. If we see a man live plentifully, and merrily; and
know of no estate he has to maintain it: we conclude either that he has some
private friend to bear his charges; or that he has some private estate; or
else certainly is assured to have an estate ere long, and therefore is resolved
to live accordingly. Now, the godly man, besides the estate, which he has in
possession, temporal means which every man sees, and spiritual means (the
means of grace) which few do and none can sufficiently prize: and besides the
help of a most bountiful father to supply him, the comfort whereof none can
sufficiently admire; has another and greater estate in reversion which is no
less then a kingdom. Behold an invisible estate not to be valued or surveyed.
An estate of invisible glory, such as eye has not seen: an estate of unheard
of value, such as ear has not heard: an estate of unconceivable greatness
for hight, and length, and breadth, and depth, such as it has not entered into
the heart of man to concieve. Behold an estate not subject to taskes, nor
taxes: not troubles, nor misfortunes: not the power of the moth or the theife.
An estate that lies in a better country then Canaan, in a better city then
Jerusalem, whose builder and maker is God (and none but he.) Where for his
earthly house of this tabernacle, he shall have a building of God, a house not
made with hands, but eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor: 5.1. As long as he has
such an estate in expectation; let him have never so little in possession; I
will say to him, as it was said to the Angel of Smyrna, (Rev: 2.9.) I know thy
works, and tribulation, and poverty: but thou art rich. Neither is the time so
long till this great estate comes into his hands; that the goodness of the
thing should be any whit abated by the length of the delay: (which usually they
have more then others, as I shall hereafter show) and many times more then they
would have themselves.) For who will not serve twice seven years, (or, suppose
a few more years) in hopes: if he have an assurance to obtain at last, I say
not a wife (and yet Jacob thought not that too little a guerdon for so many
years service) but a never-fading Crown, for the crown of his hopes. There
is but one of his own lives to run out. While that continues, he has a rent
coming in of spiritual blessings, abundantly enough to maintain him in heart:
(in respect whereof I may say in the words of Christ, He has other meat to
eat, then worldly men wot of.) And when this life ends, there is no more fine
to be paid, then a little puff of breath, to give him seizin, and set him in
possession for all eternity. And how can thou be sad, O, my soul? For shame,
be not thus disquieted within me. Come, hope still in God: for I will yet
praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God. Till I can
possess mine inheritance, I will possess thee with patience and cheer thee up
with hope of what thou have to come, which hope I am confident, if thou art not
wanting to thy self will make thee merry, if the time be never so sad.

To speak a little more of Hope: (for though it may seem to have been better
put among the godly man's conditions: yet because it is a grace that in it is
nature has relation to what the party is to have, and because it is commonly
used in the Scripture for it, I think better to speak of it now) Joy is a
proper eeffect of hope, (such hope as I Whereof Prove. 10.28. The expectation of
the righteous is gladness.
mean) and therefore says Paul, Now the God of hope fill you with all joy,
and peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope through the power of the
Holy Ghost, Rom: 15.13. He that is so happy as to be happy in hope, cannot
choose but be merry in hopes to be happy whatsoever a man (...) Arist: Rhet: l.
1. chapter 11.
rejoices in, when he enjoyes it, he can hardly choose but rejoice, when he
remembers or hopes for it. Nay he must not choose (in this hope) if it be in the
nature as it is in the number of precepts what is said in the forequoted
Epistle, ch: 12.12. Rejoicing in hope.' It Is such a thing this hope, as will
make a man not only stand upright with integrity (without which he could not
hope for what he hopes for) but hold up his head also with courage and
magnanimity under the weight of greatest afflictions. Hope it is the best thing
that a godly man has: as it is the worst thing that a wicked man has. For
what is of most consequence and concernment; the godly man always has of the
best, and the wicked man of the worst, as for example, the heart, hope, and
life: concerning which in a wicked man, thus speaks the Son of Syrach, His
heart is ashes and his hope is more vile then earth, and his life is less
worthy of honor then clay, Wisd: 15.10. To speak more distincty: 1. A godly
man's hope can never be false: having faith, which gives a Heb: 11.1.
substance to things that are but hoped for, and whose 1 Pet: 1.9. (...).
end is salvation to verify and confirm it. 2. It Is not such a hope as causes
shame, either for being in vain, or for being vain and groundless, so long
as the love of God is so plentifully shed abroad throughout all the heart of
that man that has it. Hope makes not ashamed, Rom: 5.5. 3. It is not such a
hope as causes pain or anxiety for being uncertain; as other hopes, do
being tossed and distracted with doubts and suspicions, and so causing sorrow
rather then joy. For it does not only produce a calm and serenity of the
Spirit (as of the wind; which might make us more careless, and expose our ship
to be cast away the sooner, when the storm shall arise) but it is an anchor
also to hold the heart fast being tied to it by the strong rope of faith; and
mored to the rock of ages: (God in Christ) who is our refuge from the storm
and the Rock of our hope. 4. It Is a lasting hope: breathing, and gasping, as
long as we have any breath in our bodies, Nay, then strongest, when we are
weakest: being most eager then when it is as it were within reach; as a man
that is (...) etc: Phil: 3.14.
stretching himself out to lay hold of a thing, when he is very near it. I
speak still of a sincere Christian. For if the man be a Christian no deeper
then the tongue, (or, if he be but a hypocrite: for such a one I reckon in the
number of the The word for a Hypocrite is used for a wicked man often in Job,
and so (...) for to be wicked, Jer: 23.11; and (...) for, wickedness, verse. 15
wicked) let him make never so good a show with a whited wall; his house is
built upon the sand, and his hopes stand upon that which will run away under
them; so that having no warrant, nor promise, nor any firm ground at all, they
are apt to be shaken with every wind, and must needs be momentany, even (as
Job says) like a puff of breath, Job 11.20. So that verse maywell betranslated.
As a broken tooth and a foot out of joint, so is the confidence of the
transgressour in a day of trouble, Prove: 25.19. Either his hopes and his
happiness continue but a little while with him; or he with them. Have patience
to read what the Son of Syrach says, But the multiplying brood of the
ungodly shall not thrive, nor take deep rooting from bastard slips, nor lay any
fast foundation. For though they flourish in branches for a time: yet standing
not fast, they shall be shaken with the wind; and through the force of winds
they shall be rooted out. Wisd: 4.3, 4. For the hope of the ungodly is like
dust that is blown away with the wind; like the thin forth that is driven
away with the worm; like as the smoke which is dispersed here and there with a
tempest, and passes away as the remembrance of a guest that tarrieth but a
day, ch: 5.14. Some will say perhaps, what do you talk of an estate in hopes?
give us an estate in hand. One bird in hand is worth two in the bush; your joy
is but sown here, the Psalmist himself confesses, Light is sown for the
righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart, Psalm: 97.11. And (as the
saying is) while the grass is growing the horse may starve. But such men are
mistaken every way. For (to use their own comparison) though some grass be
growing, there may be some ready cut; and there may be other food besides
grass. I say, other food: for I will never allow that a godly man is fed with
hopes, and nothing else. It is enough for wicked men, So are the paths of all
that forget God, and the hypocrites hope shall perish, whose hope shall be cut
off, and whose trust shall be a spiders web. He shall lean upon his house but
it shall not stand; he shall hold it fast, but it shall not endure, Job
8.13.14.15. Albeit, methinks, I could live very chearefully upon such a hope as
a godly man's is, if it were a thousand years. The Psalmist did not stick to
pronounce for blessed, not only him that has the God of Jacob for his help
already, but him whose hope is in the Lord his God, Ps: 96.5. But the comfort
is: he that has this hope, has a portion also in the Land of the living, I
cried unto thee, O Lord, I said thou art my refuge, and my portion in the land
of the living, Psalm: 142.5. The godly man also has a portion in this life,
(though not his portion, for it is not all he is to have) as well as the
wicked: And far better then his: not only for the goodness of the thing,
being God himself who is the chiefest good; but for the length of time that he
is to have it, not, till he dies, nor till the end of the world, (further then
which, to them and their heirs for ever, reaches not) but for ever and ever,
Ps: 73.26. God is the strength of my heart and portion for ever. Whereas the
wicked man has indeed a portion; but it it might be said also, he has his
portion; and he is to have no more. From men which are thy hand, O Lord, from
men of the world, which have their portion in this life, ps: 17.14. And thus
much for the godly man's wealth, that he is rich. I might say as much for
Honor (though not for honors) viz: that he is honorable even in the account
of the wicked, in their more serious thoughts. His face seems to shine, so
that many times they stand gazing and admiring at him.

But in the next place let us speak of his Health, A tenth ground Health.
(then which there is no temporal blessing of greater concernement for a merry
life.) Now I may say of this also, as I did of wealth that whether a godly man
have it or not (for I do not make it necessary for every godly man to have
every thing that is a cause of mirth) he is fairest for it. He has those helps
himself, and practices those things, that are good to preserve health, of his
own accord, which others are forced to use for the recovery of it when it is
too late. There is scarcely a virtue or a virtuous action, but has some virtue
more or less for the preservation of a man's health. If you consider of it,
you will find it to be so: as I say, and if I had leisure enough to instance, I
could easily make it appear to be so. But leaving the (...) (what may be, or
what is like to be in regard of the causes) let us speak a word to the (...),
what is, or has been. I will give any one leave to look abroad in the world,
and then tell me, whether he do not see it so by continual experience, that
not only godly men their health is better; but their life is longer, seldom
living out but half Psalm. 55.23^
their days, as the wicked do; unless they be taken from the evil to Isa.
57.1.
come (as some times they are.) 2. There are many places in Scripture, that
assure him of it.

Hear, O my Son, and recieve my sayings, and the years of thy life shall be
many, Prove: 14.20.

For they are life unto those that find them, and health to all their flesh,
verse: 22.

What man is he that desires life; and loves many days, that he may see
good? keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile. Depart from
evil and do good, seek peace and pursue it, Psalm: 34.12, to the 15.

Thou shall come to thy grave in full age, like as a shock of corn comes in,
in his season, Job 5.26. In full age] Hebrew (...) In which word the Rabbines
observe, that according to the signification of the letters as they are used by
the Jews; in numbering, there is contained the number of 60. And they say, it
was a custom of the Jews, when they came to that age to celebrate a feast in
token of joy; and that they counted it a heavy judgment of God upon a man, to
take him away before. There was a promise made to the children of Israel, And
the Lord will take away from thee all sickness, and will put none of the evil
diseases of Egypt (which thou know) upon thee, but will lay them upon all
them that hate thee, Deuteronomy: 7.15. See also c: 25.15. Exodus: 9.14 And I am much
taken with the testimony of the son of Syrach, chap: 1.12. The fear of the
Lord makes a merry heart, and gives joy, and gladness, and long life. 3. It
has been observed by some, that in the time of the second temple, when men
were worse, in 420 years, there had been a succession of no less then 300
Priests (they were so short lived) whereas in the time of the first Temple,
when men were better, in ten years less space; there had been no more then
18, (because they lived so long.) It is reported among the Jews by the
Rabbines, that, the house of Eli, (according to the curse denounced against
them by the And thou shall see an enemy in my habitation, in all the wealth
Which God shall give Israel, and there shall not be an old man in thyhous for
ever
man of God, 1 Samuel: 2.32,) lived very short lives so long as they continued in
their old course of idleness, and neglect of God's law; but that at length,
upon advice given them by one of their Doctors, telling them how that was the
cause they died so soon; they fell presently to reading and studying the Law,
and after that most of them lived to be old men.

4. God has much use of godly men; and they are but scarce. Precious in the
sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints, Psalm: 116.15.

5. (Perhaps for the former reason) wicked men have been heretofore made
ransoms for God's People, to spare them. So were the Egyptians for the
Israelites, Isa: 43.3, and so may others be for others. They are the Wiseman's
words, The wicked shall be a ransom for the righteous: and the transgressour
for the upright, Prove: 21.18.

But yet, some will say, peradventure, that Health and wealth, and such like
things are indifferent: and that it goes, for the most part, in matters of this
life, as with the wicked, so with the godly: and if there be any odds, the
wicked man commonly has the best. For else (to pay me again in my own coin)
how came it about, that from Adam to the flood, of the Patriarchs, who were
good men, there were eleven generations; and of Cain's line, who were bad men,
but eight? Ans. Well, I shall not contend with you much in this matter, but
shall easily yield to what you say, as in this, so in other things of this
nature, as for the things themselves. All the difference, or that which makes
the matter better or worse, and turns the scales, rises from the disposition
of him that gives, and him that recieves. It Is not so much the thing, Life,
that we care for; as the man's contentedness in the enjoying; and (especially)
God's loving kindness in the bestowing, which is better then life, Ps: 63.3.
These the godly man only has. With these the shortest life will be long and
yet sweet; and without these the longest will be short, and yet tedious.

If a wicked man's life be as long as a godly man's; yet he cannot have so long
life. Or (if you will) a wicked man may have so long a life as he but he cannot
have it so (i e: as long life.) It will never be a long life to him, though it
be never so long; for he will be always longing for a longer. Whereas the
godly man is not only blessed in, and with the having of the thing; but blessed
in the manner of the having; viz: with content and satisfaction; which is a
far greater blessing, and without which neither that nor any other thing can
be a blessing. He has a short life so, as to make it long: and he has long
life so, as to make it long enough; or so as he will be satisfied with it: and
no other having of long life, or having of life, can be properly called having
it. See it set down by the Psalmist, Psalm: 91.16: for one of the privileges
or peculiar blessings of a godly man, With long life will I satisfy him, and
show him my salvation. You may say of the godly man, let him dye never so
soon, as the words are in Wisdom, 4.13. He being made perfect in a short
time, fullfilled a long time. Whether he live many years, or not; he passes
his time quietly under the blessing of heaven, without toil and vexation; and
his Isa: 65.22.
days are like the days of a tree. But very often also, he enjoys in old
Isa: 65.22.
age the work of his hands. Let the wicked live long, and (perhaps those
promises, There shall be no more therean infant of days, nor an old man that
has not filled his days
Isa: 65.20. etc: belong to them as well as others) yet how is his condition
the more commendable, so long as The sinner being an hundred years old shall
be accursed, (as it follows in the same place.)

Well, whether the godly man's life be longest or not, I am sure, and you
cannot deny, that what I told you is true, viz: that he uses the best means
for it. And then let it go how it will, it will be well enough. For if he have
what he uses the means for; he has it with the more joy and content; and if
he have it not, he has it not with the less trouble. Methinks, the wicked man
should rather fear and suspect what the matter is, then rejoice, and be glad
in it as a blessing, that he has health or long life, when he takes all the
courses to the contrary. It would make a man afraid as of an ill omen, to have
a hare leap into his lap, as he sits in his house. 'Ile warrant you, he had
rather hunt a whole week in the fields, where they use to be, though he meet
with never a walk. To say nothing of the comfort a man takes in the use and
success of the usual means.

The next ground that godly men have to be merry, The eleventh ground, the
Easiness of his work.
may be the Easiness of their work. I say the work of godliness is easy,
and the way of godliness easy to find. Wisdom is glorious and never fades a
way: yea she is easily seen of them that love her, and found of such as seek
her. She preserves them that desire her, in making her self first known unto
them. Who so seeks her early shall have no great travel: for he shall find
her sitting at his doors, Wisd: 6.12.13.14. The way of godliness is said to be
(...) Prove: 15.19. i. e. Like the Kings high way, cast up, and made of purpose
to be found: without windings and turnings: such as travelers though fools
can hardly err in, Isa: 35.8. Love, which is one half of the profession, is
called the Royal law (or the King's law) Jam: 2.8, in allusion to the King's
way (as it is interpreted.) It is the The Syr^ack Interpreter translates, The
law of God.
King of heaven's High way. There is no mystery of godliness, as there is of
iniquity (in matters of practice.) Every thing is in the light and above board:
clean contrary to the works of wickedness, which are called the works of
darkness. Ephesians: 5.11. Wicked men both walk in the dark to themselves; which
must needs be painful, especially when the way is neither right nor plain:
and they endeavor to walk in the dark to others, which must needs be very
troublesome, and full of difficulty. It Is not to be told, what trouble a wicked
man has, before, and in, and after the doing of his work, to conceal Ps:
26.4. The word (...) is rendered by the Sept: (...) transgressors, I think it
is a word in Niphal of the signification of Hithpael which is usual as Ezra
9.1. ch: 10.11.
it. Whereas the godly man does his business with security and delight, and
cares not who sees him. The very names of wickedness betray the nature of it
(...) and (...) and (...), which expresses it is labor It is called (...) a
way of grief, but that is perhaps for it is grievousnesse to God.
in acting: (...), which expresses it is anxious thoughts in contriving; and
(...) which expresses it is unquietness and tossings of mind in lusting and
desiring: so that a wicked man may well be compared to a troubled sea, Isa:
57.20. There are many other like words, if I could call them to mind.

The godly man's work is easy, for many reasons. 1. Because it is but little. A
godly man has little or nothing to do, more then to sit down, and be quiet:
neither troubling others (a thing which cuts out a great deal of work, and
takes up a great deal of time with the men of the world) nor being troubled
himself, for any thing. For how should he be troubled, or have any care upon
his own head, who has cast all his burden upon the Lord, Ps: 55.22, The Lord
who cares for him, 1 Pet: 5.7. Being not of this world ( as Christ was not of
this world) but chosen out, and called away to another; whether he that called
him is gone before; He looks, after nothing here more then needs must. Like a
merchant, or a traveller, that is not yet come to the place where his trading
or his business lies; if he happen to meet with any good things en passent (as
they say) in his way, or by the by, such as he may take without any trouble to
his mind, or offense to his conscience; or hindrance to his journey; He will
bless God for his goodness in giving more then he deserved; and bless
himself for his unexpected happiness, in having more then he looked for, and
that is all. He will take what comes with thankfulness, and add it to the
rest. But still he will be sure, these smaller commodities, if they be not
furtherance, they shall be no let or stop to his intention for the greater If
riches increase, so it is: he will receive them thankfully, and use them
soberly: but he will follow David's advice, he will not set his heart upon
them, Ps: 62.10. What does he does he in such a careless manner; as if he cared
not, whether he did it or no. He will use this world, and the things of this
world with his mind bent upon better, or as 1 Cor: 7.31. (...), vulgar
translation is tanquam non utantur. Beza also likes it as if it were meant, over
head and ears in the use of the world.
if he used them not. Be it wealth or pleasure, or any other thing the world
affords; a little of it serves his turn, scarce so much many times as to
satisfy nature, (for grace is contented with less) but only enough to stay
his stomach till the wedding dinner, when he shall have better cheer, and sit
(...) Mat: 8.11 (as at meals Lazarus is said to sit in Abraham's bosom to
show how he was beloved and exalted from contempt; and John leaned upon
Christ's bosom. Joh: 15.23.
down with Abraham Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of Heaven. And who is there
that would not be willing only, but glad to be stinted a little now for a day
or two, and to be kept to a diet there for a while where there is such
dangerous food; so he may sit at a full table hereafter in another place for
all eternity. A godly man can have but little to do, because he has but
little to provide. Whatsoever any man cares to provide for, is more or less
accordg to his appetite, or his lust, or his desire; and his desire according
to his want (seeming, or real.) A godly man's desire, and his want of the
things of the world being but little, he must needs have but little provision
to make, and consequently but little work to do, and less trouble to suffer
in the doing. He must not, and cannot, and will not take any care for many
things: or much care for any thing. The truth is, it would spoil him if he
should: neither may he dare to do it, any more then little and weak stomachs
may venture upon much meat, and such as is hard to be disgested. A little meat
will serve to sustain a little body, and a little care will serve to provide
for a little meat. To eat much is hurtful: and to care for much, needless,
and troublesome. But a little too much meat not agreeing with a man's
constitution (as earthly things cannot with a heavenly temper) is enough to
disorder him. And so is a little worldly employment to a Christian mind. And
therefore fearing a distemper, a godly man will take little or nothing of
earthly food; and yet will live well enough: because he can make it up with
other food; as that man can forbear to come to ordinary meals with others,
who can have meat when he will in private by himself, and that which is
better. So is the godly man: whose bread eaten in secret is sweeter then the
world can imagine. For God himself who has borns him from the belly, and fed
him from the womb, Isa: 46.3, feeds him continually with Manna from heaven,
and gives him meat to eat which others know not of. Tell not him of the custom
of the men of this world; as if he lived as they do, and followed their
fashion, which is the fashion of this world which passes away. 1 Cor 7.3.
Talk not to him of this world, nor of the fashion of it. For he lives
altogether after another fashion: not by sight, 2 Cor: 5.7.
but by faith, and hope, and patience, and love, and the word of God, and such
things as these are; and fits himself for the fashion of heaven, whether he is
going, where it is not long ere he shall be, where he thinks it long till he
be, and where he has a long time to continue when he comes thither. The
Christians manner of life, is and must be such, as becomes one that does not,
and must not set up his resting place here. If he be in the body, he will
reside there as little as he can. He will endeavor as much as he can, (...) 2
Cor: 5.8.
to be absent from the body, and so care for things for the body, as if he
cared not. Men use not to bestow pains and cost, for adorning of a house, or
husbanding a living which they are to leave to morrow. Being bound for an other
place, the things he is to get here (unles it be such as are for that other
place, in getting whereof he finds more joy, then trouble) cannot be many. It Is
but a little there is necessity for; and a godly man will take of every thing
so little as necessity requires, and of nothing so much as satietie or pleasure
desires. And therefore his labor cannot be much, and his work can never be
more then he can do with ease, and have done with joy and content. He has no
high look, (...)
to see more then is fitting, to tempt him: neither has he a wide heart, Ps:
1.5.
to desire more then can be had with ease. He has none of the Gluttonous, or
the Ambitious, or the Proud man's anxious cares for the morrow, and the things
thereof. He is never distracted (as they are) with varieties of thoughts, of
varieties of meats, drinks, clothes, pleasures, preferments; which sort he
shall choose, how his meat shall be dressed, and how it shall be sawced; after
what fashion his clothes shall be made; what place or preferment is the best
or the greatest, or most for his advantage, and how it may be compassed. To say
nothing of the vexations, that are wont to follow for such men, if things go
not to their minds. The poor mind is sure to have the worst of it. For that
must be vexed now, for being displeased before; and one discontent begets
another. The godly man is always indifferent in such matters. If he have
nothing; he is contented, and patient. If he have a little, he is contented,
and thankful: nay he is as glad and as merry, as a man that finds a treasure,
or has got-somewhat beyond his desert and expectation. And if that little
should be never so much, yet will he himself be the same still; only more
bountiful, and perhaps a little more merry; and this is all the change you
shall find in him. On the contrary, for the wicked man, whose mind is bent
after these things with eagerness and affection; consider what a deal of hard
service and toil; what sleeplesse, restless, endless cares, his lusts, and
passions, and vices, like so many peevish and never-to-be-pleased taskmasters
continually put him upon: every one commanding and domineering over him, many
times all together, and sometimes for contrary designs, and most times for
such as cannot be followed without difficulty, and pain, and danger of the
loss of his body. (if I should say the soul, he would weigh but little of
that, being a thing, which he himself sees not, nor any body else; and so, out
of sight, out of mind, and regard) If there were no such contrariety in the
objects, (to say nothing of the contrariety also in the desires themselves,
worse then a civil war in a Kingdom) the quantity and the greatness of the
number were enough to overloade him; and the quality, and the variety of the
sorts sufficient to distract him. While the godly man (or the spiritual (...).
1 Cor: 2.15.
man) has but one single spirit to please: he, living a sensual life, has as
many masters to please, as he has senses, or acts of those senses, or objects
of those acts. The most temperate rational worldling (and such a one it may be
soonest; for he is for others too; whereas the intemperate brutish sot is for
none but himself) how is he (to use the words of the Apostle, 2 Timothy: 2.4)
Entangled with the afaires of this life? What a deal of cumbersome employments
has he? How many perplexities to find, and untangle? How many doubts to study
to clear? How many ways, and means, to examine, and essay; dangers and
inconveniences, to enquire into, and avoid? How many circumstances, conditions,
events, persons, times, and places, to trouble his head with? so that he is
quite wearied, and tired with multitude of counsels Isa: 47.13.
to dispatch his businesses. O the exceeding, monstrous, headless, endless
colluvies; and the numerous, tumultuary army of disordered and confused
thoughts, and plots, and counsels, that continually throngs and crowds in the
little room of the heart of a carnal man! I dare say, he has no less then a
thousand to one with the godly man. For the godly man having but little to do,
cannot have much to think, or to speak: and that little which he does, is
(clean contrary to what always is to be seen in the actions of wicked men)
not only not accompained with solicitude in, but not attended, and dogged with
biting vexations, and sorrows, and repentings, after the doing. Methinks, I
would feign in large a little upon this point: and therefore I desire your
patience to consider a little longer with me, whether godly man have not by
much less to do then the wicked, besides what has been already said, for
these ensuing reasons.

1. Because both they and their virtues, are like men within a castle, or those
that have the defensive part: whose business and care relates but to a little,
and to a few objects, for the preservation of themselves (that is almost all
that they care for; and if they take any care about others, it is in relation to
their own duty, and with an eye to their own recompense of reward,) whereas
wicked men and their vices, are rather like the besiegers, or those that are
without the castle, whose maine business it is to offend: which makes them
have a great deal more to do, inasmuch as every offensive party has
necessarily both parts to act.

2. Because virtue (or a good action; or the virtue and goodness of actions) is
like the mark in a But; simple, and single, and but in one place: whereas vice
(or a bad action, or the badnes and pravity of actions) may be either here or
there; nay is here, and there, and every where, except in the middle, When
there is shooting at a common mark; suppose one man able and willing to hit
the mark every time; and suppose another neglectfull of the mark, and desirous
rather to show his skill in shooting to any other place besides the mark,
sometime, to one and sometimes to another; and tell me who has most to do, or
whose work is hardest; he that has but one place to hit, though he have many
to avoid; or he that has many places to hit, and so many times as many more to
avoid, as he has places to strike. God appoints but one way. The wicked man
Jer: 3.13.
disperseth his ways, and by that means increases his trouble. How often do
we see the most cunning wicked men weary themselves in the mutitude of their
ways, Isa: 57.10. To instance in one virtue, veracity. What an easy thing it
is to speak every man the truth to his neighbor. We need not take much pain
in apparelling Truth, or putting over many clothes about her. For though she
may be modest, she is bold, and loves to go naked. No need of a guard of many
words to attend her, nor of colors of gaudy expressions to make her take the
better. No need of adorning her with devices of Rhetoric, to make her
beautiful; for she is naturally so: nor of arming her with artifices of
arguments, to make her strong; for she is strong enough of her self, stronger
then women or wine, Darius being judge in the Apocryphal history, 1 Esdr:
4.14. With Leasing (or, falsehood) it is clean otherwise. For it must be as
well clad and adorned by him that uses it, as it is naked, and deformed of it
self. He that bends his Jer. 9.3
tongue like a bow to tell a lie; with how much anxiety, care, study, fear,
doubt, compunction, and sense of guilt, does he elaborate his story! And when
he thinks he has made all sure, and stopped every gap; and does not only not
know of any that knows; but knows, that no man knows how to find him: yet
nevertheless he has palenesse in his face, and faintnes in his heart: his
tongue faulters, his lips, hands, and legs tremble, and the sound of a shaken
leaf will chase him. Although the fear of God be not in him, to keep him from
sinning; yet the (...) Gen: 35.5.
terror of God will be upon him, to affright him in it. This solicitude in
the contrivance of lying (whether by words or actions) is as great as in any
wickedness whatsoever. And therefore, well might the Prophet complain of the
Jews at once, that they taught their tongues to speak lies, and wearyed
themselves to commit iniquity, Jer: 9.5.

A second reason of the easiness (and pleasantness) of a godly life, you may
gather, if you consider how there is no trouble after, nor (when once a man
has been used to it) in forbearing to do evil: as for example, in forbearing
to eat or drink too much, or in any other act of temperance; or indeed in any
act of any other virtue that attends godliness. Nay rather, on the contrary,
what lightness and alacrity in the mind; as well as ease and lightness in the
body! whereas on the contrary (for example) intemperate men, when the short
winded pleasure of taste, which the longest winded draught can afford, is past;
(to say nothing of the nauseating and pain of the stomach sometimes for the
present) they have not done that which they will no more hear of; but they are
almost certain to meet with pain, and sickness, and sorrow; and if not a
reckoning more then they can well pay now (which is often enough) yet without
question a most difficult account to be made (O this word! they must needs be
sad to hear it named) Heareafter.

Godly actions are like the works of nature, See next reason.
which are with pleasure. Wickedness a man may be weary with. Nay he will be
certainly so one time or other. Take the confession of the wicked themselves,
We have wearied our selves in the way of wickedness and destruction, and we have
gone through dangerous ways: but we have not known the way of the Lord, Wis:
5.7. Infinite deal more might here be spoken of the troubles, and
difficulties, and sorrows of the works of wickedness, especially by
instancing in the practices of several vices, as thieving, adultery,
drunkenesse, pride, envy, and the rest: but I should make my volume swell too
high.

3. The works of godliness are most easy, because most agreeable to nature.
Reasonable, and spiritual service (such as that is) is fittest for reasonable
souls, and spirits. On the contrary, vices, and the works of wickedness, the
greatest part of them, are, for the greatest part, but sensual, carnal and
material; fitting only the body, to which we should be loath to give the name
of nature. Rather let nature be the better part (which is enough to serve for
denomination) the Soul. We never live truly according to nature, till our
lives are suitable to this part. And therefore (besides the dishonor we do to
him that made us) we do highly undervalue our selves, and our descent, when we
live wickedly; in regard that being borne gentlemen (as I may say) we live like
beggars: being of a noble, heavenly, and divine extract, we are notwithstanding
base, and earthly, and (like so many Sons of the earth,) fighters against
heaven. Certainly if we do so; if we live according (...), Rom: 8.13.
to the flesh only; we are (which we should be loath to be) enemies to our
selves, and very unnatural man: for our souls are our nature; and virtue, and
godliness, best befit our souls. Vice would seem as much against nature, as
it is; and would go against the grain, if it were not for our default. And it
is an argument, that, as we are, we are not our selves: but that we have lost
our selves, and our natures: and that all those inclinations of our souls,
which should be in us, are not in us; because we can entertain that which is
our enemy, and suffer it to dwell with us, and in us, with approbation, and
welcome; as if it were our friend. Certainly if the stomach were clean, such
unwholesome food would never be well liked; and where the stomach is not clean,
let no food be discommended for being disliked. The fault is in none but the
man, if the works of piety be painful. No employment ought to be called
painful, because it is so to a man that is not well.

5. The works of Godliness are easy, because the virtues and graces that
accompany it produce much ease and quiet, and content. For what a deal of ease
has patience, and forbearance, in comparison of impatience, and rage! contempt
of the world, in comparison of worldly-mindednesse! continence, and temperance,
and contentedness, in comparison of the troublesome, importunate, and
unsatisfied qualities of lust, and gluttony, and ambition! The Graces of God,
how much trouble do they ease us of! helping us forward in good things, and
restraining us from evil things: either making us, out of conscience, not to
grieve at all for losses and crosses; or, out of providence, to grieve for a
little while for sin, that we may not grieve for ever.

6. It may be proved by scripture. 1. By the testimony of Christ himself, Mat:
11.30. My yoke is easy, and my burden is light. 2. By the testimony of the
disciple whom he loved, 1 John: 5., His commandments are not grievous. God's
ways are not rough with hills, and stones and rocks, such as might make them
uneasy to go in; but only so rough as not to be slippery, as the other ways
are. Only a little rough-casted (as I may say) with sand, as the fighting
places were wont to be; so whereby they are the less dangerous to walk in,
and much the more fit for soldiers and fighting men (or men continually
fighting) such as Christians are. Whosoever thou art therefore, that art taking
a journey for the heavenly Canaan; be not dismayed to think that it will be
troublesome. When thou go thy steps shall not be straightened, and when thou
runnest thou shall not stumble, Prove: 4.12.

But yet after all this, I know many will be ready to say, that I speak against
mine own knowledge, and the opinion of every man else, viz: that Christianity
is no idle religion; but painful and laborious: promising much ease, but
enjoying but little; regarding little the present, but differing all to the
future. Answ: Well, suppose I do grant you, that it is laborious (as the ways
and means to all excellent things are: for difficilia quae pulchra the fairest
apples are at the top of the tree, and they will not drop into a man's mouth,
nor fall into his hands) it is not by and by grievous, and wearisome, and void
of all pleasure. No, Christians may, and many men of necessity do eat their
bread in the sweat of their face. But, yet nevertheless, they may eat it with
abundance of pleasure and content. It Is the bread of idleness (as Solomon
calls it Prove: 31.27.) not the bread of labor and pains (unless it be the
bread of wickedness and wrongs) that is the bread of sorrows. The work of
husbandry is laborious: but it is easy to learn and pleasant to practice, and
affording a great deal of health and delight. The earth is dig'd with pain;
but with pleasure too; for it yields a smell wholesome to the digger in the
digging (besides that, a treasure may be found; and abundance of fruit is to
come.)

Again there can be no greater torment, or cause of sadness, to one that has
any life in him, then to want employment: and therefore to be laborious, cannot
make godliness a cause of sadness. Rather then men will be thus sad, we se it
to be their common practice, to practice vicious courses, to keep themselves
doing: to put themselves to any trouble, and to do any thing, rather then to
sit idle, and be melancholy. Labor as hard thoughts as the sluggard has of
it, is the best pleasure and recreation to an industrious man: and the delight
he takes in work, is many times more then that which he has in profit. An
industrious man will be sorry when his work is nere an end; and when he has
nothing to do, he knows not what to do. He sits, as if he were without life
or soul, and knows not how to dispose of himself: and if sorrow or vexation
ever assault him, then is the time. An industrious man can be more merry in
plowing, and sowing, with expectation; then another shall be at the end of
harvest, with possession. There is more mirth, and joy, even in the labor of a
righteous man that tends to life; then there can be in the revenue of the
wicked, that tends to sin, Prove: 10.16. Laborious things always make
themselves pleasant with Hope of profit, more or less ((...) Prove: 14.23.)
Things wherein there is no labor, seldom bring any profit afterward.

Though the godly man's labor be more, and his work be harder then the wicked
man's; yet is it to him but so much delight and recreation, if there were no
other reason, for this alone, that though his candle go not out in the night;
though he take pains to sow his seed in the morning, and in the evening
withold Eccles 11.6.
not his hand; though he be kept never so hard to it: yet he has continually
standing by him this cordial of comfort to cheer him, that he does not plow
the sea, nor sow the wind, nor spend his money for that which is not bread,
and his labor for that which satisfies not; but that having plowed in
fruitful ground, and sown precious seed, he shall return from the field of
this world, into the garner of the world to come with joy, and bring his
sheaves Psalm: 126.6.
with him.

Nay, suppose I should grant that Godliness is not only laborious, but
difficult: yet it will be only to such, or such. It is not so of it self; but
made so by him, to whom it is so. It is not so for any excess of painfulnesse
in the things to be done; but for defect of painfulnesse (or willingness, or
something else) in the person that undertakes it. For either he is a sluggard,
one that is always calling for a little more sleep, a little Prove: 6.10.
more slumber, one that will not plow, because it is cold, Prove: 20.4: nor go
out of doors because it raines. To such a one it is difficulty, and pain
enough, to pluck his hand out Prove: 19.24.
of his bosom: and therefore I need not trouble my self to study for
arguments, why he may not be credited, when he complains of the difficulty of
his work. Or, (2ly,) he is a young beginner in this way, newly entered, and not
yet accustomed to go in the yoke of Christ. For one that has been long in
another way, and wedded wholly to that, will not easily be brought to change
his old mumsimus (as they say) for a new sumpsimus; being confident that the
old is best, because he knows not the goodness of the new. And such a one, if
he complain; I need no other argument to dissuade you from believing him, then
his own ignorance. Or, (3ly,) such a one, as has indeed been formerly
accustomed to the yoke of Christ; but now, by reason of desuetude, is grown
stiff in the neck, and become a beginnner again. And such a one (if he did not
but only act the Christian, as a Hypocrite; and were not of a contrary mind to
what he seemed to be) I shall need no other argument to dissuade you from
believing him, then his own knowledge. For I dare refer you to his own
confession, and what he can tell you himself, he once found by experience,
and perhaps now desires to find again with a great deal of sorrow and
repentance. Whosoever thou art therefore, when thou do any good work, or
duty; if thou sindest it to be grievous, and painful: do not by and by (as
the manner of most men is) look round about thee for the cause, and complain
of the hardness of the work, or the master: but rather first suspect thy
self, and examine the matter well within thee; and it is a thousand to one,
that thou will need to go further abroad. If the rule, and the work which thou
do, do not agree, do not therefore make the rule bad, but the work better.
Never wish to have the rule change. I dare warrant thee, change but thy self;
and there will need no more to mend the matter. Be more a new creature: be more
changed in thy mind; rectify thy crooked will; pare off thy redundnat lusts;
and cut away the knotty pieces of thy refractory spirit; and all will be well,
and thou will say as I do. Doubtless, if thou woudst but consider the matter
well, and deal ingenuously; thou must needs confess, that thou did not
find godliness difficult, but godliness found thee untoward. The exercises of
it, are like many of those that are wont to be imposed upon School-boyes: hard
to be performed by none, but such as are hard to be brought to perform them.
The yoke that was easy so long ago when Christ said it; cannot be grown
narrower with wearing. (it might have grown less indeed, and so better to be
worn) Rather, thou art grown fatter with idleness: or thy neck is grown
bigger, and stiffer, with pride. The burden would not be so heavy to the first
undertakers; but that shrinking their shoulders before they feel it, and not
only not giving their mind to it, but bending their minds against it, they make
it to be so themselves. For the works of godliness, are like the words of
wisdom; all plain to him that understands, and right to them that find So
near is ae man that is willing to bea wise man, to a wise man: that Solomon
many times calls the lover of wisdom by the same name.
knowledge. Prove: 8.9. There are to this purpose some words of the Septuagint,
Prove. 2.20. (for which there are none extant in the Hebr:) If they had gone in
good ways, they had found the ways of righteousness smooth. He that has
gone in such a way but for some time; or gone in it against his will, as if he
went to hanging; there is no reason, that his judgment should be taken
concerning it.

I know, that not withstanding all this, thou will say still, the master thou
art to serve, is to austere. He takes up that which he laid not down, and
reapeth that which he did not sow, as it is Luke 19.21. He bids a lame man
go, and yet keeps his staff away from him. He bids me come out of the pit,
but will not give me his hand; and yet he knows, I can never be able to get up
without it. His commands are many; and he is nice in the performance of every
one of them. He is not like other masters; who are satisfied if their work be
well done, not examining my thoughts: but he searches my heart, and my reins,
and my inmost thoughts before I can think them. He requires such obedience; as
I have no ability to perform: so that I must needs be disobedient and sin;
and yet, The soul that sins shall dye. This is thy usual complaint. And
indeed, I confess, it is a hard case to be servant to such a master, as thou
describest. Whom thou must thank most, that thou art in such a case, I know
not. This I know, that thou art bound to thank thy God, whom thou so much
blamest, that there is also a way made to to come out of it. He who was not the
servant Heb: 3.5.
only, He is called a Servant Zach: 3.8.
but the everlasting Mich. 5.2.
son of the same master; freely and over and above what he was bound to do,
took upon him the form of a servant, Phil. 2.7.
did as hard service as ever servant did, pacifiedthy master for the past, and
made him merciful for the future, and fulfilled all righteousness in thy
behalf. I grant, there had been no remedy, but the soul that sins must
surely dye, had not he dyed who never sinned. And why he should dye, when he
did not sin; unless it were to redeem and save thee that did sin (as
the innocent beast did the sinner, in the time of the Law) I cannot tell.

Well, thus it is. what was to be done by any one, he has done; and what was
to be suffered by us (unless it be some few (...) Col: 1.24.
) he has suffered himself. All thy work is but to believe that he has done
so much; and to trust that he will do more; and to live accordingly as well as
thou can.

But let me be plainer with thee. Perhaps thou that make these complaints,
never trod'st one foot in the paths of God's commandments (and I much fear
that thou art such a one) For shame, do not talk of the difficulty of the
work which thou art to do, before thou know what it is. The trial of work
is only in practice. First make trial, and taste, and see how gracious the Lord
is: and then tell me afterward, what thou think. Suppose there be some
things (as I do not deny but there be) that are irksome and painful to thy
body. Be not dismayed. Thy body will scarce be sensible of the pain; for the
joy which thy soul takes both in doing the work (if thou do it in the best
manner; as there be many that do) and in the hopes of having more hereafter,
when it receives the wages. If I would, I could give thee an hundred cordialls;
every one of which, if thou would take it, should be strong enough to keep
the from fainting at thy work, under any of thy discouragements. But for the
present, I will prescribe but two meditations.

1 Meditate upon the immensity of the wages, which God will give his servants
at the last day: and the unspeakable astonishing disproportion, those wages
bare to the work which they do for it. O the wonderful lenity and bounty of
God toward them! For much ill done, they have a little temporal chastisement:
and for a little well doing aninfinite lasting reward. This disproportion (for
I know not what proportion to call it) I say not, it is a hundred fold (which
our Savior said, they should have in this life, Math: 19.29.) but infinitely
more then an hundred times a hundred. Now what man can for shame say, he has
hard service; when for a pennyworth of work, perhaps badly done; his master,
out of love he bears him, or upon his sons entreaty, or because he endeavored
only to give him content, shall give him an estate great enough to maintain
him as long as he lives. Much more then should it be a shame, but to think it
hard service; when for a little done in all, so as it is; and nothing at all,
so as it should be; my master notwithstanding, as if I had done whatsoever was
my duty to do, or as if I had been righteous, shall give me such a crown of
righteousness (1 Timothy: 4.8,) as is a crown of life, Rev: 2.10: such a crown of
life, as is a crown of glory, 1 Pet: 5, 4: and such a crown of glory, as is
everlasting; an inheritance incorruptable, undefiled and that fades not away,
1 Pet: 1.4. Doubtless, all godly men have a great deal of comfort, and joy,
even in their actions; to think of their end, and the reward, and profit
wherewith they are crowned. And indeed their condition would be as
comfortless, if they had not such thoughts: as it would be miserable, if they
had no reward. The wicked cannot take comfort in their actions, if it were for
nothing but this; that though they do not know, that they cannot profit; yet
they do not know, that they can or will. The knowledge of this, and the thought
thereof, is of great concernment to cause a man cheerfulness in working. For
what should one labor for the wind? yet so the wicked do: which will be their
complaint one day against themselves, among other things, What has pride
profited us, or what profit has the pomp of riches brought us? Wisd: 5.8.

The second Meditation is upon the greatness and goodness of thy company. Most
men will be merry in good company, if ever they will be merry: and most men
will say, The more, the merrier. A bruit creature, though his work be hard,
will go on cheerfully with company; and will keep up with the rest, though he
break his heart. To cheer-up thy spirit therefore, in thy march to heaven; be
ever and anon thinking upon the armies of Saints, that are gone before thee the
same way. But especially, I would have thee think upon him who is Captain of
the company, him I mean who is himself the way it self and the life, Joh:
14.16. The Shepherd of our souls, 1 Pet: 2.25. The Apostle and high priest of
our profession, Heb. 3.1. and the captain of our salvation, ch: 2.10. Looking
unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set
before him, endured the Cross, despised the shame, and is set down at the
right hand of the throne of God, Heb: 12.2. Let it not seem hard and tedious to
thee, but to follow so far as to the Cross; since it seemed not so to him, to
go first to be crucified on it. A dog will follow his master through thick and
thin; whether he call him or not, and though he knows not whither he goes, or
what it is for. And cannot I, who know the way that I go, and the end of the
journey, and what I shall have when I come thither; cannot I take a little
pains, for a little time, for a great reward, to follow my Savior when he
calls me.

But perhaps after all this, thou will yet again object. I question the
goodness of the ware, if it be so cheap as you make it. This news is too good
to be true. You told us before, difficilia quae pulchra. Godliness cannot be
so good, as others say it is; and so easy too, as you make it. The best things
(every one knows) are hardest to be got, far fetched, and dearly bought To
this I answer, that what I said first, and what you said last, is both true:
and in that sense which you speak of, I will yield that godliness is
difficult, viz: because of difficulty in attaining to it: which difficulty,
according to you, cannot be in the thing, (neither this not any other excellent
thing,) because it is only before we have attained to it. Now I confess, we
cannot so easily be willing to undergo difficulty, to attain that which we
must enjoy and use with difficulty too: for we could never love it so well. But
that godliness is thus difficult; that it is painful, and toylesome, and
uncomfortable in it is exercises; so as a man cannot live one merry day, as long
as he has it; but that tears must be his meat day and night; and his eyes
must still be consumed with grief, and the apple thereof never be suffered to
cease, I do utterly deny. Nay the more difficulty there is in getting up the
hill (I mean of Conviction of sin, humiliation, and repentance) the greater
pleasure do we take to look down again, when we are up. You may observe it,
in the hardest mechanic trades, that are hardest to be learned (which usually
are the best) the workmanship is easy to be done and without labor, or toil;
when as in those that are easily learned and are of an inferior rank, you can
scarce do any thing to the purpose without a great deal of sweat, and toil
and tyring. I will conclude this point with what Solomon said of wisdom,
Prove: 3.17. Her ways are ways of pleasantness: and all her paths are peace.

Another cause that a godly man has to be merry, may be this, that, tweflth
ground satisfactorines of the objects of Love
The objects of his love are satisfactory: which is the most necessary
qualification of any, to make a man rejoice in what he loves. (what a man loves
the mirth of his life is most concerned in, and he spends most of his time
about it) Where there is no satisfaction, but the stomach (as I may say) is
still hungry and empty (just as it is in the hunger of the body) there must
needs be discontent; and consequently sadness, in the desire of that which is
wanting, and grief for the want. But when that which a man loves, is
satisfactory, and answers a man's desires; and gives him enough: then, and not
till then, he takes delight; and then he begins to rejoice: as we say, When the
belly is full, the bones are at rest.

Now for the objects of a godly man's love; the first, and the last, and the
chiefest; the fountain from which all other objects have their satisfactory
virtue; and the loadstone at which they are all touched, whereby they have
power to draw our hearts after them; is no other, and can be no less, then God
himself; who is to every godly man as he was to David; to whom he seemed so
perfectly a satisfactory object of his desire, that he desired nothing in
heaven or earth besides him, Psalm: 73.25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and
there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. And wise enough he to make
choice of such an object. For now, neither ought he, nor need he desire any
thing: or if he do, he is in the fairest way to enjoy it, having him who is
all in all. He satisfies the longing soul, and fills the hungry soul with
goodness, Psalm: 107.9.

He] that is, He alone: for else it is no praise of him. They that seek after
another God, (another thing to give them satisfaction and happiness,) shall be
sure to multiply sorrow, Psalm: 16.4. The other objects of their love, are The
word, and ordinances of God, and the practice of good duties: which as they
give satisfaction by communion with, and participation of the chiefest good; so
are they, in their own nature, good preservatives against sorrow, and sadness;
being contrary to, and used as means against Sin, the cause of all
repentance and sorrow. I would feign know, among all the things that ever a
wicked man loved to have; and among all the actions that ever he loved to do;
which it was that gave him satisfaction.

Many other causes of joy for a godly man, might be fetched from the goodness
of his Condition. But I must leave a little room for your own meditations; and
I doubt not, but many of you that read me, have more knowledge and better
experience.

If notwithstanding all this that has been said, and though the Lord has
shown thee these good things; yet thy heart be heavy, and thou art still
dejected; whatever thou do, confess thy fault to be thine own. Say not,
godliness is this, or that. But rather say with David, when he was ready to
think, that God had forgotten him, (after he had thus complained, Is his mercy
clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? Has God forgotten to
be gracious. Has he in anger shut up his tender mercies? Psalm: 77.8.9,) Surely
this is mine own infirmity, and nothing else, verse: 10. And come to thy self
again; as he does in the following verses, saying thus, I will remember the
works of the Lord: surely, I will remember thy wonders of old. I will meditate
also of all thy work, and talk of thy doings, verse: 11.12. I am resolved, I
will no longer entertain these melancholy phancies: but I will comfort my
heart with meditating upon the goodness of my God, and the wonderful things
that he has done for me, whereby my Condition is so good.

The second Book. Of the Mirth of a Christian Life.
FRom the godly man's Condition in which he is, let us proceed to the
Conditions, affections, and qualities, which are in him, and the actions which
proceed from him; and see what causes he has to have mirth of his own making,
by the grace of God. The first thing he has to make him a cheerful
countenance (give me leave to to go so largely now, I shall speak more
particularly hereafter) is his Godliness. Godliness, I say, both of his
heart, and Life, both past, and present in the performance of good actions. Of
these I might speak more distinctly; but I shall take my liberty, and speak
sometimes of one, and sometimes of another. For godliness in heart; (when a
man is able to assure his heart before God, and his heart does not condemn
him: when a man knows that God's love, and anger is alone to be regarded) it
is impossible he should be sad that has it, let things without him be how they
will. And therefore says the Psalmist, Shout for joy all ye that are upright
in heart. For godliness of Life past, what can be sweeter then the remembrance
of it; unless it be the mercy of God? A good conscience, non-guilty, and
quiet, neither disquieted it self with sin, nor disquieting the mind with
old debts and reckonings, is as great a comforter as an evil conscience, or a
conscience of evil things committed, and intended (which is like an evil
spirit possessing a man) can be a tormentour. If it were not so, certainly the
Apostle Paul, a humble man (he that said if he rejoiced in any thing, it should
be in his infirmities 2 Cor. ^2.9.
) would never have professed so boldly as he did, 2 Cor: 1.12. Our rejoicing is
this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity,
not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our
conversation in the world. This good conscience, is a Con-science, or an
acknowledgement in the spirit of a man of what he does, or has done, the
spirit of God bearing witness with it. Or it is a commending witness ((...),
Rom: 2.15.) of the goodness of actions in, and a comforter after the
performance. Neither does it give a fit of comfort, and away; but a standing
testimonial, ready for their use upon all occasions: continually affording
(...) Romans 2.15.
(...) excuses, and apologies, whenever he that is (...) the grand accuser of
the brethren, lays any thing to their charge. It is a most cheerful
incentive, or encouragement to, though there be never so many impediments in
the way: it is a most excellent lenitive, or sweetning of, though there be
never so much difficulty in the performance: and it is a most triumphing
commemoration, or a delightsome redolence or relish after good actions, though
there be nothing got by the doing. Good actions are like strong fragrant
spices, not only giving a sweet smell for the present, but perfuming the room
where they are; so that you may have the sweetness a long time after. For
Godliness at the present; it is better tried, then told, what joy, and pleasure
a godly man has in the performance of good actions: both when no body joins
with him, and especially in the public assemblies, when believers power out
their souls so many of them together in prayer and thanksgiving. Little do
the Drunkards think, that take so much pleasure in frequenting the houses of
Bacchus; that the godly take a great deal more; and have a great deal more
joy, in frequenting the houses of God. But it is a thing that God promised long
ago by the Prophet, Isa: 56.7. Them will I bring to my holy mountain, and
make them joyful in my house of prayer: their burnt-offerings and their
sacrifices shall be accepted upon my altar; for my house shall be called a
house of prayer for all people. And methinks, I hear the willing people of
God's power, merrily calling one to another in the words of Micah, chap: 4.7.
Come and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the
God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths:
for the law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.
How is a godly man ravished with the beauty of holiness, when he is at such
meetings? How was holy David taken with being in the house of God at Jerusalem?
insomuch that if he were kept from it but a little while, his soul panted for
it, and longed after it, and fainted for lack of it, as a thirsty heart would
do for lack of water. As the heart pants after the waterbrooks so pants my
soul after thee o God My soul thirsts for God, for the living God: when
shall I come and appear before God? Psalm: 42.1.2. The poor disconsolate
Captives prefered it to the best place in their memory, If I forget thee, O
Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning, Ps: 137.5. Nay they preferred
it to their chiefest joy, If I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy,
verse: 6. There was no place in the world that David regarded or cared to be in,
in comparison of it, Psalm: 84.10. A day in thy courts is better then a
thousand: I had rather be a doore-keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell
in the tents of wickedness. Insomuch that he could find it in his heart, nay,
and would choose, if he might have his desire, to spend all his days in that
house, Psalm: 27, 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek
after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to
behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple. Was mount Zion the
joy of the whole earth (as it is said it was, Psalm: 48.2.) and that
notwithstanding the pains the people must take to go so far to the place,
and the many burdensome ceremonies, and chargeable sacrifices to be undergone,
when they come thither? Had they so much joy then, to go so far? and cannot
the godly, think you, have as much and more oy now, in their assemblies, when
the houses of prayer and preaching are so near their own, and the duties to be
performed so easy, and so cheap, and the influence from the heavens upon them
so much more abundant, and the sunshine of knowledge so much more clear, then
it was in those days? Doubtless, they have more by far. What a comfortable
delightsome smell do I perceive, so soon as I come into the room where
hundreds are pouring out vialls full of odours, such as those mentiond in the
Revelation, which: Rev: 5.8.
are the prayers of the Saints! But then how must it not needs be more
comfortable, to be one of the number! One of the number, I say, then when so
many shall join hands, to lift up their hearts: when they shall flock together
with one mind, and go boldly hand in hand to a throne not of judgment, but
grace; where they are sure to obtain pardon for the past, and grace to help
in time of need Heb: 4.16.
for the future.

And if there be so much joy in prayer for what I want, when I am in need; what
is there in praise, and thanks for what I have obtained when my need is
supplied? Praising can as ill consist with sadness, as it can with sin. Of
this there is constant use, Ephesians: 5.20.
because there is constant occasion, through the goodness of God: and therefore
how can a godly man spend much time in sadness? The thought of the goodness of
God, for which we praise him; and our enjoyment of good things, for which we
praise his goodness; if both these together be not enough to make our hearts
merry, I know not what can be. Especially, I cannot choose but commend praising
(for this use and purpose) if it be expressed by singing of psalms: as it uses
to be in the public meetings of godly men. Then there is none taken up with
business, and work, to teach, or to learn: but every one does all that he can
to make and increase mirth; all cheerfully together singing, not only in the
right tune of the psalm, and making melody with the voice to men; but in the
right tune of the heart, speaking not so much (to be heard) to others for
information, as to themselves and others for consolation, Ephesians: 5.19. Speaking
to your selves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making
melody in your hearts to the Lord. Believe it, there is more true mirth in
singing one of the songs of Zion, or one of the Lord's songs, though it be in a
strange land (as this world is no other to a godly man) especially when men
sing with grace in their hearts to the Lord: Col: 3.16: then there can be in
singing never so many of the most musically composed sonnets that can be
imagined. For a testimony of the pleasure to be found in praising God, I need
give you no other then the Psalmist's (who had practiced this duty as much as
any man, and therefore knew what belonged to it) Ps: 135.3, Praise ye the Lord,
for the Lord is good: sing praises to his name, for it is pleasant, Psalm:
147.1. Praise ye the Lord, for it is good to sing praises unto our God; for it
is pleasant, and praise is comely. As James said, If any be merry, let him sing
psalms, Jam: 5.13.
(that is, let him express his mirth in such a way) so I say, If any be not
merry, and would be so; let him sing psalms, or let him make himself merry,
by the singing of psalms.

And not only in prayers, and praises in public: but in the private practice
of any other good action whatsoever, whether of piety, or justice, or charity;
a godly man does, or may take abundance of joy, and delight. When I am giving
of alms, or good instructions, or a good example; how much joy and content do
I take, to think of pleasing him whom I love best, of the good that will accrue
to my brethren, of the rich reward which I shall have my self; and of the
glory that redounds to him that enables me! Methinks I see how merrily an
ingenuous child looks up upon his master, or his father, while he is doing what
he knows will please him: and how gladly, and cheerfully, a loving wife goes
about to provide what her husband loves. If there be so much strength in that
love, which many times has no nobler, nor stronger principal then nature:
what must there be in that which comes from grace! If when I am a child, and
without knowledge; I can do thus in obedience and love to him that begat me to
misery: what will I do, when I am grown a strong man in Christ (for such they
are, whom I most call upon to Rejoice) out of obedience and love to him, who
has redeemed me to an eternal happiness! The very Heathen could find it in
their hearts, to make their happiness nothing but (...), The exercise of
virtue. For they thought, it consisted not so much in (...), as in (...) in
possession, as in action (in (...) not (...), as the Philosopher determines
Eth: l. 1. cap. 8
) They thought a man had no need of a reward for virtue: but that it was (...)
a reward sufficient for it self. It was the saying of one of their Poets.

-- (...)
(...),
(...), -- which I was willing to insert, because it agrees so well with that
of the Psalmist, Psalm: 19.11. (speaking of God's commandments) In keeping of
them there is great reward. I shall need give you no other English of the words.

Artist's, not only liberal, but Mechanic; what delight do they take in
their work; especially when they do it well! Insomuch that you shall have many
of them, not care a jot for any recreation besides. Nay not only workers (who
may be thought to be merry in their work, to think of the profit and the gain)
but players too (as at dancing, or any other sport) who have an eye no further
then the act: when no body sees them (so as they cannot be thought to be merry
for making others so) and when no reward is expected, if they do it well (so
that they cannot be thought to be merry for love of profit) the pleasure they
take in the action is so much; that the pain which they suffer, cannot be
felt, and they care not how long they do it. Even among brutes, observe the
spaniel dog. How glad is he, when he has done as he should, and pleased his
master! And how does he slink for shame, and shrink for fear, when he has
done amiss! Nay this poor silly creature, can take such delight in doing
those tricks that you teach him; that be he never so hungry, he will leave his
meat uneaten, and his nature unsatisfied, to satisfy his master. It Is not to
be believed, that the body, having less work to do and so the less need to
be eased, shall have a priveledge to have pleasure in doing it is works (as it
has in the works of nature, tasting, and smelling, and the like) and the
soul, that has so much more to do, shall have none in the doing of here is. Or
(if you will) that the soul shall take a delight in the works of the body, or
the works that she does by the body: and not be able to have any by her self
in her own: such as I count spiritual exercises, and godly performances
properly to be. (The godly man's work must all be done, though not done all by
her.) No certainly. For as much pleasure (no doubt) may the soul take, in
taking the bread of life, and chewing, and ruminating upon the word of life,
while men are living in the Spirit: (Gal: 5.25.) as the body can in eating the
food that perishes. And so in doing any spiritual good work; as much as it
can in any work of the body.

Again, should not the soul have a recreation in working; did it not take
some pleasure and delight therein; one would think, it were impossible she
should hold out working; sithence her work is so various, and boundless, and
endless. Now (to glance a little on the wicked man) being reasonable in it is
nature; and so necessarily delighting in things that are reasonable; how can it
have true genuine content, and be unfeignedly, and unflatteringly merry in the
unreasonable, brutish, merely sensible, (and many times senseless) and
unnatural ways of sin? I grant, some kind of seeming forced pleasure it may
have in those things whereof it will be one time ashamed; as being either drunk
with lust, or bewitched to madness; (like a man that is tied up to the love of
an ugly woman, by the strength of a potion) and that is the most. I grant, that
even while she is fettered and confind to things below her condition, and
unbecoming her breeding; she may be merry as long as she does not think of it;
or after a sort make her self so, that she may not. A noble spirit forced to
be a servant, or a drudge, or a beggar; as long as he does not think upon his
condition, may be as another man, and make a shift, it may be, to have a
sprinkling of mirth now and then, to wash away the memory of his unhappiness
of being brought into that condition. But yet still, his heart is another way,
and his mind is higher then so. He is like the bird in the cage; singing,
perhaps, sweetly, so that a man would doubt sometimes, whether he had not
rather be there then any where else: but yet ever and anon thrusting out his
head at the holes; so that a man may be sure, he is not where he would be, or
he is not in his element; and that though he sing sweetly and pleasantly to
you, yet it is not so to himself. Besides, there is a singing tongue, with a
weeping heart; and all the mirth such a man has, is but sorrow and sadness;
in comparison of that mirth which he would have, if his person were as free, as
his spirit is ingenuous. Thus the soul of a wicked man, it is of the same
breed that a godly man's is: and being borne as rational as his, would delight
in rational actions, and in the reasonable service of God, as his does, if it
were it is own soul; and it is own soul it would be, if it knew well that it is
not. But alas, she is not her own: For the Devil has bought her unto sin
for nothing, and made her a slave: and she has sold her self to slavery, to
commit iniquity, for pleasures only seeming so by the juggling tricks, and
panourgie of the tempter; and being in the power of darkness, does not regard
to be redeemed. The Divill has taken her alive, 2 Timothy 2.26. (...).
and put her in the cage, and made her miserably subject; a most pure,
spiritual, divine substance, to most foul, carnal, divellish accidents; to
the base and impure passions, and lusts of the flesh, as to the commands of an
imperious whorish woman.

But what do I go about to prove that gladness may be, when I might as
easily prove that it must be the companion of good actions, insomuch that they
cannot be good without it. Companion, I say, not as bells on the neck of a
horse, to make him go the faster: or as sweetning to a pill, for fear of
nauseating good actions without it; as if it were necessary only thus, viz:
that we, and not that God may be pleased. No surely, it is more then after this
manner necessary. For else the actions might be good enough without it (as
pills may be without sweetning, if the mouth would receive them) which they
cannot be, no more then they can without willingness, which is altogether
necessary: for (I mean in this sense) the will of God, cannot be performed
without the will of man. To go further, gladness in the performance of
duties, is more necessary then the performance of duties. For a duty may not be
done, and yet I may do my duty: because I may do another duty, though I do
not this. But I cannot do my duty at all, unless I be glad, or unless I be
willing. (willingness will cause gladness, wheresoever it is, in some
measure) I know not but it may be a command, as well as advice, Serve the Lord
with gladness, Psalm: 100.2. And so that, Psalm: 107, 22, Let them declare his
works with rejoicing. And there is excellent encouragement for as many as do
so: For it is said, that God meets him that rejoices, and works
righteousness, Isa: 64.51.

Wherefore, as James said, If any be merry, let him sing psalms: so I say, If
any sing psalms, or do any other duty, let him be merry: for God loves not a
cheerful giver only; but a cheerful doer of any thing else that is good.
'Twere better thou did sleep, when thou broughtest thine offering to the
Lord: unless thine heart encourage thee, and thy spirit make thee willing,
Exodus: 35.21.

But to make the joy which is to be had by good actions, better yet (and to
speak a little more to what I began with) as we are commanded to hold up our
heads, and look right forward with cheerfulness, upon what we are doing: so
are we allowed to turn about our heads too sometimes, and look backward with
gladness, and rejoicing upon what we have done: as a carpenter, or mason, or
any other workman, uses to do upon his work. And good turn is it, that we
are so allowed. Else we should soon transgress. For how could we choose but be
glad, when we have done that, which we are glad to do when we did it, and must
and will be glad to do, if it be to be done again? Even good words (or words
which we have well spoken) are to look to, like apples of gold in pictures of
silver, Prove: 25.11. Much more then, may good actions be pleasant to look to,
and comfortable to think upon. Methinks, I see how joyfully Samuel stood upon
his justification, because he had lived honestly, and had done no body wrong.
Behold, here I am: wttnesse against me before the Lord, and before his
anointed. Whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I
defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I recieved any bribe
etc: 1 Samuel: 12.13.

And indeed, I do not not see how we can have any joy; whatever we may have
else, if we want this cause. Or, it we have any; it will be very short-lived,
and such as will run away like honey, that has no combs made before to hold
it: as Bernard said upon those words of Paul, Rom: 14.17 (Righteousness and
peace and joy in the holy Ghost) Justitia, and pax ipsa ergo praecedant tanquam
cellulae mellis, ut adhuc labilem liquorem suavitatis solidior possit materia
continere (comparing joy to the honey; and righteousness and peace to the
combs) You may remember, I told you that good actions are as pleasant to the
soul of a spiritual man (one that lives in the flesh indeed; but not after
the flesh, but after the spirit, and by the faith of the Son of God) as meat
and drink are to the body, when it is sit to recieve them. And so indeed they
are: and that not only for the present, while they are (as I may say) in the
mouth (For so unwholesome meat may be pleasant to the distempered sick man; and
so the worst actions may be pleasant to the intemperate wicked man) but a long
time after, and (as I may say) in the stomach, and the belly, and in all the
body; being food of a most excellent nourishing quality, never turning into
choler, and bitterness, ill blood, and ill humors to distemper and disquiet
him; but into spirit and life, and good blood, such as will be ready to retire
to the heart in time of sorrow, and fainting to cheer him, and support him (as
a wicked man's Actions like ill humors, at such times use to run violently
thither to kill him with despair.)

It is all reason (one would think) that he who is to have so much happiness
hereafter at pay-day, and is not to have it till then: should have a little
comfort now to stay his stomach as in part of payment. Neither do I see, why
the wicked man should have so much sorrow for having done ill: if he himself
could not, and the godly man cannot, have joy for having done well. Let the
godly man's condition be every way as good, as the wicked man's is bad; which
is in this respect bad enough, I am sure. For do but give a glaunce of your
eye (in due time I mean to hold you longer in full view) upon the sad troubles
of mind, and the troublesome sadness of heart, which a wicked man has, when
he looks back upon his past actions. I fear, he dares not do it, for fear of
the terrors of hell to torment him before his time. The past life of a wicked
man, may be compared to the same thing, that he himself is by the Prophet
Isaiah (ch: 57.20.) viz a troubled sea, casting up nothing but mire and dirt in
his own face, so that he durst not come near it. A bankrupt-Factor cannot be
more loath to look back upon his book of accounts: nor a man that has gone a
great way out of his way, to look back upon the way which he has gone, and
consider that he is so much the further from the place he should go to; with
more pensiveness, and anguish, and vexation. For with such kind of thoughts he
must needs be tormented, unless he thinks he is still in the right, and
resolve to go on: and then he is in a more miserable condition, and will one
day have so much the more sorrow. For he will be still going further, and
further on: and as many steps as he goes, so many degrees his misery increases.
His misery (I say) increases, if not in the next world, in this: for though it
shall please the Lord to turn his heart, he is sure to be troubled with the
labor of going twice for once, and the vexation and loathnes to go the same
steps again. (There must be going backward by humiliation, and grief, as well
as a turning into the right way) To say nothing of what fear a man that has
done done wickedly, continually goes in (like Cain) lest some justice or other,
or the law of men, or his wronged neighbor should apprehend him. If any body
do but know them, they are in the terrors of the shadow of death, Job 24.17.
How sadly pensive is the prodigal Steward, that has misspent his masters
allowance, when he looks upon the bill of his own expenses, and thinks upon
the greatness of his masters expectations!

Why should not the joy of the godly, be all as much on the contrary? to
consider, that so far as he has gone; he has not been a jot out of the way;
but that as many steps as he has made, he is by so much the nearer his desired
home: To think that he has no necessity to run away like a bankrupt, and
fly to the rocks and mountains to hide him; but that he is ready at any time
to come to God at a call, and give an account of his stewardship? O what an
exceeding weight of comfort is it, for a man to have lived so well, as to be
able to look every one of his former actions in the face; to pass all his
debts and accounts over, and find never a debentur, nor the least occasiof a
Cross to his mirth, for want of a cross from the Cross of Christ to set to
every farthing!

Though at such a time he could not do as he would, but miscarried in his
design by making a conscience to be wicked: yet it is his comfort, he did as
he should. He had rather suffer, if it were never so much misery of body, for
doing well, now; then endure the least trouble of mind for having done ill,
hereafter. To have one lash of the conscience upon the mind, which no body
sees; is more to him, then to have a thousand upon the naked body, and to be
made a gazing stock of afflictions to all the world. It Is more misery to him to
have sinned, then to have suffered. I will conclude with this question. Who,
do you think, was most light at heart; Joseph, who was innocently and wickedly
sold, to suffer the wickedness and oppression of strangers: or his brethren,
that sold themselves to do that wickedness to sell him? And so much for the
integrity of a godly man's heart in the love; and the integrity of his life in
the practice of piety.

A second cause of mirth that a godly man has of his own, or from within
himself, Second cause serenity of mind
is The Quietness, or serenity, and calm of his mind, the good order that he
keeps there, and the command that he bears over his passions and affections.

He has so mortified his passions, and affections, that he seems to have no
(...), or passion at all; at least no inordinate affection, as the word (...)
(passion) Coll: 3, 5, is rendered. I say, inordinate affection: And in this
sense, I think Austin Lib: 14. Dc Civ: Dei c. 1
well approved of the opinion of the Stoics; who held, that only wicked men
and fools have (...) perturbations, So Cicero reneers the word.
or inordinate affections; and that they did cupere, laetari, metuere,
contristari, desire, rejoice, fear: but as for wise men and good men, they had
(...) (rendered, Constantias) even, and well ordered affections: and it was
proper only to them velle, gaudere, cavere, to will, joy, and beware.

There can be no greater joy to a King, or any other governor; then to have
those that are under him dutiful, and obedient to him, and loving, and quiet
among themselves. No greater content to a master, then to have all his servants
at a beck: neither is there more quiet, and merrier living; then in a family,
where the servants and children are orderly, and temperate, and at command. If
it be so in these cases: judge then, how it is in the state of the soul (in
the family of the Interior domus) when grace, and reason shall sit and command,
and but say to this passion, go, and it goes, (for I will allow them to go,
when there is good occasion) and to another passion, come, and it comes.
Certainly, there must needs be much content where it is thus: as there cannot
well be any where it is otherwise. We are not so often sad: neither do we vex
our selves so often, and so much, and so long for any mishaps; as those that
come by our own default, and unrulinesse of our passions. For then we bite our
own lips, and are grieved to think, that we might have been at home (as I may
say) or at leisure to have prevented such a mischief, had we not been wholly
taken up and carried abroad by such or such a passion. In such cases, the cause
of sorrow being from within, where it is constantly maintained, can never keep
out: and so the sorrow of the heart is reflected upon the heart, till like the
beams of the sun, by long and much beating, it become burning hot, and hard to
be quenched. In other cases, judgment and reason will stench the blood, and
enlarge the heart where it is straightened, because it finds a reason to forbear.
But here, it wrings the more for want of reason; and the wiser the man is, and
the more for reason; the less merry he will be, and the more unable to excuse
the fault: having only cause enough for the grief, but no reason for the
cause. Now the godly man has little or none of this kind of trouble; if he
have had but time enough to discipline his passions.

Time, I say: for time it requires, and deliberation, and policy, more then to
conquer an army of men. The enemy that is intestine, is most dangerous: and
among'st our own men mutinies are worse then foreign wars. A man may better
overcome a thousand contrary cross actions without, then one froward cross
passion within: which perhaps plays with him, and makes him sport, and laughes
in his face like a fairy; but will lead him against the trees, and put him upon
difficulties, and at length like an ignis fatuus, cast him into a bog of
inextricable perplexities. Well then, we suppose that already he has bred his
servants (I mean his passions) to his hand, and so disciplined his soldiers,
that they dare not rebel. And having thus ordered them, that every one knows
his own work, and can discern a right object, and keep a due posture; and
observe a fit time, and place, to stop, or run accordingly, and to hold when
it is too much, or too little; I do not see how he can have much sorrow from
his passions. A passion may be in him; but he will never be in a passion: I
mean, so as to be all in in it, all in a passion. (as we use to say.) To
instance a little, he will never be up to the ears in love: for he will love
the creature so, as to hate to abuse it. So neither in hatred. He will hate
sin so, as to love the man that commits it the more, that he may do him the
more good. He will fear a danger so, as to have courage to undergo it. He
will joy in prosperous things so, as to be sorry for his sins that make him
unworthy: and he will sorrow too in adverse things so, as to rejoice that he
shall be never the worse now, and the better hereafter. He will hope for the
best, so as to fear and expect the worst: and he will fear the worst, so as
to hope for the best; following Seneca's rule, not to hope Nec sperave ris sine
desperatione nec desperave ris sine spe.
without despair, nor to despair without hope. Third cause Self-denial.


Another thing whereby godly men cause themselves mirth, is Self-denial.
Whosoever is sad, is displeased Whosoever denies himself, cannot be displeased
(I mean as we commonly use the word) for he regards not to be pleased. Let God
afflict him; He will say, If God be so pleased, so let it be; I have denied my
self. Let men persecute him, he will say, If God be pleased to have it so, I
am contented: I desire not to have it as I will, but as he will: I have denied
my self. Whatsoever hurt any man does him, he takes it no worse, then if it
were to another man. Nay, not so bad: for he has not denied another man; but
only himself. Let him be put to it, either to be wicked, or to lose all that
he has; yet will he not be at all sad, either with doubt of what he shall do,
or with fear of what he shall suffer. For in such a case, Love of a man's
self, and of what is his, and thoughts of selfe-Concernments (I mean of what
Concerns himself in a temporal way) are the only things that make him sad:
it being impossible for a man to be merry, either when he parts with, or when
he thinks he shall part with what he loves. Let the selfe-denyer have never so
many losses; so long as he denies himself, he does not own himself; and he
that does not own himself, will not care to own any thing else; and he that
owneth nothing, cannot be sad for the loss of any thing. (Thought of
propriety, is a maine cause of sorrow.) Let his cowardly friends call upon him
never so often (...) (the words of Peter to our Savior, *) they cannot make
him at all to relent. It Is looking on ones self and pitying ones self, that
makes him sad almost in all cases. (at least of sinful sadness) How do many
men, and how many times do weak Christians, make shipwreck of courage, if not
of a good conscience, in the use of such selfe-doting expressions as these,
What! It is my self. It is my own flesh. It Is that which I have labored for.
It Is my inheritance. I have had it so long; and shall I now part with it? This
goes against my very heart. The selfe-denyer scorns such language; being
tender hearted to none but his brother; and for temporal good things, more a
friend to any one, then to himself. What disgrace? what losses, what injuries,
what dangers, what evils, can make him sad by displeasing him, who can be as
well displeased, as pleased? whose eye is not upon himself; who compares not
what he meets with what himself, viz: how it fits his nature, or his humor,
or his condition, to do him a pleasure; but compares it still with his sinful
life, determining, if it be bad, that he is worthy of it; which will abate his
sorrow: If it be good, that he is unworthy of it, which will increase his joy.

How selfe-denyall will dispose to mirth, you will best percieve, if you
serioufly consider how the contrary disposes to sadness, and what sadness
wicked men continually have from it. It is as hard to be merry with self love,
as it is to have every thing to a man's mind. He that loves himself too much,
will love many other things to much: he that loves many things too much, must
needs have many occasions of being displeased; and he that has many occasions
of being displeased, it is impossible that he should live a merry life, and be
a wicked man. It were easy to be large in this point, by instancing in several
particulars wherein self-love works the wicked man sorrow: But, I must
remember my own intentions, and the Reader's ease.

Another thing that a godly man has to make him mirth, is Faith (and good
turn it has virtue for that use; in regard the godly man's life is most upon
it) I mean not only faith in Jesus Christ, for deliverance from the wrath to
come (that which is enough of it self, to make him rejoice (...) 1 Pet: 1.8.
with joy unspeakable and full of glory) but the grace of believing with
confidence whatever God says; of expecting with confidence what ever he
promises: of trusting to him: submitting to his will, and wisdom: resolving
that he can choose better for us, then we can for our selves: that what ever he
sends us, if it be never so bitter, is wholesome, and fit for our turns. There
cannot be a better thing to keep a a man in merry heart, then to have
continually one to trust to. He that trusts to God, has the best cause of
mirth: because he has the surest ground of trust, viz: the Truth of God: which
is not of no concernment for matter of comfort (as it might be, if God had
never said any thing what he would do for men) in regard that God has
promised so many excellent things: which seeing he has named no particular
persons, must in all reason be concieved to belong to those that believe him,
and love him. If therefore there be any comfort in any of the word of God, the
faithful (or the godly) man cannot be without it. Nay there is certainly in
it, that wherewith he will keep himself from being sad, in any condition.

When any danger is threatened, be it from men, or the creatures, it troubles
him least of any. Come, says he; As the mountains are round about Jerusalem,
so the Lord is round about his people from hence forth and for ever, Ps: 125.2.
Either I shall never meet with any such troubles as they talk of; or, if I
do, I am consident that the Lord will keep me harmless; for I remember a
promise of his, When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee; and
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walk through the
fire thou shall not be burnt; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, Isa:
43.2.

Suppose it be certain, that he shall suffer: he is not so poorly acquainted
with God, or so ill conceited of him, or so little child-like-disposed, to be
vexed for it. He will say, It is the Lord; Let him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel: 3.18. What? shall we recieve good at the hand of God, and shall we not
recieve evil? Job 2.10. What? we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected
us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto
the father of spirits, and live? For they verily for a few days chastened us
after their own pleasure: but he for our profit that we might be partakers of
his holiness. Heb: 12.9.10.

But you will say, all the faith in the world, cannot possibly make him merry,
when affliction is upon him. Ans: Say you so? what? has it nothing to comfort
a man when he has most need? Then a Pin for faith. But certainly, it has.
For, as many things as there are, concerning which there is any promise, so
far is faith able to Comfort. In this case, it has heard, and it doubts not
of the truth of it, that the Lord does not afflict willingly, Lam: 3.33: and
therefore it hops, he will not be long in his punishment. It considers,
That he is God and not man: and therefore it hops that, he will not exercise
the fierceness of his wrath, Hos: 11.9. It is enough for infidels, to lie
comfortless under afflictions; and yet know, that God has said, Happy is the
man whom God corrects, Job: 5.17. And, Whom the Lord loves, he corrects,
Prove: 3.12. Is it nothing, in a time of affliction to have an (...) (or
substance) of such things hoped for, as a believer hopes for, to stand by a
man; especially considering, that besides the certainty of his hope, he knows
withal that these short afflictions which are but for a moment, work a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cro: 4.17. So great are the
comforts, and encouragements, that a godly man has under affliction; that
though he will not despise Prove: 3.11. Despise not the chastening of the Lord.
the affliction so, as to reject it: ((...)) yet he can in a manner despise it
so, as not to be affrighted with it, and made to leave God for a little
beating. Nay, he can comfort himself upon thoughts of gaining by affliction.
Says he, I love God: (and I am confident, he that loved them that hated him,
When we were enemies Christ dyed for us. Rom: 5.10.
will never hate one that loves him) Now, I know (for the word of God is not
to me, as the word of man; or as a letter; or dead as it is to a wicked man)
that, All things work together for good, to them that love God, Rom: 8.28. I
am confident, there has been many an experience of that which is said, 2 Cor
7, 6, God that comfort those that are cast down.

Let a faithful man's affliction increase: as often as he feels an increase,
so often will he repeat, Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, Job: 13.15.

He can be merry when he is reproached; because it is said, If ye be reproached
for the name of Christ, happy are ye, for the spirit of glory, and of God,
rests upon you, 1 Pet: 4.14.

If he be slandred, and ill thought of, through mistake, or malice (either way,
it is that which one that is not a Believer, can hardly bear without very much
discomfort, and vexation) he has this cordial still by him to comfort his
heart, that God will one day make amends for all, and bring forth his
righteousness as the light, and his judgment as the noonday, Ps: 37.6.

Let him live in never so mean and contemtible fashion, and no man regard him:
he will not be be a jot the less merry for that; but perhaps the more; because
he believes that one time or other, God will honor him (which is far
better) because he has said, Them that honor me, I will honor. 1 Samuel: 2.30.

If there come any sickness near him, he can presently say, I remember what
David said, and I do verily believe him, Surely he shall deliver thee from the
snare of the fowler: and from the noisome pestilence. He shall cover thee with
his feathers and under his wings shall thou trust: his truth shall be thy
shield and buckler. Thou shall not be afraid of the terror by night: nor for
the arrow that flies by day. Nor for the pestilence that walks in darkness:
nor for the destruction that wastes at noon day. A thousand shall fall at thy
side, and ten thousand at thy right hand; but it shall not come nigh thee. Only
with thine eyes shall thou behold, and see the reward of the wicked, Ps:
91.3.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. By the help of this grace, either he hopes to escape: or,
if not, he has presently prompted to him, The Lord will strengthen him upon
the bed of languishing, thou will make all his bed in his sickness, Psalm:
41.3. When others, even in the midst of riches, and all wordly likelihood that
they will continue, are ever anon perplexed with thoughts and fears of want;
the Believer, even against hope, will hope with confidence: and when the
distrustful carnalist, with lamentations, and condolings, speaks to him of
his future sad fortunes; he can reply with cheerfulness, Come, I will not be
dismayed. I do still, as I ever did, take it to be the word of God, There is no
want to them that fear him, Psalm 34.9.

If poverty have overtaken him, (perhaps because he has been overtaken in some
notorious sin of trusting in creatures, or distrusting the Creator) yet even
then, if he be not wanting to himself; yea, if he be not too much present with
himself, and do not trust too much to his own wits; he will comfort himself
thus, I remember the saying of one that made experience of it, and one whom I
believe to have said it upon God's motion, Cast thy burden upon the Lord and he
shall sustain thee: he shall never suffer the righteous to be moved, Ps: 55.22.

He can be merry, though he be forced to forsake his house, his brethren, his
sisters, his father, his mother, his wife, his children, his lands, for the
name of Christ; because he believes, he shall recieve an hundred fold, and
shall inherit everlasting life, Mat: 19.29.

If he cannot be religious, unless he leave his parents and his dearest
friends: whereas, another heart would be ready to break, he goes from them
with abundance of alacrity, remembering these words, Come out from among them,
and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I
will recieve you, And will be a father to you, and ye shall be my sons and
daughters, says the Lord Almighty, 2 Co: 6.17, 18

He can be merry in a time of Famine, because it is said, The eye of the Lord
is upon them that fear him: upon them that hope in his mercy, To deliver their
soul from death and keep them alive in famine, Ps: 33.18.19, In such a time;
when all the people of the country besides him are sad, and know not what to
do; he will cheer himself up, and say, Although the fig tree shall not
blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines, the labor of the olive shall
fail, and the fi^l^s shall yield no meat, the slock shall be cut of from the
fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls: Yet I will rejoice in the Lord,
I will joy in the God of my salvation, Habak: 3.17, 18.

He can be merry in a time of War, because he believes not that only in
famine, God will deem him from death, but in war also, from the power of the
sword, Job: 5.20.

He can be merry under oppression, because he believes, that God will be a
refuge for the oppressed. Psalm; 9.9.

He can be merry the same day that his father dies, because he believes that
God is a father of the fatherless, Psalm: 68.5.

He can be merry though all the men in the world be against him; because he
believes, that, so long as his ways please the Lord, the Lord will make even
his enemies to be at peace with him, Prove: 16.7.

He can be merry, though the Devil be close by him to devour him; because he
believes, that God does give his Angels charge over him to keep him in all
his ways, Ps: 91.11. And that he will not give the^ charge without power to
execute.

Although he know, that, as long as he is in this world, all this world will be
one way or other for his hurt, (by temptation, or some other way) yet he can be
merry, because he is still thinking, that Christ gave himself for his sins,
that he might deliver him from this present evil world, Gal: 1, 4, and that
whatsoever is born of God overcomes the world, 1 John 5.4.

He can be merry in a strange country (where it is hard to be merry, so long
as a man has the heart Exodus 23 9.
of a Stranger) because he believes, that God loves the stranger, Deuteronomy: 10.8.

He can be as merry in the night, as at any other time (which the wicked man
will hardly believe, because he uses no revelling, nor drinking) because it is
written, When thou lie down, thou shall not be afraid: yea thou shall lie
down, and thy sleep shall be sweet, Prove: 3.24.

He can be merry, if he have never so great a design in hand (whereas in such
cases, other men are full of sad, and perplexed thoughts, and doubts, how it
will succeed) because he believes, that if it be not displeasing to God, or not
for his own good (in which case he does not desire it should succeed) so long
as he commits his way unto the Lord, and trusts in him; he will bring it to
pass, Psalm: 37.5.

He can be merry in temptation, because he knows, if he be faithful himself
to believe, God will certainly be faithful to help, and will not suffer him
to be tempted, above what he is able, 1 Cor: 10.13: But especially, because his
hope extends not only to a freedom from this temptation, but in little time
a complete conquest over the tempter, having this word for it, And the God of
peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly, Rom: 16.20.

If he be called before the enemies of the truth, to speak his mind of it (when
others are sad and troubled either with fears or doubts) he can be merry,
because it is written. Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I
confess also before my father which is in heaven, Mat: 10.32. When he has
confessed, and is put to suffer for it, he rejoices the more, upon remembrance
of those words of Christ, Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and
persecute you and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my
namesake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven:
for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you, Mat: 5.11.12.

If he be cast into prison, he will not be dejected; because he knows, that
God despises not his prisoners, Psalm: 69.33. That he hears their groaning,
Psalm: 102.20: and in due time brings out those that are bound with chains,
Psalm: 68.6. Neither need he be sad, because he cannot be revenged; inasmuch as,
if he were desirous of revenge (which he is not) he knows not only that
vengeance is God's; but that he will certainly repay, Rom: 12 19.

If he be presently to suffer death, it is all one: for he will make himself
merry with this, that he that loses his life for Christ's sake, shall find
it; Mat: 10.39.

But it may be objected, 1. How know you, that these promises belong to every
faithful man? (especially) what warrant have you, to claim a right in those
promises which were made to particular men? Ans: I will reply in no more words
then these: What warrant has the Author to the Hebrews (chap: 13.5.) to
exhort the Hebrews to be contented with those things which they had, upon this
encouragement, For he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee?
when as these words were spoken unto one particular man, viz: Joshua, Jos: 1.5.

2. It may be objected, In these cases that you have mentioned, it is easy not
to be sad. A Stoick's stomach will go so far: and in most of them, it is no
more then your godly man is bound to do. But what can he do against those
evils, that in his own opinion are indeed to be lamented? As for example.

1. Continually repeated sins. First Object
Can your faithful man, that should be sorry for sin, be continually merry,
and yet be continually sinning? Ans: First, I do not say, he is continually
merry. Secondly, I say, that there is some joy in a godly man's heart, even
while it is sorry. The thing that rejoices him notwithstanding his sins, is
the same grace of Faith still, whereby he believes, that the Lord is merciful,
and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness, and truth, keeping
mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, Exodus: 34 6.7.
And that he will be so in particular to him; because he is none of those, to
whom he denies to show himself in those terms, viz: those who sin
presumptuously, and with delight. So long as he endeavors not to sin (and
therefore John first bade the Christians be careful, that they did not sin
before he told them those words) If he sin, he knows he has an advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is the propitiation for his
sins, 1 John 2.1.2. And knowing that this Advocate was of God's appoynting; he
is always comforted with this, that if he confess his sins, God will be
faithful, and just, to forgive him his sins upon his intercession, 1 John
1.9.

2. Second Object
Ignorance in spiritual truths. Can one that is greedy of knowledge (as your
godly man is) be without his desire; and yet be merry? Ans: Yes, he can be so,
if he be certainly persuaded, that he has recieved an unction, whereby he
knows all things that are for the present needful to be known, 1 John: 2.27:
and that God will certainly guide the meek in judgment: and teach the meek his
way, Psalm: 25.9.

3. Third Obj ct
Scarcity, and weakness of grace. Can he that is so much a thirst for more
grace, and very hungry for the food of life be merry with but a little of it? A
very thirsty, or hungry stomach, cannot be merry with little meat, or drink.
Ans: I must needs confess, this is a thing would break my heart for sadness
(so I must say still, say you what you will) were it not for Faith, whereby I
believe, that God will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and slouds upon
the dry ground, Isa: 44, 3: and that he will fill the hungry with good things,
Luk 1.53. He that so much desires to persevere with God, and knows his
inability thereto; it is impossible he should be merry, if he did not believe,
that the Lord is faithful to stablish him, and keep him from evil, 2 These:
3.3. And he that does confidently believe this, how he can be sad for fear of
falling away, I see not.

4. Fourth Object
Strength of corruption, and inclination to sin, and love to the creature.
Can one that is still crying out, Who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? Rom: 7.29.
be merrry as long as he is in this bondage? Ans: Yes he may, if, besides his
being justified nevertheless by faith in Christ at the present, he have also a
certain hope to be eased thereof, by little, and little; as indeed he has;
seeing he builds upon it, that Christ will be to him, first, or last, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor: 1.30.

5. Fifthct Obje
The silence of the spirit. What can he do now? Ans: Faith will comfort him
still. For by that he believes, that his heavenly father will give his holy
spirit to them that ask it, Luk, 11.3.

6. Sixth Object
Hiding of God's countenance. Can he that places all his mirth in (or at least,
grounds it upon) the enjoyment of God; be forsaken of God, and not be sad. Ans:
I confess, here is sadness indeed: but either first it is but for a moment,
to speak of, (as it is said, Isa: 54.7. For a small moment have I forsaken
thee: but with great mercies will I gather thee:) and then you have no reason
to make such a matter of it. Or secondly, It has together with the shortness
of the time, a knowledge that it will be so: which will sprinkle some drops of
joy among'st the sorrow; even upon the remembrance of this word of God, He will
not always chide, neither will he keep his anger for ever, Psalm: 103.9.
Besides, the faithful man cannot forget those words of his Redeemer, He that
has my commandments, and keeps them he it is that loves me: and he that
loves me, shall be loved of my father: and I will love him, and manifest my
self to him. If a man love me he will keep my words: and my father will love
him: and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him, John: 14.21, 23.

7. Seventh Object
Dullness to duties (v: g: prayer etc:) Can a soul that loves God, be merry,
when it cannot express it is love to him? Ans: God forbid a man should be so
senseless, as to be merry in such a case. But this I say. First, that he will
be so but for a little while. Secondly, that he is not without comfort, because
he knows it: inasmuch as he believes, that in due time God will prepare his
heart; and (whereby he will be a gainer) at such a time, as he will cause his
ear to hear, Psalm: 10. Thou will prepare their heart, thou will cause thine
ear to hear.
17. Though he be straightened in his own spirit, and cannot open his mind: his
comfort is, that the spirit of God will make full amends, helping his
infirmities, and making intercession for him, with groanings thot cannot be
uttered, and that (to be sure) according to (...).
the will of God, which he himself perhaps might be defective in, Rom: 8.26,
27.

8. Eighth Object
Ill success in prayer. Can a man be merry that is continually praying, and
desiring, and never obtaining? Ans: This will vex another man indeed; but a
faithful man it cannot; or at least it will not, but by his own default. For
he knows it, and takes it for a certain truth; if he be not in fault
himself, or there be not some other impediment which he himself would allow,
if he knew it; that the Lord (for his part) is rich unto all that call upon
him, Rom: 10.12.

9. The afflictions of the Church. He ought, Ninth Object:
(and if he ought, he will, if he be a godly man) weep with them that weep,
Rom: 12.25. Ans: First, I do not say, a godly man is never sad at all.
Secondly, I say, that he may weep, and yet not be sad so as wicked men are, or
as wicked men think godly men to be, viz: troubled, and vexed with anger,
doubt, fear, and the like. Now he is the less sad in such a case because he
believes that word of God, As the mountains are round about Jerusalem: so the
Lord is round about his people, Psalm 125, 2: and that though the power of man
should, yet the gates of hell never shall prevail against him, Mat: 16.18.

I have been the longer in these instances of faith, because I would show the
young, weak, and doubtful Christian, the way of improving this grace. And I
have spoken so much upon this faith of Trust, rather then upon faith of
justification, and election to glory; because I know it to be common for wicked
men to pretend to that, who have nothing at all to say to this: the falsehood
of the former, discovering it self by the want of the latter.

Now I cannot be so large as to express: but, upon what is said, I desire you
to consider your selves, what a deal of sadness, and vexation, must needs
attend the wicked man, who wants Faith. Every evil has it is full power on
him. When he is in want, he cannot believe that God will provide for him: and
so makes have to supply his want himself: and making have, is necessarily
subject to anger, obnoxious to hindrances, and can never be at leisure to be
merry. When he has any business in hand, he cannot commit it unto the Lord.
Trusting unto nothing upon which he can depend; he does every thing with
solicitude, and is continually vexed with crossings, and failings, and
miscarriages. When he is wronged, he cannot believe that God will recompense,
and so free himself of the trouble by leaving the judgment to him: but
unnecessarily puts himself to abundance of pains, and discontent, and
vexation. I might instance further: but I intended only to show you the way.

I should in the next place speak concerning Hope, but that I have spoken of
it already, when I treated of the godly man's estate in expectation. The next
thing which I will speak of; shall be Love: which wheresoever it is, and to
whatsoever; whether it be to God, or men, or any thing else; expels any
sadness, or vexation that may come from such objects, as heat does the cold.
Love to God, though he shall whip a man never so much, will make him close his
lips, and kiss the rod that strikes him. It will make him as mute as David
was, Ps: 39, 2: dumb with silence. Love to God, will produce a liking of any
thing that comes from him: and a liking that comes from him, will make him
rejoice with thankfullnes, if it be good: if it be bad with patience. Love to
men, though they shall persecute him never so much with injury, and revilings;
will make him prosecute them again, not with suits in law, to revenge; but
with suits in prayer to convert He will behave (...). Ign: ad Ephesians: Ed: Voss:
himself as a Brother; but he will be Imiter only of Christ. Though they
curse, yet he will bless. The more they delight to vex him, to work him
sorrow: the more will he delight to endure it with patience, and overcome it
with joy. And indeed, he cannot be angry with them, for any hurt that he
receives by them: because he does not take it (and so it is, as he takes it) as
from them: no more then a man does a wound which he receives from the sword
(for such a thing the wicked Psalm: 17.13.
are in the hand of God.) No, he takes it as from God: and therefore he knows,
he must; nay therefore he is resolved, he will be contented. Let it be Shimei,
that curses; and let him curse never so much; yet he will say, It Is the Lord,
and that is all he will say. He knows he has deserved to be punished by their
wickedness: and he knows he is pardoned for those sins by which he deserved
it: and therefore let them do what they will, they shall never make him angry,
nor sorry, nor weary. He is one that can say with the Prophet Isaiah, upon the
same confidence that he did ( viz: that God would help him.) chap: 50, 6, I
gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair,
I hid not my face from shame and spitting. And no wonder he does thus, being
taught to do so by God himself, v: 7.
who opens his ear in the same manner, as the Prophet says he had done to
him. He is taught to believe that there is no evil in the City, but the Lord
has done it: and he is taught to say always, The will of the Lord be done. So
that, come what will, it is welcome: because he looks upon God as the author,
whom he loves too well to repine against him.

Love is a cheerful passion. If a man be slow, it will make him quick. If a
man be careless it will make him dilligent. If a man be covetous, it will make
him liberal. If a man be silent, it will make him speak: And sing too,
according to the old saying Amor musicam docet Plut. Symp: lib. 1. prob: 5.
and if he be sad, it will make him merry. It is a question usually discussed
whether there can be joy, where is not, or has not been love before: and it is
generally held affirmatively. Austin Lib: 14. de Civit: Dei: cap: 7.
called joy Amorem boni habiti The love of a good obtained. There cannot be a
better thing to prevent sadness, then Love of Friendship. Amor amicitiae.
For it is in it is nature selfe-denying: putting a man out of Amor facit amatum
in amante esse and vicissimamantem in amato, Thom: Aq:
himself, and making him live in the thing that he loves. But to speak a word
more of love toward men, as I spoke of it before (meaning not love of
friendship, but pious charity) You will not imagine what quietness, (and
consequently what cheerfulness,) is in the spirit of that man, who has the
love of every man within him, though he have Redamari non est de essentia amoris
not the love of any without him; I mean, that loves every man; though every
man hate him. Hatred, (and so envy, Damascenus dicit invidiam esse speciem
tristitiae.
and every passion that has but the least spice of hatred in it) can never be
without sadness. Either the man has a cause of his hatred, an injury offered:
which if it do not grieve him (as I make no doubt but sometimes he is glad of
a provocation) then want of power to revenge, want of instruments to employ, or
one unpleasing circumstance, or other, will do it. Or else, he has no cause
(in which hatred he is most bitter, and most frequent) and then, besides the
trouble of mind to make one, and the remorse of conscience for having none; his
enemies are the more, and the difficulty of executing his malice is much the
greater. The object of Hatred, is Malum evil, either so indeed, or appearing
so: either of which, if it do not make a man sad, will be sure to keep him
from being merry. In all the passions whereof hatred is the ground work, (or
one of the ingredients) Aristotle puts (...) sadness, and trouble; as if
haetred could no sooner be kindled; but sorrow, and trouble must presently
catch a fire. Now Love in a godly man, like a predominant element, has so
overspred his whole nature, and so conquered and corrected the adversary
passions: that there is not so much left of any one of them, as to be strong
enough to draw up one cloud upon his face, or a wrinckle upon his brow, or one
angry word from his mouth. Meet him when, and where, and in what condition so
ever; you shall be sure to find him, in his countenance, in his speech, and in
all his carriage, loving, and cheerful, and very well pleased. He will have
his head anointed; and his face washed: and be ready to speak, and willing to
be spoke to, when he goes abroad; though he have fasted, and wept, and mourned
in secret, never so much. (though I must confess, I find too many professors
defective in this kind) Certainly there must needs be much the less sorrow,
where so much Love is; which does not only cover, and pass over: but prevents
the committing of multitude of offenses.

The next thing that I have to speak of, Fifth cause Fear of God
I shall but a little more then mention: but mention it I will, lest it should
be objected to me: and because I know, wicked men will hardly believe, but such
a thing must needs be a cause of sadness. That which I mean, is The Fear of
God. He that fears God for love, is so beloved of him, that he need not be
afraid of any thing: and he that is not afraid of any thing, will be sorry
for nothing. He that fears God, is afraid to displease him: he that is afraid
to displease him, will take nothing impatiently: and he that takes nothing
impatiently, will not be much vexed for any thing.

The next best herbs that grow in the garden of the Spouse, so good to prevent,
and to purge melancholy, are Patience and Meekness, and Humility. Herbs, that
grow all very low, and by the ground; and so the less exposed to weathers, and
tempests, Patience.
and troubles. For the first of them Patience, (I mean the Habit of suffering
well, though a man be not actually afflicted) there is not any thing in the
world, I should prescribe, so soon as it: not to put a man in a fit; but to set
him in a kind of habit of mirth. It has a sovereign virtue, to take out the
sting of the worst reproach, that any busy pettish wasp, flying in my face,
will fasten upon me. It has a virtue to take out the teeth, that it bite not
at all; or to expel the power of the greatest affliction. It will whet, and
sharpen thee a stomach, to slight the greatest abuse. It will strengthen thy
stomach, to live well upon the hardest fare. It will cleanse thy stomach from
choler, and phlegm: from testiness to be moved, and dullness to be daunted: so
that any course meat shall please thee, any injury down with thee, and nothing
shall make thee sick. It will take away the loathing of the appetite, and the
prejudice of the judgment, and give thee a resolution (which many times is
sufficient) to relish the potion (I speak of wrongs, and crosses, and the like)
like a patient indeed.

A patient man will apply himself betimes to the hand that strikes; and
getting near the rod as soon as it is moved, must of necessity by so much abate
the force of the blow, as he stops the motion of the rod. Either the trouble of
an evil will be prevented: or the evil of a trouble will be soon allayed by
such a compliance. The way, many times, to prevent a blow in the face, is to
set a man's face toward it, and catch the ball in his hand ere it come so
far. A thing that falls on a man from on high: if he stand still; and either
shrink his shoulders, and pluck not up his courage, but let it fall into his
heels; or be taken napping; or do not think he may be hurt, and so provide not
for it: may by these means beat him to the ground. Whereas if he gather up his
spirits about him, and call up his courage, and bear up his shoulders, and
endeavor, and spread his arms to embrace it; he may bare the burden without
hurt, and not lie under it neither, but stand upright. In the like manner the
case stands with thee, Christian, when any evil befalls thee: and after the
same manner must thou behave thy self. Be before hand with every cross. Look
for every evil, thou can think of, as if it were falling; and ward the blow.
Expect every thing: and by this means thou will not Nil ad mira ri, prope res
est u na, Numici, So laque quae possit facere and serva re beatum. Hor: ep:
wonder at any thing: which is the only way to make a man composed in spirit,
and consequently quiet, and able be merry in any condition. It works in a man
an (...) a constant temper of mind, an equability, or moderation: which
doubtless is a notable qualification for a merry heart: and therefore the
Apostle, after he had bid the Philippians Rejoice etc: ch: 4, 4: presently
added (...) etc: Let your moderation be known unto all men.

And as in all manner of affliction, patience does either make the burden
light, before it light upon the man; or the man's heart light in bearing it: so
much does Meekness in afflictions from men; and more too; in regard that I
cannot exercise my patience, till there be an affliction to suffer; but my
meekness I can. Many times, the affliction which else would have been kindled,
if I had been stout, and hard enough to have struck fire upon; whereas by
patience, it could have been only lessened, and weakened; by my softness, and
gentleness, and meekness, is altogether prevented. A godly man, having both
meekness at all times, to carry himself; and patience in persecution to carry
his cross; will either be quiet with all men's consent, or be merry in spite of
their teeth. A meek man has seldom any bodies ill will: because being no busy
body to be in many places; he is seldom in any bodies way, to give him
occasion of offense. Either he is quite out of the way; private, and retired,
possessing his soul in humility: or, if he be in the way; he is so low, and
close to the ground, that none but he that has a hellish foot, and treads
under ground, can stumble at him; and none but he that has the devil in his
heart, can find in his heart to molest him. If any malicious spirit shall be
angry for want of an occasion; and, sithence he could not be moved by him by a
provocation, will be moved by the devil by a temptation to injure him: he will
either make the fire go out for want of fuel, (making him leave striking by
not resisting, weakening the blow, by withdrawing his body, and lying like the
dog upon his back, so that, unless he be worse then a dog, he will leave off
biting.) Or else, if his enemy be resolved to persist, and there be no remedy
but his body must needs suffer: yet he will be sure his soul shall do well
enough, and with very indignation bear up.

He will clap his head under his wings, like the beaten Cock, (that would seem
to be beaten so much, that he may not be beaten any more) and when the other
thinks he has brought him to despair, laugh in his sleeve, (or in his heart)
and be merry where no body can see him. Whosoever can bear an injury offered;
can easily forbear to return an other: and he that can forbear, and hold his
hand but never so little; will be so glad of his forbearance, and so proud of
his patience, that for the joy which he has for so doing, he would not for all
the world, but he had done as he did. It Is as much joy to a moderate man, that
he has tempered his passions; as it is to a temperate man, that he has
moderated his appetite. A patient man (says the Son of Syrak) will bear for a
time; and afterward joy shall spring unto him, chap: 1.23.

He that does not think himself so good, as not to deserve to suffer an
injury; will think the offering of the injury not to be wonderd at, and the
suffering of the thing it self not to be grieved for.

I pray, do but consider, who is most likely to be merry; or who is likely to
be most merry? he that is meek, and has injuries offered, but never receives
them: or he that is proud, or stomackfull, and provokes men to injure him, and
receives the injury, and cannot take rest, till he have taken rvenge? It Is not
easy to think, unless thou have tried, what content, and joy, and triumph, it
is to a godly man (more then if he had obtained a conquest over his person by
force) as it were to starve his enemies malice, by denying it matter to feed
on: to weary him out with waiting for provocations: to make him vex, and pine,
and wast his own strength; and so to get the better of him (as Fabius did of
Annibal) by slighting, and forgiving, and refusing to fight with him. Such a
man as this, who is merry not only by his patience, but for his patience, and
not only glad to suffer, but glad that he has suffered (which is a joy that
will last to all eternity) notwithstanding all his sufferings, let them be
never so many, we are so far from thinking him a sad disconsolate man, and an
object of pity: that we are rather of Aristotl's mind, not to commend him with
praises, but to magnify him with admirations (...).
(...), Jam: 5.11. We may venture to call such men (...) men of blessed memory,
while they are yet amongst us. Godly men, upon the account of this and other
such graces, are so far from being ordinary men, that they seem not to be men
at all, but Angels: for they live Angels-lives, and have their conversation in
heaven. Every godly man, is a man of a heavenly spirit; and no earthly thing in
the world can have power over him. Only a sad look from heaven, can make him
look sad. It Is not all the foul weather of scornful looks; nor the continual
showers of scornful speeches, can do it. It Is no news to him to be hated,
that abhors himself: nor to be vile, to him that has humility (which is the
next virtue that I mentioned) because he is vile in his own eyes already; which
makes him not care how vile he is in another.

Do not think to make him sad, by reproaching him with lowness: and baseness
in the worlds account, Humility.
who is so in his own. Thou can not make him lower then he is already; for he
is as low as the ground which thou treadst upon, and makes it his common
practice to lay his mouth in the dust. All thy hard sayings, and reproaches,
that thou castest upon a godly man, fall upon him like stones upon a bag of
wool, or fiery darts on a leathern shield (Ephesians: 6.16.) His clothes are girded
close to him (for he is no loose liver) with truth, and innocence ( Ephesians: 6.14.)
and he has also upon him the breast plate of righteousness: so that thou can
take no advantage against him. Thy reproaches have not the power upon him,
which they have upon a wicked man. For there they meet with resistance, (like
stones struck upon steel) and strike fire, and make a combustion. The least
spark of fire, will set him all in a flame. Having much combustible matter of
passions; he is soon incensed and troubles himself for revenge, and is sad if
it be but delayed. The godly man is above wrongs, and injuries, and miseries,
and the world, and all. Without pride be it spoken, he scorns to take notice
of his enemy, or his malice. He has humility indeed, which makes him look
low: but he has nobility too (by adoption) which makes him look high, and live
above the things of a lower world. His humility will make him look upon the
ground: but not for dejectedness, as if he could not look upward; nor for
affectednesse, as if he thought it a good work (as, I fear, many do) but
only that he may not look, and gaze upon the things that are round about him,
and see such things as may displease him, or grieve him, or seduce him. He has
none of those cares, Non de integra conscientia venit studium placendi per
decorem, Tertull: de Cult: Faem:
which the proud man has so many of viz: among others: lest his clothes, or
his words, or his carriage be not fine enough: none of his fears of being
counted foolish, or childish, or clownish, if his looks, or his language, or
his carriage, or his complements be not in the fashion, or according to his
quality: None of his sad thoughts, for coming off ill at such, or such an
exercise; or suspicions, that such a one looks upon him, when he is doing this
or that: Lastly, none of his jealousies, nor doubts, nor misconceits: with in
finite more such troublesome businesses, which the proud man's head is
continually full of.

Next to his humility, and carelessness of being honored with esteem, and
reputation (an excellent preservative against sorrows, and vexations, which
continually hang like flies upon those that are shye, and nice in such things)
is his Carelesnes of being honored with preferments, and places of wealth, and
power. I call this carelessness, Modesty, or want of ambition (for we can go a
little further then Aristotle, who would not allow of Aphilotimy) It Is a virtue
this, that having little to do, and less to care for; can quietly sit, and
sing, or sleep, without disturbance either from within or without: while
Ambition, seeking great things for her self, walks up and down, scratching her
head, and biting her lips; as sad, as cares, and doubts, and fears of
miscarriage, with multitude of thoughts, and multitude of enemies, and
multitude of obstacles, can make her. And yet has not a godly man less honor
(in men's hearts; that is, that they think him worthy of preferment) for not
caring for it but even so much the more. Whereas the wicked man has many times
the less, when he looks most after it: and when he has most, he has none at
all, Prove: 3.35. The wise shall inherit glory, but shame shall be the promotion
of fools. When he has all: he has no content: for he is, as Solomon says,
(...) Prove: 28, 25: big, and wide of spirit, of a large heart, hardly
satisfied: like a longing stomak, always craving, and never filled, till it be
full. The truth of it is, the godly man is soexcellent in this and other
virtues, that the wicked man himself cannot choose but honor him in his heart,
whether he will or no. Nay, in spite of his teeth, sometimes he does bewray and
discover it: for you shall see him stand gazing, and amused, and amazed, when
he sees the temperate man, and the devout man, and the self denier; and their
faces seem to shine, when he looks upon them. I might speak a great deal more
in the commendation of a modest man's life, in relation to his mirth, and joy:
but I forbear, lest I should make him blush.

Another virtue, which the godly man has, much conducing to a merry life, is
Taciturnity, or Saying little: as little troubled with sadness, as it is with
repentance: For (as Plutarch De Liberis educan dis.
said) (...), (in B. Hall's english) It repented me often that I spoke to much,
seldom that I held my peace. It was the saying of a wiser man then Plutarch,
Who so keeps his mouth and his tongue, keeps his soul from trouble, Prove:
21.23. Nulli tacuisse, nocet, nocet esse locutum. In many words there must
needs be much hurt, and offense, either to the hearer or speaker: and, I
believe there is as much vexation in the world, for words, as for deeds.

But, the most constant companion of godliness, and the merriest companion of
all, Contentedness.
is Contentednes. Neither is it an ordinary merry companion; one that will be
merry with them that are merry; or one; with whom a man may be merry, if he
will: but such a one as will make mirth, wheresoever it comes; always preventing
trouble at home; always ending, and never be ginning brawles abroad. Well may
Contentednes make a godly man merry, be he never so miserable: for, it will
make him rich, be he never so poor. Make him rich, did I say? or rather
declare him only to be so? And yet no disparagement to contentedness, neither;
as long as the honor redounds to godliness: with that, I know, it will be
well contented. For godliness first is gain by it self: and contentedness is
the gain, or the fruit, of godliness. But such a fruit it is, as it bears
continually, winter, and summer; and more in the winter, then in the summer:
for adversity is her chiefest bearing time. I think, you may take those words
of the Apostle, 1 Timothy: 6, 6, Godliness with content is great gain, in the
sense which some do those of the Wiseman, Wisdom is good with an
inheritance: so, as if I say, a wise man is strong with his armor, or the
like. A godly man, though he have never so little; having contentedness, has
as much as he can desire. Now he that has the goodness to desire but little,
and the happiness to desire no more then he can have: how can such a man choose
but be merry? A godly man is never without (...) moderatenesse of passion. Now
where there is (...), there is also Sufficiency by himself.
(...). (for if I care not how it go abroad, and am one manner of man, go how
it will, and have that within me which will serve for every condition; I have
no need of foreign things, and have enough of my own, or I count it enough that
which I have, (which is all one) and so I am (...)) but where (...) is, it is
impossible any condition should make the man sad For when a man is (...) (as
who yould say selfe-sufficient) and cares for no more, as long as he enioys
himself, or is able to live by himself; he cannot be troubled for want of
other things, and consequently cannot be sad. On the contrary, the wicked man
who minds earthly things, enlarging his desire as hell, and being as death
which cannot be satisfied: the objects of his coveting are always so many, and
those things which he can obtain, so few; that, like a longing woman, he
cannot choose but be always sick, and sad in mind, both with the trouble of
coveting so much; and the thoughts of his misery, that he covets what he cannot
have, and that he cannot have, what he covets. But especially, is he thus sad,
if his maine vice be to be covetous, I mean in that sense in which we usually
take the word, viz: covetous of money, or wealth, either to get, or to keep it,
or to increase it: wherein he endures so much pain, and fear, and
distraction, (as, it may be. I shall show you more fully in it is proper place.)

Another cause of mirth which godly men usually have (wicked men but seldom)
is Laboriousnesse: and business of mind, and love of employment: qualities,
that are of excelient use in a man's heart, to fill up the room, and stop the
entrance to sorrowful thoughts, and fears. As, on the contrary, constant
experience tells us (and I can say somewhat my self) if a man do not busy
his mind, but be either a busie-body only, and wander about from house to house
to tattle and prattle; or else lies gaping, and folding his hands out of
sluggishnesse; or making pictures in his fancy, as children do in the walls,
out of pensiveness and dumpishnesse: I say, if a man have such abundance of
idleness (as the Prophet's word is Ezekiel: 16 40.) let him have never so great
abundance, and fullness of bread: let him have an affluence of all worldly
things to his mind, and let every body please him, and do all that they can to
make him merry (besides being more exposed to the temptations of Satan, and
more open to his assaults, while he has no Work a doing, to keep him out) his
own necessarily active, and still busy (such is the nature of his soul) but
yet idle, and not busied mind, and fancy, will work him sorrow enough, and
more then ever he will be able to conquer, though nothing from without was ever
able to overcome him.

Another virtue of a godly man that will dispose him to mirth, is Temperance: a
virtue that will make the heart as light, as it does the rest of the body. A
Temperate-man, first Resolves to use but a little; and therefore has not much
trouble of care, to provide what he would have. Secondly, he does use but a
little: and therefore he has not much trouble of fear, that it will do him
hurt. Thirdly, he has used but a little: and so is free from the trouble of
distempers, pain, and sorrow, and of much loss to boot. It were easy to be
large upon this: But I have much field, and I cannot tell how to stand long
upon one place.

There is one more, that is far beyond all the rest, a virtue, shall I call
it? or, a compound of virtues? I mean, Harmlesnes, or Innocence, or
unwillingnes to hurt any body for the present, or hereafter. (for of innocence,
i: e: unguiltinesse and not having done hurt heretofore, I have spoken already)
He that will not hurt his enemies with injuries, will never hurt himself with
sorrows and vexations. I think, there is none more troublesome to himself,
then he that is most troublesome to others. The creatures of prey, live
solitary in deserts, and disconsolate places: while the poor harmless sheep,
and other such creatures as they are (though they be nearest the slaughter)
skip, and play, and think of nothing. The innocent man, intending to hurt none,
and having a desire to do every one good (while he knows, that non-intention
to hurt is sufficient to excuse, and a desire to do good, good enough to
commend him) can no more be sad for having done hurt, then he has cause to
grieve for not having done good. It Is not the act of doing hurt, will make a
man the worse: no more then the power of doing well, will make him the better.

With his unwillingnesse to do hurt (for else I should not care much to
commend him) there goes a willingness to do good, then which there is nothing
that works more constant quiet to the soul of any Christian: especially if
his endeavor be for the soul of his brother. The object being better; the
good done is the better too, the person's commendation more, and the joy for
having done it, greater. To enlarge a little here (though I have spoken to this
purpose already) What a deal of comfort does a man take? what happiness does
he count it? and with what joy does he tell of it, and remember it, that he
lifted up an other man's ox out of the ditch? or saved his lamb from the fox?
or any thing else, though it be but of little value, from the fire! How much
more joy then, think you, must it be to a man (unless he do well, and know
not of it, which is more then he can do: for a senseless creature may as well
do a good deed, that has no knowledge at all; as a reasonable creature, if he
have no knowledge of what he does) to have saved, or won, or gained a soul
(for such a thing it is to convert a soul; and we have no weaker adversaries
then Satan, and all the world to contend with us for the prize) to have lifted
it up from the pit of hell, recovered it from the jaws (not of the fox, but)
the Lion, and snatched it as a firebrand out of the fire, when it was so near to
be burnt? If it be such a comfort, and joy, and glory to a Schoolmaster, to
have made a good scholar in human learning what must it be to have made one in
Divine? (and there is no learning, truly learning? but the Divine: nor any
Divine learing truly Divine learning, but Christianity, and godliness) Paul calls
the Christians in Philippi his joy, and crown, chap: 4 1: and so those or
Thessalonica, his joy, and Glory, 1 Epist: chap: 2.20. Surely, he that converts
a sinner; since his charity is all as much; his joy must be no less then the
woman's was, when she found the g^o^t, or the Shepheard's, when he found that
sheep that was yielded for lost.

And here, now I am speaking of saving of souls, and converting of sinners,
(In which I comprehend strengthening the weak, instructing the erroneous, and
ignorant, and comforting the afflicted, and all other such actions of a godly
man as these are, (tending to the benefit of other men's souls) I have an ocean
of matter before me, and I have much ado to forbear launching into it; but I
am afraid of going too far, or tarrying too long at sea, it is such pleasant
sailing.

There are two things more in a godly man that dispose him for mirth, which I
will but mention. The first is, the Agreeing of his Will with the will of God.
The second is (that which will follow upon this, and the rest of his
qualifications formerly mentioned) a Preparedness for any condition, or time,
though it be the very last judgment; for he lives not in darkness; and
therefore that day cannot come upon him as a thief in the night, 1 Thessalonians: 5.4.

For the first, that it is so, may not be questioned: for his constant prayer
is, Thy will be done; and his ordinary motto, The will of the Lord be done, or,
It is the Lord, let him do what seems good. And then, if it be so, that he
may be merry in any condition, is all as true. For, if his will be according to
the Lord's will: nay, if his will be at all times this, that the will of the
Lord be done; and he knows that there is no evil in the City, but what the
will of the Lord is, should be done: it is as impossible, that any evil should
make him sad; as it is, that, that which is according to his will, should
grieve him: which cannot be.

For the second, that it is so, appears by all my discourse hitherto
concerning his cenditions. For being furnished with good qualities, and all
things necessary within; doubtless, he is provided to entertain any guest that
shall come from without, and to welcome and comply with any accident. Which if
it be so; that he cannot be sad will follow; because, being so prepared; he
knows how, and he has ability wherewithal to do it. He will use every
condition so, as it shall in no way force him to sadness. If it be bad; he
will not be so much troubled as to be sad now; and if it be good; he will not
be so much gladded, as to occasion himself to be sad for it hereafter; as
other men are wont to do through want of moderation. Having so many props, and
helps, as he has (the grounds, and causes of joy, which I have mentioned) and
being so well taught as he is, by the spirit from within, and by experience
from without; and endued with so much strength, and courage from above: like a
thing that is square; which way soever he falls, he will stand upright; and
throw him, how you will, he will be sure to pitch upon his legs, and
courageously say with Paul (Philip: 4.12.) (...) know how to be abased and I
know how to abound^ every where and in all things, I am instructed both to be
full, and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need.

It were easy to show, what quiet the Continent man has, in comparison of the
Incontinent man: whose restless burnings with desire, and his difficulties,
and fears, and diseases, in, or after the accomplishing of it; there is none
but will easily believe. So likewise, to show how quietly, and void of vexatious
thoughts, the Merciful man lives, in comparison of the Cruel man. Neither
were it difficult, to enlarge upon several other commendations of a godly man,
in regard of his virtues, and the usefulnes of them to the producing of joy:
but this much may suffice or the present.

There are also several other ways for a godly man, to make himself merry. I
could show him some out of Basil, in his sermon of Thanksgiving, wherein he
explaines those words of the Apostle, Rejoice always etc: For putting the
question, whether the Apostle did not exhort Christians to an impossibility, in
regard that at all times, either they are in afflictions, which it is
impossible they should be glad of; or have committed sins, which they are
bound to be forty for; he answers himself, and says; First, that misery, and
sin, Licet uti peccatis Estius in L. 1. Did: S. 2.
which breed so much sorrow to others; to a man that is in Christ, prove an
augmentation of joy. Secondly, that such a man, in the greatest affliction,
has those things to meditate upon, which will afford him abundant occasion to
rejoice: as, among other things, his creation out of nothing; his being made
after the image of God; his having reason, and understanding; his power to
discern between good, and evil; his restoration after his fall; and his
hoped for resurrection after his death.

In the next place, because the carnal man, (whom Idesire to lure over to
christianity) understands not these things, and is better acquaintend with
worse; I think, it may do well, now I have spoken so much of the chief causes
of joy, which a godly man has: to say somewhat of the chief causes of sorrow
which he has not: especially considering, that men of fearful and prejudiced
minds, though you tell them of never so much good, which they never thought of;
you had as good say nothing, unless you tell them likewise, how they may avoid
never so little evil, which they are afraid of; although that evil be so
clean contrary to the good, that it cannot consist with it. You shall never
make them merry, by telling them of living in plenty, or an assurance of having
this, or that; unless you can persuade them, that they cannot come to poverty,
by such, or such a mischance; or that nothing can hinder them of it, or take it
from them. There are within a man's own self, two grand enemies to his own
mirth, Care, and Fear. He that has the first, is sad, because he thinks he
cannot obtain: and he that has the last, because he thinks he cannot avoid,
what he would. For the first, The godly man may not, (and being a godly man,
will not, because he may not) suffer it to be within him. He may not by any
means take care upon him: and if he happen to have it thrown upon him, he has
a warrant to cast it off again upon God, who cares for him. See an express
command for it Phil: 4, 6, Be careful for nothing etc: Be not sollicitous; as
if thou thoughtest thy caring were sufficient without God's providence; or, as
if God's providence were not sufficient without thy overmuch caring. He that is
so, must needs be sad for the present with the trouble of care for good, and
will be afterward with the trouble of sorrow for ill succes. But the godly man
is never so, nor so. As for Fear, it is too cowardly an adversary to conquer
the heart of a Soldier of Christ. The righteous is as bold as a Lion. His
heart is too well fixed, to shake for Fear, Prove: 28.
Psalm: 112.7.8. It is tied fast to God, by hope, and faith: and it is held fast
by God, by his everlasting love.

A godly man is a choice vessel, without crannie, or breach, or leak: not to be
sunk, with the waves and troubles of conscience; for they shall never be so
strong as to break him: nor yet to be overwhelmed, with the waves and troubles
of afflictions; for they shall never rise so high, as to get above him. And
therefore is it, that an upright man can walk to and fro so boldly, and not be
touched at heart (though all his hair be burnt) in the greatest combustions,
Isa: 33.14, 15. If he have at any time a little touch of fear (as he may have,
being a man; neither does reason require that a man; or faith, that a
Christian, should be senseless) yet it is so, that he may be merry
nevetheless, and rejoice with trembling, as the Psalmist speaks, Ps: 2.11. But
yet, I pray tell me, what should he fear? It cannot be any kind of misery: for
he knows well enough that all things work for his good; and therefore misery
too, among the rest. Neither can it be any kind of adversary (and who will slye
when none pursues him? unless the terror of God be upon him; which is only
upon the wicked) for he is well eased of all his adversaries; and therefore
fears them not. First, he fears not what the devil can do; because, he
cannot kill the soul, but with it is own sword. I mean thoughts, words, and
actions: which by the grace of God he shall never have power of. Secondly, he
fears not what Men can do; because, they can but kill the body: and for that,
he could afford to come again, and give them thanks, because of a better life,
which by this means he enjoyed the sooner. Thirdly, He fears not what his
lusts can do; because they are Mortified themselves, and cannot kill either
soul, or body. Fourthly, he fears not what the World can do; because, he
has overcome, not only the temptations and tempting vanities of it, so as he
scorns to be sorry if he want them: but all crosses and unpleasing accidents,
that he can meet with in it, so as he scorns to be sorry, if he have them.
Last of all, he fears not, either the King of terours himself, Death; because
they two are friends now, and he has, in a verry good sense made a covenant
with him; not that he may not meddle with him, but that he do him no hurt: or
secondly any of his Pursuyvants, as Sickness, and deadly diseases; because, to
him (that I may use the words of our Savior concerning Lazarus, even when he
knew he was to dye, John 11, 14.) They are not unto death. They are not sent by
God so much to kill him, and take away a life that is but temporal (though
that be no more, then to lay his body down softly on the ground; or rather lay
it up safely in the grave against a good time) as to make it better alive; that
when he has raised it up again an incorruptible, and glorious, instead of a
corruptible, and base condition; he may give it a life that shall last to all
eternity.

By this time, I hop, I have brought you over to be of my mind, that a godly
life is the merriest. In the next place, lest you should mistake; and, because
the best life has so much mirth; where you see much mirth, presently think,
that there is the best life: I will give you some marks, and chraracters,
whereby to distinguish the true mirth, which is to be found only in a godly
life, from that which may be had in a wicked. Those marks are drawn partly from
the Author; and partly from the the object, and subjects; and partly from the
properties of it.

1. For the Author, (the principal mover, or efficient cause of it) it is the
Spirit: according to Paul, Gal: 5.22, But the fruit of the spirit is love, joy
etc: Joy has the second place among the fruits of the Spirit: who may be
compared to a Fire (as it is in Math: 3.11.) as well for warming, and
cherishing, and refocillating the heart with joy; as for purifying, and
purging, and cleansing the conscience from dead works. It Is the Spirit's
proper office, and business, to be a Comforter. And therefore a godly man may
lawfully be merry, upon his warrant, and never fear to be troubled for it
(whereas the wicked man is sure to be called to an account for his mirth)
because his authority is good; having his warrant and commission, from the
Father and the Son both; and being sent down among'st us under that name.

2. For the Object, The maine, ultimate, and adequate object of it, is God: who
is the object perse, and there is none other besides; unless it be
anologically in relation to, and by participation of him! I say, the object of
it is God. For as the joy is from, and by God the spirit, who beget's it in us:
so is it in God the Father, who gave his Son, and all things else with him; and
(especially in God the Son, who gatt it for us, and gave himself a ransom to
redeem us from sin, and punishment, and sorrow. Whence it is, that you find
those expressions of rejoicing in God etc: so frequent in Scriptures,
wheresoever there is either an exhortation to rejoicing, or mention made of the
practice of it. See one place in the prophecy of cap. 61.10.
Isaiah; and two in the Epistle to the cap: 3 1. and c. 4.5.
Philippians, (where, I think, as in most other places of the Epistles, by The
Lord, is meant more especially Christ (as I hinted but now) the Sovereign Lord,
and God (indeed) of all the world, but more peculiarly the Lord and Master of
the Saints, who are his household: and their High Lord, of whom by faith they
hold their inheritance, which he purchased for them: and their Lord and Owner,
whose peculium, or peculiar possession they are, purchased by, and to himself)
What happiness has he, that has such an object, to rejoice in! What perfect
joy has he, that rejoices in such an object, though in none besides! And
indeed, none besides must it be for if he rejoice in any thing else, that the
world affords; his joy in this will be little. Sicut Bernard: Sermon: 38. De
Verbis Domini.
non potest homo duobus dominis servire: sic and nemo potest in, hoc seculo
gaudere, and in Domino. A man can no more rejoice in God, and the world too;
then he can serve two masters. Better be content with this object alone and
seek no further. It Is the way to make the joy better. A true friend will be most
trusty to me, when I trust most to him: and if I trust wholly to him, I shall be
sure to have my business done. If thou should seek further; thou would
but loose thy labor, as Solomon did: who sought far and near, to pleasures,
wisdom, and wealth, thinking they might make him some mirth, and content; but
in the end, he confessed, he found the best of them but mere emptiness, and
vanity, and vexation of spirit.

3, For the subject of this mirth, as the Author was the Spirit of God: so the
subject of it is the spirit of man, or the spiritual man. For in a godly man's
mirth, the outward man has little or no share: it is the inward man, that
rejoices; and that for inward, and spiritual things only. De interioribus
gaudeamus, de exterioribus necessitatem habeamus, non voluptatem, says Austin
on the thirteenth psalm. Outward things are but for his necessity; and so he
uses them: and not for his pleasure or delight; for, so he should abuse them.
It Is not as the mirth of a wicked man: for that is but just as much as you can
see; merely superficiary, or shallow. The wicked man, is like one that wears
all his clothes at once. If he have never so great need, he has no change.
When his mirth of laughter is done, which heshewes abroad to all the world,
commonly to serve them; he has no more at home to serve his own turn. When
his outward mirth is ended, and his outward comforts fail him: he has not one
dram of inward mirth, or comfort, to support him, and keep him warm for one
minute. Alas, it were a poor business if a godly man's mirth were no better
then so. For what joy can be in the labor of the sides, or the throat; if it
go no deeper? What is the merriest tune upon the treble of the tongue; unless
the base and ground of the heart, consort? Or, what is it to say with David, my
lips shall rejoice; unless we can add with him, And my soul which thou have
redeemed? Psalm: 71.22. If a godly man's mirth were no better then so ( viz: to
consist in laughter) it were little better then madness; for ipse dixit
Solomon (who, no doubt, had lived a joviall life, and therefore could tell by
experience) said it, and stood to his word, I have said of laughter, it is mad,
Eccles: 2:2. No, the mirth I speak so much of, is no such thing as uses to be
expressed by, or has it is being in shouting, or dancing, or shaking of the
sides, or showing of the teeth. Neither are any of those expressions, the
necessary fruits, or signs of it. For then, you might often conclude against
me: in regard you shall often find them missing (being either neglected for
love of better, or forborne for fear of offense) The isntrumental causes of
this mirth, are of the same nature the efficient, moving, and all the rest are,
not carnal, but Spiritual. Godly joy plays least in sight, and plays most
so. It is not ordinary ware: to be seen by every one that sees the owner. It Is
not a thing that may be imitated by beasts; or any man, but the spiritual.
Flesh and bone, and skin, and bodily organs, cannot act such a pure,
spiritual, and divine work.

Nay, most commonly, when (for ought a man can see) by his countenance without,
a godly man may be sad, and melancholic, and perplexed: his joy and mirth
within, grows so much the stronger; as heat does in many bodies in the inner
parts, by the antiperistasis of the cold that is without. Or rather, indeed,
the Soul, knowing the nature, and worth, and excellency of the joy, coming
from a Spirit; thinks it unfit to mar the gift in the use, and abase it in
the enjoyment, by suffering it to be exercised by lower instruments then
spiritual: and therefore keeps it wholly to her self, without dividing it out
to many subjects: so that the joy, being undivided, must needs be stronger in
it is exercises, by, being united: and the Soul the stronger to exercise it, by
being undistracted, and more at leisure: For so she does all her self, and
trusts not to servants; and who doubts, that the work is bettter done, when the
mistress does it her self?

Other marks there are of this joy, to be fetched from the nature and kind of
it; and from the chief properties, and qualities belonging to it.

The properties belonging to a godly man's joy, which are not to be found in
the joy of the wicked, are, 1. Truth, and Sincerity. It is joy in puris
naturalibus, as they say. It Is all gold, and without any alloy. No mixture of
wormwood in the cup, to imbitter it: no ill herb in the pot, to mar the
broth. No trouble to go with it: no bitterness, or sorrow in the bottom, to
come after it. It is good without sorrow, so that he does not grieve with it
now: and it is good without sin, so that he need not repent of it afterward.
It Is without the adulteration of sadness, to make it uncurrant; and the mixture
of any thing that is evil, to make it unpleasant. The mirth of the godly is
the quintessence of joy; the gladness of joy, as the expression of the
Psalmist is more then once, when he would set forth the greatness of joy,
Psalm: 43, 4, I will go unto the altar of God, unto God my exceeding joy. In
the original it is, the gladness of my joy. So Psalm: 68.3. Let the righteous
be glad: let them rejoice before God: yea, let them exceedingly rejoice. In the
original it is, let them rejoice with gladness: as if there might be a joy,
that had sorrow with it; and as if none but the righteous could have such a
joy, as has none with it.

A wicked man's joy can be but little better then equivocally so, as a painted
dog is a dog, or a dead man, a man. It Is not true i:e: sincere: For it is mixed
with sorrows and never runs clear. Neither is it true, i:e: genuine: for it is
but feigned, and hypocritical. It Is no jugis aqua, water that comes from a
fountain from whence it may be continualy supplied. It Is but like the river
that Job speaks of: dried up in the scorching summer of adversity, when he has
most need of it, and when the godly man's joy is highest. There is a fair
outside, indeed, of profuse laughter, and jollity: but there is nothing else.
There seems to be something goodly: but it is no more then a whited wall, with
mud underneath; or as a whited sepulcher, beauty full without, but full of dead
men's bones, and rottennes within. It Is not gold that you see in a hypocrite:
it is but gilt, upon tin. So much gilt without; so much guilt and vexation,
and sorrow within. His inward parts are as full of vexation, and sollicitous
thoughts; as they are of ravening, and wickedness. ( Luk 11.39) His mirth is
like the pleasant itching of a sore, that is healed to soon: for it is (...),
and it festers underneath, though it look never so well. Within there are
prickings of heart: for in the midst of their laughter (as Solomon says) their
heart is sorrowful: and besides that, the end of such mirth is heaviness,
Prove: 14.13.

2. Property of a godly man's mirth is Fullness, and perfection. Fullness, I
say, absolute, in quality, or truth; and in quantity, as much as this present
life is capable of: For as for absolute fullness of joy in Melancthon upon
those words, Your joy shall be full, Joh. 17. Intelligatur ergo non quantitate,
sed sirmitate.
quantity, we must tarry till the next life. However, there is such fulness of
this joy, even in this life; as that it cannot be exhausted, measured, or
expressed, either by the actions of the body, or the relation of the tongue.

Yet is it not the worse neither, for being so great: for it is all as good
too; even, as Peter says, Full of glory, 1 Pet: 1.8. It is said of the
disciples, Acts 13, 52, that they were filled with joy, even in a time of
persecution. What Christ has done and spoken for us (and so whatsoever he
does, or speaks for us still) it cannot have less effect in us, then to make
us truly joyful, John 15.11. These things have I spoken unto you, that my joy
might remain in you, and that your joy may be full. All redeemed ones, that
have so many mercies on every side, and are encompassed with the Ps. 5.12 and
32.7.
favor of the Lord; must needs be encompassed also with Ps. 32.10.
songs of deliverance, and girded Ps. 30.11.
with gladness. If it were not so; or, if it should not be so; God would never
have said by his Prophet Isaiah chap: 65.14, that his servants should sing for
joy of heart: (for the godly only sing for joy of heart; the wicked sing for
want of it) nor would the Psalmist have the Saints be so merry, as to shout for
joy, Psalm: 132.9.

The joy of the wicked, is never full or perfect, not so much as in simple
being, so as a man may truly give it the name of joy; much less in the best
sort of being. For there is always one thing or other missing, or amiss: and
many times confessions are drawn from their own mouth, that their mirth is not
true. How usual are these speeches amongst them, If this or that had been; or
if this or that had not been, we had been truly merry.

3. A third property of a godly man's joy is, that it is Continual. 1.
Continual without interruption: an inconvenience common to the mirth of the
wicked; which comes and goes by fits, and lasts but for a moment (to speak of)
when it lasts longest, Job 20.5. A man had better be sad, then merry so little
while. For it does but set him a longing, and so leave him in pain. And yet
thus it is with the mirth of the wicked: which is therefore compared by the
Preacher Eccles: 7, 6: to the crackling of thorns under a pot. It is as soon
out, as in: makes a great cry, and dies.

2. Continual without end: everlasting consolation, 2 Thessalonians: 2, 16: like the
liberty to which he is redeemed, and for which he joys (see the prophecy of
Isaih to this purpose chap: And the redeemed of the Lord shall return, and
come to Zion with songs, and ever lasting joy upon their heads: they shall
obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.
35.10.) like every thing else that comes by grace, and every way that God leads
a man in, Ps: Lead me in the way everlasting.
139.14. Oh happy man! how graciously does God deal with him! He has a long
time of health, and joy, and cheerfulness of mind now before (as men use to
have of their bodies, after some great disease) and joy everlasting after the
second resurection; for a very short shaking ague, of sorrows, and pangs, when
he was borne anew at the first resurection. If he have a tempest of trouble or
sorrow, for awhile; he has the longer, and the greater calm for it afterward.

The godly man's joy is of as long continuance, as he himself, and his power
of rejoicing is. If he and that endure for ever; so shall his joy: for the
object of his joy endures for ever, is not subject to be lost, and cannot be
taken away from him, like the object of a wicked man's joy. Si gaudes de nummo,
times furem: si gaudes de Domino, quid times? says Austin upon the 144. Psalm:
If thy joy be in money, thou fear the thief: but if thy joy be in God, whom
fear thou? And therefore the same father upon the 84 Psalm: gives this
counsel, Qui vult securus gaudere, in illo gaudeat, qui non potest perire. He
that will be secure in his joy, let his joy be in him, who can never perish. We
may compare this joy, as Hugo de S. Victore does God's mercy, (from whence it
drops) to the oil in the cruse; which was still spending but never spent.

The wicked man is ever, and anon, in the midst of jollity, troubled, and sad
to think, that his joy will not last: so that it is his usual saying, I shall
weep for this another time. His mirth wastes, and lessens, and changes color in
the using, according as he sees the vanity of the thing, for which he is merry;
and perceives the weakness, and badnesse of the cause: which he will of
necessity do, more or less, within a little time. Whereas he godly man's
cause of his mirth being sufficient, and such as whereof he will never be
ashamed: his mirth increases in the use; and the more the drinks, the better he
may. Neither need he to fear that he shall be weary, and so cease from mirth,
for want of variety: for he shall be continually supplied with recruits; new
mercies, and new songs (not every morning, but) every moment. He shall never
want occasion to say as David did. Sing unto the Lord a new song, Psalm: 96, 1,
Sing unto him a new song, Psalm: 133.3. He has put a new song into my mouth:
Psalm: 40.3.

The Mirth Of a Christian Life. The Third Book.
I Would now use some words of exhortation and reproof; but that I find some
rubs in in the way, which I must first remove.

I hear too many object, and say, What do you go about to prove this, and
that, and to extol the condition of a godly man, as if none were merry nor
happy but he? when as you see your self plainly, and in your heart cannot but
acknowledge the truth of the contrary, viz: that he is neither happy, nor
merry. That he is not happy, is sufficiently evinced by the many troubles, we
know, the righteous (as you call them) have in all ages of the world, and their
continual affliction: so as one would think, that they alone of all men in the
world, were made to suffer: and borne to misery as the sparks sly upward. To
say nothing of that which is most certain, by the word that went out of
Christ's own mouth, which must never return to him again, peremptorily
spoken. In the world ye shall have tribulation, John 16.33.

To such I answer, that their argument will not hold stich, for want of
consequence. For godly men may be happy notwitstanding their afflictions; and
they may say as Paul did 2 Cor: 4.8, 9. We are troubled on every side; yet not
distressed: we are perplexed but not despair. Persecuted, but not forsaken;
cast down but not destroyed. Afflictions in this world, are not miseries to
them; whatever they are to others, and what ever they are deemed to be to them:
any more then fightings, and watchings, and hardships are to courageous
Soldiers, and volunteers; who are as willing (as it would be their shame, if
they were not) to undergo danger, as to undertake service; knowing they must
take pains as well as wages.

That afflictions are not miseries to a godly man, so, as he is unhappy by
having them, may be proved by these two reasons. First, beceause he is prepared
for them. Secondly, because they are prepared for him. First, he is prepared
for them, as a patient is for his physic, viz: with gentle preparatories, that
they may work kindly neither too little, nor too much, so as he should have
either way cause to be grieved. God (who is his Physician; and therefore will
do the best for him for his own glory; as any physician will for his credit)
always sends him suffering graces, when he intends to give him suffering
times. Let poverty, and sickness, and all the rest of the reputed miseries of
this life, come upon him like armed men at once: they shall not prevail
against him. For being well provided with the provision of Hope, and Faith; and
fenced with the armor of prayer, and patience; and being watchful, and
standing still upon his guard; let them come as many as they will; and let them
come when they will come; he is ready to recieve them. Nay, more then so, he
knows that they will come; having intelligence long ago given him, that which
was but now spoken of. And therefore (to retort my objectours own arrow in
their own face) being still in expectation of them, and seeing them before they
see him; he takes his time to fit himself, and his best advantages to deal
with his enemy: and so it is a thousand to one but he overcomes him -- Infregit
fortunae vires, quisquis prior vidit.

He that sees the Basilick first, shall neither be overlook't, nor overcome.

2 They are also well prepared for him: as well, and as carefully, as a father,
if he were the physician, would prepare a medicine for his own child: sugared
over, and corrrected with many lenitives, and made easy to endure. Only, they
must have some strength left them, to effect their intended operation; which
was, that being but short and momentany, they might work out for them an
everlasting, and far more exceeding weight of golry, 2 Cor: 4.27.

Now, because (it may be) you will hardly believe this, that afflictions should
be easy to the godly: and because it is of great consequence for your own use,
and the maine design aimed at, viz: the Mirth of the godly, it will be labor,
and time well spent, to show you more fully, how i^ may be so.

To begin therefore. Afflictions may be easy to the godly man. First, because
of the Commonnes of them to such as he is: even to all the Saints that have
been, of who^ he has hard, or read: all that now are, whom he has seen
himself, or heard of by others that have seen them: all that shall be, of whom
he has seen, and heard the prophecies, that their condition shall be the same
that his is. He that is in afflictions; and knows, that all those which are,
or have been of his mind, are not, nor have been otherwise then he is; cannot
in reason: and he that knows that always those that shall be, shall not be
otherwise: seeing there was a time, when he himself was not (and so he is one
of those) cannot in sense, expect to be otherwise himself. Lo a necessity,
which he himself knew, that it could not be otherwise: insomuch that I may say
to him, and such as he is, as Paul did to the Thessalonians; 1 Epist: 3, 3, No
man should be moved by these afflictions: for your selves know, that we are
appointed thereunto. To grieve for what a man knows must needs be, is folly: to
grieve for what comes of his own choosing, is worse. Now he chose to be godly,
though he knew a necessity that such must suffer afflictions.

I need not leave this argument for the weakness of it. For, doubtless,
Commonnesse of a godly man's Affliction to others, must needs lessen the
heaviness of it; if there were nothing else, and no limitation what those
others were. For, Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris, is an old saying,
and true, whatever the company be. The heathen themselves, even those who were
so far from thinking that others should grieve for them, that they thought it
unfit to grieve for themselves; yet thought it a great deal of ease to a man,
to have a great deal of company. Cicero (in his Epistle ad Coecinam) Levat
enim dolorem communis quasi legis, and humanae conditionis recordatio. But, if
there be ease to be had from the common condition of humanity, where there is
nothing but company; much more from the common condition of Christianity, where
there is is not only com-passion and company; but compassion, and sympathy: a
(...) (or communion) not only in having every one the same head; but in
enjoying the same good, and suffering the same evil one with an other.
Christians are not only suffering fellows; but fellow sufferers: not only
bearing each one his burden; but every one another's burden. Add hereunto
the company of one, who is more worth then all the world, Jesus Christ: who was
in all points tempted as we are, Heb: 4, 15: who besides compassion to pity
(being touched with the feeling for our infirmities) has consolation to
comfort: who so suffers with them (being himself afflicted in all their
afflictions, Isaiah 63.9.) as to make them able to suffer with him; having not
only bowels to resent their affliction; but a hand to relieve, and make away
in the temptation to escape, 2 Cor: 10.13.

2. Afflictions are not so grievous to the godly, because, to them they are not
clouds only, or signs of anger; but rainbowes, and donatives, and tokens of
love now, and very good signs of salvation hereafter. They are sent to them
from God: and not only for a (...) a proof of their faith (as they are said to
be by James chap: 1, 3: and by Peter 1 Epist: 1.7.) but (...) more then a
probable sign Drexelius makes them one of his twelve marks of their
predestination.
that he loves them. It Is not their curse to be afflicted, but their blessing:
Not a mark of a rogue (for afflictions are the marks of Christ, Gal: 6.17.)
but an honorary privilege of such as the King of heaven intends to honor,
Phil: 1, 29, To you it is given etc: To you it is given in the behalf of
Christ not only to be lieve on him but also to suffer for his sake.
(...), it is a special gift, wont to be bestowed upon them, as upon those that
are gracious and in his favor ((...)) Afflictions, as I said before, are the
marks of Christ, which he sets upon his sheep. And so they are also the marks,
and badges of Christianity. They are God's usual livery which he gives. They
are another baptism, and seal of his Covenant with us. Our Savior called his
crucifixion, his baptism, Math: 20. It must not, and doubtless, it will not
be gievous to him that will be a Christian, to be baptized, and to be
anababtis'd so over and over.

If it be so; then give me afflictions, or I dye. Oh, let God afflict me with
all my heart; so long as he says, I have chosen thee in the furnace of
affliction, Isa: 48.10.

If a Schoolmaster bear no affection to a lad; he will even let him alone, to
take his own course. Whereas, if he love him, and desire to do him good; he
will be ever and anon punishing him with exercises, and setting him taskes, and
trying him with difficult questions: and a good Scholar would desire to be
often tried. Just so it is in the school of Christ; where the trials are
afflictions, Rev: 2.10. And those are oftenest tried (and it is for their
credit; as it is for schoolboys, so to be) that are most beloved: and those are
most beloved, that seem to be least. Illi vere irascitur Deus, cui non
irascitur, God is angry with him indeed, with whom he is not angry. It Is the way
to be, and a sign of being left to destruction, to be left to a man's self.

God, (like many Schoolmasters, and fathers) is most angry, when he says
least. When he neither chides me like a father, nor chastises me like a master:
I have cause to fear he will sentence me like a Judge; and will punish me the
more, for that he has punished me so little. It Is true, a child, or an
apprentice, either (at any time) because he is ignorant, may think it to be out
of ill will: or (at the first) because he is young and tender; may take it to
heart, and think, and speak the worse of his master that beats him, for a long
time, while he remains in his ignorance, or his childhood. But seldom, or
never, knew I such a one, after he came to knowledge or years of discretion,
(unless he were then so bad, as not to know the good of it by experience)
complain of correction. It is even so with a young scholar in the school, or
an apprentice in the household of Ephesians: 2.19.
Christ. At first, perhaps he may cry out of infirmity (being but weak in the
faith) and he may complain out of ignorance (being as yet but in the rudiments
of christianity (...) Heb: 5.12.
) and but now initiated into the Temple; 1 Cor 3.16. Ye are the temple of God.
that he is hardly dealt with, when others are spared. But afterward when he is
well grown, and grown strong in faith, and has been a good while in the
Sanctuary (whither David went, Ps: 73 17.18.
when he would see the end of the prosperity of the wicked) and has gotten to
himself a good degree in all saving know ledge of Christ; when he percieves
the benefit of correction, and sees to what pass others come, who were let
alone to their liberty: then he is just like him, who is angry with his
physician, while he is sick with his physic: for afterward, when he has found
the good of it, he thanks, and praises his Physician, for doing so well, likes
and commends his physic for working so well, and blesses himself for taking
so good a course. Then you shall hear them say (as I my self have said many a
time) I would not now for a thousand worlds, have been without chastisement.
Better, never to have been borne then to be a Heb: 12.8. But if ye be without
chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards and not sons.
bastard so. If I had not been sick, I should have been. If I had not been
diseased with afflictions then; I had been diseased with sin now, and to be
diseased with punishment for ever hereafter. It was a good Ps: 119.71.
turn, that I was afflicted: otherwise, in what case had I been? Nihil eo
Demetrius in Seneca.
in faelicius, cui nihil infaelix contigit. None more unhappy, then he that is
never unhappy. The furthest way about to unhapinesse in the worlds account, is
the nearest way home to unhappiness in the Christian's account, or that which
is such indeed. If it be a woeful thing, to receive a man's consolation here,
as it is said it is Woe unto you that are rich for ye have received your
consolation.
Luk 6.24. I cannot but think the better of my self, and hope for the better
from my God, for his choosing to afflict me now. I will not be angry, let him
do what he will. No, if I may have my choice; let him strike me, and love me,
rather then stroke me, and hate me. A lover was never angry with his mistress
for striking him, though it were never so hard: because he takes it as a token
of love. Falling out amongst lovers is a renewing of love. Here is no falling
out, but all love. Ablow in love is better then a gift: and a gift from one
that hates me, is worse then a blow. -- Timeo Danaos, and dona ferentes.

Let him that loves me, or let my God smite me rather. I shall count it a
kindness: it shall be as precious balm: I Will warrant you, it shall not break
my head.

A godly man cannot but take the afflictions which God sends him, as from a
loving master: who bearing a love to a scholar, chastens him betimes, when it is
least shameful, and most profitable, He that spares his rod hates his son:
but he that loves him chastneth him betimes.
Prove: 13.24. God corrects him privately here in the sight of a few, and those
such as (many of them) will not rejoice at it (unless because they think it is
for his good) but rather grieve with him, and comfort him, and do what they
can to deliver him; that he may not do it publikly, in the sight of all the
world, when every one will rejoice at the sentence, and where there shall be
none that shall be able, or willing to save a man.

The godly man is judged now, that he may not be judged then 1 Pet: 4.17. (For
the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God: and if it begin
first at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gosple of God?)
Which must needs be a great deal better. For now, there is an Advocate: then,
it is all judges; God and his Saints, and the advocate himself. It Is well, that
judgment begins with the godly, better have it begin, then end. With the wicked
it begins, when it ends; which is a sad thing, viz: to have the last judgment,
when they are sure to have the worst; and to be reserved to that too, as they
are said to be, 2 Pet: 2.9. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of
temptation: and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished.

Well then, the love of God to the godly, appears clearly in their
afflictions. And this apearance of his love to us; if we care for his love, and
love any thing that comes from him: (as we use to do with men whom we truly
love) it will be abundantly enough to us, to make our afflctions, our greatest
consolations; so that we may say with Paul (2 Cor: 1.5.) As the sufferings of
Christ abound in us; so our consolation abounds in Christ. Let him send us
never so much foul weather of troubles, and calamities: if the clouds be not
so thick, but we may see his face shine through, we care for no more. It will be
as good to us; as if they were removed out of the way, and we were delivered.
We will say, as the Psalmist did, Psalm: 80, 3, Turn us again, O God: and
cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved: (and so v: 7.19.) do but cause
thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.

3. Afflictions are not so grievous to the godly, not only, because they are
sent in love, and are not hurtful (for who will give his friend that which
shall hurt him? and God (besides) has made a promise to his children long
ago, Isath: 43, 3, That when they pass through the waters, he will be with
them: and through the rivers, they shall not overflow them: when they walk
through the fire, they shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon
them. Insomuch that Hierome, seeing the Church still having the worst, and yet
being never the worse; compared it to the Bush, Exodus: 3, 2, that continued
burning, and was not consumed) but also because they are infinitely profitable,
and beneficial every way, to perfect us, and make us fit to be redeemed ons:
as our Redeemer himself was perfected by sufferings ((...), Heb: 2.10.) and so
made fit to be a Redeemer. Like the bitterest pills, they have the sweetest
operation; and that to many excellent effects, which I shall speak unto.

1. They are very good to hasten both the birth, and the growth, of the new man.

There is no readier way to be borne again: then through pains, and pangs,
and travells. Nay there is scarce any way but that. For how shall there be a
birth, and delivery; where is no travel, nor burden. How can the body of sin
be dissolved, and the life of the old man be taken away, without pain; while
the body of flesh and bone, and the life of the man himself cannot? Can a man
go on hot coals, Prove: 6.28.
and his feet not be burnt. or can a man be ^ath 3.11.
baptized with fire, and feel no pain? Certainly, weaning from the milk of the
world, must needs be painful at first; before a man finds, that there is
better nourishment in the milk of the word. The circumcision of the foreskin
was exceeding painful; insomuch that Gen: 34.3.5.
two men could master a whole town, when the men were circumcised. And
doubtless, the circumcision of the heart (the circumcision of Christ, as the
Apostle calls it, or the circumcision brought in by Christ) is as painful; the
heart being as tender, as that part: and without the circumcision of the heart,
there can be no putting off of the body of the sins of the flesh, according to
the words of the Apostle, Col: 2.11. A man must put off, and cast off, and cut
off, and deny, not only the world, but his own self. The very heart must be
broken up, and the old frame quite taken abroad; ere Christ can be formed in
it. No setting a new stamp, without defacing the old. You must get away the bad
flesh, if you will have better come. As in the ordinary course of nature, there
must be a corruption before there be a generation: so in the ordinary course of
grace, the death, and corruption of the old man, is necessarily prerequired to
the generation, and birth of the new. I call it generation, because it is
called regeneration; and because it is a second generation, whereby we are
begotten a new. Not as if it were a generation properly so called. For there is
nothing in us, out of which grace can make any thing. Who can bring a clean
thing out of an unclean? And therefore that new thing which is made, is called
a Galat: 6.15.
creature. It is indeed a creation rather and the work of an Almighty power,
to make a new man, or to form the the second Gal: 4.19. I travel till Christ
be formed in you. Christ is the second Adam 1 Cor: 15.47.
Adam: even as it was to make the first man, or to form the first Adam. I say,
that before this introduction of the new, there must be an ejection of the old
inhabitant, by reason of the enmity between them, they cannot be together.

Believe it (I speak, for the most part) there is a great deal of pains to be
endured, in fashioning a new man. A bone out of joint is not set in it is place
but with pain. If there were no pain, when it was set; without doubt, it was
not set aright: and in short time, though it may not for a while, it will
appear. (I speak of the pains of Humiliation, and Conviction) Commonly, your
seeming religious men, are such as never knew what the throws of the new birth
meant, and did but only pretend them. I shall ever suspect that Christian, that
was never afflicted. His dross, and tin must be purged out in fire: and
there must be much contrition, and beating with the hammer of affliction,
before it can be well wrought. I cannot hope that any thing that is hard (as
our hearts are) will be made into a new fashion, till it be put into the fire,
and softened with the flames. Honey-combs must be squeezed; D. Featly
Ore must be stamped in the mills, and tried in the fire: and so must the
Saints too, before they can be gold fit for the building of the new Jerusasalem.

And so for the growth of the new man. As our rational life is best, when our
vegetative is worst; and as we begin to grow in wisdom, when we cease to grow
in strength: so our spiritual life, has more life, and spirit, and vigor,
then, when the life of the flesh, whether by reason of sickness, or poverty,
or persecutions, or voluntary (...), or mortification, is ready to dye. When
the body is lowest, the soul is highest. Like two scales: when one is down,
the other is up. The more weight you throw upon the body; the lighter the
soul. Water in a vessel, if you throw stones into it, it mounts the higher. A
godly man may say with Paul, when I am weak, then I am strong, 2 Cor: 12.10.
Yea, though his very heart should fail: he will be a gainer by it. For whereas
before he had no strength, but his own, which would quickly fail him: now, God
will be the strength of his heart, Psalm: 73.26. The Body without exercise, will
grow sickly: and so will the Soul also; needing exercise more then the body,
as needing both it is own and the bodies too.

2. Afflictions are beneficial, because they have an excellent virtue to
clear the sight. They make a man see the vanity, and baseness of his
pleasures: viz: that they are such as are presently destroyed, if but one part
of them that use them, and that the worst too, this contemptible frail body of
theirs, be never so little distempered.

But, besides the discovery of the vanity of the object, they make a man also to
see the vanity, and baseness of the subject, the Soul: viz: In looking after,
and being pleased with such pleasures; the use, and enjoyment whereof, must
depend upon the strength of such weak helps, and instruments, as the members of
the body, that are subject to so many casualties: even according to that
abundance of supplies, and necessaries, which they stand in need of continually.

Afflictions discover the sin of the Soul, in that manner, as many times men
by one disease of the body, discover another: being made to look more narrowly
to their health, by their sickness: and to observe their constitution better
then else they would have done. By seeing one hole, many times we take occasion
to seek for another; and so by seeing the weakness, and frailty of the flesh,
and the pleasures that it has; we come to see the weakness, and folly of the
soul that loved them. And even to this end, men are said in Scripture to be
afflicted, as Job 36.8, 9, 10. If they be bound in fetters, and be holden in
cords of affliction: then he shows them their works and their transgressions
that they have exceeded. He opens also their ear to discipline, and
commandeh that they return from iniquity. Indeed by nature, notwithstanding
our reason, and the immortality of our souls, we are like the beasts that
perish. The horse, if he have any sore, or disease; unless he be hampered, and
tied so fast, that he cannot move; will not endure the hand of the horseleech:
but is ready to kick, and bite, and will not be cured but by force. Just so we,
even the best of us; till we are tied with the bonds of afflictions, are apt
not to care to be freed from the bond of corruption. But after that, we will;
if we are not hypocrites: who do but At least they do not cry unto God with
their heart when they howl upon their beds, Hosca 7.14.
cry, as long as the pain of the bonds endure: they do not call upon him that
binds them, as it is Job 36.13. But the hypocrites in heart heap up wrath, they
cry not when he binds them.
Nay, sometimes, they cry out upon him, rather then call upon him, or cry unto
him.

Neither do afflictions make men only to see their sin, and the sinfulness
of their pleasures: but to leave the sin, and the pleasures too. I have seen a
tame heron, that having eaten something that he should not; after he has been
driven about a little, and threatened to be be beaten, has thrown it up again.
So we, when we have eaten that which we should not, forbidden fruit, and sour
grapes: when we have drunk in iniquity like water, and filled our selves with
delicates, and pleasures of sin: if we are beaten, and frighted alittle with
the rod of God's anger; it is a ready way to make us sick with what we have
eaten, and to cast it up, and so loath it ever after, as never to meddle with
it again.

Aflictions make us leave our pleasures for the present, because they make them
leave us: and for the future they will make us leave them, because they thus
left us for the present. I say, they make them leave us: for poverty, and
sickness, and such like evils, either disarme our lusts, that they may not
rise: or, if they are up; keep away provision, and starve the enemy out: by
this means making their soldiers, the members of the flesh, weak, and unable
to fight with the spirit.

Adversity has few, or no temptations; little or no fuel to burn, and little
or no fire at all to kindle. Now where there is no fuel to work upon; there
the fire of love, and pleasure, formerly kindled, must needs go out. For, to
what purpose should I love the pleasures, which I took in the creatures; when
either the creatures themselves, by poverty; or the power to use them, by
sickness; is taken away? So it is; that Affliction will do you some good
whether you will or no. You must sin (I speak of sin showing it self) the
less for the time, in spite of your teeth: and if afterward you return to your
vomit again: it is the beastliness of your own nature; and not the
unprofitablenesse of afflictions, that is in the fault. Oh, for such physic,
which must needs make me well, when I take it, and I cannot refuse it. By
nature, I am so miserably sottish; that I am loath to part with mine own
miseries: being settled upon my lees, as the lazy boy was upon the horse, who
had rather ride, and dye with cold, then take the pains to alight, and go,
and get him a heat. Happy therefore that violence, that snatches me out of the
fire: blessed that thing, whatsoever it be, that so leads me out of the crooked
path of sin, that it draws me by force.

But again afflictions bring us out of love with our pleasures, not only for
their ill nature in leaving us, when we are in a bad condition, when we have
most need: but for their ill turn they do us in bringing us into such a
condition: for so they usually do. Prosperity is commonly the cause of
adversity. It makes men too fat; so that many times their heart is as fat as
Ps: 119 70
grease: and then they are fit for nothing, but to Deuteronomy: 32.15.
kick against him that fed them, and to be led to the slaughter. Gross bodies,
and such as keep a full diet; are most subject to diseases, and subject to most
diseases, and most subject to torment by their diseases. When we are at ease,
and have all things at will: either we punish our selves by sin, or make God
to punish us for it; and one is common as the other, unless the last be most
frequent. When I am most subject to commission, and subject to most commissions
of sin; I am most subject to be punished: and when I have most occasions of
sinning, I must needs be most subject in this manner. So again, when I have
most duties to perform; I am most subject to omission: and subject to most
omissions of duties: and when I have received most blessings, I have most
duties to perform. Either I mistake God's goodness, and presume upon mine
own: or else I forget it, and become unthankful. When we have received most,
we are deepest in debt, and commonly, when men are deepest in debt, they have
least care to pay. How often were the Israelites warned (and therefore, sure
there was need of it) to take heed, that, when they came into Canaan, and had
every thing at full, they did not grow wanton, and sin, and forget the Lord
that brought them thither! See their warnings repeated, Deuteronomy: 6, 12: chap:
8.11.16, 17. chap: 9.4.

Why should Afflictions be counted such miseries, for denying us pleasures; any
more then denying children raw fruit, and such things as are hurtful for them,
is to be counted their misery, or grudging them food? Would a man, that is
running over a rock, where he is sure to break his neck; count it a misery, to
fall by the way, and break but his leg? or if he were going to a place where he
must needs have lost his life; to fall sick by the way, or be hindered in his
journey, or have his way fenced up that he cannot pass (as Job in his passion
once complained, He has fenced up my way that I cannot pass: and he has set
darkness in my paths.
ch: 19.8.) If in my prosperity, when the press is full, and my fats do
overflow, and I have made my self drunk with the wine; having the the wind at
my back, and the reins on my neck, I am running like a blind mettlesome horse,
with full carreer, in the easy, and smooth, but slippery ways of jolity and
pleasures, into the pit of destruction: far be it from me to count it a
misery, to slide, and have my legs broken with Affliction, that I may go no
further; or to meet with such a cross in my way, in these cross, and crooked
ways of death, as may violently throw me into the path of life. If I am like a
mad man, and ready to destroy my self; have I cause to be sad for it, or is it
my misery, to be bound? (as the expression is Job, chap: 36.8?) No, I should
rather choose to cut of my right hand my self, and pluck out my right eye, and
voluntarily throw away any thing that is most pleasant to me; rather then in
keeping of it, displease, and offend my God, or my brother, or my self, or my
conscience.

Moreover, Affliction, as it brings us out of love with the pleasures of the
creatures and the pleasures of sin: so it brings us in love with God, and the
pleasures of godliness: which are then most, when there are least of the
others; to the godly man's unspeakable joy, and comfort. Who can choose (and if
ever you were well affected, you will say so) but be ravished with, and desire
more of that exceeding weight of comfort, that is to be found in most secret
meditations of, most confident prayers to, and most familiar converses with all
the three persons of the most blessed Trinity? now, none of these exercises are
better done or with less dissturbance, then in a time of adversity. Who would
not love godliness ever after, that should work such effects in such a time;
if it were never so little while? It Is strange to see, what excellent fruits
there are of such a seeming dead tree: What profit, and gain, by such a dead
trade, as suffering of affliction seems to be to a believer at the first view,
and to a carnal eye at any time. Believe it, these fruits are recompense
enough, and enough.

I will set down therefore for a third particular, wherein Afflictions are
beneficial, viz: because they make us do like children, when some body has
beaten them, or when they see their enemies about them, viz: to cleave to God;
to keep us closer to our Fathers side, and cling the faster about him. A child
that is always at home with his Father; either knows not, or thinks not, what
a happiness it is to have a Father. A Father is little more to him then
another man. He can never love him so well, or prize the enjoyment of him so
much; as one that has been sometime absent from him, and knows the want of
him. The way to be much in love with any thing, is to see it but seldom: and
none knows the value of a thing, better, then he that is put to buy it. The
time of Affliction is God's usual time, both of calling the uncalled before,
and calling home again the rest. It Is his time when he will be sought, and
found of men; and it is his time when he makes them to seek him. In the second
of Chron: 33, 12, and 13: it is said of Manasseh, When he was in affliction, he
besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his
fathers: and prayed unto him, and he was entreated of him and heard his
supplication, and brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom. Then
Manasseh knew that the Lord he was God. So Isa: 19, 22: it is said of Egypt,
They shall return even to the Lord, and he shall be entreated of them, and
shall heal them. After the children of Israel have suffered affliction in
captivity, then, says the Prophet; they shall stay upon the Lord the holy one
of Israel in truth, Isa: 10.20. The Lord has called thee as a woman forsaken
and grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth when thou wast refused, says thy
God: In the same Prophet, chap: 54.6. And thus much did Az^ria testify to Asa,
2 Chon: 15, 3 and 4. It Is said of Christ, Heb: 5, 8, Though he, were a son, yet
learned he obedience by the things which he suffered.
Now for a long season, Israel has been without the true God, and without a
teaching Priest and without law: But when they in their trouble did turn unto
the Lord God of Israel, and sought him, he was found of them.

And as the absence of the person of a father; so likewise does the
discontinuance of his favor, increase the love of the child, and make him more
obedient to his command. If a child be always dandled upon the knee, and
suffered to have his will, and never denied a request: it is a thousand to one,
but at length he scorns the love that is so cheap; and be by so much the more
disobedient, by how much he has the less cause. It Is the ready way, first to
make him sinful, by his forsaking his father; and then to make him miserable,
by his father's forsaking him. Fair weather, and the sunshine of prosperity,
may cause thee to presume, and run out, and play off too far like the
wanton conies, from the rock of defense, and so bring thee into danger: but the
storms of adversity, (unless thou art unreasonable,) when thou art in, will
make thee keep in: and (unless thou art insensible) when thou art out; will
make thee run in again. Surely, afflictions (if thou have any thing of a
Son in thee) will make thee hang about, and depend upon God, and look up in
his face, (as the child does to his father) with tears in thy eyes, and
prayers, and cries in they mouth; and never leave moaning before him, till he
take thee up, and hug thee in the arms of his Spirit, and set thee down again
with this gracious answer, Be still and fear not: there is nothing shall hurt
thee; thy faith has saved thee: and my love shall never leave thee.

4. Afflictions are beneficial, not only because they make men more willing,
and able to seek God; but (as I hinted but now) because God also is more
willing, and more easy to be found in a time when we are to seek, or at a
loss, and can find no comfort from any thing else. And therefore, whereas
David in one sense said, in the time of great water-flouds they shall not come
near thee: I say in another, In the time of great water-flouds (or, in time of
adversity) they shall come near thee, and then best of all, and best welcome,
and with best success. God is a present help at all times; but he is a very
present (...)
help in time of trouble, Psalm: 46, 1. God is not, as men are, to take most
notice of those that are greatest, and are able to requite; and to slight
others. No, he has not despised, nor abhorred the afflicted, neither has he
hid his face from him: but when he cried unto him, he heard him, Psalm: 22, 24,
and therefore has he said, Psalm: 91, 15. He shall call upon me, and I will
answer him: I will be with him in trouble: I will deliver him, and honor him.

5. Afflictions are beneficial to them, because they make them pray the more
earnestly for spiritual things; to recompense, and supply the want of
temporal things, which Afflictions deprive them of. They will make a godly man
say thus with himself. Is it so? Well, I am resolved, if my body must needs be
thus distressed; yet my soul shall be well. If I must be poor one way; I will
be rich another. Let my goods miscarry one way, and my trading be bad in this
country: yet I shall have sufficient amends, by the greatness of the gain
which I am to have in another, All the hurt it shall do me, shall be, to make
me drive a better trade in a far better Heb: 11.6.
country, where I shall have a far better return; not a hundred fold ( for
that I may have in this Math 19.29.
country) but more then a thousand for one.

Whereunto add, that such prayers are seldom succeslesse. The souls of such
men, usually, are as a Jer: 13.12.
waterd garden.

6. Afflictions (here) are beneficial, because they endeere to men their
happiness, which they are to have hereafter: making them to long for it with
more earnestness, pray for it with more confidence, and hope for it with more
assurance. They have not their portion in this world, even to this end, that
they may, and for this reason, because they shall have it in the next. I cannot
have a greater temptation to neglect my happiness hereafter, then the
enjoyment of happiness here; and there is no readier way to lose my
happiness, then by neglecting it: And shall I then be said to be miserable for
Afflictions? Nay, my present Afflictions, will make my future happiness, not
only dearer to me now; so that I shall be the more careful to look after it:
but more sweet, and welcome to me when it comes; so that I shall be the more
happy, when I have it: the pleasure of happiness being as much inhannced by
the remembrance, as the price is by the endurance of the afflictions. And shall
I then be said to be miserable for afflictions?

7. Afflictions are beneficial, because the loss of a temporal estate, as it
makes us pray the better for a spiritual; so it makes us improve it better,
not only while we are thus afflicted, but for ever after. Not only God's grace
is most prayed for then, because then we have most need: but our own graces are
most exercised then, because then we are most at leisure.

But you will say, That for the present because the dirt hangs heavy and
troublesome about me; or, because, I fear that I shall be called to appear
before God; I will cleanse my self from mine iniquity. That, it may be, while I
am sick, for my own ease, even out of nature, I may seek for grace, as the sick
dog does for grass, to make me cast up my sins that oppress my conscience:
but as soon as I am eased; with the dog, I take up my vomit again, and return
with the sow to the mire.

No, no, I cannot so soon forget the pain which I felt in vomiting to make my
self sick again; nor the pains which I took in washing my self, to make my
self foul again. For my own ease I shall keep my self temperate, and clean
from sin for time to come: yea, more temperate, and clean then ever. First,
my Love to God shall be more, for the love that I found from him in my
sickness, and my recovery. Secondly, my Faith in him for the future shall
never fail, now that I see his faith and truth fails not, but endures for
ever; and that he leaves me not, though he leaves me nothing. I cannot but be
faithful to him, that is faithful to me. And thirdly, my obedience toward
him shall be better. I will do the more for him that has done so much for me,
stood by me in my misery, relieved me in it, and released me out of it. I am so
far from being the worse; I shall have much the more grace, and my grace
shall be more. True valor is not dulled, but whetted by difficulties, and
increased by resistance. My sword is the better for being used: if it were
still kept in my scabberd, it might be marred with the rust. Let my enemies
persecute me never so much: the more hurt they do me, the more good they do
me. Like the palm tree (if it be the true palm) the more they endeavor to
keep me down, the more I shall strive to rise. My graces, and virtues, like a
running river, will rise higher for being stopped: and now that affliction has
brought me to see my way which I lost, I shall go the faster ever after to
make amends for my loss. I will endeavor to improve my graces now, if it be
for nothing, but because I found so much good by them in my affliction, and
because I will be better provided, if affliction come again. As one said,
sanguis martyru^ etc: so I may say, afflictio mart: est semen Ecclesiae. For
when they are broken up, and harrowed by afflictions: when long furrows are
made upon their backs by oppression, and persecution; then is the time for God
(who is the husband man) to sow the seed, and the seed to grow. If it be sown
in such a time; it will sink the deeper, and grow the higher. If we will but
keep a good diet, and keep a watch over our souls: we shall be in the Spirit,
after afflictions, as men use to be in the body, after agues or other diseases:
viz: we shall grow the faster, and become much the taller Christians. True
Grace, like some grass, will grow the thicker, for being trod upon. Before, I
was not much afraid of affliction, when it was coming: but now, I can be glad
Before, I took it patiently: but now I can take it joyfully. Before, I trusted
in God to help me, because he promised me: but now, since that he has been as
good as his word; I am confident of him, that he will never forsake me. I am
every way better then I was: and whereas sin abounded before, now grace does
much more abound: -- Ab ipso ducit opes animumque ferro. Our graces are apt to
loose their strength, as our bodies use to do in the scurvey: and to wast and
consume away for want of exercise. But Affliction makes us seek for physic, to
purge the humors, and remove the obstructions: those which hinder our growth in
Christianity; will not suffer grace to be nourished; but are nourished
themselves by a too plentiful diet of prosperity. A stomach well scowred with
purging, will relish wholesome meats, much the better a long time after: and a
man's meat never does him more good, then when he is most hungry. If God keep
me a while from the enjoyment of blessings by adversity; or the use of
blessings, and the practice of good duties by infirmity of body: when I come to
enjoy the blessings again; I shall make better use: and when I come to perform
the duties I shall make better work.

If my Affliction be persecution; my persecuted virtues, like spices beaten,
will smell the better. The graces of my soul, when my body suffers, like sweet
odours in a box, when the box is broken, will go the further, and continue the
longer. Nay, by this rising in grace by falling into affliction, you may judge
of the soundness and strength of the Christian: for the strong Christian, like
the strong tree, the more he^ shaken in the top (in the boughs, in the outside
of his body, or estate) the more hearty he will be at the root, and the better
rooted at the heart.

And so for the time after, when a man has seen what need, and what use there
is of grace, and the strength of grace, in a time of affliction: if he have any
providence in him, or if he have his senses about him; knowing how subject he
is to come into the like condition again; it is impossible, but he must do
his utmost, and make all the provision he can, to maintain himself in it. He
will endeavor to increase his Love; that, when all other delights fail him,
he may delight himself in the Almighty. He will endeavor to increase his
Faith; that, when God shall defer to fulfill his promises, or to hear his
prayers; he may not make his sufferings more tedious, by making have for
deliverance. He will endeavor to have a more lively Hope; that when he shall
be quite deprived of things that may be seen, and have nothing at hand: he may
be able to support his spirit with the expectation of things that are not seen.
Whatsoever graces he found use of, or stood in need of (if he have but so much
nature as to love himself) he will be so far from neglecting to furnish
himself of those; that he will study and enquire, and labor all that ever he
can for more.

8. Afflictions are beneficial, because they make us set a greater price both
upon the goodness of God, and the goodness of his gifts and blessings (which
we have formerly undervalued, or not valued as we should) and so behave our
selves with more thankfulness, and humility. The price, and estimation of
things, is always raised by the want, and the loss; (according to what I said
before of God.) And we are never so well possessed with the opinion of the
worth of a thing; as when we have not the possession of the thing.

From this alteration in judgment, proceed these fruits. First, Repentance of,
and secondly, Prayer against sins which before men thought not of. For while
they had what they never prayed for, and kept what they never gave thanks for,
and were permitted the use of what they abused by intemperance, and luxury:
they hardly ever thought either prayer, and thanksgiving, to be duties; or
intemperance, and luxury to be sins (certainly, many wicked men in their
prosperity do not, because they see they are never the worse, or because they
have no changes, Psalm: 55.19.) But now in Affliction, when their blessings are
taken away; when they examine the matter, and search for the cause: as soon as
they look back upon. their own lives, they find the fault to be there. Aman
that looks back, is like a stander by; and makes his own eyes serve for another
man's. In any kind of work, if I keep on working, and never stop to look back;
unless my hand be guided by another's, I may commit many faults (or commit the
same fault many times) which otherwise I would not do; and never perceive it.
So, if I have a constant uninterupted enjoyment of outward felicity; unless
there be a special hand of God to direct me; I shall sin, and sin, over and
over, and never change my conditions, till I change my condition. There is also
a third fruit of this alteration of judgment, viz: performance of duties before
omitted: as praising of God's goodness to all; and giving thanks for his
goodness to them: together with a humble acknowledgment of the mercy of the
Lord that gives, and the justice of the Lord that takes away Job: 1.21.


9. Affliction (or adversity) is benefiicall. because it makes men not only to
esteem of, but use prosperity better. Like physic and fasting, it cleanses the
stomach, and begets a more kindly appetite, and so makes a man digest, and
improve temporal blessings, to spiritual nourishment. If a man never know,
what the bread and water of affliction means: but always sit at a full table
of worldly contentments; either by taking too much, he takes surfeit; or else
by the foulenes of his stomach, and a mind overcome with lusts, and ill
humors; his food to turns to choler, his happiness to bitterness and
misery; and his blessings into curses. Nothing better for such a stomach, then,
as the Prophet's words are (however it be displeasing to the palate, for such
things are commonly wholsomest) to be fed a while with the wormwood of
affliction, and to have the water of gall to drink.

10. Afflictions are beneficial, because they are good, both to make a man
have a low esteem of himself, for his weakness, that he could not help
himself in his adversity: and to make him abhor himself for his
sinfulness; that ever he hurted himself in his prosperity. Never such a time
to be low in mine own eyes, as when I am so in every ones else. When a man is
upon the ground; it is easy to put his mouth in the dust. When my body is weaned
from the pleasures of the world; it is the easier for my soul to be as a
weaned child

11. Afflictions are beneficial, because, when they have made us see our own
weakness, and wickedness; in the next place, they will make us see Gods
power, and goodness. When our selves are odious, that we cannot look upon
them: then we will begin to look to our Maker. So the Prophet's expression is,
Isaiah 17.7. At that day, says he (viz: when the glory of Jacob is made thin,
and the fatness of his flesh become lean, verse: 4.) a man shall look to his
maker, and his eyes shall have respect to the holy one of Israel.

Hereupon there will follow, First, Trust, and relyance, and staying our selves
upon God: being now become so weak, that we cannot stand by our selves: and so
wise, as to know that we cannot. Now as the Apostle said (2 Cor: 1.9.) We have
the sentence of death in our selves, that we should not trust to our selves,
but in God who raises the dead. Secondly, now that we have seen our own
naughtiness, and Gods goodness; a resolution to live more free from one, and
more worthy of the other. The blunesse of a wound cleanses away evil: so do
stripes the inward parts of the belly, Prove 20.30.

12. Afflictions (such as persecution, and losses, and poverty) are
beneficial, because they teach men a great deal of wisdom: which, being
dearly bought, they value the higher, and keep the longer. -- Grande doloris.

-- Ingenium est, miserisque venit solertia rebus. In the 94 psalm verse 12,
chastening, and teaching, are put together. Blessed is the man whom thou
chastenest, o Lord; and teach him out of thy law. If there be any good
metal in us: if there be any spark of grace, or any (...) (or gift)
whatsoever; we shall see it then: for Affliction will (...) 2 Timothy 1.6.
turn it up from under the imbers, and make it appear. If we be not
altogether earthly: if we be not so dry, but there is some juice in us: surely
the wine press of affliction will squeeze it our Necessity will make fools
witty; and cowards, courageous. It will make fools writy: For there is not so
silly a man, nor creature; but when he is put to his shifts, either by hunger,
or the pursuit of his enemy, or any such other extremity; will become witty,
and cunning to save his life. So it makes cowards, courageous. (and this might
be another thing for which afflictions are useful) Q. Curtius said of
Ariobarzanes, Lib 5.
(whom Alexander meeting in a narrow place, by that means compelled to fight)
Ignaviam quoque necessitas acuit, and saepe desperatio spei causa est. No man
bolder then a fearful man, when he leaves off to fear: and no enemy like a
coward, when once he begins to fight. nullus est perniciosior hostis, quam quem
audacem angustiae faciunt. Lib: Not: Q cap: 59.
And therefore Aristides, when his enemy was on this side the bridge, over the
Helespont and Themistocles persuaded to cut down; the bridge, that so there
might be no way left to retreat: would by no means hearken to his counsel;
for, says he (...), If we bring them to a necessity of fighting, they must
needs fight the better, and the more desperately, for being desperate: rather
make an other bridge then do so.

The Godly man's grand enemy, The devil, will get but little advantage over
him by afflictions. Nay, on the contrary, the godly man get's a great deal of
him, both for wisdom, and courage, whereby to defeat his policies, and
conquer him in his assaults. For when I say that wisdom is gotten by
Affliction; I do not mean wordly wisdom only (although there be much of that
too to be gotten by this means: and although this were an argument good enough
ad hominem, as to the wicked, who think so as they do of the godly, because of
their Affliction.) No, the wisdom which I mean is spiritual wisdom;
craft, and policy, to deal with spiritual Ephesians: 6.12. (...).
adversaries; the Devil, and principalities, and powers from without: and
strong 2 Cor: 10.4. (...).
lusts, and high imaginations from within: a wisdom harder to be learnt, then
that other wisdom, and never better learnt then under hard discipline in the
school of affliction.

A child cares not how he goes, 2 Cor: 10.5. (...).
till he has fallen: and a man never goes better, nor more carefully, then
after he has fallen. The readiest way, to learn to ward a blow in any place
of the body; is to be stricken in that place first. When my prosperity, by the
divell's temptations, and mine own lusts, has proved my misery; and my abused
blessings have been turned into curses; and then I have been soundly beaten
with the rod of affliction: unless I am given over to folly, and madness, and
the nonsense of a reprobate sense; I must needs learn somewhat by it; and
forbear to stumble again at the same stone, to be taken a gain in the same
snare, and receive a wound from the same enemy in the same place, when it
shall please God to try me again with the same prosperity. I said to try me:
because, indeed, to speak the truth, what ever you think, I count prosperity to
a child of God a greater trial, then adversity. For what boy, if he were never
so wicked otherwise, will dare to be so, while he is under the lash. The trial
of him is when he is most at liberty, and (as he thinks) out of his masters
sight.

-- Tanta adeo cum res trepidae, Sil: Ital
reverentia divum Nascitur, and raro fumant felicibus arae. Prosperity is so
much more dangerous to me then adversity; as a false familiar friend is more
dangerous then an open enemy. De qui te me fie, di^u me guard, says the
Frenchman, from him whom I trust, God deliver me. It Is hard not to be bitten
by the dog that uses to bite without barking; not to be overcome by the enemy
that makes a war which he never proclaimed; and not to be hurted by a seeming
friend, that holds a gift in one hand, and a sword in the other. Prosperity is
such a thing, as either of these three. You shall be bitten, and overcome, and
hurted, insensibly. You shall be sold, and made a slave to the devil, and be
almost quite dead in trespasses and sins, and never know how, nor which way.
Through prosperity, you are not only drawn into sin; but you are made to
believe, that sin is no longer sin, because prosperity is still prosperity.
If Pharaoh can detain the children of Israel, and be suffered to continue to
do so: he will do so still, and think he may do well to do so, whatever he
be commanded to the contrary. When adversity comes, and I want those things,
which while I enjoyed, I was drawn to such and such sins, to which now I am
not: By this means I find out the divell's methodes, (...) Ephesians: 6.11.
and tricks which he uses in prosperity. I understand (...) his manner of play,
and the place where he lays his snares; so that I am able to deal with him
now; and I am resolved, if ever I come to be in my former condition, he shall
never catch me as he has formerly done. As it is said of Christ, for helping
us in our our resisting him ( Heb: 2.18.) that having suffered himself being
tempted; he is able to succor them that are tempted: so I may say of our
selves; for our resisting him in his temptations, that, having been tempted so
by him already, we shall be able to do the better also our selves, when we are
tempted next. If by abstaining from such and such meats, I am not troubled with
the pain which I had before when I used them; I may easily conclude what was
the cause; and so by astaining from them for the future, prevent the disease.
Sithence that now, when I have not so much worldly wealth, I have not so much
worldly mindedness: Sithence that now, when I use not so plentiful a diet, I
am not so much inclined to lust: sithence that now, either being poor, by
sobriety for want of drink; or being sick, or in prison, by disuse of ill
company for having none: I am not drawn to the commission of sins, as
formerly I was: If it shall please God to put me into my former condition, I
shall know what to do: for I know where the water came in, and will stop the
holes. If too much meat were the thing: I will put a knife to my throat. Prove:
23.2.
If to much drink: I will have a care how I look upon the wine when it gives
it is color in the cup. Prove. 23.31.
I will eat and drink for strength; Eccl. 10, 17.
and not for pleasure: and I will use this world's wealth, as if I used it not.
If ill company were the thing: I will have good company instead of it and if
that be not to be had, I will be either alone, i.e: without company; or be as
if I were, when I am in it. Tune praecipue in te ipsum secede quum esse cogeris
in turba, Sen: Ep: 25.
I will either avoid all occasions of sinning; or not take them when they are
offered. Either I will be without that, which being forced to be without now, I
have the less sin: or, if I cannot live without it; I will not be taken with
it so, as to be overtaken with it. Because now I know which way it hurted me; I
will take it so, as it shall hurt me no more.

13. Afflictions are beneficial, because when we are afflicted (to speak a
little more particularly to what I have already spoken in general) then is the
time for patience, to wait upon God for his mercy. When we have obtained this
(either by deliverance from the Afflictions, or by being supplied in them with
the graces of his Spirit) we come first to Experience, by which we are assured
that he loves us truly for the present: and then we come to Hope, by which we
are confident that he will love us for ever for the future; according to that
of the Apostle, Romans 5, 3, 4. We glory in tribulatioon also, knowing that
tribulation works patience, and patience experience, and experience hope: For
if my friend be so much my friend, as to be my friend in a time of need and
distress; I have no reason to fear, that ever he will forsake me.

The graces of the Spirit, which I mentioned, which assure me of his love for
the present; though they may be given at any time, yet are they most
plentifully powered out, when the vessel is most empty, and needs them most,
viz: in a time of Affliction. Then is the ministration of them most liberally
afforded: an (...), of one grace after For in this sense the word seems to be
used 2 Cor. 9.10. Col. 2.19. Ephesians 4.16,
another, according as need requires. Paul found it so, and made the same use
of it as I speak of, Philip: 1, 19, For I know (says he) that this shall turn
to my salvation through your prayer, and the supply (...).
of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. The chiefest of all those graces is Patience, a
most proper mark of true Christianity. Insomuch that the Gospel is called the
word of my patience, Rev: 3.10. And it is that to which the kingdom of Or
Heaven
God herafter is more certainly assured, and the kingdom of Or, of Grace
Christ now more constantly a companion; then victory is to the valor, and
courage to the victory of a Combatant, The Kingdom and patience of Jesus
Christ, Rev: 1.9.

14. Last of all (though I do not say that this is all that I can say: but
because I would not hold you too long from your own meditations) Afflictions
are beneficial, because of the comfort which we have, not only while we do
suffer them, but for ever after, even because we have suffered them. -- Haec
olim meminisse juvabit. Reader, if thou were never afflicted, thou can not
think, what a comfort it is, to think of Afflictions when they are past, and to
be able to boast of them, as a Soldier does of a scarre of honor when he has
been in a fight. With what content, and glorying, as it were, do we hear
people sometimes talk of such a disease, or of such a wound which they have
had! how one has escaped drowning, another murdering, and another robbing: so
that it is who can talk of most dangers he has been in, and how well he came
off; and they would not for any thing now, but they had had such or such a
mishhap. And this they can do in a vainglorious Thrasonicall boasting; merely
out of a prattling humor; and sometimes, it may be, by way of Complaint;
accusing God, to make an excuse for themselves, for this or that defect in the
exercise of piety. If men that have no cause, do so out of a principle of
pride: doubtless, such as have cause, may do so out of a principle of grace,
and a sense of the benefit which they still enjoy, from the afflictions which
they have suffered; being able to say truly, It is good for us that we have
been afflicted.

The truth is, either I will glory of my afflictions; or I will not glory at
all. For if I should glory of my prosperity, every wise man would laugh at me:
even as much as he would at a soldier, that should brag that he had never been
in a skirmish: or a seaman, that should expect to be commended, for that he
had never been in a storm. I cannot glory of my being in that condition, which
he may manage, who has neither courage, nor hope, nor patience: no more then
a soldier should, of being in such a place, which a coward may manage, as well
as any other. It Is not the constancy of my happiness, that commends me. And
therefore, if I boast of any thing (with Saint Paul) I will not boast of my
strength, but mine infirmities: or if I do boast of my strength, it shall be
of my strength in my infirmities: for none but such is worth a boasting of. But
yet I must tell you, I will boast only so, as a man may boast of an excellent
gift, which he has received of his friend. For that which I call my strength,
was not my own but Gods: and what have I, which I have not received of him? 1
Cor: 4.7. So then will I boast, and so will I let another commend me, and so
will I commend another; and God shall have the less glory. For certainly, it
cannot but be a credit to a man, to have had many Afflictions, and to have been
not only not the worse, but the better for them: To love his master the more,
for sparing him the less: To have fought a long time, and to have had many
temptations to yield; and yet to keep his old ground, his first Faith, Tim: 4:
7.
and love, Rev: 2 4.
and a good conscience. 1 Timothy 1.19.
Such a one, if men did rightly judge of things, would not only be talked of
with commendation, but poynted at with admiration, whethersoever he went, --
Digito monstrari and dicier hic est: Even as those Saints in the Revelation are
by the Elder, chap: 7, verse: 13.14. Where observe, how he takes a delight to
boast of them; asking, as if he did not know, What are those which are arrayed
in white robes? and whnce came they? and then, answering himself, These are
they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes and have
made them white in the blood of the Lamb. The Apostle James allowed a rich man,
to glory (...), rendered rejoice
in his abasement, Jam: 1, 9, 10.

Thus you see, that Afflictions are so far from being (as they are thought to
be) miseries, or any thing hurtful; that they are rather indeed mercies, and
very beneficial: so that they make our condition exceedingly blessed. And
therefore, instead of pitying any man that is afflicted, I will boldly say with
Eliphaz, and care not who hears me, Behold, happy is the man whom the Lord
corrects: therefore despise not thou the chasttening of the Almighty: Job
5.17. For what hinderance can Afflictions be to mirth, if they are so
beneficial? How many things could I name, which although they are painful,
yet because they are known to be beneficial, men endure with joy! Be glad
then, O ye righteous, and rejoice in the Lord, in the midst of your greatest
Afflictions. If Paul could rejoice in his Afflictions, because he had done so
much good to others other ways (1 These: 3, 7, Therefore brethren, we are
comforted over you in all our affliction, and distress, by your faith) why
cannot we rejoice in, and after, and for our Afflictions; when even the
Afflictions themselves do so much good to our selves. Certainly, we can, and
do, and will rejoice.

4. Reason why the Afflictions of the godly in this world, neither are
miseries, nor are to be so accounted by them, is, because of the inestimable
amends, which is certainly made after a very few minutes, in a better world,
For if we suffer we shall also reign. And so those words Rom: 8.17 (...) per
haps) may well be rendered thus, for as much as we suffer with him, that we may
be glorified with him.
You cannot deny the consequence: for I have it of the Apostle, 2 Timothy: 2.12.
The greatest burden must needs be light in the balance, that has such an
exceeding weight (...). 2 Cor. 14.17.
of glory laid against it: Which made Moses, and the rest of the faithful in
the old Testament, bear their burdens so cheerfully as they did: as knowing
whether they went with them. Moses (as it is said, Heb: 11: 25, 26,) Freely
chose rather to suffer Affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season: esteeming the reproach of Christ greater
riches, then the treasures of Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompense of
the reward. What is a little short pain of a purge, or a vomit, or a letting
blood: in comparison of a long lasting health? He were a very fool, who would
not be not only contented, but glad, to have no fruit at all this year, when
every one else has a great deal: upon condition to have a great deal next
year, when few besides have any. Do but have a little patience, and stay till
the Lord come; and all will be well. I will use James his words to you, chap:
5, 7, Be patient therefore brethren unto the coming of the Lord: Behold the
husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience
for it until he receive the early and latter rain. Let it not be said, any
man shall have more patience for a temporal, then you can have for an eternal
reward.

5. The Afflictions of the godly are not miseries, because for the most part (I
mean Afflictions, which are chiefly counted such by the wicked in their
objections, to whom I direct my answer) they are arrows that will reach, or at
most kill, no further then the body: which is a thing they do not reckon so
much of. Neither, indeed is it a jewel of such a price; as that a man should
be miserable presently, as soon as it is cracked. Rather they count it a
happiness for the soul: and consequently no misery to them. For a man would
willingly be miserable, as the world accounts misery, in the worst part; to be
happy in the best, which is happiness indeed. Many times, it is the way to be
so; as it is many times a means of preserving the vital parts of the body
within, to make a wound in one of the others without. The body is as a prison,
or manicle, to the soul. Quod equidem non aliter aspicio, quam vinculum
libertati meae circundatum, said a heathen. Sene-Epist: 65.
And will a prisoner count it a misery; if his ma^icles be loosned; or his
prison, or the walls thereof go to decay; whereby there may be hopes of
escaping? Nay, the body, in this condition it is now in; till it be well
purged, and resined, and made fit for such an inhabitant as the soul is; is
not only troublesome, but hurtful to the soul.

-- Noxia corpora tardant
Terrenique hebetant artus. Virgil:

The bodies of clay hanging about the Soul, are like so much dirt hanging
about the wings of a bird; and will not suffer it to fly like a bird to the
mountain, Psalm: 11.1. Has the soul reason to be heavier, for that it is the
lighter? Or, will any thing that is hurted by another thing, be the worse,
because that thing is hurted? Or, may I be counted miserable, when that is not
well, which the better it is, I am (commonly) the worse? Certainly, it cannot
be. Unless the Soul were improved by the accession of things corporeal, more
then it is; it cannot be so much impaired by the want. But the improvement it
has from thence, is but little. For commonly, when there is a diminution of
the things of the body: there is as great an addition of the things of the
Soul.

Now, as I said before, those Afflictions of the godly, which the wicked talk
so much of, and for which they account their condition so miserable; are so
far from adding Phil: 1 16.
to the bands of the Soul; that they are the usual means to release her of
them; and have no power, but upon the bands themselves. A skillful workman will
knock off the band of a thing, and do the thing no hurt at all. And so God can
do a man's body hurt: and yet do him no hurt at all. Nay, if God love a man;
he will punish his body in this day of his own; that his Spirit may be saved in
that day of the Lord. Like a fencing master, or one that fights in love; he
never strikes at the vital parts. Or if he does, it is but with a blunt weapon:
as intending not to kill, but to teach the Combatant. His blow shall make him
smart; so as it shall not easily be forgotten: but it shall be in such a place,
where it may be easily cured. Cured, I say, either living, or dying; which is
all one both to him, to whom all do live: and to the man also, to whom to live
long, is but so much loss, unless so far as it is Christ; and to dye betime,
advantage.

I say, the Soul of a godly man, being a Spirit by nature; and being
spiritual by grace; is out of gunshot, for ought that any thing in the world
can do to it. God, who is able, is unwilling: And the devil, and the world,
who are willing, are unable. The devil though he be a spirit; is no more able
to hurt this spirit, then one body is to hurt an other, when it is armed: as
the spirit is throughout, even with a whole suit Ephesians: 6.13.
(or panoplia) of spiritual arms. The world, whether malicious men, or
worldly crosses, or sickness, or poverty, or persecution, is not able to reach
it. I may say to any of these, as the Philosopher did to the Tyrant, Tundis
vasculum Anaxarchi, non Anaxarchum. Knock, and beat, and do your worst. Though
you break the casket in a thousand pieces; you shell never be able to hurt the
jewel in the least manner. Beat upon the outside (the body) as you will, you
do but make that which is within the stronger: for now the blood, and the
spirits, retire to the heart, and so to the soul; which by this means will
take heart, and gather spirit, and prove the stronger.

It Is true. If a wicked man be not well in his body; he is not well in any
part. If his out-workes be taken, he can hold out no longer. His soul is the
most diseased part: and therefore will be sure to suffer most; being also least
able to bear it. He is rotten at the core. His heart neither is sound, nor
ever was. It was always the weakest spoke in the wheel (though you never
heard hard it creak, and though you might think it strong enough) even then
when his body had health enough, and God did grant his desire in those things.
As the Psalmist says, Psalm: 106, 15, God gave him his request: but sent
leanness into his soul. If his soul were so bad in prosperity; it must needs
be worse in adversity. For then all the ill humors run to it: as they use to
do to a weak, or diseased member: And his sins, which he has formerly
committed, like so many dogs, when they see another dog beaten; come every one
of them not to help, but to opresse the weaker side. The pleasures which he
has loved, and used: the creatures which he has loved, and abused: the
devil, whom he has not loved, but obeyed: when the body is hindered from
being any longer serviceable to such purposes; like enemies made to be friends,
or friends restrained from being enemies, only with gifts and compliance; will
be all ready to fly in his face, and testify against him all that ever he did.
Now, it is otherwise with a godly man. For if one part be afflicted, he shall
have amends presently made in the other. If the outward man though our outward
man pere^h yet the inward man is renewed day by day, 2 Cor: 4.16.
be weak; he has not therefore lost his strength for the inward man, viz: the
soul (and the soul of a man is the man) has so much the more. What ever else
fails, his heart shall never fail him; because he depends upon God, who never
fails of his word, and has promised to strengthen the heart of those that
depend upon him, Psalm: 27, 14, Wait on the Lord: be of good courage, and he
shall strengthen thine heart: wait, I say, on the Lord.

And, indeed, herein has the godly man a great advantage above the wicked. For
the wicked man's care being for the body, which is not able to live without the
soul: his care, and trouble must needs be the more; in regard that those
things which the body needs, are so many, and so hard to be supplied. But the
godly man's care is chiefly for the soul; which can live without the body, and
upon such things as the poorest man may buy; and a little will serve to
maintain it. If it be but a bare Hope; it will make a shift to live with that.
So that a godly man is so much less miserable in affliction then a wicked man;
as a man that has a little appetite, is less miserable in a time of famine,
then he that is a great eater. The food of the soul, is his food: and that can
be gotten at any time, and more plenty of it, when there is least of the other
food.

If God give the godly weakness of body; he will be sure to give them strength
of soul, Ps: 138, 3, In the day when I cried, thou answeredst me: and
strengthned'st me with strength in my soul. Perhaps, he cried to him for
strength of body, or for power against his enemy, and had it not. But he had
that which was as good: God strengthened him with strength in his soul. God is
more then a Father to us, if we trust in him: For he will not only, when we
ask an egg, not give us a scorpion; but when like foolish children (as many
times we do) we ask for a scorpion, he will give us an egg. Luk: 11.12.
Nay, he will not only give us better then what we ask for, when we ask for
that which is not good: Who is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that
we ask or think, according to the power that works in us, Ephesians: 3, 20.
but he will give us (being as willing to give, as he is able,) far above
what we ask, or are able to ask, or think.

God is never behind hand with his children. He will one way or other make it
good. Either they shall have money, or mony-worth still. If he strike them with
one hand, he will stroke them with the other: and they shall never have a purge
for their bodies; but they shall have a cordial for their souls. If they be
in poverty, and, as the Apostle says, (2 Cor: 4.8, 9.) (...) perplexed, or to
seek of a plentiful supply of maintenance: yet shall they not be (...),
clean out of cash, altogether helples. The way wherein God usually supplies
them, and makes amends for their sufferings, is that which I have already
mentioned, viz: If their bodies be in trouble, their souls shall be at ease.
Psalm: 25.13, His soul shall dwell at ease: and his seed shall inherit the
earth. So long as that is well: For the other, if it be not well, they are able
to bear it. And therefore is it, that they take so much care of the soul, and
so little care of the body. For their prayers are not so much, (...), that they
may not labor (or be sick, or weak) in their bodies, as (...), that they be
not so in their souls, (as it is in the Epist: Consider him that endured such
contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your
minds, ( or souls.)
to the Heb: cap 12.3.) and in that they are most sure to be heard. Though in
their bodies, they be never so ill, and ready to dye: yet in their souls they
shall be well, and their heart shall live, Psalm: 69, 32, Your heart shall live
that seek God. And so long as it is so, they care not. They are well enough
preserved from evil, if their souls be preserved. The Lord shall preserve
thee from all evil: he shall preserve thy soul: Psalm: 121.7. God may suffer
their hungry bodies many times to continue empty: yet he will be sure to fill
their hungry souls with goodness. The Lord will not suffer the soul of the
righteous to famish: but he casts away the substance of the wicked, Prove:
10.3. Indeed, the wicked man's soul (who makes himself rich, and yet has
nothing, Prove: 13.7.) according to what was said in the Scripture last cited,
in his greatest plenty, is poorest; so that he starves (as they say) in the
Cooks shop. In the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits, every
hand of the wicked shall come upon him, Job 20.22. Insomuch that he may very
well use the words of the Poet -- Inopem me copia facit. But it is clean
contrary with the godly. For if God have not of his goonndes, prepared
abundance of goods for the poor godly man: yet has he of his mercy prepared
abundance of his goodness for him, Psalm 63.10. If he have not the blessings of
the earth; yet he shall be blessed upon the earth. The Lord will preserve him,
and keep him alive, he shall be blessed upon the earth, and thou will not
deliver him unto the will of his enemies, Psalm: 41.2. You never saw him
forsaken, no nor his seed after him, although they beg their bread. Neither
shall you often see them beg their bread: Pract: Catech.
especially, if they be such as D. Hammond would have to be meant by the
righteous man, viz: a merciful man, and one that is charitable, and free to
the poor: For you shall seldom see such men's families go to decay, and their
children a begging.

And so likewise, you shall never know such people as they, not satisfied:
though they have never so little: which is all one, as if they had never so
much. Even in the days of famine they shall be satisfied, Ps: 37.19.
Satisfied; and that abundantly: if not with the fatness of their own houses;
with the fatness of God's house, which is far sweeter, Psalm. 36, 8, They
shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house: and thou shall
make them drink of the rivers of thy pleasures. In so much that if I should say,
They shall never be in want, because God is he that provides for them, (as
David says, Psalm: 23, 1, The Lord is my shepherd I shall not want.) I should
speak truth; although you should say, that they are miserably poor, and in
want of all things. For it will be true, either in this sense, viz: that though
they want all things, that seem to the eye of a worldly man to be necessary and
good: yet they want nothing that is good indeed, and that which God knows to
be good for them, They that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing: and
Psalm: 84, 11, No good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly,
Psalm; 34.10.

Either God hedges them about so with his blessings, so that nothing can break
in upon them to hurt them, as he did Job, Job 1.10. Have not thou made a hedge
about him and about his house, and about all that he has one every side?
Or he hedges up their ways with punishments, so that they cannot go on, Job
19.8, He has fenced up my way that I cannot pass, and he has set darkness
in my paths.
At such a time, when their way is not right before them, nor safe unto them,
and when they had better be stopped then suffered to go.) Or else in this
sense, viz: (as I said before) because they can be satisfied, and contented, in
any condition: as being able to live very well in it, whatever it be; neither
troubled with sorrow, that it is not, nor with care, that it may be better. He
that loves course fare, and can live upon that, as well as upon better: will
not be displeased, because he has not better provided; and scorns to be sad
for the want of it. He that cares not for a thing which he has not; does not
want it, though he has it not. When I have no use for a penny, I cannot so
well be said to want it; as when I would have it to spend. A godly man, if he
have never so little, does not want more, because he cares not to have any
more: and so he is more rich, then the richest wicked man; who has never
enough, if he have never so much. A wicked man cannot be without this, or that
besides, when he has most; and he must desire it, and he cannot get it; for
every thing he cannot have. He is still without this, or that, to help him,
and has always a hole to fill.

A godly man may say to wicked men, when they object poverty to him, as M. Cato
does in A. Gellius, cap: 22, vitio mihi vertunt, quia multis egeo: at ego
illis, quia nequeunt egere. I may say, and say truly. Only he that can want,
does not want; and he that cannot, does. You tell me that a godly man wants
these, and these things, which the wicked man has: but I tell you, he can no
more be said to want them, then a Butcher may be said to want Homer (or such
another thing) because his disposition is such, that he makes no reckoning; and
his manner of life is such, that he makes no use of those things which you
usually mean. It Is but only necessary things, that he cares for: And those are
not many. But one thing is necessary: and that he has chosen, viz: the better
part. And therefore, if he have nothing at all of other things; he does not
want, neither is there any thing wanting, which might make him rich enough; or
by absence whereof, his riches should be said to be deficient. A body is not
maimed, unless it have lost a principal part. Only privative defects
discommend a thing: and not those that are negative. When we say, there is
nothing wanting to such or such a creature, or thing that a man has made; we
mean, that it has all that belongs necessarily to it. We speak not of such
things, as may be added for complements, or ornaments, or the like (such as are
those things usually, wherein wicked men excel the godly.)

Even so it is, When we say that a godly man wants nothing. For though in
regard of unnecessary goods, he be as having nothing: yet in regard of others,
he is as if he possessed all things. He wants nothing that is necessary, either
for his glorifying of God (being able to do that best even in, and by his
afflictions) or for God's glorifying of him, and making him happy: having God
himself for his portion, and supply of his wants; who is abundantly sufficient
at all times, for all persons, in all conditions. As long as he has him;
whether he have more or less of other things, he has all alike, and he is all
alike. No changes make him change, unless it be to better; and that he often
is, when he seems worse. In the want of temporal goods, his condition is so
much better then a wicked man's: as that son's condition, to whom his father
allows but little in his minority, but means to give him a great-estate, when
he coms to be of age, and denies him nothing what is fitting in the mean time;
is better then his, who has all his money given him before hand, and all his
portion in his hand before his time. If it pleases my heavenly Father to have
it so: I shall be glad, if I have not my portion, till I come home. If I had
it, I should mispend it. Therefore, let it alone. It Is in a good hand: a hand
that is close enough to keep it, and open enough to bestow it, when time shall
serve. He that is of this good mind, will make any condition good enough. For
the mind it is, that does all, for matter of rejoicing, or grieving, in any
condition. If that be rightly disposed (as it mostly is in a godly man) let
every thing go how it will, nothing shall go amiss. For instance, a contented
mind (which of all others is best disposed for joy) keeps the soul in the same
posture, let things without turn how they will; by keeping Afflictions from
piercing any further then the body. For if I am contented, they shall be there;
they will stay there, and go no further. But if I strive and storm, and
tumble; I shall but tie my self faster in the snare; and like an unruly
prisoner, make my imprisonment straighter, by impatience for liberty. The
arrows which I shoot toward heaven in discontent, will fall back again upon
my own pate; and I shall have two afflictons now for one. Whereas, if my mind
had been according to God's will, God's will had been according to my mind, and
I had suffered but in one part of me: Now that my mind is not right and will
not agree with, nor endure to be yoaked to the condition from which it cannot
be separated; I must suffer in both, and, like the Ox that draws back,
endure so much the more pains, as I endeavor to endure less, and be doubly
afflicted.

The mind of a man is such a thing, that, as it is thus or thus disposed, will
make him miserable in the greatest happiness, and happy in the greatest
misery. He that is of a merry heart, has a continual feast (Prove: 15, 15,)
even when he has no meat to eat. Happiness depends as much upon the
condition of my manners; as upon the manner of my condition Sui cuique mores
fingunt fortunam, Cicer Ep. 2 ad Brutum
Every man's conditions make his condition. It Is not so much the condition of
the things without thee, and without thy power (thy fortune, and thy estate) as
of the things that are, within thee, and within thy power, thy mind, and thy
passions; which will render thee (or for which thou may be said to be)
happy, or unhappy. The worst news is no sad news, unless I grieve: and the
best news is no joyful news, unless I rejoice to hear it. Things are good,
or bad, to me, as my mind is. According as I take them, so they take me. As the
old proverb is it is every one as he likes. So long as I keep the Poet's rule,
-- mihires, non me rebus submittere conor i:e: so long as endeavor to make all
things subject to my self, and submit my self to nothing; I will be sad for
nothing and I will be merry with any thing. I can frame any thing to my mind,
if I can frame my mind to any thing: and if I can frame my mind to any thing, I
shall be sad for nothing.

If the condition of things be the same; yet if the conditions of the persons,
or the temper of the same man be different: one will be happy, and the other
miserable; and the same man will be miserable, and happy, with the same
condition. It Is not so much the difference of conditions (or estates) as the
difference of dispositions, that does the work in this business. Hence it is,
that one that is of a retired disposition, can be at liberty in a prison: and
another, that is addicted to company, is in a prison, if he be but alone: One
that has nothing, can laugh, and sing and be merry, as if he had all things;
and another that has the world by the nose, is always sad, and dumpish, as if
he were not owner of a penny: One that is always vexed, is continually pleased:
and another that is continually pleased; is always vexed, and discontented.
Multos qui conflictari adversis videantur, beatos; ac plerosque quanquam per
magnas opes miserrimos, says one in the Tacit Annal. lib. 6.
same sense. And how comes this to pass: but by men's well, or ill managing
their fortunes, when they come? as the same writer add's, Si illi gravem
fortunam constanter tolerent, hi prospera consulte utantur. It Is with politic
creatures in cases, and accidents; as it is said to be with natural creatures
in the business of causes, and actions, Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum
recipientis, as they find men, so are they; good, or bad, according as men's
minds are well, or ill disposed: like the Cameleon, altering their nature, and
color, according to the nature, and complexion, of the person to whom they
happen.

Happiness is not an outward relative accident, or a bare denomination of him
(because he has these or these things) but it is an inward qualification in
him, of his own making (by the grace of God) because he is so, or so, or
because he does these or these things. It Is not he that has goods, is happy:
but he that is good, and does good; he that loves God so, that he meditates
continually of him; he that loves him so, that he keeps the love, and loves the
keeping of all his commandments. Such a man as this, let poverty come never so
well armed, he is ready to meet her: let there come never so many losses, and
crosses, and calamities (as they are thought to be to him, and as they are
^ndeed to a wordly man) I say, let them come hand in hand (to say nothing of
the joy extraordinary, which he may have in such a time) the least that he is
sure enough of, is a quiet spirit, and a contented mind: and that is amends
sufficient. Si celeres fortuna quatit pennas, Resigno quae dedit, and mea
virtute me involvo, If fortune gave him any thing, and will take it away
again: he is resolved to let her have it quietly, and trouble himself no
further. He will pluck in his horns into his shell; and wrap himself up close
in his course (but warm) garment of content; and be more merry in that, then
ever he was before in his finest clothes. As Elisha (if I may give you a
comparison used by another man) shrinking his own body to the length of his
child's put life into the child: so can he, either shrinking himself, or (as
the proverb is) cutting his cloak to the length of his cloth, put life (as I
may say) into any estate, and make his condition good, if he find it never so
bad. When his estate is most in decay, and his condition too low to agree, and
consort with the height of his former life and carriage; it is but letting the
pegs lower down, or playing lower notes; and he is presently fit to consort
with the music that he meets with.

If you reply, that we talk of promises of the enjoyment of these temporal
blessings, as a part of the godly man's happiness: and therefore to want them
in this manner, as we have spoken of, must needs be misery: my answer is, that
if for every temporal blessing denied them, they have a spiritual blessing
allowed them; the happiness is never the less enjoyed, nor the promise
performed. At least, he is not worse then his word, who promised me brass, and
paies me gold.

Again, I must tell you. First that the promises made to the godly, and
mentioned in the Scriptures of their deliverance from temporal evils (and so
of bestowing upon them temporal blessings) are meant of their eternal
deliverance simply, and of their temporal deliverance only conditionally, viz:
as it shall consist with God's glory, and their own good. Secondly, that most
of them are meant to the whole Church collectively, and not to every particular
member. And thirdly, that most of them are meant of deliverance from Spiritual
evils, figured out in temporal expressions.

I have done with the first objection, viz: that the godly man's condition is
most miserable, or, that they have cause to live the saddest life. The next
objection is that, they do live the saddest life: and this, say they, must
every body confess; for they are known by their sad, and dejected looks. It Is
even a mark to know them by; and God has long ago set a mark upon them for
it, Ezekiel: 9, 4, And the Lord said unto him, Go through the midst of the city,
through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men
that sigh, and that cry for all the abominations that are done in the midst
thereof. Nay, and Christ blessed them for it, Math: 5, 4, Blessed are they that
mourn. And we wonder (say they) you should expect any other from men that are
not of this world; but Pilgrims, and Strangers, and such as seek another
country; as you say, godly men are, and do.

To this I answer, that this conclusion concerning godly men, is too hastily
made. Their heart may be light enough, though their countenance be heavy. The
Sun shines still notwithstanding a cloud: and godly men usually put the worst
side outmost. It Is true, they are travelers here, and in a strange country
and while they are at home in the body, they are absent from the Lord (as the
Apostle says 2 Cor: 5.6.) But I deny a necessity that therefore they must be
sad. First, because though they are traveling; they are traveling homeward.
And such as are traveling toward their home; you know, though their way be
never so difficult and dangerous, are the joyful'st men in the world. Secondly,
because though they are for the present absent from the Lord; yet they are
going all as fast to him. They are present with him in their hearts by faith,
already; sitting with him in heavenly places, Ephesians: 1, 3: and they are sure ere
long to be present with him in their persons. And you will little wonder; if
you consider that they are men that walk by faith, as the Apostle says, 2
Cor: 5.7, 8: not by sight (and so, if the things which they see, be not to
their mind, they are the less troubled) being not only willing, but delighted
with the thought and expectation of it, to be absent from the body, and to be
present with the Lord. They live and dye in faith like the Patriarchs, Heb: 11,
13. not having received the promises, but only having seen them afar off; and
are persuaded of them: and embrace them and confess that they are strangers and
pilgrims on the earth: and are not troubled with the thought of it (for who
will be troubled with the thought of being a stranger (or a traveller) through a
strange country? This very desire, and expectation of theirs will make them
merry enough. The saying, Nil aeque gratum adeptis, ac concupiscentibus,
Nothing is so pleasant when it is obtained, as when it is desired, will serve
here: if not to undervalue the enjoyment, yet to commend the desire. It Is joy
enough to be desirous of the presence of Christ, more to be in the way to
obtain it, and more yet to be sure to obtain it: All which agree to the godly
man in this life.

Yet must I tell you, that however, I do not grant the first part of the
antecedent neither altogether; as if all godly men had such dejected looks.
Some there be that look, and behave themselves worthy of their hopes. And for
those that do not, I account it their fault, for which they should be blamed;
and not their misery, for which they should be pitied. Sithence they have no
cause, why they should be sorry; I see no cause why they should seem to be so,
unless it be a fear of displeasing their enemies, if they should be merry. But
if they are sad they will do worse: for then they are sure to scandalize them,
and sin against God besides.

But the truth of it is, for the most part, the world is out in their
physiognomy. They do not judge well of countenances, or if they do judge well
(to return to my first answer) they do not conclude well, viz: that men must
needs be sad, because they look so. For they may be, as Paul said, 3 Cor: 6.10.
(...) as sad, and yet always rejoicing. They are not sorrowful, but serious.
They are indeed as sad: or they are as serious, as if they were sad; as men
that think it not becoming them, to be profuse, and childishly merry; but to be
considerate: which they cannot well be, if they be over-merry. It Is hard to be
merry and consider (as the preacher's word is, Ecles: 7, 14, In the day of
prosperity be joyful, but in the day of adversity consider.

They are no more sad, then is necessary for a courageous man to be, when he is
in the midst of his eneimies; or upon the sea, in a storm; or in any
dangerous place. He is wary doubtless, and he may be somewhat fearful, and
sad about the mouth: but he is merry still at the bottom of the heart, even
for this, viz: to think how merry indeed he shall be when the danger is over.
He had no sadness but that of the countenance: and by that the heart is made
better, says Solomon, Eccles: 7.3. Even so is the godly man, merry at the
heart, go how it will: yea and most merry in that part, when least in the
rest, even when he is most afflicted. The Thessalonians even in much
affliction, received the word with joy of the holy Ghost, 1 These: 1.6. Where
you see (by experience) that Affliction, and joy, can very well go together:
though they seem as strangely coupled, as prosperity, and sorrow; or Affliction
and prosperity: But the HOLY GHOST, that takes a way the wonder. So the
Maaedonian Christians, Paul brags of them, That in a great trial of afflicton,
(...), the abundance of the joy etc: (...), abounded unto the riches of their
liberality, 2 Cor: 8.2. And so Paul himself, even for the good which others
had received could say, (...), and (...) etc: I am filled with comfort, I am
exceeding joyful in all our tribulation, 2 Cor: 7.4. And I doubt not but
another godly man, as he was, may in his greatest afflictions, say as much as
he did, upon good grounds. For when he is most afflicted, he is most assured,
that since he has not his portion in this world, he is one of those that are
to have it in another. He is glad of it, as a prisoner, that has deserved
death, is glad when he comes to be whipped; because now he presumes that he shall
not be hanged. He can be proud of it, like a valiant Champion, that he is
chosen out by God himself to fight a combat with such strong adversaries, as
the devil, and the world, and the flesh: whom it can be no small comfort and
glory to conquer. Nay he can glory with the beaten Apostles, * that he is
counted worthy to suffer. He counts it an honor to drink of Christ's own Cup;
Though it be with sickness, and much against the stomach, he will joyfully
pledge him. He will cheerfully go any where, as long as he has such a leader
before him. Whereas else he would be sad, and fear, that God had laid him
aside as a stone unfit for his building ( viz: if he did not beat him with the
hammer of affliction) that he had given him over, as not fit to be wrought
upon, leaving him to himself and so to destruction: Now, he is merry, and
gathers heart, and resolves to bear up sail, because he thinks, like the sick
man, that there is hope of life, so long as the Lord gives him physic, and
keeps him under with a diet of Affliction. Like a man that has a disease
already upon him, or a crazy body about him, so that he needs the help of
physic: Because he thinks he has need of it, he cannot but be a little sad,
and pensive and fearful, till he take it: but when he has taken it, unless
he be a child, or a madman, or a fool; he is presently glad, though it put
him to never so much pain, because he is confident it will do him good; and
he expects every hour when it will. Affliction is the Godly man's ordinary
physic, which he takes of course: and, like a man that has been used to
Physic, at such and such certain times, and forbeares it but once; it is a
hundred to one but he is presently sick, if he want it. He is naturally subject
to many spiritual diseases, and therefore is glad when he uses the means, and
is in a course of Physic to be cured and preserved. Now what spirit has so
weak an edge as to be dulled with a little affliction which (though it were
more) is not only attended with, but the cause it self of so much good?

Away, never talk of it, I scorn your words, that a godly man can be sad,
unless when it is his desire, or his duty: So as it is, to see God dishonored,
and men sinning against him. He can bear any burden but such: Endure any thing
but sin: And bear with any man but a wicked man; whom he cannot (...) bear
with or endure; like the church of Ephesus, of which it is said, that she could
not (...) bear them which were evil, Rev: 2.2.

But as for other things, Afflictions and persecutions (as it is said of the
same church verse: 3, (...) and have borne, and have patience) they make nothing
of them.

You will say yet, that either your objection must be true; or Christ's own
words must be false, who told his followers long ago, that it should be so as
you say, as it is recorded, John 16, 20, Verily verily I say unto you, that ye
shall weep, and lament, but the world shall rejoice: and ye shall be sorrowful
etc:

But (to answer you) I pray, what kind of sorrow did our Savior mean? He says
himself in the very next verse, it was but such a sorrow as that of a woman in
travel. And think you that women are truly sorrowful, when they are in
travel? No more are the godly in all their sufferings. They may be in pain,
as women in travel are: and in travel till they be delivered of their
Affliction (as no chastisement for the present seems to be joyous, but
grievous,) Heb: 12.11
But yet so it is, that they do not only not remember their pain, as soon as
they are delivered, (for joy, either that they are by this means regenerated,
and borne again, or that they were so well beloved as to be chastened, and
counted worthy to suffer) But even all their pain be it what it will, they
will never think it too much, or too high a price, for the birth of such a
child as Affliction in the new generation brings forth. For the pangs, and
throws of our short Affliction here, as short and as sharp perhaps as those of
a woman in travel (to say nothing of the sweet fruit of righteousness, which
they usually bring to them that are thereby exercised in this world, Heb,
12.10. He chastneth us for our profit, that we might be partakers of his
holiness.) must needs come exceeding short of that exceeding weight of glory,
which they may be said to bring forth in the world to come. What? Shall he that
expects such a harvest of profit; having now sown his wheat, be out of heart
because of the winter? Let the seed alone. If it do not yet come upward; it is
because it takes root downward, and that it may not be forward, out of season:
for so it might be backward, when the season comes. Nothing better then frost,
and snow, to chasten corn: and nothing better for corn, then a little
chastening. Why am I in such have? And why do I vex, and grieve? If I can but
tarry: for all my loss of a temporal health, and wealth, and happiness of the
body; I shall have an unvaluable satisfaction of an eternal health, and
wealth, and happiness, of body and soul to make me amends. This could make
the primitive Christians at Jerusalem, endure the loss of their goods with joy:
and why should it not me? Why should I repine against God for Afflions; when I
know that they are tokens and pledges, and as it were new security of his love?
This kept David from repining; even because he said, he knew that God out of
very faithfulness did afflict him, viz: because he meant to be faithful in
keeping his promise in his everlasting covenant of grace, and not to leave him
to himself without afflicting him; lest being thus left, he should sin and so
give God occasion to forsake him. Why should I be a jot troubled, or break my
sleep for any persecution; when I have God standing by my bedside? So Peter had
(no doubt) and thence it was it, that he slept so quietly even between the two
soldiers in the prison? Why should my soul be disquieted within me, when I
have God himself about my path, and about my bed? And so had David. And
therefore, though he were persecuted so much, never took it a jot to heart, but
even laid him down, and took his rest, Psalm: 3.5. I laid me down and slept; I
awaked, for the Lord sustained me. And this, he said, was his resolution still
to do upon that account, Psalm: 4, 8. I will both lay me down in peace, and
sleep: for thou Lord only make me dwell in safety. Last of all, why should I
be of a dejected spirit, as long as I have a comforter within my very spirit;
The Spirit of the God of all consolation: in whose presence there can as well
be want of joy, as there can be want of light in the presence of the Sun, or
want of heat, where there is a great fire? What do you talk of sadness? They
that have such to keep them company, and such company to keep them safe, ( God,
in all the persons of the Trinity, and the blessed Angels) cannot be sad, if
they would. To have company that is so comfortable; protection that is so near,
that so is strong; protection and company both, that is so faithful, that
never parts, that is most willing to help when I have most need: To think that
I have God himself, not for my helper only (one that can and will help me,
when I need) but even for my very help ( David says, he is a present help in
time of trouble) so that if I have him, I have presently help with the same:
what? all this? it is enough to make me merry if I lay a dying, and to say with
David, Ps: 23.4. yea though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I
will fear no evil: for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff they comfort
me.

But to this purpose I have spoken before, viz: when I spoke to the several
grounds, and causes of the godly man's joy. I will next show you some
Scriptures for a godly man's mirth in Affliction.

1. There is Christ's exhortation.

Mat: 5.11, and 12, Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute
you and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice,
and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted
they the Prophets which were before you.

Luk: 6.22, 23, Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall
separate you from their company, and shall reproach, and cast out your name as
evil, for the son of man's sake sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for
joy: for behold your reward is great in heaven.

2. We are called to patience.

1 Pet: 2, 21, For even hereunto were ye called: because Christ also suffered
for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps.

We are none of Christ's soldiers, if we cannot endure hardness: as Paul said
to Timothy 2 Epist: 2, 3, Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good Soldier of
Jesus Christ. Now we cannot endure hardness, if we cannot endure it with
cheerfulness. For to endure it with repining and grieving is not to endure it.
So any one can do, because he cannot do otherwise.

Add hereunto next Saint James his exhortation, chap: 1.2.

My brethren count it all joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations. Paul, you
have not only his exhortation to rejoice at all times, to the Philippians,
chap: 3, 1, Finally my brethren rejoice in the Lord: And to the Corinthians, in
the last words of his Epistle to them 2 Epist chap. 13.11.

Finally, brethren, farewell: Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind,
live in peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with you.

But also his desire, and constant prayer to God in behalf of the Colossions,
ch: 1.9, 10, 11. that they might be strengthened unto all patience, and
long-suffering with joyfulnesse: as if their patience, and long-suffering had
been nothing, unless it were joined with joyfulness.

3. You have before you the practice not only of the primitive Christians, as
of Paul himself, Colos: 1.24.

Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of
the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the
church.

Of himself, and others, Rom: 5.3.

And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also: knowing that tribulation
works patience.

And of the Hebrews, 10.34.

For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling of
your goods, knowing in your selves that you in heaven a better and an enduring
substance.

But of the Saints also in former ages: as of David, Psalm: 119 92.

Unless thy law had been my delight; I should then have perished in my
affliction. And of many others. Some of whom you have recounted, Hebr: 11. So
that you have not only a cloud of witnesses, to show that it may be so: but a
large catalogue of good examples, to prove that it should be so in you, I
mean, that you should rejoice in afflictions, as they did, through the comfort
of hope, and the strength of faith; resolving as David did, that you will not
fear though the earth be removed, and the mountains be carried into the
midst of the sea, Psalm: 46.2. Let the storms of adversity rise never so high,
and the winds of persecution blow never so furiously; the house can never be
shaken, that is founded upon the rock of salvation Jesus Christ. The ship
cannot be cast away, that has the Cross of Christ for the maine mast, to
fasten her sails; the word of God (a rule that will never deceive) for the
card to direct her; D. Feat ley.
the most sure promises of God for the anchor to hold her; the Spirit of God,
for the wind to carry her; and Christ himself for the Pilot to steer the
course. Jactatur, nunquam mergitur ista ratis. Such a house may be blown upon,
but it cannot be shaken. Such a Ship may be tossed, but it cannot be lost.

A godly man is even as such an house, or such a ship. And he knows it very
well: And therefore, though he expects, yet he fears not the worst. Let his
enemies be never so mortal he knows they are mortal, and he shall soon be
eased of them. Let them never leave thirsting for his blood, till they draw it
out; his soul is able to live upon the blood which such as they are, drew from
him his Savior: and so long he cares not. Let the men of this world plow upon
his back, and make the furrows never so long, so he may bear good corn: Let
the Prince of this world shake him, and winnow him like wheat. For now he will
say with Ignatius (when he heard the roaring of the Lions, that were appointed
to devour him) Christi frumentum sum, I am glad of it. Now I see, I am clean
corn, for I am going to the mill. Do not think these expressions poetical:
Neither imagine, either our Martyrs to have lied, when they spoke of their joys
in the flames: or all those stories of their joyful expressions to be lies.

Let men talk what they will, of the magnanimity, and fortitude of the old
Romans, and the heathen Philosophers; as if it were not to be pararell'd. I am
confident, that many a true Christian has a great deal more, and better, then
any of them had. Pet: Martyr in his common places ( class: 3. c: 12.) puts the
question, An sancti homines inferiores fuerint Ethnicis in ferendis rebus rebus
adversis? whether the Saints were inferior to the heathen in patience. And
having brought some of the best examples among'st them, as of Horatius
Pulvillus (who having news brought him of his Son's death, as he was
consecrating the Temple, went on his work, and was not a jot moved at it.) And
of Anaxogoras (who having the same news brought him, only made answer, sciebam
me mortalem genuisse, That he had not begotten an immortal Son.) And some
others; yet determines. First, that the Christians were no whit inferior to
them: And that if Christians did at any time grieve at the news, or upon the
thought of death, or the like; it was because they were better men then those
heathen were, and eiter might or would glorify God more, and do more good if
they lived: or for such like causes. Then he applies to this purpose the story
of Aristippus. Who being asked by a Mariner why he was fearful being a
Philosopher; whereas he who never knew any Philosophy at all, was not? replied,
Non debuisti sollicitus esse tu pro anima nebulonis, ego videbam Aristippum
Philosophum periclitari. For your part, you should not be sollicitous for the
life of such a poor knave as you are: but I saw, that Aristippus the
Philosopher was in danger to be lost.

2. Those Romans, and Philosophers, feared not death, or grieved not for it,
quod post hanc vita^ nulla reliqua essent, because they thought, after a man
was dead, there was an end with him: whereas the Christian grieved not, or was
not afraid of death, because there was not an end with him; but there was a
life to live, in which men should be rewarded or, punished, for what they had
done in this; which is far more to be commended, and a sign of greater
courage.

3. The fortitude, and courage of the heathen was but (...), or (...), a kind
of stupour, a want, not a moderation of passions and grief, which Austin
says, is omnibus vitiis pejor, worse then all vices. They had no patience, but
in want of sense; which could be none at all: whereas these had none but when
the sense was quickest: which must needs be best of all.

And then fourthly, he answers that their courage, if it were never so much,
was not at all pleasing to God (which is Saint Austin's opinion also contra
Julianum, lib: 4. cap: 4.) because it proceeded not from Faith; as the courage
of a Christian does, (for otherwise it is no more pleasing to God then theirs
was.)

I know, yet you will say, that it is impossible that flesh and blood, meeting
with so many sad accidents as Christians usually do, should forbear to look
sad, and be so too. But for my part I know no such necessity. Indeed I confess
a godly man (and so he may at any other time, as well as then) may have sadness
upon the top of his countenance. But alas, so many sad (as we use the word) and
serious, and sober dry thoughts, as he has, are enough to produce that without
any sorrow. This is such a sadness, as I cannot pity, or dispraise; but rather
commend it, as the Preacher does, It is better to go to the house of mourning,
then to go the house of feasting; for that is the end of all men, and the
living will lay it to his heart. Sorrow is better then laughter: for by the
sadness of the countenance the heart is made better. The heart of the wise is
in the house of mourning: but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth,
Eccles: 7.2, 3, 4. But as for sorrow, and grief, and vexation of heart; a
godly man has not such vipers nourished within him. He has sorrow for sin
indeed: but then he has joy never the less; and his joy is never the less for
his sorrow. I will undertake it, there is more true mirth in a godly man's
heart one hour, even in the mid' st of his sighings; then any wicked man has
with all his tighings, and sneerings all the day. For such a sorrow is so fare
from destroying joy; that it is the cause of joy, and the cause of the best
joy, and the best cause of the best joy.

Reader, it is strange to consider, how a godly man excell's a wicked man in
matter of joy. A godly man can joy that he has joyed, and joy that he has
sorrowed, and joy for any thing: And so with all my heart let him sorrow: as
Austin said, doleat homo Christianus, and de dolor gaudeat, Let a Christian
man grieve, and rejoice in his grief. On the contrary, the wicked man's joy is
sorrowful: for he sorrows for his joy, for hurting others. And his sorrow is
exceeding sorrowful: for he sorrows for his sorrow, for hurting himself. His
sorrow is but worldly at the best, and accordingly it works death, one way,
or other. Seldom have you known the godly man's sorrow, which is a godly
sorrow, to cause him to do any thing to hurt his body, either by hanging
himself, or breaking his heart or the like. That he does his soul good by it
for this world, he knows it by exderience; and for the world to come, by the
word of God.

Of this good nature is his sorrow for sin. And he has little or none other
sorrow, to speak of, but what is, of this nature. David Psalm: 38, though he
complains indeed of his sickness, and the diseases of his body: yet, it semes,
he could deal pretty well with them. But when he comes to feel the burden of
his sins, and the diseases of his soul; then he is ready to sink, verse 4,
They are as a weighty burden, too heavy for me. If he speaks of sorrow, (as he
does verse 17, My sorrow is continually before me) presently he makes mention
of sin verse 18, for I will declare mine iniquity, I will be sorry for my
sin, so Psalm: ^5, verse 17, 18, The troubles of mine heart are enlarged; O
bring thou me out of my distresses. Look upon mine affliction, and my pain,
and forgive all my sins. He no sooner speaks of his afflictions, but he prays
for forgiveness of his sins. He is sure to complain of them, what ever he
complain of else; as being that which lay heaviest, and longest upon his
stomach.

To speak the truth, the soul never truly grieves, but for what is either in
her, that should not be in her; or done by her, that should not be done by her,
the being or doing whereof, could, or should have been prevented. (such a thing
is sin) Plus dolet qui, quod intus est, dolet. Grief within the soul shall
never be, or it shall never be much, for things that are without it, with which
it has nothing to do. Nemo nisi sua culpa diu dolet, The grief is quickly
over, when I my self have no hand in the cause. If I am never so much at a
fault, or to seek for a worldly good: If I am not in fault too; it shall never
trouble me a whit. All the bitterness that any man has, that walks in the
way of godliness, he has it not from the way, but from turning out of the way.
Hence it is partly, if godly men are seen at any time to be sorrowing for
outward evils, they are but (as Paul says) as sorrowing, and yet rejoicing.
For their sorrow is no more then a spark of fire is in the sea, suddenly
quenched with waters of comfort, and rivers of joy of the Holy Ghost. If there
be a mixture of both joy, and sorrow; joy is still the predominant. So that at
the worst, they cannot be swallowed up of sorrow, because the sorrow is so soon
swallowed up of joy.

Having showed you why you are to go the journey, and what manner of way you
have, and what the fruit of the journey will be: Now that I have removed the
rubs also, it remains (although I have not been idle as to this work in my
answers to the objections) that I put on my spurs, and use some motives of
exhortation to stir you up, and prick you too by reproof if you go not on.

First then I will exhort you, and beseech you to rejoice in the Lord. You that
are called by the name of Christ: you that have the Lord for your God: you that
are so fast in the favor of heaven, that neither life, nor death, nor angels,
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, or any other creature; shall be able to separate you from
the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord: Romans 8, 38, 39.
to be breife, you that enjoy so many, and so great privileges, and enjoy them
so freely; you, I say, though you do suffer afflictions, yet nevertheless
lift up your eyes, and your heads, unplait your brows, and clear up your
countenance, so that no sign, or cause of suspicion of sadness be left: for
your redemption draws nigher and nigher every day, and your salvation is so
certainly determind, that it is every day nearer Romans 3 11.
then when you first believed. A way with this squalid, dejected, sour,
Monkish, pharisaicall carriage. Wash your faces, and anoint them with the oil
of gladness: for your deliverance comes on a pace. I tell you, melancholy, and
Christianity, are no such companions, as the world think they are: and
therefore, pray, do not you think so of them. And if you find affliction and
Christianity to be so: be no more troubled, Cypri-Ep: ad Mart:
then I have proved you have need to be. Certain it is, if you are good
grapes, (de vinea domini pingues racemi) there is no talking of it, you must to
the winepress: you must be squeezed and bruised, and oppressed. But as I told
you before, such usage is a sign, not that you are the less, but the more
cared for. Now, you shall be safely kept (as men keep their wine) and highly
prized, and never thrown away.

However you are, or have your selves ill; yet be sure to behave your selves
well, and cheerful; and if for nothing else yet for these few reasons.

1. To avoid scandalizing, and disheartning of men: that so you may gain more
credit, and more Proselytes to your profession.

2. To avoid scandalizing (as the word is also used for making a thing a
scandal) and dishonouring of God, and making Christ a scandal: that so you may
gain more glory to the truth, by living up sutably to the honorable, and
happy condition of those that keep it. Believe it, it becomes no body so well
as a good Christian: and nothing becomes a good Christian so well, as to be
merry, Psalm: 33.1, Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous, for praise is comely
for the upright. In the wicked it is uncomely, and absurd, because they have no
reason wherefore. Yea it is folly and madness, because they have so much reason
wherefore not.

3. Because (...) well, are wont to be by their master: neither is God only
delighted in you, (like such masters) when you do your work cheerfully; but
you are taught likewise, and if not commanded, yet exhorted (as I told you
before) in an imperative mood, so to do. The places I cited, were Matt. 5.12.
Luke 6.22.

Christians, it is strange to me, not to see you merry, when you are doing
well. For if you are willing to do what you do; I do not see how you can be
sad in the doing; unless you can be unwilling, when you are willing. If you are
not willing, you had better let it alone then do it. The high spirited-Roman
Soldiers, went home-ward with countenances dejected, and heads hanging down,
because they had been sub jugum missi, made to pass under the yoke. But to
you let such usage heretofore, be a motive now to the contrary: And be glad
that you were indeed (as the Apostle says) the Romans 6.17.
servants of sin, and in the devils yoke; but that that yoke is off now,
and another put on, which is light, and large, and smooth enough.

4. Because to be cheerful, and merry in any service (and why not then in
Gods service?) is the only way to make it easy. It awakens, and calls up the
Spirits in the heart: which when it has opened, and enlarged, it sends them
out to the members too, to supply them with vigor, and strength. Heaviness,
and sorrow, when thou art doing any thing, will make thee first, Heavy, and
dull, and lazy Secondly, Pensive; causing thee to think upon other things, and
upon any thing rather then that which thou art doing Thirdly, to go
unwillingly about it. These three things are enough to make the easiest work
that is wearisome, and difficult. To what purpose is it? Nay what a madness is
it for you, first, to render your actions unpleasing (nay displeasing) to God,
and more tedious to your selves: and afterward to lose not only your labor,
when you have made it more then needed, but the reward of the actions also,
which is so much, and the master's good will which is most of all.

5. It is required that you should be cheerful, that so you may express your
love (and thankfulness) to Christ, and to his service which you have
undertaken. If I should see a Soldier continually sad, and dejected: I must
needs think that he either loved not the Captain, or did not like the service.

But however, mistake me not, and have a care of taking an ell, when you have
but an inch allowed you. Such mistakes are dangerous, and too too commonly the
occasion of multitudes of sins. Sunt certi denique fines. For I must tell
you, after all this, there is a difference, and there must be a distinguishing
betwixt being merry, and making merry (as they use to call it) I have allowed
you freely of the first; but I shall be very sparing to you in the last, as it
is commonly used. It Is enough for wicked men, who have none of those comforts
either without them, or within them, which you have; to make themselves merry:
and therefore it is, that they use so many helps and means, and devise so many
tricks to do it. You for your part have no need to do so. You are sufficient
of your selves to be merry; and you have sufficient besides your selves, to
make you merry without any force, or labor of your own. You know what making
merry means, and what the fashion of the world is, viz: to pass away their
time with sports, to sing and play away their cares with wanton songs, and
dances, and drown their sorrows in the cup, which they will have the deeper,
that they may do it the better. But you, I am sure, have otherwise learned
Crist. For neither are you allowed if you cannot be merry otherwise, to use
such means, or if you can, to express it so.

As I said first, so I say still, you may, and must be joyful; but in the
Lord: As Austin said (upon those words of the Psalmist, Psalm: 97, 12,
Jucundamini Justi, Rejoice ye righteous.) Forte fideles audientes jucundamini
convivia meditantur; calices praeparantur. Sed vide quid sequitur; In domino,
Happily, the righteous, hearing and the words, Be merry, may think upon
feasting, and provide their cups, and the like. But look what follows, IN THE
LORD. It must be no otherwise then so. All that I would have you do, is, that
since you can speak of so much joy, and comforts, and delights of the Holy
Ghost within you; you would also make it appear, without you; and let others
know so much by your carriage and behavior; that so they seeing you thus, may
think the better of your profession, and glorify your father which is in
heaven, when they see his children are not neglected.

So on the otherside, I do not say, but there is a time (as the Preacher
says) to weep, as well as to laugh; a time to be sad, and to have a sad
countenance. A man may, no doubt grieve: For Christ himself did so. But to
make ones self sad, Hilary denies it, and says he did not dolere, but only
pati impetum, which Peter Martyr reprovs him for.
and to be of a sad countenance, as if that were the proper and inseparable
mark of a mortified man, or as if that were the temper he must needs be of: it
is a thing no way to be allowed in a Christian, and that which our Savior long
ago condemned for the trick of a hypocrite.

And so much for exhortation. A word of reproof, and I have done. Of reproof,
I say, both to him that thinks he cannot be a Christian, unless he be sad: and
to him that thinks he cannot be thought to be so, unless he look so. For shame
leave off sobbing and sighing, like men without hope. Do not disgrace the
master whom you serve, and make the world believe you are overlabour'd, and
hardly used. Be not like the dog in the manger, that would neither eat hay
himself, nor suffer the horse to eat any. Be not longer an hinderance of your
brethrens joy. And be no longer a scandal, and a stumbling block in the way,
to hinder such as are coming to the service of Christ; and yet serve him never
a jot the better your selves, but the worse. If you are discontented, tell me
what aileth you. I am sure, you have more then heart can wish, or conceive, For
neither has eye seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of
man to conceive, the things that God has prepared for them that love him. 1
Cor: 2.9. If you regard not your own good; however do not give your enemies
occasion to rejoice, or think that your condition is worse then theirs. I would
be merry, surely, if it were but to outvy them. What? shall a wicked man
comfort himself in a poor barn full of corn, and say, rejoicing, Soul; thou
have much goods laid up for many years: take thine ease, eat, drink, and be
merry, And have thou nothing to say, that art an heir to no less estate, then
the Kingdom of Heaven? Shall a natural man, and a Philosopher, and a Stoic,
brag that nothing can make him grieve: and shall a Spiritual man, and a
Believer, and a Christian, complain, that nothing can make him merry? If you
can endure such a disparagement of your religion, you can endure any thing. I
will conclude with the saying of Solomon (do not endeavor to bring the truth
of it into question by your practice) God gives to a man that is good in his
sight, wisdom and knowledge, and joy: but to the sinner he gives travel, to
gather, and to heap up, that he may give to him that is good before God,
Eccles: 2.6.

The Fourth Book. The Mirth Of a Christian Life.
HItherto it has been my endeavor to set forth the joys, that are, or may be
had in a godly life. And now, lest the wicked should say, Qui statuit aliquid
part inaudita altera,
Aequum licet statuerit, haud aequus fuerit.
Who judges ere both parties he has heard;
Although he judge aright, he has but erred.
I must crave your reading to judge, and your patience to read, what I shall
say concerning a wicked life. Seeing David bids us not be envious against the
workers of iniquity Psalm: 37.1. I will see a little, what it is they have,
worth the envying: and whether they are so happy, and live so merry, as men
commonly think they do. Certainly, all is not gold that glisters. I believe,
you will find your joy so much cried up, if you put it to the touchstone of
spiritual judgment, or if you hold it to the light of Gods word, and look
nearer to it; to be but a bastard joy, a mere counterfeit, and no true jewel.
I beseech you, let me have a little time to search into the nature, and
propertyes; and examine the causes of it. If I can prove their joy to be less
in quantity, and worse in quality; their sorrow to be more, and worse; and
their condition to be absolutely worse, and to have much more cause of sorrow,
then the godly man's condition; and no cause at all of joy: I hope I shall not
loose my labor, but obtain my desire of persuading you, not to trouble your
selves as you do, at the sight of their but seeming: but to rejoice as you
should, in the enjoyment of your own truly happy condition.

First then, whereas the joy of the godly, (or the godly joy) is continual,
i.e. uninterrupted, and continual, i.e. lasting, (nay, everlasting) The joy
which the wicked have, (or the wicked joy; for so most of it is) is but
momentany; either so that it is interrupted with one thing or other; coming,
and going, upon fits, and flashes: or so, that, if it should be without
interruptions, it would not be long, ere it would be no more. For, indeed, it
is so weak, and like an abortive child; that it does not only not live out all
this life, which is but a moment compard with eternity; but very seldom holds
out longer then a moment of this Gregory upon Job, c. 20. compares it thus;
Gaudium (says he) hypocritarum instar puncti in puncto enim stylus-ut ponitur,
levatur, appparet ad momentum, sed despuret in perpetuum.
moment.

A wicked man has as bad a tenure of any thing that he has, as any Villaine'
can have in an estate: uncertain and unstable; in to day, and out to morrow:
Every thing sudden, and vanishnig, and gone in an instant. And to this purpose
Job has excellently spoken cap. 8, 14, to the 19. Whose hope shall be cut off,
and whose trust shall be a spiders web. He shall lean upon his house, but it
shall not stand: he shall hold it fast but it shall not endure. He is green
before the sun, and his branch shoots forth in his garden. His roots are
wrapped about the heap, and sees the place of stones. If he destroy him from
his place, then it shall deny him, saying, I have not seen thee. Behold, this
is the joy of his way, and out of the earth shall others grow.

And as all other his good things (as he esteems them to be) so his joy
especially. If it be sweet, its sure to be short; scarce enduring time enough
to be taken. Most of his Comforts make him but as happy as Tantalus; bobbing
him in the mouth, and touching him no longer, then only to make him long, and
away. At the best, and the longest, his joy endures but for a night (the only
time for thieves, and drunkards, and such like: though I know, how sad, and
fearful their night-mirth also is) but his sorrow comes in the morning (no
less sure, and no more in his power to hinder, then the rising of the Sun) and
takes the whole day before it.

And So, most of his pleasures, in which his joy is, hold but the lasting of a
taste, and a touch: viz. so long as his meat, and his drink is passing through.
How few of his delights outlive one thought! And how few of his thoughts upon
his delights, live till one thought upon another be past! He is scarce ever
able to have two merry thoughts together, and never a sad one between.
Perhaps, this moment, he thinks himself in heaven (for so meanly does he think
of it, and so badly is he acquainted with it, as to compare any thing to it)
for enjoying such or such a boon. But let him think again; and it is a thousand
to one, but he repents. His joy runs no longer then it raines; while the
weather and times are good. It has no constant fountain, as the godly man's has.
Perhaps it may be strong, and violent at first: and so usually those motions
are, that are of short continuance. It may make a great cry: and so many other
things do, when there is little, or no wool. It Is like the valor of the
Insubrian Gauls, of which L. Florus speaks, Sicut primus impetus iis major
quam virorum est: ita sequens minor quam faeminarum. The first onset was more
then manlike; but all the rest less then woman-like. It may make a great
flame: but it will be but like the flame of straw, or thorns, or a squib of
powder. It will mount up high, so that every one shall see it; and make a great
crackling so that all the town shall hear it, but it will be quickly out (as
most other things are quickly ended, that are quickly begun) and besides the
little benefit it does by his heat or Light, Leaves a stinch behind it.

And It must needs be so; unless the man had either more fuel, or such as
would last longer. For his prosperity, (and that he knows himself; which
makes his joy, sad and fearful) is exceeding fickle: Perhaps, long coming,
and usually soon going. like the morning dew, a little heat will make it fall,
and any thing will shake it to the ground. He cannot have a longer estate in
it, then for his life at best. For the most part, he has but a few years: many
times a few days: sometimes a few hours: and constantly at the will of an
unconstant fortune. If it does last all his life long; yet it does not last
long: for his life is but short, when it is longest; and it is more like to be
shorter, then longer; and then how short is it! His prosperity he and such as
he is, do but call it so; and so it may pass here amongst men (as a piece of
leather may pass for a piece of money, if men will have it so; and a piece of
brass may pass for, and please a child as well as gold) but it will not go
for such in another world, and he has no hopes to have any other in exchange.

He has his portion in this life. And he is both able, and likely, to spend
it, and lose it, and be taken from it in the twinkling of an eye: And then what
will he do? He has all that he was to have all ready; and there is nothing to
come: No (...) or after payment; which commonly is the greater, to recompense
the slownesse of the payment, Prove. 24.20. such as the godly man has, For
there shall be no reward to the evil man: the cardle of the wicked shall be
put out.
Prove: 23.18. and such as in every thing is the most comfort to expect, and the
greatest joy to receive.

Indeed, the wicked, many of them, in regard of their flourishing condition in
this kind of prosperity are as the growing grass. But it is but the grass
that grows upon the house tops. of which the Let them be as the grass upon
the housetops, which withers before it grows up; wherewith the mower
fills not his hand, nor he that binds sheaves his bosom.
Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 129 6, 7. viz. that withers before it be plucked up;
and wherewith the Angels, which are the reapers, shall never fill their hand to
put them into God's barn: for they are sure to be burnt. I may say, as St
James does of the rich man, chap. 1. v 10, 11. As the flower of the grass, he
shall pass away. For the sun is no sooner risen with a burning heat, but it
withers the grass, and the flower thereof falls, and the grace of the
fashion of it perishes: so also shall the rich man fade away his ways. Wicked
men may be as rank, and large weeds, that grow a pace. Yea some of them may
be green herbs, and fine glorious flowers. But they are no better then such.
For they wither; as those herbs and flowers do; and when the time of the year
is gone (a short time allotted them to flourish here) they are gone too. In the
winter, if you seek them, their place Psalm. 37.35, 36. I have seen the wicked
in great power, and spreading himself like a green bay trce. But he passed
away, and lo, he was not: I sought him, but he could not be found.
(especially) shall know them no more. Even in the Summer, when they prosper
most they are cut down; and they are suffered to grow, that they may be cut.
Their prosperity, and their joy, and they themselves, dye, and are gone, like
the untimely birth of a woman. If therefore, a wicked man's prosperity be never
so much; his joy is never the more; because it may be suddenly, and it is sure
to be shortly, nothing at all. How can he be merry, who does not only not hope
to continue so; but still thinks that he cannot?

Again, there is somewhat else in a wicked man's prosperity, besides the
shortness of duration (which notwithstanding is enough and enough, to hinder
him from taking joy in it long, if there were nothing else) and that is this,
that it proves but little better then a curse to him. I say not, that it was
intended no otherwise by the giver: only I say, that whereas it is given to a
godly man, in love, (insomuch that God is said to take delight in the
prosperity of his servant, Psalm: 35.27.) It is given to him (as it were) with
an ill will. And such things, we use to say, when one man gives a thing to
another, will never do him good; And it cannot be joy to enjoy them.

Adversity sent by God to the Godly, is like the wounds of a lover: but
prosperity given to the wicked, seems to be like kisses of an enemy; and what
does Solomon say of those two, Prove: 27.6. Faithful are the wounds of a
friend: but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful. If God do give, and do not
give in love; thou may be in fear of, thou can not be in love with his
gifts; (...). Thou can never be merry with them, (if thou have the lest
thought that he is not thy friend: as a wicked man cannot well have any, that
he is) For thou will be ever and anon suspecting, that he intends thee some
hurt; that he means to take advantage, against thee, and to heap coals of
fire upon thee: as meaning rather to burn thee, then to warm thee; and to
make thee lose the more, for having had so much.

To say nothing, how he will make thee punish thy self, with care, and
travel, to keep, and increase, and Fear to lose ( Eccles: 2.26. To the sinner
he gives travel to gather, and to heap up: that he may give to him that is
good before God) all the wealth he has given thee, being but such as moths can
corrupt, and thieves break through to steal. If God leave the world still in a
man's heart; although he should have all the world to his Command; he must
necessarily be Subject to a world of misery.

Woe to that man to whom much is given, with a little grace. It Is as bad as a
full table, and a great appetit; and no strength to digest. It will make him
unable, but willing to live: and it will make him both unable, and unwilling to
dye: And judge you, in what a fine case such a man is to be merry.

The more wealth the wicked have, and the longer (it being like wrongfully
sequestered means, and scarce their own) the greater, and heavyer will the
account be, when they are called to it; and the damages so much the more.
Unless there be somewhat else given with it, an ingredient of grace: I will
not give a doit for all the wealth, or honor in the world, to be cured of the
least sorrowful thought. Non enim gazae, neque consularis
Summovet lictor miseros tumultus
Mentis and curas laqueata circum -- tecta Horat-Car lib: 2. odc 16.
volantes.
And therefore let wicked men brag of the goodness of their condition; and
foolish men envy them for it: For my part, I think, they that say, they can be;
or they that seem to be merry in such a condition; are no more, nor no better
merry then those (as they say) have eaten of the heath Sardonia. Silinus cap.
12.
who dye laughing; or those that being desperately sick, laugh when they are a
dying. They sing like the swan (and with as much ignorance) when they are
nearest their end: and it is a sign that they are near their end, when they
do sing. As Solomon said Prove: 18, 12. Before destruction the heart of a man
is haughty: So may I say. Before destruction the heart of a man is merry. The
wicked man is usually merriest, when his destruction is nearest, and when he
has least cause. When the evil day is nearest; then he puts it furthest off.

Ungodly men have little more reason to be merry, for having a great deal of
wealth; then any creature, that is put a part to be killed, has cause to be glad,
(though glad enough too, no doubt, he is) for having a great deal of meat: For
even in the same manner are they fed; and therefore they have the same cause to
fear, they are left (if not designed) to the same end. They are fed with the
fat of the Land (but lean meat, and poverty is more wholesome) and fatted up,
with plentiful feeding. So Eliphas speaks. Job: 15, 27 He covers his face
with his fatness and makes collops of sat in his flanks. But then see what
he says afterward verse. 29, 30. He shall not be rich, neither shall his
substance continue, neither shall he prolong the perfection there of upon the
earth He shall not depart out of darkness the flame shall dry up his branches,
and by the breath of his mouth shall he go away. Little do they think, why
they are thus sufferd to prosper, and sufferd to prosper thus viz that like
beasts, they may be fitter for slaughter. When the wicked spring as the grass,
and when all the workers of iniquity do flourish: it is that they shall be
destroyed for ever. Psalm. 92.7. The fatter they are, the fitter they are for
slaughter: and the sooner slain Psalm. 78.31.
. He slew the fattest of them. Did I say, a wicked man is fed with prosperity?
Nay, but he need not be fed for he will feed himself, if he be let alone, and
have meat enough: unless being in honor he had (as he has not) understanding
enough (though it were never so little more then the beasts that perish) to be
temperate in the use of it. He is like bad ground: Whether he have any thing
sown on him: or whether he have nothing; he is all one: unless the difference
be in this, that he brings forth most weeds, when he is sown with the best
seed. Prosperity is to him, as a horse which he can neither break nor ride;
and so he must needs be thrown. A wicked man having a bad heart, or, as I may
say, a bad stomach: prosperity, and the best meat that can be given him, will
beget in him nothing but ill humors, fears, and cares, and vexations, and
sins: continual distempers both of body and mind.

Perhaps, sometimes his prosperity has not these troubles with it. Yet is it
not enough to make him merry. No, it is too negative so: and that which makes a
man truly merry, must be more positive. He must take delight in it: he must
enjoy himself in the prosperity, as well as enjoy the prosperity; or else it
will be nothing worth. This a wicked man can never do, though he should have
never so much, and enjoy never so much outward peace; Prosperity, so the word
is used in our Bible.
because he has no peace within. Having no peace within him; what ever peace he
has without him, he can no more be merry, then a Prince who is plundring of
another man's house abroad, and in the mean time has an enemy seizing upon his
kingdom at home. But then again, here is more misery for a wicked man. For as
he is not able to use prosperity: so (that which will necessarily add to his
sorrow) he must necessarily have it. As he knows not what to do with it; so he
knows not what to do without it. For he has no strength to encounter with
adversity: and is no more able to live merry in sad times; then a man that is
not before hand, is able to live plentifully in a dearth; or a man that has no
stock of money to lay out, is able to get his living by a trade. Being poor
without a stock. of grace, he cannot find himself maintenance: and being lazy
without a principle of grace, he will never labor to get it. His soul is
naked, and without the garment of faith to keep it warm, and so cannot endure
the cold: It is loose, and without the anchor of hope to hold it fast, and so
cannot endure the storms of affliction. Certainly it must needs be starved to
death: it must needs be miserable tossed in this world, and irrecoverably cast
away in the world to come. Wherewith should a wicked man encounter with
adversity? The best weapon for such an use, must be a strong soul (for a
strong body opposed to miseryes, is but a great heap of wood to a flame of
fire) but alas, his soul is so sick with sin; that instead of easing him of
his burden, it will add more weight, and press him lower to the ground. But I
will not speak much of adversity, lest wicked men tell me, I may spare my
labor, they are not so much troubled with it. I will return therefore, and
have a word more of their prosperity, which they so much brag of, and of which
they have so little cause to brag, considering to what pass it brings them:
they being so much the more miserable in the end, for that their beginning was
so happy.

Nay not only their end hereafter; but every interuption of their condition
while they are here, is so much the worse. For the more they have, and the
fatter they are; the more is their grief, when they lose; and the greater
their pain, when they are any way sick, or afflicted (as it is usually seen
in fatt, and corpulent men, in regard of bodily sickness) and yet they are
subject also to as much as another, and more too; as full bodies are to
diseases. What a sad comfortless sight, is a wicked man in his sickness or in
any other affliction! whereas, on the contrary, what comfort is there in a
godly man, not only to himself, but to any other that shall visit him; even
then when the hand of God is heaviest upon him! All sorts of evils, partly by
their Suddenness, partly by violence, and partly by his own unpreparednesse,
and security (presuming of nothing but peace) like natural things meeting with
things of a contrary quality, have their full blow upon a wicked man. That
which was threatened to the Babylonians, is usually his case. Therefore shall
evil come upon thee: thou shall not know from whence it rises: and mischief
shall fall upon thee, thou shall not be able to put it off: and desolation
shall fall upon thee suddenly, which thou shall not know: Isa 47.11. His Candle
seldom goes out, but is put Job 21.17.
out suddenly (though I speak not so much of outward admonitions, as of Gods
inward preparation of this heart.)

But to return to the wicked man's Joy. Give me leave to mention a few reasons,
why a wicked man's mirth (that which he has) is so short lived. My reasons
shall be drawn. 1. From the Abundance of helps which it needs, and from the
weakness, and fullibility of those helps 2. From its imperfection, both in
regard of its subject, and object, and also in its own nature.

For the first viz: the Abundance of helps which it needs 1. It depends much on
the company of men; wherein be cannot always have his mind (and yet otherwise,
he cannot be merry) For still one thing or other is amiss. Either he wants
company, or he has too much, or too little, or such as does not agree with his
humor. If the fault be one of these three last; he may, perhaps, scrabble out
with a great deal of pain. But if it be the first; he has no shift to make.
For he has such a number of objects without him, to tempt him, and vex him,
which he cannot put off; such a loud importune noise within him viz: of a
troubled conscience continually upbrading him, which he cannot appease;
finally, such disturbance, from his thoughts to, or for, the committing of
sin, which he cannot remedy; that if you put him to single mirth, he is no
body. If you keep him but within doors never so little; he is presently off
the hinges; and like a thing, as I may say, unhang'd: dull, and unweildy, and
without any activity at all.

Certainly, that clock is not good, that cannot go long, after it is set a
going: whose hand will go no longer, then it has the helping hand of another
to keep it going. Even such another thing is a wicked man's joy. The joy of a
godly man is clean contrary; because, he has so little need of foreign
assistance; being so well furnished at home, and able to live of himself. You
may not think to make him sad, by making him solitary; who has most of God,
when he has least of men; and is never less alone, then when you think him to
be so.

2. It depends much upon the state of his body. He is merry, either because he
is of a sanguine complexion; and so his mirth can be but a humor, at best, and
of an uncertain continuance; being that which proceeds from a humor, which
must be supplied, and may be corrupted, and will run away at the least hole
in a vein. Or else, because he is in a good condition of health, and strength;
and so his mirth must needs be as his body is; viz. seldom sound, quickly
disturbed, and easily destroyed. Keep such a one but from a meals meat: or
give him a morsel too much: hurt him in one of his fingers; or let him have
but a little dumpish weather; how does he sit mourning like an owl, and knows
not how to be comforted! His laughing is presently turned into howling, and
sighing, his harp into mourning, and his organ into the voice of them that weep.

3. It depends much upon his age. As his mirth dies with him; so it grows old
with him, and decays, as he does. There is seldom a wicked man, but his gray
hairs are brought down with sorrow to the grave: Sorrow for pain: and Sorrow
(such as it is) for Sin; and Sorrow that he cannot be merry. Every thing that
he has been, he cannot think of it without sorrow: either that he was so, or
that he cannot be so any longer, or that he has no longer time to be not so.
How often does he repeat it, sighing, and shaking his head. I was, and I have
been thus and thus: Those days are gone, or, It was a merry time with me the^.
And So every thing that he has done, he cannot think of it but with sorrow; at
least, he cannot be glad to think of it. If he were able to lay together before
him, all the deeds that ever he did, all the words that ever he spoke, all the
thoughts that ever he conceived, and all the objects too that ever entered into
his senses, or his understanding: he would not be able to extract out of them
one dram of Comfort, to exhilarate, and revive his disconsolate drooping
soul.

4. It depends much, upon his meat and drink. His bones are never at ease, till
his belly be full I will not give a pin for his mirth, if he be fasting. If he
be hungry, and not presently supplied which meat; he is angry, and was pish. As
the frensh-man says, A hungry Clown, etc: so may I say, a hungry wicked man,
is half mad. And yet if he is not hungry, he will be angry then too, and sad
for want of a stomach. When he is empty, he would be full: and when he is full,
he would be empty. He will be sad, because he cannot eat: and he will be sad,
because he can eat no more. He has more then enough to do, to please his
taste, and the rest of the senses: and yet he knows not what to do, if he do
not. Deny the merriest epicure such a dish, or such a sauce: or let him want
but his wine, and tobacco: and who so melancholy a body, as this merry soul.
Believe it, such a man's mirth is, for the most part, but drowning of sorrow
upon times and tides. For when the water is gone, and the drink is all up, and
down: his mirth is upon the head, his joy is at an ebb; and, like banks that
have been overflowne, there is none so muddy as he.

2. A Second fault in a wicked man's joy is, that it is imperfect. And so it
is, in regard both of the subject, and the object.

1. In regard of the subject that has it: viz: because it is but in one part of
the man, and that the worst too, the body; and not in the soul: and in the
worst part of the body, the outer part; and not in the heart. or if at the
best, it be in the Soul; it is but in a part of that neither, and the worst
part thereof too; even as far as it is carnal, or natural, and not a jot
further, or higher. But it is seldom so neither: and therefore it can hardly
be said to be in the man, or to have any depth in it; and consequently, a man
cannot be truly affected with it. For, seeing it is but outward, and carnal,
superficial, and floating upon the top: it is no more comfort to the heart,
then a cup of strong water thrown in a man's face.

I say, a wicked man's joy in regard of its subject, is as gross, and earthly:
(remaining in the members of the body,) As in regard of the cause, it is aerie,
and vain: (beginning, and continuing upon light occasions:) so that it is
neither pure enough to pierce so far as the Spirit, nor weighty enough to
sink to the bottom of the heart. Any stranger Prove: 14.10.
may intermeddle with it, and any strange accident will interrupt it. His heart
will be many times sad, when his countenance is merry: but his heart can never
be merry, when his countenance is sad. A merry heart may make a cheerful
Countenance: but a Cheerful countenance will not make a merry Heart. His
heart is so far from the objects of his joy (which are gross, and earthly
things, that cannot get to it) and the objects of vexations so near his
conscience; and his conscience so near his heart; that he can never be
heartily merry. Perhaps, he may be pleasantly touched, and tickled on the
outside of his heart: and so he may have a little forced mirth for a while; as
a sick man, or an old man may have by the strength of a potion, or a cup of
liquour: But I do not remember, that ever I read, or heard; and I believe, he
cannot say it himself, that joy entered into his heart, and that his heart was
enlarged with it, so that his very spirit rejoiced; (so as the godly man's uses
to do, and as the Scriptures testify of him every where.) He looks merrily
without, like a whited sepulcher: but within there is a sad sight of dead men's
bones; of a dead heart, and a dead conscience, and a whole soul dead in
trespasses and sins. He is like a country where the ways are clean (such as
one, that has no judgment, will prefer before any other) but the soil
underneath is heartlesse, and barren, and fruitless. His pleasure is not a
whit more hearty, then the heart is fleshly. For if by the heart, you do mean
any thing that is spiritual; it is nothing hearty at all. Now the pleasure
that goes not home to the heart; is as when a man may taste of a thing, but must
not, or cannot let it down: which does but vex him the more, and set the
stomach a longing, and the body a pining.

And truly, even so the spirit of a wicked man (that which is of most
consequence, and he thinks not of it: and that which, let him use it how he
will, will live however, and cannot dye) is sad, and hungry, and ready to
starve for want: while the flesh, and the members of the body, are glutted, and
not so much delighted, as sated, and sadded, (while they seem to be gladded)
with abundance of pleasures. As, plus dolet qui quod intus est dolet: so, plus
gaudet qui quod intus est gaudet. For what is shaking of the legs, stretching
abroad of the jaws, and making a noise with the throat (wherein there is pain,
and weariness; and which are as suddenly ended, as they are vainly begun, and
violently prosecuted) to a well grounded, quiet, undisturbed, endless, joy of
the spirit.

Joy is better enjoyd by the spirit: and the joy of the spirit is better, and
more. It is not only with less fear and disturbance: but in more abundance.

The Vessel must needs be the fuller, when less runs out; and is not so
soon empty. Grief is greatest, that is least expressed, and wrung out into
tears, Expletur lacrymis, egeriturque dolor) and so; doubtless, joy is more,
and more sound, and perfect, if it be in one lump, only in the heart; then if
it be minced into parts, and scattered and diffused into the several parts of
the body.

2. A wicked man's joy is imperfect in regard of the object too.

1. Because it is corporeal. And so it is the less wonder, that his pleasure
is but corporeal for the subject; while the objects of it are no other, such
as meat, and drink, and monyes, and the like. For such things as these, being
corporeal, and of a gross substance, it is impossible, they should come near
enough to the soul, which is spiritual, and of a pure sustance, either in
place and being, or in pleasing, and being liked as to make it fully, and
intimately, and thoroughly glad.

Nothing is suffered to be near another thing in situation, that is altogether
of another kind: and nothing is liked or suffered to be near in affection;
which neither is nor can be made like, to that which is to like or to love it.
Things that love one another, would even be one another, (as we use to say,
Amicus alter idem, a friend is another self) for love, and desire are such
strong affections, that they will never leave clipping, and embracing, and
joining the thing that is loved, to the thing that loves; till, imitating
nature in her operation, they have made it almost one with it, and in a manner
transformed it into the same thing. For thus it is with a godly man, and the
objects of his love, God, and Christ, who are all one in the other, and one
with one another, as Christ said I am in the father, and the father in me, and
you in me and I in you. Insomuch that a godly man's joy, having such objects,
which may be so enjoyed; must needs be perfect, and without defect.

Now if the Soul (or the mind) love such objects as these (as it cannot do,
if it be it is self, and in it is right mind: not mad, nor drunck, nor set
besides it self with passion) all that it could do, would be only this, even
create the more trouble to her self, in loving, and desiring that which she is
not able to enjoy: even as much trouble and pain, as it is for any one to love
that which he cannot eat; or a woman with child, to be still longing for what
can never be gotten; or a man, to strike at a ball with all his might and miss
of his blow. And yet on the other side, if the Soul do not love such objects;
her vexation is all as much to have them always offered to her, so as they
are. It Is an equal misery, to love nothing but that which I cannot have; and
to have nothing, but that which I cannot love. How miserably is the Soul of a
wicked man, eith r pined with want of food; or vexed with such as it cannot
eat! Poor soul! that must take all the pain, and can have none of the
pleasure. Not one of the senses can have the pleasure of the members, or the
members the pleasure of the senses without thy help; and must thou only be
helples thy self; and is there nothing provided to comfort thee? Can thou,
and must thou, take care and provide for all their not only necessities, but
pleasures; and in the mean while must thou sit alone thy self, as if thou
were no body, (as thou art not) sad, and hungry, and neglected: kept in a
fools paradise, and in a prison as long as thou art here, (a prison too well
loved by thee, and supported by thine wone care) and yet to be condemned for
ever to another hereafter for thy labor. Truly, truly, I must needs say, thy
condition is slavish, and miserable; and thou may well cry out, Woe is me
that I have my habitation in the tabernacle of the body, and in these tents of
Kedar.

2. Imperfection of a wicked man's joy in regard of the object (it being
supposed, that the true subject of joy, which is the Soul, is incorruptible)
is this, that the object is corruptible neither good enough, nor great enough,
nor lasting enough, for such an excellent, glorious, everlasting creature, as
the soul is, to rejoice in. They say, a horse will never prove, where he has
not a full bite (his unsatisfiednesse, and his longing, does him more hurt then
is meat does him good: so the soul, if it have only a little slender
corruptible food; if it have no better diet, or entertainent in the body then
so: it may seem to live; but it will secretly Consume, and pine; and with
eating food too long that is not fit for her, at length lose her stomach to
better; and then dye to all eternity.

Corruptible objects to an incorruptible soul (especially if it can have no
other) are like weak meats to a strong stomach: or, bad meats to a good
stomach: which because it must have some, and it has no other, does not reject
them; and by degrees may be brought to use the^ constantly (as many by degrees
are brought to a diet contrary to their nature) but then in the mean time, it
turns the meats into ill humors, and grows the weaker it self, for want of a
stronger subject to work upon. So it is with the Soul in the use of this
Corruptible food. It is so far from being improved with it, that it proves
the worse: and not only abuses the creatures with too much mispence: but
wrongs her self with abundance of diseases. I tell thee, thy soul must have
otherguise food, if ever it think to grow; unless it be to grow worse.

An Incorruptible soul, is so far from being satisfied with any Corruptible
things, so as to make her self merry in the enjoyment of them: that when she
has used the^, like a great stomach with a very little meat, she grows more
hungry; and consequently more discontented, and sorrowful. If it had no
knowledge, nor sense; it would never prosper, so long as it is tied to such
things as disagree with the nature of it, or are a hinderance to that which
does agree: no more then a vine, or any other plant, can grow near that, which
either has an antipathy to it, or hinders the influence of the sun, or diverts
its nourishment another way. How much less then, having knowledge what those
Corruptible things are, how vain and empty, and altogether unfit for her; is
she able to be merry in the enjoyment of them. How can I take full delight in
that company, which I am sure will leave me suddenly? Even the more delight I
take in such Company; the less I take; for the thought that it will not
continue. The faster a thing is joined to another thing; with the greater pain
it is separated from it.

3 A third Imperfection in a wicked man's joy in regard of the object, is
because its objects, as they are of too short continuance; so are they of too
narrow extent, for such a thing as the soul is, to be merry with. The soul
has an infinite capacity, and a Capacity of that which is infinite. Though she
be cooped up, much against her will, and made to dwell below her dignity in a
little poor cottage; yet is she big enough for all the Trinity to dwell in,
and too big for all the world besides to fill. She does not only look forward
beyond the world, the (...)
world of the creatures, to things which last in another world, (where she
knows she is to dwell longest, and therefore makes the greatest provision for
it) but she looks beyond the world every way, beyond the creatures of the (...)
world, whether in heaven or earth, Spirits, and Angels, and all. It Is not the
most divine thing: but only that which is Deity it self, can set a bound, and
give content to the desires of this Spiritual, immortal, and divine creature.
Nothing but the fear of God, and such wisdom as that affords, will fill her.
The rich man might brag as much as he would, and tell his soul, Soul thou
have enough, and Soul, thou art well enough, when his barn was full. But
'twas more then his soul would tell him, or was able to say herself. For if
the whole world had been his barn, and a world of riches had been in his
barn, and his barn been full to the brimm, alas poor wretch (and never so
wretched as now) his empty soul all the while is ready to starve, and die, and
he feels it not. I might say to him, as it was said to Laodicea, Rev: 3.17.
Thou say I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing: and
know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor and blind, and
naked.

Nay, it may be (that which is worse) by this time, by reason of long want of
food, the soul's appetite is gone, and she cannot desire what she should have.
She may be full: but it is as a vessel that is empty of good liqour, and full
with air. She is full with wind, and vanity; like a stomach that has been
kept fasting too long. She has nothing, and she is neither able, nor desirous,
to take any thing: and so her condition was never so dangerous, as now it is.
Say, thy soul be full: yet it is not satisfied. And unless there be a
fulness of satisfaction, all other fulness is but a burden, and nothing
worth* That is the fulness which the preacher means, Eccles: 6.3. If a man
beget an hundred children, and live an hundred years so that the days of his
years be many; and his soul be not filled with good, and also that he have no
burial: I say that an untimely birth is better then he. Though thy soul have
as much as it can have now, while it has, what it has: yet it has not what
it would have, if it were as it should be; and what it could have, if it were
not as it is. It is full, i. e. sated, as a stomach overchargd with heavy meat,
to sickness; but it is not full, i.e. satisfied, as a stomach refreshed with
what is fitting, to alacrity, and content. Neither indeed, is it possible it
should be so, with such heavy and light vanities, as these earthly goods are;
which, like sweet cates, cloy the stomach before they fill it, and fill it
before they satisfy it. These overlushious dainties of corruptible pleasures,
take away the appetite, before they satisfy the desire. It was not for
nothing, you must think, that David was so afraid to touch them, Psalm. 141.4.
Incline not my heart to any evil thing to practice wicked works, with men
that work iniquity: and let me not eat of their dainties.

But the worst of it is, the soul, perhaps, is not full so neither. For if she
were, I believe she would feel some pain; and by this means be brought to
take some course to be cured of of the distemper, and resolve to be
distempered, and glutted so no more.

Doubtless, the soul, being in this condition of a surfeit, and yet feeling no
pain: the condition of the wicked man must needs be the more miserable, and his
soul the sicker: even as the body is in the worst condition, when it eats
nothing but unwholesome meat, and eats too much, and is not sick with it
neither. For feeling no pain, as long as she can eat; she keeps on her old
diet: her diseases increase secretly, and so increase the more; and she
continues eating poison, and knows it not. She is as one, who going the wrong
way, thinks he is in the right: and that will make her go on: and going fast
(because she is naturally quick, and hasty in going) she goes the further in
the less time (so that she has no time to deliberate and repent) and the
further she goes, the more loath she is to go back again, and take another
course. Like a metalsome blind horse, she stumbles most dangerously now, while
she is in the way; and in the end of her journey throws her self irrecoverably
into the pit of destruction.

3 In the third and last place, wicked men's joy is imperfect, not only
relatively in regard of the subject and the object, but in its self. And good
enough for them. For sithence what they do, and what God should have from
them, is imperfect and not full (as it is said of the people of Sardis, Rev.
3.2. that their works were not (...) full, and perfect) they must expect that
what they have from God, must be imperfect too. Why should they have any
content from God in the enjoyment of his blessings, who will not give any to
him in the performance of his Service?

Now the joy of a wicked man is imperfect in its self 1. because it is not so
as it seems to be, or it is not sincerely so. It Is not pure gold: but alloyd,
and adulterated with sorrow. It may look well to one that is bleere eyd; but it
will not pass for good to one that looks well to it. Let any one consider and
weigh it well, in the balance of the Sanctuary (whither David went to fetch
the scales for the same purpose Psalm: 73.17.) and he will find it too light by
many grains. It Is not so withinside, as it is without: no more then a mudwall,
that is plastered with white: or a stinking grave covered with a glorius
monement. It is (...) looking fair and smooth, like true joy: as a wounded
member that is heald too soon (and you know how God by the Prophet complains
of the hurt of his people that was slightly healed Jer: 6.14.) and it looks as
well as any other part of the body; but underneath, there is still a sore,
which festers so much the more, and is the worse, for that the outside is so
well. Where pretenses and cloakes, and disguises, are fairest; there the
knavery, and the person, and the evil Concealed is usually foulest.

And indeed herein is a wicked man's Condition truly sad, and truly miserable;
because he is Confident, he is truly merry, and truly happy, when he is least
so. And in this manner is he most easily deceived: not knowing what he wants,
of true mirth, because he never had true mirth, and never knew what it meant. I
may say of him, as the Prophet said Is. 29.8.
He is as a man that dreameth, and behold he eats; but he awaketh, and his
soul is empty. Having his judgment lulled asleep with Circaean songs of
intemperance; he dreams, and fancies, that he is merry. But when his senses
are awaked, and he recovers his wits, and casts up his accounts to see what
remains (as where there is true joy, there is always something that remains:
something that is sufficient cause of joy, to stand by a man) behold, he is
sorry, and sad. Sad for want of true joy; and sorry because his joy was not
such.

A wicked man's mirth is usually tragical. That which should be the best, is
the worst. For it has a most specious beginning; but it ends most commonly in
sorrow, and goes out in a stinch, as offensive to himself as others. It is
like oversweete things: which are pleasant in the mouth, but turn to Choler
and bitterness in the stomach. It Is not like the words of the wise, which are
pleasant if thou keep them in thy belly, (Prou: 22.18.) but like the book,
which John ate up (Rev. 10.10.) which was in his mouth, as sweet as honey, but
as soon as he had eaten it, his belly was bitter. It Is like the wine which
Solomon speaks of (Prove: 23.32.) which gives an excellent color, and moves
it self aright in the cup: But at the last, when a man has drunk his fill of
it, it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder.

A wicked man's mirth is overmuch in the expressions of the body, even till his
sides are sore: But it is too much to be good, too bodily to be spiritual, and
too good to be true. It Is not gaudere, but gestire: For. L. 2. de Sermon. Dom.
Mali homines non gaudere sed gestire dicuntur proprie, Wicked men are not
joyful but frolic. Their joy is like a melancholy man's mirth; suddenly
coming, and making a great cry; but all as suddenly going again; and more
like a blossom, then a fruit. A wicked man will be excessively galliard for a
sit; and many times he is suddenly so, when he cannot tell why himself. But
when he has be thought him self a little, and considered every thing; it is a
thousand to one but that, which before seemed to him a good occasion of joy,
and a fit object of his love (which is commonly the pleasures of vanity and the
vanity of pleasures) is now an occasion of sorrow, and a fit object of hatred,
even in his own conceit. He seldom joys in any thing that he can joy in when
he viewes it again: Second thoughts never afford him comfort. And therefore he
meddles not with them. It Is clean contrary with a godly man. For the objects
of his joy are so good, that decies repetita placebunt. The longer he looks
upon them the more he likes them; juvat usque morari. They please after the
longest meditation.

But what need we go so far as the end of his mirth to find a fault in it:
when as even in the midst of his laughter his heart is sorrowful? Prove.
14.13. There is always one Coloquintida or other, that spoils all the broth;
and let his cheer be never so good, he cannot be truly cheery, so long as
there is death in the pot. The best fruit he can gather in his garden of
pleasures, are but bittersweets. They have so much of the bitter, as the sweet:
nay, they have more. For they are not (...) Sweet-bitters, but bitter-sweets.
They are not sweet things first, and then in bitter'd: but better things first,
and afterward sweetened: in themselves naught, and hurtful, and forbidden; but
by the juggling of the Serpent, and the distortion of the judgment, made to
seem good, and profitable, and allowed to be eaten.

But neither is the wicked man's joy worse then the godly man's physically only:
but also morally. For 1. It is always sinful, and offensive to God; and so
must needs be sorrowful one time or other, and cannot be true at any. 2. It is
most commonly hurtful, and offensive to man viz: himself, or others, or both,
either by word or deed. Whereas a godly man's mirth is allways innocent and
harmeles, as well in it is own issue, as the intention of the person.

And no wonder, his joy is so bad which he has; when he has no cause of having
any joy at all. And therefore the best I can say of the best of his mirth,
being without cause (or reason) is, that it is brutish. Like the horse in the
battle (not so much for want of fear, as for want of wit, or knowledge of the
danger; or, as we say, without fear or wit) he runs boldly, and merrily on in
the most slippery, and dangerous places. For all the ways of the wicked are
slippery, and therefore dangerous. Nay, and dark besides: as the Psalmist says
(Psa: 35.6. Let their way be dark and slippery and let the Angel of the Lord
persecute them) and so the more dangerous; viz: because they cannot be seen
that they are so. (As usually those things cannot, that have most hurt in them.)

The wicked man is merry, as the bird is, that sings in a cage; or the man that
sleeps upon the top of a mast. For all that time that he is so merry as he
seems; he is captivated, and taken alive by the devil, and knows not of it. He
knows not, that there is no condition worse then his. Nay, he knows not that
there is a better, and that he might be set at liberty. Therefore, if he sorrow
not; it is not out of courage, but stupidity. His jollity, while he is going in
the ways of sin, which lead to the Chambers of death, is like that of the ox,
when he is going to the slaughter; or the bird, when he hastes to the snare as
the expression is Prove: 7.22, 23. His laughter has but the name, and likeness
of laughter. For it is both irrational, and without cause: being like the
laughter of a mad man, that is melancholy Ela (as they call it) or a sick man
that is desperately sick: not out of joy, but disease: such as will make a
godly man weep to see it, because he will judge him to be far gone and past
cure; that he has gone so far that he knows not how far he has gone, having
lost his way, and himself too. Certainly, a man in prison, and slavery (as
every wicked man is) cannot be so galliard, as one that is at liberty; unless
he be so senseless as one that is dead, or at least dead-drunk. No more can a
wicked man unless he be over wicked; drunk with pleasures, and quite dead in
trespasses and sins: past feeling, and not having his senses exercised.

But in the next place, as a wicked man's joy is little, and false, and he has
no cause to be joyful: so his sorrow is much, and true, and he has infinite
cause to be sorrowful.

That his sorrow is much, i.e. frequent, first there are Scriptures enough
every where to witness it. See one place especially Psalm: Their sorrows shall
be multi. pliod, that hasten after another God: their drink offerings of blood
will I not offer, nor take up their names into my lips.
16.4. 2. There is Experience enough to attest it. For most of his actions are
ill done, i. e. in passion, and most of his days are ill spent i.e. in sin.
Either way, he must needs be vexed. And his anger, and vexation is so much the
more: because it is with none but himself.

That his sorrow is much i.e. great, and truly so, appears. 1. Because it it
all sorrow: Even a perfect heap of ashes, and never a spark of joy to make
him bear up. For whence should be have it? It cannot be from without. For if
he have never so little loss, or cross from thence, to make him sad; he is
presently like a mad man; and it is not all the reasons, nor all the
comfortable speeches, nor all the friends in the world, can persuade him to
patience; much less to mirth. And from within he cannot have it, unless the
Spirit were his Comforter: Which he is not (but only to the godly.)

2. His sorrow is great, and truly such, not only because it has no joy in it,
or with it; but because it has none to attend it. It does not beget joy; as a
godly man's sorrow does: nor is recompensed with it, as his is. It neither
produces joy as the fruit, nor is paid with joy as the amends. Nay he does, or
may, sorrow for his sorrow: as I have formerly told you, he does, or may for
his joy. And if the fruit of his joy be sorrow, can you expect, that the fruit
of his sorrow should be joy? If his best tree bring forth bad fruit; what can
he gather from the worst? He may sorrow for his joys, because they were not
such as they should be; (because they did himself hurt; or because they were
vain, and could not do him good) and he may sorrow for his sorrows, because
they were such as they should not be, ie. sins; offensive to God, and
destructive to himself.

3. His sorrow appears to be great, and truly such. Because, it is
remediless; as most of his evils use to be. Either he has no remedy at all;
or else (which is worse then if he had none, because it deludes and vexes a man
with vain hopes.) the remedies are too weak to prevail. And hence follow
those imperecations, and wishes usual with wicked men, Would I were dead; or
would some one would knock me in the head, and the like. His remedies are so
weak, that instead of lifting up his head with comfort, they bow him lower, and
plung him deeper under water: so that he is as a man that catches at a reed,
when he is almost drownded; and holds by that which is not strong enough to
hold him.

As in other things, so especially in this, the difference between a Godly
man's joy, and a wicked man's, appears to be very great, viz: that a Godly man
his disease is sin, and sorrow is his remedy. And therefore his sorrow cannot
be remediles, because it cannot want that which it cannot be without. Now there
is no need of a remedy for the remedy, till the evil be remedied: and then a
godly man will remove it himself, by applying the sovereigne balm of the
merits of Christ He must let the drawing plaster first have it is work, before
he apply another to heal it. When the purging Physic has sufficiently
wrought to remove the humors: then, and not till then, is a man ready for a
cordial to restore the Spirits. Now, his disease which he is to cure with
sorrow, is so mortal, that there needs no other thing to produce joy, then
curing the disease: Which being done by sorrow, his sorrow proves a cause of
joy; and so he may be glad to be sorry. To a wicked man sorrow is a disease;
and sin, (as drunkenness, self murder, and the like) the Physic that is
usually taken to cure it: One disease to cure another; which must needs make
his condition desperate. And yet so it is. The best help he has, is to lessen
the pain for a while, and increase the disease for ever. For he that seeks to
cure sorrow, by committing sin; shall then cease to have sorrow, when sin
shall cease to be sin; which it can as well do, as not be the cause of sorrow.

Never blame, nor pity a godly man for being sorry, (if he be sorry as I would
have him.) For his sorrow is both his duty, and his desire. He should be sorry;
and so he ought not: and he would be sorry; and so he desires not to remove it.
A wicked man, when he is sorry, would not be sorry; and so seeks for a remedy:
And he should not be sorry (it being not for sin, for which a man ought only
to be sorry indeed) and so his sorrow is sin, and his sin is punished with
want of a remedy.

But now, lest you should wonder at me, for saying the wicked have so many
sorrows, Causes of Sorrow
because most men think the contrary, and that they are not in trouble like
other men; it is but naming some few causes, Psalm: 73.5.
from whence those sorrows proceed; and I doubt not to persuade you. The
causes of a wicked man's sorrow are for the most part, 1 (which aggravates the
matter, and makes the sorrow the greater) within, and from at home (the causes
from without I have less mind to speak to, being punishments, either such as
he thinks not of, or is not to suffer till hereafter, and which I cannot so
plainly convince him of.) The causes that I mean, are unruly passions, and
unruled actions, vices, and sins for such things he has most of, and he can
show you but little else.

To begin with unruly passions. It were endless to tell you, how much either
noise, and trouble; or fretting, and vexation, is continually in that house,
where they are. How the master of the house: (if I may so call him who was
never master of this masterles crew) is pulled, and hall'd, (and it cannot but
vex a man to be so pulled, and halled by his servants) sometimes by this
passion, and sometimes by that. How he is drawn several ways, by the same
passion, at several times and by several passions at the same time. Believe
it, it is a worse misery for a man to be servant to many passions; then for a
servant to be slave to many masters. For, it being impossible to please them:
Seeing he is led by them, it will be impossible to please himself; and so
consequently impossible to be merry. Nay on the contrary, by unpleasing objects
not well used, and by pleasing objects ill used to excess, he will never be
without anger, and repentance; And so will be continually assaulted with
sorrows; which he will not be able to repulse, any more then a city that is
broken down, and without walls, is able to keep out an enemy. So speaks
Solomon of one that is not able to rule his passions Prove: 25.28. He that has
no rule over his own Spirit, is like a city that is broken down and without
walls. They may well be called passions: for he shall be sure to suffer, that
has them. They are like so many tormentors, or executioners: And he that is
given to his passions, is given over to so many tormentors, (...) says the
Apostle, Rom: 1.26. God gave them over to vile affections (or-passions) an
exceeding great punishment; and an argument, that God was very angry with them.
There can be as well peace, and mirth, in a country that is full of
commotions; or in a Kingdom where the Subjects are up in Rebellion; as in a
heart, that is disturbed with passions. And therefore Aristotle, in the
definition of most of the passions puts (...), saying, they were sorrows, and
troubles (or tumults.) As if it were all as unlikely, for a passion to be
without sorrow, and trouble; as for sorrow to be without a passion.

To instance in two or three of the passions, as Anger, Envy, and
Revenge-fullnesse. One will not think, what a deal of sadness, and vexation,
any one of these will beget. A viperous brood they are; accustomed and able to
hurt none but the heart that conceived them. Like the mothes, and the Canker;
eating, and fretting the body that bred them. A man in anger, do but think
what fitts of pain, and what flames of agony he is in, while the storm lasts:
and what sorrow, and vexation he endures when it is over, (for when his anger
with others cease, his anger with himself begins) What indignation against
himself for oaths, which out of a passion, perhaps, he was not wont to be
guilty of: What fretting to no purpose, for rash-vows, indiscreet speeches,
unseemely behavior, revealing of secrets, and giving advantages to his enemy;
and a thousand such like. And consider, what manner of life the man that is
subject to such a passion, lives: and what a merry life the meeke-spirited,
moderate godly man lives in comparison of him.

2. For Envy, it is a fire within a man's own bowels: the sa^e disease that
anger is, lengthened, and become chronicall: even a very tabes, or consumption
(as you have it excellently discribed by a heathen poet) Ovid. Met: lib: 2.
fab: 12.
of the very person himself in whom it is: hindering not only his mind from
Contentment, but his body also from nourishment. See what Job says of anger,
and envy c. 5, 2 Wrath kills the foolish man, and envy slays the silly one.
I would be large in this, if it were not so easy.

But 3 For revenge, I leave it to any one to judge, whether a revenge-full man's
life can be a merry life; if he will but consider, with what sleeplesse-cares
he is possessed, to compass his hellish designs, which he himself is struck
with terror to think of: What fears he has of miscarrying; what doubts.
either that his business will never be done, or that it will not be done as it
should be: and what vexation for every the least delay, and because it is not
done already. I might (had I leisure) with abundance of ease enlarge my
discourse in several passions, to which a wicked man (having no principal of
grace to restrain him) whenever opportunity shall persuade him, will easily
be led; although, perhaps, because of constitution, or some other carnal
cause, he have them not in a habit.

Now if passions be so trouble-some, when they are but passions: what are they
when it comes to a habit? how trouble-some are vices? If my enemy can do me so
much hurt at his first coming; what will he do when he has gotten firm
footing? Doubtless, my misery is doubled. For I am easily moved by habits, and
my habits are hardly removed. My servants were troublesome to me at first,
because I did not keep a hand over them: But now, they are grown too stout,
and will not endure thereins, nor the rider. Now they will be still commanding
me; and I shall not command them any more.

I had once a mind, (and it were very easy) to show you the vexations and
sorrows of several vices; but If I should go about it, I am afraid of being
too large, and I have done somewhat this In my View of the Threats
way already, besides a great deal to be had in Common places. I will only
name two, because the Scripture, speaks of them to this purpose in such a
manner.

And those are 1. Covetuousnesse. 1 Timothy: 6, 10. For the love of money is the
root of all evil, which while some coveted, after they have erred from the
faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. 2. Drunkenness, Prove:
23, 29.30. Who has woe? who has sorrow? who has contention? who has babbling?
who has wounds without cause? who has redness of eyes? They that tarry long
at the wine, they that go to seek mixed wine. And can there be better fruit
expected while there is a root continually in the hearts of wicked men,
yielding matter for nothing else? That which I mean is sensuality, and being
addicted to pleasure. Pleasure is either upon the remembrance, or the presence,
or the expectation of some good. Every one of these ways, has the wicked man
a multitude of sorrows. If he love it, and never had it; it is impossible but
he should be vexed. But whether so much, or so long, as if he have had it, and
have it, and may have it; I question. I think, there is more vexation, and
sadness, where pleasure is least a stranger; then where there is a constant
seeming grief, and a cause of sadness. What shakings of head, and lamentings
that they are past, have wicked men upon the thought of pleasures which they
have had, and cannot have again! Those which they have, how are they troubled
for want of this, and that, to make them complete! And how are they troubled to
think, that they cannot enjoy them long! that their power will not suit with
their desire, the creatures will not be sufficient for their use, and the time
will not tarry their leisure! If they have pleasures a coming, what pains to
stand a tip-toe! what wearisome shouldering along of the time! what painful
wishings for the day, when it is night; and the night, when it is day,
according to the time when they expect them!

But there is one thing yet, which is more then all the rest which I have
hitherto mentioned, to hinder a wicked man from living a merry life: as being
indeed one cord made of many, or one result, and effect, as the former was the
root of a great many causes (although I confess, it to be referred better to
his condition, then his conditions) and that is a continual fearefullnesse,
arising from the conscience of those vices, of which he is continually guilty.
What an aguish discemper is such a guilty man in continually! -- tacita sudant
praecordia culpa. How often do fitts of cold-sweat come upon the thoughts of
Sin, Death, Hell, Judgment, any thing. Let him think upon what he will and
he is afraid. If he think upon God, he is afraid, because he has offended
him. If he think upon man; he is afraid because he has wronged him. If he
think upon the creatures; he is afraid, because he has abused them. And if he
think upon himself: he is afraid because he himself has done all this. The
shaking of a leaf, and the sight of a shadow, is enough to make him shake, and
tremble like a leaf. A dreadful sound is in his ears: in prosperity the
destroyer shall come upon him. Job 15.21. He that fears not God, must needs
fear every thing else: and he that is afraid of every, thing how can he be
merry with any thing?

But is this all the cause of sadness, that a wicked man has viz. to be
troubled with vices and passions? No no. For, besides his bad conditions, which
are inward and domestic causes (abundantly enough to make him continually sad)
he has a bad condition too, and outward occasions, infinite many more (which
those causes have brought him) to increase his sorrow: such a condition, as he
cannot be merry if he do but think upon it. (And yet such as he cannot be
happy, if he do not think upon it: for he must think upon it, if ever he think
to get out of it) Now that you may see the badnesse of a wicked man's condition
(I shall but hint a little; for I meant not to speak of it at all for reasons
above mentioned) First read what Job says of him cap. 18.5. to the end, and
cap. 20.5. to the end. When you have read that, I will leave it to your own
judgment, whether his condition be not bad, and whether it be not impossible
for him to be truly merry.

Next, to give you a word or two my self 1. He is so far from Safety,
(which, as I have formerly said, is of great consequence for a merry life) that
he is in continual danger. Job. 5.4. His children are far from safety, and
they are crushed in the gate, neither is there any to deliver them. For, (what
ever such as he think to the contrary) where ever he goes, he is in danger of
snares that are laid to catch him: so that having too much fear he must needs
have too little confidence (a thing very necessary for this purpose) to be
merry. And in this the godly man is exceedingly beyond him: as Solomon says
Prove: 29 6. In the transgression of an evil man there is a snare: but the
rightous both sing and rejoice. Where ever he is, he is in danger of falling,
God himself (who knows all places best) setting him in slippery (and
dangerous) places. So the Psalmist tells us Psalm: 73.18. So that he need not
have prayed, as he does elsewhere, Let their way be dark and slippery Psalm: 52
6. Now the ways of wicked men being slippery, are consequently smooth, and easy
to the feet; so that they run along a great way before they stop with
pleasure, and sport like boys at a sliding. But then, to counterpoise all this
sport; besides the mixture of fear in the midst of their sport; if they fall,
it is with a vengeance (as they say.) And they are apt to fall (or as bad) with
the least touch: being like chafe, that cannot stand against the least puff of
wind Psalm. 1.5.

Their ways will seem fair, and safe, and the best ways, to him that never
saw any other, or never well viewed any. But not else. For if you do but look
into the sanctuary: you shall presently see what they are. You shall see what
the end of wicked men is, and the end of all their ways. Until I went into the
sanctuary of God (until I lok'd into the word of God, and considered his law)
Then understood I their end. Surely thou did set them in slippery places:
thou castedst them down into destruction. Psalm: 73, 17, 18. Now the end, you
know, is all, in every thing. For what is a fair easy way; if it end there,
where I would not be; or if it lead me out of the way? But then (as I have
formerly said) a wicked man's ways, besides that they are slippery, are dark
too. And what sad walking is it (besides the toil and vexation) in the dark.
Prove: 14.9. The way of the wicked is as darkness: they know not at what they
stumble.

2. A wicked man has many masters, and many sorts of masters, and such as are
very bad. (If they were good; it were bad enough, in that they are many) viz:
The devil, the world, and six hundred Lusts: Such masters, as are (to him) for
the most pars taskmasters: and such taske-masters as are Egyptian
taskmasters. For. 1. they are unreasonable. They will require brick of him,
when he has no straw: Command him him to do this and that, and make him covet,
and fear, and lust, and hope, and be angry; when there is no possibility to
obtain, or void, or be revenged. Which must needs put him to a great deal of
torture, and vex him exceedingly. 2. They are unanswerable: imperious, and
importunate. They will not be put off. They will have their commands executed,
what ever come of it, presently, to the full, and every one, though they be
never so contrary to reason and to one another: or else he shall never be quiet
(And shall he be quiet so?) 3. As their commands are unreasonable, and
imperious: so they are continual, and without intermission. It Is not company,
nor want of company: not opportunity, nor want of opporrunity, to do what God
would have him: It Is not night, nor day: Not sleeping, nor watching: Not being
in public, nor being in private: Not any time nor place, nor person, nor
thing, that will make the devil, or his Lusts, forbear tempting him one
minute of an hour. And what domineering manner of tempting is it, wherewith
they tempt a wicked man! But 4. there is one thing more in this tyranny which
the devil and the flesh have over a wicked man, that makes it intolerable: and
that is this, that it is to be obeyed in severally ways; extending it self
both to body, and soul. They will be served with all the soul, and with all
the body: which is more then God himself (to whom only our service is due)
necessarily requires (for if the spirit be doing, it will suffice when the body
cannot.) But this they do: and that with the inevitable hurt now, and
necessary destruction hereafter, of both body, and soul, which have thus
served them: which will make a fifth aggravation of a wicked man's misery in
being subject to these masters, viz: because their commands are cruel,
enjoining him to do, (not that from which some good or benefit may come, or
which is indifferent, or which is only wearisome and painful, but) that
which is only evil; absolutely, and every way unprofitable in a spiritual
sense, and many times, and many ways, in a carnal sense; necessarily
hurtful, and destructive, not only to the body now (as in the sins of
whoredom, intemperance, contentiousnesse) but both to body and soul hereafter.

3. A wicked man has many enemies. Even those his masters, are his enemies.
What condition can be more sad then his, who cannot fight with, but is under
the command of his enemy? Especially 1. If it be an intestine, and domestic
enemy. No misery like to that. One would endure to be under a forreiner: but a
civil enemy, my subjection to him is as slavish, as the hatred between us is
bitter. A wicked man's lusts, and Satan, being his masters, and his enemies;
his enemies are domestic enemies, and his domestic enemies are the most
bitter, and malicious: for they seek not any good of their own, and yet they
seek his everlasting hurt.

2. If it be a secret enemy, and a seeming friend. so these enemies, and
masters are: which makes them the easier to be believed, the harder to be
avoided, and the worse to be dealt with. Those enemies are all in the dark to
a wicked man; who walks altogether in the dark, and has noe light at all,
either without him, or within him: and what advantage has my enemy, that stands
near me in the dark while I am in the light! A wicked man, being in darkness,
is no more able to deal with the devil (who is able to transform himself
into an Angel of Light) then a blind man is able to fight with one that has
his sight.

But, beside these that dwell within him, he has other enemies without him
that are not far from him neither. 1. God, who made him, is made his enemy: and
what an enemy must he be? One whose eyes are always upon him; who knows all
that he does, or says; nay that he will do, or say, or think every counsel,
and thought of his heart, and that a far off, and long before. What a case is
he in, that has such an enemy and provokes him too as he does, every minute!
2. Men. Wickedness will make enemies, one way or other, in the execution of
sin. Now if those men be wicked, there is malice enough with them: and God is
like to prosper it against his enemy. If they be godly; there is power enough
with God: and he is certain to exercise it, first, or last, in the behalf of
his children.

What a poor love is it, that a wicked man has! The godly man loves him, but
does not love his company: the wicked man loves his company, but does not love
him. He may love what he does (as drinking, and the like) because he loves to
do it himself: but no longer then he does it, neither. Nay, no longer then he
does it with him, and as he would have him (wicked men associate, not so much
to bear one another company, as to bear a part with one another) but he loves
not what he is, he loves not his soul (that is the most that a man is.) His
soul is seldom knit to the soul of his companion, by the band of friendship.
Neither, indeed can it be. For there can be no true friendship (and yet without
that there cannot be a merry life) where there is no virtue. Philosophers have
said so long ago; and Christians find it to be true. Wicked men may keep one
another company, to keep one another counsel: they may agree together to do
mischief, because they cannot do it otherwise. But it is no better then when
dogs and curres agree to cath a prey: unless it be in this, that they will
agree sometimes when they have taken a prey (which not withstanding usually
they do, not so much out of mutual love, to protect one another; as out of
self love, to preserve every one himself from the hand of justice.) 3. The
Creatures, who bear him a grudge continually. That they forbear him the least
minute, it is through the infinite forbearance of a most merciful
long-suffering God, who can endure to let his sun shine both upon the Godly,
and the ungodly. Read the stories in the Bible, of the enemies of God destroyed
by Creatures without the help of a reasonable hand.

But what need I puzzle my head to search, or weary my pen to show you, how,
and what occasions a wicked man has to be sorrowful: when almost any object of
any of his senses, or his knowledge, is sufficient to make him so? Not any
thing that he sees or hears, when he goes abroad: Not any thing that he eats,
or drinks: Not any action that he does himself, or knows to be done by
another: Not any event that befalls him: but, if it be not every way according
to his mind, will mar all his mirth, if it were (or, if it seemd to be) never
so much before.

His mirth is such; so carnal; so frail; and so much depending upon the use,
and enjoyment of outward things: that, unless there be a continual supply of
such oil, it will quickly go out in a stinking snuff of sorrow. Unless
there be a constant affluence of all those things in a full current: if there
be never so little amiss, or never so little intermission, or never so little
abatement of the water: his wheels are presently stopd, and he can go no
longer. Any change of any circumstance, will change the mood (for a wicked man
is but in a merry mood, at the best: never in a merry mind) Too soon, or too
late: too fast, or too slow: too often, or too seldom: too long, or too short:
too much, or too little: any of these, or such as these are, will do it. His
mirth is but stayed up by props, and those very weak ones: So that having no
root to hold it, any little puff of wind will overturne it. It Is but
superficial; without depth; but on the top of his face: Mere paint, no
complexion. Heat will melt it, and water will wash it, and any thing that
agrees not with it, will deface, or take it away.

To conclude, let a wicked man's condition be what it will, it is all one: for
he is still after the same manner, who is still the same man. He has enough
within, to counterworke any thing that you shall bring from without. Use what
instruments you will, cords, or forks; enticements or enforcements; a good, or
a bad condition; it is all one. His nature holds fast: and his bad condition
will continue still, to breed him discontent enough. Come prosperity, or come
adversity; you shall see but little odds for the better. One may make him more
sad then the other: but neither will make him more merry. Adversity may break
his heart: and prosperity will not make it lighter. He has not the patience to
endure the one: nor the discretion to manage the other, without vexation.
Adversity is like a shield which he cannot bear: and so he must needs be
overborne with it. Prosperity is like a sword which he cannot weild: and a
thousand to one, but he hurts himself with it (this sword will enter into his
own heart Psalm: 37.15.) His afflictions are intolerable, because they are
cursed of God, as he himself is: they are sent in displeasure: and not so
seldom neither, as men count, if we took better notice (but because we think
so well of good men, and see them punished, we take notice of none but them.)
How often. is the candle of the wicked put out? And how often comes their
destuction upon them? God distributeth sorrows in his anger. Job. 21.17. If
their afflictions come not often, recompense is made in the coming. For they
come with a vengeance. If his fall be but one, it is irrecoverable; for, He
that is perverse in his ways, shall fall at once, Prove: 28.18. When he is
afflicted, none more afflicted then he. For he has no grace, either to endure
his affliction; or to pray to be eased. On the contrary, the godly man, being
well affected to God, and having God well affected to him; is so far from
being so sadned and dejected either for being, or for fear of being afflicted:
that he cannot only look upon, but laugh at afflictions. c. 5.22. At
destruction and famine thou shall laugh.

One that looks upon a godly man, and a wicked man with a carnal eye: nay,
one that looks with a spiritual eye, but does not look near enough, or long
enough; will wonder there should be so much difference, as there is, between
them, in regard of their condition. But, I Will warrant you, let him look as he
should; and he will find it to be as I have said.

I will but show you in a word or two, of what use that which I have said, may
be to the wicked man; and I have done. It is of use to him both for
Information, and for Exhortation.

For information, To inform him that he has been misinformed by the devil,
and the world: who have put it into his head, that there is no life like that
which he is in, for mirth; no mirth so good as his, and none so merry as he. 2.
That his case is clean contrary: viz: that no life has more cause of sorrow
then his; that no mirth is worse either morally, or Physically, i.e. for
corruption of sinfullnesse, or mixture of sadness: and that none is less
truly merry then he.

For exhortation, it will be of use to exhort him, That, seeing he has so much
cause to be sorry, and his mirth is such, what ever it seem to be: he would
forbear a while his foolish jollity, and bethink himself of the sadness of
his condition, to get out of it; and the vanity of his mirth to leave it. Come,
whosoever thou art, do not flatter thy self as other wicked men do (as the
psalmist said, He flattereth himself in his own eyes until his iniquity be
found to be hateful, Psalm: 36.2.) Do not cousen thy self, to deceive the
world. I tell thee, thou have many diseases. Discover thy folly. Do not
conceal it: at least, to him who will know it, though thou do what thou
can; and will forgive it, if thou do what thou should. Do not heal
slightly thy wound: but search thy sins to the quick, and never leave, till
they be dead. Thou have many a leake: and thou have a great deal of water in
thee already. Repent, and pump it out at thine eyes, ere thy ship sink. It Is
but be sad for a while, till the work of humiliation and conviction be done;
and afterward, I will warrant thee mirth enough, and good enough, and long
enough. For, He that goes forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed: shall
doubtless come again with rejoicing bringing his sheaves with him Psalm. 126.6.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and to be sold by Richard Davis at his shop
near Oriell College in Oxford.
A Paraphrase, and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Testament by Hen:
Hammond D.D. in folio.

The Practical Catechism, with all other English Treatises of Hen: Hammond
D.D. in two volumes in 4o.

Dissertationes quatuor quibus Episcopatus Jura ex S. Scripturis and Primava
Antiquitate adstruuntur, contra sententiam D. Bl^ndelli and aliorum, Authore
Henrico Hammond. in 4o.

A Letter of Resolution to six Quaeres, in 12o.

Certain Sermons and Letters of Defense and Resolution to some of the late
Controversies of our times, by Jasp: Main D. D. in 4o.

A View of the Threats and Punishments Recorded in the Scriptures
Alphabetically composed, with some breife Observations upon several Texts, by
Zachary Bogan of C.C.C. in Oxon: in 8o.

Fides Apostolica, or, A Discourse asserting the received Authors and Authority
of the Apostles Creed: together with the Grounds and ends of the Composing
thereof by the Apostles, the sufficiency thereof for the Rule of Faith etc.
with a double Appendix. 1 Touching the ATHANASIAN. 2. The NICENE Creed: by
George Ashwell, B: D: in 8o.

Ailmeri Musae Sucrae, seu Jonas, Jeremiae Threni, and Daniel Graeca redditi
carmine, in 8o.

Ad Grammaticen ordinariam supplementa quaedam, editio 2. multis auctior in 8o.

A Guide to the Holy City, or Directions and Helps to an Holy-life, by John
Reading B. D. in 4o.

Theses Quadragessimales in Scholiis Oxonii Publ^^rs,

viz: Quod Caeli sint Fluidi. Terra Moveatur. Terra Centrum Universi non sint.
Luna sit Habitabilis. Radius Luminosus sit Corporeus. Sol sit Flamma


A CAROLO POTTER, in 12o.

Contemplationes Metaphisicae ex Natura Rerum and rectae Rationis lumine
deductae. Auctore Georg: Ritscheli Bohemo in 8o.

The Amorous War, a Play in 4o.

Aditus ad Logicam, Authore Samucle Smith in 8o.

Elementa Logicae, Authore Edwardo Brerewood, in 12o.

Johan: Buridani Quaestiones in octo Libros Politicorum Aristotelis in 4o.

Robert: Baronii Philosophia Theologiae Ancillans, in 8o.

The Hurt of Sedition. by S. Jo: Cheek, in 4o.

Scripture Vindicated from the misapplications of M. St: Marshall in his Sermon
entitled Meroz Cursed, by Ed: Symmons, in 4o.

The Christian Race, A Sermon on Heb: 12.1. by Tho: Barton in 4o.

A Sermon on the 2. of Timothy. cap. 3. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. by Will.
Chillingworth in 4o.

A Funeral Sermon on Philip: 1.23. by John Millet, in 4o.

A Funeral Sermon on 1. Cor: 7.29, 30, 31. by Tho: Hauskins in 8o.

A Nomenclator of such Tracts and Sermons as have been Printed or translated
into English upon any place or Book of the Holy Scripture, now to be had in
the Public Library in Oxford, by Jo. Vernevill in 12o

The Vaulting Master, or the Art of Vaulting, illustrated with Sixteen brass
figures, by Will: Stoakes, in 4o.


