THE ARRAIGNMENT OF ERROVR: OR, A Discourse serving as a curb to restrain the
wantonness of men's spirits in the entertainment of opinions; and as a
Compass, whereby we may sail in the search and finding of truth; distributed
into six main Questions.

Quest. 1. How it may stand with Gods, with Satan's, with a man's own ends, that
there should be erroneous opinions? Quest. 2. What are the grounds of abounding
errors? Quest. 3. Why so many are carried away with error? Quest. 4. Who
those are that are in danger? Quest. 5. What are the examens, or the trials of
opinions, and Characters of truth? Quest. 6. What ways God has left in his
Word for the suppressing of error, and reducing of erroneous persons?
Under which general Questions, many other necessary and profitable Queries
are comprised, discussed, and resolved.

And in conclusion of all; some Motives, and means, conducing to an happy
Accommodation of our present differences, are subjoyned.

By SAMUEL BOLTON Minister of the Word of God at Saviours-Southwark.

(...). Chrysostom. in 2 Timothy 1 hom. 2.

1 John 4.1. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether
they be of God, because many false Prophets are gone forth into the world

London, Printed by G. Miller for Andrew Kembe, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the Talbot gate in Southwark, M.DC.XLVI.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE And eminently Noble Patriot, JOHN, Lord ROBERTS, Baron
of TRURO.
Right Honorable,
I Have had the opportunity to speak often to your ear, and have now the
happiness to present something to your eye: The acceptance my weak endeavors
have found in the former way, is my encouragement to succeed in this later. I
have long thirsted after such an opportunity, wherein I might impresse some of
those deeper engravings which are upon my breast, and by that perpetuate my
just esteems and valuations of your Honor: the hour is now come, and I rejoice
in it; yet now I am in a strait; should I give out the full counterpane of what
is in my heart, and by that transcribe my whole soul; it would but create envy
on you, and be interpreted weakness in me; though in so doing, I should no way
be conscious to my self, either of over-rating or over-speaking your worth.
Your virtues, as they have not been ambitiously published; so neither can they
be enviously secreted: you have not been an ambitious seeker of glory, rather
desiring to do, then to be seen to do: nor can envy it self conceal, and keep
down your deserved praise. L. Verula^.
It is laid down for a maxim by a learned Statesman, That envy is a wholesome
Ostracisme in a State; I am sure it would be the canker of ours, the present
exigencies of which, calls out for emulations and out-doings of others worth,
rather then suppressing and concealing the deserts of them who are worthy. It
is true, Fame is oftentimes a better Nuncio, then a Judge: but when worth it
self is the foundation of fame, and the praise of men is not merely the breath
of men, but the reflexed beams of virtue, though it should not be ambitiously
courted and desired, yet it may be kindly entertained, and friendly embraced,
being Gods report in men, heavens echo, an encouragement in our work, and an
earnest of our reward. And though it be Machivils principle, and is too much
the foundation of practick wisdom in more politic men, That the appearance of
virtue is better then the truth; the one, being helpful, the other, hurtful
to secular designs, yet that honor will never hold, whose foundation is in a
shadow; it is but glory writ in clay, but honor engraven in the dust, which
will not last long; we have seen the experience of it in our days; many, who
yet had the garments of virtue, Rev. 16.15
but now walk naked, and their shame is discovered. My Lord, you have not
courted the shadow, but adored the substance: which, as it was your honor
before: so now it has been your strength and muniment in these days of
distress. Long before these times of trouble, you were troubled for the times,
looking on them, as the womb of all these present births of calamity,
foreseeing (as it were in vision) the sad harvests which those seed times did
portend, if God did not avert them. Since these times of trouble you have sat
in counsel, as a faithful unwearied Steersman, whom neither frowns nor
favors, promises, nor threats could make to desist in your duty, or decline
your station. All temptations being too little for that spirit, which was too
big for the world. In the Armies, you have not only been helpful in council,
exemplary in conversation, but active in employment, and have continued in the
midst of all discouragements, bin fellow-commoner with them in their wants,
sharer in their necessities, patient of heat and cold, of drought and moisture,
and born a part, both in the greatest sufferings, and mightiest services. Whose
exemplary doing and suffering, as it was said of the L. Howards in that exigent
of time in 88. though his service was but small, Camb. Eliza in an. 1588.
the towing of a Cable, yet in that little, because that little was exemplary,
he did more then many men. In the field you have encountered with difficulties,
undergone hazards, confronted dangers, faced death, as if nothing were fearful
but fear, Vitam quamvis non posuit, deposuit tamen.
standing up when so many have fallen on both hands, though a monument of Gods
preserving mercy, yet a sacrifice ready to be offered up for this Cause, and
for that God whose glory you esteemed more dear, and precious then your life.
Aurum igne probatu^ dicitur is, cujus fides rebus adversis exp^^rata
spectataque est.

Quid sunt merita nostra nisi munera Dei. Aug.


Thus you have every way showed your self, (...), approved gold, all your
trials rendering you more approved. My Lord, I reckon up these; though your
honors, yet your duties; though your adornments, yet your engagements; though
your riches, yet your debts, for which you are bound to more thankfulness, and
more service. As these are acts of differencing grace; so they call forth for
acts of discriminating duty. And blessed be that God who will single us out to
make us any way isntrumental for his glory; if he will trust us with work, we
may trust him with reward, where he calls forth to the one, he has surely
designed the other.

NOETNON Pientissimae, Honoratissimaeque HEROINAE Dominae LVCIAE ROBERTS,
Vxoris Nobilissimi Dom. Dom. JOANNIS ROBERTS Baronis Truroensis, filiae
Tris-honoratissimi Comitis WARWICENSIS.
And now, my Lord, among all your noble doings, I cannot but sadly resent your
eminent sufferings; among which, though the separation from your interests,
relations, possessions, be things of great weight and concernment, and might
much heighten and swell your sufferings, yet they are drowned and swallowed up
in this, which is the summum genus of all, the incomparable loss of a precious
Consort, a beloved companion, a dear yoke fellow, a loss, I say, incomparable,
being one of whom the world was not worthy; and a loss incompensible, unless
made up by Christ alone. She was a branch of a noble stock, but yet more nobly
born then of flesh and blood, being born from above; and more happy in her
second, then she was eminent in her first birth; it was my happiness to have
large and inward experience of her spiritual worth, which indeed was obvious
to all with whom she did converse, and could be no more secreted then the light
of the Sun: a jewel she was which after God had polished, showed to the
world, and made your adornment for a time, he took unto himself, where now she
is one of those beautiful stones, which adorns the new Jerusalem: while she
was upon the earth, she breathed after, or rather breathed heaven, as if she
had been but a piece of glory, sojourning in grace, and a spark of immortality
fallen down to kindle our more earthly substance. She lived in the world, but
as much above the world, as we poor creatures live below heaven; Christ was
her only element, upon whom her soul in it is right actings did as naturally
feed, as do our bodies upon our daily bread, being no more able to live without
him, then the body without the soul. Her whole life was nothing else but a
continued design drawn out for the advancement of Christ, the spring of whose
motions was the grace of Christ, and the end of whose movings was the glory of
Christ. She was always (being spirited with life from above) very active, and
indeed (her body, not being able to keep pace with her soul) she often out-went
the strength of her body; yet toward the end of her days (as all natural
motions drawing nearer to their center) she moved, as if every motion should
put her into her rest, and as if by every step she would reach the Garland, and
apprehend the prize. She was one, who scarce had another, no fellow but her
fellow, who indeed were a pair of such noble Sisters, as England could hardly
match; in whose two bodies, lived one soul; and in whose two souls, lived one
Christ: between whom, if I would make any difference, it should be such an one
as Alexander made between his two friends, the one was, (...), a lover of
Alexander; the other was, (...), a lover of the King; or else such an one, as
another makes between Peter and John; the one was, (...), a lover of Christ;
the other, was, (...), a lover of Jesus: or, if you will take it in this; the
one excelled in knowing and doing; the other in doing and knowing; the one, in
light and heat; the other, in heat and light. In a word, they were both of them
the glory of their family, the comfort of their Parent, the crown of their
Consorts, the adornment of Religion, the rejoycings of the godly, the
refreshment of the Saints, and are now both entered into the possession of that
which was their breathings in grace, and is their satisfaction in glory. And o
that their examples might ever live as paterns to those, who do yet supervive!

And now, my Lord, having breathed out my sad resentments of your loss, give
me leave to put into your hands these weak, but willing labors designed to the
service of these times, and seeking your Patronage in them, they flee to you
for protection, and yet I know no reason they should fear harm; their great
design is truth; the message they bring is peace; the language they speak is
accommodation: In which word me thinks I please my self, though I see less and
less hopes of seeing the thing accomplishd. Some Essaies I have attempted to
lay down in relation to such a happiness, which were they brotherly
undertaken, sweetly managed, faithfully pursued, might either procure our
agreement, or lessen our difference; either make us one, or not so much two. I
cast them down, such as they are, at your feet, as one able to judge of things.
And when you take them up, take up these thoughts with them, that he that
penned them, is one who while he can speak, will speak peace; and while he has
a being, will desire to be,

Your humble Servant in the service of Christ to be commanded, S. BOLTON.

TO THE Christian Reader.
Christian Reader,
THe multitude of prevailing opinions at this time was the great ground; and
the preservation of my own people was the main end of the undertaking the
following Discourse. I had not (in my first undertaking the work) thought it
would have been so large as now it is, but it swelled under my hand, and I hope
thou will esteem its bigness to be its perfection, not its disease. It usually
fares with works of this nature, as with our Masters bread, they multiply in
the breaking. The whole is digested into six Questions, set down in the Title
page, from which Generals many other particular Queries are deduced, discussed
and resolved. In the first part my great design has been to fence from error,
and to put a stop to the wantonness of men's spirits in the handing and
receiving of opinions. In the body of the Discourse I have laid down the
Examens of opinions, and the Characters of truth. And in the close of the
whole, I kept this in my eye, as the mark I aimed at, to drive on a happy
agreement among those who did conscientiously differ. Wherein it is my hope, if
my extreme desire of a happy accommodation has (in thy thoughts) carried me
too far, I may obtain the excuse of my affection, For it is not granted (say
some) to love and to be wise. I am not ignorant that essaies of this nature
have often proved, not only Abortive, but the trouble of the Parent. And
therefore politic men, as they will reserve themselves, and not speak all
their heart: so they will not engage themselves beyond their power of retreat,
if they shall after see reason for it. You know whose speech it was, That he
would lance no farther into the Sea, then he might safely return to shore
again; Thou will see in this Discourse I am not of that versatilis ingenij. And
indeed the greatness of the evil of division, and the misery that does attend
it, with my vehement desire of a happy Accommodation of our differences, not
too dear to be bought out even with our bloods, has over-powred me to speak my
whole heart, and to lay out my whole strength without those politic reserves.
Though I would give all reverence to the results of other Churches, yet would I
set up none as Hercules Columns, beyond which nothing more is to be known, nor
nothing more to be enquired; We have the same Star to sail by, which others
have, and it shines as bright in our Horizon, as in any part of the Christian
world. Nor can it be any scandal and offense to other Churches, if in all th
ngs we come not up to them: as they take their own just liberty to consult
their own peace, so may we. We see in part the mischiefs of divisions; It is
indeed the blazing Comet, which portends more evil, then all our enemies can
bring upon us; but when shall we be one? Shall we yet be dividing wedges,
cleaving our selves into splinters, and renting our selves into further
division? We have had some ways of accord; but do all ways of accord set us
at farther distance? Do means of union prove ways of disunion? Do reasons for
agreement turn to arguments of further difference? A sad omen! and gives us
cause to fear, that if yet we will continue two, God may find a third to
chastize us both, God being as careful to chastize his peoples wantonness, as
to relieve his peoples wants: from the dust he will have means for the one; and
from the dead he can raise instruments for the other. However I fear that both
parties will have cause hereafter to repent that they are two, though no third
party be used (which God avert) as a means to make us one. The foresight of the
misery of lengthening out our differences, prevailed with me to attempt that
which I have done in this Discourse by way of healing and accommodating of
them; toward which, if these weak endeavors may be serviceable, or put on
some abler pen to attempt the like, I have my desires, and good men their
prayers, if not, I have given in my vote. And (as a learned Author says in
attempts of another nature) It will be enough for me, L Verula^.
if these weak endeavors may be reckoned among the best sort of wishes. And I
may be esteemed,

An earnest breather after truth and peace, S. BOLTON.

Gentle Reader,
Thou will find in the perusal of this Discourse (notwithstanding all our
care) some literal faults, these I present to be amended, and the other I beg
(wanting time of further perusuall) may be indulged.

Page 3. l 5 r (...) p 9. l. 1. mar r (...). p. 9. l. 34. for notable, r. not
able. p. 78 l 9 r scrupled p 101. l c. r audire p. 119. l. 22 m. r. novem. p.
125. l. ult r obliqui. p. 341. l. 33. r. terrors p. 343. l 6. r modi^am p. 360
l. 19. r. our. l. 31 1. speak.

I Have with much satisfaction, and content perused this Treatise, entitled
[The Arraignment of Errour] And finding it to be very solid and judicious,
pious, and exceeding seasonable toward the healing of the present differences
of our times, I allow it to be printed and published.

John Downam.

THE General Prospect OF THE ENSVING DISCOVRSE.
THE general enducement unto the ensuing Discourse, Page 1. The coherence of
the Text, and the division of it, p. 2, 3. The several Doctrines contained in
it, and the main Doctrine propounded, viz. Doct. That there shall be many
dangerous and erroneous opinions toward the end of the world, which shall
seduce and carry away many. 4, 5. This Discourse is carried on in way of
resolution to six main Questions. 5. Qu. 1. How it may stand with Gods ends,
with Sata^^ ends, with a man's own ends, that there should be erroneous
opinions? p. 6. The several branches of this Question are spoken unto; and, 1.
It is showed how it may stand with Gods ends. ibid. 1. It may stand with Gods
ends, 1. His merciful ends to the good. 1. To them brought in. 2. To them in
purpose to call.
2. His judicial ends to the bad.
ibid. 1. With his merciful ends, viz. to them brought in, 1. To fifth and try,
1. Their conditions. 2. Their graces. 3. Their grounds. 4. Their (...).
The two first are only spoken unto. 1. To sift and try their conditions; where
six conditions are laid down to which God has promised direction in truth, and
preservation from undoing errors p. 7, 8. 2. To try their graces: where are
five graces laid down, which God does especially try by permitting of errors
1. Their knowledge. 2. Their love. 3. Their zeal. 4. Their stability. 5. Their
sincerity. p. 8, 9, 10, 11. A second merciful end which God has to his own
people, is to exercise and quicken their graces, this instanced in four graces,
viz. 1 Their knowledge. 2. Their zeal. 3. Their faith. 4. Prayer. p. 12. 10 15.
A third merciful end, to make them keep closer, 1. To him. 2. To his Word,
p. 55. A fourth merciful end, to commend his love to them, p. ^6. A fifth, to
discover to us where our strength is, ib. A sixth, to make us prize truth more
while we live, 17 A seventh, to make us wary of what we receive, 18. to 21 2.
It may stand with Gods merciful ends to them in his purpose to call, viz. 1 To
awaken them. 2 To beat them off their sandy foundations. 3 To clear the way of
truth to them, 21 to 25 2. The permission of errors may stand with Gods
judicial ends to the bad, 1. To the promoters. 2. To the receivers.
1. For the punishment of some former way of sin, where five sins are named,
wherefore God does suffer men to be carried away with errors, 27, 28 2. For
the further hardening of their hearts; where are diverse ways set down of Gods
hardening the heart, 29 ^. The second general branch of the 1. Question. viz.
How it may stand with Satan's ends, 1 To the good. 2 To the bad, 30
To the good, 1 To seduce, 31 2 To unsettle, 32 3 To shake, 33 4 To perplex, 34
5 To prejudice entertainment of truth, 35
Solutions to some objections made by those who rest in the light of their
forefathers, without seeking further, rejecting what ever has not been of
former reception, 37. to 40 2 It may stand with Satan's ends to the bad, 1
Receivers. 2 Promoters. 41
1 Receivers, 1 To lessen the belief of things known. 2 To discourage them from
doing any thing. 3 To suit himself to the tempers of men, 42 4 To corrupt and
defile them more, 43 5 To beget dislike of the ways of God, 45, 46
2 Promoters 1 To make their conditions more irrecoverable, 46 2 To increase
their sin, 47 to 4^ 3 To increase their torments, 50. to 52
3 The third general branch of the first Query, viz. How it may stand with
man's ends, 1 The contrivers. 2 The actours.
Contrivers' 1 To blast the truth. 2 To divide the professors of it, 52
Actours, to advance their 1 Ambitious 2 Covetous 3 Voluptuous
ends. 53, 54. Qu. 2. What may be the grounds of abounding errors? 55 Answ.
The grounds are four, 1 Satan, 57 2 Corruption of men's hearts, 58 3 Men's
readiness to drink in every opinion, 59. to 64 4 Want of good discipline, 64.
to 68
Quest. 3. What are the grounds that so many are carried away? ^8 Answ. The
general grounds are, 1 Weakness incident to the godly, 1 Weakness of judgment,
68 2 Want of stability, 69 3 Too much credulity, 71. to 77
Where five grounds are laid down of our credulity, 72. to 78 2 Wickedness
proper to the wicked, 77
Qu. 4. Who those are that are in danger to be carried away, and led aside with
errors, 78 Four things first premised. 78. to 84 The answer laid down in seven
particulars, 1 All such who have not retained the notions of God in a holy and
pure heart, 84 2 All such who have not entertained the truth with love of it,
ibid. 3 All such who have not walked sutably to those truths which God has
revealed to them, 85 4 All such who have embraced former truth out of partial
respects, 86 5 All such who are not grounded and established in the truth, 87 6
Such who have rejected truths received upon corrupt grounds, 88 7 All such who
have the world for their god, ibid. Four sorts of men noted, who will never
hold to truth, 89 Means of establishment in the truth, held forth from the
Scripture, 90 Qu 5. What may be the examen^ of opinions? This branched into
four lesser Questions. 1 Who are to examine? 90 2 By what rule we are to
examine? 90 3 Who is to judge? 90 4 What ar^ the Diagnosticks? 90 qu 1. Who are
to examine opinions? The error of the Papists; and some distinctions ^ouching
examination premised, 90 to 91 A main position laid down in answer to the
Question, viz. That every one is bound to examine, not only private opinions,
but even the sentences, definitions, determinations of Councels, Synods, etc.
and to embrace them, or reject them, as they are consonant, or dissonant to the
word of God, 94 1 This position first cleared by Scripture. 94, 95 2 Confirmed
by arguments, 96-103 3 Strengthened by testimony. 103. to 106 4 Objections are
answered, 106. to 112 And this main position applied to our times. 112. to 118
Quest. 2. What is the rule by which we must examine? After some generals are
premised, the answer is laid down, that the Scripture is the rule and
touchstone whereby opinions must be tried, 118, 119 This confirmed by diverse
arguments, wherein the properties of a rule are laid down, 119. to 126 Some
objections answered, 126 to 130 Quest. 3. Who shall judge that this is Gods
mind in Scripture? Some generals premised; together with some distinctions of
judges, and truths, and doctrines to be judged, 130. to 134 And some general
answers laid down, 134 to 137 Some more particular answers formed out of those
premised distinctions, with some directions to find out truths doubtful, 137.
to 144 Quest 4. What are the Diagnosticks, where 1 The false marks. 2 The true.
1 The false marks, or the commonly received Characters of truth and error are
1. Examined in six Queries, viz. Qu. 1. Whether antiquity, or the ancientnesse
of an opinion, is not a true Char^cter of truth? 145 After some distinctions
the answer is laid down, 145, 146, etc. Qu 2. Whether the newness of an
opinion is not a sufficient mark to discover it an error? 147 Four
distinctions premised to the answer of this, and the Query answered in two
conclusions, with some admonitions to us in these times, 147-154 Qu 3. Whether
the wickedness of them that maintain it be not sufficient to evidence an
opinion to be erroneous? Some general answers laid down, to which are annexed
four rules requisite to be observed; if you would judge of an opinion to be
erroneous by the wickedness of the maintainers, 154. to 163 Qu. 4. Whether the
holiness of those who are the publishers and receivers of an opinion, be not
sufficient to discover their doctrine to be truth? Some general distinctions
are premised, and the Query answered in four conclusions, 163. to 169 Qu. 5.
Whether this be not sufficient to evidence an opinion to be true, that it in
maintained by learned men; and on the contrary, an opinion to be an error,
because maintained by those that are illiterate and unlearned? 169 1 The diverse
distinctions and acceptations of learning, 169. to 175 And thereupon answers
framed, 175. to 182 Qu. 6. Whether the multitude, or pancity of them, who are
the divulgers, and entertainers of an opinion, be not sufficient to
characterize an error or truth. After the terms explained, the Query is
answered at large in many particulars, 182. to 190 The mysterious workings, and
energy of error laid forth in seven branches 190. to 204 2 The true and
infallible Characters of divine truth. 1 Character. Divine truth is
word-revelation, 205 This branched into three maxims. 1 What ever the word of
God does plainly and evidently hold forth, that is infallibly truth, 206 2 What
ever may be collected by way of manifest consequences, or made out by evident
deductions from the word, is certainly a truth, 107 Yet three Cautions are
laid down concerning this, 207. to 209 3 Maxim. What ever may be made evident
to be consonant to Gods mind, or the main end of God in Scripture, though
there be no particular place for it, yet doubtless it is a truth, 210 2
Charact. That which does really and truly advance all God in Christ, is
certainly a truth of God. This branched forth into four particulars, and many
opinions in our days examined by it. 210. to 216 3 Char. That which does
really advance the whole work of grace, in the hearts and lives of Saints, that
is certainly a truth of God, 217 This branched into four particulars, and fix
eminent operations of truth said down, 217. to 214 As 1. It has a
soul-humbling power: upon which some Objections are answered, 221. to 228 2 It
has a heart-changing power, 228 3 It has a sin-subduing power. 230 4 It has
a heart-quickning power, ibid. 5 It has a heart-inflaming power, 231 6 It has
a heart-raising, spiritualizing power, ibid Use The whole applied to our times,
233 The application branched into some 1 Cautions. 2 Directions, 235
1 Cautions, where are four laid down, 1 Beware of being too credulous; where
three great grounds of men's credulousnesse are noted, 235-236 2 Beware of
prejudices, 237 3 Beware of being biassed with corrupt affections; where four
great biasses are laid down, 239. to 243. 4 Beware of wilfulness and
perverseness. Two directions. 1 Consult impartially, and diligently with the
Word of God, and God in the Word, 244 This branched forth into four
particulars, and seven mediums laid down to enable us to find out the right
sense of Scripture, 244. to 250 Direct. 2. Get an humble heart, 25^ Direct 3.
Labor to be renewed in the spirits of your minds, ib. Direct. 4. Get a heart
prepared for the entertainment of truth. 5 Enquire diligently, 252 6 Walk
answerably, 252 Quest. 6. What ways God has left us in his Word for the
suppressing of error, and reducing of erroneous persons? 253 Some generals
premised. The answer comprised under two heads, 1 Ecclesiastical. 255 2 Civil.
255
Ecclesiastical are 1 Fraternall, 257 2 P^st^^all, 3 Judicial, 1
Congregationall 1 Admonition, 258, 259. 2 Excommunication
2 Synodicall.

Some Objections upon Matthew. 28.17. answered, 261. to 265 The Synodicall means,
265 This branched into four particulars, 1 What a Synod is? where many cases
are resolved, 266. to 273 2 That God has set up such an Ordinance as this is,
and in what cases needful, 273 3 That this means has been blessed and
succesfull, 276 4 What power God has endued and enabled a Synod withal, 279
Diverse opinions laid down, 280 Our agreements in the negative laid down in six
particulars, 281, 284 The power of a Synod, as relating to the Question, laid
down in these three particulars, 285 1 The power they have as relating to
erroneous Doctrines, laid forth in three particulars, and an Objection
answered, 285-287 2 Their power, as relating to erroneous persons, laid forth
in 4. branches, 287-190 3 Their power, as relating to erring Churches, laid
down in six branches, 290-295 Object. concerning the difference betwixt our
Synods, and that in Act. 15. answered, 295-302 The Quest is concluded in a
discourse upon the diverse opinions concerning Excommunication of a whole
Church, and of delivering up to Satan, 302-30^ The grants of the Brethren, laid
out in six particulars concerning the nature and power of Synods, 308-311 2 The
civil and Magisteriall means, 311 This summed up in five particulars, q. 1.
What power the Magistrate is said not to have? this is said forth under four
particulars, 312-319 q. 2. What the power of the Magistrate is asserted to be,
as relating to this Quest. Several opinions concerning this, whereof two of
them extremes, one middle, 31^-321 q 3. Whether there be any such power
warranted? and ordained of God, as is asserted? ibid. The Query resolved, and
Objections answered, 321-325 q. 4. Whether such a power be needful to the
Church? This is answered in four Conclusions, 326-329 q. 5. How this power is
to be dispensed? where six necessary Rules or cautionary advices are laid down
in answer to this Question. Rule 1. This power is to be dispensed rightly, 329
Rule 2. This power is to be dispensed knowingly, 331 Rule 3. This power is to
be dispensed wisely and prudentially, 334 Set down in three things, viz. It
must be dispensed with distinction of Errors. Persons. Penalties.
1 It is to be dispensed with distinction of errors. Where are four kinds of
errors laid down unsufferable, 334-336 2 This power is to be dispensed with
distinction of persons, 336 Where seven rules are laid down, serving to
discover a man truly conscientious in an error, from one pretending conscience
for his error, 337 -- 342 3. This power is to be dispensed with distinction of
penalties, 342 Some errors are to be healed with patience, 343 Rule 4. This
power is to be dispensed orderly, 344 It is not the only means, the first
means, nor the means to be used alone, 346 Ru. 5. This power is to be dispensed
piously and religiously, upon religious grounds, in a religious manner, for
religious ends, 347 Ru. 6. This power is to be dispensed mercifully and
ch^ritably, 348 The Discourse concluded with some desires, motives and ways of
Accommodation, 349 First, It is showed that this accommodation is possible, in
respect of God, in respect of our differences, and in respect of the persons
differing 349 2 It is exceeding desirable, 1 To Christ. 2 In it self. 3 To us.
4 To all the Churches of Christ.
Unto these motives some ways are laid down subservient to this Accommodation,
355 1 That all would get their hearts in love with peace and union, 355 2
Silent all characterizing names. ibid. 3 Bury up, and forget all bitter, and
distastefull passages, 356 4 Retract unjust charges, inconsequentiall and
strained deductions fastened upon either. 357 5 That there be a truce and
cestation from all matters of strife and contention agreed on, 358 6 Set up a
brotherly and amicable conference; where four things are suggested, requisite
to the well managing thereof, ibid. Three main things to be endeavored by the
undertakers of this conference, 360 1 All unnecessary controversies are to be
avoided, ibid. 2 To conclude and establish our agreements, 36^ 3 To accommodate
our differences, 362 And with the earnest desires of a happy Accommodation, the
work is concluded.
THE ARRAIGNMENT OF ERROVRS.
MATTHEW. 24.4, 5. And Jesus answered and said unto them, Take heed that no man
deceive you.

For many shall come in my Name, saying, I am Christ: and shall deceive many.


THe multitude of opinions which are in our days (every one of them stamped
with the name of Christ, and claiming his authority;) and the great danger of
them, has been the only inducement to me, to make choice of this text at this
time, which God willing shall be the examination of many opinions now on foot.

Indeed there have many glorious truths been discovered to us, which before
were hid in the dark; but when God is communicating truth, then is the time
for the Devil to bring forth his ware, and vent his errors also. And
therefore great care there ought to be, what we entertain, and how we
entertain opinions; Take heed that no man deceive you: For many shall come in
my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many.

The text which I have read to you, it is the beginning of Christ's prophetical
Sermon to his Disciples: Where take notice of these two things.

1. The Occasion of it. 2. The Sermon it self.
1. The occasion is

1. More remote, and that was the Disciples admiration of the building of the
Temple, verse. 1.

2. More near, and that was the Disciples questions which they put forth, ver.
2.

The Questions were three.

1. When these things should happen which Christ had spoke off in the 2d verse?

2. What should be the sign of his coming?

3. When should be the end of the world? as you see verse 3d.

2. We have the Sermon it self, which was upon a double subject; 1. Of the
destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple. 2. Of his coming to judgment, and the
end of the world.
Both which are so interwoven, that it is hard to separate them.

Christ does not here answer them directly determining the time and year when
these things should be. But he tells them of some foregoing signs of these
things.

1. There shall be false prophets, impostors, seducers who shall come and
deceive many.

2. There shall be wars, famines, earthquakes, pestilences, etc. And he does
admonish them to beware of the one, and not to be troubled at the other.

My text is a branch of the first of these, Take heed that no man deceive you.

In the former words you shall observe a curious inquisition; here in the text
we have,

1. A necessary admonition, Take heed that no man deceive you.

2. The ground and reason of it, which is threefold.

1. Multi erunt seductores, there shall be many seducers.

2. Multos seducent, they shall deceive many. Here was ground to take heed, but
yet there is a further ground.

3. Seductionis periculum, the danger of the seduction: Which is set down in
two things.

1. They shall come it my name, (...), it is read, in my name: Calvin reads it
sub nomine me, under my name; they shall use my name as their color or
pretext, the better to set off their errors: and there is great danger in that
they shall come in my name, not that Christ sent them, not that they had
Commission and authority from him, as the word is used otherwhere; but they
shall come under pretense of my sending, in my name, as if I had sent them, and
that is danger. No greater danger of being deceived, then when men come in
Christ's name.

2. They shall say I am Christ: Why but what danger of deceiving them in that
that was so gross an error, it was so obvious to them who had received
Christ, and knew him, that there was no danger of being deceived by such
impostors?

But yet here is the danger, 1. They shall not say they are Christ personal,
but Christ doctrinall; they shall say their opinions are Christ's mind, Christ's
will, Christ's doctrine.

If they had said they were Christ personal, then how could they come in
Christ's name? they could not say they came in his name, and yet say, that they
were Christ; and therefore I conceive that this is spoken of their opinions
that they were to hold forth, that they shall stamp them with the name and
authority of Christ, which yet are contrary to Christ.

And this makes the danger the greater; 1. They shall come in his name; they
shall pretend they have Commission from Christ, Christ's authority, that Christ
sent them.

2. They shall pretend their opinions are Christ's mind, his will.

And when that a deceit is fathered so high, when an error does claim Christ's
patronage, and comes clothed with such authority, when it is held forth under
such colors, there is great danger of deceiving those who are simply honest.

And therefore it has been the policy of Antichrist, and of all who have been
the patrons of error either in doctrine or worship, to hold out their opinions
and doctrines upon the highest pretenses, to make men more willingly to close
with them and swallow them: And opinions so handed to us, come with great
advantage.

Well then, seeing there shall be many seducers, and they shall prevail to
seduce many; and seeing there is such danger of seducing others also, in regard
they come with such specious pretenses, giving out that I sent them, that they
have Commission from me, and the opinions they hold forth they are my mind and
will, therefore take heed that no man deceive you, Beza in loc.
(...), that no man seduce you; so the word speaks, whence planus in Latin is
taken pro impostore. It is a word does properly signify to be enticed out of
the right way, into woods and groves in which there is danger. As a thief does
allure the travellour out of his way, into woods and groves, that he may rob
and kill him; so the Devil who is the grand impostor, does endeavor to draw
men out of the way of life, that he may rob them of their graces, and murder
their souls. And therefore take heed that no man seduce you, for many shall
come in my name.

I have the larger insisted upon this, that I might in the laying down the
parts of the text, convay the meaning of the words to you also: Now we come to
the Doctrines.

1. That there shall be many seducers, many erroneous opinions before the end
of all things.

2. That these seducers and seductions, these deceivers and deceits shall carry
fair pretexts, the seducers shall come in Christ's name, and their seduction
shall be given out to be the mind of Christ.

3. That many shall be seduced and carried away with them. They shall deceive
many.

4. That the Saints had need themselves to take heed.

You see the ground, many are deceived; and the danger, they shall come in
Christ's name, and say I am Christ.

As we use to say, we are never deceived but by those whom we trust, such as
make show of honesty, a knave cannot deceive us, for we trust him not. But now
such who have show of honesty, they may easily deceive, because we never
mistrusted them, we looked for all good from them, and thought of no deceit. So
there is greatest danger of deceit, when opinions come with glorious b^ites and
shows; if men came in their own name, and gave them out for their own
opinions, we should mistrust them, for every man is a liar, the best know but
in part, but when they come to us under the authority of Christ, and are handed
to us for the truths of Christ, here is most danger of being deceived.

And the errors in our time had not prevailed with so many, if that the
seducers had not been so sacrilegious, as to make Christ the patron of them, if
they had not baited the hook with such a glorious bait, if they had not said
they came in Christ's name, and held out nothing but Christ, and the truth of
Christ. Wolves indeed in sheep clothing.

But I speak not of all, God forbid; some that say so, of whom I shall be
tender, in the discourse, though their opinions may not be received.

But I will not anticipate my discourse. We begin with the first doctrine
propounded, and it shall be the whole I shall insist on: And we will give it in
these words;

That there shall be many dangerous and erroneous opinions at the end of the
world, which shall seduce and carry away many.

It was here foretold in prophecy, and it is fulfilled in our days. I need
not speak to the truth of it, it is plain enough, he that runs may read it;
I shall therefore, omitting that, endeavor to clear these things:

1. I will show you how this may stand with Gods ends, with Satan's, and with a
man's own ends, that there should be erroneous opinions.

2. What are the grounds of so many abounding errors?

3. Why so many are carried away?

4. Who are those that are in danger?

5. What are the Examens, touches or trials, whereby we may be able in these
days of dispute, to clear what is error and what is truth.

6. What ways God has left in his word, for the suppressing of error, and
reducing of erroneous persons?

And I shall desire so much from you, being a seasonable discourse, that you
would lend me your attention till I have finished it; and then I doubt not, but
as it may be a check to the greedy entertainment and confident broaching of
opinions, so it may be a help unto those that are in the dark, and in some
measure enable them to see their way clear before them, and settle them in
these unsettled times; and through the like blessing of God, those who have been
carried away, may be reduced out of the ways of error into the paths of
truth: And if that be the end of the discourse, as it is my end in the
undertaking of this discourse, both you and I shall have cause to bless God; I
that I undertook it, and you that you heard it.

We will therefore begin with the first thing propounded. viz.

1. How this may stand with Gods ends, to suffer many abounding errors and
opinions in the Churches. And

1. I shall show you how it may stand with Gods ends to the good.

2. How it may stand with Gods ends to the bad.

1. It may stand with Gods merciful ends to the good, 1. To them brought in.
2. To them in his purpose to call.


1. To them brought in God suffers errors;

1. To sift and try his own people; these times are sifting times: As times of
calamity, when misery abounds, so times of division when errors abounds, they
are times of sifting; times wherein God will try what mettle you be made of,
whether you be corn or chafe, whether dross or gold, whether wheat or
tares. He is said in Amos 9.9. to sift the Nations: I will sift the house of
Israel, as corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the least grain fall upon
the earth. There is your comfort, not a grain shall be lost, who ever is true
grain, who ever is sound and sincere, they shall never be lost, God will
preserve them, none shall be lost. Every man has his hour of sifting one way
or other, he has his hour of temptations, and blessed are they which endure
temptation, blessed are they who hold out the trial, James 1.12. A Soldiers
valor and courage is not so well known in the Garrison as in the field, there
he is discovered: So a Christian is not known till an hour of temptation
comes, and then he is discovered.

Now there are four things which God puts us on to sift, by permitting
erroneous opinions abroad. 1. To sift our Conditions. 2. Our Graces. 3. Our
Grounds. 4. Our Ends. I shall speak only to the two first, and shall take
liberty to speak more largely to t^

1. God puts us on hereby to si^^ our conditions, whether we are in such a
condition as may fence us from seduction, as may comfortably evidence to us,
and we may build upon it, that we shall not be led away. Indeed we cannot be in
such a condition here, but we may be led aside with some errors, we are not
perfect in grace, nor are we perfect in knowledge here; the Apostle tells us,
we know but in part, but we may be, and Gods people are in such a condition,
that they shall never be led away with destroying errors, God will preserve
them from them; he has promised, that his elect shall not be deceived, that is
in destroying undoing errors, this they shall not be, Joh. 10.4.5. they shall
not hear the voice of a stranger. And this now puts us upon the search,
whether we are in such a condition as thereby we may be persuaded we shall be
fenced from undoing errors, that such errors shall never prevail over us.

Now there are 6. Conditions to which God has promised direction in truth, and
preservation from undoing errors; and the soul is put on to search whether he
be in those conditions.

1. Whether we are in covenant with God; he promises to teach all such, Jer.
31.34. He will teach all such.

2. Whether we be the children of God; there is a promise to that, Isa. 54.13.
And all thy children shall be taught of God. So Joh. 6.45.

3. Whether we are the friends of God, Joh. 15.15. there is a promise to that;
henceforth I call you no more servants but friends; for whatever I have heard
of the Father, I have made known unto you: And the secrets of the Lord are
with them that fear him, as the Psalmist says.

4. Whether we have the Spirit of Christ; there is a promise to that, Joh.
16.13. He shall lead you into all truth. And you have an unction whereby ye
know all things, by which is meant the Spirit, 1 John 2.20.

5. Whether we walk humbly and obediently to every truth revealed, whether we
do answer Gods ends in truths already made known, Psalm. 25.9. The humble he
will teach, the meek he will guide in judgment. And Phil. 3.15, 16. As many
as be perfect let them be thus minded, and if any be any otherwise minded, God
shall reveal it in his due time: Nevertheless whereto we have already
attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing.

6. Whether we have received the truth with love of it; 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11.
Because they received not the truth with love of the truth, therefore will God
give them up to strong delusions to believe lies. These are the conditions in
the persons whom God will preserve from undoing errors. And now this puts us
upon the sifting of our selves and of our conditions: Ah says the soul, there
are many errors abroad in the world, if the Lord fence not my heart against
them, if I should receive them, I am undone; but what assurance have I that I
shall not be led aside; I see others who are men of greater parts, of greater
appearing graces led aside, and what assurance have I, that I shall not be
carried away?

Am I in Covenant with God? am I one of his children? one of his friends? have
I the Spirit of Christ? do I walk humbly and obediently to every truth
revealed? have I received former truths with love of them? if it be not so, I
have no assurance to be preserved from seducing errors. And thus it puts the
soul upon search of his condition.

And that is the first, God suffers errors to sift his people, first, to put
them upon search of their conditions.

2. God permits it to sift our graces; and this will try you to the back: There
are 5. Graces God does now sift in his people.

1. Their Knowledge, here God tries y^^r knowledge, how you have thriven under
means, what knowledge you have to discern between error and truth, light
and darkness. God expects after all the means you have had, (...). Col. 2.^.
that you should not still be children, but men in knowledge, and that you
should be able to discern between light and darkness. As we read of a full
assurance of faith, so we read of a full assurance of knowledge, some that are
weak in knowledge, some stronger; God does by these, try what your knowledge
is, under all the light you have enjoyed.

2. God does now try your Love, whether or no you will adhere to his truth,
whether you will hold close to him, and not suffer your selves to be rent away,
and carried away with every wind of doctrine. God expects that we should be
rooted and grounded in love. Ephesians. 3.
And now he would try your love, your love to God, your love to Christ, your
love to truth; men that have not received the truth with the love of it, that
have entertained it into their heads, but not into their hearts, into their
understandings, and not into their affections, will now certainly in this time
of temptation foregoe the truth, even truths professed, truths preached, truths
contended for formerly. The head is no safe casket to hide and lay up truth in,
it is easily stolen away if lodged in no safer a place. But now if you have
entertained it with love, you will maintain it too, you may as well take away
their hearts, as take away their truth, it is lodged there; nay this love has
changed the heart into the nature of it, truth does so, where it is received
with love. And hence it is that Gods people, they have a rising of heart
against error, when they want an argument against it, and they have a love to
truth when they cannot maintain and dispute it. As you see the Martyrs in Q
Mary's days, they could say they could burn for Christ, though they could not
dispute; they were notable to maintain the truth with their heads, but they
could with their lives; they could not give them reasons against their errors,
but they could lay down their bloods. As a godly man said once, he would desire
no other confutation of Arminius, but the work of regeneration (...) any holy
heart; there was in every disposition of a gracious heart, a real confutation
of all his tenants.

3. God would hereby sift your Zeal^ whether or no you will contend for the
truth, as you have it expressed it. Jude 3. E^arnestly contend for the faith,
which was on^^ delivered to the Saints. God will now try whether you will
contend for the truth, Rev. 1.3.
or whether you will bear with them that are evil. Thus God tried the Church
of Pergamus, Rev. 2.14, 15. and he blames them for their lukewarmenesse, that
they had no more zeal to oppose those errors which were vented in their
times. Gods people though they be little, when they be to deal with God, dust
and ashes, as deal for God, and they will not brook with error. You see the
hot contention between Paul and Barnabas, Paul and Peter, what zeal and
affection Paul did show for God: and all was, because they did not walk
according to truth, as you read, Gal. 2.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. As Moses would not
yield to Pharaoh, not in a hoof, the Orthodoxall Christians to the Arrians not
in (...).
a letter, an Iota, a title; nor Paul to the Jews, no not for an hour, so the
soul who is zealous for God, he cannot brook with error, nor can he yield to
any thing contrary to the truth of God.

4. The fourth grace God would sift, is our Stabisity, whether or no we are
bottomed and grounded in the truth; whether we have that full assurance of
understanding, Col. ^.2. whether we are established in the truth; or whether so
unfixed and unstable, that we are carried away with every wind of doctrine; of
such the Apostle speaks of, Ephesians. 4.14. Many Christians that are as 'twas
said of R^uben, Genesis 9.4. as unstable as water, that are found according to the
vessel which does contain them, poor Christians, that are up and down, not
only weak in knowledge, but they are fickle in their understanding, like soft
wax, now receive this impression, this stamp, but are ready to receive another
when ever it is impressed: And this does arise not only from weakness of the
understanding, but want of firmness of understanding, from inconstancy of
spirit.

Now opinions will try your steadfastness, see how you are settled, how you are
bottomed; when a stream comes you know it takes away what ever lies loose upon
the banks, but those things which are settled, trees and such things that are
rooted, it cannot stir: men that are not rooted in the truth, are in danger
to be carried away with errors, they are like loose things upon the banks: but
such as are rooted and grounded they abide, nothing shall move them from their
steadfastness.

But are all those that abide rooted?

No. There are many who are rooted in sin and error, fixednesse, as the others
unsetlednesse is their sin.

5. The fifth grace God would fifth, and that is your Sincerity; your grounds,
your ends, upon what grounds you have entertained truth, and for what ends: Oh
there are many in the world, that do adhere to truth upon easy grounds, upon
poor reasons, low considerations. Some that have entertained truth only by
tradition, they were borne in these places where Religion is established, and
therefore are of this Religion; and if they had been borne in Turkey, had they
no better principle, they would have been of that too.

Some that have entertained truth me^rely for gain, and do adhere to truth as
the Ivy to the tree, not because it loves it, but because it is nourished by
it. Others upon other grounds; because their Fathers, their friends were thus
of this mind. Others because such Learned men, and great ones are of this mind,
they p^^ne their f^^le (...) their sleeves; the Jews but this argument, which
of the ^^^lers believe in him. Others because of other grounds: (...) John said
to the elect Lady, whom I love for the truths sake. They often love the truth
so the Ladi^^ sake, (...) other respects.

Now at such a time as this, when error have been a bread, if there be any
grounds upon which you have entertained truth, but mere love to the truth, you
will never hold out. If you have entertained it upon other grounds, or do
close with it upon other ends then such as are sincere, you will never hold to
it. God will try your ends, what ends you have in adhering to truth; if it has
been for the world, it may be as much of the world shall be propounded to you
in a way of error, and then you are gone. He that will serve God for the
world, will serve the Devil for the world; he that will for bye respects close
with truth, will for the same respects, if they weigh down the other, close
with error, if they do but outballance them, if more weight be cast in he is
gone: He that serves God for a little, will serve the Devil for more; where he
can mend his wages, he will give his service. Errors are great trials of our
sincerity, what our grounds and what our ends are; if you have entertained
truth merely for corrupt grounds, its possible you may mend your selves, by
entertaining of an error, and then you are gone.

And therefore to discover sincerity, God permits errors in the Church, as you
see it 1 Cor. 11.19. I hear there are divisions among you, and I believe it,
for there must be heresies among you, that they which are approved may be made
manifest: and as they try, so they do discover our sincerity to our selves, to
God, to others, by which means we are approved.

And this is the first merciful end which God has to his people in permitting
errors in the Church, to sift his people.

2. A second merciful end which God has to his own people in the permitting
errors, viz. to exercise and quicken our graces. As God suffers corruptions in
our persons to exercise and quicken us, he could as easily destroy them, as
subdue them, unbe^ them, as conquer them; so he suffers errors in his
Churches, on purpose to exercise and quicken his own people. We had need of
quickening: rather then God would suffer his people to be dead, he suffers the
Canaanites to be as thorns in their sides: and rather then dead, he suffers
errors in the Church, and if there be any life in you, this will quicken, this
will raise it. God has on purpose permitted in all ages some error or other
on foot, to exercise the graces of that generation; the Fathers were famous in
their times for contending against the errors of their days. Augustine was
famous in his Contests against Pelagius, Athanasius in his against Arius,
Cyrill in his against Nestorius, Gregory Nazianzen in his against Macedonius,
Leo in his against Eutyches, Hierom in his against Jovinianus, Ruffinus, etc.
Every age has had its poison, and its antidote. There was never any
generation, but as there were some suffering truths in it, some truth that
perverse generations would not close withal, so there were some infecting and
poisoning errors; in former times the abounding errors were the errors on
the left hand, and God grant that the spreading errors now be not errors on
the right hand: The Devil has been so long beaten at the other, that now like
a wily serpent he will go and change weapons, he has long been a prince of
darkness, who has ruled in the children of disobedience, and now he would
become an Angel of light, if possible to seduce the children of the light. You
have something of that insinuated in the text; Deceivers shall come in Christ's
name, and say of your opinions, loc here is Christ, and this is high deceit. It
may be God will exercise this generation with more of this kind then others,
because they have learned Christ better, they have more knowledge, he has done
more for this generation then any other, and therefore God may exercise us more
then others: And this is another end God has in permitting errors, to quicken
and to exercise the graces of his people. And there are four graces or
gracious dispositions that God chiefly aims at to exercise in his people by
this suffering errors abroad.

1. He would exercise their knowledge, or rather their conscientious study and
search, to know the mind of God more fully. God would put them on to read
more, study more, converse more, to search the Scriptures more, to examine
what is truth, and that diligently. Many that are too much of Gallios temper
now, of whom you read, when he heard of those things which Paul preached, it
is said, he cared not for those things. This is a profane temper of spirit,
and is naught. A man may as, well reject truth as error, if a man do not try
and examine, for ought he knows he has rejected a truth instead of error, if
he do not sit down to examine what is truth, and search whether it be an
error or a truth, how should he be able to close with the one, or reject the
other. There are many that reject the opinions of these days for errors,
because they will not be troubled to search and examine them whether they be
truths or no. We are commanded to try all things, 2 Thessalonians. 5.21. and how should
we be grounded and established in the truth, or know truth from error, if we
do not search into the mind of God, and learn what is his mind and will. 1 John 4 1. Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God
anno. Many a truth is rejected in these days, because many an error is
entertained; You do by opinions as you do by Pamphlets, because there be many
lies abroad, therefore you will not believe truth. Certainly this is that which
God preaches to you, in these times by the multitude of opinions, to search
what is truth, to take more pains, to examine and search out the mind of God.
It is not enough with Pilate to say what is truth? and then sit still, as many
do ask questions, rather for discourse sake then out of desire to be
satisfied; but you must search the mind of God, inquire diligently.

2. God would now exercise your zeal of love, if you have any love in you,
show it to the Lord, love is a zealous affection. We say the fire burns the
hotter for the cold weather, the colder the weather, the hotter and more
scorching is the fire, it is per Antiperistasin: so the more errors abroad,
the hotter will your love and zeal burn to the truth, and in the truth. As
the bellows blow the fire and intend it, so does this opposition intend our
affections the more, or love to God, to truth, to others.

3. God does it to exercise a dependentiall faith upon God, that he would not
suffer us to be carried away with error. If you have any faith, you will now
exercise it, faith to believe promises; he has said, we shall be taught of
God, he has said, he will lead us into the way of all truth etc. here is
faith exercised to close with promises, to sue out promises, and to depend on
God for the performance of them. Oh now the soul gets to a promise, finds
sweet there, and some stay it the midst of his unsetlednesse, now he esteems a
promise above a world.

4. A fourth grace God would exercise is, the grace of prayer: Now will the
soul go and improve all his interest in Heaven, that God would lead him into
the way of all truth, that he would not leave them to be carried away in any
way of error. Now does the soul ply the throne of grace indeed, tells God of
his pliablenesse to entertain any truth of God, truth with penury, truth with
prison, truth with any affliction; now he goes and tells him how willing he is
to let in any light of God, his eyes shall be broad open to receive what God
shall reveal; now he goes and beggs for the Fathers teaching, the Spirits
leading into the way of all truth, professing the universal willingness of
his spirit, to close with naked truth upon any terms. Such dispositions are
now drawn forth, which perhaps had no occasion to appear all thy life before;
and there is comfort in exercise of them, the soul is comforted in their
actings, although he cannot yet find what is the will and mind of God. And this
is the second merciful end God has to his people, in the permitting and
suffering errors, as to sift them, so to exercise them.

3. A third merciful end which God has to his people in suffering errors,
and that is to make his people keep more close to him, and more close to his
word; these we put together, though they are two things.

1. To keep more close to him for counsel, instruction, direction, who is the
Prophet of his Church; who has undertaken to lead and guide his people into
the ways of truth, to guide us with his counsels, and this makes a soul to
keep close to God, to lie at his feet for instruction and direction, it brings
a man to immediate dependence upon God.

2. To keep us close to the word, the written word of God, that our faith may
not be built and founded on man but God. In pictures the further you go from
the original the mo^e unlike they grow; if you draw a picture by the
original, by the person himself, it may be something like, but draw another
picture from that picture, though it may be like the picture, yet it is less
like the person, and the further you go from the original the more unlike it
is, that if at last you come to compare the picture with the person, though one
picture might resemble another, yet the last picture was nothing like the
person; now there is no way to rectify this, but bring this picture to the
person, to the original, and there, upon comparison with it to mend it.

We have had too much of this divinity in our times, first we have drawn plat
forms out of the word, then built upon them, and drawn deductions and
consequences from them, and then consequences from those consequences, till at
last they be nothing agreeable to the original the word of God. Now God
suffers errors to arise, most of which will be found to be bottomed upon false
deductions and consequences drawn out of the word, many opinions built and
fastened on them. And God suffers this, to bring us back to the original the
word of God, that there we might rectify all.

We have taken up too many things on trust, and our faith has been too much
built upon man, the judgments, writings and opinions of men, which are but
sandy foundations. God whips us from it now, by suffering so many errors to
arise, and all this to bring his people to the word, to live upon the word,
that our faith might be resolved into God and not man. Isa. 8.20. To the Law
and to the testimonies, if they speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in them.

4. A fourth merciful end, God suffers it to commend his love to them, in
preserving them from the poison and infection of error; to give you a taste and
experience of his goodness in keeping of you, that you are not carried aside
with the ways of error. And this does exceedingly take the heart, and raise
it up to praise him. Oh says the soul, Lord, others of greater parts, and
greater abilities, thou have suffered to be led away, and carried away with
error, how comes it that thou have preserved me? This sets off and commends
Gods love, and raises up the heart in praises.

5. A fifth merciful end, to discover to us that it is not by our own strength
we stand, but by the strength of Christ. As we are kept in grace, so we are
preserved in truth; and the Apostle tells us, We are kept by the mighty power
of God through faith. When you see errors to abound, and see them prevail
with so many others, men of greater parts and abilities, when you read that
they shall prevail with them that shall perish, oh this makes the soul keep
close to Christ; and herein does God discover it is not our strength but his,
whereby we are preserved in a way of truth, and kept from error.

6. A sixth merciful end, to make us prize truth more while we live, nothing
does so much inh^nch and raise the esteem of truth, then error; It may be
before you had low esteems of the truths of God, you did not value them and
pri^e them as you ought, you cast them aside; but now you take them, lay them
up, hide them in your hearts; you value of a truth as your best riches, your
honor, your treasure, the comfort in life, and support in death. When there
are many false pearls, false stones abroad, it will make men gather up the
true ones, and if he have such, to value of them; When there is much
counterfeit and light gold abroad, it will make men to value of good gold, you
shall see good gold, such as has abidden the touchstone, it is all gathered up
and preserved at such a time as this is. So when errors are abroad truth is
then of value, oh then every truth is entertained. Before truth was looked
upon, but found little entertainment, if it got any, it was in our houses, in
books, or in our heads only; but now it finds welcome and entertainment in the
heart. Naked truth, suffering truth, persecuted truth, it is now entertained,
truth is welcome any way. And it is now owned in the authority of it, in the
Majesty of it, as a King to rule and govern us, we will not rule it no more,
but it shall rule us. It is owned in the latitude of it, in the extensivenesse
of it, extend it as far as you will, its welcome in its largeness, it is
owned in the universality of it, all truth, such as makes against you, as well
as such as makes for you, they make for you in that they make against you, for
your souls, though against your sins. If ever truth be valued, if ever it
appear worth something, it is at those times when errors abound. You see how
the many false relations abroad, does make men value of a true relation, if
they can meet with a friend or a book that speaks true and impartially, they
value much of it; and what is the reason, because of the false relations abroad,
this heightneth the esteem of truth. So here, the many errors abroad, is a
great means to heighten and advance truth, and to make that great. And
therefore God does permit error to advance truth, that truth may be more
glorious in it self, and more glorious to us.

7. A seventh merciful end which God has in suffering errors and erroneous
opinions to abound, is, to make his people watchful and wary of what they do
receive.

There are many glorious truths to be revealed toward the end of the world;
great things are spoken of the latter days, for glorious revelations of the
truths of God. And there is many dangerous and fearful errors that shall come
abroad at that time too, as Christ does here foretell. And it is a greater
mercy there should be many then if there were but few, if there were but few,
we should take them in with truth, but being many, diverse of all kinds, it
makes the people of God watchful and careful what they entertain.

There are so many truths now to be made known at the end of all things, that
if there should not be many errors, and those dangerous errors also, we
should be in danger to receive all under the notion of truth, to close with
all, and swallow all that comes under that pretext. Where now by the abundance
of errors, we are made more wary, more watchful. If it be given out that
there is a great deal of false Coin, of light gold abroad, it will make men
careful of what they receive, which if it were not so, we should receive all
that comes; So here, certainly God would by this permissive providence of his,
have us take heed as well what we hear, as how we hear, he would have us to
take heed what we receive. God seems to speak, he would have us to entertain
truth not traditionally, but knowingly, not because it is the mind of such and
such men, but because it is the mind of God; not because discovered by such and
such men, but because revealed of God.

In our days, in regard of the multitude of errors, God seems to speak to
you, to be more then ordinarily wary in the receiving of truth, to receive it
knowingly, weightily, humbly, to receive it after sound debates, not suddenly,
least you be deceived with an error: Let it pass through all debates, before
it be received under the notion of truth.

We have some things that are merely divine, and there is no debate to be in
them, if a tool come on this Altar it defiles it.

Some things which are mixtly divine, and those admit of debate. The Apostle
tells us of two sorts of truths; 1. Foundation truths; 2. Building truths, 1
Cor. 3.10, 11, etc. There are some truths that are to be entertained without
debates of reason, they are to be believed as soon as revealed, faith is
required to the entertainment of them: As God in the Trinity of Persons and
Unity of Essence, Christ in his Person, hypostaticall Union of Natures, the
work of Creation, the Resurrection; Rations precedentes fidem, minuunt fidem,
subsequentes augent.
here faith must go before reason, believe and know; It is an unsound opinion,
Vbi definit ratio incipit fides.
where reason ends faith must begin, here reason must not begin at all, reason
pollutes, its corrupt, and will corrupt these; these are supra above, though
not contra rationem, against reason.

There are some truths again, and that is most of those which are in dispute
and debate now adays, and they are not to be entertained without long debate,
dispute, holy reasoning. You are to use all your knowledge and Christian
wisdom, and all your skill in the word of God: all your prayer and seeking. A
man may entertain a truth as well as an error too quickly: that is when he
entertaines it upon trust, or without debate, or because others say it, or
practice it, or because at first view it seems like a truth, this is to
entertain it too quickly: the Church of Ephesus is commended for her patience,
Rev. 2.2. And this may be one part of it, one branch of her patience, that she
had tried them which said they are Apostles, and found them liars, and this was
not done suddenly, as the third verse implies.

So let this be your commendation, that you have tried those opinions that
carry the highest pretext, that you have not been apt to believe every spirit,
but you have tried the spirits, and the doctrines, etc. before you have owned
them.

You would not take a man into your house that you knew not, and will you
entertain any thing into your heart? you would have tried servants, such
servants as are known, such husbands and wives, of whose goodness you have
heard, and will you let in a truth and not try it? What ever you entertain as
truth, you are to be subject to it, and will you be subject to error? You are
to maintain truth, to part with goods, to endure friends to become enemies, to
part with liberty, life, for truth; And shall I not try it, shall I do all
this for an error? Indeed if you were to do with truth as some others can,
that can take them up for their occasions, and lay them down again at
pleasure, that can embrace them and renounce them when they please, then you
did not need so much curiosity in search, but when you are to entertain truth
as you do your husbands and wives, till death separate, nay to take it not
only till death, but to all eternity; this should make a man consider, and not
be too light of his belief and entertainment of truth.

Again, if thou were to entertain truth as a servant only, that should only
serve thy uses, and be serviceable to thee, as many do with truth, they ask
what it can do for them before they entertain it, if it were to be so
entertained, then there need no such great trial; that truth that would be
most serviceable to thy estate, and advantage thee most in the world, thou
might embrace, Religion were then nothing but a policy: But being to
entertain it as thy King, not to subject it to thee, but thy self to it, not
to have it to moove according to thy mind, but thou according to its motions;
this should make thee consider before we entertain.

Again, if that we might entertain a truth as we do only our goods into our
houses, that would not endamage us any way; though they bring in nothing, yet
they would not endamage us, then the matter were not so much. But when we are
to entertain truth, as that which must live on us, that for which I am to part
with relations, with comforts, with riches, with estate, with liberty, with
life; Believe it, it would make a man in earnest, and try thoroughly before he
do entertain a thing for truth, and to be sure that God says it.

But add to this, your soul may depend on it, and that to eternity, and not
only thine but thy posterities too; how many families in this Kingdom that are
Papists, upon no other ground then their ancestors were; and does the soul of
me, my child, husband, wife, etc. depend much on me? and shall not I be wary
what I entertain? surely no honest heart but will. Well this is another ground
or end, God suffers errors, that we might entertain opinions warily, drop by
drop is the best receiving of opinions. We are commanded to buy the truth; and
surely the errors that are abroad, tell us it is to be bought by retaile, in
parcels, not by whole sale in the gross, for fear of receiving error as well
as truth: there are many cheating chapmen abroad, false lights; I name none, I
aim at none in particular: There are such who huosterize the word, adulterate,
sophisticate the word. And what is that? they mingle truth, and error, linsey
woolsey. And if you take up all in the gross you may be deceived, therefore
beware, try before you trust, examine, search. Take heed that no man deceive
you.

And thus I have showed you the first, how it may stand with Gods merciful
ends to those who are brought in, that there should be many errors.

II. We are now come to the second, how it may stand with Gods merciful ends
to those who are not yet called, but in his purpose to call. And it may stand
with Gods merciful ends to those yet in his purpose to call, or those who are
not yet called and brought in.

1. To be a means to awaken them, and put them upon the study and enquiry
after truth; the abundance of errors abroad, may put men to search and find
out what is truth; when you see men up in arms as it were, in hot contentions
to find out what is truth; who, save only Atheists, but will think themselves
concerned in it; every one will think, surely it is their business also, and
so will fall upon inquisition and search of it. If there be any thoughts of
eternity in you, if you be not Atheists, if you do conceive there is a Heaven
and a hell, and that error leads one way, and truth the other, it cannot be
but that abundance of errors abroad must awaken you, and put you on to
enquire, to hear, to read, to confer, to endeavor to find out truth.

It was the multitude of errors, which put Luther to search out what was
truth, if there had not been so many errors, it might be he had not enquired
and sought out truth; the like I may say of Calvin and others, and the errors
and corruptions in worship, imposed, did put on us to the trial of the whole,
and made us more strict to examine the bottomes whereon we stood.

2. God suffers it to beat them off their sandy foundations whereon they
build. As it is a means to put you on to search what your foundation is
whereon you build, the bottom whereon you stand, so it is a means to beat you
off your sandy foundations. When a man sees abundance of opinions abroad, one
says this, another that, sure it will make a man to put the question to
himself, upon what foundation do I stand, what is my bottom? And how can he
have any rest till he have gotten a better foundation to build on, a foundation
which none of these opinions can shake and unsettle; when he sees so many fair
buildings, specious structures to fall down, and not able to stand out the
blast of trial and temptation, because they are houses built on the sands; It
will make a man to enquire after the rock, and endeavor to build there, that
when the wind blows, yet the house may stand firm. This is the different
working which opinions have upon the good and bad, upon such whom God has a
purpose of good unto, and upon such that he will not own. That the one, the
multitude of opinions does draw him away, or else Atheist him, that he will be
nothing. The other it does un-atheist him, put him upon the search and
examination what is the truth of God; One he is now more formal, and minds no
more but mere formality, to go to Church, and say over a prayer, and if God
will save him with that well and good, he will do no more; The other, these
things do fire him out of his formality, and he can have no rest till he come
to some bottom to stand on: And that is another end God has, he would awaken,
and beat us off our sandy foundations.

3. God suffers multitude of opinions, and out of mercy to them who are not yet
brought in, to clear the way unto those who are not yet brought into the ways
of grace, that when they are brought in, they may be able to see their way more
clearly. As we our selves do receive a great deal of light and benefit by
the sufrings and clashings of others; If there had not been such clashing and
disputing in former ages, our way had not been so clear to us, in many
glorious truths; So here God suffers it, that posterities may inherit the
benefit, that after ages might be able to see more clearly what to do, and
what is truth.

It is a great favor for a man that must go a way dark and knotty, to have
one go before him not only with a light to discover the way, but with a weapon
too, to cut down those cumbrances which are in the way, that there may be
nothing to hinder the passage; oh how sweetly, how evenly and quietly a man may
go! Such gracious ends has God to after generations, by suffering these
multitude of opinions and errors to arise in our age and generation. Seldom
was any truth discovered and cleared, but some error or other was the occasion
to draw it out; The point of Free grace, in opposition to man's free will in the
work of conversion, had not been so fully discovered, if that Pelagius had not
broached that error, that man might be saved if he would, that he himself
might believe, repent if he would; which occasioned Augustines so full debates
and clear settling of the truth.

The freeness of Gods grace in the work of justification, that it is of mere
grace, had not been so fully cleared to us, if it had not been for the error
of the Papists, that it was of works and not of grace.

So the doctrine of predestination, that it is of grace and not of faith and
works foreseen; the contrary error brought out this truth and helped the full
birth of it.

So the doctrine of the Sacraments, the stability of Gods Covenant with his
people, perseverance of the elect: All these and many thousand more, whose
birth has been helped by the publishing of errors, the publishing of errors
have been a means to the clearing of the most precious truths we have, which
had not been so clear to us now, if that there had not been a cloud of errors
over them before. Nay I say since the defection of the Church, and the
universal corruption by Antichrist and popery, there has scarce any glorious
truth been cleared, or discovered but by opposite error. Error has been a
means to help on to sift, and to find out truth. As we bring fire out of flint
by striking it, so out of these clashings truth. Nay you see in Scripture that
the publishing of error was a good means or help, or gave occasion to the
publication of many glorious truths of God. Acts 15. you see there the error
which was then broached to the disturbance of the Churches of Antioch, was the
occasion of the settling and clearer revealing of the opposite truth.

The Jews error of being justified by the Law, and looking for righteousness
thereby, was an occasion of the publication of the use of the Law, the
impotencie of it to justify and save, together with those glorious discoveries
where and in whom man's righteousness did lie.

Again, The error that men needed not to look to their walking and
obedience, seeing we are justified by faith only, gave occasion to the
discovery of many precious truths touching works and obedience to be annexed to
faith, not to justify our persons, but to justify our faith; the obedience of
faith justifies our persons; the obedience from faith justifies our faith,
which you see it is the great scope of St James to clear in the second chapter
throughout.

The doctrine of Christian liberty by Christ, gave occasion to some to publish,
that they were set at freedom from obedience to Magistrates in the Lord and
for the Lord; and others used it as an occasion of scandal to them that were
weak, and thought that they had liberty to eat of meat offered to Idols,
though the weak were thereby scandalled and offended, yet why should not they
use their liberty. I say these two errors which were strong in those times,
and seemed to be founded on the doctrine of Christian liberty which they were
to maintain gave occasion to the publication of many precious truths,
concerning the due bounds, limits, restraints and extents of Christian liberty,
by two great Apostles Paul and Peter: Paul dealing with Christian liberty in
points of scandal, 1 Cor. 8.9, 10, 11. Take heed least by any means this
liberty of yours become a stumbling block to them that are weak: And Peter
dealing with it in point of disobedience, as you may read it at large, 1 Pet.
2.13, 14, 15, 16. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man as free, yet not
using your liberty as a cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants of God.
So that I say, God has merciful ends toward them who are brought in, to
suffer errors to abound, to clear the way to those who shall be called; and
he has ends in respect of truth it self, not only to give occasion for the
publication, but the sifting and finding out of truth; as you see I have
showed. And thus much of Gods merciful ends to them called, and to them in
purpose to call; we come now to Gods judicial ends, which is the second
particular.

2. As God has merciful ends to the godly, so he has judicial ends to the
wicked, in permitting errors abroad; and that 1. To the seducers. 2. To the
seduced.


1. To the promoters. 2. To the receivers of opinions. We will join these two
together for brevities sake. God may then suffer men to be led aside with
errors and delusions.

1. For the punishment of some former way of sin. As a corrupt head will breed
a corrupt life, so a corrupt life, will breed a corrupt judgment. Sin in
conversation, is often punished with corruption in judgment, with darkness in
the understanding.

God often suffers a corrupt judgment, to be the punishment of a corrupt life.
You walk it may be in some way of sin, and as yet though your affections and
conversations are corrupted, yet your understandings they are not corrupted,
you still retain the truth; But sure it cannot be long before the
understanding be tainted, before that light which glowes therein is obscured
and put out. It is a hard thing to keep a spark of fire alive, in the midst
of a sea of water, to keep a beam of light in the understanding, under such
darkness in the heart and affection, and such works of darkness in your
conversation.

This is sure, either the truth will make you leave sin, or your sin will make
you leave the truth. Either that light in you will overcome your darkness, or
your darkness will overcome your light. Men that hold up affection to sin,
though not practice in sin, they will betray the light they have, they will
smother it, put it out at last. When men are willing to sleep, they will put
out the candle, nay and draw the curtains that no light may come in to trouble
them: So men that are willing to sleep in sin, they will not only draw the
curtains, that is labor to keep out the receiving of more light; but they
put out the candle, obscure that light they have, that they may more quietly
sleep in sin, sin without disturbance. Sometimes indeed error is the
cause of sin, sometimes sin is the cause of error; we will exemplify
this. It may be that a man has walked in some way of sin, and will not be
reclaimed of it, he has some light within, which gives in testimony to his
conscience of the evil of his way, this disturbs him now in a way of sin,
but this will not reclaim him of his sin, he will sin still, but the light
within him disturbs him, he cannot sin with that quiet and peace as others
do; and therefore now his corrupt heart begins to undermine the light he has,
the strength of sin in the affection, begins to darken, and blow up or blow out
the power of light in the understanding, that he may the better sin with
peace. And therefore first he begins to find out some shifts for his sins, he
will have some excuses, and this is a sowing of figge-leaves to cover his
nakedness: If excuses and pretexts will not do, then he begins to dispute
against the light, why may I not do this? is this so much to do? If this will
not do, then he falls to deny the light, and say it is a needless scruple,
tush its nothing. And at last he comes to take in such an opinion as he may be
quiet in his sin, as he may sin without trouble. And as many errors are
bred and begotten out of this, they are but opinions that a sinful but
troubled heart, have taken up that he may be quiet in his sin. So many
errors are received too, because they do correspond and comply with their
sinful and corrupt hearts.

Christians, it may be there be some of you that have many truths in you, you
understand more then others do, and it may be yea you walk in some way of
sin; that light you have stares in your face, gives evidence, bears witness
against you; yet for all this you will not hear the counsels of truth, you
will not take notice of it: yea but do you take heed least God in punishment
of your sin, do give you up to a way of error.

There are five sins which God does often punish with error, some are
intellectual, some are sensual.

1. A wilful shutting out the light when God is coming in with light from
Heaven, when he is revealing himself and mind to us, and yet we will shut our
eyes, we will not see, we will not open our eyes nor own the truth, out of
corrupt grounds, fear, love of the world, etc. I say this man is in danger to
be given up to a way of error, if you will be blind you shall be blind, if you
will not see you shall not see, as Christ told the Pharisees, he preached to
them in Parables, that Quia cum loquebatur perspicue noluerunt intelligere, in
poe^a^ jam loquitur obscure. Muscul.
seeing they might not see, Math. 13.13. This is that Christ said to the Jews,
Oh Jerusalem Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered you together, etc. but
now these things are hid from thine eyes. Oh had thou known the time of thy
visitation. And therefore take heed of this, if God is coming in with any
truth, take heed of wilful shutting of your eyes, either out of pride, corrupt
affection, love of sin, love of the world, fear of men, this is the way to
be given up to error.

2. When a man does entertain the truth of God partially; I say partially; 1.
In respect of the object, not all truth; It may be they will embrace such as
may make for them, but not such as may make against them, such as whereby they
may keep their lusts, their sins too; but not such as may disturb them, or
are inconsistent with their sins. 2. Or partially in respect of the subject
our selves, when we entertain it into our heads not our hearts, the notion of
it but not the love of it, when we do not close with it in our hearts and
affections. This you see in the 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. where there is the same
sin and the same punishment, because they received not the truth with love of
the truth, for this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they
should believe a lie. What is that receiving of the truth with love of it, but
receiving it wholly in respect of the subject, into the understanding, will,
affection, and the receiving of all truth in respect of the object. Men that
love truth as truth, do love all truth, every truth is welcome. A man that
loves truth for other ends, he will only entertain so much of truth, as may
stand with those ends, he will not dash his own design in pieces: When a man
does entertain truth for ends, will he entertain such truths as are
destructive to those ends? A man that loves the Law, or a man that loves
Divinity, he will for it self entertain it in the largeness of it; but now
he that only loves these things for ends, will take in so much as may be
serviceable to him in his practice, as a Lawyer, but he cares for no more, for
he aims at profit, not excellency in knowledge. Now this is another sin that
God does punish with error, partial receiving of truth.

3. Entertaining of truth deceitfully; you shall see many who will give
entertainment to truth, but upon what grounds? It is with corrupt principles,
upon corrupt grounds, and for corrupt ends, and such men entertain truth
deceitfully, and shall not hold it long.

4. Unanswerable walking to those truths which God has revealed. You give your
servants a candle to do their work by, if they will play, you put out the
candle, let them play in the dark, you will not be at cost to find them candle
to play by. God gave the light for this end, that you might know how to walk,
and if you will not walk by your light, God will put it out; if you will do
works of darkness, you must be in darkness.

It is one reason that God does withdraw the light he has given, nay and
suffer men to be given up to ways of error, because they walk not answerable
to the truth received: You see this, Romans 1.21, 24, 25.

5. When a man grows weary of that light he has, when God has made known
something to a man, and because it will not suffer him to sin quietly, he
grows weary of it, or it will not stand with his ends and designs: You see
this, Romans 1.28. Because they did not like to retain God in their knowledge,
therefore God gave them over to a reprobate mind, etc. So when you are weary of
your light, weary of Religion, profession, it is too exact, precise, too
troublesome, too laborious, too costly, because you like not to retain God,
and the ways of God, therefore God gives you up to ways of error. These
sins does God often punish with error, and I say more, unreclaimednesse
under any sin what ever, will bring in error.



one evil the cure of another to the godly, so he suffers one sin to be the
punishment of another to wicked men. As you see plain, Romans 1.24, 27. 2 Thessalonians.
2.10, 11. So in Psalm. 81.12, 13. My people would not obey, here was their
sin: Therefore I gave them up to their own hearts lusts: there was their
punishment, yea and sin too. And woe be to that man, to whom God makes one
sin the punishment of another. It is not so much to make sicknesses, losses,
death, prison, etc. punishment of sin, as to make one sin the punishment of
another. It is better to have any judgment the punishment of sin, then to
have one sin the punishment of another, then to have sin punished by it
self. And is it not so with you? your ignorance is a sin, and is it not the
punishment of neglect of means, contempt of means, the sleighting of it? This
is a still punishment, but God keep us from it: better any evil, then sin
to be our punishment.

2. A second judicial end which God has to wicked men, and it is a sad one
too, viz. for the further hardening of their hearts.

There are many long disputes of Divines against the Papists concerning
hardening of the heart; whether or no God do harden? the Papists charge us in
this point, that we make God the author of sin, in saying that God does
harden any, though there be many Scriptures that speak plain. God is said to
blind, to harden etc. as you see, Exodus 9.12. Exodus 4.21. Ezech. 14.9. Romans
9.19. He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he heardeneth.

And God may be said to harden the heart diverse ways:

1. Abstrahendo, by abstracting of his grace; take away the light and darkness
must needs follow,; take away the Sun, and night must needs ensue: So take
away softning grace, and man must needs be hardened: Joh. 12.39 40. Non malum
chirudendo sed gratiam non concedendo, Aug.
Therefore they could not believe, because Isaiah said, he has blinded their
eyes, and hardened their hearts, that they should not see with their eyes, nor
understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them.

2. Proponendo, which is objective, by propounding objects, by which a man's
heart shall be hardened, which may be the Word and Sacraments, as you have it,
Isa. 6.9, 10. And oh what a woeful condition, when that which should soften,
does harden: Jer. 6.21. Behold I will lay stumbling blocks before this people,
and they shall fall upon them; Christ himself is an object to harden; he is
set up for the rise and fall of many etc. and the word is said to be a savor
of life, and a savor of death.

3. Tradendo, by delivering a man up to the Devil to be blinded and hardened:
2 Cor. 4.4. Whom the God of this world has blinded.

4. Permittendo, by suffering a man to harden his own heart.

5. Efficiendo, actually hardening or enduring. I do not say I agree to all
these; these are the several ways which are laid down by Divines against the
Papists, to clear our selves of that charge of sin, in saying God hardens.

But in this discourse of Gods hardening the heart. It will not fall here in
controversy, whether God does effectively and actually harden, that which I
say here is permissive, and in this all agree. I say God permits a man to fall
into error, for the further hardening of his heart. Error hardens, Isa. 63.17.
Why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our hearts from thy
fear; first err, and then harden.

And God permits errors for this end, namely for the further hardening of the
hearts of the wicked.

objection against this; If it be so? It will be said, then God punishes one
sin with another, he punishes sin with error, that is, one sin with
another, and he punishes error with hardness of heart, there is the same?

opposed by Papists and Arminians, and upon this ground, because say they,
hereby we make God the author of sin, etc. yet as God sometimes makes one
sin the cure of another in a godly man, so he makes one sin the punishment
of another in a wicked man: You see it plain in Psalm. 81.12, 13. My people
would not obey, there was one sin; and therefore I gave them up to their own
hearts lusts, there is another, and the punishment of the former.

And this shall suffice to have spoken of the first great head, how it may
stand with Gods ends, to suffer men to be les^ aside with a way of error; 2.
How error may stand with Satan's ends.
we now come to the second.

2. As it may stand with Gods ends, so it may stand with Satan's ends too.

1. His ends to the good. 2. His ends to the bad.

1. It may stand with Satan's ends to the good: Satan has these four ends in
the setting on foot errors.

1. To seduce the godly, to draw them into error. He attempted this upon
Christ, as you see in his temptation, Matthew. 4. and much more will he attempt
it on us, having far more hope to prevail. Christ was all pure, all clear,
all light, and no darkness, and therefore could be no more prevailed upon then
to make Heaven, hell; but he knows we are poor compound creatures, have light
and darkness in us, error and truth, a dark side and light; as there is
something within us which is an enemy to him, so there is something within us
which is his friend too, something that holds correspondency with him, and that
is ready to give entertainment and set open the gates to let him in, when he
comes with a temptation. And if he would attempt it on Christ, nay if he were
too hard for Adam in his innocence, who had reason at will, and wit at command,
and grace too, righteousness at least, and no error in him, nothing of his
side, but only this, that he was mutably good, that it was possible for him to
be seduced and drawn away, how much more will he attempt it on us. Its true
God has said, that the elect shall not be deceived, they shall deceive if it
were possible the elect, says Christ; by which is evident the elect shall not
be deceived; And he knows that if they be elect he shall not prevail, because
God has said it: But he knows not whether they be such or no, though he have
some guesses at it, yet he has not the infallible knowledge of it; neither
has he entered into Gods eternal decrees, nor can he know the heart, for that
is proper to God alone; but though he should know it, yet he would be
tampering, he would endeavor to seduce the elect. He knew Christ was the Son
of God, and had heard God so declare from Heaven, and yet he durst venture to
attempt to seduce Christ, or rather, to use the words of Scripture, tempt
Christ; therefore much more will he endeavor the same with you, though he
should not be able to seduce you, nay and though he knew that too, yet he has
other ends as I shall show anon, which may put him on to attempt it.

But besides, though he should not seduce them to damnable, yet he may seduce
them to dangerous errors; the Saints may be led aside with sinful, though not
with damnable errors, and if he can but prevail in that, to draw them aside
with sinful errors, he counts it worth the while. The Devil will take a
great deal of pains to bring a Saint to one sinful error.

Its true it may be and I easily grant, that a godly man's ends are honest in
the entertainment of it, otherwise he could not be godly, and I do not
queston but he entertaines it for truth, but though he do, yet Satan cares not
much for that if he can bring him to entertain an error, he matters not much
under what notion they receive it and entertain it, so the thing be
entertained. He is glad if he can make him to receive an error for a truth, if
he can foyst in eggs of his own laying, if he can shuffle in error for truth,
and can have himself who is the Prince of darkness, to be entertained under
the notion of an Angel of light, he is proud of that, this is unknowingly,
unwittingly to set the Devil in Gods steed. As one says, he that does a good
action to a bad end, makes God serve the Devil; but he that does a bad action
to a good end, makes the Devil serve God. So we may say here, he that
entertaines a truth for an error, sets God in the Devils place, and he that
entertaines error for truth, sets the Devil in Gods steed. And the Devil
must needs look upon this as a grateful service; and that is the first: It
stands with his ends, 1. To seduce.

2. A second end he aims at in the godly, it is to unsettle them, if he cannot
seduce them and draw them away, yet he labors if he can to unsettle them in
the truth, if he can bring us to an unsetlednesse, whether we are in the truth
or no, if he can unsettle us in those things we are established in, he has his
desire and what he aims at.

And multitudes of errors and opinions abroad, they have too great an
influence into the unsetling of the hearts of the godly in the truths that they
have received and been established in. If it be given out that there is
abundance of false gold abroad, it will put men to the trial of what they
have received, as well as to the care of what they are to receive. So when
there are many errors, and false opinions abroad, it puts not men only to the
care of what they are to receive, but to the trial of what they have received,
and by this to labor to unsettle us.

There is indeed a trial that is good, and a trial that is bad, to try those
things that man has said is good, we are not to believe every spir^^, but to
try all things, but to try those things which God has said is bad, those
things which God has said we are commanded to trust, to believe, and then try,
but those things which men have said we are commanded to try them before we
trust them, as you see, 1 John 3, 1. Believe not every spirit. In the other
believe, here believe not, what then? why you must prove all things, try them
by the word as the Bereans did.

But did not the Bereans try what the Apostles said,

1. They tried what they said by what they had said, search the Scriptures, for
they testify of me: So they tried what the Apostles said, by what was written,
and such a trial there may be.

2. Again, there is a twofold trial: 1. A suspicious trial, a trial
arising from jealousy and mistrust, that the things we have received are
unsound, and that is bad, if it be truth which has been received. 2. There is
a confidentiall trial, whereby a man is assured of the truth of those things
he has received, and rather goes for confirmation in it, then out of
dubitation or doubt and questioning the things are not true.

The first trial is bad, and that which the Devil aims at in the multitude
of opinions and errors, to bring us to a questioning and jealousy, and
mistrust of those things we have received; he would now labor to make us look
upon all Religion as a fancy, as a mere notion, and all the truths we have
received as chimaeras, mere notions without foundation, he would bring us to
entertain all doubtfully, that so we might work deadly.

3. A third end he has if he cannot seduce us, nor unsettle us, A third end
Satan has.
then he labors to shake us, though he cannot unsettle us in the belief of
truth, yet he labors to shake us in it; you know it is the fruit of the many
lying pamphlets abroad, it makes men doubt of the very truth it self, it
shakes men in the very confidence and belief of those things which are true.
So the Devil he does vent his errors and his untruths now, that he might
shake us in the belief of those things are true.



attained to the same measure of knowledge; some are but weak and babes in
knowledge, though some that are men grown. Now the variety of opinions, and
errors, and disputes, they are a perplexing, a shaking of weak minds, though
at last they shall but root firmer; for this puts them on search, trial,
prayer, and so they shall be firmer, yet this may shake them for the present.
Hence the Apostle, Romans 14.1. Him that is weak in faith receive ye, but not
unto doubtful disputations. Why so? because this was enough to shake, and
unsettle, and trouble a man weak in faith. And surely that is another end, why
Satan raises up doubtful disputations, and sets afoote errors, viz. to shake
the weak.

A fourth end which Satan has.
4. A fourth end Satan has to the godly, and that is to perplex them, if he
cannot seduce them, nor unsettle them, nor shake them, yet if he can but
perplex them and trouble them he is content. This is that which God said of him,
and it is the utmost of his chain. Thou shall break his head, and he shall
bruise thy heel, though he cannot break our head, separate us from Christ,
yet he will bruise our heel, though he cannot bring us out of the way of life,
seduce us from the ways of truth, yet he will do all he can to perplex and
trouble us in them.

If he cannot seduce us out of the way, yet if he can hedge up our way with
thorns, if he can cast blocks in our way, if he can disturb us in our course,
which he labors to do this way, he is well content, and can afford his
labor. And this has been his great design in all ages of the Church of God,
to raise up some impostors, some notable seducers, to perplex and to trouble
the Church of God. I might carry you down from the Apostles days till now, you
may have enough out of Ecclesiastical histories, how Satan has still raised
up some notable juglers, who have troubled the Church of God: In the Apostles
times, you read of many, and afterward not of a few; witness the Arrians,
Manichees, Nestorians, Pelagians, and hundreds more in our days, the Papists,
Arminians, Socinians, with multitudes more both of the right and the left hand;
by all which he labors to perplex the Church of God, and trouble the hearts of
the people of God; he has no comfort himself, and he envies comfort where
ever he sees it; he has no peace himself, he has all trouble, and he is an
enemy to peace in us, his endeavor is to bruise our heel, though in Christ we
break his head.

5. A fifth end that Satan has to the godly, and that is, A fifth end Satan
has.
to prejudice the entertainment of further truth. Satan knows full well, that
toward the end of the world, there will be abundance of truth revealed and
made known, the knowledge of the Lord shall be as the waters that cover the sea.

God has spoken glorious things of the latter days, every child shall be as
David, Zach. 12.8.

The Sun of righteousness, the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, it
arose in its glory and brightness, in the first days of the Apostles, but it
was not long before this sun was obnubulated, clouded and darkened, with the
mists of error, and foggs of darkness, which Antichrist and corrupt men
raised up, which was foreseen by the Apostle, and in his time it began to
work, although the cloud like Elijahs cloud, was no bigger then a man's hand,
yet the Apostle did then foresee it would span the Heavens, and even darken the
Sun, and shadow the glorious light it self, as he that has but looked into
the histories of former times may evidently perceive.

Now toward the end of all things, God will scatter these clouds, he will
clear the truth, and the knowledge of the Lord shall be increased, Dan. 12.4.
And at this time Satan will vent his errors, he will set on foot many
dangerous errors, to prejudice the hearts of the people of God, in the
receiving and entertaining of truths to be revealed. Indeed Satan has many
other ends, as I have showed you; and besides them diverse other might be named;
Satan is busy when God is sowing wheat, to sow his tares, when God is
discovering of truth, to be communicating of errors; he hopes in the heat of
the market, to vent his own wares, he hopes in the throng, to put off one with
another, and that men will not so carefully observe it; at least if men be shie
to entertain the one, he hopes by this to lessen the authority, and to
prejudice the entertainment of the other.

And indeed the multitude of errors abroad, they are great disadvantages to
the entertainment of the truth, they are a great prejudice to the receiving of
it: Men that hear of false reports abroad, though they have not been abused
with them, will be shie to entertain truth, so men that hear of a multitude
of erroneous opinions abroad in the world, though they have not been seduced or
led aside with them, yet will be shie and afraid to own the truths, which God
in that generation does hold forth to them.

And by this means Satan has a great advantage, he persuades and prevails
with men to adhere to their former principles, without any inquiry after more:
And this is dangerous.

As it is dangerous to stint and bound our selves in practice, thus much we
will do and no more, as it is the spirit of many men: So it is dangerous to
stint and bound our selves in principles, or things to be known, thus much I
know, and I will search into the revelation of no more.

2 Pet. 1.9. 1 Pet. 3.18. Heb. 6.1.
As we are not perfect in grace, and therefore we are to add to faith virtue, to
our virtue patience, etc. to grow in grace, to be led forward to perfection,
and he that sits down with any measure is yet to begin. So we are not perfect
in knowledge; the Apostle tells you, we know but in part, and therefore we are
still to study and search, not only after clearer revelation of things known,
but fuller revelation of Gods mind to us; and he that contents himself with
the measure of revelation he has, is yet to begin in the knowledge of Christ.

And therefore this is a dangerous error, when Satan shall persuade and
prevail with us to adhere in those things we do know, and slight any further
revelation, to be content with those measures of revelations we have, and to
seek to know no more of Gods mind and will to us.

And this is another wile which Satan has in the multitude of errors, that
thereby he might prejudice the further search and inquiry into the mind of God,
disadvantage the entertainment of truth, and persuade with us to stick and
adhere only in those which are already revealed to us.

It is good to adhere to those that are revealed, but bad to adhere in them,
and seek no further revelation, because we are not perfect in knowledge,
therefore must grow. As we say of grace, so of truth; It is good to have a
heart stablished in grace, but stinted in grace is naught, stablishing does
keep the heart from going backward, and that is good, but stinting does keep
a man from going forward, and that is naught: You are to aspire to grow in
knowledge, as well as in grace.

But you will say, what needs any more? Fathers held out these truths, and
sought no further, and we hope they are saved, and so shall we too, if we do
but adhere in the truths of our forefathers, and seek no further?

1. The reasoning is corrupt, I say this is corrupt reasoning; truth, it is not
enough to evidence they are truth; that they went in this way, is not
sufficient to declare it was a good way, and a way for us to walk in, this is
to take up our Religion by tradition, not from Scripture; the Papists have the
same Arguments, our Fathers were of this Religion and therefore it is good,
which you will all say is corrupt reasoning. You have a place in Jer. 9.14.
they walked after Balaam which their fathers taught them.

2. But secondly admit our fathers held forth these things for truths, yet they
held not forth all truth, they knew some, but yet they knew not all truths: It
is said, we know but in part. And God is therefore said to appoint a Ministry
in the Church, for the further building us up in knowledge, Ephesians 4.12, 13. for
the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith,
and of the knowledge of the sons of God, to a perfect man.

3. Again, though our fathers held out these truths, yet we wrong our fathers
to say, that they sought no further, though they knew these and these truths,
yet they labored not only after a clearer revelation of truths known, but
after further revelation of truths not yet known and discovered to them, and
this appears both in their writings, and also upon experience; every
generation grows up in further knowledge of the mysteries of Christ and the
Gospel, as might be instanced in many points which have been debated between us
and Papists, and us and Arminians, Pelagians; all which truths have been the
proper revelations to those particular generations. And therefore you wrong
them to say, they knew these and sought no further.

And the experience of much more revealed in every generation, is sufficient
confutation of that. Did our fathers in King Henry the eights days, who first
rejected the papal tyranny, or our fathers in King Edward the sixths days,
who set up that infant reformation, that wanting nursing fathers and mothers,
has been kept back and held down so long, where otherwise it might have come
to manhood and perfection: the thriving of the child lies much in the goodness
of the nurse; Kings and Queens are called nursing fathers and nursing mothers
to Religion; this child, this infant Reformation has not had that nursing
whereby it should thrive, the breast of nourishment has been kept from it, and
drawn out toward children of error, they have thriven, the true child has
pined away.

Kings and Queens are called shadows, as Josiah, Lam. 4.20, 32. Isa. 2. And
we speak it with grief as things have been carried, they have endeavored to
make them like trees, which the papal faction have clasped about and adhered
to, as the Ivy to the tree, not because they love it, but because they have
sucked sweet from it; but they have been such shades as have hindered the
growth of better things.

But to pass this; If you come down to Queen Elizabeth's days, did our
fathers in her time know so much? had they that full revelation of that which
is in our days? he that reads, may easily see. And therefore this is a plain
confutation, though our fathers did hold out some truths, yet they sought after
more, they did not rest in that they had, but studied to know more of Gods mind.

4. Though this were true, that our fathers held out some truths, and that they
did not seek and enquire after more, which yet I cannot grant, and hold their
condition good, yet they did not reject further discoveries, if revealed to
them; this is certain, where any truth is received with love, there is a
readiness of spirit to embrace all truths that shall be discovered and
revealed. For this is an undeceiveable evidence of a man that has received the
truth, as he is willing to receive all truths, he opens his eyes broad for any
communication of God; so again he will not reject any truth which is revealed
to him.

Indeed he may reject a truth held forth to him, because as yet he does not
apprehend it to be a truth, but he cannot reject a truth discovered to him; no
bye ends, wordly respects shall prevail with him to reject it, if God have
discovered it.

5. But fifthly, thou say again, our fathers held out these, and sought no
further, which I have disproved. And yet thou say they were saved, and so
shall thou if thou adhere in those which they have left thee; well for this I
say thus much.

Admit that they were saved, I will grant that, yet it will not be enough to
clear this to thee, that thou shall be saved if thou go on no further; they
held out these truths, but were willing to receive more, sure they rejected
none that God revealed.

Thou holdst out these truths, and say thou adherest to them, but do not
adhere to them, thou holdst them forth in thy understanding, but they are not
wrought into thy heart, nor held forth in thy life, never a truth which thou
say thou adherest unto, which thou live answer^ble to in thy conversation.

Again thou adherest rather in them, then to them, thou seek to know no
more, but they did; nay thou rejectest those di^coveries of God which are made
to thee, which they did not. They might be saved by that little light, if true
light, when they were true to it, when they walked answerable to it, when they
were willing to receive more, when they rejected not that which was discovered.
But you cannot when you walk not answerable to what you have received, when
you are not willing to receive more, when you reject what is discovered to you,
etc.

Men may be saved with many errors, if not fuundamentall errors, and by a
little light if true light, when no more is revealed. But if those errors be
discovered to be errors, though not fundamental errors, and more truths be
revealed to be truths, though not foundation truths, if you do reject the one,
and embrace the other, you cannot then look for salvation. Grace embraces all
truths, rejects all error. God would have all saved by coming to the
knowledge of the truth.

The Patriarchs lived in the sin of poligamy, marrying many wives, and esteemed
it no sin to take to themselves as many wives as they pleased, so that they
were not the wives of another. And notwithstanding this great error, the
Patriarchs were saved, they knew no better, and times of ignorance may plead
some indulgence.

But now we cannot look for life and yet practice such a sin, because God has
revealed the truth in this which was more concealed before, as Christ said,
from the beginning it was not so. And if any had cause of two wives, then the
first man, to populate the world, but God made them male and female. And this
shall suffice for answer to that objection.

truth saving, and the same error damning in any age, and therefore that which
saved them will save me?

saving now, is saving hereafter, but the reason why that truth which saves
others, will not us; it does not arise from any defect in the object truth, but
in the subject man, if the subject receive some truths, but not all, if willing
to entertain some, but to reject others, and so to reject some errors, but
yet to retain others though convinced of them, then there is no salvation.

2. The same truth which saved them will save us, if received, but if received
of them and not of us, it cannot save; now there is no greater evidence that
truth is not received, then that you are not willing to entertain more. Truth
where it comes, where it is received into the heart, it holds open the door to
let all its kindred in, bids all truth welcome; and therefore if thou say, thou
receivest some truth as truth, and thy heart is shut up against other truths
revealed, thou deceivest thy own soul; there is no surer character of received
truth, then willingness and universal willingness to embrace all: Indeed men
that receive truth into the head only, do not embrace all truth, they pick and
choose, but if it be received into the heart, then the doors are open to all
truth, and every truth comes with authority, and carnal respects, shall not
hinder the embracing of them. And thus we have done with the first, how it may
stand with Satan's ends to the good; we come to the second, how it may stand
with Satan's ends to the bad.

2. It may stand with Satan's ends to the bad, and that both to the 1.
Receivers, and 2. Promoters.


1. It may stand with Satan's ends to the receivers, or to the bad in general;
which we will show you in five particulars.

1. To lessen the credit, or if you will belief of those things which they do
know. Men who are yet of unregenerate life, may know many truths of God, and
though they have not much faith of them, yet some credit they give to them,
which begets awful thoughts of the truth of God, and this general belief of
these things, does restrain many from many sins, and puts them upon many
general duties.

Now Satan cannot endure this light in them, he knows not what in time it may
come too, and therefore he sets many errors on foot, that if possible he
might lessen the belief of those things which are real truths, and render all
you know which keeps you in some awe, by virtue of that power the general
belief of them has upon your spirit: I say to render them all, but notiones
secundae, chymeraes, mere fancies, or policies, the better to keep men in
awe, and under rule, and some government.

And in the time of aboundiug errors, he will thus deal with a man; you
thought that this and that was a truth, but you see now it comes to be debated,
it proves but a shadow, and so are other things you believe, if once they were
sifted and debated: if understanding men would but deal faithfully, and would
apply themselves to dispute other things you give credit to, they would be
discovered to be of the same stamp, and as little bottom in them as in these
which you have built so much upon.

And here a poor man he is gone; either this does fill his spirit with horror
to hear it, and so does awaken him, and puts him upon reading, praying,
studying, searching, or else he is carried away with the stream of the
temptation, and if not openly, yet he ^acitely subscribes to the thing, though
he speaks not out, witness the casting off that fear, that awe, that care he
had before.

And thus Satan comes to Atheist men, if he do not awaken and unatheist you by
this, he will certainly Atheist you more.

2. To discourage and take off the heart of men from doing any thing.

As it does weaken the belief of truths, so it wounds the practice of them
much more; if men fail in principles, they will not long hold out in practice;
if in rebus credendis, things to be believed; surely in agendis, of things to
be done. Men you know will not labor and take pains for that which they have
no belief of, you shall hear men discouraged and taken off from plain common
duties, praying, hearing, reading, why will a man say, I see all I do to no
purpose; I have done this and that, I have prayed, gone to Church, walked in
such and such ways, and now all this is cried down, there are opinions abroad
which throw down all these as nothing, and therefore as good to sit still and
do nothing, as to do all this and to no purpose.

3. It may stand with Satan's ends, that there should be multitude of erroneous
opinions, I say not only some errors, but many should abound, that he may the
better suite himself to the tempers of men; every fish is not to be caught
with the same bait, some with one, and some with another, and therefore the
cunning Fisherman does suite his baits, to the fishes he angles for: So every
man is not carried away with the same error, some are led aside with one, and
some with another, there is a dissonancy between a man and some errors,
scelera dissident, and therefore Satan he has multitudes and variety of
errors abroad to suit with every man's temper of lust.

As it is with errors of conversation, every one is not carried away with the
same lusts, that may be lovely to one, which is no way pleasing to another; the
covetous man he will not be prodigal, and a spend thrift, etc. and therefore
Satan suites temptations to the temper of spirit in men.

So it is with errors of judgment, every one is not seduced and led aside
with the same error, etc. and therefore it suits with Satan's ends, not only to
have errors, but many errors on foot, that he may have a bait for every man's
temper, provision for every man's lust: As the lusts of life are diversified,
you see the Apostle tells us, that wicked men served diverse lusts, Tit. 3.3.
for we our selves were disobedient, serving diverse lusts; they are diversified
according to the measure of understanding, according to notions received,
according to tempers of men, relations, interests, and diversity of ways men
are engaged in.

Every man is not carried away with the same bait, temptation, nor lust; some
are carried away with gross lusts, lusts of life and practice, men of gross
and beastly temper, sensual men; others again of finer tempers and spirits,
that must be undone a finer way, a more spiritfull way, the gross way is too
low for them, and here he has the lusts of the understanding, and yet every
one of these are not taking with all; some are taken with one error, some with
another, according to the difference of knowledge and understanding, and the
command of some lust in the heart: And therefore Satan has multitude of
errors on foot, that he may suite temptations to the tempers of men; Non
promotus sed expertum doctor, Luth. (...). 2 Cor. 2.14. Rev. ^.24. 2 Cor. 3.2,
14.
And hence he is called a Serpent, a wily creature, yea and the old Serpent,
and his temptations, the depths, wiles, methods of Satan. You had need to take
heed of him, if he see a man conscientious, he will not go about with gross
temptations to corrupt him, for there he thinks it will be labor in vain, but
he endeavors to corrupt the understanding with errors, and such as are
agreeable and correspondent to the conscientiousnesse of his spirit, as I might
show at large.

4. A fourth end that Satan has to the wicked in multitude of errors, it is
to corrupt them, and defile them more; error is of a corrupting and defiling
nature; Satan labors all he can to corrupt the souls of men, and his chief
design is, to corrupt the fountain, the understanding. He does not so much
care for to corrupt a man in his practice, as to corrupt a man in his
principle, to corrupt a man in his life, as to corrupt a man in his judgment,
he knows an erroneous head, will quickly come to a sinful life. Men's lives
are but squared according to notions received, and impressions of things
retained in the understanding. As true notions do help to frame a good life,
so false notions are serviceable to a bad, the one is the seed of a holy, the
other of a sinful life; so that though you could not know truth and falsehood
in the seed, in notion, yet you might know it in the fruit, in the
conversation; Men act surely according to their principles received, if there
be not a bridle and restraint upon them by something without: And therefore if
Satan can but corrupt a man's understanding, he knows such a man he will be
sure for him, he will sin without reluctance, without check or disturbance. If
a man have some true notions, or light in his understanding, though for the
present his life be bad, and he be carried away with strength of temptation,
yet Satan is not so sure of this man, as of the other, he knows so long as
this light is in him, he will not sin so fully, if he sin, yet not without
control and check; and he is in danger to loose him at every turn, Satan is
ill troubled with a man sound in judgment, though corrupt in life; either the
light in his understanding will overcome his darkness in life, or the
darkness in his life will overcome the light in his understanding, and the
combats such a soul finds, makes Satan he cannot yet conclude which shall
have the day.

But now if he can corrupt the understanding, if he can pollute the spirit, the
refined part of man, then he knows this man is sure, he can bring this man to
maintain his sin, yea and argue for it, and do all this, with show of
religion.

I told you, a corrupt heart will breed a corrupt judgment in time, but a
corrupt judgment will presently work a corrupt life.

A man that has his understanding yet preserved, he does not work regularly in
a way of sin, he is off, and on, as his lust does prevail, but now the other
he walks uniforme, he is always the same in sin.

Again, the one if his knowledge be not directive, it will be afflictive, if
it be not a bridle, it will be a whip, if not a curb, it will be a scourge. But
now the other, he sins with quiet, he has sinned away the light, and as he
has no light to direct him, so he has none to afflict him. Hence this is the
reason, you see two men, it may be they are both of them unregenerate men, yet
one of them if he chance to fall into some gross sin, for spiritual sins
trouble him not, if he be drunk or overtaken in such a way, he is so troubled
and disquieted, and conscience is up, and light within him stares in his face,
and he cannot get his former quiet or dead peace in a long time after.

But now another he is nothing troubled at all, he is drunk, and is at peace
and quiet, we hear of no roarings; and what is the reason? why because he has
sinned away the common light, he has sinned away conscience, he has no light
to direct nor any to afflict him, and if you will not own light to direct, in
time you shall have no light to afflict. Sin is an eating thing, it will eat
out all good dispositions, good affections, good inclinations, moral
principles, it will eat out the very stock of nature, a man may even sin
away his common principles. Sin will never leave, till it have eaten out all,
and made all sin, you see the very fences of nature were broken down, the
very principles of nature were sinned away in Romans 1.26.

5. A fifth end that Satan has in multitude of errors, is to bring men's minds
into a dislike of the things of God, to set their spirits at a farther distance
against Religion and the ways of God. You see now it is the fruit of the many
errors on foot, it sets men's hearts at further distance against the truths of
God.

Every truth of God is now entertained with such language as this, we have so
many opinions, so many new fangles now adays: And even these things become a
means, to fuel and strengthen the dislike against the ways of God.

Let me tell you this, and let it be a caution now in these days. Men whose
hearts are set against the ways of God, shall be furnished with matter enough
to bring them into further dislike daily: If you desire to be furnished with
arguments against Gods ways, you shall have enough of them to your cost, you
shall be furnished with enough, but to your further hardening. If you will
keep a rooted dislike against the ways of God, you shall find enough in the
world to nourish it; men that will be offended, shall have offenses enough, men
that are willing to stumble at the ways of religion, shall not want stumbling
stones if Satan can furnish them. Christ himself who was the corner stone,
elect and precious, yet to the disobedient he was a stone of stumbling and rock
of offense, 1 Pet. 2.8. Men willing to be hardened, shall have blinding and
hardening enough, if the word do not teach you, works shall blind you, if the
word do not soften you, works shall harden you; if you stumble at the word,
you shall fall at works; if you take offense at the duties the word commands,
you shall find enough in works and providence in the world to fuel,
strengthen, and increase that dislike in you. You see this in 1 Pet. 2.8.
Christ was a stone of stumbling: so Religion, the ways of God, they are a
stone of stumbling, but to whom? why to those that stumble at the word first.
So here, you dislike the duties and ways of Religion which the word commands,
and this dislike is but further strengthened by providence in the world, and
this is judicial.

I have done with the first, Satan's ends to the receivers: I come to the
second, to show you how it may stand with Satan's ends to the promotors.

2. It may stand with Satan's ends to the promotors, that there should be many
errors.

1. To make their condition more unrecoverable, these lay men in chains, this
is not naked, but fortified wickedness, on its hard to reclaim this man;
where others they lie naked to the powers of the word, they lie open to the
batteries of truth; this man is double walled, he is strongly fortified against
the truth.

Lusts of conversation are easily convinced, and easily reclaimed, but lusts of
the understanding, they are hard to be prevailed withal, they are hardest to
conquer. And therefore the Apostle calls strong holds strong reasonings, 2 Cor.
10.5, 6. strong reasonings are strong holds against the truth, and the work of
their own conversion.

Indeed every wicked man has a house against Christ, and the Devil keeps it,
as Christ says, the strong man keeps the house, nay and he makes every lust
to put on arms to keep Christ out; but now this man he has a castle against
Christ, a strong hold, he is fortified against him, Luke 11.21, 22.

The house is quickly buttered, though the strong man keep it, as Christ
says, when the stronger man comes, then he enters and spoils him of his
armor.

But castles, and forts, and strong holds, they are hardly conquered,
difficulty overcome. When a Town lies open and naked, it is easy to enter it,
but when it is fortified it is hard to conquer. Others they are but naked
sinners, lie open to every stroke of the word; but this man is one who is
fortified against all the assaults of it, he has strong holds, which are
raised up to oppose what ever shall assault him; he is Sermon proof, and
ordinance proof, nothing will now work upon him, he is double walled, he has
not only an inward wall, a wall of lust and corruption against the power of the
truth, but he has an outward wall too, which are his corrupt and erroneous
reasonings, too thick to batter, too high for truth to get over; he is a man
that stands in the forlorn hope, hardly brought off, hardly recovered. It is
far more easy to conquer and prevail with a drunkard, a swearer, an
unclean person, he has nothing to oppose; indeed every lust is an armed man,
but he has no forts, nay we have a fort within him, that sides with us in our
batteries; even his own conscience, and he is not able to stand out against his
own light, to hold out against himself: But now the other he is fortified
against the assaults, and locked up against the entertainment of any truth. This
is not naked but fortified wickedness, therefore so hard to be retained; and
therefore may it well stand with Satan's ends, he knows every error will be as
a bulwark raised up, a fort builded against the work of thine own conversion.

2. It may stand with Satan's ends to the promotors, to increase their sin, the
Devil is not only content to have men sinners, but he would have them rich in
sin, feign he would have some as bad as himself.

And if any thing will treasure up sin, if any thing will make men as bad as
the Devil, it is the sins of the understanding, those sins make men the
likest to the Devil in sin of any other, sins of the spirit more then
sins of the flesh, for he has no body; sins of the understanding they are
properly the sins of the spirit, which as it is best renewed, and therefore
the Apostle says, Be ye renewed in the spirit of your mind, Ephesians. 4.23. so it
is worst corrupted: The understanding it is the purest, spirituallest and
refinest part, and corruption optima pessima corruption, the corruption of the
best part is the worst and most dangerous of corruption, when that which should
keep other faculties from corruption, nay recover others out of corruption, is
it self corrupted, how great is that corruption. As Christ says of the eye of
the body, the light of the body is the eye, if the eye be dark, if that which
should give light, be it self darkness, how great is that darkness? So I may
say of the understanding, (...).
the glass, the eye of the soul; if that be darkened, if that be corrupted,
how great is that darkness, how great is that corruption?

Though the streams be corrupt, yet if the fountain be clear, there is more
hope; but when the fountain it self is poisoned, when the fountain is
corrupted, the corruption is dangerous. So though a man had many errors in his
life and conversation, yet if the understanding were kept pure and untainted,
if that were kept from corruption, there were yet some hope, but when the
fountain of action is corrupt, when the understanding is polluted, there is
great danger of recovery.

It would be a hard question to resolve, whether a sound judgment, though with
corrupt conversation (which seldom meet, yet if they do) whether it may not
hold weight with a corrupt judgment, though the conversation be not blameable.

Indeed a corrupt heart, and a corrupt life, is not so bad as a corrupt head
and heart too. Some say, the corruption of the understanding, is the worst
corruption, though minoris infamiae, yet majoris culpae, though of less
scandal, yet more fault. And the grounds might be, in regard that the
corruption of the understanding, does make men likest to the Devil, and may
seem to be most opposite to God, God is a Spirit, and the corruption of the
spirit, must needs be most opposite to God.

Indeed were the conversation sinful, and the spirit not corrupted, then were
not sin in conversation so opposite to God, as error in understanding, but
both are corrupted in wicked men, the practice and the principle, affection and
action, and therefore to say that the corruption of the understanding is most
opposite to God, I dare not, for as error in the understanding is opposite to
Gods truth, so sin in affection is opposite to Gods holiness.

And yet there is thus much seems to speak for it, that the corruption of the
understanding is most opposite to God, because, the understanding is not only
our spirit, but it is the spirit of our spirit, as the Apostle, Be ye renewed
in the spirit of your mind, Ephesians. 4.23.

But however though that should not hold, yet we may say, that sin in
conversation, is not so bad as sin in affection, nor sin in affection and
conversation, so bad as error in the understanding, at least to a man's self.

1. Because the one does not fight against the means of his conversion, as the
other does.

2. Nor is he so hard to be reclaimed, and recovered out of his condition as
the other is. I speak after the manner of men, for it is all one when Almighty
grace comes, that knows no difficulty, all is then alike to Almighty power.

3. Error in principle, will breed error in practice, and if it do, then will
a man run headlong and violently in ways of sin, if the understanding were not
corrupted, it would be as a bridle of restraint, that our passions and
affections could not drive so furiously in a way of sin, this would curb us,
and check us, but when that is corrupted, then the reins are laid upon the
neck of our furious passions and affections, and a man goes headlong in sin
Jehu's pace. When that which should be our bridle becomes our spur, when that
which should restrain us, becomes it self an instigation to sin: such a man
he sins twice at once, he never scores but twice at once. While the
understanding was preserved, it held the hand, it awed the spirit, restrained
practice, but now he sins fully; he sins fully that sins with
understanding, as well as with his affection; and that man sins with his
whole heart, his whole soul, that man sins twice at once, though he did
wickedly before, yet his understanding did not assent to it, did not allow it,
he did not say it was well done: but now the understanding allows it, and
assents to it, his life sins, his affections, his understanding and all
sins; heart and head are joined, all sins and nothing stands out, and this
man must need fill his measure quickly, this man will quickly have done, he
ripens with a witness, this does aedificare ad gehennam, build up to hell with
a strong hand: and so in the issue a corrupt life may hold weight with a
corrupt understanding.

Besides, a corrupt life is not so dangerous to others, men are not corrupted
by practice, so much as by error, error in conversation, does not prevail
with men so much as error in judgment, this seduceth and draws many away; It
is more destructive and dangerous, then sin in conversation, men may more
easily discern evil in practice and conversation and so avoid it, then they
can error in principle, and therefore this is most dangerous for the
corruption of others.

A third end Satan has to the Promoters.
3. It stands with Satan's ends, to increase their torment: As it suits with
his end to increase their sin, so it suits with his end to increase their
torment too. Satan is not content to bring wicked men to hell, but he would
have them as low in hell as he can, feign he would have some as miserable as
himself; as he labors to make them as sinful, so he desires to have them as
miserable as himself is.

And this bids fair for it; Divines say of Paul's glory, it receives
augmentation, and is increased every day, as his labors and pains are
fruitful; We may as well say the torment of wicked men is increased and
augmented, as their errors do take effect and prosper in the poisoning and
corrupting of souls, which should make men beware, as of what they vent in
life, so of what they leave after death.

The parable of Dives speaks something to this opinion, he desired that Moses
would send Lazarus to go and preach unto his brethren, that they might avoid
that place of torment, why we cannot think there is charity in hell? it was not
out of love to their souls, but love to himself, because he had corrupted
them with his life and practice before, and had left a bad example behind him
which they followed, and therefore he desired that they might, if not be saved
(for that I think a damned soul cannot desire) yet that they might not for his
cause and example be brought into that place of torment, because this would be
the increase of his torment too; as he was guilty by his example and practice
of the murdering and undoing of their souls. It should be a caveat to you how
you live and walk, least the example of the husband, the father, the master,
be the undoing of the wife, the child, the servant, and the increase of your
torment too: Your examples will prevail more to their undoing, then all our
rules for their saving.

It is a fearful thing by our examples to draw others to destruction; when
your children and servants shall see you walk in a way of sin, they themselves
are drawn aside and undone by your examples. There are many have so much in
them, that though they will swear, and drink themselves, yet they will not
allow it in their children, their servants, but if thou would not have them
walk in the same way of sin, leave not such a sinful example behind thee. But
this by the way. It suits with Satan's ends, that men should broach erroneous
opinions for the increase of their torments: Which it does not only directly
and in it self, but indirectly and by consequent, contracting the guilt of
soul murder from those who are undone with their precepts and poisonous
doctrines. And thus Satan deals with all his servants, they who do him most
service, shall have most torment, those who have been his statists, designed
all for him, or his engineeres to act all for him, this is the reward he gives
them, greater torment, soarer damnation; the deepest cellars, and darkest
vaults of hell, are reserved for such persons.

But mistake me not, I speak not this of all kind of errors in judgment,
what man is he that erreth not? All errors are sinful, but all errors are
not damning: all errors are hurtful, but all errors are not destructive and
undoing errors. I told you there were some errors, which were building
errors, and some which were fundamental errors: as the Apostle speaks, 1
Cor. 3.10, 11, 12, etc. In the one the work shall be burnt, in the other the
workman? one shall be saved, but so saved as by fire, the other shall be
destroyed in fire, work and workman, person and errors shall perish together,
1 Cor. 3.13, 14, 15. And thus I have done with two of the first generals
propounded, and showed you how it may stand with Gods ends, and how with Satan's
ends, to suffer errors abroad.

We come now to the third, how it may stand with man's ends; It may then stand
with man's ends also, that there should be multitude of dangerous and erroneous
opinions.

The men with whose ends it may stand, may be distinguished into three kinds.
1. The contrivers. 2. The actors. 3. The abettors. I shall only speak to two
of them.

3. It may stand with man's ends
1. Those that are the Contrivers of this design to set on foot errors, it may
stand with their ends. There are two maine ends the common adversary has: 1.
To blast the truth. 1. To divide the professors of it.

1. Their end is to blast the truth, to bring the truth of religion into
disrespect among men, to render the professors giddy and unstable, and their
profession unsound and unorthodox.

Do not our enemies within our selves take advantage to cry down the truth, to
blast reformation, and to bring religion into disrespect by the multitude of
opinions that are abroad. It may be they themselves have been the envious men,
have sown tares, and when they have done, they tell us it is because the
watchmen (who were ever asleep) are taken away; do they not take occasion to
blast the truth, and to say, that their oppugners, are a sort of giddy and
unstable, empty and illiterate men, who are certain in nothing but
uncertainty, and steadfast in nothing but unstedfastnesse. Anabaptists,
Brownists, Antinomians --

And is it not the same argument their elder brethren hold forth, do not the
Papists argue our religion to be unsound, and endeavor to bring the truth into
disrespect, by telling men of so many opinions, so much difference as there is
among those who are the prefessors of it? do they not say, our religion is
divided into factions, Lutherans, Calvinists, Arminians, Socinians, some of
which differences they themselves have contrived and set on foot, to bring
religion into disrespect, and to render it of less credit, by reason of the
multitude of divisions among us, though all agree in this, that theirs is false
and erroneous.

2. A second end they have, and that is to divide the professors of the truth.
Si sumus inseperabiles sumus in superabiles.
If we are unseparable, we are unconquerable, and therefore it is the
Machivillian design, divide and vince, divide and conquer, and hence it suits
well with their design, that there should be a multitude of opinions, that
thereby the professors of the truth, might be divided amongst themselves. It
was frequently observed in the reign of the Bishops, that those that were
called non-conformists, were far worse handled, then those who were called
Brownists, one would think this strange, that they should deal better with
them, that said they were no Church, then with those who said they were a
Church but corrupted, that they who cried their government down for
Antichristian, should fare better then they who only said it wanted
reformation: what should be the reason of it? sure they were greater enemies
that struck against their being, then they were who desired only reformation
not unbeing? But here was the business, they liked division well enough, and
they feared one side, it was too great, but they slighted the other, and
therefore would rather countenance them in design, then suppress them,
because all this served to weaken them that were their terror.

And in this also they agree with them of Rome, who send forth their
Emissaries, Jesuits, Priests, who shall turn Socinians, etc. and other
opinions, on purpose to divide the reformed Churches among themselves, that so
they may drive their mils with our breath, and use our hands to do their work,
and this design has been too successful, in the Netherlands, especially in
Socinianisme, which was broached as is reported by a Jesuit, on purpose to
divide them; So you see it stands with man's ends, 1. The Contrivers.

2. It stands with man's end, the broachers and actors of this: St John divides
all that is in the world into lusts of the flesh, lust of the eye, and pride of
life, 1 John 2.16. And I may rank all the men in it into these three. 1. Some
are proud and ambitious. 2. Some are worldly and covetous. 3. Some are profane
and luxurious or voluptuous.

1. In case a man be a proud and ambitious man, it will suite with his temper
and his ends, to broach erroneous opinions, to make himself a Rabbi, one
greater in esteem, honor and applause then other men: he would be taken
notice of for one to see further then others, one that has greater light
communicated to him then others have; he is a man that desires to be singular,
and loves no greatness but what is gotten by making others little, nor no
esteem, but what is wrought out of the disesteeme of others; he is a man that
loves to enrich himself by making others poor, and to swell himself and make
himself some body, by making others no body, he cannot be taken notice of in
the crowde, and therefore he thinks himself best seen, when he goes alone: Of
this spirit was Diotrephes, who you read of in Joh. Epist. 3. Who because he
could not be great enough, subordinate to the Apostles, for says the text, he
loved the preeminence. Therefore he endeavored to blast the Apostles, and make
himself great, by making them little among the people, he labored to work up
his own esteem, by bringing them into disesteeme. Joh. Epist. 3. ver. 9, 10.
Diotrephes who loves to have the preeminence, and prated against them with
malicious words, and not content therewith, etc. And therefore it is hard for a
proud man to find out truth. God says, the humble he will teach, and Christ
says, how can you believe when ye seek honor one of another; so how should
you discern of truth, when you carry an eye to your own applause and glory,
and not the glory of God.

2. In case a man be worldly and covetous, it may stand with his ends too, by
this means to enrich himself, and fetch maintenance out of the very heart and
bowels of truth, such men seek their own, not the things of Christ. And this
is the ground of many errors in the world; if you look into Popery, you may
r^solve many of their tenets into this, their covetous desires of gain; could
they be so simple to hold ou^ so many childish opinions, viz. Purgatory,
Dirges, Prayers for the dead, Pennances, Pilgrimages, Pardons, Indulgences,
etc. but that these bring in abundance of wealth into their coffers; all is to
be sold at Rome, Romae omnia venalia.
they will sell Christ or any thing for gain; and you see men will plead for
errors, they will maintain these, because these maintain them, by this craft
says Demetrius we have all our gain. See 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. where he speaks
of such as make merchandise of men's souls.

3. In case a man be profane and voluptuous: It will stand with his ends to
broach errors, that he may more securely sin, truth will not prevail with him
to leave his sin, and therefore his sin prevails with him to leave the
truth, while he entertained the truth, it would not suffer him to live quietly
in his sins, it would be ever checking and reproving of him, he could not sin
without disturbance, and therefore he must either foregoe the truth, or his
sin, but his sin he cannot part withal, and he now takes up such an opinion,
as he may keep his sin without disturbance, he may sin without trouble. I have
heard of one, that went on in a way of sin, and would not be reclaimed, though
conscience held out to him, that if he did persist in that way, he was sure to
perish: But for all this he held up sin, and therefore he could not long hold
up truth, it was impossible that these two should stand togther, he loved sin
and could not leave it, and he saw the truth flew in his face, which told him
that he should perish if he sinned, thereupon he took up an opinion, which was
said to be Origens, that after a 1000. years torment in hell, all men shall be
saved, and now he sinned with more quiet: Others that come to this, that none
shall be damned, God never made his creature to damn his creature. These with
many others, might be named, all which are taken up, that themselves might sin
without check and disturbance.

And Christians take heed, you have some truths, some light of God, and you
walk in ways of sin, notwithstanding all that light. If you sin against that
light, you will sin away that light, if the truth will not move you to forsake
your sin, your sin will prevail with you to forsake the truth.

If a man were able to enter into the heart of an old sinner, an old worldling,
he should see what a pack of unsound tenants he has gotten up; what
subterfugies and fig leaves he has sowed together, what a body of base
divinity he has gotten up together, and all this that he might sin securely
and be secure in sin, he that converses with them shall have experience of the
truth of all this.

And as it may stand with the ends of the Contrivers and Actors, so with the
ends of the Abettors, which I might insist upon at large, but I choose rather
to conclude this first great general which was propounded, viz. how it may
stand with Gods ends, with Satan's, with a man's own ends, of which I have spoken
in each particular for clearer and fuller satisfaction.

We will now come to the second general thing propounded, viz. The second
question.


Q. 2. What may be the grounds of abounding errors now at the end of the
world? And indeed the question may well be asked, for at the end of the world
it is prophesied, that there shall be many glorious truths discovered; it is
said of these times, that the knowledge of God shall abound, even as the waters
that cover the sea; And it is prophesied, that truths sealed and before hid,
shall be then manifested and revealed, there shall not only be a clearer
discovery of things already revealed, but a fuller discovery, a revelation of
those things were not known, as in Dan. 12.4. Daniel had prophesied of the
latter days, and he is commanded to shut up the words, and to seal the Book,
even to the time of the end, when many shall run too and fro, and knowledge
shall be increased: And Zechariah tells us, that he that is feeble shall be as
David, Zech 12.8. And to this purpose I have read some that apply that place
Rev. 1.13. where Christ is described to walk among the golden Candlesticks,
Weemes.
and girt about the paps with a golden girdle. In the old Testament they were
girt about the middle (says my Author,) here about the paps, which shows
says he, the Church is growing up nearer and nearer to perfection: And without
controversy, there are glorious things spoken of these latter days, not only
glorious things to be done, for God has reserved most of his visible glory to
the end of the world, but glorious things to be revealed and made known. And
therefore how darkness should be at that time, when such abundance of light
is prophesied of; how error and abounding error, at such a time when truth
and abounding truth shall be made known, here is a wonder!

But Christ puts it out of question, that this should be at the end of the
world, when many shall come in his name, and say I am Christ.

And therefore we will enquire, what may be the grounds that now in our times,
which are toward the end of all things, that there should be such an
abundance of dangerous and erroneous opinions. It is said indeed that at the
end of the world Satan shall be loosed, and he shall go and deceive the
nations, Rev. 20.7. But I conceive that time of binding and loosing is not yet
come. Satan is not yet bound, and therefore he has yet liberty, though the
liberty of his chain only, and goes now about, so far as God will give him
permission to be a spirit of seduction and delusion in the hearts of men. And
therefore,

1. The first great ground of abounding errors now, I conceive to be Satan,
who is called the god of this world, and is the Prince of darkness, and
therefore is the patron of error.

As all truth is light, so all error is darkness: as God is the Father of
light and truth, so is Satan the grandfather of darkness and error, who has
long walked as a Prince of darkness, and has ruled and reigned in the darkest
times and places, and in the darkness of our understanding, till at last the
glorious truth and light of the Gospel has discovered him: and therefore from
a Prince of darkness, he labors now to turn to an Angel of light; and so
seduce those by a false light, which he could not prevail withal as a Prince
of darkness. As he was a Prince of da^knesse, so he blinded men's eyes, lest
the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should shine unto them, as the
Apostle says, 2 Cor. 4.4. Whom the god of this world has blinded, lest the
glorious Gospel of Christ should shine unto them. But as he is an Angel of
light, so he does not blind, but enlighten men with a false light, which
enlightening is a blinding: As the Apostle, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. where he tells
them of false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the
Apostles of Christ: And no marvel says he, for Satan himself is transformed
into an Angel of light. He had long time been successful with the Gentiles as
a Prince of darkness, but he could prevail in that shape no longer: and
therefore he comes now to deceive them as an Angel of light: In the first he
blinds, in the second he deceives; in the first he is an opposer, in this a
seducer.

And here is a great deal in this, Satan transforming himself into an Angel
of light. Why how would an Angel of light come to win you to the truth, would
he tell you that this is a truth of God, a glorious truth, would he set out the
danger of rejecting it, the blessedness of entertaining it? would he commend
the truth from the effects and operations of it, if it were entertained, how it
would make us wise, direct us in service, be helpful to our walking,
destructive to our lusts. Why for ought I know Satan may use all the same
arguments and motives to prevail with us to the entertainment of error, what
ever a blessed Angel of light might use as an argument or motive to prevail
with us, to close with truth, that may Satan use too, to persuade with us to
entertain an error, otherwise he could not transform himself into an Angel
of light, if he did not act and deal with us, so as it is not possible by his
acting to discern him from an Angel of light, how could he be said to be
transformed into an Angel of light, if men might say this is the Prince of
darkness. And the same you see of those false Apostles and deceitful workers,
who yet transformed themselves, says he, into the Apostles of Christ, 2 Cor.
11.13. that is not barely giving out that they were the Apostles of Christ, as
Rev. 2.2. you read of some that said they were Apostles but were found liars,
but it was a transforming of themselves into the Apostles of Christ, and would
preach error, as the Apostles preached truth, and might use the same
arguments, motives, persuasions which the Apostles did for the entertainment of
truth, for the embracing of error. Christ tells us the same here, many shall
come in my name and say, lo here is Christ.

And this is the first ground of abounding errors at this time, the malice of
Satan who is the envious man, who then loves to sow his tar^s, when God is
sowing wheat, who then loves to communicate errors, when God is discovering
truth, and perhaps will use the same arguments and motives to persuade to one,
which God does to prevail to the other, nay and how far he may convey false
light, as God does true, I know not.

2. A second ground of abounding errors may be the corruption of men's hearts;
Satan is the father, a corrupt heart the mother, and error the daughter, Satan
conveyes the seed, the heart is the womb, which being formed and cherished
there its full months, at last the monster is brought forth, There is not only
seminarium hostis required to the birth of error, but partus cordis, not only
the suggestion of Satan, but the conception of the heart; we say seed will
never grow in a living body, unless there be a womb to nourish it; so Satan
could not prevail, he could not set afoote his errors, if he found not
corruption in our hearts to receive and cherish them. And therefore as Christ
said, Quid tibi facturu^ est tentator, te vince and vict^^ est Satan, Aug.
the Prince of the world comes but shall find nothing in me. Indeed its true
he seduced Eve, who yet had no sin in her, upon which has been raised many
questions, how Eve could consent to a sinful action, when yet there was no sin
in her, consent implies sin; the Apostle tells us Satan beguiled her, he was too
crafty for her, he deluded her, he got her ear, and by that stole into her
heart, he got her eye, and by that worked into her spirit: she was good, but
not immutably good, she was wise, but knew not all; Satan therefore worked into
her, either making use of her naturals, which in themselves were not sinful;
making use of her eye, her ear, her natural desires after further perfection,
or else being too hard for her by his sophistry, who was the wily serpent, and
that is implied, Genesis 3.12. and 1 Timothy 2.14. That she tasted of that God had
forbidden, was her sin, but yet there was sin before; That she looked on it was
sin, not simply, for she might look upon all the fruit in the garden; but
looking upon it, in the devils glass as he discovered it, that worked into her
heart, and then her heart consents. But how far Satan may deal with one
without sin, is a question; he seduced her to look, seduced her in looking, or
by looking. Satan gets [into] us, but came [to] Christ and Eve, in a bod^ly
shape, he could find no footing in them, because there was nothing of his own,
there was no sin.

But to return, that is another ground of abounding errors, the corruption of
the heart. A man may be carried away with an error, and yet not have a corrupt
heart, but error must needs proceed from the corruption of the heart. (...),
Minime malus, inn^cens. Decipiunt animos innocentum.
I say he may be led away, and yet not have a corrupt heart; it may be he has
nothing but honest ends, and honest grounds in the entertainment of it: The
Apostle tells us of such, Romans 16.18. by good words and fair speeches, they
deceive the hearts of the simple; the word signifies error of them not evil,
but though the hearts do not argue a corrupt heart, yet it discovers
corruption in the heart, and that's the second ground.

3. A third ground why there are so many abounding errors, is men's readiness
to drink in every opinion, to entertain every thing that comes under the name
of truth to them, without trial and examination of it; Men that have their
hands open to take all, may receive false coin as well as true: we say all is
not gold that glisters; so men that are ready to entertain what is suggested
to them under the name of truth, may take in error as well as truth. It is
good and our duty to have a preparedness of spirit, and a ready disposition of
soul to entertain every truth of God that is discovered to us: But Satan does
abuse this good disposition, oftentimes deluding us, and turning errors on us,
with a show and name of truth.

And there may be many grounds, why those who have yet a preparedness of
spirit to entertain truth and all truth, and nothing but truth alone may be
carried away with an error.

1. Want of trial, we take in all, and swallow all as they are represented to
us, without any debate, or any search and examination of them. It is an
Apostolical injunction, that we should not believe every spirit, and that we
are to prove all things, and then to hold fast to that is truth, that is, hold
fast to that which upon trial, upon examination, is really a truth of God, the
want of which is the cause why those who have a preparedness of heart to
entertain truth alone, and would not for a world give entertainment to error,
are yet led aside with error.

I have told you a man may be too quick in rejecting of an error, as well as
too slow in receiving of a truth; that error is too soon rejected, that is
rejected without trial, without evidence that it is an error. You think it
unreasonable that a man should be condemned before his trial, though the man
may deserve to die, yet it is to be made evident, otherwise we may condemn the
innocent. So though an opinion be erroneous, yet let it have its trial,
otherwise you may reject a truth for an error: Certainly, as truth is not to
be entertained and received slightly, so error is not to be rejected
carelessely, before you know it error; the choicest truths of the Gospel have
been rejected for error, and yet are blessed truths. We are to reject error
as we receive truth, not passionately, but rationally, not with passion, but
reason, not carelessely, but religiously, because otherwise you may receive
error for truth, and may reject truth for error.

Now I say, many for want of trial and examination of things, may give
entertainment to an error, though they have a preparedness of spirit to
embrace nothing but the truth.

2. Another ground, why those who have a preparedness to entertain truth, may
yet be carried away with error, is, they want knowledge to try and prove, and
also want judgment to determine what is error, and what is truth upon their
trial. Some errors that are very obvious to be discerned, but some are very
subtle and intricate, yea and carry very specious shows, hold out glorious
pretenses. For the first sort of errors, these Gods people are seldom
entangled withal, but now for the other, which are more subtle, and carry
high pretexts, these few have knowledge to try them, or upon their trial,
judgment to determine: The best of us we know but in part here; and as for the
most, they are but children and babes in knowledge; we are not children in
humility, in innocence, but we are like them in knowledge, we know but little,
and therefore may be overreached with the sophistry of Satan, with the wiles
of men.

3. Besides, this good disposition which is in the hearts of Saints to receive
all truths that God shall discover, it may be abused, yea and which is a
wonder, be made serviceable to let in an error: that it is abused there is
nothing more plain, Romans 16.18. Satan comes and works on that, corrupt men
they come and work on that good principle too; they ask you, have you not a
preparation of heart to receive every truth of God? how dare you then reject
this? how dare you shut your eyes against such an evident light? how dare you
turn your back against such a clear manifestation of God? thus it is often
abused. Nay and sometimes this disposition is made serviceable, for the
introducing and letting in an error.

This preparedness of heart to receive all truth, works a fearfullnesse of
rejecting truth if it be discovered to us. It may be there is such and such a
thing held out to us, and it is well managed, strongly carried on, insomuch
that it carries great appearance of truth, now the soul who is prepared to
receive all truth, and fearful to reject it, he stands hovering, he knows not
what to do, he cannot close with it, he dare not reject it; but at last upon
that appearance of truth it has, and that fear in him to reject truth, he
gives entertainment to it, though it be an error and not a truth.

Thus the fear of rejecting of a truth, may be a help to bring in an error.
It is wonderful to see how Satan abuses these two dispositions, fear and
tenderness of spirit.

1. Fear, it should be a fence to preserve us from error, but Satan often
makes it a means to keep out truth; fear is oftentimes a cause to keep us in
error, as well as a fence to preserve us from error. Many are afraid of new
opinions, not because they are errors, but because they are new. I say fear is
a means in many to keep out truth, as well as to fence out error: It should
only be the guard of the soul to keep out error, but Satan makes use of it to
keep out truth, and to let in error.

2. And as he abuses fear, so does he that tenderness of spirit: It would be
strange to tell you, how Satan does take occasion to enslave a soul by his
very tenderness; if the chain of sin be broken, he labors to make a chain
of our graces; if he cannot keep us in bondage by our sins, he labors to bring
us into bondage by our graces. You will think this strange, but there is
nothing more evident in men of tender spirits at their first bringing in; when
they are tender of every thing, they are tender of such things which indeed is
their bondage to be tender of; they are tender not only of things indifferent,
which are of a temporal nature, but of things lawful and commendable. A
thousand cases there are wherewith Satan does perplex their souls, they can
do nothing now without a temptation, and most of temptations are raised upon
this ground, and helped on by this advantage, their tenderness.

Though a tender spirit be a bl^ssed thing, the greatest mercy on this side
Heaven, a true tenderness to sin and for sin, yet this disposition may be a
distemper as well as a grace, there may be an excess in it, it may fall into
nothing but scrupulosities and mere questionings without actings. As there is
a sin in defect, the want of it, when men will rush upon actions without
warrant, so may there be a sin in excess, when men will do nothing for
scruple.

Satan makes use of this disposition; 1. Sometimes to fence out truth, they
dare not entertain such a thing for fear it is an error. 2. Sometimes he
makes use of it to let in error, they dare not reject such a thing, for fear
it should be a truth. 3. Sometimes he makes use of it to overdoe actions. 4.
Sometimes to underdoe them. 5. Sometimes to scruple the doing of them. 6. Nay
to neglect the doing of them; he will prevail it may be with a man not to
pray, because he sins in praying, there is so much deadness, coldness, etc.
that he will tell you it is better not pray at all then so to pray; or prevail
with a man not to preach, because he sins in preaching, because there is much
pride, ostentation, hypocrisy in his preaching: So not to give alms, not to
converse with men, not to serve God with his talents, because so much pride in
the exercise of his gifts, so much ostentation in his alms, etc. thus he will
labor and sometimes prevails to bury up a man's talents, and make men
unserviceable to God, or to their brethren.

You had need to know the wiles of Satan, that you may avoid them. In vain is
the net spread in the sight of any bird, says Solomon: so in vain will he
attempt this way, when you once know his wiles.

This I insist the longer on, knowing it of great use in these times, lest
otherwise Satan make use either of your tenderness and fear, to fence out
truth, or to let in error; I see many precious dispositions in many
Christians, you have had it pressed on you to stand ready for the entertainment
of every truth, to close with every truth of God, it has taken good eff ct in
you; many there are of you who are wrought up to a preparedness to follow
Christ in any way. And I see this disposition in you, and our next care must be
to preserve this disposition, that this readiness to follow Christ be not
abused to this, to follow a stranger instead of Christ. Indeed you shall not
follow the voice of a stranger in destroying errors, in undoing ways, so
Christ says, but you may follow the voice of a stranger, in sinful, in
corrupting errors for a time. Gods children are free from damning errors, but
none are free from defiling errors; possibly the best may be misled, and the
tenderness of the most tender is in danger of being abused, especially when
error comes not only under the notion of truth, but under great appearance of
truth, when it is held forth, Lo here is Christ, this is Christ's mind, and
Christ's will, this is a truth of God. And therefore you had need to beware,
take heed that no man deceive you, you have good dispositions in you, but you
had need to get knowledge, lest those good dispositions be abused either to the
rejecting of truth, or to the entertainment of error: either to keep you in
the conditions you are, without desire to enquire further; or to hinder you
from embracing any more of Gods mind if it be revealed, for fear of being led
away with error, or to make you to embrace error, for fear of rejecting a
truth.

It is good to be as soft wax if there were no stamp, no impression to be
received but Gods and truth; but soft wax is dangerous, when so many false
stamps and corrupt impressions are abroad. Oh that God would make us wax to
receive every impression of truth, but rocks of flint against any impression of
error. Oh that he would open our eyes broad to receive and let in any light of
God in these knowing times, and shut our eyes against any error or false
light. Oh that he would give us a preparedness of spirit to embrace any thing
of him, and a heart locked up against any thing which is not of God. Oh that he
would make us tender of rejecting truth, but harden us more against any way of
error; that he would make us fearful to reject truth, but valiant also to
resist error in our generation.

4. A fourth ground of abounding error, has been the want of holy discipline,
and a regular way for the suppressing of error. Certainly such a blessing goes
along with the right administration of the government of Christ, as to
suppress errors, and reform the erroneous.

Indeed a bad discipline, as it does restrain and suppress many glorious
truths, for certainly truth has but little shadow, little shelter from a
corrupt discipline, I say as it does suppress and restrain many a truth, so
it may be a restraint unto some errors, it may restrain some upon pollitick
grounds, but it can reform none; We have had a bad, a corrupt discipline, such
an one as has been a mother, a nurse to many corrupt and sinful opinions,
both in doctrine and in worship.

1. In doctrine, witness those gross points of Arminianisme vented with
license, nay of Popery too, as was evidenced in the Ministers Remonstrance, and
that out of many books put out by public license; viz, Auricu^ar confession,
Authoritative absolution, Prayers for the dead, etc.

2. In worship too, witness all their Altars, Crucifixes, Adoration toward the
East, Pictures, Images; the Table was an Altar, the Minister was a Priest, the
Sacrament was a Sacrifice, and there wanted nothing to be added to it but the
name of Mass, and to call it the Sacrifice of the Mass. It has been a fence
indeed against truth, but a gap to let in error; a natural mother to corrupt
opinions, but a stepmother to sound doctrine. Indeed, some errors had their
frowns, few their blows, them that had, it was not as they were errors, but
as the persons which held them were enemies to them.

This I speak the rather, because men say it was better in the Bishops time
then now, for then there were not so many errors; I say there were, yea and
such as were more dangerous, being foundation errors, such as opposed the
power of godliness, such as were flatly opposite to the offices of Christ,
such as were destructive to the true religion, and such I know none on foot
now; if there were, yet they had their being then, and their corruption in
doctrine and discipline, has been a great occasion to the breeding and
begetting of them; if you say though they were in that time, yet they durst not
appear: I may say again in answer to that;

1. There were other errors far more dangerous, that durst appear both in
Press and Pulpit.

2. Again as those errors durst not appear, so neither was the truth
suffered to appear; for one error which they suppressed, they held down many
a truth; if they suppressed error, they murdered truth, and stifled it.

3. If they suppressed any, yet they reformed none; It is the proper work of
the discipline of Christ, rather to reform then to restrain, rather to amend
then to suppress, at least to reform with restraining, and to restrain
together with reforming. Indeed to suppress by reforming and amending, and not
by silencing and smothering them, which was their way, and the great occasion
of the swelling and not the abating of them. As it is with Rivers, the stopping
of them, does but swell them and increase them the more, it does not any way
lessen and abate them.

Certainly the way of Christ to deal with errors, is to endeavor to reform
them, to amend them, to preach the word boldly, to convince gainsayers, to
admonish, to exhort, to reprove, to mourn over them; and when nothing will
do, to ej^ct them and cast them out, Tit. 3.10. and when that is done, not to
leave them, but to labor still to convince them, to mourn over them.
Government as Christ's does not reach to crumenall or corporal punishment,
either to the punishment of the body or the state, as I shall show at large
hereafter when I come to set down the ways which are left us in the word to
restrain, to reduce men from error.

Now then the way which they went, silencing, suspending, imprisoning, fining
of men, whipping undoing men; Certainly was not the way of Christ, for the
reforming of errors; Suadenda fides, non imponenda, says Bern.
men are rather to be persuaded then commanded, rather to be dealt withal by
the authority of God then of man, which is as nothing in heavenly things when
God concurres not; but this I shall speak unto at large in the last question,
and therefore will proceed no farther now. This is the fourth ground of
abounding errors in our days, even the want of the discipline of Christ, the
want of regular proceedings in several Congregations and Synods for the
reforming of them.

5. A fifth ground is, the too much connivance, nay inc^uragement that they find
among the people of God, this is a great ground of broaching opinions. We say a
receiver makes a thief; your readiness to comply with opinions, and to
receive all, does give great encouragement to broach them; It was that which
the Prophet complained of in his time, Jer. 5.31. The Prophets prophecy
falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and my people love to have
it so, and what will be the end thereof: o quam consentaneum, cries one in the
reign of the Bishops, how did the Prophets or those Emissaries, Preachers,
they had sent forth, prophecy falsely, and how did the Priests bear rule by
that means? they held up the standing and dignity of the Bishops, and how did
the people love to have it so? they were well enough pleased and contented with
their doctrine and way; We were like Issachar, who thought rest was good,
although it was with burden; and you see now what is the end thereof.

Some of this may be appliable to us, the Prophets Prophecy falsely, and my
people love to have it so; there is too much connivance, too much content, too
much pleasing among the godly themselves in variety of opinions, though none
under the notion of error. Indeed there is thus much good in it, that things
come to be debated and scanned, by this we come to search upon what grounds we
stand, we come to sift out the truth of God, which certainly never was more
clearly revealed, then when some errors have been the occasion to clear it
and bring it forth, as I showed before. In the point of Free Grace, in
opposition to man's free will in the work of conversion, which had not been so
fully discovered, if Pelagius had not broached that error, that a man might be
saved if he would. So the freeness of Gods grace in justification, had not
been so clearly discovered, if the Papists had not broached and maintained
that error of justification by works.

Indeed were they undoing errors that are preached and held forth by any, St
John's rule comes in, Epist. 2. ver. 10, 11. If there come any unto you, and
bring not this doctrine, that is, that Jesus is the Christ, as he shows you
before, ver. 7, 8. Receive him not into your houses, neither bid him God speed,
for he that bids him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds. So then did
you know any to hold forth fundamental errors, such as are the overthrow of
faith, or destructive to the power of godliness, there is no countenance to be
given to such, you make your selves sharers with him in his fin, and bring upon
your selves the same guilt. And therefore says Paul, Tit. 3.10. A man that is
an heretic after the first and second admonition reject, knowing that he that
is such, is subverted, and sins being condemned of himself.

These are the rules for undoing errors: Nay and were they defiling though not
da^ning errors, were they but sinful, though not destroying errors, yet if
they were evidenced to us, and manifest to us to be errors, we ought not to
connive at them, to countenance them in their way, but to admonish, to reprove
them, to exhort them, and use all possible ways left by Christ to reclaim
them.

But now when the things held forth are but merely opinion, or if more, yet
they are not any way injurious to faith, or hurtful to the power and practice
of godliness, then there may be more agreement, the difference of judgment
should not in this case alienate affections, though you are not all of one
mind, yet you are all of one heart, and here you differ only about the way to
advance Gods glory. You have both cordial affections to God and Christ, you
desire to bring him glory, only you differ in the way; one thinks this way, and
the other this, and in both it may be the Scripture is silent, or holds out as
much for one as the other. Now in this case why should there be falling out:
certainly diversities of opinion, may be countenanced, and yet without sin,
provided that it does not arise, either from fickleness, unsetlednesse and
inconstancy in us, or from pride, that we love to side and differ from others,
or that it does not tend to make disturbance of the peace of the Churches of
Christ. But I am too long on this; I will therefore conclude this second
general, the ground of abounding errors, and come to the third.

Q. 3. What are the grounds that so many are carried away; And because this
question does fall in so much, with the former question, therefore I shall be
short on it.

In brief then I shall resolve all into these two general grounds.

1. Weakness. 2. Wickedness. One incident to the godly, the other proper to
the wicked.

The first ground that men are carried away with error, it is weakness. I
will branch this into three particulars.

1. Weakness of judgment, which is the weakness of head.

There are many, who though they have grace and good affections in them, yet
want knowledge; they are babes in understanding, they want judgment to
examine, and try opinions, the things in controversy are above their fathom,
their line is too short, and they want sufficiency of light to discern of
things that differ, to distinguish between truth and error, there is a great
deal of sophistry in error, there is the head of the serpent in it, who was
too subtle for our parents in innocence; it may be an error may be handed out
to us, by holy men, and represented to us, under fair specious and high
pretexts, and we our selves want wisdom or knowledge to see to the bottom of
it, and therefore embrace a shadow for substance, an error for truth.

2. Want of stability, though they have some knowledge, yet they are not fixed
and stablished in the truth, there is a kind of lubricity and fickleness, and
inconstancy of spirit in men, which the Apostle takes notice of and blames in
Ephesians. 4.14. That we henceforth be no more children tossed too and fro, and
carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men and cunning
craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive; too many who are of this
temper, like children tossed too and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine; It is a metaphor taken from a weathercock, which is carried about
with every wind, it stands this way now, but it is because another wind blows
not, they are not fixed and stablished in the truth. There are many who are
fixed and grounded in error, and too many who are unstable and unsettled in the
truth, which does not merely arise from want of knowledge, but from want of
stability: They are of uncertain and unconstant spirits; that spirit which
many men have in error, would be a precious spirit if it were joined with the
truth; but to be stable in error is a punishment, and to be unsettled in truth
is our sin; and yet how many who are fixed in the one, and will boast of it,
I thank God I am no changling, when others are unstable in the truth. I have
sometimes thought what might be the ground of this inconstancy and
instabability of spirit, in those who yet are full of good affections.

And to let go the natural grounds which arise from the tempers of nature; I
have thought of these four spiritual grounds.

1. Want of knowledge, they are but yet babes and children in knowledge, and
therefore may be unsettled, according to the measure of knowledge, such is the
measure of setlednesse and stability of spirit; if we knew perfectly, we should
never change, but we know but in part, and therefore being imperfect in
knowledge, we are also imperfect in our stability.

2. Want of grace, I say degrees of grace, not truth and essence of grace; this
the Apostle sets down, Heb. 13.9. Be not carried with diverse and strange
doctrines, for it is a good thing that the heart be established with grace;
here was inconstancy in them, what was the reason? they had grace, but were not
stablished with grace, they wanted such a measure as to stablish their hearts:
Grace will ballace the most unsettled heart, it will fix the most unfixed
spirit; a little grace will so fix the heart, as 1. It shall never entertain
any fundamental error; 2. Nay he shall never make any error his choice: 3.
Nay if he give way to any error, it is still under the notion of truth* A
little grace will do this, but there is required a greater measure of grace to
stablish a man in the truth, and to preserve a man that he shall not be led
aside with any way of error.

3. Want of comfort may be another reason of instability. It may be a man has
walked in these ways, and finds no comfort in them, his heart is troubled, he
can get no peace, and because they find not comfort in those ways they
expected, they look for it in other ways. It is a sad thing for a soul to be
without comfort. As the body without the soul is dead, so is the soul without
comfort; that which the soul is to the body, comfort is to the soul, and
therefore men in the want of comfort, are apt with the Be, to go from flower
to flower, from one opinion to another, if God keep them not; upon this ground
many have fallen to Popery, because they could not get comfort upon the
principles of our Religion, which affords no comfort to them who would reserve
their sins.

And upon the same ground, men under troubles, and wanting comfort, they are
apt to run from this opinion to that, hoping in all to find comfort to their
troubled spirits. Like men sick of a Fever, they think their disease is in
their beds, when it is in their bodies, they think by shifting of beds to be
ridd of their distemper, when yet they carry the distemper with them; yet some
refreshment for present may come with change, but certainly it is a great
mercy, and a wonder of mercy, when men have long been in trouble, and in want
of comfort, that God has kept them, and not suffered them to seek for comfort
out of Gods way, that he has not suffered them to run into any way of error
to find comfort; that he has given them patience to wait upon God in the ways
of obedience, in his own way: And rather to charge themselves then the way, if
they want comfort, and surely the fault is at home; either you are formal in
your walking, or you hold compliancie, though you give not entertainment to
some corruption; or you give way to your own unbelief, the doubtings and
misgivings of your own spirit: or God is willing to deny thee comfort, for thy
further exercise, to quicken, to humble, to put thee on self purging, but at
last he that shall come, will come.

4. A fourth ground of instability, may be the violence and heat of their
affections to find out truth; which puts them on to an inquisitiv^nesse, a
trial, a search of all things. In which search it may be this appears a
truth, and may be another time there seems a truth in another, men are not
settled while they are searching, they are not fixed while they are inquiring;
their good affections prompt them on to inquire after truth, and during inquiry
they are unfixed and unsettled in the truth. And so much for the second general
ground why many are carried away, viz. want of stability.

3. A third ground, too much credulity: Some men are too slow to believe, and
some are too facile and easy of belief; to be too slow to believe when God
speaks is our wickedness, and to be too facile and easy of belief what man
speaks is weakness. It is not good to be slow to believe a truth, and it is
evil to be facile to believe an error, and yet both these may arise from the
same grounds in the spirit. A man is slow to believe a truth, because he does
suspect it an error, and he is facile to believe an error, because he does
apprehend it for a truth, so that both these may arise from the honesty of a
man's spirit; in the one he is fearful to entertain an error, and therefore
slow to believe a truth; in the other he is fearful to reject a truth, and
therefore gives entertainment to an error. Fear is oftentimes made a
shooing-horne to draw on an error, and to hold out a truth. But this I am not
now to deal withal. That which I am now upon seems the contrary to fear,
viz. too much credulity and easiness of spirit to believe, which though it be
contrary, yet two contrary causes may produce one and the same effect: Error
may be the effect of an excessisive fear, as well as of an easy faith, though
indeed it be more properly the effect of too easy faith, then of an excessive
fear. Men that take all upon trust, are like to be deceived: And it is a maine
ground why many are carried away with error, their overmuch credulity, their
easiness of belief: There is too much of this temper even in the godly
themselves, and I have thought of diverse grounds of it.

1. This easiness to believe, does arise from the great esteem of the wisdom
and holiness of those who hold forth an opinion, if indeed he were learned and
not godly, or if he were godly and weak in knowledge it would give some place
to jealousy, but where these two meet together, they have great authority
upon the spirits of men, and all that proceeds from such men, is received as
infallible truth; men take things upon trust from an honest man, but they will
examine what a cheater brings; if an honest man bring you gold, you will scarce
try it, especially if he say it is weight, he has tried it, and he knows it
to be weight; but if a dishonest man bring it, though he say it is good, yet
you will try it: Men will suspect a truth if a liar tell it; and therefore
Christ would not own the Devils acknowledgement of him, when he said thou art
the Son of God. But they will be ready to believe an untruth if an honest
faithful man affirm it.

When you hear any news of great concernment, the first thing you enquire is,
of what credit is the author, and if he be thus qualified:

1. That he be a man of great intelligence, one who knows much of affairs.

2. If he be a wise man and an honest man, one who is not over credulous, that
will believe all, and disperse for truth what ever he hears, if he be one who
has seldom failed in his intelligence, one that has often spoken truth, you
conclude, that what ever he brings is truth: and yet it is possible for this
man to publish a falsehood too.

So if you know one who is a wise learned man, a man has much commerce with
Heaven, and intelligence thence, one who is godly and holy, and a man not apt
to receive all opinions, not overcredulous to take in all, nor forward to vent
all which he has heard; nay and perhaps has been one who has delivered many
glorious truths of Christ: why such a man you are ready to receive all from
him, even as Gospel, you believe all he says, every thing comes with a great
deal of authority into your spirits: And yet its possible for this man to be
mistaken, it is possible to err; we know but in part, says the Apostle, and
who can say he is infallible in his knowledge.

Indeed there is much to be given to a man thus qualified in points that are of
less concernment, and controverted on all sides; and this may be done, I
conceive, without any prejudice to faith, I say it may be done, and yet not to
resolve our faith into the authority of men. But when this carries all, when
opinions are drunk in because they are the judgment of such men, or because
such men, so godly, so learned, so faithful do hold them forth, this is to
pin our faith upon another sleeve, this is to resolve our faith into the
authority of others (and is a shread of that garment whereby Babylon is
distinguished,) it has much of the Roman doctrine in it, I believe as the
Church believes: so I believe it, because such hold it forth. And that is the
first ground of overmuch credulousnesse in men, which we had need to beware of;
and the more, because we are too apt to slide into it, and put man in Gods
steed to us.

2. A second ground of this overmuch credulousnesse, is the benign and fair
aspects which an opinion carries. It may be you hear of an opinion, and it is
comely dressed, it carries such fair and benign aspects, it looks so lovely
that we are ready to receive it, and give entertainment to it without any more
examination. Thus the Devil beguiled Eve at the first, the Apostle tells us she
was deceived; and what deceived her? it was the benign aspects which the fruit
carried; you read it, Genesis 3.6. And when she saw that the tree was good for
food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make
one wise, here were the benign aspects, the lovely looks of it; and what
follows? she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and did eat her death
in it, too; so here when we look upon the benign and fair aspects, which an
opinion may seem to carry, we are ready to receive it, and give entertainment
to it, without further trial: This is to work upon the understanding by the
affections, which is a preposterous and a dangerous way, because the affections
are blind, coecae potentiae, and those gained, they win the understanding to
them, by inticement, not by demonstration, they inveagle, they do not inform
the understanding, they persuade by enticing, and not by evidence and reason. A
man may well suspect those opinions which are wrought upon the understanding by
the affections, and not by demonstrations; the affections often inveagle the
understanding, sometime enforce it; sometime they bribe, sometime they threaten
the understanding into an opinion; its dangerous for the affections to work
upon the understanding: The less the understanding has to deal with the
affections in judgment of truth or error, and the less the affections with
the understanding, the safer and clearer is the judgment. A man may well
suspect those opinions which are wrought upon the understanding by persuasions,
and not by demonstrations. The Philosophers used to say, that to win the
understanding by gaining first into the affections, is to woe the Mistress by
the maid. Affections are to attend and serve the understanding, and not to
enforce it, they are not to tell what is truth, but to follow the understanding
with love and delight, in the embracing of it. Suspect that for truth that you
are threatened or bribed into. And so much for the second ground.

3. A third ground of credulousnesse is, the similitude and likeness which
error may carry to a truth of God; you must know that though Gods people may
entertain error, yet no damning, though defiling errors; nor do they
entertain any error, as an error, but under the notion, nay apprehension
that it is a truth, and there is such similitude which an error may carry to
truth, that they may entertain it without debating and examining of it. I told
you from the 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. That Satan might transform himself into an
Angel of light, and so may represent error under such a show of truth, that it
is not for every one to distinguish between that and truth.

There was never any error set on foot, but it was endeavored to be grounded
on the Scripture, the word is pleaded on all sides, and many places alleged
which may seem to afford strength even to false opinions, by which an error
may be represented to them who are not able to discern, as if it were a truth.
There are but few errors in our days, but they carry some resemblance of
truth with them, at least the face and appearance of truth; nay but few but
have some ingrediency of truth in them: and therefore carrying such a
resemblance with truth, looking upon the first view, like a truth, the best may
be deceived with error instead of truth, if they take things on trust, though
this deceit shall not be an undoing deceit, if it be not an undoing error, and
that Gods people shall never be given up unto: We say though error fortunae, a
mistake in the estate, does not cause an anullity in marriage, yet error
personae, the error of the person does: if you were married to one whom you
took to be another person, this does cause an anullity in the marriage. The
entertainment of truth or error, is a kind of marriage between the soul and
it, and there is a firm marriage between corrupt hearts and error: but the
contract which is between a godly man and error, is a false contract, and
therefore that claim which error has to him, is a false title, because
though it be an error, yet he entertained it for a truth, and therefore it
shall not damn him, though it does for the present defile him.

4. A fourth ground of the credulousnesse of the godly, their facile and easy
belief, it is the high and specious pretexts which an error may carry: Error
may bear as big a sail, and hold up as high pretexts as truth it self, and
this may prevail much to the entertainment of an error, this is a great
advantage which error has. It may hold forth the same authority, bear it
self up upon the same bottom; it may pretend holiness, the glory of God, the
good of our souls, etc. and what not? Do not the Papists hold forth the same
authority for their errors, which we do for truth? do they not persuade to
the entertainment of them, by the same arguments? will they not tell you, that
these are for the glory of God, for the good of your souls? Was it not the
usual argument of the hierarchy for their superstitions, and humane
inventions, for their Altars and Jesu-worship, and bowing toward the East,
with the rest, that all this was to declare our reverence, humility, etc. in
coming into Gods presence, it was for the glory of God? etc. And are there any
errors now, that carry not as high, as fair pretexts, as specious shows? Who
does not say, lo here is Christ, and here is Christ? who does not challenge
patronage from Heaven for their several opinions? who does not stamp their
opinions with the authority and mind of Christ? Is it not that which Christ
does here foretell, they shall come in his name, that is, they shall pretend to
do so, they shall pretend his authority and commission, and they shall say, I
am Christ, they shall pretend, that that which is held forth, is the mind of
Christ, which sets out the danger of the temptation; such an error coming
with such high and specious pretexts, being held forth with such authority, may
prevail much toward the entertainment of it. In our days if we look upon
the present contentions of the times, the cause now on foot and acting sadly
with the sword, do not our adversaries hold up the same pretenses? do they
not speak in our own language? do they not say the same things, that they
fight for the Protestant religion, Liberty of the subject, Laws of the Land?
and if we take all on trust, how dangerous to be deceived? When the Pirate
hangs forth your own colors, there is danger of robbing. The Crokadile sheds
tears when he has a mind to shed blood; the foulest designs are often
masked with the fairest pretenses; the spiders webb is full of art, but she her
self is full of venom: you may truly suspect most venom, where you see most
art. There is not any bad cause, nor any error, but is hand^d to us under
fair pretexts and specious colors, which wins many: and that's the fourth
ground.

5. A fifth ground why men are apt to take opinions upon trust, either because
they cannot try them, they want knowledge and wisdom to examine and try them,
or they want judgment to determine upon trial; either they cannot, or they
are unwilling to put themselves to the trouble in the trial of them: But I
pass this. We have done with the first ground, why men are carried away with
errors, and that is weakness; 1. Weakness of understanding. 2. Want of
stability. 3. Too much credulity, and I have given you the several grounds of
these also.

We come now to the second general ground, why men are carried away with
error.

The second ground, and that is wickedness; A second ground men are carried
away with error.
the first was incident to the godly, this is proper to the wicked only. A
godly man may entertain an error out of weakness of head, but not out of
wickedness of heart. A godly man he entertaines an error with honest
affections, and to honest ends, and a wicked man entertains a truth with
corrupt affections, and for corrupt ends: He is carried naturally to error, he
is nothing else but darkness and error, but he goes not to truth without a
byasse: To that which is evil, he has a natural motion, a principle within
carries him; but to that which is good he is moved by weights, either fears
or hopes. Naked evil he can close withal, but truth must have a bait, else he
has no heart to it.

Godliness is no gain he thinks, u^lesse he can make a gain by godliness:
as he will forsake truth to preserve his estate, so he will entertain error
to gain an estate; men will make all serviceable to that which is their God:
Mammon is his God, and therefore all is serviceable to that; he will either
wave truth, or embrace error upon this ground, to advantage himself.

We say, all other desires they are serviceable to the great desire; Caeterae
cupiditates ingenti cupiditati subservient.
what ever is a man's master-desire, all the rest are servants to it: as all
other lusts they are serviceable to the master-lust, etc. Now Mammon the world
is his master-desire, and therefore all other vailes to it and serves it. To be
short, he is a man who mooves not out of himself, self is the spring and
principle, and self is the end of all his motions. When he receives a truth,
he will ask what it can do for him, before he bid it welcome: and so when he
entertaines an error; here is the difference, some truths he will not receive
upon any terms, and those he does entertain, they shall bid high and offer
largely, before they shall be welcome: but now error shall be entertained at
low rates, even at any hand; he will not stick with it, it is his friend, his
flesh and blood. Corrupt men they seldom scruple errors, but they scruple
entertainment of truth. I have heard some to scruple to go to prayers in their
family, and they say, Where have we a word for it? its superstition and
will worship, and yet they have never scurpled to drink, to bezzle, --

Some who never scrupled to swear oaths enough, but yet scruple a religious
oath. The Jews scrupled not to murder Christ, but scrupled to have him hang on
the cross, because of the preparation to the Sabbath.

Men's scruples of conscience are oftentimes the punishment of their looseness
of conscience. I shall proceed no farther upon this. It would be endless to
set down the many grounds which corrupt hearts have for the entertainment of
error. And because I have spoken already much to this purpose upon a former
inquiry, I shall therefore shut up this, and come to the next question
propounded, which is the fourth general laid down.

Quest. 4. Who those are that are in danger to be carried away, and led aside
with error?

Before I come to give a full answer to this, we will premise three or four
things, which may be serviceable to the more clear and distinct answer.

1. There is no man can plead immunity from all kind of errors, there is not
a man but is in danger to be led aside with some error or other, as we say of
sin, ^in atham asher lo jechate, there is no man which sins not; so we may of
error, there is no man who errs not.

There is no man on earth, who has an unerring privilege, an unerring spirit,
no not all men on earth together; not Fathers, Synods, Counsels, but are
subject to error, as is confessed by all, and largely proved against the
Papists; that is the first, that no man can plead an immunity and freedom from
any kind of error. Nemo sine crimine, and nemo sine errore, are alike.

2. That even the best men are subject to the worst of errors: I say the best
men on earth are subject to the worst of errors. Subject I say, what is that?
that is, they are incident to them, they are liable to them, that's something,
as our bodies are incident to all sickness, so our souls to all sin and
error too.

But that is not all, to be subject to error, is not only to be incident to
it, but be inclinable, and that's more. A man may be incident to many
sicknesses, which yet he is not inclinable unto; inclinablenesse does not only
imply a passive capacity in the subject, but a prepared disposition. As in hard
wax there is a passive capacity, but in soft wax there is a prepared
disposition to receive the impression of the seal. And in saying the best of
men are in themselves subject to the worst of errors, I do not only mean they
are incident, but inclinable; they have not only a passive capacity to be
corrupted, but they have a prepared disposition, as to sin in practice so to
error in judgment: yet this inclinablenesse is not alike in all, it is
capable of degrees, not as it is by nature, for so all are equally corrupted,
but as some have improved their corruptions more then other, some are more
inclinable, and some to one error more then another.

3. That though none can plead immunity from all kind of errors, nay though
the best of men may be subject to the worst of errors in themselves, yet are
the Saints secured from such kind of errors by the grace of Christ: though
they are subject to all, yet they are secured from some, I say, by the grace of
Christ.

I have formerly told you from that 1 Cor. 3.10. that there was
foundation-truths, and building-truths, so there are foundation-errours and
building-errours, damning and defiling errors; all errors are defiling, but
all are not damning, all are dangerous, but all are not destructive.

Though the godly are incident to defiling, yet Christ has secured them from
damning errors, though they may be carried away for a time with sinful and
dangerous errors, yet has Christ fenced them from destructive and undoing
errors: And this I conceive expressed in these two places, Joh. 10.4, 5. The
sheep follow him, for they know his voice, but a stranger they will not
follow, for they know not the voice of a stranger. This place by all
Interpreters, is taken for following Christ, in doctrinall truths, and it must
be meant of necessary or fundamental, not of accessory and building-truths. It
must be meant of such doctrinall points as are essential to salvation, and the
being of godliness, not to such which are less necessary, and are only of the
welbeing of a Christian; for if you look there, even the sheep of Christ have
followed the voice of a stranger, embraced error instead of truth: as I could
instance in all ages: which has arisen not from the wickedness of their
affections, so much as from the weakness of their understandings: not from
their willingness to embrace error, but from their weakness to discern of
truth.

The other place is Matthew. 24.24. There shall false Christ's arise, and false
Prophets, and shall show signs and wonders, that if it were possible they
should deceive the very elect: by which it is implied, that it is not possible
for the elect to be deceived, they may be led away with dangerous, but not with
destructive errors, with defiling, but not damning error: So that's the third,
though the best of men are subject to the worst of errors in themselves, as
men, yet they shall be secured from such, by the grace of Christ.

4. That though Christ has secured us from damning and undoing-errours, yet
our security lies in the use of means, the way whereby he does secure us, is
in the use of means, viz. hearing, reading, prayer; hence does Christ exhort
us, caution us, and admonish us, Take heed that no man deceive you. This
caution does not imply, that we may be thus deceived, for he tells us, that it
is impossible that the elect should be thus deceived; but by this as a means,
Christ preserves us from deceit. It is a false collection of the Papists and
Arminians, from such places as these, to infer a possibility of being deceived;
as in other places, Let him that stands take heed lest he fall, from thence to
infer, that it is possible for Gods people to fall. Indeed we say, it is
possible in respect of us, but impossible in respect of the promise and grace
of Christ.

Indeed these cautions are used as means to preserve us in our standing, and
keep us from falling, but they do not any way prove, that Gods people may
fall. These things I do but hint at, to set you right in the understanding the
meaning of these cautions, lest you should make bad collections from them.

Cautions imply not a possibility in the thing, but serve in stead of means to
prevent it. And you see it plain here in this 24 verse; Those whom Christ
promises to be preserved, and says it is impossible that they should be
deceived, yet to these he gives these admonitions and cautions, which are
means of their preservation: Take heed that no man deceive you. Christ does
not promise preservation to our security, but to our sedulity; not to our
neglect, but to our use of means: he that promised Hezekiah should live,
decreed that Hezekiah should eat. He that (...), Arist. Rhet.
has ordained to the end, has determined to the means too; and therefore
Hezekiah used physic after God promised to prolong his days.

And this by the way meets with two dangerous errors that are in many, both as
touching perseverance and seduction. 1. Perseverance, Oh say they, I shall
never fall, God has promised to preserve me, he has said I shall not fall,
etc. But you must know the promises of God, though they be free in fieri, yet
are conditional in facto esse; though they are made out of mere grace, yet
they are performed upon some subservient duty in us, especially promises of
this kind.

There are two sorts of promises. 1. There are promises of grace. 2. Promises
to grace: the promises of grace they are absolute and free, but the promises to
grace they are upon condition of our exercise and improvement of grace: As in
that place, To him that has shall be given; this is not a promise of grace,
but a promise to grace, wherein God ingages himself to them who improve either
gifts or graces, to them of grace shall be given more. And the Apostle has the
same; add unto your faith virtue, to your virtue, patience, etc. 2 Pet. 2.5,
6. for if these things be in you and abound, ye shall neither be barren, nor
unfruitful in the knowledge of Christ, there is a promise to improvement: and
that is the first, though God promised perseverance in grace, yet has he
promised this to the use of means for our preservation; or rather he that has
decreed the one, has determined the other as the means whereby we should be
preserved.

There is a second error into which we are apt to run, as touching seduction;
men read this, that God will lead his people into all truth, that they shall
not follow the voice of a stranger, that it is impossible for his elect to be
deceived; and thereupon some may grow secure, too wanton, and adventure too
far, even run into dangers of seduction, out of a vanity to try all things,
and rash confidence that God will preserve them from being deceived.

But you had best take heed of going out of Gods way, in confidence to be
preserved: we ought to try all things, but we had need to beware we do not put
our selves to trials above our strength of grace received, in hope that God
will not suffer us to be deceived. Some trials may be temptations; we pray,
lead us not into temptation, and therefore are not to carry out selves into
them. It is good for a man to know his own strength, I mean the strength of
grace received, lest you put your selves upon too hard a temptation. God has
promised not to suffer us to be tempted above our measure. And when God brings
us into a temptation, he will not suffer us to be tempted above our measure;
but when we bring our selves into it, God may suffer us to fall.

If a man were unavoidably brought into an Idolatrous Temple, or to Mass, he
might trust in God for strength and grace to preserve him, and might look up to
God for preservation: but when a man shall put himself upon such a temptation,
either out of vanity, curiosity, or desire to see novelty (though it were not
unlawful to afford presence in an Idolatrous worship, which yet it is,) yet
does a man put himself upon a greater temptation then he can in Gods way with
confidence expect preservation from, or deliverance out.

The same may I say of other things, though we are commanded to try all things,
yet we must take heed of wading above our depth, of putting our selves to the
scrutiny of those things which are above our reach, lest we make this trial a
temptation to us. Good affections are often carried away with specious words,
which lead their affections, but do not persuade the understanding.

As a man may be too profane in his neglect: so he may be too curious in his
trial.

This is our comfort, truths necessary, are truths evident; and for opinions, I
would neither be a Gallio, who rejected all, cared for nothing; nor a Sceptick,
to examine all: some are to be sifted into for edification, but others are to
be rejected as temptations.

I speak this the rather, because some think they are bound in conscience to
hear and read all, etc. which yet is burdensome, dangerous, nay impossible:
man's life is too short to travel over the births of many ages, especially if
former ages have been as pregnant as our present age is. Besides the Apostle
tells us, Romans 14.1. Him that is weak in faith, do not receive to doubtful
disputation: and why so? lest you should stagger him, unsettle him, trouble
him: and certainly if they are not to be received to doubtful disputations,
they are not to go to them; if it had been their duty to go, it had been the
others duty to receive them. Indeed we are to search, let not any profane,
loose, careless, secure atheist think I give indulgence to his laziness and
security: Let not any think I go about to patronize or countenance their
carelessenesse: You are to search, God is revealing glorious things in the
world; many precious truths come masked to you under the notion of error, and
many errors may be handed to you, and seem to borrow the name of truth; we had
need to search, we had need to pray, we had need of a discerning spirit. Only
this, take the measure of your own strength, and put not your selves to
difficulties above your measure: if you meet with difficulties in these knotty
times, be not too swift to conclude, make not your conclusions, before your
premises are framed. A man may be too soon in an error, too long out of a
truth; but that man is in a truth too soon, who embraces it in his affections,
before it be made evident to his understanding, who entertains it, before he
can in some measure maintain it, who concludes, before he has cleared. That
cannot be good judgment that is passed before evidence is brought in: Nor that
can be no orderly receiving of truth, before which there has not gone
discussion and search.

But I will proceed no further, these are the four things which I thought to
premise, before I came to the answer of the query.

1. That no man can plead an unerring spirit, an immunity from all kind of
error. Consul misner de eccl. p. 657, etc.


2. That the best of men are subject to the worst of errors.

3. That though they be subject to them of themselves, yet are they secured
from them by the grace of Christ.

4. That the way Christ does secure us, is in the use of means.

We now come to the resolution of the Query, viz.

Who are in danger to be led aw^y with error.
Qu. Who those are, that are in danger to be led away with error.

1. All such who have not retained the notions of God in a holy and pure heart.
A corrupt heart is neither a fit receptacle for the receiving, nor fit house
for the entertainment of truth: A sinful heart will not long be the house, nor
truth long a tenant there.

Indeed where truth comes and abides, it comes not as the tenant, but as the
Landlord, the Master of the house, that will dispose and order of all according
to his own rules. Now this no sinful heart can brook withal, he would take in
truth to be his servant, but not to be his Lord; he would close with truth to
serve him, but not to serve truth; he would live on truth, but truth shall not
live on him, to speak plain, he would entertain truth, no further then it will
maintain him: this is a corrupt heart, and will not long be the receptacle of
truth; such a man is in the high way to be carried away with error.

He that will not be Gods servant, shall be the Devils slave; he that will not
be a servant to truth, shall be a vassal to error.

As we say, he that will not be under the sovereignty of Christ, shall be under
the tyranny of sin; he that will not be under the command of grace, shall be
under the power of lust: so he that will not be subject to truth, shall be
enslaved to error: you have something of this expressed in Romans 1.21, 25, 26.
Romans 1.21, 25, 26.
Because when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, etc. for this cause
God gave them up to vile affections.

2. All such who have not entertained the truth with love of it, men that take
it into their heads to know, but not into their hearts to love. Truth has
rather a tyranny then a sovereignty over some men; it awes many, whom it does
not persuade, it convinces their understandings, but does not convert and
turn their hearts, their heart is up in rebellion against all their light;
their affections are in arms against all their knowledge, and their spirits
are not brought into a peaceable subjection to those things revealed. And such
men truth will quickly be weary of them, or they of truth, where the heart does
not close with truths revealed, but still stands up in arms against it, this
man is in danger to be given up to a way of error. You have this in 2 Thessalonians. 2
9, 10. 2 Thessalonians. 2 9, 10.
Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. For
this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe a
lie, and be damned.

It may be God has revealed some truths to thee, and thou have entertained
them into thy head in notion, but not into thy heart with love and affection,
here is light without heat, thou have no heart to embrace those things
revealed, may be upon examination tho^ find they will not suite with thy
greatness, with thy interes^, with thy hopes, thy aims, thy ends, and therefore
cannot cordially close with them, thou cannot deny thy self, and become a
servant to truth. Thou art the man who art in danger to be given up to a way of
error.

3. All such who have not walked suitable to those truths which God has
revealed to them. It may be thou have had many precious truths revealed to
thee, and thy corruptions would not suffer thee to walk suitable to them, there
is light in thy head, but darkness in thy life, truth in the understanding,
but error and sin in practice and conversation, let me tell thee thou art in
danger to be given up to error. Men that will not do what they know, shall
not know what to do; men that will not follow the guidance of truth, shall be
led aside with error, Sin in practice will bring in error in principle. Men
of a bad life, cannot long be men of a good belief, 2 Thessalonians. 2.12. 2 Thessalonians.
2.12.
the Apostle tells us of such, who were carried away with the deceiveablensse of
error, who have not believed the truth, but have taken pleasure in
unrighteousness. If you know Gods will, and will not do it, if God have
revealed his mind to you, and yet you will not square your lives to it, if you
will walk in ways that are not good, notwithstanding God has revealed the
evil of them, you are the men are in danger to be given up to error.

4. All such who have embraced and adhered to former truths out of partial
respects, private and corrupt ends, these are in danger to be led aside with
error.

Vix queritur Jesus propter Iesum.
There are many corrupt ends for which most men, either embrace or adhere to
truth: few seek Christ for Christ, so few there are that do embrace truth for
truth. Now this is certain, Qui hoc desiderat propter aliud, non hoc
desiderat, sed aliud.
he that desires any thing for another thing, does not desire this, but the
other thing, and therefore can as well close with an error as a truth, if it
may be serviceable to that end which he desires. It would be an endless work
to tell you all the corrupt ends which men of corrupt principles have in the
embracing of truth. Indeed who can do it? one man perhaps sees it a way of
gain, of honor, of preferment and advancement (though this has been very
seldom that greatness did lie in the way of goodness and advancement in the
way of truth) yet such a time may come, and therefore a corrupt heart sides
with it, or perhaps he sees such and such whom he knows and values this way,
and therefore he goes the same way with them.

Men that do not believe truth, nor love truth, may side with it for corrupt
ends. Leo the tenth, that monster of men, though he had mean thoughts of the
Gospel, Quantas nobis divitias comparavit haec ^abula Evangelij.
yet he could side with the Gospel, because it brought treasure into his
coffers. Most men do entertain truths, as you do servants (as I have told
you) and will examine and know what they can do for them before they do
entertain them; or they adhere to truth, as the Ivy to the tree, which is not
because it loves it, but because it sucks from it berries and leaves, because
it nourishes and succors it. By this craft we have our gain, says Diana's
crafts-men. As they said of an error, so many say of truth; alas how few men
that entertain, naked truth, and that are willing to embrace truth with
singlen^sse of spirit.

We say men always worship the rising not the declining Sun: So rising
truths, advancing truths, enriching truths they will own. But who will own a
sinking, a declining cause, who will close with a persecuted truth, an
impoverishing truth, an imprisoning truth: Which is a plain evidence that truth
is not entertained for truths sake. Men will see nothing truth, that stands not
with their advancements, their greatness, their accommodations; when truth
comes once to live on us, we grow quickly weary of truth. And such men as
these, they are in the high way to error, he that will be of truths side,
shall not ever be of the rising side. And when men cannot find these things in
the ways of truth, and do see them in a way of error, they will forsake truth
and close with error.

5. All such who are not grounded and established in the truth. The house built
on the sands stood not long, sandy foundations can never hold; men unbottom'd
can never be firm, like the weathercock, they stand but this way for want of
a stronger wind: many who are of this uncertainty of spirit like water that
are formed according to the vessel that holds it, so they according to company
they converse withal, like trees without root they are shaken with every
wind, with every breath of men. It may be they read this, or hear this man,
and they are full in his thoughts, another comes and leaves another impression
on their spirits. This man is a poor man, he is nothing, his light is in
others, he is darkness, his principles are in others, he himself is nothing,
but what you will make him; he is a man to be argued into error or truth,
according to the temper of his companion, he is upon a dark stormy sea, and
steers by the light is held out, he has none within him to guide him, and he
fastens his boat to the next barge, moved by another motion, for he has none
of his own. This is a man, a piece of paste fit to be molded up in what
form, and to what temper you please.

When the stream or flood comes, it cannot move trees and houses, but it
sweeps away what ever lies loose: so here when the stream of error comes,
though rooted Christians stand firm, yet such who sit loose are apt to be
carried away. And therefore the Apostle bids us, not to be ever children,
carried away with every wind of doctrine, this is to be like weather-cocks,
which are moved with every blast, he bids us to labor to get stablished in the
truth, even as a house upon a foundation, that nothing can shake or unsettle us.

6. Such who have rejected truths revealed upon corrupt grounds, it may be
there are such, whom God has made clear convincing discoveries of truth to
them, and yet because they could not stand with corrupt aims, and selfish
ends, therefore they have rejected them as the Jews did Christ: how just is it
with God to give up such to a spirit of error?

It is the observation of Pareus upon the Jews, Act. 5.36. where you read of
many of the Jews that were seduced, he tells us, Iusto judicio Dei seducti
multi fueru^t, ut crederent impostoribus, quia Christo fide^ habere nolucruat.
Par.
It was just with God that they should believe imposters, because they would
not give credit to the truth. It was just with God that they should be punished
with embracing a shadow, who had rejected the substance; with error, who
rejected truth. Christians! you have had many clear discoveries of truth to
you. Let not corrupt ends, selfish respects come in, take heed of rejecting any
truth for corrupt ends, if you do, you will be in the high way to be led aside
with error.

7. All such who have the world for their god, men that have the world for
their god, must embrace such a religion as the world will dictate to them. The
Apostle tells us, The love of money will cause men to err from the faith; it
will make men any thing to get the world, and any thing to keep the world.
Demas is a sad example of this, he had the world in his eye, and he embraced
the world and forsook Christ. The love of the world will make a man shie to
acknowledge truth; how shie was Nicodemus to acknowledge Christ, and it was for
fear of the Jews. It will cause a man to balke and decline truth. Men that
have Court designs will not own any the Court frowns on, they balke them; So
if men have worldly designs, they will never own those truths the world
frowns on. Nay, it will make a man deny truth, yea truths professed, truths
preached, truths contended for: upon this ground many of the Jews renounced
Christ, because if they should acknowledge him, they said the Romans would come
and take away their place and Nation.

Nay the love of the world will make men embrace error in stead of truth, as
you sadly see in Spira. There is no cause can be sure of them, whom either
money or honor can buy out, such men they are only this way till they can mend
their wages. As they say the wind it follows the abundance of exhalations: so
they follow that way, where most abundance of profit. He that will serve God
for a little, will serve the devil for more, he will be any way where most
wages may be had.

There are indeed four sorts of men, who will never hold to truth, or any cause
of God.

1. Ignorant persons, such as know not truth: we must first know and prove,
before we can hold fast, the Apostle tells us so, Prove all things and hold fast
that which is good. When men are ignorant and know not what is truth, how can
they hold to it?

2. Unsound hearted persons. Apostasy and hypocrisy, like the Symbolicall
qualities, one quickly slides into the other. It is an easy matter to make him
an Apostate, who is first an Hypocrite. An Hypocrite is but an Apostate veiled,
and an Apostate an hypocrite revealed. One vertually and in causis, the other
actually and in effectis.

3. A lover of the world. The love of money will cause to err from the faith,
says Paul. Demas was a sad example of that, he forsook Christ and embraced
this present world, he went to be an Idol priest at Thessalonica, as Dorotheus
says. There is no cause can be sure of those, whom either money or honor can
buy out: such men they are only this way till they can mend their wages.

4. Cowardly and fearful spirited men. The fear of men will work a snare,
Prove. 29.25. And this is one snare, it will not only make men shie of truth,
with Nicodemus, but baulk, decline, suppress, nay fall to error and forsake
truth. A fearful man will never be a faithful man: its all one to trust a
coward and a traitor: he that is the first will quickly be made the second.
Fear will undo him, as it has done many. To conclude, this is certain, who
ever is under the command of any lust, truth has no command over him: he that
is given up to any sin, will quickly be given up to error too. And thus you
see who those are, who are in danger to be carried away with error. And how
much this Nation, nay every one of us are guilty of these sins, you will
know, if you do but impartially look over them.

1. We have not retained the notions of God in holy hearts. 2. Nor received
truths with love. 3. Nor walked suitable to truths revealed. 4. We have adhered
to truth for partial respects. 5. We are not grounded in truth. 6. We have
rejected truth on corrupt grounds. 7. We have been servants to the world, and
how just it is with God thereupon to give us up to ways of error, I have
already showed you: to conclude then, if you would be established in these
times, let it be your care;

1. To get into Covenant with God, Jer. 31.34.

2. Get to be his child, Isa. 54.13.

3. Get to be his friend, Joh. 15.15.

4. Get the Spirit of Christ, Joh. 16.13.

5. Be willing to embrace truth revealed, and practice truth received, Hos.
6.3. Joh. 7.17.

6. Be humble, Psalm. 25.11.

7. Entertain truth into thy heart. 1. Truth. 2. All truth. 3. As truth. 4. And
with love of the truth. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. And thus much for the fourth Question.

We are now come to the fifth and grand Question.

Qu. 5. Qu. 5.
The grand Question is, What may be the Examens of truth and error, I say,
What are the Examens of opinions or the trials and discoveries of truth and
error? In the handling of this, in regard it is the main of all, I shall take
more liberty to be larger. And we shall break this into these four Quaeries.

1. Who are to examine opinions.

2. By what rule, or by what touchstone we are to examine.

3. Who is to judge of them.

4. By what marks or signs may a man be able to distinguish truth from
error, and discover error from truth.

We shall now begin with the first. And that is a maine inquiry. viz.

1. Who those are who are to examine.

And if you ask the judgment of the Papists in this point, they will tell
you, that none are to examine or judge of opinions or controversies, but only
the Church, that is, a Synod of Bishops, or an Assembly of Roman Prelates. This
is their tenent, that what ever the Prelates do define in cause of faith, that
ought to be believed and received of all Christians without any examination or
doubt, Bellarm. has this passage Ecclesia non potest errare in explicanda
^octrina fidei, and Christiani tenentur eam recipere, and non dubitare an haec
ita se habent, debet Christianus sine examine recipere doctrinam Ecclesiae.
the Church cannot err in unfolding the doctrine of faith, and all Christians
are bound to receive their determinations without any doubt, whether they be
true or not. A little further he says, Every Christian ought without any
examination to receive the doctrine of the Church, that is, that doctrine,
those prescriptions and definitions which they shall stablish. And he gives one
reason, because what they do establish and prescribe to others, they do it
not as teachers, but as Judges. He has these words, It is one thing to
interpret the rule, after the manner of a teacher, another thing to interpret
it after the manner of a Judge: to the explanation of it after the manner of a
teacher, there is required only learning and knowledge, but to the explanation
of it after the manner of a judge there is required authority. The doctor does
not propound his sentence as necessary to be followed, but as reason does
persuade: but the judge propounds it as necessary to be followed. Augustine and
the rest of the Fathers had but the office of teachers, Aliud est interpretari
legem more doctoris, aliud more judicis, etc. Bellar. Tum doctrinam ex D^o esse
sat is inrelligium, cu^ a legitimo pastore proponi eam animad vertimus, etc.
Greg. de Vol.
but Counsels and Bishops in Convention have the office of Judges, thus he --
So that you see this is their opinion.

1. That Christians are to receive all the explanations and definitions of the
Church touching doctrine of Faith, without any Examination and doubt.

2. That the Church does interpret the Law of God or scripture not after the
manner of a Doctor or Teacher, but a Judge or a Supreme and absolute Prince,
who requires obedience, not so far as law and reason persuades, but for his
authority.

3. That this Church to which they give this absolute Empire over Christians,
is nothing else but an Assembly of Roman Bishops.

You see he speaks high, and yet some go farther then this: One of them has
this passage. Then do we sufficiently know that the doctrine is of God, when
we perceive it to be propounded to us by our lawful Pastor, especial a
Council assenting to it, And if any will not rest here in the doctrine
propounded, but will try further, and arrogate judgment over their judges, and
call to question whether those things are truths which are propounded by the
Church, by whom the spirit of God would teach us, let such an one know, he does
transgress Gods bounds, and the way and manner of trying of spirits commanded
of God. The same man says further. It is not fit that any private man should
arrogate to himself to judge of the doctrines or opinions of his Priest, Quic
simpliciter omnes jubebantur sacerdoti de rebus controversis a^^quid statuent^
acquiescere. Greg. Ecclesiae ministerio credimus simpliciter and absolute, and
si ministri ecclesiae in aliquo dubio definiendo errarent, populus Christianus
errare posset; imo deberet. Stapl.
because every one are simply and absolutely commanded to rest in the
determinations of the Priest.

I will but name another, who yet rises higher. We do simply and absolutely
believe the ministry of the Church. And the people are so subjected to the
sentences of their Pastors, that if the Priest do err in any thing, the
people may and ought to err in obedience of them.

So that you see, if you ask the judgment of the Papists in this point, you
are in a poor case, you are to stand to the determinations and definitions of
Synods, Counsels, without any doubt or examination whether they be true or no,
( and that they might the better bring in this implicit faith, and blind
obedience.) They tell you that they are infallible; that you might the rather
put out your own eyes, and be led by their light, they tell you that they are
unerring guides, and in indeed if this were true, the people might better shut
their eyes and go by theirs, they might rather tie their boat to their ship,
follow the dictates definitions of them, without either doubt or examination:
but they must believe the one, that they cannot err, and then they must do
the other, that is, stand to all their sentences and determinations.

But we will pass this, only we show you that they take away all power in any
Christian man of judging or examining and prooving the doctrines which are
propounded by their Counsels and Bishops, and do require a blind faith and
obedience to them all, saying, that every particular person ought to stand to
the determinations of the Church, and to believe them to be truth, because the
Church has an unerring spirit.

And this belief suits well with the people, say they, to believe as the Church
believes, for he that does believe, him that does believe, is not improperly
said to believe, though he know not what he does believe. An opinion which does
Papistae in religione recipienda ethnicorum, imo pecudu^ more ducu^tur.
beast men, and denude them of all reason, and what is of man in them. Against
which Luther speaks in these words. Hoc uno scelere meritos esse Praelatos
Romanenses, ut ex ecclesiae coetu, tanquam lupi, and tyranni pellere^tur. Tom.
2. p. 375. Qu. Who are to examine opinions.
For this one wicked opinion, viz. that absolute dominion which they claim over
the faith, and consciences of men, the Roman Prelates deserve to be driven out
of the number of the faithful, as Wolves and tyrants. And under this censure
we will leave them, and come to the answer of the Question.

Qu. Who are those who are to examine opinions?

You have heard what the Papists say, viz. that none ought to doubt of, or
examine the opinions, definitions and determinations of the Church. Before we
come to give you our answer, we will premise some distinctions, as touching
examination.

1. First then, there is an examination in foro publico, or externo. And, 2.
There is an examination in foro privato, or interno; that is, 1. There is a
public and authoritative examination. 2. There is a private and Christian
examination. Or, 1. There is an examination in reference to public censure. 2.
There is an examination in reference to private settlement.


The first is authoritative, and is that which comes up to that which Divines
call, judicium ministeriale, or ministerial judgment, which is, when many
Ministers are authoritatively called, convened and met together; there they are
not only inquisitors and examiners of opinions, but Judges; that is,
ministerial and subordinate Judges, or determinators of doctrines and
opinions, and may pass censure upon such opinions, as are found erroneous. And
of this kind is conceived to be that great solemn convention of the Disciples
and Elders, Act. 15. Where there was an examination and debate of things, and
thereupon a passing of censure and judgment. And of this kind were those
ancient and famous Councels and Synods in the Primitive times of the Church;
famous against those errors and heresies in those days. And this is the first
kind, authoritative examination.

2. The second is, a private and conscientious examination of opinions, in a
man's own Court, the Court of conscience, whereby a man does try and debate
whether those things which are prescribed, or those things which are preached,
written, etc. be truths and agreeable to the Word of God. And this does amount
to that which Divines call judicium discretionis, or the judgment of
discretion, in which men have power to examine, debate, and to pass judgment
in reference to their own practice and walking. Every man is not only to be an
inquisitor or examiner of all opinions, nay of the definitions and
determinations of Councels: but he is to judge of them; and this he ought to
do in respect of his own practice, though his judgment is not binding to
others, or concerns not others, no further then others shall find that there
appears truth in it.

Now having premised this, I shall come to the answer; and passing by the
first, leaving it to another place, viz. authoritative examination. We shall
only deal with the second, and say,

That every Christian who has care of his salvation, ought to examine, not
only private opinions; but even the sentences, definitions, determinations, of
Synods, of Councels, and to bring all to the rule of faith, the Word of God,
the true touchstone of doctrines, and to receive them, and reject them, as they
are conceived to be agreeable or disagreeable thereto. This position that we
have here laid down in answer to the question, I shall 1. Clear it by
Scripture. 2. Confirm it by argument. And, 3. Strengthen it by the testimony
of Divines against the Papists. And, 4. Answer objections, and so go to the
second.

1. I shall clear it by Scripture, and you have one here in the text, Mat.
24.4. Take heed that no man deceive you, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Prove all things,
and hold fast that which is good. 1 John 4.1. Beloved, believe not every
spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God, because many false Prophets
are gone forth into the world: So that you see the truth clear in Scripture,
That it is the duty of every one to examine, not only private opinions, but
even the sentences, definitions and determinations of Synods, of Councels
themselves, and to receive them, and reject them as they are evident to be
agreeable and consonant, or dissonant and contrary to the Word of God.

But against these places the Papists object.

Object. That those commands of proving, Praedicta mandata non ad omnes, sed ad
Doctores pertinent. Bellarm.
examining and trying of opinions, do belong unto the Doctors and Steers-men
of the Church, and not to all.

Answ. First, for that place in Matthew. 24.4. though it may seem to be spoken to
the Disciples, yet are others alike concerned in it, if the Disciples were to
take heed, much more others; if the Disciples were in danger of seduction, much
more are others also, who wanted that knowledge, that light and illumination
which they had. And therefore there was greater necessity that ordinary men
should take heed.

For the other place in the 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Prove all things. It seems clearly
that the Apostle did rather speak to the people, then their Pastors; for having
before exhorted them to the due respect of those, who were set over them, verse.
12. and that they should not despise prophesying, he comes to admonish them,
that they do not give too much, as well as too little. To despise prophesying,
is to give too little, and to take all is said upon trust, is to give too much.
It is to set up men in Gods steed. It is to make masters of your faith in
earth; and therefore he exhorts, prove all things, and hold fast to that which
is good.

And for that place in the 1 John 4.1. It is evident the Apostle spoke to
believers in general. First, in respect of his appellation, (...), children,
which appellation better suits with the people, then with the Doctors. And
secondly, because he charge them concerning such as were teachers, there are
many false Prophets gone out, and therefore take heed; this seems the ground of
his exhortation, because there were many false teachers, therefore they were to
beware.

So that you see it is clear in Scripture, that it is the duty of believers to
examine, etc. We will now come to the second thing propounded, viz. confirm it
by Arguments, and we will put these Scriptures into an Argument, which shall be
the first.

believing Chistian be commanded of God to take heed, to prove, to try, to
examine doctrines, then God would not have us to take things of trust, to
submit to the definitions, and determinations of men, the best of men, without
examination and search: but this is the command of God to all Christians, as I
have showed: therefore -- All the doubt lies in the consequence, that if we be
commanded to prove and try all things, then God would not have us submit to any
thing but upon examination and search. And this is plain: for if we are to
swallow all, if we are to receive what ever is offered, if we are to take all
upon trust; It is then impossible, that ever we should do these duties of
proving and trying and examining, before we embrace, and therefore seeing God
would have us to do the one, certainly God would have us to do the other
also, viz. to examine things before we do embrace them.

Obj. But this is spoken of doubtful doctrine, for that only needs trial, and
proving; but the doctrine which is commended by them who are in authority, is
manifestly good; therefore are we to receive it without trial, this is
Bellarmines.

Ans. Were the doctrine that were prescribed good in it self, yet if not
evidently good, it could not be received; and it cannot be evidently good, till
it is evidenced to me to be established upon the Word; and this cannot be, till
it have passed a scrutiny, till with the Bereans we have searched whether these
things are so or no, Act. 17.11. This is certain, doctrins may not be in se
dubiae, in themselves doubtful, and yet auditoribus dubiae, and incertae,
doubtful to the people; I say they may not be doubtful in themselves, and yet
they may be doubtful and incertaine to us; and therefore we are not able to
receive them, though clear in themselves and to others, if not cleared to us.
And they cannot be clear to us, till we have tried, and examined them. The
doctrine that the disciples preached to the Bereans, it was clear in it self,
but yet it was not clear to them till they had searched and examined it. And
if the doctrine of the Apostles were subject to trial, and they commended for
their scrutiny and trial of it, much more any doctrine of man, or any
prescriptions of mere men, and they deserve no less commendation, who will
take pains in the scrutiny and search of it.

2. To the second part of the Objection, viz. That the Doctrine commended by
them in authority is manifestly good: you know this is built upon a false
foundation: they say Councels and Synods are infallible, they have an unerring
spirit, and therefore they say, all their conclusions are good.

But we say Councels and Synods may err. Et errore p^sse, and errasse co^cilia
certum est.
That Councels may, that Councels have erred is certain, and therefore their
results in stead of being manifestly good, may be evidently bad, witness the
results of the Council of Neocaesariensis, Doctores in Synodis congregati, vel
concilia, sive particularia, sive generalia sin^, uti saepiu^ in rebus fidei
errarunt, it^ eti^^num errare possunt. Misner. Praesbyteris in nuptiis bigami
prandere non convenit, quia cum poenitentia bigamus egeat, quis erit
Praesbyter, qui propter convivium talibus nuptiis possu praebere consensum.

Post consecrationem corpus and sanguis Christi est sensualiter in sacramentis,
and manibus sacerdotum tractotur, etc. Confess. Berenger. errat apud Gratianum
de Consecrat distinct cap 2. Consul. Daven. de judice and norma fidei, p 136
usque ad p 142. Consul. Misner. de ecclesia, page 615. usque ad page 744.


which condemned second-marriages, as a great sin. And the Roman Council
approved on by Nicolaus the 2d, who concluded the real presence in the
Sacrament, and in as gross a manner, as ever was, viz. that after the
consecration, the body and blood of Christ was sensually in the Sacrament,
handled by the hands of the Priests, and torn in pieces with the teeth of
believers.

The like I might show of the Council of Laterens, which is said, for the
greatness of it, to be an oecumenicall and general Council, who put in this as
an Article into the Creed, to believe that Christ's body and blood were
Transubstantiated in the Sacrament. I might add to this the Council of Trent,
and others --

And therefore seeing that all Doctrines are not free from d^ubts, which are
established by Councels, nay, seeing that Councels themselves may err,
therefore these commands of Christ, Take heed of being deceived, and those of
the Apostle, Prove and try all things, are of use and requisite to the
examination and trial of the results of Councels and Synods themselves. They
that prescribe things, are but men, and therefore not infallible, they may err
and we that receive them, we are men too, and therefore are to receive them as
men, that is, rationally, not precipitantly, deliberately, not rashly. Omnis
homo dimittens rationem propter authoritatem humanam, incidit in insipientiam
best ialem. Dur.
That man that puts off reason, for humane authority, falls into beastly folly.
Nullius puri hominis authoritatem rationi praeserrimus.
We prefer no authority of pure man before reason: so that as we are men, we
are to receive doctrines, and that is rationally: but yet more, we are not only
men, but Christian men, and therefore are to receive doctrines as Christians,
having a light of the Word, added to the light of reason, whereby we may be
able to examine those things which are prescribed. And that shall suffice for
the first argument.

Arg. 2. Why Christians are to examine the doctrins and definitions of men?
Because God has furnished Christians with abilities for such a work. I will
name three.

1. They have light, as men.

2. They have light, as Christians.

3. They have a faculty, whereby they are able to reflect, and upon reflection
to discern of things that differ.

1. God has furrished them with light, as men, he has given them a reasonable
soul, an understanding faculty, which was therefore set up and created of God
to enquire and find out saving truth, and every man's understanding does owe
this operation to God, to take pains in the search and examination of the mind
of God. And certainly, it is a great fault, in those who out of sloth and
sluggishnes, do adhere to the dictates and opinions of others, because they
would not be troubled with the pains of a scrutiny and examination, whether the
things commanded be agreeable to the Word of God, yea or no.

2. God has furnished them with light and abilities, as Christians, he has
not only given a natural, but a spiritual and supernatural light, whereby we
are made able to enquire into the truths of God. It is the opinion of our
learned Divines against the Popish tenent of implicit faith, and blind
obedience, Quod singuli fideles habent, adeo tale donum illuminationis, quod
eos reddit sufficientes and idoneos ad examinandum, dijudicandum and
discernendum in dogmatibus fidei, quod verum, quod salsum, quatenus sunt
unicuique eorum ad salutem necessario credenda, vel cavenda. Daven, de jud. and
fidei.
That all and every believer has of God such a gift of illumination, that
renders them sufficient, and fit to examine, judge and discern of the doctrines
of faith, what are true, and what are false, so far as they are needful to
salvation to be embraced or rejected.

And there is enough in the Word to prove it, Isa. 45.13. And all thy children
shall be taught of the Lord. Christ speaks the same, Joh. 6.45. Joh. 7.17. If
any man will do my will, he shall know my doctrine, Psalm. 25.14. The secrets
of the Lord are with them that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant,
Consul. Whitak. cont. 1. q. 5. c. 8. arg. 4.
Matthew. 13.11. To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of God,
etc. Joh. 10.4, 5. My sheep hear my voice and know it, but they know not the
voice of a stranger. 1 Cor. 2.14, 15. The carnal man discerns not the things
of God, etc. but he that is spiritual judges all things, and he himself is
judged of no man, Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were once darkness, now light in the Lord.

All which do evidently and clearly prove, that God has given to believers a
sufficient light and illumination, whereby they are able to discern of things
that differ, and are able to examine, and to try whether doctrines propounded,
if necessary to salvation, are of God, yea, or no.

3. God has given them a faculty to reflect, and upon reflection, to know
things that differ. And not to use it to examine all things, to find out
truth, and to discover errors, to judge false teachers, to know the mind of
Christ, the voice of our shepherd; what is it, but to hide our talent in a
napkin, to bury up those abilities that God has given us, and to be
unserviceable by them? This is a second reason, why we are to examine the
doctrines of men, because God has given us abilities for the doing of it, we
have a natural light, as men, and we have a supernatural light, as we are
Christians, and we have a faculty whereby we may make use of this, and by
comparing and bringing things to the rule, may be able to discern of things
that differ.

If indeed there were no more required then to embrace and receive what ever
were tendered, without any further trial or examination of it, there were no
need of all this, there were no need of the understanding of Christians, nay
indeed of the understanding of men. As one says to this purpose, to receive
all, and swallow all offered, No^ est opus virili^ intelligentiae, sed pucritis
inscitiae.
there is no need of the understanding of a man, but of the simplicity of a
child. Infants do swallow what ever the Nurse puts into the mouth, but men
examine whether that which they eat be wholesome, yea or no; now if you will
swallow what ever is offered, and not examine it, what needs the understanding
of men, the simplicity of children will serve for that. And so much in brief
for the second reason.

try and examine what ever Doctrines are prescribed and imposed, or we are to
receive what ever is imposed, or reject what ever is imposed without
examination. But this we are not to do.

1. Not to reject without examination, for so we may reject truth in stead of
error.

2. Nor to receive what ever is imposed.

1. For if we were to receive what were imposed without trial, then should we
make men masters of our faith: but that we ought not to do, as I shall show
hereafter. Ergo.

2. Again, if we are to submit to what is imposed, without trial and
examination, then would not God charge us with sin, if we believed any error
or heresy, provided it were imposed or prescribed by them to whom it was our
duty to submit, without trial or examination. The ground is this, because none
ought to be blamed, who have done their duty, who have obeyed Gods ordination,
or Gods order; and therefore the Papists say, that if their Prelates are
deceived, the people ought to err with them, Populi vi regiminis und errare
posse, imo debere.
rather then dissent from them; and they say it upon this ground, because that
men are bound to receive and embrace for truth, what ever is prescribed by
them, and if so, if it be their duty, then though they embrace error, yet they
cannot be justly charged, because they did but their duty. So that I say, if it
were man's duty to receive all without examination or search, then would not God
charge them with sin, who received error from them in authority. But God
does charge them, Luke 6. If the blind do lead the blind, they shall both
fall into the ditch. So Lam. 2.14. The Prophets have seen vain and foolish
things for thee, and have seen false burdens and causes of banishment.

And therefore we are exhorted to beware of such, Jer. 23.16. Hearken not to
the words of the Prophets that prophecy unto you, they make you vain, they
speak a vision of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord. And
upon this ground you have it so often in the new Testament, Beware of false
teachers, beware of the concision, beware of such who do come in Lambs
clothing, but within are ravening wolves. Parisiensis has a strange passage.
Si seductor sub. praetextu very doctoris, simplici alicui and indoct^ errorem
aliquem impietatis praedicet, Deus cor ejus avertet, ne illi credat, nisi h^c
vel negligentia ejus, vel alia culpa impediat. Paris. de legib. cap. 21.
If some seducer should come under the pretext of a true and orthodox Preacher,
and should preach some wicked error to some simple and unlearned men, God
(says he) would turn the heart of his people from believing his doctrine,
unless their negligence; or some other fault of theirs, were the obstacle and
hinderance of it. And Augustine has a passage like it. Nemine^ excusatu^ iri,
si seducatur per verba homl^um, quia vocem ipsius Christi in sacris Scripturis
audiri debuit. August.
There is no man (says he) that is to be excused, if he be seduced by man to
error, because (says he) he ought to have heard the voice of Christ in the
Scriptures. Nemo mihi dicat, o quid dixit Donatus, quid Pontius, etc quia nec
catholicis episcopis consent endum est, sicuti forte fallantur, ut contra
canonicas Dei Scripturas aliquid sentiant. August. de unit. ecclesiae cap 20.
No man shall say to me, What said Donatus, or what says Pontius, or
Parmenianus, or any mortal man? there is no believing of the greatest Councels
of the world, because it is possible they may err and deviate from the Word of
God, etc. So much for the third Argument.

Why we are to examine all doctrins: and that is in respect of facility of
being deceived, and the danger of seduction in things that concern our souls.

1. The facility of being deceived, if we do not examine doctrines: most men
that are carried away, they are drawn aside for want of examination. It may be
they examine the quality of the doctors, not of the doctrine, they look upon
men, and see them men of great parts and learning, men of holy life and
conversation, men perhaps that know much of Gods mind, and thereupon they
swallow all that they offer, they embrace all that they tender, Consul. Misner.
page 657. etc.
and never examine whether the things they hold forth be conformable to the
Word of God. Why the learned men, the most knowing men, the most holy men,
may be deceivers, may lead thee away with an error, and therefore seeing such
facility of deceit, there is great need of examination: Ne dum Evangelium
sitiant, venenum hauriant.
Lest while they thirst after the Gospel, they drink poison: lest while truth
is their thirst, error may be their drink.

2. The danger of seduction: what a sad and fearful thing it is to be carried
away with an error? to build hay and stubble upon a good foundation? as the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 3.12, 13. It is dangerous to thy self, dangerous to thy
family, dangerous to thy posterity, it may be dangerous to thy soul too, and
therefore certainly there should be all care had, before you do entertain or
embrace doctrine.

Christians are not lightly to receive any thing that concerns faith and
salvation, they had need to try it, and examine it over and over, we are not to
reject an error ignorantly, but rationally, nor are you to embrace a truth,
till you have debated and examined it whether it be a truth or no, an opinion
perhaps may cost you your liberty, your estate, your lives, and I would be loath
to buy an error so dear. A man would be willing that it should be truth that
a man should do so much for, he had need to be assured of that, and therefore
there is great necessity, now, if ever, that we should examine what is truth,
and not to take all is brought to us, but to see whether it be agreeable to the
Word of God, yea or no. Isa. 8.20. To the law and to the testimonies: if they
speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them.

receive all that is presented, without examination and search, whether the
things prescribed are agreeable to the Word of God, then have men dominion over
our faith, then should we make men Lords and Masters of our faith. But no man
ought to have dominion over our faith. 2 Cor. 1.11. It is that you see the
Apostle does abhominate there, we have not dominion over your faith. And it is
that which Christ speaks against, Matthew. 23.8. call no man father, and call no
man master upon earth. verse. 10. Indeed we are commanded to be obedient to man,
Ephesians. 6.8. Servants be obedient to your masters, according to the flesh: and
yet we are commanded again, not to be servants unto men, 1 Cor. 7.23.

The meaning is evident, if you consider with me, there are twofold masters,
1. Masters according to the flesh, and masters according to the spirit. We are
to be obedient to Masters according to the flesh, so far as appertains to
the outward man in all outward things. But of our souls and consciences, as we
have no Fathers, Oportet nos ex ea part, quae ad hanc vita^ pertinet, subditos
esse potestatibus, ex illa vero part qua credimus Deo, and in regnum ejus
vocamur, non oportet nos esse subditos cuiquam homini. Aug.
so we have no Masters upon earth, only our Master and Father which is in
Heaven.

And in this sense Christ speaks, when he does say, Call no man Master and no
man Father upon earth, that is, acknowledge none your supre me Master, neither
yield your selves to be wholly and absolutely ruled by the will of any, nor
inthrall your judgments, submit your consciences, to the sentences, laws,
definitions, doctrines, of any man, or Angel, but only to your Lord and
Master Christ. But if so be we were to receive all that is prescribed, and
submit to impositions of men without search and scrutiny whether they be of God
or no, we should make men Masters of our faith. This were to set man in Gods
stead, to put man in Christ's throne: this were to yield an implicit faith, and
blind obedience, which to do, is to make men Gods, and your selves beasts.

Thus you see I have laid down the position. I have cleared it to you by
Scripture, I have confirmed it by argument.

3. I am now in the third place to show you, that this has been the constant
doctrine of our learned and orthodox Divines, in opposition to the Papists,
ancient and modern.

I think it not necessary to name many; a few therefore for all. Clem. Alex.
has this passage. Non absolute enuntiantibus fidem habemus, quibus licet
contrarium enu^tiare, etc. Clem. Alex. Si contraria invicem senserint concilia,
debemus quasi judices probare meliora. Hilar. de Synod. advers. Arianos.
We are not absolutely to assent to the doctrines and determinations of men,
who themselves may dissent from their own opinions, nor to expect the
testimony which is given of men, but to search and prove what is the voice of
God. Another this. * If Synods should determine contrary, we as judges should
prove and approve of the better.

It is the speech of another, viz. Ego solis eis Scripturarum libris, qui jam
canonici a^pellantur, didici hanc honorem timo rem^ differ, ut nullum eorum
authorem s^ibendo aliquid errasse firmissi ne credam, etc. Aug. D^v. 169.
I have learned to give this honor and reverence to the Canonical Scriptures
only, to believe what ever is therein is truth it self: but for other writings,
though men excellent in learning and holiness, yet I read them so, as that I do
not therefore think the^ to be true, because they have thus spoken and thought,
but because they do thus appear to me to be consonant and agreeable to the mind
of God, the word of truth. Another thus. I^ qui praeest, si praeter voluntatem
Dei, vel praeter quod in Sacris Scripturis evidenter praecipitur, vel dicit
aliquid vel imperat, tanquam falsus test is Dei, aut sacrilegas habeatur.
Isidor.
If any that are in authority, shall declare or command any thing which is not
agreeable to the will of God, or not evidently commanded in Scripture, let him
be held as a false witness of God, or one sacrilegious. Another, Omnis homo
dimittens rationem propter authoritatem humanam, incidit in inspientiam
bestialem, Daven.
He that puts off reason, or subjects reason to meet humane authority, falls
into beastly folly; and the same Author. Nos plus rationi damus, quam cutcunque
authoritati humanae, etc.
We do not prefer the authority of any mere man before reason, and therefore
seeing the fathers, whether taken singly or jointly in Councels, are but mere
men, and their authority but mere humane authority. The faith of Christians is
not to be so subjugated to the determinations of them, that there shall be left
no use of reason, much more of Scripture in proving and examining doctrines,
whether of God or no. Sicut debtor est voluntas suae operationis in bonis
volen^i^: sic intellectus suae operationis debtor est in veris credendis, seu
cognoscendis; quare nec error, nec ignorantia excuset unquam a perditione.
Paris. de leg cap 21.
Pariensis has this passage. As the will is a debtor unto God in its
operations for the choice of good: so is every man's understanding a debtour to
God in its operations for the believing of truth. Therefore neither error nor
ignorance can excuse any before God if they perish. Another, says this. Ad
ipsum verbum Dei oportet nos omnes scientiarum disciplina^ and opiniones,
tanquam ad lydeum lapidem examinare, etc quodcunque ab eo auth^r^tatem non
habet, eadem facilitate contemnitur, qua affertur. Cornel. Agrip de vanit
scient. cap 100 de verbo Dei.
It is our duty to bring all opinions to the Word, as the touchstone of them:
and if any has not its authority thence; It may be as easily contemned, as it
is offered and held forth. Luther also speaks the same thing; he has this
passage. Over debent far judicium, utrum Prae^ati vocem Christi, vel
alienorum proponant. Luther. Tom 2. page 375. Consul. Dav. de Jud. and nor.
fidei. ubi plures recitantur, page 167, 186. etc. etiam 168, etc.
It is the duty of the flock of Christ, to examine whether their Pastors do
speak the voice of Christ, or visions of their own heart. The same man says
further. Where the Word of God is preached, the people have not only power and
command to judge of doctrines; but every godly man ought to perform this,
under danger of salvation. And if we should consult with all, they all speak
the same language, and say, though there is not given to all the faithful a
spirit of interpreting Scripture, in an authoritative and public way, yet
every Christian has a spirit to examine, and judge of doctrine in his own
conscience. Learned Whitaker has this expression. Non datur omnibu^ fidelibus
spiritus interpraetandi Scripturas, ad authoritatem publicam in ecclesia, sed
tamen ^^n^us cujuscunque Christiani est spirit^^ (...), ad privatam doctrinae
probationem and dijudicationem in conscientia ipsius. Polan. Syntag. l. 1. cap
45. Omnibus piis incumbit, ut sibi caveant, and quam vis doctrina^ diligenter
examinent ne falsa forsan pro veris suscipia^t; quisquis debet ni^i sua fide,
sueque judicio divini^us in sp^rato, non ex alterius nutu and arbitrio pendere.
Whitak cont. 1. quaest. 5. de interpret Script.
It lies all Christians much upon to examine all doctrine, lest they do
otherwise take false doctrine for true, and every one ought to lean to the
persuasion of his own judgment enlightened, and not to depend upon the will and
judgment of others.

Another of our learned Divines says. In doctrinis quorumvis mortalium
admi^ten^is adhibendum est examen, and judicium discretionis, ut possimus
tanquam probi argentarij adulterinam a leg^ti^^a doctrina discernere D^v.
In the receiving of the doctrines of any mortal man, we are to examine, and,
like unto tryers of silver, are to discern between false doctrine and true.
Again, In doctrina investiganda non alienis tantum modo oculis, sed suis
utendum, etc. Daven.
In the finding out of doctrine, we are not only to use others eyes, but our
own eyes, nor are we to commit our faith to others judgments, but to clear it
to our selves. Pedibus potius quam cordibus ca^t in sententiam aliorum, qui
dogmata non expendunt.
They rather bring their feet then their hearts into a way, who subscribe to
the doctrines of any without examination and search. A fi^guli^ ergo in
doctrina s^^^tis admittend^, usus propriae rationis, propriique judicij
requiritur, etc.
The use of a man's proper reason and judgment, is required of all those who
are to receive the doctrine of salvation, not that we should judge according to
natural reason of divine truths, but that we should use our understandings
enlightened (according to the rules of good and necessary consequence) what is
agreeable, and what is disagreeable to the Word of God, and are no further to
submit to the doctrine of any mortal man, then it is evidenced to us to be
deduced out of the Word of God, and agreeable to the mind of Christ.

I have here given you a taste of an abundance more, that might be alleged,
you see a cloud of Witnesses, that it is the duty of all to examine, not only
the opinions of private men, but the sentences, determinations of Synods and
Councels, and to receive or reject them, as they shall be found consonant or
dissonant to the Word of God. We will now come to the fourth thing propounded,
viz. The answer of objections: and so pass to the second, viz. By what rule we
are to examine.

Obj. If Christians are to examine and judge of the opinions and doctrines of
their guides, or them, who are set over them: then it will follow, they are
judge of their Judges: but this is absurd. And therefore --

Ans. A Christian makes himself Judge of none, nor is he judged of any, as the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 2.15. It is one thing, judicare, another thing, judicem
agere, one thing to judge of mine own acts, another thing to act a Judge. To
judge by way of authority, in foro externo, in public way of doctrine, does
not belong to private Christians: but to judge by way of a Christian in the
Court of conscience, in foro interno, what is to be done, what is not to be
done, what is according to the will of God, what not; this belongs to every
Christian.

It is the duty of every Christian to weigh, perpend, examine the opinions and
doctrines of others, so far as they contain any thing to be believed, or
done: and in this doing he judges not of persons, but of things: not of men,
but of doctrines: not as they are the acts of others, but as they are to be his
own acts. The Apostles in Acts 5.40. did judge it not fit to abstain from
preaching the Gospel, notwithstanding that decree of the Priests, and yet they
made not themselves Judges of them. So the Christians judged, notwithstanding
the sentences and decrees of Emperors, that Idols were not to be worshipped:
and yet they were not the Judges of those Emperors. So the three children, in
Dan. 3.

There is a twofold judgment granted by Papists themselves, Forense.
Rationale.


The former, to wit, public judgment, they say belongs to them, that are in
public authority; the other belongs to all to whom God has given a reasonable
soul. And V^^squisque debet ^^tus suos examinare ad scientia^ quam a Deo habet,
omnis enim homo debet secundum ratione^ agere. Aquin.
Aquinas grants some kind of judgment to the people. And therefore this
judgment, viz. rational and private judgment, may be exercised, by their own
confession, and yet in this they are not judge of their Judges.

Obj. 2. Those who ought to rest in the judgment of their Doctors and
teachers, they ought not to examine and judge of doctrines, and receive or
reject them, as they shall appear to them to be true or false. But private
Christians ought to rest in the judgment of their Doctors. For this, they urge
that of Christ, The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chair, what ever they
say to you, do.

Answ. For the first part of the objection, that we are not so far to rest in
the doctrines and determinations of any, as not to examine, I have fully
cleared to you in this Discourse already, and this does but beg the Question:
if indeed we are to rest in the judgment of others, then its true, it were not
our work to examine, but to do; but I have showed, we are not to rest in the
judgment of others, and therefore our work first to examine before we do.

And for that Allegation of Christ's, Sedendo s^per ca^hedram Mos^s legem Dei
docent ergo per illos Deus docet: sua vero illi si v^lint d^cere nolit^^
audire, nolite facere. Aug. ^ract. 46. in Joh.
we are to understand it, that Christ would have them to hear them so far, as
they might hear God in them, that is, so far as that which they speak was
agreeable to the Word (...) God, and no otherwise certainly. Suppose that the
Scribes and Pharisees should have preached to the people, as no doubt but they
did, that Christ was not the Messiah, that he was not sent of God to be the
Savior of the world, would Christ have them hear them in that, certainly they
themselves do not hold that, and therefore that [whatsoever] is to be
understood with this limitation, so far as their doctrine and precepts were
consonant and agreeable to the Word of God. For where they erred, he himself
blames them.

And indeed, if the Papists would consult with their own authors, as touching
this point, they would resolve them in it. One of them propounding this
Qu^stion, Whether people are bound to obey their Superiors in all things, 1.
Non ten^tur subd tus obedire superiori suo co^^ra praeceptum majoris
potestatis. ^ No^ tenetur obedire, si ei aliquid praecipiat, in quo ei no^
subdatur. Aquin. 2. 2. q. 104 art. 5.
he resolves it after this manner.

1. The people are not bound to obey their Superiors, if that their command be
contrary to a command of greater power.

2. The people are not bound to obey their Superiors, if their Superiors
should command any thing to them, in which the people are not subjected to
them, that is, if in his commands he go beyond his bounds, and require that of
them, which is due to God to require only. When he commands things, which are
contrary to the Word of God, we are not bound to obey; because this is contrary
to a command of greater power. When he commands things, which are besides the
warrant of the Word, and beyond his bounds, we are not to obey; because he has
not dominion over our faith; he commands things above his power. It is a
savoury speech of Austin. Oportet nos ex ea part, quae ad ha^c vita^ pertinet,
subditos esse p^testatibus, ex illa vero part qua credimus D^o, and in regnum
eju^ vocam^r, non oportet nos esse subditos cuiqua^ homini -- Deo enim potius
obtemperandum quam hominibus. Aug.
It behooves us in things which concern this life, to be subject to higher
powers: but in those things which concern another life, we ought not to be
subject to any man; (that is, commanding things evil, for he says) it is
better to obey God, then man.

If then these things be true, that we are not to obey those comm^nds, which
are contrary to greater power: Nor are we to obey, when the command does
transgress and exceed the limits and bounds of his power. Then this is clear,
that when any thing is imposed, either to be believed, or to be done, it is the
duty of all to ex^^ine, whether in the obedience of the commands of man, he
does not transgress the will of God, or give more to men, then is his due, and
proper alone to God. --

Obj. 3. The faith of Christians ought not to be conjecturall and uncertain,
but certain and firm, but when men lean upon the judgments of their own
private spirits, in admitting or rejecting doctrines, their faith is uncertain,
because private men may be deceived, but the judgments of Councels and Synods
are unerring and infallible --

Ans. For the first part of this Objection, viz. that the faith of Christians
ought to be firm and certain, and not conjecturall or uncertain, we freely
grant. It is a maxim in Divinity, Fidei nihil potest subesse alsum aut
incertum.
Nothing uncertain, nothing doubtful or false can be the object of faith: and
this takes away their main ground. It is then impossible that we should believe
the determinations or definitions of Synods or Councels without examination,
because they may be false, for they are not infallible, they are not unerring,
as I have showed; they are but men, and therefore their results and
determinations doubtful, and therefore cannot fall under faith.

For the other part of the Objection, That they who lean to their own
judgments, and not to the judgment, and determinations of Councels, their
faith is doubtful and uncertain.

I answer, If by leaning to their own judgment be meant, to adhere to what
their own humane reason does dictate to them in divine things; then I say, that
their faith is doubtful and false, for man's understanding is no fit measure,
nor judge of divine truths, it is above reason. But if by leaning to our
private judgment, be meant, adhering to that which an understanding enlightened
does evidence to be in the Word, or adhering to that which the Spirit of God
has revealed and persuaded the spirit of a man to be the mind of God in the
Word, then I say, that this faith is neither uncertain or false.

And therefore it is rightly spoken by a learned Divine, Is nititur proprij
spiritus judicio, quod illud sentit de rebut divinis, quod ratio dicta etc.
Consul Morton. Apolog. Cathol. p. 2. l. 5. cap. 10. Turpissime falluntur
papistae, quod judicium spiritus privati and spiritus divini, ex multitudine
potius aestimant quam ex origin. D^^.
He leans upon his private judgment, that judges of divine things, what his
own humane reason does dictate, but not he who judges of divine things,
according as the Spirit of God does persuade him by the Word.

In this therefore the Papists are miserably deceived, that they esteem that
which one man judges to be the judgment of a man's private spirit, but what a
multitude and Council do determine, that they call the judgment of the
divine Spirit, and so take up their judgment of a private spirit, or divine
Spirit, rather from the authority of the determiners, ^en from the truth of the
t^ing determined, rather from the multitude, then from the original of it;
when yet it may happen, that the judgment of many, even of a Council, may flow
from a private spirit, and the judgment of one single man, from the Spirit of
God. Patre^ qui in Concilio Nicaeno putaba^t conjugale^ societatem sacerdotibus
denegandam, sequebantur judicium privati spiritus: unus Paphnutius, qui
desendebat rerum immaculatu^, etiam in sacerdotibus bonorabilem, sequebatur
judicium Spiritus divini. Ib.
You see in the Council of Nice who denied marriage-society to Ministers,
certainly they followed the judgment of their private spirits, it was not the
judgment of the Spirit of God: and on the contrary, unus Paphnutius, one
Paphnutius, who defended against them all, the lawfulness of marriage to
Ministers, and the bed to be undefiled, followed the judgment of Gods Spirit.
Truth may be alone, and not with a multitude; one Paphnutius may have the
truth, and the whole Council be in an error. Truth is not tied to multitudes,
to learning, nor to multitudes of learned, nay holy men; yet there would I seek
it, when at a loss.

To conclude this then:

1. That man who does embrace any doctrine or opinion, because it is suitable to
his mind, and pleases his private spirit, that man is led by his private
spirit.

2. Or that man who closes with a doctrine, because such and such do teach
it, or such command it, this is his own humane credulity, and he acts his own
spirit.

Siquis credat aliquid per and propter internum dictamen Spiritus divini,
judicium ejus per verbu^ illuminantis, and informa^tis, is solus credit uti
oportet. Daven. ib.
But he that does believe a truth, by and through the inward dictate of the
spirit informing his mind by the Word, he is not led by his private spirit,
but by the Spirit of God.

Obj 4. But you see most Christians are so ignorant, that they are not able to
judge of Questions of faith, they themselves will confess they are not able to
determine of such points.

Ans. I grant there is too much ignorance amongst them, who should know: we may
say with the Apostle, Heb. 5.12. When for the time we might have been teachers
of others, we our selves have need to be taught what are the first principles
of the oracles of God.

It is never enough to be lamented, the ignorance even among them that are
godly themselves. Non quaeritur quid rudes and inertes Christiani facere
possint sed quid pij and fideles facere debeant. Dav.
But the Question is not here, what those that are idle and slothful can, but
what those that are godly and faithful should. Certainly, they should be able
to give an answe^ of their faith: they should be able to know the voice of
Christ from the voice of a stranger: they should be able to discern between
meat and poison, between truth and falsehood. That is their duty; and in some
measure those that are believers are able in those points that are necessary to
salvation.

Obj. But you will say, that God has not commanded unlearned men to study
Divinity, that thereby they might be able to maintain the truth. God does not
require of them (say the Papists) that they should understand those things, or
come to the knowledge of them, Iudicando ex ratione doctrinae.
by judging of the truth or falsehood of doctrines, Sed pendendo ex authoritate
docentium.
but by depending upon authority of the teachers.

Ans. Briefly to answer this. It is not necessary to all and singular persons
to judge of all Questions and Controversies arisen, touching faith, and
therefore not necessary they should make it their study. But for such as are
necessary doctrines, without which there is no salvation; it is needful that
all that would be saved, should both hear them, and understand them, and judge
of them.

What a fearful thing, if our condition were such, as those blind Papists,
who know nothing, but believe as the Church believes, and that they might not
know, the key of knowledge is taken from them, they are interdicted the private
use of Scriptures, and the public use of them is rendered unusefull, being read
to them in an unknown tongue. And having thus beasted men, they say to them
after this manner, Vos rudes est is and imperiti, nullo modo potestis judicare
de quaestionibus fidei, ergesi salvi esse velitis, nihil jam reliquum est, nisi
ut coeca obedientia nostro judicio subscribatis. Bellar.
You are unskilful and illiterate, and therefore are no way able to judge of
Questions of faith: if therefore you would be saved, there is nothing then
remaining, but that you should with a blind: obedience subscribe unto our
judgments and determinations. Here is the miserable condition of those blind,
deluded souls. We know better, we know it is our work to study and enquire
into the things of heaven. It is our work to learn to be able to judge of
things that differ; if to prove all things, then to judge.

Indeed, if by Divinity, be meant Spi^osas Scholasticorum altercationes, those
thorny disputes of School Divinity, or wrangling questions, doubtful
disputations, such points as do but nourish contention, not edify the heart
and conscience, then we say indeed, that God has not tied all men to the study
of such Divinity. The Apostle says, Him that is weak in faith, receive ye, but
not to doubtful disputation. But if Divinity be meant the holy Scriptures, and
those things necessary to salvation, then we say that God has tied all men
upon this bond and obligation of life, to study, enquire and to be able to
judge of these things, which concern eternal life. One objection more.

Obj. 5. But you will say, It has been the constant custom of the Church of
God in all ages, that those who have not rest^d in the judgment of those who
were their guides, and such set over them, were deemed for heretics; therefore
it was never lawful for private men to examine, and to judge, and reject the
doctrines of their Superiors.

Ans. A short answer will serve for this. It is one thing to be a Heretic,
Daven. de Jud. and norma page 159.
another thing to be so reputed. There is nothing more common then this, that
they who have gotten public power and authority to join with them, to account
them for Heretics, who reject their decrees and determinations: because they
are persuaded they have decreed nothing, but what is according to the rule of
the Word. But if they be deceived, as it has often fallen out, and that the
other be in the truth, those who are called Heretics are the Orthodox. To
reject the decrees of Councels does not make a man an Heretic; but to reject
the truth, the Word of God. And therefore it is needful to examine and to
judge of things, Ne dum haberi pro haereticis vitamus, esse haeretici
incipiamus, Daven. ib.
lest while we would shun to be called Heretics, we begin to be Heretics.

And thus we have done with the first grand Query; Who are to examine of
opinions. I told you there was a twofold examination, one public, the other
private.

And I laid down this position, That it was the duty of every Christian, not
only to examine private opinions, but the sentences, determinations of
Councels, Synods, and to reject them, or receive them, as they shall be
evidenced to be consonant or dissonant to the Word of God. It is needful,
before we pass to the second, to make some application of this first, the
season calls upon it. --

The Position applied.
Let us then give to Synods and Councels that which is their right: It is their
right and office to expound Scriptures, and to unfold and determine
controversall doctrines, and to declare their sentences and decrees to the
Churches.

But let us not give to them that which is divine, and Gods right, to submit to
their definitions and determinations of faith, without any scrutiny,
examination and judgment, whether they be according to Gods mind, or no.

It is the speech of a learned Divine, Laicis praecipiamus quod illis ut ^^e
est, ne temere and superbe rejiciant sana and orthodoxa decreta praepositorum:
sed ne illis mandemus quod plane servile est, ut nullo judicio adhibito faciant
quae vis imperata Superiorum. Daven.
Let us charge the people with that which is profitable to them, that they do
not rashly, headily, proudly reject the sound and Orthodox decrees of Councels,
and of them set over them; but let us not prescribe that which is beastly and
servile: that without any scrutiny and examination, they subscribe to the
judgment and impositions of them over them: this is, as one speaks Homines in
belluas transformare.
to transform men into beasts, to denude them of man, of reason: this is
Fedibus poti^^ qua^ cordibus ir^ in sententiam aliorum.
rather to go into another opinion with the feet, then the heart.

My Brethren! you have now a Council, an Assembly at work about the Reformation
of the worship of God. We all know it has been corrupted, and blessed be God
we have so much hopes it will be reformed: we have an Assembly of choice and
godly men, who I persuade my self look toward God for his direction. But they
are but men, though choice men, they do not claim an unerring privilege, none
will say they are infallible, and therefore it is our work to examine. Non est
satis dicere quod visum est, se^ oportet etiam probar^ quod dictum est: non
expectamu^ testimonium quod datur ab hominibus, sed quod voce Domini probatur,
quaeritur, Clem. Alexand. Strom. 17.
Judicium ministrale is with them, they have public and ministerial
judgment, and are to determine, define and declare the doctrines of faith, and
manner of worship, unto the Churches of God. Judicium discretionis is left to
us, every one has liberty, nay they are bound to examine and judge of the
definitions and determinations of them. They desire not that their authority
shall be valid with you, unless they bring the authority of God, nor that you
should hear them, unless you hear God in them. It is their work to propound,
to determine, to declare: yours to examine, to prove and judge.

As one speaks, Cum dogma pr^ponitur credendum aut praeceptum aliquod
faciendum, quum credere and facere sunt actus mei; Si me hominem rationis
participem praestare velim, etc. Examinare oportet quicquid proponitur ad
scientiam meam.
when any doctrine is propounded to be believed, or any thing commanded to be
done, because to believe and to do, are my acts, if I will show my self to be
a man endued with reason, I ought to examine what is propounded, and so to
assent or dissent, so far as agreeable or disagreeable to the Word.

And indeed, unless you will say we are bound ad personas and titulos, to
persons and titles, and not to the truth of the Gospel; it is requisite that we
should not only examine Non modo qualitatem and authoritatem docentium, sed
qualitatem doctrinae.
the quality and authority of the teachers, but the quality of the doctrines,
and what conformity it has with the mind of Christ. Gal. 1.8. If an Angel
from heaven should preach another doctrine, let him be accursed.

Neither indeed is it possible you should assent to, and receive any truth of
Christ, without the previous action of a man's own judgment, unless there
pass examination and judgment in a man's own spirit, that it is a truth of God.

I say there can no man embrace a truth, and assent to it, upon the bare
persuasion or determination of another, Morton. Apol. Cath. p. 2 l. 5. c. 9,
10, 12, etc.
although he does never so much desire it, unless there pass an examination,
and a proper act of a man's own judgment, that the thing commanded is the mind
and will of Christ. Indeed, a man may not contradict it, or a man may give up
his affections to it, and subscribe to it out of corrupt affections, and from
humane or rational grounds, but he can never receive it, as a man; never
subscribe to it, as a Christian, till there has passed an act of his own
proper judgment, and this upon scrutinie and examination.

It is a shame to think how the common sort of people do embrace doctrine,
the authority of the imposers does give them eyes to see, and judgments to
assent, and faith to believe and subscribe to what ever is imposed.

In the reign of former Princes, how soon were the body of the Nation converted
from Popery to Protestantisme, receiving and rejecting, embracing and refusing
the sacred truths of God, mainly, if not merely according to the aspects and
commands of authority.

And is there not the same spirit in the multitude to this day, ready to
embrace and receive what authority shall command, without any previous search
and examination, whether the things be of God or no?

A blessed and happy thing it is for a Nation to reject corruption in worship,
superstition in the service of God, but then to do this as men, as Christians
knowingly. And as blessed it is to embrace a reformation, to submit to the
ways of God, but to do it knowingly upon scrutiny and examination, this will
make you men, and to adhere to the truths of God received upon the utmost
hazard. I see in many a preparation of heart to subscribe to what ever is of
God, but oh that there were the care, the study, the endeavor to examine
things also, that you might evidence them to be the truths of God, that you
might say as they of Samaria, Joh. 4.42. Now we believe, not because thou have
told us, but because we have heard our selves, and we know him to be the
Messiah. So now we embrace this Doctrine, this way of worship, not because it
is imposed, not because it is prescribed of men, but because I see and am
persuaded in my heart it is of God: this were a work worthy a Christian.

This I exhort you unto; away with blind faith, with blind obedience; you are
men, do things as men; you are Christians, do things as Christians; embrace
not any thing out of fear, but out of faith, not out of corrupt affections, Nec
ego Ariminensis concilij authoritate, nec tu Nicaeni detineri^. Au.
but out of a pure and holy heart; reject nothing out of pride, prejudice, but
out of light, do nothing ignorantly, but all knowingly, be resolved in your
selves, and that upon search, upon examination. Do not pin your faith upon the
bare authority of men, no not the best of men.

1. You will wrong God; what a wrong is it to God to attribute that to man
which is proper to him alone, to set man in Gods throne, and to receive and
subscribe to man, before you see God to speak in them?

2. And what a wrong is it to man, to make them masters of your faith? they
claim it not, it is Gods due, and as you wrong God, so will you them, if you
do give it to them.

3. You wrong your own souls, you prejudice your selves in the ways of God,
wound your souls with guilt of sin.

4. It declares you either ignorant, atheistical, or careless about the
business of your souls, or to be led and biased with corrupt affections,
fears and hopes, -- when you will close with any thing, till you have tried it,
and examined it, and brought it to the bar, past sentence and judgment on it.

It is the bravest thing in the world to see men do things knowingly, if not,
you do but side with a way out of faction and affection, not out of knowledge
and conscience. It is not easy to determine whether is worse, to be rationally
and knowingly in an error, or to be ignorantly and blindely in a truth -- Get
light therefore to discover, and then to embrace.

5. You prejudice the cause of Christ, when you adhere to it upon slender
grounds. What a shame to do that which we are not able to evidence is our duty
to do, to walk in that way, which we are not able to maintain.

6. You endanger your own revolting: that man can never hold to a way, which he
has not cleared, and thereby is persuaded to be the way of God. The same
ground upon which he receives a truth, he will reject it, and embrace an
error. If authority come in, it shall cast the scale any way: if it had not
been for this, that authority came in, we should not have had so many
Protestants: and if that authority had not come in, we should not have had so
many Papists. When the Standard is set up, all flock to it; but to the standard
of authority, not of truth. I may say of most, they are this way, and they are
not that, they embrace truth, and reject error, not because the one is truth,
the other error, but because the one is commanded, the other is condemned:
authority carries all. And what will be the issue, they will be as ready to
reject, as now to receive, if authority come in, as it was said of Israel, they
willingly followed the counsel of Jeroboam; He no sooner comes with his
authority, but all stoop to it, when they heard the trumpet blow, all fell down
to worship his Calves. Oh that my voice would go through England now that
things are upon the wheels, reformation in the birth, things in a way of
settling, that they would be prepared to receive things, as men, as Christians,
that they would be ready to receive things knowingly: subject not your souls
merely to any authority, believe God, prove all things, and then you will hold
to what is good.

I see a spirit in men, some look what will authority settle; others, in what
way will preferment lie. And as the wind follows the abundance of exhalations:
so they, where there is most abundance for the world.

I see others standing and enquiring, which way such men go, men so holy, men
so learned, and few that will take the pains to enquire what is the mind of
God. They ask indeed with Pilate, what is truth? what is the way of God? but
they will not dig into the mine of Scripture to find this treasure, they
will not take pains to search. They best they hope, that godly men and learned
men will not settle any thing but what is good, and there they rest: what is
this, but resolving our faith, into the determinations of men? this we are not
to do, though the best of men, because it is sinful, it is not certain, it is
not safe, nor is it a way like men.

This is the position, that it is our duty to examine the doctrins,
determinations of Synods, Councels, etc. And let it be our practice. --

And as I would not have you to embrace any thing out of corrupt affections or
ignorance: so not to reject the sentences, determinations of Synods, unless
you have firm ground. Take heed, they are weighty things, though they may
err, yet thou art liker, and therefore take heed.

1. Beware of pride. 2. Of faction. 3. Of partiality. 4. Of corrupt affections.
5. Of profanen^sse of spirit.

Ministerial judgment is their due, and the judgment of discretion,
rational judgment is yours. You are not to embrace without ground, much less
to dissent without cause, lest thou be found to be a troubler of Israel, a
disturber of the peace of the Churches of God. As I would not have you shut
your eyes, and go by the light of others: So I would not have thee put out
their light, and go by the dark lantern of thine own understanding. I
would have you to embrace knowingly, and not to reject ignorantly. I would give
as much to such an Assembly, as to any judgment upon earth; I would give to
such an Assembly as much as to man, but not so much as to God.

They have not unerring judgments: indeed their definitions and determinations
are not infallible, yet to be reverenced, I say they are to be reverenced,
though not adored, though their determinations are understandingly to be
scanned, yet not proudly and ignorantly to be slighted. Consul. Whitak. cont.
1. q 5. c 9. p. 362. b. vel ad sinem cap.
It is good to see a ground of assenting, and be sure also to see good reason
of dissenting.

In brief, this is all I commend to you, receive not their determinations with
blind judgments, neither do you reject them with perverse wills: Prove all
things, and hold fast to that which is good. Men may err, the best men,
Councels of the best men, and therefore prove, thou may err much more, and
therefore be not peremptory. Though they may err, being but men, yea holy men,
yet if I should rationally seek out for truth, I should seek it among an
Assembly of holy, learned, experienced men, acquainted with much of Gods mind.

I would neither have you to slight their judgments, nor enslave your own:
Not to contemn the light they hold forth to you, nor to give up your own eyes,
and resign your selves merely to their guidance.

Ministerial judgment is theirs, and their determinations are to be
reverenced.

Rational judgment is thine, and their definitions are to be examined, and in
that we give reverence to them. In receiving of their determinations, show your
selves to be men: in rejecting of them, show your selves to be Christians.

And thus much for the first great Question. We now come to the second.

Qu. 2. What is the rule by which we must examine, or the touchstone by which
we must try opinions?

And here again if you will consult with the Papists, they will tell you, that
the d^finitions of Synods, the determinations of the Pope, these are the
unerring rules, these are the infallible Judges of controversies and opinions:
as for the Scriptures, they say of that, it is but nasus cereus, a nose of wax
which may be wrested any way, and will receive what interpretation men will
give it. Scriptura non potest esse judex controversiarum circa fidem. Non
Scriptura Dei vox, sed ecclesiae praesentis vox est fidei nostrae magister and
judex injallihilis.
Not the Scripture, say they, which is the voice of God, but the voice of the
present Church is Master and infallible Judge of our faith. But I purpose not
to lanch into this vast ^ea of controversy, but waving the long disputes about
this poin^, as succinctly and clearly as I can, I shall give you the truth.

And that I may proceed more distinctly and clearly in the resolution of this
Question; give me leave by way of premisall to tell you what we mean by
opinions, and what we mean by rule.

1. By opinions, I mean, Dogmata fidei and cultus divini.
the doctrines of faith and of divine worship, or truths to be believed, and
things to be done.

2. By Rule, I mean the law or sentence of the supreme Judge, set up for this
end to be the touchstone to reveal truth and discover error. This we mean by
opinions, and this by rule.

We now come to the answer of the Question, viz.

Qu. 2. What is the rule by which we must examine, or the touchstone by which
we must try opinions?

That there is a rule all grant, but what is the rule, here is all the
controversy.

We shall not now speak to this controversy according to the vastness and
largeness of it, as it is handled by our learned Consul. doctiss. Whit. con.
1. q. 3 per totam praecipue, q 5. c. 8. and 13. Consul. Daven de judic. and
norm. fid. per totam prima^ partem. Cons Part. de polit. eccl. l. 2 c. 2. ubi
noni^ argumenti^ confirmatur Scripturam solam esse judicem^ necnon and Morton.
Apol. Cath. Bilson. Reinold. Jewel.
Divines against the Papists. It would be too vast and intricate. --

The result of all would be but this one Position, that the Word of God, and
God in his Word, the Scripture, and God in Scripture, is the only infallible,
supreme, authoritative Rule and judge of matters of doctrines and worship, of
things to be believed, and things to be done. And this I shall make good to you
in brief, by Scripture-arguments, and by the suffrage of learned and holy men,
and answer some Objections, and come to the third Question.

That alone to which all the properties of a Rule do belong, is surely the
rule and touchstone, whereby we should try opinions. But to the Scripture
alone do all the properties of a Scriptures are alone the Rule and touchstone
of opinions. I suppose the first Proposition is clear, all the difficulty lies
in the second; That to the Scriptures alone do all the Properties of a Rule
belong. And this I will evince to you by the enumeration of some of the chief
properties of that which is to be a Rule, which I shall show you are
incommunicable to any thing, but Scripture: I will number six of them.

Rule of divine and heavenly things ought to have the authority of God, who you
know is alone acknowledged the Lawgiver to his Church. As in Commonwealths,
it is not in every Lawyer to make Laws, these are established by the supreme
authority: so in divine things, it is not for any man to constitute rules of
faith and worship, but it is proper to God alone, Vide Dav. de jud and norm
fidei, p. 46.
who has the supreme authority in his Church. The Rule of divine things ought
to have Gods authority, and that alone the Scripture has, as it is confessed
by all. And therefore the Word only can be the Rule.

Rule of divine and heavenly things ought to be known, and evident and clear to
all, who are to live by it. You know in Commonwealths, Ignorantia juris
neminem excuset.
the ignorance of the Law does not excuse any man that breaks it, because all
are bound to know it. And so ignorance of the mind of God in Scripture does
not excuse any, because all are bound to search and enquire, all are bound to
know it: and if so, then must it be supposed to be evident and clear in things
pertaining unto life.. And that is implied in those words of Christ, Luke
16.29. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them: As if he had said,
they need no miracles, they need not one to rise up from the dead, the Word is
nigh unto them, they have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them: and like
to that is Romans 10.6, 7 8. Say not in thy heart, who shall ascend up to heaven,
that is, to bring Christ down from above, or who shall descend into the deep,
that is to bring up Christ again from the dead. But what says it? the word is
nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that is the word of faith,
which we preach.

Rule of divine things ought to be constant, stable, immutable and unmovable.
Consul. Whitak. cont. 1. q. 5 c. 12. Misner. de eccl Sect. 4 c. 7. These. 3.
Morton. Apol Cath. p. 2. l. 5. c 9, 10. etc.
But this only belongs to the Word; men are fickle, unstable like water,
Councels may alter, be one to day, another to morrow, to day determine this,
and afterward upon better grounds recede from their former thoughts, and
determine the contrary. But now the Scripture that is ever the same, it is an
unalterable Rule, it is unmovable and unchangeable, like God himself, ever the
same, yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever: The grass withers the
flower fades, but the Word of the Lord continues for ever.

Prop. 4. That which is to be the Rule to try opinions by, Consul. Whit. con.
1. q. 6 p^^ totam. Morton. Apol. Cath. p. 2. l. 1. c. 53, 54. Necesse est
Scriptur d^ sanct as in testimoniu^ vocate, na^ sine his testibus, enarratione
etc. Orig. Non afferamus stateras dolos^^, ubi appendamu^ quod vo^^mus, and quo
modo volumus pro arbitrio nostro, sed stateram divinam de Scripturis sanctis,
etc. Aug. Peccurro ad illam stateram dominicam, ubi non ex b^mano sensu, sed ex
authoritate divina rerum mon^e^ta pensantur Aug. de cap. l. 2. c. 6, 14.
or the touchstone to prove and examine opinions by, it must be able and
sufficient to do it, it must be adequate and proportionable to the things
which are to be ^ryed, it must be able to discover all truths, and to evidence
all errors: Otherwise it is not a complete Rule. But that alone is the
Scripture; neither Men nor Councels are able to do this: some things may
appear to them to be errors, which are truths, and to be truths, which are
errors, and therefore men cannot be the touchstone, or the rule of trial,
but now the Scripture is able, this is a complete rule, this is proportionable
and adequate to the things to be tried, and does reveal error by discovering
it to be dissonant to it, and truth, by declaring it agreeable to it self.

Prop 5. That which is the rule of trial, must be infallible; it be such a
Rule as cannot deceive, if we come to a^ke for bread, and it should give us a
stone; for truth, and it should deceive us with error, it cannot be said to be
a just Rule of trial. The rule must be unerring, it must be infallible.

But this can no man be, none can plead an unerring privilege, none can say
that their determinations are infallible, we know but in part, and the best,
the most learned may not only come short in things they ought to know, but may
fail, may mistake in the things they think to know: As might be evidenced at
large in many famous Councels: therefore men cannot be the rule, they are not
infallible.

But now the Scriptures are, they are the Word of the living God, they are the
standard of truth, and truth it self. We may deceive our selves in the search;
but the Scriptures are infallible, they cannot deceive, if a man have never so
juct a measure, yet he may deceive himself in the measuring, but yet this
deceit is not to be charged upon the measure, but upon our selves: So the
Scriptures are a just, infallible, unerring rule, yet may a man be deceived in
the measuring of things by it, but this deceit is not to be charged upon the
rule, but upon our selves. Either we err, not knowing the Scriptures, or we err
in the partial search and enquiry into the^, we are not faithful in the
scrutiny.

All failing arises either from ignorance, from neglect, or from corrupt
affections, and not from the Scriptures themselves. All errors do pretend to
have then foundation in Scripture, Cum habeamus omnium exactissimam and
perfectissimam regulam ex divinarum Scripturarum assertione, ^ro vos omnes ut
relinquatis, quid huic, quid illi videatur, and de bis a Scripturis haec o^n a
in quirite. Chrysostom. Nihil sine, nihilixira, nihil praeter, nihil ultra divinam
Scripturam admittendum est. Consul. Morto^ p. 2. l. 3. cap. 25.
every heretic will allege Scriptures, but the Scripture will not patronize
errors, you may cast them upon Scripture, but the Scripture will not father
these unlawful births of your own, which are begotten between ignorance, and
corrupt affections.

The Scripture it self is a pure fountain, without mud, an infallible rule,
without error or deceit, and nothing else is.

6 Prop. That which is the rule whereby opinions are to be tried, is to be a
just exact measure, capable of no addition, nor no detraction, neither of
lengthning, nor of lessening. But that is only proper to the Word of God. Men's
judgments of things are capable of addition, they are not so full, to which
nothing more can be, or ought to be added, nor are they so perfect, from which
nothing can be taken away. Never were the results of men so full, that there
was place for no addition, nor so perfect; that they had not after cause to
retract in some thing. But now the Scripture is such a Rule, which is exact,
complete and perfect, and this is largely handled by our Divines against the
Papists, in opposition to their supply of unwritten traditions; they are able
to make the man of God perfect; there needs no traditions of men, there is a
sufficiency, a perfection in Scripture.

Nay, and they are not only: complete, perfect, but entire in this perfection;
to which nothing must be added, nor from which nothing must be subtracted and
taken away: as you see it. Deuteronomy. 4.2. Ye shall not add to the Word which I
command you, nor shall ye diminish ought f^^m it, so the 12. Deuteronomy. 32. and
Deuteronomy. 5.32. Ye shall do whatever the Lord has commanded, you shall not turn
aside to the right hand, or to the left. Neque pastor, neque, concilium, imo
neque Argelus in ^ebus fidei recipiendus est; non dico solum con^ra scripturas,
sed etiam obsque scripturis, vel praeter scripturas. Bil. Con. Apol. p. 2. p.
266. Diabolicum est extra divinarum Scripturarum authoritatem aliquid divinum
putare. Theoph.
Gal. 1.8. If an Angel from Heaven should preach another Gospel, let him be
accursed. And Rev. 22.18, 19. which shuts up not only John's Prophecy, but the
whole ^anon of Scripture, If any man shall add to this prophecy, God shall add
to him the plagues that are written in this book: and if any man shall take away
from the words of this book, God shall take away his part out of the book of
life, and holy City, etc. and therefore the Scriptures being so exact a rule,
so complete and entirely perfect, capable of no addition nor diminution; it
must needs follow that the Scripture is the alone rule, whereby we are to try
opinions, that lapis lydius or touchstone, whereby we are to prove all the
doctrines of men. And so much for the first Argument.

Arg. 2. That which is to be our Judge after death, is surely to be our Rule in
life: this is plain, if we are to be judged by it, surely we are to be ruled by
it: if it must be our Judge hereafter, then our Law here. But the Scripture
shall be our Judge after death, Joh. 12.48. He that rejects me, and receives
not my Word, has one that judges him, Mort. Ap. C at. p. 2 l. 1. c. 48, 53,
etc. Cons. Park. de polit. eccl. l 2. c. 2. p. 148, 149. Non aliter impios
haereticos perfrictae frontis poss^mus convincere, nisisacros habeamus codices,
ex quibus clara veritas elucescit. Mort. def. Apo l. p 1 c. 9. See Reynolds
conf. p. 97. Cons. Park. l. 2. c. 2. p. 130.
the Word which I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day. So, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. He shall come in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know
not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 2.16. He
shall judge men according to my Gospel.

Arg. 3. That which is the touchstone to discover truth, and to manifest
error, is certainly the rule to try opinions. But the Scripture is the
touchstone, to discover truth, and to manifest error: therefore. For the
truth of this minor proposition, that the Scripture is the touchstone, it is
easily made good thus. That whereon all truths are founded, and by which all
truths are confirmed, and wherein all errors are convinced and condemned, is
surely the touchstone, whereby all opinions are to be tried. But in the
Scripture are all truths founded, and by it are all truths confirmed, errors
convinced and condemned: Ergo.

Arg. 4. That unto which God himself does demit us, and send us to try
opinions, that surely is the rule to try opinions. But to the Scripture does
God demit and send us for the trial of opinions, for the finding out of truth
from error, and discovering error from truth: therefore surely this is the
rule.

Now that God does demit and send us thither, for the trial of opinions, and
for the discovery of truth from error, you shall see, Isa. 8.20. To the Law
and to the testimonies, if they speak not according to this word, it is,
because there is no light in them. When the Question was to be resolved against
the Sadduces, concerning this point of the resurrection, Christ does reduce
them to the Scripture, and tells them, if they had searched and enquired there,
they would have been convinced of their error, Consul. Whitak. cont. 1. q 5
cap. 13.
Matthew. 22.29. Jesus said unto them, Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor
the power of God. So when he would prove to the Jews that he was the Messiah,
for proof of that he reduces them to the Scriptures, Joh. 5.39. Search the
Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they
which testify of me.

It should be our enquiry in all our opinions; what says the answer of God?
men say this, others say that, but what says the answer of God? De c^^lo
quae^^nd^^ est judex, sed quid p^^sanu^ ad coe um, cum habe^m^^ hi^ in
Evangelio ^estamentum?
The Judge is to be sought from heaven, but what need we knock at heaven, when
we have his Word, his mind in Scriptures? Coelestis judex non ^u nubibu^, sed
ex Scripturis quaerendus.
You are not to seek the heavenly Judge from the clouds, but from the
Scriptures.

In ter^^inamlis controversii^ Theologicis, sacrae divi^^que Scripturae
solummodo relinquatur locus.
So then, that unto which God does demit us, and that wherewith we are to
consult in all controversies of faith, of doctrine, or worship, that certainly
is the rule.

But to the Word does God demit us, and with the Word we are to consult in all
controversies of faith; we, I say, not only private men, but Synods, Councels:
and therefore certainly this is the rule whereby opinions ought to be tried,
etc.

I will but add one Argument more.

Arg. 5. That which is the supreme Judge of controversies and opinions, is sure
the rule by which we are to try opinions. Daven^ de jud. and nor. 65. p. Vid.
Whit. cont. 1. q 5. cap. 8. per ^otum.
But the Scripture is the supreme Judge of controversies.

1. It is full of wisdom and able to judge. It is called, the Word of wisdom.

2. It is full of truth, infallibly true. It is called, the Word of truth.

3. It is full of power, it is the authority of heaven, thus says the Lord,
and this authority Menc^^h all disputes, this puts an end to all controversies.

4. It is the great Lawgiver, that which gives out all truths to be believed,
and all commands to be obeyed.

It has alone supreme authority to constitute doctrine of faith and worship,
and therefore supreme authority of determining, interpreting and resolving
doubts, which arise from them, nay, and God was infinitely wise to foresee all
errors, and all doubts that might arise, or that should arise, and has
furnished the Scriptures with sufficiency to determine, to convince, to condemn
appearing errors. Consul. Whitak. cont. 1 q. 5. c. 8. arg. 10 1^, etc. Quasi
nos man^averimus ta^t^ ante Prophetis and Apostolis, ut in libris suis null^
testimonia ponere^t quibus pars Donati ecclesia Christi esse doceatur. Reynolds
Confer. c. 8 div 1. p. 461, 462.


It is one reason why our Divines say, that no man, nor coetus mortalium, no
company of men, Synods, Councels, that can be supreme Judges of opinions,
because they are not able to foresee what errors and doubts may arise, yea
and even out of their own determinations; they determine of things only, pro re
nata, those doubts and controversies which do arise in their time, but cannot
foresee what may arise afterward: but now God he fore-sees all, he knew all
that would arise, and did furnish the Scriptures with sufficiency to determine
of all doubts, and to resolve of all truths necessary for our salvation.

I remember a passage to this purpose, which learned Reynolds does produce out
of Augustine in his conference with Heart: it is this; St Augustine making
mention how the Donatists hated him for preaching of the truth, and confuting
their heresy, as though, says he, we had commanded the Prophets and Apostles,
who were so long before us, that they in their books should set down no
testimonies, whereby the Donatists might be proved to be the Church of Christ.

5. It is that at which we are to enquire, and with which we are to Vbicunque
locus ad disputandum constitutus fuerit, sacia^^s codices Canonicos praesto
esse; and si quae profer^^ possunt ex utraque part document^, post positis
caete^is, ^^m^^^t^^ ad inquisit^^^^ terminum perducamus. A^gust.
consult, in all doctrines of faith and worship, and not only we, but Councels,
Synods, they are to go to the Word, and to the testimonies, and their judgment
no further valid, then as it is founded upon the sure foundation, the Word of
God. And therefore it must needs be the supreme Judge, Au ^^antur de^^e^io
chartae nostrae, proce^a in medium co^ex Dei, audi Christum dicentem, ^u^i
veritatem ^oquente^. A^g.
and by consequent the only rule whereat we are to enquire in all points of
faith and worship.

Abundance more might be said of this point. It is the great controversy,
which our great Champions have combated with the Papists in, and the great
truth, which they held out in their generations; Whitaker, Reynolds, Davenant,
in whom you may see more at large.

And it was not new to them, it has been the constant tenent of all the
learned in all ages of the Church. Nolo argumento credas, and nostrae
disputationi, Scripturas interrogemus, Apostolos interrogemus, Prophetas
interrogemus, Christum interrogemus. Amb.
Do not believe the argument and our dispute, but let us search the
Scriptures, enquire of the Apostles, ask of the Prophets, enquire of Christ,
let them determine. Non adeo perdite confidens sum, ut aufim aliquid affirmare
quod sacrae Scriptura silentio praeterit. Ego in sola divina Scriptura
acquiesco. Theod.
Theod. I am not so desperately confident, that I dare affirm any thing which
the holy Scriptures have passed with silence, I rest only in the Word of God.
It is a devilish spirit, to think any thing divine, which is out of the
authority of Scripture.

We will now come, having settled the truth upon the Scripture, to answer some
Objections, one or two only.

Object. 1. That which does receive diverse senses and interpretations, cannot
be the rule whereby we should judge of opinions: but the Scripture does receive
diverse senses, yea, and it self is not able to tell which is the right: and
therefore it is not the supreme Rule, and judge of opinions.

Answ. Scriptura non varios and incertos sensus recipit, Ex condition rei
affirmatae, aut ex intention affirmantis, sed ex inscitia, aut pertinacia
detorquentis. Daven.
The diverse senses the Scripture receives, is not from the mind of the
Inditer, but from the ignorance of the enquirers; nor from the things affirmed,
but from the darkness or perverseness of the searchers.

I say, it is not because the Spirit of God did give the Word ambiguously and
doubtfully, nor because the things affirmed are dark and doubtful, Consul.
Whitak. Contr. 1. q. 5 c. 7.
but because we are ignorant or slothful, or else perverse and wilful.

Because the Rule may be bended, the Scriptures wrested, shall we therefore
deny them to be a Rule, to be the Scriptures? some pervert the Scriptures,
says Peter. 2 Pet. 3.16. to their own destruction, and yet we know they are
the word of life to Salvation.

The diverse senses of Scripture do arise, either from our ignorance, or our
perversenes, or our corrupt affections, o^ our sloth, that we do not enquire
and search, we do not compare Scripture with Scripture, but it does not arise
from the mind and intention of the spirit, nor from the nature of the things
that are affirmed in it.

The ambiguity of Scripture. Non infringit judiciariam Scripturae authoritatem,
sed ostendit necessitatem spi^^tus il^in^ntis. Da^.

Dicimus verbu^ Dei non ^^^il^ere judiciaria^ authoritate^, quia ho^^^^nes
ine^^o re deme^si non s^mper inte^^ig^nt contras^^ judicatum ess^ (...) No^
liquid^ percipiunt (...) se da^^^tos ^^encsententia verbidiv^^ni, do^^ec c^ram
Christo judice in novissimore stat^^niur and aper^o libro c^^^^^^ertur. Da^^^^^.


It does not infringe the authority of the Scripture, but declares the
necessity of the illumination of the spirit. So much for the first objection.

2 Obj. Another objection against the Scriptures, being judge of opinions is
this; It is the work of a judge so to declare his sentence, that the one party
may see he was in an error, and the other, that he is in the right: but the
Scripture, nor the Spirit of God in Scripture, does thus evince truth, and
convince of error, as to make the parties to know they are in truth, or were
in error: therefore the Scripture cannot be the judge of opinions.

Answ. It is the work of a Judge to declare the law, to give his sentence,
declare his judgment, and not to convince parties. It will be a hard thing to
convince the loser that he is in the wrong.

Men who are given up to error, blinded with folly, and bewitched with
self-love, in love with their own opinions, it is a hard thing to convince
such that they a^e in an error. And shall we say the Word of God shall lose
its judiciary authority, because men in error will not discern of its
judgment?

2. Though they will not see now and be convinced, yet the time will come that
they shall see, if not before, yet at the gre^^ day of account all things shall
be made evident: many that break the laws, and are guilty of felony or of
murder, yet will not confess to a petty Justice, that he is guilty, but at
the Assize he is made evident, and then he is convinced of it: so however men
sew fig leaves and cover their nakedness now, will not confess their error,
yet at the great day of Assize all shall be made evident, and their mouths
stopped.

3. I say that the Scriptures do sometimes so clearly evince truth, and
convince of error, that the parties themselves even in this life are convinced
of it, and cannot gainsay, or stand out against the evidence.

4. I say again, if that the light, and judgment and authority of the Word
will not convince men of error, neither will any authority upon earth do it.
Quae controversiae siniri non possunt ex determinatione verbi divini, neque
fin^entur unquamex determinatione cujuscunque authoritatis humane. Da^en. Qui
ex scripturar^m lata sententia se victum non agnoscit, nunquam agnoscet se
victum ex sententia alterius judicis cujuscunque, Daven.
Those controversies that cannot be concluded and determined by the judgment
of the Word, neither can they be determined and ended by any authority upon
earth. He that does not acknowledge himself conquered by the evidence of
Scripture, will never acknowledge himself overcome by the sentence of any
judge upon earth.

Give me leave to shut up what I have spoken in a word of application, and I
shall enter upon that enquiry.

Use. You see I have showed you two things, Who are to examine, and by what
rule to examine.

I have charged one upon you, as your duty, at all times.

It is the duty of every one to examine, etc.

And I have given you here the rule by which you are to try, viz. the Word of
God. This is the touchstone: It is not men, not Councels, not Synods, much
less the Pope, whose unerring authority the Papists set above Counsels. But
it is the Word of God which is the rule and judge, Theodor. histor. Eccles. l.
1. c. 7. In epist. ad Innocent. Epis. 90. Inrer Epist. Aug.
and therefore by this the Council of Nice both tried and condemned the Arian
Heresy, by this the Council of Carthage, of Melevis, of Orange, tried and
condemned the Pelagian Heresy. It is the speech of a heathen Philosopher: Qui
ponit legem judicem, ponit Deum, qui addit hominem, addit and Bestiam.
he that makes the law judge, makes God judge, but he that makes man,
substitutes a beast instead. And he gives this reason, Quia homines optimi
distorquentur affectibus, lex autem vacua est hujusmodi preturbationibus. Arist.
because the best men are wrested with affections, but the law is free of these
perturbations.

If so much is to be given to humane laws above the judgments of the best of
men, how much more to the divine, the Law of God?

It has been my work to clear this to you, the Scripture is the rule. Oh that
now you had wisdom in the trial: you had need of wisdom to search, to
examine, and need of wisdom to determine. It is a shame to see how men sit, as
if these things did not belong to them.

Some are slothful and will not enquire, like Gallio, they care for none of
these things. I have read of a Story of Henry the fourth of France, who asking
the Duke of Alva, whether he had not observed the eclipses, he answered, no, he
had so much he said to do upon the earth, that he had no leisure to look up to
heaven: and there are many of this spirit, who are so taken up, and have so
much to do with the business of the world, that they have no leisure to look
up to heaven.

Some who enquire but slightly and overtly, they ask, with Pilate, what is
truth? but do not take pains to find it.

Others again, who enquire, but with corrupt affections, which either bribe the
understanding into error, or blind the understanding, that it cannot discern
of truth.

Others that perhaps find, but either fear to own it, or turn their backs on
it, as the young man in the Gospel: Pelago se non ita co^missur^ esset, quin
quando liberet pede^ refer posset.
and you know what the King of Navar is said to speak to Beza, that he would
lanch no further into the deep, then he might come safe to shore.

Men look upon truth as an ignis fatuus that leads them into boggs: most men
would entertain truth as a servant, but few as a King, they would own so much
as might be serviceable to them, but they will not own any more, not so much as
may master them: so long as they may live on truth, they like it, but cannot
away with it, when it comes to live on them, nay and live on the best of their
comforts, to live on their estates, wives, children, possessions, nay liberty
and life, etc. this is hard. And he that sees not truth his honor, truth his
riches, truth his friends, truth his liberty, life, that man will never own
truth alone.

In the disquisition of truth, in the enquiring after truth in these days,
beware of a double spirit, beware there be not treachery in thee, beware of a
double spirit, beware of being biased with corrupt affections, etc. Ask the
way to Sion with your faces thitherward, that is, with resolution to go it,
when it is revealed: be not only willing to know, but stand resolved to do:
and when God sees you willing to do, he will make you able to know. And so
much shall serve by way of touch in application; we come now to the Query.

Qu. 3. If the Scripture be the Rule, God in Scripture Judge; yet the great
Question is, Who shall judge that this is Gods mind in Scripture? Here lies
all the controversy.

There is great cause of propounding this Question, in regard that the
Scriptures, they are not in all things so clear, but that you see they are
capable of many interpretations. Capable, I say, not that these diverse senses
do arise from the nature of the things affirmed, or from the mind and
intention of the declarer, but from the ignorance or perverseness of the
searchers and inquirers, as was said before. --

There is nothing more known, then that there are diverse senses, various
interpretations of the same Word of God, of the same texts in Scripture. Had it
never been known before, yet our days had given us plentifully sad experience
of it, which is the root of all the divisions and differences among the people
of God.

The Papists indeed have a way for union, though not Gods way: they take away
from the people, first, the Scriptures, and then, the judgment of discretion,
or rational judgment, and give them no power to examine and try their
Councels, sentences, determinations; but contrarily tell them they are bound
with implicit faith, and blind obedience to submit to, and receive the
doctrines and determinations of the Church, and their safety lies in submitting
their judgments to their guides, though they lead them in a way of error, not
considering that which Christ says, If the blind do lead the blind, they
shall both fall into the ditch.

Thus they do, they take away the Scriptures from them, the light of the
Sun, and then put out their eyes too, take from them a common and rational
light, tell them they have no power to examine their sentences and
determinations, and then they bid them follow them in the dark, give up their
faith and consciences to be ruled and guided by them: thus after they have made
them as beasts, they put them under the yoke, and deal with them as beasts. And
now when they have done this, they boast of the unity, that is among them, and
tell us they are all of one mind, they are not divided into so many factions
and different opinions, as Protestants are. Indeed they have a blind agreement.

The Protestant Churches go not this way for to bring men to union, they
render us the Scriptures in our own tongue, Whitak. cont. 3. q. 6. Daven de
judic. and nor. fidei. p. 110, 111, 112. etc. 136, 142.
they tell us it is our duty to search and examine them, they tell us that
Councels are not infallible, that every Christian has the judgment of
discretion, and is bound to try all things, they tell us that we are not bound
to submit to the determinations of any, no further, then they shall be made
evident to be consonant and agreeable to the Word of God. Consul. Whitak. cont.
1. q. 5. c 8. Mort. Apol. Cath. p. 2. l. 5. c 11, 12.


And if this occasion difference (which it does not of it self) yet it is
better knowingly to differ then brutishly to agree. It is better to differ as
men (nay as Christians) for so we do in a kind, every one holds forth light
and conscience to be the ground of difference, though this conscience may be
misled, and this light may be darkness, I say, it is better to differ, as men,
as Christians, then to agree as beasts: if we differ, we differ Christianly: if
they agree, they agree brutishly. A conscientious dissent is better then a
blind union; if the one be ours, I am sure the other is theirs. But I am too
injurious to you. We will come to the Question.

Qu. The Scripture is granted to be the rule whereby we are to try opinions,
and God in Scripture is agreed to be the supreme Judge of them.

But here is the Question, who shall judge that this is the meaning of the
spirit, that this is the mind of God in Scripture.

It is granted Scriptura est sui ips^m interpres. Whit. cont. 1. q. 5. cap. 13.
Scriptura se clarissime and laculentissime interpretatur, si nos Scriptura^
sese interpretantem attendere volumus, and si non in omnibus ubique locis,
ficut dubitationis ^ihil relinquatur, tamen in p^urimis maximeque necessariis,
and in sum mis fidei nostrae capitibus. Whitak. loc. cit. Consul. Pa^k. l. 2.
c. 2 p. ^ 151, 152. Mort Apol. Cath. p. 2. l. 5. c. 9. Scriptura, eam stidiose
perscrutantibus est sui interpres. Consul. Dave de judic ac nor. fidei etc c.
17. q 4. p. 95, 96. etc. V^de and Whitak. cont. 3. q 6. An Concilia possint
errare, per totam quaestionem.
that the Scriptures are the best interpreters of themselves; and thither all
must go for the discovery of the truth or falsehood of opinions, not only
private men, but Synods and Councels; if they speak not according to this Word,
it is, because the truth is not in them. And there are eight several Rules
laid down by that learned Whitaker, which if they were observed by all in the
trial of opinions, and searching out the mind of God in Scripture, abundance
of controversies would come to a fair end, you may peruse them in his 1. Cont.
q. 5. cap. 9. de medijs inveniendi verum Scripturae sensum.

But it will be said, if every man is to be Judge; then so many men, so many
minds, there will be nothing but differences, divisions and confusions.

If it be said, a Synod or a Council are to judge; then are men either to
submit to their sentences and determinations before they have examined them, or
they are to examine them before they submit to them.

If we say the first, that we are to submit to them before, or without
examination; then do men give up their faith and consciences to men, and yield
implicit faith and blind obedience to humane authority.

If we say the second, that we are to examine before we are to submit, which
certainly is the truth, no Council upon earth is infallible; if not
infallible, it may err; if it may err, then certainly there is a liberty left
for every one to examine; and if a liberty to examine, then the like liberty to
assent or dissent from their determinations, as they shall be made evident to
his own understanding and conscience to be consonant or dissonant to the Word
of God, the supreme Judge of doctrine.

But I am not in this Question to deal with the consequences, or the several
inferences that will be made upon the answer of it. I have reserved that to the
next, which is the sixth general Question, viz. What are the remedies against
errors and erroneous opinions.

I shall therefore at this time only lay down the answer, and so pass on.

Qu. The Question is, who is to judge that this is the mind of God in
Scripture?

And here I must tell you, it is a knotty Question, and of great concernment,
the issues may be dangerous on both sides: if the results be, that Synods are
to judge; it will be said, there will be danger of subjecting men's consciences
to the determinations of men: if that every one are to do it, then will there
be danger of confusion: It is a tickle point, and more need of your prayers for
Gods assistance.

Now then for the answers of this Question, that I may not beat the air, and
speak at random, there will be a necessity of premising some distinctions.

1. Concerning Judges. 2. Concerning points to be judged.

1. Concerning Judges. As we say of judgment, so we may say of Judges,

There is a twofold judgment, and there are twofold Judges.

1. There is a twofold judgment 1. Ministerial 2. Rational
Judgment. Reynolds in his conference with Heart, cap 2. div. 2 p. 100. middle of
it


Or there is. 1. A Judgment in foro externo, or publico, a public and
authoritative judgment in Synods, Councels, Assemblies.

2. There is a judgment, in foro interno, or privato, a private and
self-directive judgment in the Court of conscience.

And this distinction is founded upon the Word of God, it has footing there.
The first, viz. Ministerial judgment, or that public authoritative decision,
in Councels or Synods, you may see it plain, to have its footing in the Word of
God. Look to Act. 15. here was the occasion of this convention, much trouble of
the Churches concerning some difficult points and errors spread, ver. 2. then
here is messengers sent from the Churches, and here is the matter of a Synod,
Apostles and Elders of several Churches, here is the form, assembling
together, here is the end of it, after much debate, to clear and settle the
truth, Act. 15.^8 Act. 16.4.
here was the determination of the doubt, with authority to bind the Churches.

For the 2d, viz. private, rational or self-directive judgment in the Court
of conscience: I have cleared that to you by many Scriptures, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
Prove all things, and hold fast to that which is good, which I have showed you
to be a charge to all Christians, 1 John, 4.1. Believe not every spirit, but try
the spirits whether they be of God, yea or no -- And the example of the
Bereans, who were yet commended for trying and examining the doctrines of the
Apostles themselves, Act. 17.11. the Apostle injoyns us, Let every man be fully
persuaded in his own mind, To. 14.5. And if so, then is he to examine and
judge.

And great reason, for this will not bear us out, to say that Authority
commanded, a Council determined it, and therefore I obeyed, I submitted: the
Papists indeed say, this will bear a man out in a way of error: but Christ
says, If the blind lead the blind, they shall both fall into the ditch. And
the Apostle tells us, that w^ll not excuse us, that we followed the
determinations of Councels, of Synods, For every man shall bear his own
burden. Gal. 6.5. Nay, and every man shall give an account of himself to God.
Romans 14.12. So that you see this distinction of ministerial and rational,
public and private judgment and Judges, is founded in the Word of God.

We come to the second, and that is, to distinguish of points to be judged;
they are not all alike. I will give you these distinctions of doctrine to be
judged.

1. Some are Doctrines of faith. Some are Doctrines of worship.


And both these admit of their several distinctions too.

1. The doctrines of faith, they are either such as are Fundamental or,
Superstructive
Doctrines.

I say, these are either foundation-truths, or building-truths.

And building-truths are such as are either More necessary, or Accessory.


Accessory truths are such, as are either More Evident and clear, Or, More
Ambiguous and doubtful.


Those more ambiguous and doubtful, are so either In themselves, or To us.


2. The Doctrines of Worship, and those are such as concern, Either 1.
Internal worship, and so they come under the Doctrines of faith. 2. External,
and so they fall under the external regiment or government of the Church.


The Doctrines of external worship, are either Essential, or Circumstantiall.


Essential, are those things which belong to the distinction of offices, the
choice of Officers, and execution of them, etc.

Circumstantiall, are such as may be added for order, for the commodity and
profit of the people, viz. time, place, hours, In disciplina ecclesiastica
distinguam^^ ea qua sunt fundamentalia ab accessoriis and levioribus:
fundamentalia sunt haec, ut legitimae vocationes personaru^ retineantu^, veluti
pastores, presbyteri, diaconi, and ut ij legitime electi suo munere fungantur,
vel d^ponantur and removeantur; Accessoria dico, quae ut haec fiant and
observentur in ecclesia quaque pro te^pore, etc. Danaeus in 1 Timothy 5.13 p. 289.
with such like.

And that these distinctions also are founded upon the Word of God, I might
show you at large. The distinctions of Doctrines of faith and worship, they are
the sum of Christian Religion, Fides and cultus, faith and worship, are the
two general heads of Christian Religion spread through the whole Scripture. And
concerning the Doctrines of faith, the distinction of foundation and
building-doctrines, you may see plain, 1 Cor. 3.10, 11, 12. I have laid the
foundation, but let every man take heed how he builds thereupon, for other
foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid, Jesus Christ. There is the
great foundation-truth. Now if any man build upon this foundation, gold,
silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble. Here are building-truths, of which
there is distinction, some precious stones, some gold, some but silver. The hay
and stubble are errors and erroneous doctrines, built upon a good foundation,
bad consequences drawn from good conclusions, bad superstructions upon a good
foundation. So that you see there is footing for those distinctions.

I might show the like of the Doctrines of worship, those that are Essential,
and those that are Circumstantiall. This distinction has also countenance in
the Word of God. And for the Essentials of discipline, there is mention made in
the Word: but for the other they are left to the prudence and wisdom of the
Churches.

And now having propounded these necessary distinctions; I come to the Answer
of the Question, Who is to judge of Gods mind in the Word?

And here we must run over all the distinctions we have named: There will be
need of all for the clearing of the point.

First, I told you, that there was a ministerial, public and authoritative
judgment: and there was a rational, Dantur errores duplices, quidam sunt
fundamentales, qu^^^ ipsum fidei fundamentum, and consequenter salutis aeternae
possessio tollitur: quidam sunt m^^us principales, non tam de fi^e, quam circa
fidem, quibus nec ipsum fundamentum destruitur, nec salutis adeptio anceps
redditur. Misner. de eccles. cap. de errandi possibilitate. membr. 1. Sect. 4
6, 7. p. 626.
private and self-directive judgment. Now,

1. If the Question be put, Who is to judge of Gods mind in the Word, in a
Ministerial, public way? I say, that it is the office of Councels and Synods,
to examine, debate, determine, declare the mind of God out of the Word. Patres
in Concilio non tantu^modo inquisitores, sed judices.
Councels they are not only inquirers, what is the mind of God in Scripture,
but in some sense Judges, that this is the mind of God in Scripture, yet are
they not supreme, absolute, infallible, unerring Judges, as the Papists say,
but Ministerial, declarative, subordinate Judges, who are not to go beyond
their bounds, the Word of God. Concilia habent solummodo munus and potestatem
interpreta^di Scripturas, etc. Reynolds confer. with Heart. c. 2. divis. 2 p.
100.
Councels have only the office and power of interpreting Scripture from
Scripture, and the mind of the holy Ghost speaking in them.

Reynolds in his conference with Heart, has this passage. Christ, says he,
has given two sorts of judgment to his Church; the one, private; the other,
public: private, belongs to all the faithful, and 1 Cor. 2.15.
spiritual, who are to 1 Cor. 10 13.
judge of what is taught, and 1 John 4.1
to try the spirits. 2. Public, that belongs to Act. 15.6
the assembly of Pastors and Elders, for of that which 1 Cor. 14.29.
Prophets teach, let Prophets judge: 1 Cor. 14 38.
and the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. In both of which,
the Church must yet remember, that God has committed nothing but the ministry
of giving judgment to her, the sovereignty of judgment does rest on the Word
of God. Thus far he --

Another of our own. Councels may propound, expound, declare to the people that
Doctrine which the Scriptures hold forth, but they have no power of making new
Doctrine: that is, they are the public Interpreters and publishers of holy
Doctrine revealed in Scripture, they may expound and declare Scripture, but
neither make Scripture, nor become Scripture to us, 1 Cor. 4.1. 1 Pet. 4.11.

To make Doctrine is proper only to God, who is the Lord and Master of our
faith and consciences. Men are Ministers to our faith, and not Masters of it;
but this were, from a Minister to become a Master of our faith, which the
Apostle so much abhorrs, 2 Cor. 1.24. We are not Masters of your faith, but
helpers of your joy. Nay, if they had power to make Doctrine, then were we not
to exam^^e and try their doctrine, but our duty were to subject to what is
imposed: but I have cleared this to you, that it is our duty to examine all the
Doctrines and definitions of men, etc. And if an Angel from heaven should
preach another doctrine, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8. It is not in man's power
to make doctrines, though to declare them.

Secondly, if the Question be, who is to judge of Gods mind in the Word, in a
private, rational, self- directive way: then I say, that every private
Christian, is to search the Scriptures, to examine, prove, try and judge of the
mind of God revealed in his Word, so far as concerns his own faith and
practice. I have showed you that we are not to subject our understandings, our
faith and consciences, to any authority, nor to any definitions and
determinations of men, but are to prove and try all things by the Word for our
own faith and practice, we are to judge of Gods mind in his holy W^rd, with
those cautions I laid down. But this having been so largely insisted upon, I
shall say no more to it.

And this shall serve for the first, the distinction of Judges.

Secondly, I told you, there were some distinctions of things to be judged.
Some there were that were doctrines of faith, some of worship.

1. The doctrines of faith I told you were such as were fundamental, or such
as were superstructive.

Now, if the Question be asked, who shall judge of Gods mind in the Word,
concerning fundamental doctrines. I say, the Word of God is evident and clear
of it self in these things, that if a man will not wilfully shut his eyes, he
cannot but see them: we need not here ask, who shall judge; main truths are
plain truths, he that runs may read them. And that these are plain to those,
who will not wilfully shut their eyes, at least to see them in a rational way,
the Apostle shows, in Tit. 3.10, 11. He that is an heretic [which is one
pertinaciously, and obstinately erring in fundamentals] such an one, says he,
after the first and second admonition reject, or excommunicate him, and he
gives this ground of it, knowing that such an one is subverted, and sins,
being condemned of himself, as the word expresses, being self-condemned, he
sins against the secret checks of his own conscience, he is self- sentenced,
which declares that fundamental truths are evident, 1 John 2.20
otherwise he had not been self-condemned. Turks and Pagans they do these
things, and are not self-condemned; but men in the Church cannot, and therefore
are to be cast out.

Thirdly, I told you that superstructive truths were either such as were more
necessary, or such as were accessory; and necessary admits of many
distinctions, either such as were absolutely so, or such as were necessary only
by consequent, or such as are primarily necessary, and such as be secondarily
necessary. I speak not here of the first.

If the Question were, Who shall judge of truths absolutely necessary? It is
the same with fundamental truths: and I say, that every Christian is able to
judge of Gods mind in such truths; he tells us, We have Vot unctionem habetis,
id est, vos spiritum sanctum habetis, and nostis omnia, id est, omnia
necessaria. Whitak. Reynolds conf. with Heart, p 6^. middle of it. Whitak. cont
1. q. 5. c 8. Arg. 4. (...)
an unction from the holy One, whereby we know all things, that is, all things
necessary to salvation: and he has told us, His Spirit shall lead us into the
way of all truth; Impium est putare Deum aliquando defuisse ecclesiae suae in
rebus necessariis.
that is, necessary truths, and that we shall all be taught of God, that the
Sheep of Christ shall hear his voice, and know it from the voice of a stranger.
This is a certain maxim; Donum intelectus nun quam se subtrahit sanctis circa
ea quae sunt necesaria adsalute^, etc. Aqu. 22. q. 8. a resp. 3.
God does never fail his Church, nor any member of Christ in truths that are
necessary; they shall learn, they shall know and understand those things
necessaryd. And for those things which are less necessary, Councels may
declare, and if you search, if you study, if you examine and be faithful in
your scrutiny, God will reveal them to you also, at least so much as is for
your comfort, and cheerful walking in the ways of God.

Fourthly, I told you that accessory truths were either such as were evident
and clear, or such as were doubtful and obscure.

The Question needs not to be asked of the first of these: for those that are
evident and clear of themselves every Christian may judge of.

But the Question will be of obscure and doubtful truths.

See Mast. Reynolds on the 110 Psa. p. 273, 274.
Of those which are doubtful, some are obscure, respectu objecti, rejectu
subjecti. Some are obscure in themselves, and some are obscure not in
themselves, but to us.

If the Question be of such as are obscure in themselves, who shall judge of
Gods mind in them. I say, there are some truths which are beyond the fathom of
the tallest understanding; there are certain Abysses and depths, that no man is
able to sound, no finite understanding can determine: See Reynolds conf. with
Heart. p. 96, 97, 98.
here we must fall down and adore, fall down and admire; the doctrine of the
Trinity and of the Unity, of divine essence in the Trinity of persons, the
doctrine of the incarnation of Christ, the hypostaticall Union of natures in
one Person, the doctrine of Predestination, of the Jews rejection, which was a
depth to the Apostle himself, over which he cries, (...), Romans 11.33, 34. Oh
the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! for who has
known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor? In other truths,
such as were necessary, the Apostle when he makes the same Query, he gives this
answer, But we have the mind of Christ, as you may see in 1 Cor. 2.16. Who
has known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct him, or who has been
his Counselor? We have here the same Query, but not the same answer, he
answers this Query, We have the mind of Christ, which is to be understood in
things necessary. In the other you see, he makes the Question, and leaves it
without answer, only cries out, Oh the depth of the wisdom --

So that if the Question be of Doctrines in themselves obscure: It is beyond
man to fathom, faith is our best understanding, admiring and adoring, our best
knowledge. But now if the Question be of such truths that are not obscure in
themselves, but obscure to us, not to all, but to some, which are therefore
obscure by reason of the imperfection of our knowledge, etc. It is the office
of the Ministers of the Gospel to preach them and reveal them; of Synods and
Councels, to declare them, and of every Christian to study them, to examine, to
search them out.

There are four ways that we are to go in the finding out of truths doubtful.

1. Look into the harmony of Scripture, see what the agreement, what the
concord of the Word of God will do to help thee: Consul. Whitak. cont. 1 q 5.
c. ^. ubi de mediis inveniendi verum Scripturarum sensum. Scripturae Scripturis
conferendae, fi quid in Scripturis recte intell gere volumus. See ^eynolds, c.
2. divis. 2. p. 95, 96. Fa^eamur ergo necess^ est, justificationis nomen vary
sumi, nisi velimus exis^mare Apostolos a se dissentire, and pugnantia
enunciare: apud Jacobum ergo, justificari idem valet, quod justum declarari ac
demonstrari, apud Paulum vero, justificari, idem est quod a peccatis omnibus
absolvi, justumque apud Deum reputari Whitak. loco citat.
many things seem to be truths, if you look on one text alone, that yet if you
did but look upon the harmony of the Word, would thereby be discovered to be
errors. For example, St James says, Chap. 2. ver. 21. Abraham was justified
by works; now if you look no further, it holds forth this, that we are
justified by works; for as the father of the faithful was justified; so all
the children, all believers must be justified: and is this a truth then?
Certainly no. Why, but how shall we know it? we must compare Scripture with
Scripture; as for example in this point, compare this place of James with Romans
4.2, 3. If Abraham were justified by works, he had then somewhat whereof to
glory, for what says the Scripture, Abraham believed God, and it was accounted
unto him for righteousness, and therefore the one speaks of justification
before men; the other, of justification before God; the one, of justification
properly, the other, of declarative justification. Study the harmony of
Scripture, see how one Scripture agrees with another, and how this doctrine
agrees with all.

Romans 12 6 Analogia fidei nihil aliud est, quam constans and perpetua sententia
Scripturae, in apertis and minim^ obscuris locis, quales sunt Articuli fidei in
symbolo, quaesque continentur in oratione dominica, in decalogo, etc. Consul.
Whitak. loc. citat.
2. Look upon the Analogy of faith, whatsoever doctrine, either directly, or by
way of immediate consequence opposes the Analogy of faith, is to be rejected
as contrary to the platform of wholesome words; that is another way to find out
truth in doubtful cases; See the Analogy of faith; look over your Creed, the
Lords- prayer, crooked things are discerned by bringing them to straight, etc.
Many Doctrins would be found erroneous, if they were but brought to the
Analogy of faith. That doctrine of Transubstantiation, or rather monster of
opinions, which they would seem to build on Scripture, This is my Body; if it
were but brought to the Analogy of faith, you shall see at once it overthrows
four several Articles, 1. The incarnation of Christ. 2. His ascension. 3. His
sitting at the right hand of God. 4. His coming to Judgment: for if Christ's
body be so often made of a piece of bread, and in so many places at one time,
how can all this be?

The Doctrine of Christ's kingdom and visible glory before the day of Judgment;
it seems to contradict another part of it, he is gone to heaven, sits at the
right hand of God, and [from thence] he shall come to judge the quick and the
dead; So that nothing is between his sitting in heaven, and his coming to
judgment: Alsted.
and therefore those that most rationally hold it, do say this Kingdom shall
be in tempore judicij, the time of judgment, the Jews conversion, and the
fullness of the Gentiles are to be the morning of it.

3. Look upon the concordant confessions of the Churches of Christ in all ages:
here is another way, and certainly it does afford a great deal of light, and
help in points and cases doubtful: this is not to submit my judgment and
faith unto any authority of man, but to go to them who excel to be helpers to
my faith and understanding. M. Reynolds, 110. Psalm. 273, 274. Whitak. cent. 1.
Jam. 1.5. Dixit aliquis patru^, se orando, magis qua^ stude^do ac legendo in
cognitione^ Scripturarum prosecisse. Aug in l. Scal para. c 2. Orationi lectio,
lectioni succedar oration Hieron. ad L^tam.


The Church of God is called, The pillar and ground of truth, 1 Timothy 3.16. not
that which gives being to truth, nor that which gives authority to truth, but
the Church is the depository of truth, the orb out of which this glorious light
shines, the Candle-stick which holds the light, the pillar, not so much to
hold up, as to hold forth truth, as the Law and Proclamation of Christ, it does
not hold up the authority of it, but bear witness to that authority in it.

4. The fourth way is, to go to God by prayer, and desire him who is the
father of light, to reveal the way of truth to thee, Jam. 1.5. Are such and
such things doubtful? Thou look upon many opinions abroad, and thou art
brought to a stand, thou know not what to determine, the cases are very
doubtful; go and strip thy self maked of self, of by-ends, of corrupt
affections, unbiasse thy self, denude thy self before God, and desire him to
reveal his will to thee, beg of him that he would lead thee into the way of
all truth, tell him he has engaged himself to teach thee, he has promised we
shall all be taught of God, he has said, He will lead us into the way of all
truth, urge God with his promise, believe it, conclude it, either God will
reveal it to thee, or it is not necessary it should be known.

Cum Petro dicendum ediscere nobis Paraholam istam. Hier. Non solum stuatu^
nobis adhibe^dum esse ad discendas literas sacras, ve um and supplicandum
Domino, and diebus ac noctibus obsecrandum, ut veniat agnus de tribu Judah, and
ipse accipiens librum signatum dignetur aperire. Orig. Hom. 12. in Exo Cons.
Whit. p 397. Whitgift, p. 3. p, 77, 81, 82, 83, 84. Hooker l. 3. Sect. 2.
Sutclive. tract. de dis c. 1. p. 5 Heb. 3.2. Cons. Park. l 2 c 39. per totum.
We read in Revel. 5 9. That when John saw the book was clasped, he falls down
and weeps bitterly, and then Christ comes and opens, and unclasps the book:
thus let us do, are opinions doubtful? is the book clasped? can thou not
read Gods mind in these and these things? Oh fall down, weep to him, pray to
him, either I say again, God will unclasp the book, either he will unfold the
doubt, or assure thy self it is not necessary to be known.

And thus we come from the distinctions of the doctrine of faith, to those we
named of the doctrine of worship. These I told you were either such as did
concern internal worship, of which I shall not speak, or such as did concern
external worship, viz. the outward Regiment of the Church of God in the world.
And I told you the doctrines of Gods external worship, were either such, as
were essential, or such as were circumstantiall only.

Now if the Question be asked, who shall judge of Gods mind in Scripture,
concerning the essentials of government? It is hard to tell you, who shall
resolve you.

1. Some say that doctrine only is contained in the Word, and not discipline,
and that there is no particular and absolute form expressly prescribed in the
Word, nor yet any that can be made out of the word, and they lay this as a
charge upon those who hold the contrary, that they make Christ a Lawgiver to
his Church, and do put no difference between Christ and Moses. Indeed they may
seem to come under a charge, who make that comparison between Christ and Moses,
and say that as Moses had order for every pin in the tabernacle: So Christ
(unless he was less exact then Moses, and took less care of his Church under
the new Testament, then under the old) left certain Rules for the ordering and
regulating of all particulars in the Church of God: an opinion very high, and
an expression very harsh --

2. Others say, there is a discipline in the Word, but it is only moral, not
ecclesiastical. If that will not do, some go farther, and say there is an
ecclesiastical teaching, but not an ecclesiastical governing-discipline in
the Word.

3. Others say, there are some footsteps and rules of an ecclesiastical
Discipline in the Word, Sutclive, ib.
but they are rather described then prescribed, and those are neither perfect,
to which nothing may not be added, nor immutable, of which nothing can be
altered, but may be modified and tempered to the several constitutions and
tempers of States, Kingdoms and Commonwealths, as shall be seen convenient.

4. Others say, there are Essentials of government in the Word, though not the
circumstantials; Danaeus in 1 Timothy 3.15 p. 169. etiam in 1 Timothy 5.13 p. 289.
there are rules laid down for those things of chief concernment, though not
for things of a lesser and inferior moment: but amongst these here is this
controversy, whether those rules, as touching essentials, are immutable and
unchangeable, or whether they may be altered and changed, according to the will
of man, and tempers of states.

5. Others say, there is a certain, exact, entire form of government prescribed
in the Word of God, and that not determined ad hic and nunc, to the Apostles
days, the times of persecution and gathering of Churches, but to be an
unchangeable ordinance for the governing of Christ's Church, till his coming
again. And what that particular form is, there is as much controversy; one
says one, another says another. Certainly if there be such an exact way in
the Word, its strange it cannot be found, it is a wonder it cannot be made out;
if it be, it is no less wonder that those who are willing to open their eyes
broad to let in light, cannot yet be able to see. To most men it appears a dark
controversy, and that there is not much in the Word to discover it; if there
be, a great deal seems to be buried up in the dark, and cannot be clearly made
out. It was once the speech of one, that God had done by the external
government of the Church, as he did by the body of Moses, he hid it, lest men
should make an idol of it.

Some doubt whether there be any such thing or no; Cons. Park. l. 2. c. 41, 42
43.
others say, if there be, its in the dark, it is hid, but whether it be so or
no, this I am sure of, its made an Idol of; men make that all, and all the
heats of their hearts are turned to contentions of the head. I may say, this
controversy has wrought more division in the hearts of Saints one toward
another, and more separation one from another, and keeps them at greater
distance in all the offices of love, and has more taken off the hearts of Gods
people from spiritual and heart-warming truths, then any controversy that
ever was stirred up in any age of the Church: I pray God there be not a
temptation in it. But to return.

Admit there be an exact government in the Word of God, who shall judge what
that is? I told you there were the Essentials and Circumstantials of Government.

If the Question be asked of the first, viz. Who shall judge of the Essentials.
I may say certainly of this point, as well as of others, there is a public and
a private judgment; there is a ministerial, and there is a personal
judgment.

It is the office of a Synod, an Assembly, to search, to debate, to determine
and declare, what they conceive is the mind of Christ in this; and it is
yours, to prove, to examine, to judge of their results and determinations. In
which work, as I hope they will be tender; so I desire you may be humble,
neither to embrace things with a blind judgment, nor to reject them with a
perverse will.

And for Circumstantials: If the Question be asked, who is to judge of them. I
suppose it is granted on all hands, that in those things, God has left us
free, and has not determined and restrained us to any thing. And where God
has left things indeterminate, there is no Question but the Magistrate may
determine you, and you are to submit to those determinations. And this shall
suffice for this, and for the answer to the Question.

Thus you see we have finished three of those Queries we propounded. We come
now to the fourth, viz.

Qu. 4. What are the Diagnosticks or marks whereby we may discover and discern
of error from truth, and truth from error?

When false Coin is abroad, if a man get a touchstone, whereby he may be able
to try it, and the skill in the use of it, to distinguish between counterfeit
and true, he needs not fear being deceived.

I have told you there is a deal of false Coin abroad, and if you would not be
deceived, it was your special duty to try it: I have showed you the Rule, and
told you what is the touchstone, whereby you may try opinions. And now I am
come to give you the marks whereby you may be able in the use of this to
discover and distinguish between truth and error. If a man have the
touchstone, yet if he want wisdom to distinguish, he may be deceived for all
this: So, though you have the Word of God, which is the touchstone to try
opinions, yet if you want wisdom and skill to distinguish of touches, you may
be mistaken for all this.

And there is need of a great deal of skill: an error may give as fair a
touch, and make a fairer luster and glitter then truth. And therefore it shall
be my work at this time, through Gods assistance, to lay down the marks,
whereby in this touch and examination, you may be able to distinguish between
error and truth.

Now I must tell you before I enter on this work, that as there are many false
stones, such as do render error truth, and truth error: So there are many
false marks, by which if we should be guided, we are sure to go amiss. It
shall be therefore my chief work in this Discourse, to reject the false, and to
discover to you the true. And we will begin with the first of these, viz. the
rejection of the false marks, which I will do by propounding them in
Questions, and then giving answers to them, and all this that they may have a
fair trial, before they be condemned.

Qu. 1. Whether antiquity, or the ancientness of an opinion be not a true
Character of truth?

Answ. There is no Question to be made of this, but truth is ancient, and that
which is ancientest is truth. Truth was before error: Id verum quodcunque
primum, id adulterum quodcunque postremum. Tertul.
that is truth which is first, and that is error which is last. And therefore
you see it is Gods direction to us, Jer. 6.16. Thus says the Lord, stand you
in the ways and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and
walk therein, and you shall find rest for your souls.

But now in regard that Antiquity has been the pretense for many errors, and
that we may not mistake in it, there is a necessity of some distinction to be
premised before we give the full answer.

Antiquitas est vel primaria vel secundaria: primar^a est pri^ae va cujusque
rei o^igo, and haec ^o ta ho^ tatis and perfectionis est. Secundaria antiquitas
est eorum quae diu ante coeperunt, etc Et haec antiquitas veritatis nota non
est. Vid. Parker. p. 156. l. 2. Consuetudo sine veritate vetust as erroris est.
Cypr.
1. Then there is a twofold Antiquity: a primary, and secondary Antiquity. Or
things are said to be ancient, in respect of Gods prescription, or in respect
of men's practice, in respect of Gods institution, and in respect of men's
observation: or if you will, in respect of Gods command, and in respect of men's
custom. And this will afford us this answer.

A. If antiquity be taken for Gods prescription, for Gods command and
institution, then there is no Question, but it is a certain badge and character
of truth. But if you take antiquity for what men have anciently practiced or
observed, for what has been the custom of men, and not the command of God,
then may it be an ancient, a gray headed error. That is not truly ancient,
which men have practiced; but that is true antiquity, which God has
prescribed. Antiquity of things is not to be taken from the customs and
observations of men; but from the commands and institutions of God. Veritas no^
est tempore metiend^, sed n^mine. Hoc argumento usa est mulier Samaritana
adversus Christum, Patres nostri adorarunt in monte hoc, nec falso, nam
referente Carolo Sigonio, prius in Zilo quam in Jerusalem invocatum Dei nomen
est. Morton. Apolog page 1. lib. 1. cap. 10, 11.
Truth is not to be measured by time, but by revelation; not by practice, but
by prescription; not by custom, but by command.

It was the error of the Jews, that they would follow the custom, but they
would reject the command. You may see it in Jer. 44.17, 18, 19. We will bake
cakes, and burn incense to the Queen of heaven, as our Princes, and Fathers
have done before us: and they have an argument for this custom too; for then it
was better with us then now, then we had plenty of victuals, and were well and
saw no evil, but since we left off to do this, we have wanted all things, we
have been consumed by the sword and by the famine. Just the same argument that
men have for their customs now.

So the woman of Samaria, she pleaded custom too against Christ, Joh. 4.20. Our
Fathers worshipped in this mountain, and you say, that in Jerusalem men ought
to worship: Here she pleads a custom, and one more ancient then the other, only
it wanted prescription, which the other had. Ancient custom without
prescription will not hold.

The Pharisees they dealt the same way with Christ, etc. and Christ with them,
as you see at large, Matthew. 5. It is well spoken of Cyprian, Non debe mu^
attendere quid aliquis ante nos secerit, aut faciendum putaret, sed quid qui
ante omnes Christus prior secerit. Cypr.
We are not to consider what others have done before us, but what Christ who is
before all has done and commanded. Custom without truth is but old error. Non
hominum consuetudine^, sed Dei veritatem sequi debemus. Cypr. epist. 7. p. 156.
We are not to follow the custom of men, but the truth of God: if men plead
custom without prescription, Antiquity without command, we may say with
Ignatius, (...), Christus nobis antiquitas, Christ is our Antiquity. He says
of himself, that he is the way, the truth and the life, the truth, not the
custom. Si consuetudinem fortassis opponas, advertendum est quod Dominus dicit,
Ego sum via, veritas and vita: non dixit, Ego sum consuetudo, sed Veritas. Aug.
Veritati nemo praescribere potest, non spatium temporum, non patrocinta
personarum, non privilegium nationum, ex his enim fere consuetudo initium ab
aliqua ignorantia aut simplicitate sortita, in usum per successionem
corroboratur, and ita adversus veritatem vindicatur. Tertul.
It is that which learned Jewel urges against the Papists from that place,
Eccles. 7.10. Say not thou, What is the cause that the former days are better
then these? for thou do not enquire wisely concerning this.

2. Qu. Whether the newness of an opinion be not a sufficient mark to discover
it an error?

For the answer of this I must also premise some distinctions.

1. Things may be said to be new, in respect of Gods prescription, or in
respect of man's invention.

2. Things may be said to be new, in respect of institution, or in respect of
restitution.

The Commandment of love it was called a new Commandment, as Christ says, Joh.
13.34. A new Commandment I give unto you, that you love one another. This was
not new, in respect of its institution, but in respect of its restitution, Non
quia novum mandatum, sed quia de novo redintegratum.
not because it was new, but because it was renewed. Many things are called
new, which yet are not so, in respect of institution, but in respect of
restitution.

3. Things may be said to be new, in respect of Creation, or apparition: the
moon is new, not in respect of Creation, but in respect of apparition. Many
things which appear to us to be new, which are not new indeed.

4. And this brings in a fourth distinction: things may be said to be new, in
respect of being: as a child is said to be newborn, because it never had a
being in the world before: or a thing may be said to be new, in respect of
observation: a thing may be said to be in being before, which yet was not
observed, nor taken notice of before.

There are many things, which are not new in themselves, which yet may be new
to us: many things which are not new, in respect of being, which yet are new,
in respect of observation.

Having premised this, we will come to answer the Question: Whether the newness
of an opinion, etc.

And I will answer this Question in these two Conclusions.

Conclus. 1. The newness of opinion is enough to discover it an error; if it
be new in respect of institution, not if it be new in respect of restitution.
Institution of truth is only Gods work: none is able to institute doctrine or
worship, but only God. If there be no Word of God to clear it, no Scripture to
countenance an opinion; it is to be rejected as a Chimaera, a fancy of man.

But now an opinion may be new, in respect of restitution, and yet be a truth,
when the worship of God comes to be restored, when doctrine comes to be cleared
and settled; this is not any new institution of doctrine or worship, but the
restitution of it, it is not worship instituted, but worship restored. It is
that worship which God has prescribed in his Word already, only now freed and
cleared from the corruptions and pollutions of it.

Truth may be old in respect of institution and prescription, though new in
respect of the restitution and restoring of it; as it was in Hezekiah's time:
and it was the work of Christ, in Matthew. 5.

Conclus. 2. The newness of an opinion is enough to discover it an error; if
it be new in respect of being, but not if it be new in respect of observation.
Indeed those opinions, which are new in respect of being, that have no
foundation in the Word, no being in the Scripture, they may be rejected as
errors; but not such as are new in respect of observation: there may be many
precious truths, which are new to us, which yet are not new in themselves: they
are new in respect of our observation, we never took notice of them before,
they were hid from our eyes, yet they are not new in respect of their being.

Augustins doctrine of conversion, that it is of grace, and not of free will,
was new in it is time, though now generally received; and then it was not new in
respect of being, the Scriptures are full for it; but new in respect of
observation, men had not observed, they had not taken notice of it before.

Luthers doctrine of justification, that it is of grace and not of works, was
new also in it is time, and he had a world to oppose him, and cry it down for
novelty; but this was not new in it is being, what doctrine have we more clear
in the Word? But it was new in respect of observation.

Calvin's doctrine of predestination, that it is of grace, and not of faith and
works foreseen; this was new in it is time, though a clear and ancient truth.
It was not new in respect of it is being, it is clearly revealed in the Word,
but new in respect of observation; it was clouded with errors, that men could
not discern and take notice of it before.

This is certain, that toward the end of the world, as there will be the
broachings of many errors, so there shall be the discovery of many glorious
truths, as I have fully cleared to you. I speak not this to countenance any
error, that our times or after times shall set on foot: but to take off
prejudice that lies upon any doctrine or truth, either newly, or more clearly
and fully discovered, that they reject it not for the newness of it.

I have observed it in all ages, Fama miratrix senioris aevi. See Jewels Sermon
on Hag. 1.2, 3, 4. p. 171, etc.
that as the name of Antiquity has been the pretense for many errors: so
novelty has been the plea which men have used in all ages against the truths
discovered in their generations.

Since God has broken the Antichristian yoke, which lay upon all the world,
there is scarce any generation which he has not honored with some new or
fuller discoveries of truth.

See Jewel to the same Sermon. Mark 1.27 Act. 17.19.
Antichrist had corrupted all, both worship and doctrine, and there must be a
time of clearing that which he has corrupted: and when that is done, he shall
fall, for he shall be consumed with the breath of Chirsts mouth: and God does
honor every age with something, he reforms us by parcels: and this has been
the prejudice against truth in all generations, the novelty of it: this has
been the plea, that corrupt hearts have had against the truths of their
generation, they are new things, when indeed they are not new, in respect of
their being, but in respect of their observation.

Nay, and from the beginning it has been the same pretense, that careless and
Atheistical hearts have had against the truths of God. You see in Christ's
time, and in the Apostles time, when they revealed the will of God, they judged
all to be new, What new doctrine is this that we hear? they said so of Christ's,
Mark 1.27. and the like of the Apostles, Act. 17.19. Let us hear what new
doctrine is this you teach. And in after ages there was the same spirit in men,
they adhered to their old customs and their ancient ways, and rejected what
ever was contrary to them, as new. It was Augustins complaint, Hic est mos
diabolicus, ut per antiquitatis traducem commendetur fallacia
This is the devils custom, to commend error to us for truth, under the notion
of Antiquity. Custom without verity, is the antiquity of error. Again, Si
consuetudinem fortassis opponas, etc. adverterdum est quod Dominus dicit, ego
sum via, veritas and vita
if you do oppose custom to truth, consider what Christ says, I am the way,
the truth and the life. No^ lixit, ego ^um consuetudo, sed veritas. Aug.
He does not say, I am custom, but, I am truth.

And besides him, others have had the same spirits to conflict withal. Cyprian
tells those of his time. Every custom, although old and common, yet is
inferior to truth, and that custom which is contrary to truth, is to be
abolished.

Another has these words, Religionis authoritat non tempore aestimanda est,
sed numine: neque enim quo die, sed quid colere caeperis in tueri convenit:
quod verum est, serum non est. Arnob. Quod nos agemus, novum, quod vos, priscum
The authority of Religion is not to be reckoned by time, but by revelation;
nor art thou to take notice what day this worship began, but what this worship
is [which began at that time] that which is truth is not late. The same Author
dealing with those which did plead Antiquity against truth, he says, That
which we say is new, and that which you do is old; but what does this help you
or weaken us? The authority of truth is not to be measured by time, but by
revelation.

And Tertullian dealing with the same spirits in his generation says, Here^es
non tam novitas, quam verita^ revincit: quodcunque contra veritatem sap^t,
haeresis est, etiam vet^^ consuetudo. Tertul.
Novelty does not confute an error, but the truth: what ever is contrary to
truth, does savor of heresy, even though it be the most ancient custom.

And Bernard tells us of the wicked tongues of men, Qui cum manifest^^ ^umen
obnubulare no^ queunt, de solu novitatis nomine ca villantur. Bern. Cons. Park.
de polit. eccles^t 2. c. 20 p. 254
who when they are not able to cloud or darken the evident light, they cavil at
it for a novelty. But in vain do those allege custom, who are convinc^d with
reason; reason is to be preferred before custom, much more is truth and the
authority of God.

I name these for this end, to show you that it has been the spirit of corrupt
m^n in all ages, to reject those things, which are contrary to their erroneous
customs, for novelties and new things.

And it is the same spirit, which acts in men to this day, they will rather
adhere to an old error, then embrace a new truth. I say, such a truth as is
not new in respect of it is being, but only in respect of our observing. I might
instance in many things: what if I should single out this one only, viz. our
Lyturgie? It may be you will say this was composed by learned and holy men,
such as were Reformers in their time; it was so: but there was never any
Reformation, since defection to Antichristianisme, but in time that Reformation
has been discovered to stand in need of further Reformation, we know but in
part, and God does reveal his will gradually, not all at once. The Church grows
to perfection, not all at once, but by degrees, and it may be they went as
far then, as the times would suffer, there is something implied to that
purpose in the front of it: they had a contrary stream to conflict withal,
being newly come out of Popery. And I know not whether is the greater wonder
of these two, that they went so far then at the first jump out of Popery,
when so many to oppose them; or that we never went farther since, after so many
years preaching of the Gospel to us.

Certainly they were holy men, precious men in their Generation, but yet not
perfect men: thou rejects their holiness, and closest with their imperfections:
thou adherest to their imperfections, and makes use of their holiness, for no
other end, but to retain their imperfections, such, which if they lived in our
days themselves would disclaim.

They were holy men; and I may say of thee as Augustine did to the Donatists,
who alleged Cyprian to patronize them in their error, Quod in Cypriano
naevu^, in vobis fuligo est, etc. Aug.
That which was a spot in Cyprian is Tartarian darkness and smoke in you. Or as
another answered the Armenians, who said, they held the same things with the
Fathers, Quod in patrib^^ error, in Armenis haeresis est.
That which was but an error in the Fathers, is a heresy in the Armenians. Or
as another speaking of the African Fathers, Patres Africani ex ignorantia
de^epti suere vo^ vero ex malitia peccatis. Nobis vero qui admoniti and edocti
sumus, nulla ejusmo^^ indulgentia relinquitur Cy
The African Fathers were deceived out of ignorance, but you sin out of
malice; theirs was the imp^rfection of their knowledge; but yours is the
perverseness of your wills. Or I may say as another. If any of our Predecessors
failed out of ignorance or imperfection of knowledge, God will pardon that, but
we that are warned and taught, we may suspect that indulgence for us.

It is that which Jewel has out of Hillar: against the wilful in his time.
Illu in eo quod nes^^unt potest adhuc in tuto esse salus fieredant, ribi vero
jam omnia a^saturem c^au^a su^t que negas quo^ ^am ignorare non potes. Hill.
Men may be saved though they hold many errors of ignorance, but all ways of
life are shut up to thee, who denies that which thou cannot be ignorant of,
unless you will wilfully shut your eyes.

Chrysostom has a good expression for it, Qui in luce peccat impudentior est,
ex suribus enim leges eos gravius puniunt, qui interdiu surantur. Chrysostom in ^^al
^.
Those are the boldest sinners, who will sin in the times of light: the Laws
do ever punish those thieves worst that steal in the day, and of all sinners,
those shall have most stripes, that sin in the light, and oppose the light.

Certainly those of our Predecessors that have gone before us, were learned
and holy men in their generation, yet as the Apostle says of himself, I may
say of any age in the world, we know but in part. And what Solomon says of
persons, I may say of things, Prove. 4.18. The path of the just is as the
shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day. There is no age
is so excellent, but after ages have excelled them. Non ita leviter de
Scriptoribus recentioribus ^entiendum, quasi Patribus praeponendi non essent.
Neque adeo de Patribus magnifice censendum, quasi Neo^ericis post ponendi non
v^derentur. Consul. Park. de polit. eccles lib. 2 cap 14. page 233, 234, etc.
We are not to think, says one, so lightly of modern and late Writers, as if
they were not (in some things) to be preferred before the Fathers; nor to think
so highly of the Fathers, as if they were not short of them that come after
them. They were all famous in their generations, The collection of Weemes upon
Rev. 1.13. Consul. etia^ and Parker. l. 2. c. 14 p. 234.
I love not to make comparisons. But yet Wickliffe, Hus, Jerome of Prage,
Whitaker, etc. come not short of any. I have read an observation of one, that
Justin Martyr (who lived in the second Century) had more errors in one Tome,
then Augustine (who lived in the fourth Century) had in ten. And there seems to
be much in the Word to countenance fuller discoveries, and clearer revelations
of truths, to after, then former ages. Some Divines have gathered it from the
Girdle, which under the Law was about their loins, now it is about the paps, by
which they think to be shadowed out the greater perfection of the after ages
of the Church, then the former. Some think it to be shadowed forth in Brightman
in locum. Quia Pellucidum and ab omni humano fermento purum. Cons. P^rk. de
polit. eccles p. 235, etc. Bright. in Apoc. 14. c. 14.2, 6. c. 15.2, 5. etc.
Park. de polit. eccle. l. 2. c. 14, per totum.
Revel. 14.2. where they say, the doctrine of the fathers for the indistinct
sound is compared to the noise of many waters, which does strike the ear with
an unprofitable sound: But the doctrine of the later Writers, Revel. 14.2, 3.
to the voice of harps, and the harps of God, that is, the most excellent, Rev.
15.2, 3.

Some again would have it shadowed out by the sea of glass like crystal,
Revel. 4 6. Revel. 15.2. under which, say they, is shadowed the clearness of
the worship of God from humane corruptions, which shall be in the latter days,
for the times wherein the Fathers lived, which were in the third and fourth
Century chiefly. The sea was not then of glass, but it was terrene and bloody,
as it is set forth in Revel. 8.8. and that by reason of the mountain cast into
the sea, which was the mountain of Episcopacie and Patriark-ship. Much more
might be said of it: but I shall refer my Reader to the Authors in the
margin. And thus much shall serve for the first Question, and also for the
second.

My admonition to you is this, that when you plead antiquity, or ancientnesse
of custom, take heed of taking men's customs for Gods commands, or adhering to
men's practices, without the prescriptions of God. That is not truly ancient
which men have long practiced, but that is true antiquity which God has
prescribed: if custom (though it be never so ancient) be without prescription
from God, it is but old error, and to be abolished.

And for the second, viz. the Novelty of doctrine, my admonition is, that you
would distinguish between those things which are new in respect of being, and
such things as are new in respect of observation: things may be new to you, and
yet not new in themselves.

Take heed of rejecting any doctrine merely under the notion of new: you may so
reject truth as well as error. It may be the doctrine is not new in it self,
though new to you. Against this rock many have split themselves, wilfully
shutting their eyes against the discoveries of their times, under the pretense
of novelty. The most precious truths that are have been in their generations
looked upon as new: there is nothing which you hold different from Popery; but
in their generation, when first they were revealed and manifested, they have
been looked upon and rejected for novelties.

If your spirits had lived in the times of Luther and Calvin, they would have
rejected all those things which they discovered, under the same notion which
you reject truth in these days: though indeed there was nothing which they
held was new, in respect of being, but only new, in respect of observation: nay
there was nothing in which Luther dissented from Popery, but it was condemned
in all Councels which were before that Antichristian Council or conventicle of
Trent, when surely God sealed to the bill of divorce against them.

But I have done with the first and second Question: there are many more which
we shall now speak unto in their order. The third is this.

Qu. Whether it be not a sufficient character to evidence an opinion to be
erroneous, the wickedness of them that maintain it?

Answ. It is with most men, that they take up their judgment of an opinion,
not from the precepts of God, but from the practices of those men, who are the
Authors and receivers, the maintainers and entertainers of it; if they see a
man to walk holily and unblameably in his life and conversation (though this a
man may do, and yet not be holy in heart and affection) they presently
conclude that all that comes from such men is truth, and hereupon are ready to
swallow and entertain as truth, without any further debate, what ever comes
from them. On the contrary, if they see men's practices are irregular, they
presently conclude their judgment is irregular too, and that is a false light,
which carries a man into bypath; certainly, say they, true light would direct
and steer men into paths of holiness. This is still concluded on; That men of
a bad life, are certainly men of as ill a belief, and sin in practice is a sure
note of error in judgment. And there is great reason for such thoughts,
because if the things received were truth, they would have a great influence
into men's lives, they would have a great command over men's practices and ways.

And if the light within them were not directive, certainly it would be
afflictive, if it did not guide them, it would scourge them, and they could not
be able to live in sinful practices, against such eminent convictions of light
to the contrary; and therefore they conclude, such as is the practice, such is
the principle, and that sinful life is accompanied with as bad doctrine; where
men do walk in darkness, and do works of darkness, surely they are in
darkness, there is no light in them. It was the Fathers argument of Nero, who
was a wicked man, a monster of men, Certainly that is the truth, which Nero
persecutes. And so do we conclude, certainly that is error which these men
countenance, and truth which they oppose: those are errors in judgment, which
are accompanied with such sins in life, and that judgment cannot but be
erroneous, where the life is so enormious.

Thus it is with most men, they take up the judgment of things, by man's
practices, not by Gods precepts, by men's walking, not by Gods rules: and indeed
the lives and practices of men are great obstacles and stumbling blocks to the
entertainment of truth, if bad, and as great advantages to error, if
unblameable. And to speak truth, these are probable grounds of truth and
error, but they are not infallible evidences. I say they are probable grounds.

The end of all truth is to reform our lives, to transform our hearts. And the
power of truth does enable men to live holily. It does not only teach us to do
so, Tit. 2.11, 12. The grace of God has appeared, teaching us to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts -- But it does enable us to do so, it is called
a sanctifying truth, Joh. 17.17. Sanctify them with thy truth. So that
certainly it is a probable sign, where men are sinful in their lives, they
are erroneous in their judgments too.

But yet it is not an infallible evidence. It Is possible to be erroneous in
judgment, and yet unblameable in conversation. The Pharisees they were
unblameable in their conversation, who could charge them? you may read how he
vaunts himself over the poor Publican, Luke 18.11. But yet you know he was
erroneous in his judgment. The like I may say of Arius, of Arminius, they were
said to be men unblameable in their lives, but yet fearful erroneous in their
judgments, one denying the deity of Christ, and the other denying the grace of
Christ; under the pretense of extending it to all, they overthrow the nature of
it, and give it to none.

And are not many of the Papists also strict and unblameable in their lives, as
who more strict then they, who look for justification and salvation by what
they do? you shall have more charitable works from those who look to purchase
heaven by them, or those who think by them to persuade with God, and to
procure Gods favor to them (I speak it not without sorrow) then from those who
yet have the affection of charity, and only look for, and are assured of their
salvation by Christ alone. Men do not work so freely from engagement, as to
engage, not from sense of mercy and thankfulness for it, as to procure mercy
and engage God to them: but this by the way. Now to return; I say, some of the
most devout of the Papists are strict and unblameable in their lives, yet are
they erroneous in their judgments: so that you see it is possible to be
erroneous in judgment, and yet unblameable in life and conversation with men.

And again, I say, it is possible to be right in judgment, and yet naught in
life: all convinced men are not converted men: all that are sound in judgment
in the main things are not holy of life: their passions and corrupt and sinful
affections, blind their judgments in this or that particular act, or may
overpower their judgments, and sway and carry them in those ways which their
own light and conscience condemns them in.

And these are those which we call, sinners against conscience, against light:
of which sort are most of they who live in the Church of God. They are men
self-condemned, their consciences and light within them, tells them they do
wickedly and sinfully, but yet their passions and corrupt affections carry them
on violently in those ways of sin. But now such men are right in judgment,
only by the power of argument, the evidence of reason, not by the demonstration
of the spirit; that light they have of truth, it is but a common, not a saving,
not a sanctifying light; it is but a general, not a spiritual, powerful,
transforming and changing light.

The Toad, though the whole body be poison, yet they say it has a pearl in its
head: it serves thus far for our turn, it is one of the best pearls ever was
found in it, though men may have poisonous hearts, and are of corrupt lives,
yet may they be for a time right in judgment in main things. I say, 1. For a
time. And, 2. In main things, with those two restrictions it may hold.

1. For a time, for it will not be long, either the light will overcome sin in
life, or the sinful life will darken and obscure the light. God says so, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. They who receive the truth, and not with love of it, they
shall be given up to strong delusions to believe lies, etc. And because we know
not when God may leave such men, and give them up to blindness of mind, to
strong delusions, and to their hearts lusts; therefore is it not safe, to
receive knowledge, or rather doctrine from their lips.

2. The second restriction is in main things, for a time they may be right in
their judgments in main things, that is, in general and common things, which
are of universal reception, and have universal consent, of which things
either by education, or by industry, and art, and diligence they have gotten,
and acquired the light and knowledge of. God reveals no secrets to them, those
he reserves to impart to his friends; he tells us, The secrets of the Lord are
with them that fear him, Psalm. 25.14. And Christ tells his Disciples, Henceforth
I call you not servants, but friends. And upon this ground, Because what ever I
have heard of the Father, I have made known to you, Joh. 15.15. Joh. 15.15
Others have the History of truth, the historical knowledge of things, but the
godly have the mystery, the mystical conceptions of them, To you it is given
to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God. Others have the bark and outward
rine of truth, Illi corticem, pij medullam veritatis. 1 Cor. 2. ult.
but the Saints have the marrow and spirit of it, We have the mind of Christ,
1 Cor. 2. ult. Unregenerate men may have the outside, but there are secrets in
truth, in every truth, which they know not. The Apostle speaks plain, The
carnal man is not able to understand the things of the Spirit of God: and upon
this ground, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. 1 Cor. 2.14
he may discern of them as a man, but not as a Christian; he may discern of
them rationally, but not spiritually. As there is need of a natural eye and
light, to see natural things, and of a rational understanding to conceive of
rational things: So there is need of a spiritual eye and light, to discern of
spiritual things, there is as much disproportion between spiritual and
rational things, and a spiritual and rational eye; as there is between an
animal or sensitive eye, and a rational eye, the rational perception of
things is not so far above sensitive, as the spiritual is above the
rational perception of things.

I say, man is not so much above a beast, as a Christian above a man: there is
something of animality of the beast in man, but there is nothing of a
Christian, faith and spiritual understanding of things in him: faith is as
much above reason, as reason is above mere sense.

Which might have been a 3d restriction, that unrenewed men or men of corrupt
life, they may be of right judgment for a time, in many things, but as men,
not as Christians, by the light of reason, not the demonstration of the spirit.

And therefore you see, though it be a probable sign of error, when the
entertainers of it are men of loose and corrupt lives, yet it is not an
infallible evidence, for even such men may for a time be right in judgment in
main things. The Raven might bring good meat to Elijah, though she her self was
an unclean bird, the bird was unclean, but the meat it brought was good; indeed
it was but once, we never read of a second time, that either the Raven brought
it, or Elijah received it, and it was, when he was in the wilderness too; when
we are in the wilderness and straits, we may receive bread from a Raven: God
may make use of a Raven to bring bread, but we are to expect and receive our
daily bread from better hands.

Indeed it is true, Non quis, sed quid affertur. Morton. Apol. Cath. p. 2. l. 5.
c. 9 Isa. 8.20.
we are not to look so much upon him that brings it, as the meat that is
brought; we are not so much to look upon persons, as doctrines; we should
rather judge of truth and error by Rule and Scriptures, then by life and
practice, thither God sends us, Isai. 8.20. To the law, and to the testimonies,
if they speak not according to this truth, it is because the light is not in
them. Men of corrupt life may deliver to you many excellent truths, either out
of evidence of reason, convictions of conscience, or for mercinary ends, or for
applause and ostentation; the Apostle told us of some that preached Christ out
of envy, Phil. 1.15. Phil. 1.15.
Certainly there is an error of both hands, we may have men's persons in too
much admiration, as the Apostle speaks, Jude verse. 16. Jude v. 16.
You esteem too much of men, when you will drink in and receive an opinion,
because such bring it, and you esteem too little of God and truth, when you
reject the mind of God, because such reveal it: it was the speech of Christ
concerning the Pharisees, Mat. 23.2, 3. Mat. 23.2, 3.
They sit in Moses chair, all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that
observe and do, but do not after their works. That which Christ spoke
concerning the Pharisees, I conceive to be restrained to those times, and to
that subject of the Law.

1. It was to be restrained to that subject of the Law: they were the
Interpreters and preachers of the Law, and Christ would have the people hear
the^ of it: certainly he would not have them hear them upon other subjects: if
they had preached that Jesus was not the Christ, that he was not the Messiah,
they were to expect a Messiah to come in visible royalty and glory to deliver
them from their enemies, as they understood that, 110. Psalm and other places;
but as for Christ, they knew, who he was, Is not Joseph his father, and Mary
his mother? say they: Joh. 6.41.
and is not he the Carpenter? No question this was the doctrine they preached;
and therefore Christ restrained them to the subject; hear them while they
preach the Law.

2. Yea and it was to be restrained to the time too, as yet the Mosaicall Law
was not repealed, those rites and Ceremonies were not yet abrogated, and
therefore as yet they might hear them, and walk in the practice of those
things, but afterward it would not be suffered, they who preached this
doctrine were called false teachers, and the Apostle calls such deceivers,
seducers, false teachers, who preached observance of those things, and told the
people they were bound to be circumcised and to keep the whole Law of Moses.

This is certain, Veritas a quocunque dicatur a spiritu sancto est. Au.
truth by whomsoever spoken, is of the holy Ghost. We believe truth though the
devil speak it, but we do not believe it, because he speaks it, nor do we go
to him for the Revelation of it.

It was a truth which he said, I know thee who thou art, thou art Christ the
Son of God: but we do not believe it, because he said it, but because God
revealed it: nor yet do we doubt of it, because he published it, who yet is a
liar, and might perhaps speak this truth, that we might the rather suspect it,
because a liar said it; but though he spoke it, yet we do not doubt it,
because God has revealed it. So corrupt men [may] speak the truth, I do not
say they ought to be speakers of the truth: men of sinful lives and practices
are not to be in that office, as dispencers of the Word and Sacraments; but
take it, as I mean it [may] for ability in office, nor for right to office; I
say, corrupt men may speak the truth, but we do not believe it, because they
say it, but because God reveals it: nor do we doubt of it, because they
publish it, seeing God has declared it. Indeed I would not go to a liar to
know the truth; nor should I reject truth, though it come from a liar: So I do
not go to men of sinful lives to know the mind of God; nor do I reject the
mind of God, because such reveal it. I look not to hear all truth from them,
The secrets of the Lord are alone with them who fear him: nor shall I hear of
many, sincerely made known: and those which are revealed, I take them, not as
theirs, but Gods, and close with them, not because they reveal them, but
because God has revealed them.

I doubt not but men of corrupt hearts and lives may publish many truths,
though they know few as they ought; the truths they publish are general, God
does impart no secrets to them, they know nothing of the workings of God; and
the grounds of publishing them, they are for pride and ostentation; the end,
that by this work they might have their gain: they walk in this way, as you do
in your trade, with mercenary spirits, not with holy and spiritual hearts.

And this I thought necessary to premise, and now we come to the answer of the
Question, viz. Whether the loosnesse and wickedness of the maintainers of an
opinion, be not a sufficient discovery, that the opinion maintained is an
error?

And I answer, though often times it is a probable ground, yet it is not
always an infallible evidence.

To the infallible judgment of an error by the lives and conversations of
those that maintain it, we are to observe ^^ese rules.

Rule. 1. See what agreement there is between his judgment practice, between
his opinion and his walking; it may be there is a contradiction between his
life and his judgment, his judgment speaks one thing, and his life another;
now, if so, you are not able to evidence his opinion to be an error, though
his life be wicked. But if on the contrary you see an agreement between his
practice and principles, between his life and opinion, between his judgment
and conversation, then may we conclude it to be an error; that is certainly an
error, that agrees with loose and sinful walking.

Rule 2. If you would judge of men's doctrino by their sinful practice: see
what influence his opinion has to such practices, if his opinion does
necessarily, or by way of consequence lead to sinfulness of life: it is
certainly an erroneous opinion: for example, to take men off the performance of
duty, to cry down the Law as a rule of obedience, it is an opinion that does
necessarily lead to libertinisme and sinfulness of life: men that will be tied
to no Rule, will ere long be under no command; men that neglect the practice of
holiness, will quickly fall into the practice of sin; they who will not do
what they should do, will quickly do that which they should not do.

Rule 3. If you would judge of men's doctrines by their practices, then see
whether this be a personal failing of one in the way, or an universal
aberration of all in the way. It is possible for men to fail and err in a way
of truth. David was in a way of truth, and yet had he many gross failings. It
was the usual argument that wicked men have had against the ways of God: they
have taken occasion by the sins of profession, to fall upon profession it self:
the Apostle complains, that men who lived scandalously were enemies to the
cross of Christ, and caused the ways of God to be blasphemed. Indeed many men
have fallen, and fallen foully, but yet their way has not countenanced, but
condemned them for it: their judgment had no influence into their sinful
practice: the doctrine is pure, and holy, and good, and could have no influence
into a sinful life.

Nor has their failings been universal, but personal: though some have
fallen in the way, yet God has preserved others holy, and made many of them
who have fallen, the better for their sins: you are not to be led by practice,
but by precept; not example, but rule. It is possible for some persons that
hold such an opinion or doctrine, to fail in it; but when the corruption
cleaves to all that walk in the way, it is a dangerous Symptoms of the way to
be erroneous.

Rule 4. If you would judge of an opinion by practice of men, or of a doctrine,
to be erroneous, by the loosnesse of the maintainers: then see whether that
loosnesse do arise from the error of their judgment, or from the corruption
of their affections: see whether it do arise from his opinion, or from his
corruptions; whether from the unsoundnesse of his head, or the unsoundnes of
his heart.

There are many errors in life, which yet have not their rise from error in
understanding, but from corruption in the affection: it may be the light within
them does judge and condemn such ways, and them for them; but yet they are
over-powred by the violence and impetuousnesse of their lusts and corruptions,
which carries them headlong against all the checks of conscience, and
gainsaying of their understanding.

To conclude then this Question, the wickedness and loosnesse of those who are
the maintainers of an opinion, is enough to evidence an opinion to be erroneous.

1. If there be an agreement between his judgment and practice, between his
opinion and walking, but not if one contradict the other.

2. If his opinion have an influence into such evil practices, or by way of
necessary consequence carries on to such ways.

3. If those practices be universal of all that walk in it, not if personal
and particular.

4. If his sinful life be the issue of, and flow from his corrupt judgment,
not if it arise from a corrupt heart.

And in these cases it will be easy to judge that the doctrine is erroneous.
And this shall satisfy for answer to this Question; we come to the next
Question.

Qu. 4. Whether the strictness and holiness of those, who are the maintainers
and entertainers, the publishers and receivers of an opinion, be not enough to
discover the opinion or doctrine to be a truth?

Before I come to the Answer, I must tell you that this has been the great
Episcopal argument for their Diana. Ego nunquam credam Ambrosium, Augustinu^
reliqu^sque sanctos patres Episcopatum tyrannicum gerere voluisse. Sar.
I can never believe, says one, that Ambrose, and Augustine, and the rest of
the holy Fathers would have taken upon them the office of a Bishop, if it had
not been lawful. Absit long a piis mentibus ut veterem ecclesiae formam, and
ut tot summae pietatis and eruditionis episcopos, Athanasios, Augustinos,
Chrysostomos, Basilios, Nazianzaenos and accusare audeant tyrannidis, cu^
puritanis. Scul. Hier. Anac. l. 10. c. 23 p. 65.
Far be it from me, says another, to think that the ancient form of the
Church, and so many godly and renowned men Bishops, should be thought
tyrannical, or that such holy and learned men should be in such an error.

And it is that is pleaded in many things that now wax old, and are wearing
away, the holiness of those who have been the Reformers and Institutours of
such things. And certainly, it is a great advantage to an error, and prejudice
to a truth, the holiness and loosnesse of those who are the maintainers and
entertainers of it. It is that which the Heathens alleged against
Christianity in the first times of the Gospel, the sins of those who had
received and made profession of it, which the Apostle does so often charge upon
them, that they caused the cross of Christ, and the Gospel of Christ to be
blasphemed by their unworthy walking.

And it is that which the Turks do say against the Christians at this day.
^cce quates su^t qui Christu^ colunt; si bona discerent, boni essent. Christum
legunt, and imp^j sunt: Christum oud ^nt, and inebria^tur: Christum sequuntur,
and iapiunt. S^l. ^^^^.
Behold the servants of the crucified God, certainly if their way were truth,
their lives would not be so sinful. Insomuch that we may well say, it is a
great prejudice to the truth of God, the disorderly walking of them that are
the professors of it: and it is a great advantage to an error in the minds
of men, the sanctity and holiness of those who walk in it: men are more led by
practice then by rule, by example, then by argument, by the eye, then by the
Word, and this is their argument: See their lives, and by that you may judge of
their opinions. --

But we will come to the answer of the Question; Whether the holiness of those
who are the publishers and receivers of an opinion be not a sufficient
discovery that the opinion is a truth.

Before I answer, give me leave in a word to distinguish of error, of truth
and of holiness.

1. There are fundamental truths and building truths: and so there is
fundamental and damning errors, and dangerous and defiling errors: all
errors are not damning, but all are dangerous and defiling.

2. There is an appearing holiness, and a real holiness: and so there is a
religious strictness, and a superstitious strictness; one commanded of God,
the other taken up of man.

Now having laid down these two distinctions, we will come to the answer: and I
will answer the Question in four Conclusions.

Conclus. 1. The appearing holiness of those who hold an opinion, is not
enough to demonstrate it a truth. A man may be in a dangerous (I had like to
have said, damning) error, and yet to the view of men appearingly holy. Many
men have put on a form of godliness, and show of holiness, till they have
gotten strength and power enough to back them in their opinions, and then they
have discovered the venom of their spirits, and let loose their spirits to
those corrupt ways, which their erroneous understandings did lead them to.

Arius, as they write on him, who yet held that damnable opinion against the
Deity of Christ, that Christ was not God, he was a man in all appearance humble
and holy; insomuch that his holiness drew many after him; and those who
received the opinion, they were many of them of unblameable life and
conversation: but yet when they had gotten power on their side, they acted
their venom. The like I might say of Nestorius, Maniche, etc. And Arminius of
late, who in his time discovered much appearing holiness and humility, yet
held dangerous errou^s.

It is the subtilty of Satan, and the policy of the first promoters of
opinions, to difference themselves as much from others in life and
conversation, as they do in judg^m^nt and opinion, that so their errors might
get more ground, and find better entertainment with others: As the Pharisees
made long prayers, but it was to prey upon and devour widows houses they made
the practice of holiness, but the cloak of their hypocrisy, and the stalking
horse to compass their own ends.

So many do walk in the ways of strictness, but to set off their own wicked
errors, and advantage their opinions, they know that an ill life will be
disadvantagious to the receiving of their opinions; and therefore put on a form
of godliness, but deny the power of it, that they might the better advantage
the reception of their errors.

But though some, I say, do walk in a way of holiness, to set off those things,
which they know to be errors, they put on a sheeps garment to deceive; yet
others though they be in an error may apprehend it for a truth, and with
honest affections may walk holily to adorn their profession, and make their
doctrine more receptible in the hearts of others.

So that I say, first the appearing holiness and strictness of the
maintainers and entertainers of an opinion, is not enough to discover it a
truth. It is certain, a man may be strict in an error, and yet a libertine in
a truth: though no truth does make men libertines, or countenance them in it,
yet some errors may make men strict, strict I say, not a religious
strictness, but a superstitious strictness; strict, not in observing the
precepts of God, but the traditions and prescriptions of men, as the Pharisees
were, and many of the poor deluded Papists are.

And therefore no appearing strictness or holiness can evidence an opinion to
be truth: I say [appearing] for you can go no further, you cannot difference
between false and true, between appearing and approved holiness; you know what
Christ says of them, who justified themselves before men, that is, that walked
unblameable before men, That which is highly esteemed amongst men, is an
abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16.15. Luke 16.15


Conclus. 2. That a real and approved holiness is a sure note, that the
error which they hold is not a damning, destroying error.

I say, though the holiness of those men that maintain an opinion, be not a sure
note that the opinion they maintain is a truth, yet it is a certain evidence
that it is not an undoing and destructive error. Christ says, That the elect
shall not be deceived. Mat. 24.24. Mat. 24.24
that is, though they may be carried aside with some sinful, yet they shall
not be drawn away with undoing errors. And we have all the harmony of
Scripture for that; he tells us, That they who do his will, shall know his
doctrine, Joh. 6.45. Joh. 7.17. Joh. 10.4, 5
that we shall all be taught of God, that we shall hear his voice, and shall
not follow the voice of strangers, and that we have received an anointing of
the holy One, whereby we know all things. Al which places are to be understood
of necessary truths, not accessory; of truths that are essential and
fundamental, not circumstantiall: and it proves fully to us, that God will
never give up his holy ones to undoing errors. That Is the second answer; that
holiness is a sure note, that the opinions which they hold (though an error)
yet it is not a damning and destroying error.

Conclus. 3. Real holiness in the maintainers and entertainers of an opinion;
it is a probable sign that the opinion is truth.

Indeed God does not honor wicked men, or men of corrupt hearts, with the
first discoveries of truth; what they have, they have from others. A man may
well suspect that opinion which a corrupt heart is the revealer of. God reveals
his hidden things to his hidden ones, The secrets of the Lord are with them
that fear him, and the humble he will teach and guide in all truth, as he tells
us, Psalm. 25.14. Psa. 25.14
Other men have no promise of Gods making known his mind unto them, nor are
they under any condition for God to do it. But now the godly, they are under a
promise; he has said, He will lead us into the way of all truth; he has told
us, we shall be taught of God; and we are under the condition of such
revelation, for we are in Covenant with him, and that is one condition, Jer.
31.33, Jer. 31.33, 34. Isa 54.13. Joh. 15.15. Hos. 6.3.
34. We are his children, that is another, Isa. 54.13. We are his friends, Joh.
15.15. We are such as seek him, Hos. 6.3. Then shall we know, if we follow on
to know, he will reveal his mind to them that seek him. And being under these
gracious conditions, we may expect that God should reveal his mind and truth
to us.

So that is the third Answer, Real holiness in the publishers and receivers
of an opinion is a probable sign that the opinion is a truth. I would not give
too much to holiness in this kind, for I am not to be led by any man's
practice, but Gods precepts: but this I would say in doubtful cases, where
there is not a clear rule in the Word, though I would not submit my judgment,
nor give up my understanding to the opinion of any, yet holiness should
prevail much with my affections; and I should conclude, it is either a truth,
or certainly it is no dangerous error that these hold. And if I should see two
contrary opinions held by godly and holy men; I would not go about to dispute
and debate, which of them are most holy, nor can I conclude that both are
truths: But this I would conclude, that certainly neither of them are dangerous
errors, both of them are but circumstantiall truths. This is a maxim, God is
never wanting to his Church and people in necessary truths, nor does he leave
them to undoing errors. And that is the third Answer, That real holiness is a
probable sign the opinion such hold forth is a truth.

Conclus. 4. Though a real holiness be a probable sign opinion is a truth,
yet it is not an infallible evidence.

1. The best men are but men, and therefore not infallible, not unerring: what
Whitaker said of the ancient Bishops, Etiam illi Episcopi qui martyrs fuerunt,
(...) passi sunt. Whit. cont 4.
so I may say of all, even the best of men they have their failings, they have
need of some grains of allowance. Another speaking of the Fathers, says,
Sancti quidem fuerunt sed tamen homi nei, affectus suos habuerunt.
They were holy men, but yet were but men, and had humane affections and humane
frailties. Origin, Tertullian, Cyprian, they were holy men, At qui isti in
errores multos inciderunt
but they fell into many errors, Qui vero pertinaciter eorum sententias
desenderiit haeretici habiti sunt, and Tertullianistae, and Origenistae
appellati. Reynold. cens. Apoc. praelect. 4. Jude v 16.
And those who took them up and maintained them, were called heretics,
Tertullianists and Origenists.

The best men are but men, and imperfect in knowledge; the Apostle tells us, we
know but in part; we have many corruptions, which are too apt to byas us, and
lead us aside. The best men, the most godly may be led aside.

1. Either from weakness of judgment, for we know but in part.

2. Or from partiality of affections.

3. Or from overweening the maintainers of an opinion.

It is a dangerous thing for us to have men's persons in admiration: men are apt
to take things upon trust from honest men.

4. Or from the benign and fair aspects which an opinion may carry: thus the
affections sometime work upon the understanding, and gain the understanding,
not by demonstration, but by allurement: this is to bribe us and inveagle our
judgments into an opinion, not to reason and persuade us. Certainly the less
the understanding has to deal with the affections, and the affections with the
understanding in the finding out truth and error, as I said before, the safer
and clearer is your way.

5. Or from over-credulousnesse. Or,

6. From fear of denying a truth: all which I spoke to at large in the
foregoing Discourse.

Certainly the best men may be led aside, as men, they are incident to error,
as corruption in them inclinable. --

Nay, the Apostle tells us, Romans 16.18. By good words and fair speeches they
deceive the hearts of the simple: To. 16 1^. (...).
the hearts of them not evil, as the word is. As many followed Absalom in the
simplicity of their hearts: So there are many who may follow an error, not out
of corrupt affections, for by-ends, or for advantage, but even out of the
simplicity of their hearts. Men may have corrupt hearts in a truth, and honest
hearts in an error, that is, honest ends, and honest aims. And so much for the
fourth answer, Though real holiness in the maintainers be a probable sign,
yet it is not an infallible evidence of the truth of an opinion. And so much
for the fourth Question: we now come to the fifth.

Qu. 5. Whether this be not sufficient to evidence an opinion to be true, that
it is held up and maintained by learned men: and on the contrary, to discover
it an error, that it is maintained by illiterate and unlearned men?

It has been the great argument the Papists have had: all must needs be truth
which such learned Doctors have held: and again, that must needs be an error,
which is upheld and maintained by a sort of unlearned and illiterate men: and
we have had the same note sung to us. Cons Park. Polit. Eccl. l. 2. c. 20. etc.
And there are some places of Scripture which seem to favor it, that the want
of learning is a great cause that men run into many errors, as you see, 2 Pet.
3 16. where the Apostle speaking of Paul's Epistles, he tells us, That there are
some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable,
do wrest, as they do also other Scriptures, unto their own destruction. By
which the Apostle seems to infer, that the want of learning is the cause that
many do run into error. And yet if this place be conferred with other places,
it will appear not to make so much for that purpose: but on the contrary, those
who have been judged to be unlearned, have been in the truth; and those who
were the learned men of that age, were in the error.

In the times of Christ and his Apostles, the Scribes and Pharisees, and the
learned Doctors of the Law, they were in the error, as you know; the Apostle
asks us in the 1 Cor. 1.20. 1 Cor. 1.20.
Where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where is the disputer of this world?
has not God made foolish the wisdom of the world? So in the 1 Cor. 6.7, 8. 1
Cor 6.7, 8.
We speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, which none of the Princes of this
world knew, speaking of the great Doctors of the Jews, for had they known it,
they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. So that if you look into those
times, the learned men were in an error: and on the contrary, those who were
judged unlearned (though they were truly learned in the wisdom of God) they
were in the truth, as you know.

And indeed in all ages of the Church, as it has been a great advantage unto
error, the learning of those who have maintained it: so it has been a great
obstacle and prejudice to the truth, the unlearnednesse of the maintainers. You
see in the times of the Gospel, it was that which they opposed against Christ,
Which of the Doctors believe in him? And it was that which they had against
the Apostles, it is said, Act. 4.13. when they saw the boldness of Peter and
John, and perceived that they were unlearned, they marvelled. -- Nay, they
objected this against Christ himself, who was the wisdom of the Father, and
whose humane nature was filled with all the wisdom of God, For in him dwelt all
the fullness of knowledge; nay, Col. 1.19.
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, as the Apostle, Col. 2.3. Col. 2.3.
Yet they said of him, when they heard him to teach, Joh. 7.15. Joh. 7.15.
How knows this man letters, having never learned? They saw he was not
brought up as others were in the Schools of the Prophets: it might be he worked
at his fathers trade, till the time that he began his Ministry, which was not
till he was baptized, about the 30th year of his age; and they thought, seeing
he was never taught by man, therefore he knew no letters; they were ignorant
that he had an invisible Tutour, the Spirit of God, as the Prophet tells us,
Isa. 61.1. Isa. 61.1.
Isa. 42.1, 2, 3. Isa. 42.1, 2, 3.
and Isa. 50.4. Isa. 50.4.
The Lord God has given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how
to speak. But ignorant they were that he was the wisdom of God, and all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge were hid in him, they were in him, God has
filled the humane nature with all these treasures, but they were hid in him, as
the Apostle says, they were veiled, and their eyes could not behold them, as
you see by them in this place.

So that you see, as it has been a great advantage to error, so has it been
a great prejudice to truth, the learning, or want of learning in the
maintainers of it. And I conceive the ground is this, because most men of the
world, they are led by an implicit faith, and believe as others do, and they
are great admirers of learning, and therefore give up their faith to those whom
they apprehend to be learned men, and walk by their light, submit to their
knowledge, believe as they believe, and there they rest, without troubling of
themselves any further. Tutum est peccare authoribus istis. Sic and,
And one would think this a great deal of wisdom. As one said of great persons,
so they say, and in natural wisdom it seems safe Errare cum doctoribus istis.
to err with such learned men; why, will men say, if they know not what is the
truth, who should? How can such poor men as we be able to judge of things, so
well as those, who are the Doctors and Rabbis of the Church?

And so I find most men ready to resolve their faith into the opinion of
others, and give up their judgments to those whom they do apprehend to be
learned; they think that such must needs be in the truth: but for others, they
apprehend them weak and illiterate, and therefore doubtless they are in an
error.

Now to answer this Question, which is of some weight, that we may more
distinctly proceed, and more clearly come to the resolution of it.

I will in the first place give you the diverse acceptations of learning in
Scripture, and tell you how it may be taken --

1. Sometimes I find it taken in a good sense; sometimes in a bad. It is taken
for truth, The knowledge of him who is truth it self, Ephesians. 5.20. Ephesians. 5.20.
And once we read it is taken for error, or erroneous doctrine, Rev. 2.24.
Rev. 2.24.
where St John speaks of the doctrine of Jezabel, who had taught that men might
eat things sacrificed to Idols, and commit fornication without sin: as many as
have not this doctrine, or this learning, (...).
as the words may be read, As many as have not this learning, that is, this
error, or as many as are not carried away with this erroneous doctrine, they
are all the same. But

2. Sometimes we read that learning is taken Divinely. Humanely.


We begin with the first.

1. Sometime learning is taken humanely; and so sometimes Strictly. Largely.


1. Strictly: and that, 1. Either for the knowledge of tongues, and so I
conceive it is taken, 1 Cor. 14.16. 1 Cor. 14.16.
where the Apostle speaking of the knowledge of tongues, which was a miraculous
gift, and accompanied the first times of the Gospel, first given to the
Apostles, that the Apostles might be able to speak to all men in their own
languages, as you see in Act. 2. beg. Act. 2. beg.
yet continued for certain time in the Church, as you see it there, 1 Cor. 14.
this the Apostle calls learning, and says, when the Church is met together, and
all speak with tongues, and there come in those that are unlearned, or
unbelievers, will they not say that you are madd? Where by unlearned in that
place, he means such as have not the knowledge of tongues, and therefore
understood not what they spoke; which I call humane knowledge, though at this
time divinely given.

2. Sometimes learning is taken for the knowledge of Arts and Sciences, Act.
7.22. Act. 7 22.
And Moses was learned in all the learning of the Egyptians, and was mighty in
words and deeds: And in this sense it is probable they spoke, when they said,
the Disciples were unlearned, Act. 4.13. Act. 7.13.
that is, they are not skild in the knowledge of the Arts and Sciences, nor
were they brought up in the Schools of the Prophets, and so instructed as they
were.

2. Learning is taken largely, for the improvement in all kinds of humane
learning, Ephesians. 3.19. Ephesians. 3.19.
That you may know the love of Christ, WHICH PASSES KNOWLEDGE, by knowledge
there, is meant all humane knowledge, or the improvement of man's understanding
in all kinds of humane learning. And so much for the first acceptance.

2. Sometimes learning is taken divinely; and that either more Strictly. Or,
Largely. Also


1. More strictly, for the knowledge of the doctrine of Christ, the mystery of
the Gospel, Ephesians. 5.20. Ephesians. 5.20.
Ye have not so learned Christ.

2. More largely, for the sound understanding of all divine doctrine, 2 Timothy
3.14, 15. 2 Timothy 3.14, 15.
Continue in the things which thou have learned, knowing of whom thou have
learned, and that from a child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are
able to make thee wise to salvation. Thus it is said, Romans 15.4. Romans 15.4
That all Scripture was given for our learning, that is, for our instruction
and information in spiritual and divine things.

Now this knowledge in divine things, which is di^^^e learning, it may also be
distinguished.

1. It is either infused and revealed. Or,

2. It is merely acquisite. Or,

3. It is partly acquisite, and partly infused.

1. It is either infused, or immediately revealed, and so was the knowledge of
the Apostles and Prophets, as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 3.2, 3, 4, 5. Ephesians. 3.2,
3, 4, 5.
If you have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God, which is given to
me to you wa^d, how that by revelation he made known unto me the mystery, which
in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, but is now revealed unto
his holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit. There the Apostle shows you
plainly how they came to their knowledge.

2. There is knowledge merely acquisite by humane industry, by education, by
arts and diligence, by conversing with Scripture, with the writings of learned
and holy men, together with the common assistance of the Spirit of God, which
is called general and common illumination, whereby a man may get a great deal
of knowledge in divine things, and be able to discourse, preach, to write, to
dispute of them, and yet know nothing spiritually and savingly, as he ought to
know. The heart is dark under all this light: it is but a dead knowledge, it
does but tell the way, it does not enable to walk in it, it does but keep down,
it does not mortify and subdue sin, it is but a daring, it is no reforming
light; and what he knows, he knows rather as a man, then as a Christian, rather
rationally then spiritually: he knows things, but the godly know them by
another light then he does. The light in an unregenerate man, and one renewed,
it does not differ in degree only, but in kinds; they see things different,
and have different sight of them; one sees them by the evidence of reason, the
other by the demonstration of the Spirit: the one is but like the light of the
stars, the other of the Sun; as it may be night, notwithstanding the Stars;
so the heart may be dark, notwithstanding all this light.

3. There is knowledge, partly acquisite, partly infused. I say, partly infused
of God, and partly gotten by holy and religious diligence. First, God gives the
eye to see, and power for the eye to see, and our sight is further cleared by
the media, the means of Gods appointment and ordination, as reading, hearing,
discoursing, meditating and studying of the deep things of God. The first is,
implanted light; the second is, improved light.

Divines distinguish between supernatural habits of knowledge, and such as are
acquired by industry and diligence. The knowledge God infuseth, which is called
the supernatural habit of knowledge, is properly a divine light, whereby God
does break into, and enlighten the soul, and comes into a man, as the Sun
arises upon the earth, and dispels those foggs, mists, vapors of darkness
and ignorance, which before clouded and darkened the soul, and that which is
acquisite, is but the improving and using of that light, to search out and know
the mind and will of God more fully.

In the first, God does but, as it were, give man a candle, whereby he sees,
and is able to search. It is a candle within him, not a light in his hand, but
in his heart; many have the candle in the hand, but not in the heart: in the
second it is but the use of this candle, or this light, which God has given to
search, to know more of the mind of God, and where ever he goes he has a
candle with him, he has an eye, some measure of knowledge and light to discern
of things that differ, especially in those things which are essential to
salvation. And this is implied in those phrases, you shall be all taught of
God, you have an unction of the holy One, whereby you know all things.

There is many have the rational eye, that want the spiritual eye, they have
light in divine things, but no divine light, all the knowledge they have, it is
gotten up by industry, by arts, by common and general helps; they want that
spiritual, that holy, humbling, transforming light: they have light, but it is
but the light of the stars, it is night for all this, their heart is dark
under all this light, they have not the light of the Sun, no light from Christ,
who is the Sun of righteousness, which lightneth all that come into the new
world of Saints. You shall see a man get more knowledge of God in one half
year, after God has come in with this spiritual light, after God has given
him this eye, then he had, nay, then others get all their lives. Do you not
see it in every days experience? some men it may be your neighbors or kindred,
that before God worked on them, they were dark, understood nothing; yet after
God has come in with this spiritual light, they have in a short time grown up
to wonder, as far exceeded thee, as thou do the poorest novice of the
Parish; and no wond^r, they have been taught of God; God has implanted a light
into them, whereby like the Sun they shine more and more to a perfect day.

Thus having premised these necessary distinctions, we will come to the answer
of the Question. Whether this be not enough to discover an opinion to be a
truth, that it is held forth by learned men? etc. Out of these distinctions
laid down I shall frame these answers only.

1. For one of these we shall cast it out, there is no Question to be made of
it, That if by learning be meant that light, that knowledge, which is revealed
of God to his Apostles and Prophets, it is an infallible character of truth:
this is most certain, All Scripture was given by inspiration of God, holy men
of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. ult. 2 Pet. 1. ult.
So that there is no Question, if learning be taken for knowledge revealed by
the Spirit, it is an infallible character of truth.

But there are four other acceptations of learning, which we shall speak unto.

1. Learning, taken for the knowledge of tongues.

2. For knowledge in Arts and Sciences.

3. As it is taken for that knowledge which is merely acquisite in divine
things.

4. As it is taken for knowledge, partly acquisite, and partly infused. Out of
these distinctions, we shall frame these answers.

1. If by learning be meant the knowledge of tongues only, as I told you it was
taken in my first distinction of humane learning, then I say, that neither is
that learning sufficient to evidence that a man is in the truth, nor the want
of it, conclude a man to be in an error. Indeed that kind of learning has
but little of man and reason in it, even the least of man; it is conversant
rather about words, than about reason; it rather helps to judge of words, then
of matter; it is little help to judge of error or truth, it judges more of
words then things.

2. If by learning be meant the knowledge in Arts and Sciences: neither is this
conclusive: those that excelled most in this kind of learning, have been the
greatest enemies against the truth: all their knowledge has been but the
strengthnings to carnal reason, the fortifications of corrupt reason, to make
it more strong to oppugn and oppose the truth. When the Apostle came to
Athens, which was the eye of the world, or the chief Magazine of the earth for
this kind of learning, you see what strong opposition he found, all their
learning did but fortify them against the truth, which he published. And when
he preached to them of the resurrection, they cry out, What will this babbler
say? -- they judged all but babbling, which gain-sayed their tenants. And he
tells you what entertainment the Gospel found among them, 1 Cor. 1.23, 24. 1
Cor. 1.23, 24.
We preach Christ crucified, which to the Jews is a stumbling block, and to the
Greeks foolishness. They looked upon this glorious mystery of the Gospel, but
a silly folly: That Is the second.

3. If by learning be meant mere acquisite knowledge in divine things, or a
knowledge gotten up, merely by conversing with Scripture, with the writings of
holy and learned men; then I say again, that neither the enjoyment of this will
be conclusive that man is in the truth: nor will the want of much of this
evidence a man is in an error.

I have known a man full read in all the writings of men, that could better
tell you another man's judgment then his own; and when out of the abundance of
his reading he has set you down many several opinions of Fathers and others
concerning a point, he has at last concluded with the worst himself. Besides
there be many errors in the writings of the Fathers, and so indeed in all
humane writings, and he that goes to others to ^ake up his knowledge of truth,
and wants light within him to distinguish of things that differ, may sooner
side with an error, then close with a truth. Nay, if he converse with
Scripture, and have not a light within him, for want of that, he may by
mistakes run upon error, in steed of truth: if the holiest men, who have the
light of the Spirit, out of the imperfection of their light and knowledge, may
mistake, then much more may he, who has no light in him, he who though he have
a rational, yet wants a spiritual light. The Apostle tells us, The carnal man
is not able to understand the things of the Spirit of God, because they are
spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. 1 Cor. 2.14
I know they distinguish between animalis homo, and homo non renatus, between a
carnal man, and an unregerate man, and say, that though the carnal man is not
able to discern of the things of the Spirit of God, yet the unregenerate man
may, he has common gifts, light, knowledge, which puts a difference between
him and a carnal man, though they do not declare him a renewed, a regenerate
man. But yet I say, that if we respect the kinds of knowledge, neither the
carnal, nor the unregenerate man can understand the things of the Spirit of
God, and the Apostles ground shall be mine, because they are spiritually
discerned, which is as much as this, because he is not spiritual, because he
wants an eye from above, because he has no light that is adaequate
proportionable to the things revealed; they do exceed captum humanum, man's
reason and apprehension, they are depths above his line to fathom, there is a
sublimity in the object, and a debility in the subject; he wants an eye: as the
natural eye must enable you to discern of natural things: so a spiritual eye
must enable you to discern of spiritual things: he may talk of them, and
dispute of them, and have rational apprehensions of them, but no spiritual
and divine discoveries of them to his soul; he sees them, but by the light of
the Stars, not by the light of the Sun; he sees them by a rational
conception, as a man, but not by the spiritual notion of them, as a Christian.
As the Apostle shows afterward, when he tells you, That God has revealed these
things to us by his Spirit, such things, as eye has not seen, etc. that is, no
natural eye could apprehend, nor any eye, which is not enlightened by the light
of Christ; and the reason why they perceived them, was, because they had a
spiritual eye, nay, the mind of Christ, as in the last verse. And so much for
the third.

4. If by learning be meant such knowledge, as is in godly men; or, if you will
so put it up to the utmost; such knowledge, as is not only in the ordinary
rank of godly men, but such as is in those, who do excel, and have improved
their knowledge by industry, by reading, and have heightened and refined their
intellectuals by the best and choicest helps afforded to man: Yet (I say)
though this be a probable sign, that the opinion which such men hold forth, is
a truth, yet it cannot be a conclusive and infallible evidence: the best of
men, and the most learned of men have their imperfections, their blots, their
failings. It may be said of the most knowing man in the world, He knows but in
part; which though the Apostle spoke of degrees and measures of the knowledge
of good and truth in the Saints, yet it may be meant in respect of the degrees
of the knowledge of evil and error in them also, We know but in part. I have
read of a passage in Reynolds, Quanto ingenio Origines and Tertullian^s, quanta
doctrina, quam singulari eloquentia suerint, omnes intelligunt, adeo ut alter
Graecorum, alter Latinorum Princeps est habitus; a^qui isti in errores multos
inciderunt; qui vero pertinaciter eorum sententias defen^eru^t, haeretici
habiti su^ and Ter^^ ^^anistae and Origenistae appellati Censur Apoc. prae^ect.
4.
Origin and Tertullian did greatly excel in learning, insomuch that the one
was esteemed the chief of the Greeks, and the other of the Latins, yet they
fell into many errors, and those who held their opinions, were judged
Heretics, and called Tertullianists and Origenists, etc. Yet in this I say
thus much; that so far as they have learned of the Spirit, so far as their
learning is implanted, so far it judges truly: but that which is ours, and
the improvement of our knowledge, by industry and diligence, that improved
knowledge is subject to error and mistake.

The Father may leave his child a good stock, and well gotten, but the child
may fail in his improvement of it, his additions to it may be faulty. The first
stock is Gods, and that is light in main things; he gives his people an
unerring, an infallible light, in essential and fundamental truths, or truths
necessary to salvation: but now the improvement of this stock is ours, the
additions and accretions to it, in accessory and circumstantiall truths; and
herein we are subject to fail and err.

Thus I have answered this Question, Whether it be not enough to discover an
opinion to be a truth, that it is maintained and upheld by learned men, etc.

But least you may think I have been too abstruse, that I may speak plain to
all, take in these three things: Learning then, I say, cannot be a conclusive
evidence of truth.

1. Because all learned men are not gracious men.

2. Because learning, without grace, is but the forge of error, such men they
are for the most part self-conceited, part-proud, and the pride of the head is
a dangerous engine for error.

3. The most learned and the most gracious men may err, as I showed before.

I see this spirit in many men, that they are great admirers of learning:
indeed some give too little to it, as well as others too much to it; some
wildly cry down all learning, as if it were a prejudice, and utterly
disserviceable to the finding out of truth in divine things. Indeed learning
without grace is a forge for error, and an engine against the truth; but if
you take learning only, as we speak it, for the improvement of holy reason, by
the helps of Arts, of Sciences, tongues and the writings of men; there is no
Question to be made of it, but that learning, viz. holy reason thus improved,
is a great, a mighty advantage to the finding out the mind of God, and the
want of this is the cause why men run headlong into many errors; and for ought
I see to the contrary, that place of St Peter, 2 Pet. 3.16. 2 Pet. 3.16.
where the Apostle speaks of some things hard and difficult in Paul's Epistles,
Which unlearned and unstable men do wrest, as they do other Scriptures, to
their own perdition; I say, for ought I see to the contrary [unlearned] in that
place may be taken in this latitude, which I speak; though it is true, those who
have not this learning, if they have this inward teaching, shall never wrest
Scriptures to their perdition, they shall never err and continue to err
damnably, yet may they err dangerously. And we see this to be true in every
days experience, the knowledge of divine things is exceedingly increased,
P^^ker de pol^t eccl^^ 2. c 18 p 244.
the hidden things of God are revealed, truths revealed and confirmed, errors
discovered and condemned, and the perusal of godly and learned men, together
with the study, meditation and debate of things, may much improve men's holy
reason, and strengthen men in the truths, fence men against error, the want of
which may render men less able to stand against the Sop^istries of men, and
more endanger men to be carried away with the stream of error. So that I would
not be apprehended to speak against learning under that notion; that is, the
use of any thing, which might improve our holy reason, and make us able to
convince gainsayers. We have to deal with subtle Sophisters, and there is
need of the utmost of the improvement of reason in divine things.

But I speak against those who would give too much to it; men are all in
extremes. Is there no middle between too much admiring of it, and contemptuous
despising of it? though it do not evidence, where it is, there is truth, yet
is it of no use to find out truth? Because gold is not good to eat; is it not
therefore good to buy meat? So because learning is not truth, is it not
therefore serviceable to find out truth? Julian.

Indeed there are some give too little to it and there are some again which
give too much. Some that do not give the least weight to it to cast the
balance: and others, that are ready to resign up their faith and judgment to
the learning of others: if they see men of learning (though they be not able to
judge of it) they are ready to resign up themselves, and yield up look and key
to them, and let them take possession, and have full dominion over their faith
and consciences. Most men are led by blind obedience and implicit faith in
divine things; and seeing they will resign up their understandings, they act
their reason thus far, that they will resign up their judgments to those
they apprehend most learned; they will be of their opinions and of their
judgments, though they can say no more for it, but that such a man says so,
it is the opinion of such a learned man. I tell you, this is as blind
obedience, as implicit faith, as any is in Rome.

To conclude this Question, there is both danger and folly in this too much
admiration of learning.

1. There is danger in it, you are endangered to resign up your judgment and
faith to them, which you are not to do, you are not to make any men the
Masters of your faith; you see how the Apostle abomina^^d that, when he says,
2 Cor. 7.
We are not Masters of your faith, but helpers of your joy. You are not to give
up your faith, your conscience, to the doctrines or opinions of men, though the
best, the holiest, the learned of men, as I have showed you at large.

2. There is great folly in it.

1. You are neither able to judge of learning.

2. Nor is learning able to judge of truth. If you will ask all the learned
men in the world, out of the Church, they will tell you the Gospel is
foolishness. And if you will ask many of them in the Church, there are many
precious truths, which they judge folly, and the rest they receive them by
tradition, or as the received doctrine of the age they live in; their knowledge
in divine things, it is gotten up by industry, even as the knowledge in any Art
or Science, and it is but the improvement of their reason, not the revelation
of the Spirit. If learning alone were a competent Judge of truth and error,
and that learned men were faithful to their light, and would not be biased or
corrupted for a world, then one would think it some wisdom to resign up our
judgment to such, and be of their opinion; but first, it is not a competent
judge; Christ tells us there is a learning from which truths are concealed and
hid; he blessed his Father, Who hid these things from the wise and learned, and
revealed them to babes.

And secondly, learned men are not uninterested men, they have corruptions in
them, and this does bias them often times to the maintaining of error, and
opposing truth, and therefore dangerous. Nay, though there be grace, as well as
learning, yet they are subject to passions, they have corruptions in them, and
how far those may work in the delivering of truth, or opposing error, how
far their fears and hopes, their pride may work, you know not.

And therefore though they were learned and holy men, yet you are not to resign
up your faith and judgments to their opinions, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. 1 John 1.4.
but are to try all things, and prove the spirits, whether they be of God or
no. And thus much shall serve for the answer to the fifth Question: one more,
and we will conclude the false marks: the sixth Question then is this.

Qu. 6. Whether this be sufficient to discover an opinion erroneous, or declare
it to be a truth, the multitude, or the paucity of them, who are the divulgers
and maintainers of it?

It is you know the great Argument the Papists have, and therefore they set it
down as one note of the true Church, the multitude of professors. And though
it was opposed against the Papists, yet was it an Episcopal argument against
the reformed Churches, Mos totius orbis and omniu^ teraporum ecclesiarum,
potior esse debet eo, qui est exigui populi, and parvi temporis. Sarar. Cons.
Park. de polit eccles. l. 2 c. 35 p. 297. 298. etiam l 2 c 6, 7.
That which has been the custom of the whole world, and of all times of the
Churches, ought to be more desirable then such a discipline, which is
maintained by a few, and is but of late standing.

Again, It is most just and equal, that seeing the number of the reformed are
but few, they should yield unto the other, who are many, yea, and many of them
in authority and office in Church and Commonwealth. Another speaks yet
plainer, Absurdu^ est Deum velle inspirare unum potius qua^ multos. Sut^l.
It is absurd to think that God should inspire one man rather then many; by
which expressions of theirs, it may seem too evident, that though they opposed
this argument of the Papists, and In rebus fidem concerne^tibus judicium unius
private hominis praeferenaum est Papae and toti Concilio, si ille moveatur
meltoribus rationibus and authoritatibus N and V. Testam. D. White citing
Panormitan. against the Papists.
held it forth to be of no weight, when they were to deal with them, because
the Papists might glory most in multitude; yet they esteemed it of some weight
against the reformed Churches, they being far less in number then they were.

It shows a cause to be weak, when they have recourse to such poor weapons, and
that surely there is not much to maintain it, when such arguments as are taken
from number and multitude are made use of.

But to come to the answer of the Question, which I conceive will not require
much pains.

The Question is, Whether this be sufficient to discover an opinion erroneous,
or to declare it to be a truth, the multitude or paucity of them, who are the
divulgers and maintainers of it? I shall answer this in brief.

1. If by multitude be meant the greater number of mankind, then it is a
certain evidence of error. The greatest number of mankind lies in darkness
and error: as St John says, 1 John 5.19. 1 John 5.19.
The whole world lies in wickedness. If you divide the world into four parts,
you will find above three parts to be Pagans, Heathens, Mahometans, Idolaters,
Atheists: how few will be the residue? Alas they are but a few in the
North-east passages, that do profess and acknowledge a Christ: and of those
how few?

2. If by multitude be meant the greatest number of men in the Church, who do
adhere to an opinion; neither will this be sufficient to discover it a truth.
And that upon these two grounds.

1. Because the greatest number they are ignorant, and so are not able to judge
of truth and error: blind men cannot discern of colors, they want knowledge
to discern of things that differ, they are not able to try, nor upon trial are
they able to determine.

2. Because the greatest number, they are corrupt and vicious, they are for the
most part either Atheistical, or profane, or proud and ambitious men, or
worldlings, covetous, hypocrites, formal professors.

If you look upon the multitude, they adhere to doctrines.

1. Either out of ignorant grounds. 2. Or out of corrupt ends.

1. Out of ignorant grounds, viz. because this was the way of their Fathers,
and they do traditionally adhere to it, or because such men whom they respect
and honor are in that way, or because it is commended to them by the learned,
or prescribed and commanded by authority. Indeed it is an easy matter to make
any thing of the multitude, they are soft wax, in regard of their religion, and
can receive any impression, they are fit for any stamp their superiors will
put upon them, they are but a body, and authority is their soul, which moves
them which way they ple^s^, in point of Religion: truth and error are all one
to them. It is an easy matter to make them any thing, who are indeed nothing.
It was a heavy charge was cast upon us by our right hand adversaries, that
England was converted from Popery to Protestanisme by the blast of one trumpet.
In Q. Mary's days they were Papists, and upon her death, within an hour after,
as soon as Qu. Elizabeth was proclaimed, here was a Kingdom of Protestants, a
nation was converted at once.

Though this charge is not true in all, for after her Coronation, besides
Commissioners sent unto all parts to deface all the monuments of Idolatry, Vid.
The most grave and modest confu^a^ion, pu^l^shed by M^st. Rathbone, p. 10.
there were Ministers sent about to preach the Word of God, viz. Knox, Leave,
Gilby, Sampson, Whitingham, Goodman, who in Q. Mary's days had exercised their
Ministry in the best reformed Churches beyond the seas, who were now sent out
to gather the people to the Lord, to discover the errors of Popery, to reduce
men to the knowledge of the truth; And upon the meeting of a Parliament, those
acts which were formerly made in Qu. Mary's days were repealed, and the
doctrine of truth again with Religion established.

And it were well, to avoid this charge, if Ministers were sent through the
Kingdom at this time, with Commission to preach and instruct men in ways of
worship, to reveal to men the truth, and prepare men's hearts, that so when
things come to be settled, we might not, if possible, have any to yield to
things with implicit faith and blind obedience. It was the practice of good
Hezekiah, when he restored the worship of God, 2 Chronicles. 29. beg. he sent out
Posts, like to Evangelists, to prepare the people, and to humble them for their
revoltings, and to reduce them to the worship of God. And if this be not done,
2 Chro 29. beg. compared with the 2 Chro. 30.6, 7.
we may fear either great opposition in men, or else blind submission and
implicit obedience.

2. Or the multitude adheres to doctrines out of corrupt ends. As the Ivy
adheres to the tree, not because it loves the tree, but because the tree feeds
it with berries and leaves, it adheres to it for its own advantage, because out
of it, it may suck berries: So do most men adhere to Religion and doctrine. Or
as the wind follows the abundance of exhalations: So they go where there is
the most advantage to be got: indeed, innumerable are the corrupt ends, that
corrupt minded men propound to themselves in the entertaining doctrine: some
out of fear, others out of faction, a third for repute, the most for profit and
advantage; all speak this language, Who will show us any good? It was the great
Argument of the Craftsmen of Diana, why they adhered to that Idolatry, By this
craft we have all our gain. And it is a great motive to a carnal heart, he
that has no principle of motion and life within, he either stands still, or is
moved with the crowd; or if he have any motion of his own, something without
him is the spring of it. The multitude is a great body, and a dull body, and
indeed has no motions of it is own; it is carried about merely with weights,
and the great weights are outward things, which taken off, there is no motion
at all -- they are like the dead sea, and cannot stir -- So that you see, if
we go about to take up our judgment of truth or error from the multitude of
them, who adhere to it, how dangerous it is to be mistaken.

3. If by multitude be meant the greater number of holy and learned men, in the
Church of God; I say then, this is a probable sign, though no infallible
evidence, that the opinion held forth is a truth.

1. I say it is a probable sign. I have told you God does never desert his
people in necessary, essential truths, He has promised they shall be taught
of God, and they have an unction of the holy One, whereby they know all things,
that is, all things necessary to salvation. And for accessory and
circumstantiall truths; It is a probable sign that the things which upon
impartial search and debate they hold forth, are truths, though it be not
sufficient for us to conclude them so, because they have determined so; but we
are to examine and search whether they be so or no. I say it is a probable
sign, but we are not to submit to it, as their judgment, but are to see the
judgment of God in them, Cons. Park. l. 2 c. 11. de authoritate Patru^.
not to conclude our selves upon the authority of men, unless we see the
authority of God in them.

2. Though it be a probable sign, yet it is not an infallible evidence.

We all know that godly and learned men have yet much darkness in their
understanding, they do but know in part, none can plead an unerring spirit,
none are infallible; I have showed you, that Synods and Councels may err. What
David confessed he spoke in haste, we may speak upon best deliberation, so
far as men, All men are liars. As the learned men have darkness in their
understanding, so they have corruption in their hearts: there is self, and
pride, and corrupt aims and ends, which may creep into the hearts of the best.
And how far God may suffer men to be biased by these things, it is not for
man to determine: how far corrupt aims and ends may wind themselves into the
heart, and bribe a man's understanding, or blind his sight, it is not for man
to judge: they who are most acquainted with their hearts, do find cause
enough to be jealous and suspect them, yea and upon known experience.

And therefore though the multitude of godly and learned men, concurring in an
opinion to be a truth, though it may be a probabl^ sign, yet can be no
infallible evidence, that what they hold forth is a truth: I say, it is no
concluding evidence.

There may be cases wherein one man may be in the truth, and yet many godly and
learned men may be in an error, Vn^^ Puphnutius to^um Concilium Nica^^um
direxit. Niceph. l. 8 c. 19. Eli^s nu^s erat, sed totus mundus non erat dignus
qui rependeretur ipsi. Chr.
One Paphnutius was in the truth, when the whole Council of Nice were in an
error: they were learned men, and it appears they were godly, by their humble
submitting of themselves to better reason, though but one man brought it, they
were not so partial, as to adhere to their own votes, nor were they so proud,
as not to recede from their opinions, and be concquered by truth, nor did they
stand upon their number, when they saw truth against them: One naked truth
should conquer them, and make them throw down their weapons: and one man having
truth with him, should be too big for that great Assembly: they did not plead
their number, their votes, and the multitude which adhered to them, but as men
that came to search out truth, not victory, they yielded up themselves to the
power and conquest of it: A mighty argument of their humility and sincerity.

Indeed we are not to measure truth by the number of votes, but by the
authorities of Scripture. Nos numero sen ^enitam no^ metimur. Ver^tas numero
non astimatur, vel unu^ qui veritatem habet, sufficienter munitur adversus
totum mundum. Mat. D. White de eccl. l. 30 p. 127. Whit. cont. 2. q. 5. c. 5.
We do not judge of truth by the number of men, though a man be alone, yet if
he have the truth with him, he is sufficiently armed against the whole world.

One Micheas having the truth with him, was too hard for the 400. Prophets, who
were in an error, 1 King. 22.15. Indeed, it is not impossible, that one man
should be in the truth, and many in an error, nor is it absurd to prefer the
judgment of one man in the truth, before many in an error. It was well spoken
of Augustine, Si justus es, noli numerare, sed appende; stateram afferaequa^,
non dolesa^. Aug. in Ps. 39.
If thou would pass right judgment of an opinion, do not number, but weigh,
and weigh not in the false balance of the multitude, but in the balance of
truth, the Word of God. This is certain, Veritas neque a nultis, neque a paucis
pendet. Park. l. 2. p. 253.
Truth does neither depend on many nor few. And therefore we are not to go by
number of votes and voices in finding out of truth, but by the authorities of
Scripture: we are not here to go by the pol, but by the line, the Word of God,
To the Law and to the testimonies, if they speak not according to this, the
light is not in them, most voices are not here to carry it, but enquire, What
says the answer of God. You know, if the dial be not set by the Sun, you
care not what it says: So if men be not guided by the Word, it is no matter
what they say; though they be myriads of men that speak it.

Indeed we may give too little, and too much to multitude.

1. We give too little, when the concurrent opinions, and deliberate thoughts
of a number of godly, learned and holy men is of no weight with us, when we
will reject their results, ignorantly, wilfully, without an impartial debate
and examination of them; an honor that you give to the opinions, I may say,
the errors of men of no name. Certainly, as you are not to submit to the
judgment of any Assembly or company of the learned and holiest men with a
blind obedience: So neither are you to reject their results and determinations
with a perverse will; you are to try them, and be so far from unprejudiced
thoughts, that you are charitably to judge, that probably so many holy and
learned men are not in an error, probably they are in the truth, and if you
think otherwise, before trial and debate, you give too little to them, and it
is your sin.

2. We give too much to multitude and number.

1. Either when we judge of an opinion to be truth, because the promiscuous
multitude does adhere to it.

2. Or when we blindly subscribe to an opinion for truth, because many learned
and holy men are the Patrons and maintainers of it.

1. When we judge of an opinion to be truth, because the promiscuous multitude,
abundance in the Church adhere to it. And this is indeed the great error, men
are carried away with the crowd, they are not able to stand against the stream,
they are carried down with the multitude, and the number of them in the way is
the great argument that concludes them in it also. Christ tells us here in the
text, That many shall come in his Name, and say they are Christ, and shall
deceive many. Here you are told, there may be a multitude of seducers, and a
multitude of seduced, they shall deceive many.

And it is the worst of arguments, to prove truth by multitude. It is a passage
of Chrysostom, In theatris multitudo quaeratur. Multitudo nota ecclesiae, ac
proinde veritatis no^ est, quia ecclesia saepe in paucis confistit: deinde,
quia multitudo malorum and impiorum major est: post re^^o, fa^sa Religio majora
occupavit spatia qua^ vera Chry. ad pop. Antioch. ^om. 26.
The multitude can be no true Character of the truth: and he gives three
reasons.

1. Because the Church of God does consist in a few.

2. Because the number of wicked men are the greatest.

3. Because error has gotten more ground then truth, the possessions and
territories of error do far exceed the bounds of truth; you know there are
more tares then wheat in Gods field, more Goats then sheep in his fold, more
chaff then corn in his floor, more bad fishes then good in his net; if
Atheistical, profane men, unbelievers, proud, ambitious men, coverous and
worldly persons, hypocrites and formal professors were singled out, the
residue would be but few: you would see ground why Christ calls his flock, a
little flock, a small remnant; and to take up the complaint of the Prophet,
that the number was but as the gleanings of grapes, after the vintage is over;
but as the shaking of an Olive Tree, after the fruit is gathered, even one of a
City, two of a Tribe; and to say with Christ, Broad is the gate that leads to
death, and many there be that enter thereat, but narrow and strait is the gate
which leads to life, and few there be which enter therein.

So that you see, if we take up judgment of truth by the number of men in the
Church, that adhere to it, we may be mistaken; we are commanded not to follow a
multitude to evil. Quae nam precor utilitas est, multu^ esse foenum, qua^
paucos lapides praeciosos, non in numeri multitudine, sed in virtutis probitate
multitude consistit.
There is much dross, little gold, much hay and stubble, and little precious
stones. If there be any validity in this argument of number, it is not in the
weight, but in the worth; Non in quantitate molis, sed in qualitate virtutis.
Non salvat Christianum, quod pontifex dicit praeceptum suum esse justum; sed
o^o. tet illud examinare, atque se iuxta regula^ superius data^ dirigere. Ger.
Laicus temere doctoribus ecclesia credere non debeat, sed coria^ doctrinas
examinare, praesertiu^ cum populi aures sacerdotum cordibus sape sanctiores
sim. Hieron^ Epist.
not in the bulk or quantity, but in the worth and quality of the persons that
are the maintainers of it. And yet therein we may err also; which is the
second way whereby we give too much to multitude.

When we blindely subscribe to an opinion for truth, because many learned and
holy men, are the Patrons and maintainers of it. I have cleared this to you at
large, that it is the duty of every Christian, to examine, not only the private
opinions of private men, but the sentences, definitions, debates of Synods and
Councels, and to embrace or reject them, as they shall appear consonant and
dissonant to the rule of truth, the Word of God.

And the Scriptures are plain for it; we are commanded to try all things, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. And not to believe every spirit, 1 John 4.1. and to search the
Scriptures, Joh. 5.39. Isa. 8.20. And the Bereans were commended for the same,
notwithstanding the doctrine they examined was the doctrine of the Apostles,
Act. 17.11. And it will not be sufficient for you to say, you followed the
doctrines of your leaders. Christ tells you, If the blind lead the blind,
both shall fall into the ditch. And therefore we shall give too much to a
number of holy and learned men, to drink in and receive what ever they do
propound; to subscribe our judgment to their positions without further debate
and examination of them; though the things be truths, yet we err in our way of
closing with them, we give blind obedience and implicit faith to them, we make
men the masters of our faith, which wrongs God, and injureth you.

And therefore as you are not to give too little, so beware of giving too much,
make not Gods of men, set not man in Gods stead; you know who has said, call
no man Rabbi, no man Master upon earth; you have one who is your Lord and
Master in heaven, which you know is meant of subjection of our judgments and
consciences to men in spiritual things; for touching the outward man, we have
Masters, but touching the inward man, our faith and conscience, this should
not, nay this cannot be subjected to any power below God. And thus much shall
serve for the answer of this sixth Question. We have now done with the false
marks; besides which, I am now to show you, that there are yet closer
agreements, which error has with truth, I say, there are nearer touches which
have deceived many; there are certain strange mysterious workings of error,
which carry great resemblance with truth it self. We read of an energie of
error, a certain energeticall power, an active efficacious working power,
which error has, in which it carries much resemblance with truth it self. You
read in the 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. of an efficacy of error, the energie of error, as
the word imports, which shows us, that error may be very energeticall, very
operative and active, as well as truth.

This energeticall power or efficacy, and mysterious strong working of error,
I will set down in these seven general heads.

1. It will work it self into the heart and affections of the receiver, upon as
high pretexts and specious pretenses, as truth it self can do; I say, it will
convey it self to the understanding, and insinuate it self into the heart and
affections of a man, and procure its reception, and purchase its entertainment,
upon as noble terms and high pretexts, as the truth it self. And this is
implied in the Text, Many shall come in my Name, and shall say, I am Christ,
and shall deceive many: that this was a deceit, a seduction, Christ speaks
plain, and that this error or deceit did procure it is reception upon high
pretexts, the Text shows plain, They shall come in my Name, that is, they shall
pretend my authority, my mission and commission, that is high, but yet higher,
They shall say, I am Christ, that is, Christ doctrinall, not Christ personal,
they shall stamp their opinions with the name of Christ, and deliver their
opinions in the name, and under pretense of the authority of Christ: and how
can there be a higher way to purchase entertainment for an error? how can
truth convey it self to our understanding and consciences, upon higher
pretexts, and more noble terms?

I know nothing that truth can say to procure room in your hearts, to purchase
entertainment in your affections, but error may use the same language: does
truth say, This is the mind of Christ? error may say the same: does truth
say, This is for the glory of God, for the advancement of holiness? why error
will hold forth the same things. The Apostle puts this out of controversy, in
the 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. where he tells us of false Apostles, deceitful
workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ. And no marvel,
for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light, therefore it is no
great thing, if his Ministers also be transformed, as Ministers of
righteousness, whose end shall be according to their works. Where the Apostle
shows plain, that the Prince of darkness may convey himself into the hearts
and affections of men, as an Angel of light, that is, he may procure his
entertainment, not under the notion of a Prince of darkness, so every one
would tremble at him, but he conveys himself to men's affections, and purchases
his acceptance, under the pretext and representation of an Angel of light; so
the false Apostles, they did transform themselves into true Apostles: and there
is nothing which the true Apostles may hold forth, but the false may hold
forth, the one will hold forth error, upon as high terms and specious
pretexts, as the other can do truth it self.

So that I say, error may convey it self into the heart and conscience, and
purchase its entertainment upon as high terms as truth it self.

And these are the most dangerous errors that claim the patronage of Christ,
and hold forth as specious pretexts as truth it self: this is the Devils
countermining, and by this he would blow up truth, Christ himself in his own
mine, by this he would drive on his own design with Christ's strength, and
further error with Christ's weapons and tools. I say, not that all that come
thus handed to us are errors; but this I say, these, if errors, are the most
dangerous of all, and that upon these four grounds.

1. Because they are the most ensnaring and seductive errors, most are taken
with them under this notion; most men they are not able to judge of truth and
falsehood, they are taken with fair pretexts and specious colors; such a
pretext as this, does strongly force it self into the heart of those who are
weak in understanding, either by love or by fear; if they will not receive it
as under this notion, for love, yet they dare not reject it, coming under that
notion, out of fear, lest perhaps they should be found to reject Christ, and
fight against Christ himself, and therefore are they the most ensnaring and
seductive opinions, if errors, and therefore most dangerous.

2. Dangerous they are, because such opinions, if not truth, they are a great
injury to Christ himself, they wrong Christ: it must needs be a wrong to
Christ, to stamp his image upon men's own adulterate and false coin. As men who
do stamp the Kings picture upon their false coin, and, to procure the more
easy and undoubted reception of it, do in this do a great injury to the
King; it is crimen laesae Majestatis, they wound Majesty in it, and make the
King, so far as they can, to serve to advance their deceit: So men to procure
the more facile and free reception of error, they may stamp their opinions
with the image and authority of Christ, but yet this is a great wrong to
Christ, for herein they make him, who is truth it self, the Patron of an
error, they draw in Christ, as far as they can, to side with, or if not, yet
his name and authority to set off an error. It must needs be a great wrong to
him, who is the King of light and glory, to make him serviceable to the
advancement of the design of the Prince of darkness. And a man had need to be
full and clear in his opinions and thoughts, which he stamps with the Name of
Christ, lest we prove to be such as stamp his image upon our own false and
adulterous coin.

3. They are dangerous, because they are the most separating and dividing
opinions that can be, Christ, or not Christ, is indeed, and justly too, the
great parting stone. Religion is the foundation of all unions, it is the great
band; and difference in religion is the great distance and disunion: there may
be oneness in heart and affections in lesser differences, but differences of
such height as Christ or not Christ, when they do arise so high, as to
un-Christ, un-Church, nay ungrace men; as that opinion in a kind does, that
holds forth Christ: It is a hard thing to keep oneness of affection; men that
have salvation and eternity in their eye, the glory of Christ their aim, it is
a hard thing to persuade them to take it well, if they un-Christ them and
ungrace them. It is not probable that a man should be well pleased to have
another spit in his face, condemn his principles and practice, and upon so high
grounds, when yet a man is persuaded upon knowing and conscientious grounds, so
far as appears to him, that he is in the right.

We may say what we will, and wish, and pray, but this will be found, that men
of different Creeds, will hardly be of one Pater noster. Men differing upon so
high grounds, as what can be higher? they can hardly be of the same affection.
In lesser and smaller differences they may; but in so high differences, when an
opinion is held forth for Christ, it will be more hard to turn all disaffection
into pity, if they apprehend them in an error, then to renounce their own, and
embrace theirs, if it were apprehended to be a truth. Men pity a persecuted
error, or men persecuted in an error, but they envi^ a prospering error, or
men prospering in a way of error. That which raises the difficulty, is the
prosperousnesse and successefulnes of that which they do apprehend an error,
when they see it to succeed to draw away the hearts of the most godly and holy,
the best of their people, it will be no easy matter, in stead of disaffection,
to act pity to them; and because they apprehend them to act affections, rather
then judgment, in entertaining of them, therefore they act disaffection,
rather then pity, in the rejecting of them. Happy were we, if the grounds of
their opinions were thoroughly examined, and impartially searched, who do hold
them forth under this notion, Lo, here is Christ, and if true, embrace them;
or that they, who hold them up upon so high terms, would convey them in a more
low and humble manner, seeing so many godly learned dissent from them: if which
be not, there will be, I fear, the seed of as great differences among the
godly, as ever was in the Church, and as much disaffection. Assure your selves,
Christ or not Christ, will be a great parting and dividing stone, both to
divide persons and affections. I speak this with a bleeding heart, foreseeing
the sad and miserable affects of it: if this difference be not happily taken
up, God knows what a foundation of future misery will be laid for future
generations.

The differences between Luther and Calvin, were not so great, but they might
have been easily taken up in their time; but posterity quickly turned these
differences in judgment to the decisions of the hand, and it has been the
ground of raising many a war, and shedding of the blood of thousands, whose
differences might easily have been composed at the first. This remains a sad
spectacle to us, and all Christian Churches, and makes me tremble to think
what future times will be, if God do not mercifully unite hearts, which should
put men to pray, to study an accord, and not to fuel and heighten our
differences, and make them unreconciliable.

4. Dangerous are these opinions, if errors, because they pass the highest
censure upon those which do dissent from them; he that says of any opinion or
way, Lo, here is Christ, does negatively censure and condemn all those, who
do dissent from it; there is but one Christ, one Lord, one faith. This opinion
must needs hold forth both a doctrinall and a practical censure against all
such, who dissent from it, and not only censure their way, but their persons,
and declare them who are contrary, either to be men of corrupt affections, of
corrupt minds, who detain the truth of God in unrighteousness, who are
biased with carnal respects, secular advantages and ends, or at the best that
they are but ignorant, blind, deluded or deceived, such as yet know not the
mind of God. And what this will amount unto, I leave any to judge. And
therefore happy still it were, that men would strip themselves of all self and
self-respects, and faithfully debate that opinion that is held forth upon so
high terms; and if truth; let us close with it; or that those who do hold it
up so high, would, in regard it is in such dispute, and so many godly differ
from it, that they would hand it to men, and convey it, and seek to pass it
upon lower terms, and more moderate grounds, seeing such are the sad effects of
it.

Indeed, if the way be of God, if it be that in truth, which it pretends to be
in holding forth, and if they were necessary truths, such as were necessary to
life, then if there were sadder effects, then these, did accompany the holding
it forth, yet there is comfort enough in it: but when the thing it self is
disputable; first, whether there be any such thing, as an exact and uniform
government; and when this is disputable among those, who do hold there is such
a way; what is that government: we see some godly, holy and learned men assert
one, and no less godly and learned defend another; and when all is done, who
ever is in the truth, it will not be found, that the income is proportionable
to the sweat: the truths held forth are not necessary, but only accessory
truths, not such as concern the being of Christians, but the wel-being. I only
demand, whether the comfort and benefit, that may come to the Church of Christ,
by the stiff maintaining and high passing of such an opinion, may ballast and
bear weight with the sad effects, and trembling consequences that will surely
come upon themselves and the Churches of Christ, if so passed, and if so
maintained -- I leave it to you to judge.

And thus much for the first, viz. that error will work it self into the heart
and affections of the receiver upon as high pretexts and specious pretenses, as
truth it self. And that which I have spoken upon it, is not to charge any
opinion to be an error, which does seek to pass it self upon so high terms,
that is not my work to do in this place; but to make you circumspect in the
entertaining of opinions, though they carry such high pretexts as these, seeing
it is possible for error to make the same pretenses, and seek it is
entertainment upon as noble terms, as truth it self. We come now to the second.

2. When an error is entertained, it will work upon the heart and affections,
as well as truth, it will work love to it, in them who embrace it, it will work
fear of betraying, it will work hatred and displacency against the contrary. I
say, it will work, not only on the passions, which move in a lower orb, but it
will work on the affections. As the sea is moved this way or that way by the
strongest wind: so the affections are moved and operated upon by the strongest
persuasions, though the persuasion be false, yet, if strongest, it does command
the affections up to it. Affections they are but the servants, of, and to the
understanding, and follow it according to it is results and dictates, they are
but coecae potentiae, but blind faculties, and the understanding is their
guide, and they follow that, though it be in an error, and that is miserable,
for then, The blind leads the blind, and both fall into the ditch. You know
the lesser wheels move as the greater carry them: the dyall goes as it is set:
so the affections they move according to the motion of the understanding; if
the understanding be in an error, the affections are carried with it: there is
no question but men's affections may be strongly wrought upon in an erroneous
way, the affections come up to those apprehensions which the judgment has:
they follow the notions of the understanding, they are but the servants of the
understanding, and follow it more faithfully in an error, then they do in a
truth, because they are corrupt. Error and sin agree; a corrupt head, and a
corrupt heart do better agree, then a sound judgment, and a corrupt heart; and
therefore they do not only follow the understanding in an error, but follow
it more faithfully, more uniformly and universally. The Master and the servant
are well agreed. Indeed, they may follow the understanding, with gainsaying
with reluctance and bearing back in a truth; but they follow it freely,
naturally, cheerfully in an error. So that you see error may work upon the
heart and affections too: you know while Paul was an enemy to the Gospel and
doctrine of Christ, he was in an error, yet it was such an error, as worked
strongly upon his heart and affections, he was in an error with conscientious
respects, and his affections they were moved according to his false light;
insomuch that he was zealous in his way, and tells us, that he was eminent in
his zeal for his error, and in opposition of those, who professed the
contrary, as he tells us, Phil. 3.6. As touching the righteousness of the Law,
he was blameless, and as concerning zeal, he persecuted the Church: So eminent
was he in his love and affection toward his own erroneous way, and so eminent
in his opposition of the contrary, that he persecuted them of a contrary mind.
And he says upon his own experience the same of the Jews, who were in the same
way of error, Romans 10.2. For I bear them record, that they have a zeal of God,
but not according to knowledge; here were affections, zeal is amor intensus, as
the Schools say, it is the heat of love, or if you will, it is an affection
compounded of love and anger; love, to that which they apprehend to be truth,
and displicency and anger against the contrary; they had a zeal to God, but it
was not according to knowledge, that is, according to sound and right
knowledge, it was according to their knowledge, but not right knowledge, they
might walk conscientiously and with conscientious respects, according to that
knowledge and apprehension they had, but yet walk in a way of error; their
affections might move according to their notion and apprehension of things, and
yet you know they moved in an error. And I conceive plain experience does tell
us this, that error will work upon the affections, as well as truth: if you
look abroad upon any erroneous Religion, or if you look at home upon erroneous
opinions, they will all tell you this, that error does work, and work strongly
upon the affections, as well as truth --

3. Error will not only work upon the affections, but it will steer a man's life
and conversation according to it. It will put a man to speak according to it,
and act according to it, live, according to it: men's practices are but the
results of their principles, their lives and ways, they are but the
expressions of their doctrins and opinions. Men may be as true to erroneous as
others are to religious principles, erroneous opinions may not only have an
influence upon the conscience, but the conversation too, and will cause a man
to order his ways, and steer his conversation according to them. Error
entertained does bind the conscience, as well as truth, to walk answerable to
it, and they dare no more recede from their erroneous principles, and walk
unanswerable to them, without wound of conscience, then a man dare recede from
the truth it self. Nay, here is a wonder, as a godly man will walk holily to
adorn the truth, and dignifie the Gospel of Christ, and dare not walk
disorderly, lest the ways and truth of Christ should be blasphemed for his
cause: so may a man in an error, out of the like conscientious respects,
endeavor to walk holily, for the gracing and adorning of an error, which yet
he apprehends to be a truth, and he dare not walk disorderly, lest he should
give occasion to others to condemn and speak against that opinion which he
apprehends truth, but is indeed an error.

And this I could evidence by instances enough, if it were need; I suppose that
Scripture speaks to it, Phil. 3.6. Paul, while in ignorance, held up the
righteousness of the Law against Christ, as they did in Romans 10.1. and he
walked answerable to this knowledge, For as touching the righteousness of the
Law, he was blameless: And no question but he made conscience to walk so much
the more exactly, that he might adorn this opinion, and give out to the world,
that there was no less exactness, no less strictness and holiness in that
way he was in, then there was in the Apostles, who held out the contrary way;
men may walk with honesty of heart in an erroneous way, when they walk
answerable to their principles, though they be erroneous; It is one thing to
walk with an understanding, another thing to walk with an honest heart in a
way. Such a man as does not close with an opinion for base respects, nor recede
from his principles for worldly respects, either gain or loss, such a man as
walks answerable to his opinion, though an error, may be said to do this with
honesty of heart, without hypocrisy, but yet with a deluded heart, They have a
zeal, but yet without knowledge. When the Disciples were sorrowful, because
Christ told them he was to go away, Christ says to them, If you loved me, you
would rejoice, I go to my Father: Certainly they loved him, they had forsaken
all to follow him, and Christ did neither doubt of their love, nor blame their
want of love here: Christus culpavit non affectum, sed consilium.
He blamed their judgments, not their affections, though they loved him, yet
they loved him not wisely, he blamed their ignorance. And thus far it holds,
men may do things with honest affections, and yet do them ignorantly. And if
you grant not this, what flesh can be saved? There were many of our Fathers
that have opposed many things as errors, Cons. Park. de polit eccles. l. 2. c.
20. p. 256.
which are the received truths of God; certainly they opposed them with honesty
of heart, though not with an understanding heart; the fault was not so much in
their heart, as in their head, they did not oppose them out of sinister and
corrupt affections, but with honesty of heart, they walked according to their
notion of things; and that will serve to demonstrate a man an honest man,
though not an upright man, a good Christian; that demonstration must be taken
in upon better grounds. It was said of Asa, That notwithstanding the high
places were not removed, yet his heart was perfect with the Lord all his days,
1 King. 15.14. perfect, that is sincere. A man may have a perfect heart, in
this sense, that is, a sincere heart, and yet have many failings in life, nay,
and not only many imperfections in his judgment, but some errors too, such as
are not damnable fundamental errors, but only circumstantiall and lesser; but
then these errors must a rise from the imperfections of his knowledge, not
from the corruption of his heart. The Apostle seems to imply this, Phil. 3.15,
16. As many as be perfect let them be thus minded, and if any be otherwise
minded, God shall reveal even that unto them. Nevertheless whereunto you have
already at mined, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same things.
So much for the third.

4. Here is another efficacy of error, it will engage a man to do much for
it: a man may do much service for an error, as well as for a truth: a man may
preach, may write, may dispute, may be at much pains, spare for no cost, to
advance and promote to an error. I could give you as you all think
innumerable testimonies and experiences of this. It was said of the Pharisees,
that they would compass sea and land, take much pains to make a Profelyte,
which when they had done, A man was much more the child of the devil then he
was before, as Christ says. And what pains will not the Papists take? how do
they compass sea and land? What unwear^able pains do they take, and all this
to Proselyte men, to bring them to their Religion? Does it not often fare, that
a servant of error will do much more for it, then they who are the children
of truth, will do for the truth? What drudges are they often to Satan, when we
are too slack in the service of God; and at two times especially the authors
and maintainers of error are active and sedulous, viz. either in the rise of
it, or in the fall of it, either when it first appears, or when it does
decline, then they set themselves with all their strength, in the one to
advance it, in the other to hold it up. When the beast was wounded, there was
great pains to lick him whole again. It teaches us what we are to do for
truth. Indeed, error is more beholding to it is servants, then truth is to
hers. Oh that men should do so much for the devil, and so little for God, that
they should think no pains too much for error, and that we should be at no
greater layings out for the truth. It is a consideration may humble us all,
that men should do more for their sins, then others for their graces, Micah
6.8. That men should take more pains, and be at more cost for error, then we
will be at for the truth. As men will spend themselves to nothing for a sin, to
maintain their lusts: so will they do for an error, nay, and much more;
because when men spend themselves for a sin, a lust, they do it not without
some check of conscience for the doing of it, they have inward troubles and
stings of conscience in the doing of it, they are self-condemned in it, and
therefore cannot do it without much regreeting; but when a man does any thing
for an error, when a deluded man spends himself for his opinion, he does it
cheerfully, he glories in it, he looks upon all as set upon Gods score, he
looks upon what he does as the evidence of his sincerity and love to God, and
therefore glories in it, triumphs in it, and does it cheerfully; he is glad he
has been so serviceable to his opinion, and looks upon it as being serviceable
to God in it, as no question many have done, and many deluded Papists do: and
this is a great work of error.

5. As it will engage a man to do; so it will check a man's conscience, if he
do not. As when a man deals not faithfully with truth, if for fear, or hope,
or worldly respects, he will either be shie to own it, as Nicodemus Christ, or
if he will suppress it, baulk and decline it, if he will detain the truths of
God in unrighteousness; or if he will deny a truth, conscience is up in arms
against him, and flees in his face for it, checks him, reproves, torments him:
So it may be with an error, if a man have received and entertained an error,
and he is persuaded it is a truth, though it be an error, if now, he have not
been faithful to it, if he have for fear, favor, carnal and worldly
respects, been either shie to own it in some company, if he have baulked it and
declined it, if he have betrayed it, receded from it, and denied it, conscience
is presently up, to check, to reprove him, and torment him for it. Indeed a man
may close with an error for base ends and respects, and for the same respects
may recede from it, and yet never be touched for it, no checks within him; but
if a man have closed with an error, with an honest, simple heart, then if he
do not walk answerable to it, if he baulk and decline it, he shall hear of
conscience. If a Papist should be forced from his Religion for fear, though his
way be an error, yet not forsaking it out of light and conviction, that it was
an error, but out of fear of punishment, his conscience will torment him for
it: and so in any other opinion, if the heart embrace it with honest respects:
which has caused some to say, that men are neither to be bribed, nor threatened
out of their opinions, but to be convinced and persuaded, they are not to be
compelled by force, nor yet to be seduced, allured or bribed by rewards; this
is to make men sin against conscience. It was Augustines, but he retracted
it, Fides non est imponenda, sed suadenda: contra haereticos nihil vi agendum.
No force is to be used against Heretics: which we shall speak to in the next
great Querie.

Thus you see, as error will engage a man to do, and to do out of
conscientious respects, so will it check conscience, if he do not. Conscience
walks according to it is light, both in checks and comforts: when conscience is
persuaded of this or that to be a truth, if he do not walk answerable to it,
it will check him for it: if conscience be not a guide, it will be a scourge,
if not directive, it will be afflictive: it will charge him and check him, if
he have not walked answerable. And this is a fearful condition, that such a
man is in: he sins in doing, because he does for an error, and he is tormented
for not doing, because he apprehends it a truth. Indeed a man is not damned for
following the dictates of conscience, for this he ought to do, but he is
damned for following an erroneous conscience: we ought to follow the dictates
of conscience, but we ought to get conscience rightly informed then. And what
need there is of that, you see here, because an erroneous conscience will
engage men to do, as well as an enlightened conscience, and will punish and
check him, if he do not, as well as a conscience enlightened.

6. As error will engage a man to do; so it will engage a man to suffer too.
I know nothing that a man may do or suffer for a truth; but he may do and
suffer for an error, under the notion of truth.

1. A man may suffer in his good name, he may be content to be reproached,
defamed, calumned, and may bind all these reproaches as a crown about his
head, with Job, and wear them as his crown and glory.

2. He may suffer in his goods, and be content rather to part with all then his
opinion; and when he has done, as a man would say for a truth, so may he for
an error, which he apprehends truth, I thank God I had any thing to lose for
it, its worth all I had, and much more. --

3. He may suffer in his body imprisonment, and what other things may be
inflicted on the body, even the highest punishment of all, death it self; and
all this for an error. As God has Martyrs for truth, so has the devil
Martyrs for error: what heresy but has been sealed up by the death of some
of the maintainers? The Arians who denied the Deity of Christ, they suffered,
nay, which is wonder, some of them would suffer for Christ, as a Savior,
though they denied Christ to be God. The like I might say of the Nestorians,
Manichees, and others. What need we go farther? Will not the Papists
themselves suffer death for their Catholic Cause? Nay, which is yet more
stupendous, a man may not only die, but he may die comfortably, in and for an
error: he may die rejoicing, as if he died for a truth, though he die in a
delusion. And that is the next.

7. It Is possible for a man to have quiet of conscience, and comfort of
conscience, when he does do or suffer for an error; the more uniformly he
walks, the more true and faithful he is to his principles, still the more
comfort he finds, he has this comfort of his sincerity or honesty of heart,
that he has been true to his light, though that light be but darkness. A man
may have comfort [in] an error, no true comfort [from] an error. Solomon had
the greatest revelations, when he was at Gibeah, and where was that, but at a
high place? but he had it not from Gibeah. A man may have comfort [in] an
error, but not [from] an error. I grant false notions may afford comfort: But,

1. Either false comfort, a painted, no real comfort.

2. Or the comfort is but the comfort of his natural conscience, in being true
to his opinion, not the comfort of God. The Papists may find some comfort in
their way, but either, it is a deluded comfort, or the comfort which arises
from being honest to a delusion. There is no question, but there is fear, and
comfort in the Turkish Religion; when they do not walk according to their
principles received, they may be troubled, and when they do, possibly they may
have comfort: The ground of this is this, because they walk answerable to their
principles, and then nothing within will check a man, all is at quiet within:
this is but the quiet of a natural conscience. Natural conscience will tell
them there is a God, and that this God is to be worshipped, but it cannot
direct the way; now being either instructed, or brought up and educated in this
or that way, he takes it for a truth, though perhaps it be an error, and
walking answerabl^ to it, for want of further light, his conscience is quiet;
he has comfort of those principles he has, when he has been true to them;
yet this is but false comfort. Certainly, if you have any comfort of God,

It is either, 1. Comfort in an error, but not from an error: or it is
comfort from your graces, not from your error. Your graces may afford you
comfort, viz. your sincerity, but your error affords none.

2. Many errors that may have some mixtures of truth in them, and then your
comf^rt is not from the error, but from truth mingled with it.

A man perhaps has been in some trouble, and his trouble arose from want of an
evidence of his sincerity: now it may be there is some opinions abroad, which a
man may close withal, as persecuted truths, though they are but censured,
condemned errors; and in this act he gets comfort, perhaps he has the
evidence of his sincerity, that he is willing to close with a persecuted truth,
which may afford some comfort, though the thing closed withal be an error.
And I believe that many do close with opinions upon this ground, as persecuted
truths, and thereby evidence their sincerity, which perhaps if they should not,
they would be troubled, and could not be able to do. Indeed it were an
honorable and desirable thing to suffer upon good grounds, suffering for
Christ is desirable; he who knows the emptiness of these things, and what
these things are in comparison of eternity, would be glad and rejoice to part
with any thing for Christ. Indeed it is not too dear to purchase and maintain a
truth with the hazard and loss of all, yet who would be at this cost for an
error? There is none that are godly, but would be content to maintain a truth,
and suffer truth to live upon them, upon their estates, comforts, etc. but who
would do this for an error? I only suggest this to you, it may be you take in
an opinion, you receive it for a truth: But take heed you be not deceived: It
may be that opinion may cost you your estate, your liberty, etc. and therefore
you had best consider well before you entertain, lest you be at this cost to
maintain an error, in steed of upholding a truth.

All is not too good to part withal for a truth, but nothing but is too good
to give for an error. There is nothing which a good heart does entertain, but
he entertains it under this notion, to maintain it, he takes it into his house,
his heart, with a purpose to maintain it; wicked men receive opinions to live
on them; but a good heart receives an opinion, that it may live on him: a
corrupt heart entertains an opinion, that it may maintain him; but an honest
heart, that he may maintain it. A bad heart takes in an opinion, as his
servant, which he makes to serve him, else he will not own it; but a good heart
entertains it, as his Master, which shall rule all, and dispose of all; if it
say, it must have his pains, his estate, etc. to maintain it, to promote it, to
advance it, he is not master of any thing he has, but all must go to serve it.

And therefore seeing it is thus, you had need to look strictly what you take
into your heart; you had need to know what you give entertainment to, seeing
you must give maintaining to it also, and it may cost all you have. I only say
thus much, all thou have is not too dear for a truth, too good for a truth: But
there is nothing so little, but is too much for an error.

And therefore take heed you be not deceived.

And thus much shall serve for the demonstration of the false marks: we shall
now come to the sure marks and characters, whereby truth and error may be
evidenced. You have seen hitherto, though some of these which have been laid
down, may be said to be probable signs, yet none of them can be set down for
conclusive evidences. We are now to deal with such, viz. to lay down infallible
and undeceiveable evidences of divine truth. And this is the first and main
Character.

Divine truth is word-revelation; Truth proceeds from God, revealed in the Word
to us. All Scripture (says the Apostle, (...).
2 Timothy 3.16. It is given by inspiration of God; and in the 2 Pet. 1.21. The
prophecies came not in any time by the will of man, Consul. Morton. Apol. Cath.
p. 2. l. 5. c. 9 Romans 11.4
but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. The Word of
God it is the r^vealer of all divine truth: if you would know what is truth,
your way lies clear; enquire not so much what this man says, or what that, For
all men are liars, but search and enquire, what says the answer of God. Non
deb^mus attendere quia alij ante nos, sed quid Christus ante omnes dixit.
We are not to attend what others before us, but what Christ before all has
spoken, the truth is in Jesus, Ephesians. 4.21.

The Word is nothing else but a beam of that eternal Sun, but a ray of divine,
of God-communication.

It is called the Word of truth, nay, truth it self, Joh. 17.17. Sanctify them
with thy truth, thy Word is truth; and this makes the lest syllable in the Word
to be more firm for a soul to rest on, then all the protestations of men or
Angels; they though true, yet they are not infallibly true, they are not
immutably true, but God is, and his Word is a beam of this truth, a ray
proceeding from this Sun; and therefore says the Prophet, Isa. 40 8. The
grass withers, the flower fades, Isa. 40.8. 1 Pet. 1.25* Mat 5.18.
but the Word of our God shall stand for ever, 1 Pet. 1.25. Nay, heaven and
earth shall pass away, before one iota, one title of the Word shall fail,
Matthew. 5.18. It is truth, it is immutable, it is infallible truth, and divine
truth is Word-revelation.

The Scripture is not only the revealer of divine truth, but of all divine
truth: not that there is no more divine truth then what is revealed in the
Word, but that there is no more for us, there is no more to be believed and
obeyed, then what God has revealed in his Word.

It is the boundary of doctrine, and the adequate measure of all divine truth,
Deuteronomy. 4.2. and therefore God sends us thither, as to the place where we should
find all doctrine to be believed and obeyed, and as to the touchstone whereby
we should try all Doctrines, Isa. 8.20. To the Law and to the testimonies, if
they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no light in them.
And the Apostle would have you know, that Word-revelation is a surer way to
evidence truth, then a revelation from heaven, as he tells us, 2 Pet. 1.16,
17, 18. where having been speaking of a revelation from heaven, and the
clearest that ever was revealed in the transfiguration of Christ, the Apostles
themselves were eyewitnesses thereof, and heard that voice from heaven, This
is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, yet (says he) verse. 19.
We have a more sure Word of prophecy, (...), meaning Word-revelation; not that
this is a more sure revelation then that was, but that this is surer to us:
Word-revelation is more sure to us, then a revelation from heaven; God would
have us to know truth by Word-revelation; divine truth is Word-revelation. And
that is the first Character, which yet for fuller and clearer conception, I
will branch forth into three particular maxims.

Word of God does plainly and evidently hold forth, that is infallibly truth:
the Word of God, or God in the Word does give out all Doctrine to be believed
and obeyed; and whatever the Word holds forth, what ever has a bottom and firm
footing in the Word, that is undoubtedly truth. All is divinely true which the
Word holds forth, but all is not morally and practically good. All is to be
believed which the Word holds forth, but all is not to be observed: what ever
is in the Word is the object of our faith, but what ever is in the Word is not
to be the rule of our life.

There are no provisoes to be laid down in point of faith, all is truth, and we
must believe all: Fides non eligit objectum.
faith does not single ^ut it is object, it does not pick and choose, but
believes all which God has spoken: but there must be some provisoes in matter
of practice; though all to be believed, yet all is not to be observed, unless,

1. It be of common equity, and not of peculiar engagement, interest,
privilege.

2. Unless it be of perpetual right and observance, Vniversalis and perpetui
juris.
and not temporary and for a time only.

There were many things which the Word gave out to the Nation of the Jews to be
observed, which since Christ are as Statutes now repealed; they were not of
common and general equity, nor were they to be of perpetual and everlasting
observance, and therefore are not to be observed by us, though believed of us:
what ever the Word gives out, is to be the object of our faith, but not to be
the rule of life. I come to the second maxim.

What ever may be collected by way of manifest consequence, evident deductions
from the Word, is certainly true. This is the second maxim. Morton. Apol. Cat.
p 2. l. 5. c 9
Though a Doctrine asserted be not in totidem verbis, as we say, expressed in
Scripture, yet if it may be made out of Scripture by manifest and undeniable
consequence, this is certainly a truth: there are many precious truths, which
are not yet in distinct words expressed in the Scripture: For example: if a man
hold forth this doctrine, that it is possible for a man to come to the
knowledge of his renovation, or his own condition: This is a truth: but where
do we find it in these distinct words in Scripture? and yet it may be soundly
collected, from such Scriptures as these, Examine, prove, try your selves, know
you not your own selves? All which imply, that upon trial a man may be able to
come to the knowledge of himself: and the like may be said of many other
points, which though in terminis are not contained in Scripture, yet may be
made out by manifest consequence, and evident deduction, and therefore are
truths. So that I say, what ever may be made out of the Word by evident
deduction, is to be received as a truth.

But here I must lay down three Cautions.

The place of Scripture, or that Word from whence the deductions are made, must
not be mistaken. The Pharisees read in Scripture that Christ should be a King,
and thence they made these deductions, that certainly Jesus was not the Christ,
here was a mistake of the place. The Disciples had read in the Law, that Christ
should live for ever, and thence they made these deductions, that Christ should
not die, We have read in the Law that Christ shall live for ever, how say
thou then, that thou must die? here was a mistake of the place. So the
Apostles, they preached Christian liberty, and had said that Christ had
purchased and instated all believers into a blessed freedom, which they were
to maintain against any who went about to defraud them of it: But now, if they
or others, should take this Christian freedom to consist in exemption from all
laws, both of God and man, here were a great mistake, far from the Apostles
thoughts; and those deductions are a building without a foundation, and cannot
stand.

deductions must be rightly gathered, they must naturally arise from the
Scripture. There are many false deductions made, and I may say so many errors
founded upon the Word of truth. Take an instance or two: you have here a
Scripture, Take heed that no man deceive you, for many shall come in my name,
etc. when a man shall gather from thence, that the Saints may be seduced and
carried away with damnable errors, this is a false deduction, the 24. verse
does plainly show us that, where it is said, They should deceive, if it were
possible, the very elect; by which is employed, the elect cannot be deceived: So
we have another Scripture, where it is said, Keep me from presumptuous sins;
and now when from this a man shall gather such a doctrine as this, that the
Saints may sin presumptuously, this is a false collection, and contrary to that
Scripture, in Romans 6.14. Sin shall not reign in you, for you are not under
the Law, but grace, etc. The like may be said of that Scripture, Let him that
stands, take heed lest he fall; when a man shall infer thence, that the
Saints may fall totally and finally; this is a false inference, and contrary to
the express Word of God, and his own Covenant, which is, Jer. 32.40. I will
make an everlasting Covenant, and I will never depart from you from doing you
good, but I will put my fear in your heart, you shall never depart from me. We
read also of such a Scripture as this, You would not come to me, that you
might have life: when a man shall draw such conclusions as these from it, that
it is in the power of man of himself to come over to Christ; it is a false
deduction: So we read such an expression as this, Work out your salvation with
fear and trembling; and when thence we shall gather, that no man can be assured
of his condition, this is a false deduction. Many more might be named, but
these shall suffice; by which you see what need we have of adding this caution,
viz. That the deductions be rightly gathered; we will come to the third.

3. Those Deductions they must agree with the harmony of deductions made, and
those rightly gathered, nay and the place be rightly understood too, and yet
those deductions may be erroneous, Nihil sere in Scripturis obscuru^ est, quod
no^ alibi planissime dictum reperiatur. Au. Scriptura eam studiose
perscrutantibus, est sui interpres. Mort. Ap. Cath. p. 2. l. 5. c. 9, 10, etc.
because they agree not with the harmony of Scripture: Truth is not ever found
by one place; what is spoken in one place may be repealed in another, and
therefore we must consult with the harmony, see the agreement how one place
does bear witness to another: though you look upon some places, and see them
disagreeing, yet there is a sweet harmony and agreement in all, like Nathan and
Bathsheba they speak the same thing; assure your self it is none of the least
of the noble works of the Ministers of Christ, to study the harmony of
Scripture, and see how they do mutually give hands and bear witness one to
another; it is the fault of some, the better to strengthen their opinions, to
set one Scripture at difference with another; it is our work to search the
agreement, and discover how in their disagreements they are yet serviceable one
to another, and to the purpose of God in the saving them that do believe. It
was Paul's course you see in his whole Epistle to the Hebrews, Whit. cont 1. q
5. c 9. p. 361. (...) medijs inveniendi Scripturae sensum.
not to decry the old Testament, which indeed was but the Gospel veiled, but to
take the vail off, which was upon those places, and upon their eyes in the
reading of them, as he tells them, and showed them that all this was but Christ
in figure, all this was but Christ in type, they were but the figure of those
things that were to come. I am confident that the want of study, and endeavor
to seek to preserve the harmony of Scriptures, is the great ground of many
errors among us: those deductions are not safe, which overthrow the harmony
and agreement of Scriptures, the Word of God. And those are certainly true,
with which the whole harmony of Scripture does agree: and so much for the third
Caution and second particular.

evident to be consonant to Gods mind, or the main end of God in Scripture,
though there be not a particular place for it, yet doubtless it is a truth:
there are many precious truths, which yet would puzzle to find a particular
place upon which they may be fully established, which yet agree with the
general drift, and main end of God in the Scripture. The great end of God in
Scripture is to bring us out of our selves, and to bring us up to him; to
render all the world emptiness, and discover fulness alone in himself; to
bring us to believe, and close with Christ, and give up our selves to him in
ways of love and obedience: and what ever doctrine does truly serve for these
ends, what ever drives on this design, is undoubtedly a truth, though it be not
contained in express words in Scripture.

And so much shall serve for the first Character, by which many errors are
struck down; we come now to the second. And,

really and truly advance all God in Christ, is certainly a truth of God. All
truth, as I told you, was divine Revelation, and it is the end of all divine
revelation to advance and set up God in Christ: it is the great design, the
great end which God does aim at in all his Word-revelation, to set up himself,
to advance the riches of his grace in Jesus Christ. And therefore that which
does really and truly advance all God in Christ, is certainly a truth of God.

For our better and clearer conception, we must take this Character in pieces,
and show you how it contains four conditions, or there are four qualifications
requisite to evidence any doctrine to be a truth of Christ.

1. It must advance God.

2. All God.

3. All God in Christ.

4. It must do all this really.

1. Divine truth it does [advance] God; it sets up God, and lays man low, it
raises up God upon the ruins of self and sin, it makes God great, and man
little, God all, and man nothing, it empties man of himself, and makes him seek
his fulness in God; and that which does thus has a good evidence it is a
truth of God.

Error may advance the creature, it may advance a man's self, but it does not
advance God; nay, error may seek God in the creature, but it cannot seek it
self in God; it may give to the creature that which is Gods, but not give to
God that which is the creatures; it may take from God to give to the creature,
but it does not take from the creature to give to God: And error may lessen it
self to make the creature great, but it cannot make it self nothing to make God
great, you see this, in Colos. 2.18. Some in a voluntary humility did worship
Angels: here man lessens himself to make a creature great, but he does not make
himself nothing, to make God great: Here he takes from himself and from God, to
give to a creature, but he does not take from the creature, from himself, to
give unto God. This is a genuine property of truth, it advances God, it makes
God all, and it self nothing, it empties it self of it is self, and seeks alone
it is fullness in God: that can be no truth, that draws not up the heart to God,
and brings the soul to live in him, as it is utmost happiness; and that which
does thus, must needs make all things little, and God great, and be content to
lose it self in God and for God, that it may find it self in God.

Now if you should examine some opinions by this;

1. There is an opinion, that man has ability to close with the tenders and
offers of grace, he has power in his pure naturals to come over to Christ.
This opinion advances man, but does not advance God, it sets up the will of
man against the will of God, it is an opinion against Word-revelation; we are
said to be dead in sin, and dead men cannot move; Christ tells us, Without him
we can do nothing, Joh. 15.5.

2. Divine truth it advances [all] God.

1. It does advance the nature and attributes of God.

2. It does advance the will of God.

3. It does advance the ways of God.

1. It does advance the nature and attributes of God. 1. The Wisdom of God. 2.
The Mercy. 3. The Justice. 4. The Power. 5. The Immutability of God. 6. The
Holiness of God.

There are some opinions which may seem to advance some of God, but not all of
God: Some that may seem to advance his mercy, but not his justice; some his
grace, but not his holiness; some his power and his wisdom, but not his
truth: that opinion which does not advance the justice, as well as mercy, the
holiness, as well as the grace of God, certainly it is no truth of God; God
has set himself to be wholly advanced in all his attributes, and you do not
advance any of God, if you do not advance all of God.

To instance for illustration in a few particulars.

1. Ther^ is an opinion that Christ came to save all: here is an o^^nion that
does advance the mercy, but not the truth of God: You know the Word tells us,
that he came to save them who shall believe in him; now certainly, if he came
to save all, then all believe; but the Apostle tells us, that all men have not
faith; therefore surely the death of Christ, is no further to be extended then
his prayer, and his prayer is not for all, as you may see, Joh. 17.9. Joh. 17.9.
I pray not for the world, but for them thou have given me.

2. So secondly, there is an opinion that Christ merited no love or mercy at
his Fathers hands for us, God loved us from everlasting, and say they, How can
Christ be said to merit that which we had already? Now would you know whether
this is a truth, or an error? You may examine it by this: see, does it advance
all God? indeed this does advance the love, the mercy of God, but not the
justice of God; it is indeed a wrong to his justice, for Gods justice is no way
advanced, unless there be satisfaction made to it; all the mercy that God
bestows on sinful men, it is in relation to his precedent satisfaction: Ephesians.
4.13.
hence Christ is said to bear sin, to satisfy for sin, etc. and God for
Christ's sake is said to pardon sin, Ephesians. 4.32.

3. There is an opinion that the Saints may fall from grace; and they say, this
opinion does much advance Gods justice: but how that can be, I cannot discern,
when I see it so evidently contrary to his truth, to his promise and covenant
he has made with us, as you see, Jer. 32.40. certainly, though the life of a
Christian be a secret life, it is hid, yet it is a safe life, it is hid in
Christ. Besides these there are many opinions which would seem to advance the
grace of Christ, and the mercy of God, which yet are enemies to the justice and
holiness of God. Certainly faith and holiness ever go together, even as heat
and light in the Sun, etc. And that opinion which does not advance all God,
is certainly an error. If you single out some attribute^ and tell us, this or
that opinion is for the glory of them, if yet it be inconsistent with other
attributes of God, certainly, it is no truth of God. All divine truth has not
only a consistency with, but tends to the advancement of every attribute of
God. That a man should be justified and saved by Christ, here is the grand
truth, and here all the attributes of God meet; here is wisdom, mercy,
justice, truth, power, grace, holiness: all meet in this, as lines in the
Center, as beams in the Sun, as Rivers in the Sea, God and all God is
advanced in the justification and salvation of poor miserable man. So much for
the first.

2. As truth does advance the nature and attributes of God, so it does advance
the will of God; by this does Christ evidence, that his words were true, Joh.
5.30. Therefore my judgment is just, because I seek not mine own will, but the
will of him that sent me. If Christ, who was truth essential, does evidence
the truth of his Doctrine thus, how much more may we evidence the doctrine of
truth by this, that it advances the will of God: It sets up Gods will above
the will of the creature: it sets up his revealed will above all the
authorities of men, above all traditions what ever.

Now if we should examine opinions by this.

1. There is an opinion that man has freedom of will to spiritual good.

Is this a truth, yea or no? Why here you may be satisfied, this tells you, it
is an error, because it advances not the will of God, but the will of man; I
say, it advances man's will, but not the will of God; it is a doctrine
overthrows all the counsels of God: if this were so, where were election,
reprobation? then the will of the creature should rule the will of God. And as
this opinion is contrary to Gods secret, so this opinion is repugnant to the
revealed will of God, he tells us, that it is God that works the will and the
deed, and that without him we can do nothing, that it is not in him that
wills, or in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy. So that this
opinion is opposite both to Gods secret and his revealed will, both to his
decree and to his Word.

3. Divine truth as it advances the attributes, the will of God, so it does
advance the ways of God.

It advances obedience, exact obedience, it advances duty and exactness in
duty, though it set not duty above Christ, nor in opposition to Christ, though
it set not up obedience above faith, nor in opposition to faith, yet it
advances duty in Christ, and obedience with faith; the obedience of faith
justifies our persons, but the obedience from faith does justify our faith.

There are many opinions which cry up grace, but de-cry holiness, that advance
faith, but cry down obedience, that set up Christ, but cry down the Law.
Indeed we all cry them down in opposition to Christ and grace, but we set them
up in subordination. And indeed there is a sweet subordination between the Law
and the Gospel, Christ and obedience. The Law sends us to the Gospel, and the
Gospel having justified us, sends us to the Law as the rule of our obedience. I
say, the Law sends us to the Gospel, for it cannot justify, it cannot save.
Indeed it says, Do this and live: But not that we should do, and live by
doing, for God has appointed another way; but it says, Do this and live, to
empty us of our selves, and bring us over to the Gospel that we might live and
do. There may be a fault to put men to doing, before they put them to
believing, or to put them to do, that they may be enabled to believe, for
faith is the rise and spring of action, all action must begin from faith, and
by faith we are enabled to obey, as it was said of Abraham, Heb. 11. by faith
Abraham obeyed: and we are said to be created in Christ to good works: there
can be no doing without strength, no strength but from Christ, nothing from
Christ but by union, no union but by faith, therefore the Apostle says, He
that has the Son, has life, and he that has not the Son, has not life:
all which seems to speak plainly, that it is no good way to turn men to
obeying, before they put men to believing, nor to put men to obeying, that they
may be enabled to believing. But yet though we are not to put men to duty to
enable them by any power in those duties to believe, yet may we, must we put
men upon faith to enable them to obey; though we may not substitute faith to
obedience, yet we ought to substitute obedience to faith. And indeed it is the
noblest piece of faith, that it does enable us to service. The excellency of
faith is not in this only, that it justifies us, but puts us into a capacity,
and gives us ability to serve God.

And he that looks not upon faith, as that wherein it is excellency does
greatly consist, that it does enable us to duty, that it strengthens us to
service; he does not yet know what Christ and faith is -- he has only a faith
in notion, but knows not faith in truth and power. And so much for the second;
divine truth it advances all God, the nature and attributes of God, the will
of God, the ways of God. We come to the third.

Thirdly, It does all this in Christ, I say, divine truth it advances all God
in Christ: God has set himself to be advanced and glorious to the creature to
all eternity, but in Christ. Indeed all God is no other way to be advanced, but
in Christ; nor has God set himself to be wholly advanced any other way of the
creature, but in Christ. Something of God is to be seen in every creature, and
something of God to be advanced in them, much of God is to be seen and advanced
in the whole creation, the Heavens they declare the wisdom, the power of God:
and he sets himself to be advanced in them, the law declares the justice,
holiness of God.

But now Christ declares all God, you may see God in all his dimensions of
glory in Christ: In him has God set himself to be visible in all his glory to
the Saints. In him dwells all the fulness of the godhead bodily: fulness, all
fulness, all the fulness of the godhead, and all this dwells in him: it is in him
primarily, originally, it is in him as the proprietary, as the Lord and master
to dispose of it, etc. It is in him perpetually, there it dwells, and dwells
for ever. And in Christ has God set himself to be seen in all his glory, his
wisdom, his power, his mercy, his justice, etc. This is the rock, into which
we with Moses must get, if we would see the glory of God; God might have
advanced his justice, his power, out of Christ in our condemnation; but he has
alone set himself to be advanced in his glory, to all eternity in his Son,
and that which advances God in Christ, is certainly a truth of God. I come
now to the fourth.

Fourthly, That which does really do all this: that I say, which does really
advance all God in Christ, is certainly a truth of God. I say [really] there
are many opinions which advance our selves, not God, and perhaps some which
seem to advance some of God, not all of God, and some which may advance all
God in Christ seemingly, but yet not really, not truly, they may seemingly
advance Gods glory, and yet really be destructive and opposite to the glory of
God.

It is said of the Chymickes, that they will so counterfeit gold that no
touchstone can discover it, though you go to the touchstone to try it, yet you
shall not be able to discern whether it be true gold or no, there is no way to
try it, but by the fire, and the fire that will purify that which is good, and
render it more excellent, but that which is counterfeit will evaporate into air
and smoke, it is not able to abide the trial.

Christians i^ there are many subtle opinions, many that have a great deal of
Chemistry in them, they are good it may be at the touch, but yet are naught at
the test; they may pass the touch here, and not be discerned, but the test
shall discover them, the fire shall try them; how ever they may pass man's
judgment, yet at that great burning day they shall be discovered, when that
which is substantial shall alone continue, and that which has been
counterfeit shall evaporate into air and smoke; the Apostle seems to imply
this, in the 1 Cor. ^.12, 13, 14, 15. If any man build upon this foundation,
gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble: Every man's work shall be
made manifest, for the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by
fire, and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is; where the
Apostle tells us, that there shall be a trial, though opinions and doctrines
may pass the touch, yet they shall not pass the test, this trial shall be by
fire; If his work abide, he shall receive reward; if be burned, he shall suffer
loss, but he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire.

Now then would you know what is truth in those many opinions which are held
forth? see whether they be Word-revelation; see whether they, 1. Advance God.
2. All God. 3. All God in Christ: and, 4. whether they do all this really,
that which does really advance all God in Christ, is certainly a truth of
Christ: and so much for the second Character.

We are come to the third Character, which is this.

Charact. 3. That which does really advance the whole work of grace in the
hearts and lives of Saints, that is certainly a truth of God.

There are three eminent discoveries of truth.

1. Truth may be discovered from the seat of it.

2. It may be known by the qualities of it.

3. It may be discerned by the operations and workings of it.

By these three eminent Characters I have endeavored to evidence truth.

1. From the seat of truth, Ephesians. 4.21.
It is in Jesus, and that was our first Character, Divine truth is
Word-revelation.

2. From the qualities of it; and the second Character was one of the most
mainest can be laid down, viz. Truth does really and truly advance all God in
Christ.

3. We are now upon the third, which is to discover truth by the operations and
workings of it: and here I tell you, That truth does really advance the whole
work of grace in the hearts and lives of Saints.

And when I have done this, I hope there will be sufficient spoken to evidence
truth from error unto you.

Now for our fuller and clearer proceeding upon this, we must give you out
this Character in four particulars.

1. I say, Truth does advance the work of grace.

2. It does advance the whole work of grace.

3. It does advance the whole work of grace in heart and life.

4. And it does all this really. We shall speak to these particulars briefly,
and then sum them up, and speak to them all jointly, as they are comprised in
the Character.

1. First, Truth does advance the work of grace. In the former Character I had
to do with truth, as it advanced grace in God: here I have to do with it, as
it does advance grace in us. In the first, I had to do with it, as a divine
affection and disposition in God: here I have to do with it, as a divine
quality implanted into us; the first has respect to grace without us; this
second has respect to grace within us, inherent and imparted grace, our
holiness; and therefore I call it here the work of grace.

2. Truth does advance the whole work of grace. It does not only advance some,
but the whole work of grace. There may be some opinions which may seem to
advance some part of the work, but they carry not on the whole work of grace
in a sweet and even proportion; you have many opinions which may seem to be
serviceable to the advancement of some graces, but not of all; they may seem
helpful to some particulars, but yet are not serviceable to the whole frame.
It is the nature of truth to serve the advancement of the whole work of grace.
Indeed it is true, there be some truths that have a more proper and peculiar
influence upon one, then upon another, and may be serviceable to one, more then
to another grace; but yet there is no truth that is disserviceable to any, nay
no truth, but is helpful to all Truth advances the whole work of grace.

3. It advances the whole work of grace, both in heart and life; not but that
which does the one truly, does the other as really; but because many will
pretend the advancement of the work of grace in the heart, when there is no
such thing seen in the life, therefore I put them both together, and say, Truth
advances the whole work of grace, both in heart and life. Truth does not only
help your comforts, but they help your service, not only your graces, but your
duties; it does not only relieve your faith, but your obedience also: though
indeed some truths that may be more naturally and immediately serviceable to
one, then to the other.

Some truths may be said to be cordials, others physic, and others food, some
that are more proper for comfort, others for purging, and others for strength
and enablement: but though one truth may have a more proper influence into such
a work then another, yet you may suspect that from being a truth, which does
not all; that is no good cordial which is not physic, and food too here.
There is nothing does comfort, but it does nourish and purge the heart also.
Free grace is the best cordial to a poor soul, and is not to be given to
faintings in comfort, as men give strong-water to men in a swoon, but it is to
be given to faintings in duty: many have been afraid to preach the doctrine of
free grace, and many afraid to hear it, they think it is only to be used as a
cordial to poor, fainting, dejected souls. But it is not only a Cordial, but
it is the best physic too, nothing more serviceable to the purging of our
hearts, 2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore such precious promises, let us cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit. Nay, and it is the best food
you can feed upon, to strengthen and enable you to all duty and obedience. It
is not only serviceable to faintings in comfort, but faintings in duty. Indeed
that has been no good help to your comfort, that has not been serviceable to
your obedience also; if it have relieved thy faith, it has relieved thy
obedience; if it have been serviceable to the work of grace in the heart, it
has been helpful to the work of obedience in thy life, otherwise thou may
well suspect that comfort.

4. Truth does all this really. It does really (I say) advance the work of
grace, both in heart and life; it does it not apparently only, but really; not
in show only, but in truth. Some opinions there are which seem to do it, but
do it not really; they seem, as if they would hold up grace, when they are
destructive to grace; they cry up grace without them, but never mind grace
within them; they are all for comfort, nothing for duty; all for cordials, but
they neglect food. Certainly you may suspect that from being a truth, which is
not as really subservient to the work of God without you, as to the work of God
within you, and to your duties, as to your comforts. Those are no right
conceptione of grace, which beget not awe, as well as love, fear, as well as
faith, and serves obedience as well as comfort. Thus having spoken a little to
this Character asunder, I shall now speak to it entire. Truth does really
advance the whole work of grace in the hearts and lives of Saints.

As there is a great agreement between error and sin, not only, as they are
both children of the same Father, but as one is serviceable and helpful to the
other; Sin in the affection has much dependence upon error in the
understanding, and a corrupt head is greatly serviceable to a corrupt heart:
There is such an agreement between error and sin, that we may safely say,
what ever does tend to the advancement of sin, to the fuelling of corruption;
what ever affords subsidies, succors, contributions, encouragement and
strength to sin, that is doubtless an error: So there is a great agreement
between grace and truth; they have also both one Father, even the Father of
light, and they are both serviceable one to another. Truth is serviceable to
grace, as error is to sin, and we may as safely say, what ever it is that
serves to advance the work of grace in the hearts and lives of Saints, that is
certainly a truth of God.

As we say of false comforts, that they will never enable to Gods services: So
we may say of false notions, they will never work Gods motions in us. As that
cannot be truth, which is naturally serviceable to sin: so that cannot be
error, which is naturally serviceable unto holiness.

Indeed the best comforts, and so the most precious truths of God may be made
serviceable to the advancement of sin, but yet they do not this naturally and
directly, but occasionally and by accident. It is one thing what a truth may
do by accident, or occasionally, another what it does naturally and truly. The
advancement of sin is not the work of truth, but it is the fruit of our own
corrupt and sinful hearts, which Spider-like do suck poison and venom out of
the choicest sweet, even the best of truth, and the best of comforts; in which
regard we say, truths are more infallibly known by their revelation, then by
their operations; but yet there may be enough in the operations of opinions to
discover them truth or error to a man's self, though not to others. All truth
it works like it self; it is holy, and it works holily; it is pure, and it
works purely; it is spiritual, and it works spiritually; it came down from the
Father of light, and it carries the soul to the place whence it came. In which
regard we may say, that the operations and workings of opinions, being received
and entertained into the heart, may be good characteristicons of the truth, or
falsehood of them; if not to others, to whom the workings are not so obvious,
yet to a man's self, to whom they are apparent, if we will not wilfully shut our
eyes, and obscure what is evident.

And that it may be more evident to all, I will here lay down 5, or 6. special
operations that truth has upon the soul, where it is entertained; by which you
may be able to evidence, whether the opinions you have entertained be truth or
error.

1. The first and great operation which truth has upon the entertained, it is
this: it humbles the soul; Truth where it comes, it has a soul-humbling power;
discoveries do humble men, truth is a discovery from God to the soul, it is a
beam of light darted from the Father of light, who if he do but dart one beam
of himself into the heart, it humbles the soul, and lays it in the dust before
him: the nearer you come to God, and God to you, the more you see the distance
between God and you: and hence it is that the greatest soul-abasements do ever
follow the greatest God and Christ-manifestations: You see this plain in those
three famous examples of Job, of Isaiah, of Agur: I have heard of thee (says
one of them) by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee, wherefore
I abhor my self in dust and ashes, Job 42.5, 6. Another cries out, We is me,
for I am a man undone, because I am a man of unclean lips -- for I have seen
the Lord of hosts, Isa 6.5. A third he cries out, Surely I am more brutish
then any man, I have not the understanding of a man, Prove. 30.1, 2. who was yet
a man of choice, high and excellent revelations; but he saw God, and looking
upon himself in opposition to him, he was humbled, he was laid in the dust
before him. And this is a natural and genuine property of truth rightly
entertained, it humbles, it empties a man, it makes man nothing, and God all.
None are more humble, more sweet, then those who are the children of the truth:
what St. James says of wisdom, which is from above, It is pure, peaceable,
gentle, full of meeknes, Jam. 3.13, 17. the same may I say of truth, which
comes from the same place; it is not only pure, but peaceable, it is gentle,
full of meekness, full of humility: it is so far from swelling, that it
empties a man, makes him nothing; so far from exalting, that it lays a man
low, and raises up God upon the ruins of pride and self in him.

Indeed we read of knowledge that puffs up; but surely it is not the
knowledge of divine truths, but of natural things, which indeed are apt to
swell a natural man; or it is not the knowledge of divine truths divinely. A
man may know heavenly things as a man, yet not as a Christian, he may know
them rationally, yet not spiritually; the one begets pride and vainglory, but
the other, humility and self-denial. A man may have a rational knowledge of
spiritual and divine things, and yet be puffed up with it; but certainly,
where there is a spiritual conception and understanding of the things of God,
the soul is much humbled and emptied, and none are more humble, more little
then those, who are the right-born children of truth.

Obj. But you will say, you see many who are humble in an error, and others,
who are proud in the truth, and therefore there is no evidencing of truth or
error by this Character.

Answ. For the answer of this, which seems to overthrow all J have said; you
see it is made up of two parts, 1. Men may be humble in an error. 2. Again,
men may be proud in the truth. For answer to the first.

1. That humility that men may have in a way of error, it is not a grace, but
a natural temper, a smoothness and natural plausiblenesse of disposition,
which may render a man grateful to men, though not acceptable to God; we see
many who are men to men, but devils to God, they are plausible to men, but act
their contrariety, and opposition to God; the greatest spiritual pride, may
lurk under the most eminent natural sweetness: the smoothest waters are
oftentimes the deepest; and the fairest disposition to men, may be the
perversest disposition to God.

You see many of the Heathens, who excelled in this sweetness of natural
temper, that yet were opposite enough to God: and the greatest acts of cruelty
have been acted by those who have had the most sweetest tempers of nature.
Sueton. in Tito.
Titus son to Vespasian, who was called, Deliciae humani generis, the darling
of mankind, the Paragon of nature, Joseph. l. 7 bell. Iud. cap. 17.
yet he acted the greatest cruelties against the people of God (which shows the
greater wrath poured on them, that so mild a temper should act it) by fire,
famine and sword he put to death eleven hundred thousand of the Jews.

2. But secondly, That humility men have in error, if not their natural
disposition, yet it is but the keeping and improving, or the concealing and
amending of nature by humane precepts, moral rules and industry. Socrates was
a man of an austeer, crabbed, wrathful and wicked disposition by nature, as he
assents to him who reads his Physiognomy; but (says he) I have corrected that
by Ethics (that is, by moral studies, rules and principles) which I was by
nature. Many by industry and morality may correct a natural disposition, when
yet the temper is not changed; they may be mended by this, but not new made,
and so their humility is not a grace, but a virtue, and such a virtue as is but
a tree without a root, till they be ingraffed into Christ: all grace is from
Christ, and no grace from Christ till we come to be in Christ: the Apostle
says, We are his workmanship created in Christ to good works.

3. Men may be humble in a way of error, because it may be they have not those
occasions and provocations which may draw out their pride and selfishnesse: the
stream may run still enough, if it meet with no stones, but then it will
swell and roar: so many may be humble and calm enough, while they meet with no
opposition; but oppositions and provocations will discover men. Natura vexata
prodit si ipsam.
We use to say, nature being vexed does discover it self: the devil could say
of Job, that he was patient, because he had nothing that might occasion or
draw forth his impatiency, and therefore he desired God, that he would give
him leave but to smite him, and then he should see, that he that was now so
patient, would curse him to the faces there is a great deal of truth in this
argument, that there could be no judging of Jobs patience, so long as there was
nothing to provoke and draw forth his impatience: and there was a great deal of
grace in Job, that notwithstanding all these provocations, he was yet patient
and silent to Jehovah.

Men are often patient because they are not provoked; while Jonah had the
gourd, he was calm enough, but when the gourd was eaten up, he grew as hot as
the Sun which shone upon him. It is no judging of men's humility, of men's
meekness, when they have no provocation to the contrary; and there is a great
deal of allowance to be afforded to them which have all provocation: Oppression
makes a wise man mad, says Solomon.

4. That humility that men have in a way of error, may be, it is but a
counterfeit, no true and real humility, it is but the visour of it, not that
in truth, there may be smooth language, and yet a stormy heart; many may have
the voice of Jacob, but the hands of Esau, and a mild countenance, yet a proud
and perverse spirit; this is like Goliahs sword covered over with a linen
Ephod; besides men may put on a smooth garment to deceive, as the Prophet
says, that is, that they may advantage their deceit, and seek to procure the
more facile reception of their errors, by the counterfeit show of humility;
and abundance of examples, if needful, might be alleged for this; he that
does but peruse the Stories of times, will see this abundantly true.

5. But fifthly, we answer, If men are truly humble, and yet in a way of error,
then their humility is not the result of their errors, but of their graces:
all errors are not damning and undoing errors, though all are sinful and
defiling errors. It is possible many errors may consist with grace, and
therefore there may be humility, and yet men may be led away with errors; but
then that humility is not the result of their errors, but the effect of their
graces. And that shall suffice to answer the first part of the Objection: we
will now come to the second part. As there are many humble in error, so many,
you will say, are proud in the truth; and therefore we cannot evidence truth
by this operation, that it has an humbling power upon them who entertain it.

Answ. Now for the answer of this, where you say, that many are proud in the
truth. It would be considered,

1 Whether you are not mistaken; many there are who mistake magnanimity, and
true nobleness of spirit for pride, as they do baseness for humility. Gods
people are often charged with rashness, choler, pride, impatience, when it is
but their courage, zeal, and magnanimity of spirit for the truth of God. Gods
people are nothing, when they are to deal with God, but they are something,
when they are to deal for God: they are little, when they are to deal with men,
even with the least of men in their own cause, but they are great, when they
are to deal with the greatest of men in the cause of God. Luther calls a
gracious spirit, Spiritus principalis, a princely spirit, though it be an
humble, yet it is a Prince-like humility, and not a Vassal-like baseness: this
is one piece of the royalty of a gracious spirit, he is not too high to stoop
to the meanest services, and yet too high to stoop to the lest sin; he is not
too big to stoop to any condition without sin, nor so little as to yield to the
lest sin, upon the greatest tenders or terrors; look upon the Story of the
three children. I say, he is nothing, when he is to deal with God, but
something, when he is to deal for God. You see John Baptist how little he was,
when he was to deal with God, I am not worthy, says he of Christ, to unlose
his shoe-lachets; yet you see how great when he was to deal for God; see how he
charge the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 3. O generation of vipers; how he
reproves Herod for his incest; this was not pride, but magnanimity and
noblenes of spirit.

And Moses, how little was he in his own cause, and how nothing when he was
to deal with God? he is said to be the meekest man upon the earth: yet in the
cause of God he shows himself; there he stands upon his terms to the utmost,
and would not yield to Pharaoh to leave a hoof behind; the like of Abraham,
when he was to deal with God, how little was he? I am but dust and ashes: yet
when to deal with the King of Sodom, which had respect to Gods providence, and
his glory, he would take nothing from him, not a shoe latchet, no, says he, It
shall not be said that the King of Sodom has made Abraham rich. So Paul,
though he was humble, and nothing when he was to deal with God, yet he was
something when he was to deal for God, he could spare none in Gods cause, if
Peter walk doubly, he will withstand him to the face, as you see.

And it is remarkable what is spoken of the Church of Ephesus, in the 2. Revel.
2. I know thy patience, and how thou can not bear with them that are evil;
one would think those two to be ill coupled together, patience, and yet cannot
bear: wherein does patience lie but in bearing? therefore these are strangely
coupled, but they agree well in a gracious spirit, there is patience in our own
cause, impatience in Gods; patience in our own cause is a virtue, but in Gods
it is a vice, it is not patience, but cowardice, but pusillanimity: to be
little in our own cause is commendable, but to be little in Gods, argues lownes
of spirit. And therefore you must take heed of mistaking magnanimity for pride.
That is the first.

confessed there is too much pride and self even in the children of truth, in
the maintaining of it, and it is a fault they are to be humbled for: how do
men act themselves in all their actings for God, express their heats, more
then Gods? do we not see in all undertakings, what a deal of pride, what a
deal of passion? how do men swell one against another? set their passion
instead of their reason one against another? insomuch that that which should be
the soader of accord, becomes but the bellows of strife, and all means of union
becomes means of disunion, and all reasons for accord prove but arguments of
further distance.

And this arises, first either from the crookednes and crabbednes natural
tempers. Grace though it alt^r nature, yet it does not abolish nature; though
it do much correct and amend natural tempers, yet it does not altogether,
either rectify, or free us of them.

The apple does retain the taste of the stock into which it is ingraffed;
though there be a great alteration, yet there may be some taste. Grace is
ingraffed upon the stock of nature, and though it may much alter our tempers,
though much amend natural disposition, yet there will be a taste of them,
there will be a relish of them. It is a hard task when a man is not only to
deal with a corrupt affection, but with a natural constitution. A little
humility in some natures may show more then abundance in another. But that is
grace indeed, which is gotten upon the conquest of contrary tempers and
dispositions.

2. It arises from weakness of judgment: weakness of judgment is often joined
with strength of will: none have more strong passions, then they who have the
weakest reason. Or it may be men may have strong affections to a way, and may
be engaged for an opinion, which perhaps they want judgment and ability to
maintain against opposition; and this causes them to fall into heats and
passions; and so much of passion, so much of nothing to the purpose; there
reason, as one says, spends upon a false sent, and forsakes the question
started.

3. It arises from the heat of opposition, which may much irritate and
provoke; the best of men are but men, and have their humana quaedam, they have
their imperfections, they have their corruptions; and opposition will tempt and
draw forth that corruption: we use to say, one froward man makes another; With
the froward thou will show thy self froward, Psalm. 18.26. It is spoken of God,
it is true of man. One passion calls in another, as deep calls in for deep;
pride occasions pride, and passion, passion, which make men sometimes sadly
think how in most disputes and contendings for the truth, men are rather Satan's
then Saints one to another, rather tempters of their sins, then helpers of
their graces.

3. Thou say men are proud in the truth. Why? but though grace do not
expel pride, yet it does humble them for it: though it do not empty them of
pride, yet it empties and humbles them for it. Grace and truth, if it be not a
bridle, it will be a whip; if not a curb, it will be a scourge; if it be not
directive, it will be afflictive; if you do not learn your duty from it, it
will chastise you for the neglect of it, and so in the issue it humbles men, it
makes them nothing for their being something: the higher the flood has been,
the lower is the ebb: the more sinfully they exalted themselves, with the more
shame and sorrow they humble themselves before God: they are as little before
God, as bigg with men. This is the nature of truth, where it is entertained,
either it will enable you to be humble, or humble you for your pride, it will
work one way; either it will empty of pride, or empty for pride: if you have
swelled, those swellings are breathed out in sighs: the sighs of the closet
do abate the swellings of the chair; and if it work either way,
notwithstanding this objection, this operation may be a good evidence of truth,
that truth does humble those who entertain it; and so much for the first
eminent operation of truth. I shall be briefer in the rest.

The second great operation of truth is this.

Secondly, Truth has a heart-changing, a heart-transforming power. I put them
both together, because I would draw up all as close as I can. It has I say a
heart-changing power. Paul had no sooner seen that great truth, Jesus was the
Christ, but he became another man, of a wolf he is now a lamb, of a sinner a
Saint, of a persecutor he becomes a Preacher. So the Jailer, what an eminent
change did the receiving of the truth make in him? he that before was so cruel
and inhumane to them, how gentle, how tender, how sweet was he now?

Truth makes such a change upon the soul, that this work is called a new
Creation, and the man upon whom it is wrought is a new creature, he has a new
judgment and notions of things, a new heart and affections to them, a new life
and conversation in them; he is a man who differs as much from himself, as
before he did from another man, head, and heart, and life, and all are changed.
And this change is not a moral, a partial, a formal change, but a through,
universal and spiritual change, they are sanctified by truth, Joh. 17.17. And
therefore I say it does not only change, but it transformes, it has a
soul-transforming power: truth does transform the soul into the nature of
truth, it makes the soul holy, as it is holy; pure, as it is pure, spiritual,
as it is spiritual; it makes a man like unto it self. Be but at the pains to
peruse two places for this; the first is 1 Jam. 21. where the word is called an
ingraffed word, which indeed changes the stock into the nature of it self. As
you cut off the boughs and branches of a crab-stock, that you may ingraff the
better fruit into it: so the Apostle he bids us there, to lay apart all
filthiness, and superfluity of naughtines, which are the corrupt branches, in
which a corrupt stock does abound, and says he, receive with meeknes the
ingraffed word, which as it is able to save your souls hereafter, so now to
change the whole stock into its own nature: the second place I would present to
you, is the 2 Cor. 3 18. While looking upon him as in a glass, we are changed
into his own image, from glory to glory; truth has this transforming power,
where it is entertained: such as men's notions are, such are their spirits: ill
precepts beget ill principles, corrupt doctrines, corrupt hearts. A man's heart
carries a conformity with his notions and principles: there is a great
agreement between what is entertained into the understanding, and what is
wrought in the heart; the work of the heart is but the births of the
understanding, the issue begotten upon the heart, by the power of the notions
in the mind: never face answered face more exactly in the water, then the
heart answers the head, where truths are of divine reception: you may receive
truths partially, and as men only, and yet be never the better for them: there
may be truth in the head, and a lie in the heart: but if you receive truth
fully and as Christians, as the wax takes the impression of the seal, so does
the heart of truth: and principles are bred in you, suitable to those notions
you have truly received: truth where it is entertained in truth, it has a
heart-changing, and a heart-transforming power.

It makes you like it self, holy as it is holy, pure as it is pure, spiritual
as it is spiritual.

And when men are not so, one of these two must surely follow.

1. Either that is not truth which you have received.

2. Or else you have not received it truly, either that is not a good word
which is ingraffed, or that good word was never yet ingraffed into you;
Certainly where that is ingraffed, both stock and fruit are changed. And so
much for the second.

truth has upon the soul where it is entertained: It has a sinne-subduing
power, truth is of a purging, healing, purifying, and commanding nature. Where
truth is received in power, nothing is in power besides it, where it commands
in the soul, the soul is under no other command but truth, where it is truly a
Master, (and it is not there truly, where it is not a Master) there nothing
rules but truth: what the Apostle says of the spiritual man, I may say of
truth, which is a great part of him. It judges all, and is judged of none, and
it commands all, and is commanded of none. Truth was never there in power,
where lust has power, nor never had command in that soul, where corruptions
bear sway. Indeed sin may dwell where truth does dwell, but sin does not
command where truth does reign. No man can be under the reign of truth, and
under the power of lust, a servant to truth, and a vassal to his corruptions,
truth has a sin-subduing power; it can pull down strong holds, cast down
high imaginations, and bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Are you then under the authoritative power of any
corruption, are you under the command of any lust, lusts of the understanding,
lusts of the heart, or lusts of life. Know this, either that is not truth which
you have entertained, or you have not entertained truth in the power of it.

operation that truth has upon the soul, where it is entertained; It has a
heart-quickning power; as the main truth did raise us up from death, and beget
life in us at the first, for every truth, in its measure and proportion, is
serviceable to cherish and quicken life begotten in us.

Truth and life always go together, truth always carries life with it, and
life is ever the companion of truth; Christ is called truth, and he is called
life too, Joh. 14.6. I am the truth and the life; he could not be the one, if
he had not been the other. Now as all light is in the body of the Sun, yet
every ray, every beam carries light with it: So all life is in Christ, who is
the great truth, and yet every truth is a beam from this Sun; and great truth
it carries life with it, it is therefore called the light of life, Joh. 9.5.
You can have no communication of truth, but there is a conveyance of life with
it; every notion will beget motion, every beam of light will be a stream of
life, and carry you on with power to the obedience of truth revealed; the same
spirit which is the spirit of truth, is the spirit of life and of power, and
where he is a spirit communicating light and truth, there he a spirit
conveying life and power to the soul also. To conclude this then, you have
entertained some opinions for truth, but are they soul-quickning truths? are
they helpful to the life of God, and to the life of grace in you? Tell me, do
they dead you, or do they quicken you more? and do they quicken your graces,
or stir up your corruptions? Are they serviceable to grace, or are they
helpful to sin? It is the nature of truth to quicken our graces, but to dead
our corruptions; and this is the nature of error, to provoke our lusts, but to
dead our graces.

A fifth Operation of truth where it is entertained, it has a heart-inflaming
power. Truth is a beam of that Sun, which does not only enlighten, but heat and
warm us. Claritas in intellectu parit arderem in affectu.
Light in the understanding begets heat in the heart, the understanding is as
the medium between the heart and Christ, and serves as the burning-glasse to
the heart, whereby the heart is set on fire with those notions which are
carried from Christ by the understanding to the soul: he that is baptized with
the holy Ghost, the spirit of truth, is baptized with fire, Fulget cherub
intelligentia luce, ardet Seraph charitatis igne. Pic. Mirand. de dig. hom.
his affections are inflamed with the love of it.

He that like the Cherub does shine with light and truth, like the Seraph burns
with heat and love. Truth has an heart- enamouring power, could we but see it
in it is beauty, as the Philosopher said of virtue, I may of truth, we could not
choose but be in love with it; and that which does enamour the heart, must needs
inflame the heart; that which takes the heart, must needs set the heart on
fire, either with desire to enjoy it, or with love in the enjoyment of it.

Indeed it is true, many are too hot in an error, and others are too cold in
the truth; and it is the ones sin, and the others shame; the one is the fruit
of the partial reception of truth, they take it into the head, not into the
heart, They receive not truth with the love of it, as the Apostle says, 2 Thessalonians. 2. and the other is the fruit of the blind entertainment of error;
they have light without heat, and thou have heat without light; their light is
a false light, because it is not joined with heat, and thy heat is a false
heat, because it is not joined with light. And yet I confess many are zealous
in a way of error, when the best are too cold in the truth; it is our shame,
as their sin. But here is the comfort, a little true heat is worth a great
deal of false fire, a little zeal acted with grace, is worth a great deal
spirited with corruption. Men in ignorance are like those under the frigid
zone, they are cold and frozen, and have no heats or affections in them. We
may love things we have not seen, as the Apostle speaks of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.8.
Whom having not seen, Ignoti nulla cupid^; Invisa pos. summa amare, incognita
ne quaquam.
yet you love, but we cannot love things we have not known; and men in error
are like men under the torrid zone, who burn with a false heat; but men in the
truth, they are like those who live under the temperate zone, whose heat is
comfortable and makes them fruitful: or if you will take it in another
comparison; men in ignorance they are like dead men, altogther cold, and have
no heat in them. Men in error are like men in a fever, whose heat is their
distemper: but men in the truth they are like unto men in health, whose heat is
their health, and enables them to action, and resists corruption. And that is
a fifth operation of truth where it is entertained, it has a heart-warming, a
heart-inflaming power. We come to the last.

Truth has a heart-raising and spiritualizing property: where it comes into
the heart with power, it does raise and spiritualize a man: indeed, the naked
knowledge of truth does no more raise the heart, then the sight of the Sun
does lift a man up to heaven, but when truth comes into the heart in it is
power, it carries the soul thither whence it came. All truth as it came from
God, so it carries the soul to God, it rayseth and spiritualizeth a man; it
does spiritualize and raise his understanding, his notions and conceptions of
things; it does spiritualize a man's heart, a man's affections, a man's actions,
it makes him a spiritual man, 1 Cor. 2.15. Men are much according to their
notions of things, men of low conceptions, are men of low spirits, men of
higher and more spiritual notions, are men of finer tempers, of more refined
spirits: so far as truth is received, so far it does refine a man: if it
enter the head, a man is part refined, but if it be received into the heart,
the whole man is spiritualized. A man's head may be refined, and yet he may have
a gross heart; as Christ says, Make their hearts gross, that seeing they
might not see, they did see in the head, and that was refined, but they did not
see in their heart, and therefore that was still gross; but if the heart once
be spiritualized with truth, then the whole man is made spiritual, for truth
is of a spiritualizing nature. And so much shall serve for the operations of
truth, and this third and last Character, viz. Truth does advance the whole
work of grace, in the hearts and lives of Saints.

Well then, you see there are many opinions abroad, given entertainment to some
of them, I do not say, that they are all of them erroneous, but many are,
others have much error mingled with some truth. I have given you three
touches, whereby you may be able to judge of them: three Characters, whereby
you may be enabled to discover truth from error. And do you try your opinions
by them? see, are they such as are word-revelation? does the word plainly, and
evidently hold them forth? or are they deductions drawn from the word? But
see, is not the place mistaken? are the deductions rightly gathered? are they
consonant to the harmony of Scriptures? do they suite with Gods maine end in
Scripture? By these you may be able to discover them.

Again, the opinions which are held forth, or you have entertained, do they I
say advance God? do they advance all God? all the Attributes? all the will of
God? all the ways of God? and do they advance all God in Christ? And do all
this not seemingly, but really? Certainly if so, they are truths of God.
Besides you that have entertained and closed with any opinions, tell me, let
conscience speak, have thou found them to be serviceable, to advance the whole
work of grace in thy heart and in thy life? What operations have they had upon
thee? have they humbled thee? quickened thee? made thee more holy? more exact in
thy walking? etc. Indeed its true, truths are more infallibly known in their
esse, then in their operari, in thesi, then in praxi, in their revelation, then
in their operations; But yet they may be discerned by their operations also,
because all truth works like unto it self, its holy, and it works holily,
pure, and it works purely, spiritually, and it works spiritual: many who
know not the simples of things as they grow, that yet know them by their
operations, and many who know not a truth in its esse and being, who yet know
it in its operations and workings; they know not truth as it is in Jesus, but
they know truth as it works like Jesus; they cannot evidence truth so fully in
its being in the word, as they can in its operations upon the heart; many that
know it better by experience, then they can evidence it by arguments. And you
shall be able to judge of most opinions, if you do but look upon them in their
operations upon the heart. Certainly that which does humble us, quicken us,
make us more holy, etc. it cannot likely be an error: if an opinion has these
influences and operations upon the heart, it is surely a truth. And on the
contrary, if an opinion does make us more proud, self-conceited, uncharitable,
less exact in our walking, etc. it is not probable to be a truth, truth is
holy, and it works like to it self, holily. If a man had received a pill, and
he see it work kindly upon the humors, he concludes it is good and proper:
but if instead of working upon them, and emptying the body of malignant
humors, it does swell a man, etc. he will presently conclude it is poison. So
when you have entertained an opinion, and you find it works kindly upon your
corruptions, it does humble you, purge you, and is helpful to your graces, it
does quicken you, and make you more holy, you have some comfortable evidence
that this is a truth, it works like truth. But on the contrary, if we find an
opinion does swell us up with pride, make us proud, and censorious, and
uncharitable, deads our hearts to duty, slackens the hand to the exercise of
godliness, and you see this not only the fruit, but the proper effect of the
opinion, you may be sure that opinion is an error.

Christians, you are fallen into those times wherein errors do abound; as
some truths are discovered, so many errors are revealed: you need to take heed
you be not deceived, especially seeing every opinion does language it self unto
you in the words of the text, Lo, here is Christ.

And me thinks I did not need to say any more, that which I have spoken might
be sufficient, to discover error, and to confirm you in the truth.

But yet in regard there are so many opinions abroad, and many of those so
dangerous, so subtle, so seductive, I shall in the conclusion of this Question
add a few particulars, which may serve instead of a fence to preserve you from
error, and a star to guide you in the ways of truth. And I shall branch
this discourse into these two general heads. 1. Cautions 2. Directions.

1. Beware of being too credulous, of taking all upon trust, and drinking in
all you hear: many men whose souls are but like to blanke paper, fit for any
to scroll upon, or like to soft wax, ready to receive what impression men will
stamp in them.

We are commanded to examine, to try, to prove all things, as I have showed at
large: Non opus est virilis intelligentiae, sed puerilit inscitiae.
therefore has God given you the light of reason, as you are men, the light of
grace, as you are Christian men, that you might prove and examine doctrines. If
we were to take all on trust, there were no need of the understanding of men,
the simplicity of children would serve the turn for that.

Now I find there are three great grounds why men are so apt to take opinions
upon trust.

1. Qualitatem docentium, non doctrinae.
One is because they come handed to us by the best men. Non personis fides
probanda est, sed potius ex fide persona.
Men examine more the quis then the quid: the quality of the doctor, more then
the nature of the doctrine which is held forth: if they see an opinion handed
to them by holy men, and learned men, they presently receive it even as
Gospel, without any scruple, or any doubt of it: and thus oftentimes though
they thirst after truth, Quamvis evangeliu^ sitiunt, venenum hauriant. Consul.
Morton. Apol. Cath. p. 2. l. 5. cap. 12. p. 421. Hoc lantu^ scio, quod nihil
scio. Consul. Mort. Apol. Cath. p. 2. l. 5. cap. 12. Estote probait numularij,
siquis num^aus fit adulterus, and figura^ Caesaris non habeat, nec signatus fit
moneta publica, reprobetur Morton.
yet they drink in error -- you had need to take heed of this in these days.
I have told you, the best of men are but men, and being men they may be
deceivers, though they are not willing to deceive; the Apostle tells us We know
but in part. And this is not the least part of our knowledge, to know that our
knowledge is imperfect.

2. A second ground men are so apt to take an opinion upon trust is, because an
opinion comes languaged under the most recept^ble terms, it is conveyed to
them under the highest notions, perhaps it may speak the language of the Text,
Lo, here is Christ. And indeed if you look abroad, you shall scarce see any
opinion that will stoop to seek its entertaynment, or procure its reception
upon lower terms, then as the mind of Christ: every opinion pretends Christ's
commission for its pass, and will carry as bigg a sail as truth it self. And
though this prevail much with men, to give up their understandings, and
subject their hearts to such an opinion, either they fear to reject it, or for
the very name sake they embrace it, yet certainly all is not truth that goes
under that name: too many do stamp Christ's image upon their own coin. To
discover some of those opinions to you, which go under that name, you may take
in these few particulars.

1. Certainly that opinion which suits not with the mind of Christ, though it
say, Lo, here is Christ, yet it is an error, not a truth of Christ.

2. That opinion which suites not with the nature of Christ, who is pure and
holy, though it say, Lo, here is Christ, yet believe it not, it is an error,
and no truth of Christ.

3. That opinion which suites not with the life of Christ, which was exact,
holy, humble, etc. though it hold forth, Lo, here is Christ, yet it is none of
Christ's.

4. That opinion which obscures and robbs Christ of his glory and gives to man
that which is due alone to Christ, though it say, Lo, here is Christ, yet it
is an error, and no truth of Christ.

5. That opinion which breeds a distance, and estrangement between Christ and
the soul, that interrupts the soul in communion with Christ, either in
believing or obeying, that draws the soul either from the obedience of faith,
or the obedience to the command, though it say, Lo, here is Christ, yet it is
an error, and no truth of Christ. By these touches you may discover many
opinions to be errors that go under that name, which shows you the danger of
drinking in all opinions, that language themselves unto you under the name of
Christ.

A third ground why men are so apt to take opinions on trust, is, because,
besides all this, they may carry some fair and lovely aspects, which may render
them lovely and desirable, as if they were truth it self; many men are tempted
into an opinion, rather then persuaded into it; they are led rather by
affection, then by judgment; the benign and fair aspects, which an opinion
may carry, may much take men, and prevail with them for the entertainment of
it. It was our fall at first, the lovely aspects which the fruit did bear; and
it is many an ones fall still, even the fair and lovely aspects which an
opinion seems to carry with it. I have told you the Prince of darkness may
transform himself into an Angel of light, and he may convey error to you, not
only under the notion, but under the habit of truth it self, and render an
error every way as lovely, desirable and acceptable as the truth it self.

And therefore there being so much danger, dealing with so subtle an adversary;
we had need to beware what we entertain, and sift it to the bottom, before
ever we give it welcome into our hearts. And that is the first Caution. I will
be brief upon the rest.

2. Beware of prejudice: look not prejudicially upon an opinion. As we are not
to look upon an opinion with affection, and so give up our hearts to it, before
we have tried it: so we must not look upon it with disaffection, and so set
our hearts against it, before we have examined it. Indeed there are some
opinions not worthy trial. Some are to be looked upon with abhorrency, as such
which are destructive to faith and godliness; when I say you are not to look
upon opinions with prejudice, I mean, not these, for those you are to look upon
with abhorrencie; but I mean, such as are controverted among the godly
themselves, and such as may consist with all holiness of life and
conversation, of these I would be understood to speak, when I say, look not
with prejudice against any way: men, when they receive prejudice against a way,
either they will not search at all, or, if they do, they will not know. As
affections to a way does hasten the understanding to know, and the heart to
embrace it: so disaffection to a way does hinder the understanding from
knowing, and hold off the heart from embracing. It is a hard thing to persuade
that man, whose heart is either engaged to a contrary way, or his understanding
prejudiced to this way: Such a man may be convinced, but it is hard to
persuade him, his affections and engagements act against all that light, that
he will not see, he will not know; it must be our work, if we will find out
truth, to beware of prejudice. You know it was that which hindered the Jews
from closing with Christ, who was the great truth, and it will be that will
hinder you from embracing of lesser truths. Formerly the novelty of a way, the
paucity of professors, the meannes of their condition, the weakness of their
parts and abilities, the bad entertainment a truth had in the world, were the
great stumbling blocks or prejudices to the entertainment of truth. It was so
in the Gospel, as you all know, and it is well if the prejudices be not turned
the other way, and that the ancientnesse of an opinion, the multitude of
professors, the quality of them, the greatness of their learning and parts,
the favor it may find in the world, be not the great prejudices which may
hinder from the closing with it. God has often times in providence smiled upon
an error, and discountenanced a truth, and he may please to let the truth
find favor, and error be discountenanced. We look for those days, when
God shall make Kings nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers to his Church, when
the Kingdoms of the earth shall become the Lords and his Christ's: this is
promised, and therefore this should be no prejudice, when God does bring it
about, to hinder us from the entertainment of an opinion. If you would find
out truth, beware of prejudice on any side, and look singly upon the opinion
without any other respects at all.

3. Beware of being biased with carnal and corrupt affections; most men of
the world are carried with byasses, rather then with principles; they are moved
rather by affections then judgment, by things without them, rather then
principles within them.

There are four great Byasses which carry most men in the world.

1. The first Byas is, the love of the world, which is a strong byas. There are
too many that stand as the people in the Marketplace, who would not go into
the vineyard, till they were hired: so they are not willing to entertain an
opinion, embrace a way, till they can see what it can do for them; they must
be hired with filthy lucre, and will do nothing till they see what will be
most advantageous: God keep us from such a spirit! He who does not see truth
all riches, shall never be the possessour of it, such a man will see nothing to
be truth or error, but what may stand with his own ends, his secular
advantages. As they used to say of a corrupt Judge, he had Bos in lingua, he
had money in his tongue, and being bribed would say any thing: So J may say of
a worldly man, he has bos in cord, the world in his heart, and he will not
close with, or embrace any thing, but what may stand with his advantages; where
there is the love of the world, Caeterae cupiditates ingenti cupiditati
subservient.
there is desire to get the world, and fear to lose the world, and such a man
will make all to serve his main corruption. You see the desire of gain, it made
Judas to sell Christ, Demas forsake Christ, he forsook Christ, and did cleave
to this present world. Hence Christ says, Joh. 5.44. Joh. 5.44.
How can you believe, so long as you seek honor one from another, and do not
seek that honor, which is from God only? And the fear of losing the world made
the Jews deny Christ, and reject him: If we entertain him, say they, the
Romans will come and take away our place and Nation. Men that love the world
they will do any thing to get, and any thing rather then hazard and lose that
they love so dearly. Hence, Jam. 4.4. If you love the world, the love of the
Father is not in you; he that will be a friend to the world is an enemy to God,
and it is upon this ground, because if ever God and the world come in
competition, he will forsake God and cleave to the present world.

2. A second byas, is popular applause: men naturally love to be some body,
there is no man that would willingly stand as it were for a Cipher. Every man,
with Simon Magus, would be given out to be some great one: and when men cannot
be taken notice on in a crowd, they will be singular. As this may be a ground,
why many do deliver an opinion to difference themselves from others in esteem,
by differing themselves from others in judgment: So it may be a ground why
others entertain and receive an opinion, to difference themselves from others
by their practice, to be thought more singular, more holy, more conscientious;
they are men only accounted conscientious which differ from others, alas they
think that others take all upon trust, and are of the State-religion, and close
with any way; and therefore think they, if J will be accounted singular, if J
will be esteemed indeed conscientious and religious above others, I must
difference my self from others, and oftentimes where there is least holiness,
they will be most, forward to go this way, to gain an esteem of holiness; men
that cannot get an esteem of holiness by their practice; they may labor to
get an esteem by their opinion; J do not say any do so, but certainly men may
do so, which is a fearful spirit: these make but Religion serviceable to
worldly ends; Godliness advantageous to their own gain; which certainly is the
worst of spirits: and that is the second.

A third byas which carries many, and of which you had need to beware is,

3. Compliancies correspondencies, or engagements to friends, who are this or
that way, or of this or that opinion. And we know by experience that this has
been a strong byas. As disaffection to persons, has wrought a distance and
dislike of the opinions they hold, and the ways they walk in: so affection and
love to persons, has too much persuaded with many to the entertainment and
embracing of their opinions also. A man looks upon such and such friends, such
to whom he stands thus and thus related, it may be a father, a son, a
brother, a husband, a wife, etc. or such to whom he is so and so engaged, or
such upon whom he has such and such dependences, and they are of this or that
opinion; and this comes in, either as a great motive to close with the same,
that so they may be rendered more acceptable and grateful to them, or it
stands as an obstacle to hinder their closings with what is contrary to them.
We should not indeed know either father or mother, husband or wife, son or
daughter in the cause of God.

As we are to slight all interests and relations, if they stand not with God,
if they walk in a way of error: our engagements to God must drown all other
engagements, our relations to him must swallow up all other relations to the
creature: though they are dear, yet God is dearer: so we are to wave all
interests and relations in the finding out and entertainment of truth. It was
David's spirit, Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, magis amica veritas.
Whom have I in heaven but thee, and in earth I desire in comparison of thee?
We are neither to be frighted into error, nor bribed into truth, we should
take in our opinions by judgment, not by affections; by revelation from God,
not by relation to the creature: if our interests, or relations, or engagements
and dependencies, do come in, while we are in the disquisition and search of
truth, we shall find them great byasses, either to carry us to the embracing
of error, or rejection of truth, or if neither of them, yet to the blind
reception of truth: the Apostle tells us, he did not consult with flesh and
blood, but was obedient to the heavenly vision, implying, that if he had
consulted with flesh and blood, he had not been obedient: so, if you consult
with your flesh and blood, with your relations, friends, engagements, either
you will not be obedient, or you will yield a blind obedience to the heavenly
vision; a man may entertain an error honestly, and receive truth corruptly; he
that entertains an error singly and simply, without being biased with corrupt
affections, does entertain it honestly; but he that receives a truth, being
biased with interests and engagements, etc. does receive it corruptly.

If you would find out truth, beware of being biased by friends, relations,
dependencies, engagements in the disquisition and search of it; let your
relations to truth swallow up all other relations, otherwise you will sinfully
embrace an error, or blindely and corruptly entertain a truth. It will be ten
thousand times better for him, who is honest in an error, then for thee, who
art corrupt in the truth.

4. A fourth great byas, which is all the rest in one, is self. Self is not
only the principle which works in most men, but it is also a byas in working.
It is a master wheel to set men on work, and it is as oil to the wheels to keep
on working: it was the great prayer of Augustine, A me ipso me libera, Domine.
Good Lord deliver me from my self, and it may well be ours; if self
interpose, you will never find out error, nor discover truth. Self-aims,
self ends, self-advantages will blind our eyes from beholding truth or error:
if self reign in any man, truth shall never command there, because the laws of
truth, and the ends of self are inconsistent one with another: if self keep the
door, it will admit and let in nothing that may be d^structive to it. It will
do by opinions, as men do at the gates of a City, enquire whether they be
friends or enemies, before they let them in; and if upon enquiry they be found
to be such, as will not correspond with their selfish ends and principles, they
will do by them, as Elisha did by Ahabs messenger, shut the door, and hold them
fast there, because they apprehend the sound of the Masters f^et behind; they
apprehend that the entertainment of such a truth, will be destructive to their
selfish aims and ends. If ever you would find out truth you must learn to deny
your selves, you must be content to sacrifice all to the obedience of truth,
you must be content to give up your sins, as a snare, and your selves as a
sacrifice for the enjoyment of it: he that sees not truth more riches then all
riches, he that prizeth not truth above riches, friends, the world, he shall
never be a true owner of it: Indeed he may own it, but never be true owner of
it; he may own it as a servant, and make use of it so far as it may be
serviceable, but he will never own it as a Master, to which he makes all
serviceable. Many love to command truth, but few to be commanded by truth; many
love to be master of it, but they will not be mastered by it: they look upon
truth, as we look upon fire and water, to be good servants, but bad Masters;
and therefore as they entertain it, when it may serve them; so they can
disclaim it, when they are to serve it. I see a deal of self in the world, both
in the setting on foot, and in the entertaining and maintaining of opinions:
nothing would be so great a check to error, nor open so free a course for
truth, as the removing of this great obstacle of self out of the way, let it be
all our prayers (we had never more cause) Good Lord deliver us from our selves.
Let not self interpose it self either in the venting, the searching, the
entertainment, or rejecting of opinions, lest we close with errors, and deny
the truth. And so much shall serve for the third Caution: I will be brief in
the rest.

If you would find out truth, Caut. 4.
beware of wilfulness and perverseness of spirit: we are oftentimes too
stubborn in error, and too easy in the truth; we are I say too facile in the
truth, and too tenacious in error; and though there be no reason why we should
be so, yet there is great reason why we are so; error, you know error has
more agreement with us then truth; it is more suitable to our natures, and our
tempers, and therefore we do more strongly adhere to it; besides, it may be an
error may be the birth of our own hearts, a brat of our own breeding and
bringing forth, and we love our own. It is more easy to deny the births of our
body, then the births of our souls; it is more easy for a man to deny his
natural affections, then his sensual affections; sin is more our selves,
then our substance is, and there is much to heighten the difficulty. Certainly
it is an act of great self-emptying for a man to recede from, and deny what he
has sweat for, what he has brought forth with a great deal of pains, and
handed to others under the most lovely and receptible notions of truth, and
has perhaps gotten a great deal of honor, of applause, of gain thereby. I say
it is hard for such a man to deny himself in such opinions. There is no man
would be accounted either weak or wicked, either a deceiver or a fool, now he
knows he shall run the censure of one of the two, either men will look upon him
as wicked, and a deceiver, one that has been an impostor and seducer; or else,
they will look on him as weak and simple. And the present height of esteem,
which the opinion has raised him up unto, does heighten the act of his
self-denial, and make it more difficult for him to become nothing; we have
need to beware of such a spirit, men have taken too much liberty in our days
to vent themselves, and it may be have drawn many disciples after them; they
have gotten much applause, and much honor by being singular; none indeed have
more esteem amongst many, then they whose hearts are the forges of novelties:
It is a sad thing, Oh! but take heed of being perverse in your way, learn to
deny your selves, and judge it your honor to be conquered by truth. It is
greater honor to be the spoil of truth, then to carry the trophies of error;
a greater honor to be a servant, a vassal to truth, then to be a King in
error. And with that I shall shut up the Cautions. We shall now come to the
Directions, whereby you may be able to find out truth in these days, wherein
error abounds.

Direct. 1
1. Consult impartially and diligently with the Word of God, and God in the
Word. There is much in this first Direction.

It is indeed the main of all, and therefore we shall speak the more largely to
it.

The Word of God is held by all the touchstone to try and discover opinions,
the mine where truth lies, the mint of doctrine, the orb, out of which truth
shines, the casket, wherein this jewel is locked up, the Star, by which we
must sail, if we would be preserved from those rocks and shelves, which
otherwise we are in danger to split our selves upon.

1. But then, 1. The Word of God must be consulted withal; the Star will be
no guide, if we do not eye it; nor will the Word be any direction, if we do
not consult with it: we must then consult with the Word, which has relation to
the understanding, for the affections are not to intermeddle in the finding out
of truth.

2. And secondly, we must consult impartially, that is, without prejudice,
without prepossession, without byassing, without sinister affections, without
corrupt aims and ends, consult impartially, as men desirous to know, and
resolved to do. It was the fault of the Israelites, they desired Jeremy to
enquire what was the mind of God, but they were pre-resolved before what to
do, Optimus lector est, qui dictoru^ intelligentiam expectat, ex dictis potius
quam imponat, and retulerit magis quam attulerit. Hillar. Non enim sensum, que^
extrinsecus attuleris alienum and extraneum debetis, sed ex Scripturis sens^m
capere veritatis. Morton. Apol Cath. p. ^ l. 5. c. 9. de Scr. jud.
and therefore when Jeremy brought them a message contrary to their minds and
pre-resolutions, they rejected it, and said in plain terms they would not obey
the Word of the Lord which he had spoken: So many they enquire into the Word,
but not with impartialnesse of spirit, they are men pre-resolved, and rather
enquire to strengthen their own resolutions, and pre-possessions, and
engagements, then as naked, single inquisitours, to know and obey the mind of
God revealed; this is the doubleness of spirit in men; these do not enquire
Gods mind, but enquire to strengthen their own mind; they are resolved of
their way, and rather search to fortify themselves in their pre-resolutions,
then to alter their resolutions according to Gods discoveries. Take heed of
such a spirit. Consult, but consult impartially, as men that do apprehend it
their happiness to know the good and acceptable will of God.

3. Consult diligently. Wisdom is a treasure that must be dug for, as the
wiseman tells you, and so is truth; and I may say of one, as he of the other,
Then shall you find it, if you digg for it as for hidden treasure: You have
another promise for that, Hos. 6.3. Then shall you know, if you follow on to
know the Lord; where ever the Antecedent duty was ever truly done, the
consequent privilege was never denied. A man may with Pilate ask what is
truth; and with him never be the wiser; he asks rather out of complement,
then out of affections to be resolved. And a man may enquire overtly and
remisly, and yet never know: but he that does enquire diligently and
industriously, that diggeth for it, as for hid treasure, shall surely find.
Truth is a treasure, it is the choicest treasure upon earth, and treasures must
be dug for; and there was never any that dug, but he found, Nunquam Pauli
sensum ingredieris, nisi Pauli spiritum imbiberl^. Bernard.
at lest so much treasure of truth, as was needful for glory and for grace.

4. You must consult with God in the Word, not only with the Word of God, but
with God in the Word. As one says of Paul's Epistles, Thou shall never attain
to the right sense of Paul's Epistles, till thou drink of Paul's spirit: so thou
shall never know the mind of God in Scripture, till thou consult with God in
Scripture. Indeed you may know the history of Scripture, but not the mystery
of it; you shall read the words, but you shall not know the mind of Christ, as
the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 2. ult. till you consult with God and the Spirit of
Christ in the Word; it is he only that must unfold his own meaning, enlighten
his own Word, reveal his own truth, otherwise thou will be dark in the midst of
light, and ignorant under all the discoveries of wisdom, as the Apostle sets
it down at large, 1 Cor. 2.7, 8, 9. and 14, 15, 16. And this is our first
direction, if you would find out truth, Consult impartially and diligently
with the Word of God, and God in the Word.

Scriptura seipsam no^ interpretatur, quia varios ens^^ praebet. Bellarm
Obj. But you will say, though it be granted the Word is the supreme Judge, yet
the Scripture is capable of many and diverse senses, and we see diverse
interpretations of them, one holds forth this to be the sense of Scripture,
another holds forth another clean contrary; and therefore, How should we know
what is the right sense of Scripture?

Answ. 1. I answer, first the diverse senses the Scripture does receive, they
are not from the Scriptures themselves, but from us, they are rather different
senses put upon it, then given by it; that diversity of senses, is not from the
spirit inspiring, but from the persons enquiring: it is the ignorance and
perverseness of men, who wrest Scripture to their own condemnation.

Morton. Apo. Cath. p. ^. l. 5. c. 9 Consul. Whitak. de mediis inveniendi,
veru^ Scripturae sensum. Contro 1 q. 5. c. 9. p. 361.
2. But secondly, though men give diverse senses of Scripture, yet God has not
left us without some helps and means whereby we may come to the knowledge what
is the right sense of Scripture. Some of the Papists, they set down four ways,
whereby we might come to the right sense of Scripture. 1. Regula fidei, the
rule of faith. 2. Praxis Ecclesiae, the custom of the Church. 3. Patrum
consentiens interpretatio, the agreement of Fathers. 4. Conciliorum praescripta
and decreta, etc. the decrees of Councels: this seems passing fair, it is a
wonder they yield to thus much: but if this be examined to the bottom, I fear
you will see the Pope to lie hid under all this; so that the issue would be,
that he is the only unerring interpreter of Scripture: for they say, 1. 1.
Regula fidei est quam Papa probat. 2. Praxis ecclesiae est quam Papa servat. 3.
Patrum interpretatio est qua^ Papa ^equitur. 4 Concilio^um definitio est qua^
Papa confirmat. Whitak. cont. 1 q 5. c 12. page 365. Consul. Whitak. cont. 1.
q. 5. c. 9. p. 361. Theologus quidam dixit se orando magis quam studendo ac
legendo in cognitione Scripturaru a profecisse: Orationi lectio, and lectioni
succedat oration. Jerome. In versionum rivulis non est haerendum, sed ipsi
Scripturarum fontes adeundi sunt. Whit. Pax in terra hominibus bo^ae
voluntatis. (...) nunquam significat liberum hominis arbitrium, sed gratuitam
Dei erga homines benevolentia^ Whit. Consul. Whitak. loc. cit.
That is the rule of faith, which the Pope approves on. And, 2. That is the
practice of the Church, which the Pope retains. 3. And that is the
interpretation of Fathers, which the Pope does follow. 4. And that is the
determination of Councels, which the Pope does confirm; so that in the issue of
all, faith is resolved into him alone. But we will leave them and their ways
unto themselves. God, I say, has not left us without ways and helps whereby
we may come to understand the right sense of Scripture. Among many I shall lay
down these eight several ways, for the finding out the right sense of the
word.

Med. 1. The first and the great means is, prayer. Prayer is the key which
opens the hidden things of God. It is Gods direction, If any lack wisdom, let
him ask it of God, who gives liberally, and upbraideth not, Jam. 1.5. As he
forgives and does not upbraid with the injury: so he gives, and does not
upbraid with the courtesy; It is but ask and have, Mat. 7. It was Gods
direction, and it has been the Saints practice, Open mine eyes (says David)
that I may understand the wonderful things of thy Law. And if he had cause to
pray, how much more have we; you read and understand not, because you do not
pray; if you would profit more, you must pray more; Go therefore unto him, who
has the keys of David, and opens and no man shuts, and desire him to open
and reveal his mind to thee. We read, in Dan. 2 28. that Christ is said to
reveal mysteries; go to him and desire him who reveals mysteries, that he
would open and reveal the mysteries of his Word to you; desire him to unclasp
this book, beg of him to take the veil from thy heart, the scales from thy
eyes, that thou may understand the wonders of the Law, the mysteries of the
Gospel, you have a promise, that you shall all be taught of God, Joh. 6. Turn
this promise into a prayer, and desire him who only can teach, that he would
teach thee.

A second way whereby we may be enabled to find the true sense of Scripture,
is, to acquaint our selves with, and enquire into the original languages of
Scripture: the knowledge of them, as it is great establishment unto many
truths: So it would be the confutation of many errors; take an instance or
two, Luke 2.14. Glory to God on high, on earth peace, good will toward men;
the Vulgar latin reads this clause, Peace on earth to men of good will; and
hereupon the Papists do establish the doctrine of free will: now from the
original they are easily confuted, for there it is (...) which does ever
signify the free grace of God, and it is never used for the free will of man.
And so some of the Papists grant: take another instance, Ephesians. 2.10. For we are
his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works. The Vulgar latin
reads it, we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus in good works; hence
the Papists do gather, that we are justified by good works: but by the
original they are easily confuted, for (...) in that place signifies to, not,
in, and so must be read, Unto good works, not in good works: so it is said,
that the Church of Jerusalem, consisting of above 8000, were but one particular
Congregation, and it is gathered from that, Act. 2.1. (...), etc. which they
render, in one place, but compare that with Act. 4.26, 27. where you have the
same words after used, but yet it is not meant or a Convention of persons in
one place, but a consent of minds in the same thing. But so much for the
second.

A third means: we are to consider in the perusal of Scripture, what speeches
are proper, and what are figurative: when words are to be taken figuratively,
they are not to be interpreted properly. Miserabilis servitus est animae signa
pro rebus accipere. Aug.
That is a miserable servitude, to interpret those speeches properly, which are
spoken figuratively: the great quarrel that is between us and the Papists
about transubstantiation, it does arise from those words, This is my body,
which they interprer properly, and they should be taken figuratively. Origin,
who in other places was much for allegories, yet he understood that literally,
which was to be taken mystically. And it is to be feared, as the taking of the
literal in an Allegorical sense, was his sin: So the taking of a figurative
in a literal, was his punishment. But how should we know what is to be taken
literally and properly, and what to be taken figuratively and by way of
Allegory? Hence the

4. The fourth means, we are to look upon the scope, Ille qui cor habet leget
superiora, and inferiora, and inveniet sensum. Aug. Ad cruendam Scripturarum
interpretationem, dog na tatissime patens hoc erit, loca clariota consulere,
and antecedentia, and consequentia perpendere, Greg. Tales homines qui suis
meritis confidunt, merito ad legem ama^dantur, ut sic, quantum a perfecta
justitia absunt, in elligant. Morton. Apol. Cathol. p. 2. l. 5 c. ^ Nihil fere
in Scrip uris obscurum est, quod non alibi planissime dictum reperiatur. Aug.
Non modo similes loci cum similibus, sed dissimiles etiam cun dissimilibas
conferend^. Ista verba figurat^e intellegenda atque interpretanda, qua alioqui
s^elus and flagitium praeciperent. Aug. l 3. de do Christ c. 16. Omnes nostrae
expositiones debent Analogiae fidei convenire, (...) Ista analogia nihil aliud
est, quam constans and perpetua sententia Scripturae, in apertis and minime
obscuris locis Scripturae.
the end, the matter the circumstances, viz. of persons, place, time, and to
attend to the antecedents and the consequents. And by this means it will
neither be difficult to refute many errors, nor to clear many truths. For
instance, 1 Pet. 4.8. the Apostle says, charity shall cover the multitude of
sins, hence the Papists infer, that charity has power of taking away sin,
and justifying us before God, and therefore say they, we are not justified by
faith only. Now if we consider the occasion, the scope, the antecedent and the
consequence, and other circumstances, we shall find the Apostle does not speak
of a charity, which does justify us before God, I know none such, but of a
brotherly charity one toward another: why, how shall we know that? I answer,
by the context, because before he said, Have fervent charity among your selves;
and compare this with Prove. 10.12. whence Peter had it, and there you shall see
it plain, Hatred stirs up strife, but love covers all sins. The like
instance might be alleged from Matthew. 19.17. If thou will enter into life,
keep the Commandments. Hence the Papists say, we are justified by works; but in
the mean time they do not attend the man to whom Christ speaks: It was to one
leaning and resting upon his own righteousness, and puffed up with pride, that
he should be saved by his own obedience, and therefore Christ to convince him
and empty him of that frothy opinion he turns him to the Law, not to be
justified and saved, but to be convinced and self-condemned, that he might look
for righteousness in another.

5 M. One place is to be compared with another, possibly in one place the sense
is very dark, and we do not understand it: then it is our work to compare
that more dark place, with such places as are more plain, and by that you
shall find the sense: to give you an instance of that, 2 Jam. 21. where it is
said, Abraham was justified by works, it seems obscure, but compare this with
the 4 Romans 2. by that you shall understand it, there it is said that Abraham
was not justified by works: And he gives this reason of it, for if Abraham
were justified by works, then he had whereof to boast; and James therefore
speaks of a declarative justification, or a justification before men: and Paul,
of a justification in the sight of God, as is usually and truly answered, thus
by comparing of Scripture with Scripture, the truth is discovered and found
out. That is the fifth way.

6 M. In comparing of places, remember these two particulars. First compare
like places with like, viz. 6. Joh 53. with this, Joh. 4.14. that water is
spiritual, and the way of drinking is spiritual, and there is the same reason
for eating; the way of eating Christ's flesh, is also a spiritual eating; so
16. Matthew. 19. with the 18. Matthew. 17. Ioh. 20.21. So that 6. Act. the choice
of deacons: It is to be expounded by the 1. Deuteronomy, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. where you
have the same occasion. It was too hard for Moses, and you have almost the same
qualifications of the persons. So 1. Cor. 5. the casting out of the incestuous
person. It may be best expounded by 13. Deuteronomy. 5, 8, 9. where you read the
seducer to idolatry was to be killed: which is not to be meant as if every
particular man were to do it, this had been murder; but there must be
processus judicialis; it was actus judicialis, and all this secundum allegata
and probata, they were first to complain, then the Judge was to inquire and to
sentence, then the people were to lay their hands on him, they were to join in
execution of the sentence, and willing r^jection and casting him out. Many
others might be named, but I shall wave them, and come to the second.

2. As you compare like places with like, so unlike places with unlike, viz. 6.
Ioh. 53. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink this blood, you
have no life in you: whence the Papists gather a corporal feeding; now compare
this with the sixth Commandment, Thou shall not kill, if it be such a fault to
kill, much more is it to eat and devour a man, as Papists do conclude by their
doctrine: Hence Aug. says, those words ought to be interpreted figuratively,
otherwise they had required a horrible sin of us.

7 M. All our expositions should agree with the Analogy of faith, which you
read of 12. Romans 6. Prophecy according to the proportion of faith; now the
Analogy of faith is nothing else, but the constant and perpetual sentence of
Scripture, in the cleerest places of it: of which sort are the Articles of
faith, the Lords Prayer, the ten Commandments; and what ever is repugnant to
this is a false exposition: now for instance, that exposition, this is my body,
by which Papists interpret, this bred is changed into my body; the Lutherans
they say the body of Christ is under this bread: both these are false, they
differ from the Analogy of faith.

1. That tells us Christ had a body like ours, and such a body as cannot lie
under the accidents of bread, or be together with it.

2. The Analogy of faith says, Christ is in Heaven, therefore not in a box
with them.

3. Consul. Whitak. Cont. 1. q. 5 c. 9.
It says Christ shall not come from Heaven till judgment: therefore not from
the box, nor can the words of the Priest, who styles himself Creator creatoris
sui, make him. So the Papists say we are justified by works, this is also
contrary to the Analogy of faith, because in the Lords Prayer we beg for
pardon, which shows remission an act of grace, not debt.

8 M. Because we are weak and not able to use these means, therefore we ought
to make use of the best helps, reading, hearing, meditating, conferring
together, with the comments and expositions of the best and most orthodox. Sed
vide^dum interim ne nimium illis tribuamus, neve putemus illorum
interpretationes recipiendas esse, quia sunt ab illis profectae. Whitak. ibid.
Esek. 43.10.11.
But in this take heed of tying your faith to men, give not too much, be
content to take in the light of others, but do not shut your own eyes, and
give up your selves wholly to be guided by them: And if you use these means
impartially, plainly, without prejudice, you shall be enabled to find out the
mind of God, so far as concerns your everlasting peace. And that is the
first direction.

2. Di. Get an humble heart, God has said he reveals his secrets to the
humble, the humble shall know his ways. God will break his mind to the
broken in heart, that is the way to find out any truth in general, and this
or that particular truth in controversy: you see this in the 43. Ezekiel. 10, 11.
Show unto the house of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their iniquities,
and then show them the pattern. And God grant we may be an humbled people:
certainly it is the way to find out the truth of God in these times of error

3. Di. Labor to be renewed in the spirit of your mind: That is another
direction.

An unrenewed man shall never know the mind of God, God will not reveal his
will to those, who will do their own. This is that the Apostle lays down as a
preparation, before he did reveal some points to them, Romans 12.2. Romans 12.2.
Be not conformed to the world, but be ye renewed in the spirit of your mind,
that ye may prove what is that good, that acceptable and perfect will of God:
where you see the Apostle lays down this as a necessary antecedent before we
can know, viz. the change of the heart, and the renovation of the mind.

4. Get a heart prepared for the entertainment of the truth of God upon any
terms.

A heart that may value more of one truth of God then a world: a heart that
esteems truth honor, truth riches, truth friends, truth to be all. A heart
that cannot deny it self in these things for truth, or a heart biased and
drawn aside by carnal respects, etc. will never find out any truth of God.
Sin in the affection causes darkness in the understanding, a corrupt heart
will breed a corrupt head, etc. sin in the affection breeds error and
darkness in the understanding.

Truth is simple, and none but a simple heart is fit to close with it;
doublenes of spirit will never close with singlenes of truth, etc.

5. Enquire diligently, search to find out Gods mind in this. When men will
take pains in searching, God will show mercy in revealing; Then shall you
know, if you follow on to know the Lord, says the prophet, Hose. 6.3. Hos. 6.3.
Most men walk in the way of their fathers, and never enquire whether it be
according to God, yea or no. And some men, with Pilate, they will slightly
enquire what is truth, but will not take pains to find it. And some there are,
who, with the young man in the Gospel, when they hear it, they will turn
their backs on it, either it will not stand with their profits or pleasures,
and such shall never be professors of truth.

6. Walk answerable to those manifestations you have, walk in conformity to
that measure you have received. As it was with talents, so here; Talents not
improved, instead of increasing them they were taken away: he that will not do
what he knows, shall not in time know what to do. If then God reveal any
point of his mind to you in any thing, beware lest either carnal fear, or
carnal respects do cause you to smother the notions of God, or detayne the
truth of God in unrighteousnes.

Let your practice come up to your light, let your walking be as large as your
knowing. And when God sees us faithful in a little, then will he reveal more
to us; when he sees you walk up to the light which he has made known, then
will he reveal his whole mind to you.

David was a man that God would reveal his will unto, and he was a man ready
to do all the will of God, Act. 14. And you have a plain Scripture for this,
Phil. 3.15. Let us therefore as many as be perfect, that is, upright, be thus
minded, and if in any thing you be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even
this unto you: nevertheless, whereto we have attained, let us walk by the
same rule, let us mind the same thing. And so much shall serve for the fifth
great Quaery: I have stood long upon it, because it is of such main
concernment, I have yet another which is of great moment also, and I have then
done with this discourse.

The sixth and last Quaery is this: viz.

Quest. 6. What ways God has left us in his Word for the suppressing of
error, and reducing of erroneous persons?

A Question certainly of great concernment: among all the contentions of the
times, I know none of greater concernment then this, viz. What are the
boundaries of opinions?

It were a sad thing, as our case stands, if there were no bounds for errors,
and as fearful a thing to go beyond Gods bounds for the suppressing of them.
Certainly there are some means warranted and anointed of God for such ends, but
what those means are, and where they are to be bounded, there is all the
controversy.

I find learned and godly men differing each from other in this point, and
Augustinus retractavit pristinam sententiam fuam, qua existimavit, contra
haereticos n^hil vi agen^um esse. Aug. retract l 2. cap. 2.5. and Epist. 48, 50.
some also differing from themselves, afterward retracting what formerly they
have held forth for truth in this point, witness Augustines retractations.

Indeed it is a tender point, it concerns the conscience, a tender part,
against which who that has any thing of God in him, but trembles to sin, and
who does not fear to injure and offend? It is a point of great subtilty which
most cannot discern, there are many labyrinths, many winding subtilties in it;
and it is of no less intricacy, having many other subtle and intricate
disputes complicated and folded up in it.

Two of the main subtilties are founded upon those two places of Scripture,
one, the 2 Cor. 13.12. We know but in part, the other, Romans 14.23. What ever is
not of faith is sin. From both which it is argued, We know but in part: There
will be difference in opinions, these opinions have power on the conscience,
for what ever a man has received he is bound to walk in it, and who ever
recedes from what he has received for truth, either for fear, or for favor,
he sins against his conscience, For what ever is not of faith is sin.
Again, we know but in part, therefore no Councels on earth are infallible; if
not, then may they err; if they may err, it is certainly our duty to try and
prove their determinations before we do approve them; if our duty to try them,
then it is our duty to assent or dissent to them, as those determinations shall
appear to us to be consonant or dissonant to the Word of God: and if it be our
duty to assent or dissent, as those results and determinations shall be
evidenced to us to be, or not to be of God; then how can it be the duty of any
to compel us to the contrary, or to punish us for the doing of that which is
our duty. It is a controversy full of subtilties and intricacies, and it is
diversely asserted, and as differently maintained, according to the different
apprehensions, principles, interests and engagements of men. Some cry up
liberty for all opinions. Others, and most, decry that. Some would have a
toleration or an allowance for lesser differences only. Others do rather
desire an accommodation, then a toleration, and that differences may rather be
healed and composed, then allowed, and tolerated among us. Men are diverse in
their thoughts, their thoughts being for the most part diversified, according
to the proportions and latitudes of their differences in opinions, from
general received truths. Men of lesser difference in opinion, pleading only
for a merciful allowance of some. Those of wider difference contending for a
liberty of all opinions. To both which we shall speak something in the
following discourse. For the present, let us return to our Question propounded,
viz. What ways God has l^ft us in his Word, for the suppressing of error,
and reducing of erroneous persons.

For the answer to which we shall in brief comprize those ways under two
general heads:

1. Ecclesiastical.

2. Civil. Both which we shall clear to be warranted and allowed of God, to
these ends, viz. The suppressing of error, and the reducing of erroneous
persons. We shall begin with the first.

1. First then there are some means ecclesiastical, which God has warranted
for these ends. And herein we shall find few to differ from us, most
concurring in this, that God has warranted some means in his Church for this
end, though indeed there is some dispute what those means are; but there needs
nor any among us, for we freely concur with any, that those means which God
has appointed in his Church, are of a spiritual nature and influence; we
utterly cast out and abominate all corporal or crumenall mulcts, and say the
Church has no power to punish the body, or to lay fines upon the estate, or to
deal with men at all, as they stand in any civil or worldly respects. The
Church of Christ owns no such weapons in her warfare: Gregor. de V^lent. in m,
^ae, disp. 1. q. 11. punct. 3. Azor. instit moral. Tom. 1. l. 8. c. 14.
It is for the man of sin to propagate his way, and suppress his adversaries
with such fleshie weapons. The Church of Christ knows not how to use any
external violence or outward force, either to advance truth, or suppress
error: though the Church be in readiness to revenge all disobedience, as the
Apostle says, 2 Cor. 10.6. 2 Cor. 10.6.
yet not by such carnal weapons in such fleshie ways, as these are. Christ
tells us that his Kingdom is not of this world. And the Apostle tells us, 2
Cor. 10.3, 4, 5. 2 Cor. 10.3, 4, 5.
The weapons of our warfare, they are not carnal, but spiritual, and mighty
through God for the pulling down of strongholds, and bringing every thought in
obedience to Christ. So that spiritual means and remedies, are only to be
used in the kingdom of Christ, the Church of God: For all other

1. They are improper, not only in respect of the persons that are to u^e them,
but improper in their own nature. And that because,

1. They are external means, and those are too short for internal maladies.

2. Besides, they are heterogeneall; they are diversi generis, of a diverse and
different kind, the one carnal, the other spiritual; the object of one, the
body, the estate; of the other, the soul and conscience.

2. And secondly, these were never ordained, never appointed of God for such
ends in his Church. We cannot exp^ct Gods blessing upon any thing, further then
it has Gods ordination. Now these were never ordained and anointed of Christ,
as means to be used in his Church and Kingdom, for such an end, and therefore
there can be no blessing expected on them.

3. Besides, these means are unsuitable to the ends to which they are intended;
fleshie means are unsuitable to bring about spiritual ends, the end of all
Church Ordinances are not ruin, but amendment; not destruction, but
edification, as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 13.10. and Chap. 10.8.
2 Cor. 13.10. God has given us this power for edification, not for
destruction; the end of Church-Ordinances and administrations, are not so much
to punish sin, as to reform the sinner; not to punish men's evil, as to make
them good, Zanch. de discip. Eccles.
as Zanchy sets it down excellently in his Tractate, de discip. Eccles. where
he would show the difference between the end of civil and ecclesiastical or
Church censure, the end of this last is not the punishment of sin, but the
salvation of the sinner, the edification of the Church, the glory of God: But
the scope of the other, is to punish sin it self, neither does it look to the
salvation or damnation of the offender, nay, though the sinner repent, yet the
Magistrate is not to spare, but to punish him for his offense committed. But
now the Church does not punish, though the person have sinned, unless he be
obstinate, and impenitent, nor is her punishment for death, but life and
salvation, and upon repentance the sinner is again received into the bosom of
the Church. So that you see, here is a vast difference between the one and the
other.

4. Let me further add to this, that as these outward means are unsuitable, so
they are unserviceable and insufficient to these ends, for which they are
pretended to be used; instead of humbling men, and reforming men, they provoke
men, harden men, and make them more averse to reformation: thus God blasts
those means which are not of his own ordination; the spirit will only work with
his own tools; he will only concur with his own means and Ordinances: and
seeing these are not so, it can never be expected that such means which are of
a different kind from the spiritual kingdom of Christ, should ever produce
and bring forth such effects as are proper only to that heavenly kingdom,
carnal fl^shly means cannot produce and bring about divine and spiritual
ends; it is beyond their sphere, out of their power, they were never anointed
of God to those ends, nor can they ever be serviceable to produce them: So that
we shall willingly and cheerfully agree with any in this, Discplina
ec^lesiastica nihil statuit in hominum bona jura, dignitates, fortunas, sed
poena quae clavium potestate infligitur spirituali^ est, and que hominem
internum, and sp rituale ejus statu^ concernit. Apol. Ius. magist. circa sacra
c Exam. 4. page 109. Mat. 18.1^
that the Church has no power over the bodies, the estates, the rights,
privileges, honors and dignities of men; Nor upon any offense what ever does
their power extend to the punishing, limiting, or depriving them in any of
these.

But now, though these are not the ways and weapons of the Church, yet she
has ways, she has weapons, and these warranted, nay ordained of God for
these ends, viz. to suppress error, and reduce erroneous persons. And these
Church means we will comprize under these three general heads.

Some are Fraternall. Pastoral. Judicial.


We will begin with the first, viz.

1. The fraternall or brotherly means, and that is set down, in Mat. 18.15.
Moreover, if thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault
between thee and him alone, where by trespassing is not meant personal and
civil injuries, as some have thought, and I shall show anon, but spiritual
scandals and offenses: and those not only such as are scandals in life, but
such also as are scandals in opinion, unless you will say a man's life is a
scandal, but his doctrine, be it what it will, is not scandalous to us. So
that this is the first way to deal with an erroneous person; we are to go to
him, if we take offense at his doctrine, tell him of his error, convince him
of it, exhort him from it; if this will not do, rebuke him, and reprove him
for it: this we are commanded to do, to exhort one another, and admonish one
another, etc. and if we neglect this duty, we are said to hate our brother, as
God interprets it, Levit. 19.17. Lev 19.17.
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke
him, and not suffer sin upon him, which holds true in error in opinion, as
well as sin in conversation. And this is one way which God has ordained to
deal with erroneous persons, which has been very successful to turn many an
one from the error of this way, as might be evidenced in many examples both of
Primitive and later times, if it were needful. But we w^ll come to the second.

2. A second kind of means which God has set up in the Church for the
suppressing of error, and reducing of erroneous persons, is Pastoral. God
has set up, warranted and enabled a Ministry for this end to publish the
doctrine of truth, and to detect, discover, discountenance and decry erroneous
doctrine and opinions; they are to watch over your souls, and if they see any
root of bitterness to arise, any corrupt doctrine to break forth, to set
themselves against it, to disc^ver it to you, warn you of it, and if any of
their people are in danger to be drawn away, to labor to settle them, and
establish them in the truth: if any are carried away, to labor to reduce them,
by discovering their error, convincing them of it, admonishing, exhorting,
rebuking, charging them in a Pastoral way, and to wait with all patience, if
God will please to reclaim them. And this you see was the Apostles injunction.
and their practice, as you may gather, 1 Timothy 1.2, 3. 1 Timothy 1.2, 3.
1 Timothy 4.11. 1 Timothy 4.11.
and especially, 2 Timothy 4.2, 3, 4 5. 2 Timothy 4.2, 3, 4, 5.
Preach the Word, be instant in season, and out of season, reprove, rebuke,
exhort with all long-suffering and doctrine: For the time will come when they
will not endure sound doctrine -- So, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25.
The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt to
teach, patient, in meekness, instructing those that oppose themselves; if God
peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledgement of the truth, and
that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil, who are taken
captive at his will. I will only add another, Tit. 1.9, 10, 11. Holding fast
the faithful word, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 6, 11. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.
as he has been taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine, both to exhort
and convince the gainsayers, for there are many unruly, vain talkers, whose
mouths must be stopped, Jud. 13. ^it. 1.9, 10, 11.
who subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy
lucres sake. So that you see another way, which also has been found to be very
succesfull and efficacious, to suppress error, to reduce the erroneous, to
stablish the weak, to confirm the strong in the truth of Christ. There is a
third, and that is the main of all, which is,

3. Judicial and authoritative: if fraternall, if pastoral means are too
short and insufficient to reduce an erring brother, to blast, restrain,
suppress the spreading of error, God has yet warranted and ordained a third
means to back and strengthen all this. And that I call judicial and further
authoritative. Which is twofold 1. Congregationall. 2. Synodicall.


1. I say Congregationall, or that which is administered, within the bounds of a
particular Congregation. For I do not conceive that God has left a Church or
Congregation of Saints without remedies within it self, to help and relieve it
self under it is burdens and scandals. But that a particular Church furnished
with it is officers, has right and power, not only to dispense Ordinances, but
to administer censures (allowing liberty of appeals) upon such who are
offensive and scandalous among themselves, Mat. 18.17 Mat. 18.17.
. And this I conceive would not be very difficult to evidence, both from
Scriptures, and the practice of Cent l. 2. c. 4. p. 391. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 22 l.
5. c. 16. l. 3 c. 19. Zip. l 3 c. 7. Whitak. cont. 4. q. 1. c. 1. p 519. Perk.
expos. in Rev. ^.20. and 3.7.
Primitive times, if it were to our purpose to travel so far in this
controversy. It may seem strange to us, that Christ should blame the Church of
Pergamus for suffering Balaam, and the Nicolaitans, Revel. 2.14.15. Yea and so
deeply charge and reprove the Church of Thyatira for suffering Jezebel, if
these Churches (which I take to be particular Congregations) had not power to
cast out their own offenders. And if you say it did not belong to these
Churches respectively to censure their offenders, but it was immediately the
work of other Churches in consociation with them: I would demand, why then are
not other Churches blamed for their neglect, as well as they? And so, why is
not Pergamus reproved for tolerating Jezebel? And Thyatira for tolerating
Balaam? And Smyrna for tolerating either? Certainly, if it had been their duty
to cast them out, it was their sin to tolerate them; but the one is not charged
upon them as their sin, therefore cannot the other be evidenced to be their
duty. I think it would be a great help to reconciliation, and for my part I
could willingly grant, that a particular Church or Congregation of Saints, has
right to determine and conclude it is own proper business and affairs, and that
it is under no obligation of Christ to go farther then it self, if there be
sufficient power and skill for the concluding and determining of them: Nor
should they be disturbed by any in their Church-administrations, P r^ pol ^.
eccl. l. 3. c. 20 p. 301, 30^, etc.
unless upon evident, at least presumed grounds of false administrations: If
indeed the business be of common concernment, and that more Churches are
interessed and concerned in it; or if a particular Church want power or skill,
to determine and conclude it is own differences; or, if there have been false
administrations, as it may fall out; or, if they may be presumed to be false;
in such cases a community of Churches is requisite, and businesses of this
nature are to be transacted, not by one, but by a Community or Synod of
Churches. Of which more afterward. We are now to deal only with that power
which Christ has l^ft unto a particular Congregation of Saints, for the
suppressing of errors, and reducing of erroneous persons among themselves. And
I shall speak, of it only under these two branches, 1. Admonition. 2.
Excommunication.


1. They have power to admonish an erring or offending brother. And that is
implied, in Mat. 18.17. M^t. 18.17
If he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee, etc. -- He is not to be
cast out, till he discover his obstinacy, till he will not hear: if he must
hear, then the Church must speak. It is then the office of the Church to
exhort, to reprove, to admonish an erring brother, that he do not persist on
such errors, nor spread such opinions; And this admonition differs from that
which is fraternall, nay from that which is pastoral; though authoritative,
yet it is but concionall and doctrinall; this is judicial and in order to
censure, if a brother will not be reclaimed: and that is the first.

2. A second means, in case the former be insufficient; if it appear that yet
after exhortation, reproof, admonition, a man continues obstinate in his
opinion, and will not be reclaimed from it; then may the Church proceed to
censure and excommunication, according to that, in Mat. 18 17. If he will not
hear the Church, let him be to thee as a Heathen and a Publican. And that is
the second means, viz. excommunication.

But now against this we have two Objections.

Obj. 1. Some say that this is meant of civil and personal injuries, and not
of spiritual scandals and offenses.

Answ. 1. If it were meant of civil and personal injuries, (...) proprie
significat injustia^, injuria affi^ere aliquem, (...) proprie errare, aberrare,
peccare, raro aut nunquam pro injuria afficere.
why should it not rather be expressed by (...), then by (...), and so read
(...), rather then (...) and so rendered, in sensu civili and juridico, if thy
brother injure thee, if he wrong thee, rather then in sensu theologico, if thy
brother trespass or sin against thee.

2. It cannot be meant of civil and personal injuries, for Christ would be no
Judge of such things, he professedly disclaims it, when the man came to him
about the dividing of his inheritance, Luke 12.14. Who made me a Judge or a
divider over you? As if he had said, this is not my business, it is extraneous
to my place and calling, I stand not in any such relation to man. And if Christ
would not be the Judge of such matt^rs, neither would he set up any such
judicatures in his kingdom; besides, if you look upon the coherence, that
which ushers in this speech of Christ, it is a discourse of scandals, as you
see in the 6 and 7. verses: and therefore, if this have any consistence with
the former, it cannot be taken for civil injuries, but spiritual scandalls,
besides the end here proposed, is not civil, but spiritual, the brother is to
tell him his fault for the gaining of his soul, not for the gaining of
reparations for wrongs, If he hear thee, thou have gained thy brother, not
gained thy goods or good name, but thy brother, thou have reclaimed him from
sin, and wone his soul. And if you look upon the words, they will tell you,
that the persons here judging are not considered, as standing in any civil, but
in an ecclesiastical capacity: that will appear by that phrase, Go tell the
Church; a name no where given in the New Testament to any civil corporation, or
bench of Judges. Indeed we sometimes read in the Old Testament, the same word
used for Chruch, Psalm. 82.1
and an Assembly of Judges. But in the New we never read that the name Church
is attributed to any civil Officers.

And yet, if it should be granted, that by this word, Church, were here meant
the Sanedrim, yet it could not be concluded, that this Sanedrim was a civil
Court. Some write of an Ecclesiastical Sanedrim, distinct from the civil,
which might be more probable to be understood by this Text, at this time,
because it is not likely that the Jews now in subjection to the Romans, and
having by them Viceroys set over them to rule them, but they would over-turn
their civil government, and rule them by laws of their own.

Besides the manner and order of their proceedings here with prayer, verse 19.
and in the Name of Christ, verse. 20. shows it to be no civil, but an
ecclesiastical convention about Church censures.

Besides the phrases here used of binding and loosing, ver. 18. which are meant
of judicial opening and shutting, forgiving and retaining sins, they are such
forms of speech, as are never applied to any civil power or person, in a civil
capacity.

And lastly, add to this the sentence or punishment inflicted, which you see
is not any civil, but a Church censure, Let him be to thee as are Heathen or a
Publican, by which is meant Church-Excommunication, not license to go sue my
brother at Caesar's bar. Nor will that impede and hinder it from being a
Church-censure, because it is only expressed, Let him be no [thee] for this
word (...) (to thee) does not hinder the generality of the sense, but that it
may be referred nevertheless to the whole Church, for this is an Hebraisme, or
Hebrew Pleonasme, or superfluity of the dative case: this abounding manner of
speech is usual among the Hebrews, (...) Genesis 6.14. Genesis 12.1. Exodus 34.27.
And yet the sense runs plain, as if there were no dative case. And so here in
effect, the phrase is no more, then this, Let him be a Heathen or a Publican.

2. Again, It is said, let him be to [thee] because he cannot be as an Heathen
or Publican to me, till he be so to the Church, or till Church censures have
passed on him: there is no brother is to esteem another, as a Heathen and
Publican to himself, before he be so judged and censured by the Church. So that
you see this does not hinder this from being a Church censure, because it is
expressed under this phrase, Let him be to thee, for he cannot be so to me,
till he be declared so to the Church.

Obj. 2. But this is meant of scandal in life and conversation, not scandal in
opinion and judgment.

Answ. It is meant of all sorts of scandal, as well those in doctrine, as
those in life, as well those in opinion, as they in conversation. Christ speaks
there of all scandals and offenses in general, and unless you will say that
error in judgment, dangerous opinions, such as disturb the peace of the
Church, and subvert men's souls, are not offenses and scandals to you, you
cannot deny but this place is meant of those kind of scandals, as well as the
other, against which these spiritual censures of the Church have been
directed. So the Apostle when he speaks of Excommunication, says, 2 Cor. 10 6.
That he has in readiness to revenge all disobedience: And I hope this will be
judged a part of disobedience. So that you see the thing is clear, that this
Mat. 18.17. is taken for Church Censures, Qui ^orrig^nol^nt, tanquam putres
corporis parts, ferro excommunicationis sunt abscindi. Prosper.
and to be exercised not only against scand^ls in life, but errors in doctrine
further. I will yet confirm this to you by some Scriptures, 1 Timothy 1.20.
Holding faith and a good conscience, which some having put away, concerning
faith have made shipwreck, of whom is Hymeneus and Alexander, whom I have
delivered up to Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme. Here is
Excommunication, and that for Heresy. So Tit. 3.10. A man that is an Heretic,
after the first and second admonition reject, knowing that such an one is
subverted -- So Gal. 5.12. I would they were cut off that trouble you; He
speaks here of Excommunication, and of those that were false Prophets, who
troubled them with circumcision, pressing it as necessary to salvation, and by
that perplexing the consciences of the weak brethren.

To establish and confirm this further, you may read, Rev. 2.2. where the Angel
of the Church of Ephesus is commended for his zeal, That he would not bear with
those who called themselves Apostles, and were not, and in the 14. and 15.
verses of that Chapter, you read the Angel of the Church of Pergamus was
blamed, for this reason, Because thou have there them that teach the doctrine
of Balaam, so have thou also them who hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans,
which things I hate -- Why should this Angel be blamed, if it had not been his
duty to cast them out? God charge it upon him as his fault, that they were
not cast out. And the like charge is laid upon the Church of Thyatira, Debuit
itaque non modo judi c^od rectio^is populu^ sibi commissu^n in orthodoxa
doctrina cru^ire, se^ judicio coercion^s haereticos comerimere. Daven.
Revel. 2.20. I have a few things against thee, because thou suffer that
wicked woman Jezebel, who calls her self a Prophetess, to teach and seduce
my servants: Mark you here, God blames him that he suffered. Why, what should
he have done? He should say some have admonished, reproved her: but what if
that would not do? What if that were insufficient? still he was no^ to suffer
her, God blames him for suffering her: So that at the least she was to be cast
out, to be rejected --

By all which it is evident, that a particular Church is to cut off and cast
out those who trouble them, nay even those who miscarry with so much opinion of
conscience, as to think themselves Apostles and Prophets, yet may be censured
and cast out of the Church, which is the case in Rev. 2.2. And indeed this
Chapter is so clear and full to the point, that those who contend most for
liberty of conscience, and have written for liberty of all Sects, yet they have
in their writings acknowledged, that Christ has endued the Ministers of the
Gospel, and Governors of the Church with power to suppress heresy and
error, and the spreaders of it, be they who they will, though they pretend
themselves to be Apostles, and never so infallible, yet they may be suppressed.
William B. Ten. c. 57. Another who writes on the same argument, confesses that
the Church of Thyatira was justly taxed, not only for not controlling and
reproving Jezebel, but also in that they permitted her to seduce weak
Christians, without cutting her off by the sword of the Spirit, the power of
Excommunication. John Bapt. 63 p. Another also, who writes for the same, We
grant it evident that the power of redressing emerging enormities in a Church
in every kind is committed by Christ to every particular Church respectively
within it self, and so they ought to be cut off by that particular Church that
is troubled by them, if there be no remedy otherwise.

By all which you see, it is evident upon the confession of all, That God has
not left his Church without some means for the suppressing of error, and the
reducing of erroneous persons; That if a man be obstinate in his opinion, and
will not be reclaimed, he may, he ought to be cast out of the Church whereof he
is a member.

And thus we have finished the first judicial means for the suppressing of
error; 2. Means to suppres error. viz. Synodicall.
we are now come to the second judicial or authoritative means for the
suppressing of error, and the reducing of erroneous persons, which I told you
was Synodicall, if fraternall, if pastoral, if Congregationall means have been
used, and those found insufficient, and too short: there is yet another means
which God has ordained, and set up in his Churches, more powerful and
effectual then the former, and that we call a Synod or combination of
Churches, which was appointed by Christ, practiced by the Apostles, continued
by their successors for 300. years before ever there was any Christian
Emperor, or any other means and assistances to the Church for th^^e ends. And
indeed the light of Nature, the equity of rules, and examples in Scripture do
teach, That particular Churches may, Amos. Medul. l. 1. c. 39. ib. 17.
and ought often to enter into a mutual confederation and consociation among
themselves in Classes and Synods, that they may use common consent and mutual
help in those things especially which are of greater moment, and beyond the
power of particular Congregations to determine and conclude.

In the Discourse upon which, that I may the more avoid all Collateral and
impertinent controversies and disputes, and speak to it mainly, as it relates
to the Question propounded; I shall restrain my Discourse to these four
particulars.

1. I shall show you what a Synod is.

2. That God has ordained and set up this as a means for the suppressing of
error, and reducing of erroneous persons.

3. That this means has been blessed of God with power and efficacy for such
ends.

4. What is the power wherewith God has endued and enabled it, to be
subservient to these ends.

The great burden of the Discourse will lie upon the last. And therefore I
shall be briefer upon the rest.

Quest. 1. What a Synod is.

It is a consociation or combination of Churches in their officers and
delegates, conveened in the Name and authority of Christ, to determine
according unto Scripture all controversies of doctrine, government, manners,
for the comfort, peace and order of the Churches.

1. In which description you have, 1. What it is. It is a consociation or union
of Churches. One Church cannot make a Synod, a Synod is a Collection, a
combination of Churches. There is a twofold Church.

1. Ecclesia prima. 2. Ecclesia orta. A prime Church, and a Church arising out
of the prime Churches.

1. Collectio singulorum fidelium in unum congregatione^ and g^neral^ nomine
e^clesia dicitur.
The prime Church is a collection of diverse faithful persons into one
Congregation, and in a general name is called, a Church.

2. The Church arising from the prime. Ecclesia o^ta, est ^oll^ctio and
co^binatio Ecclesiaru^ prima^um plurium in unum coetu^ and appellatur Synodus.
It is a collection or combination of more Churches into one Assembly, and it
is called a Synod.

So there is the nature of a Synod, It is a consociation of Churches.

2. You have in the definition the persons whereof a Synod is constituted or
made, and that is, not of all the members of every Church, but of officers and
delegates, or persons chosen out and sent by the Churches. Indeed no faithful
persons, who desire, are excluded a liberty or presence of reasoning or
speaking, provided they do it orderly and wisely, but they are not there as
parts constituentes, as constituting parts or members of such an Assembly,
they are there rather by permission then by commission; as consenters, not
determiners, and rather spectatours, auditors, witnesses, then as officers.

Yet it will be easily granted, and Act. 15. seems to hold forth some footsteps
of it.

1. That the brethren, by a solemn Church-act, should design and choose their
officers and commissioners they send thither. So you see they did at Antioch,
Act. 15.2. they send the whole Church, (...), determined, they made a
Church-ordinance to send Paul and Barnabas, (...), And certain others of them
to the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem.

2. That the several Churches should have liberty to convey with them, whom
they have chosen, their burdens, doubts, scandals and desires, and so you see
in Act. 15.2. they sent their doubts with the persons, they determined they
should go up, (...), about this Question, not that this was the only end of
their going, to have the Question resolved, or that this was the only subject
of the Apostles disputes and determinations. In the 6. verse. It is said the
Apostles and Elders came together for to consider, (...), of this matter, not
only of the Question but of the scandal, the rent and division among them, and
how to heal that as well as remove the scandal. And their determinations make
it plain, ver. 22, 23, 24.

3. The brethren, especially such as are most eminent among the brethren, and
others so far as the convenience of the place, and other circumstances will
admit, have a liberty of presence, to hear the debates, and take notice how
things are transacted in the Synod. This is seen in the 12. verse. of that
Chapter.

4. These brethren may have liberty of speech, in case they desire it, or if
interessed and concerned more especially in the determinations of the Synod.
There is something of this in the 7. and 12. verses of that Chapter.

5. Their approbations and concurrence may be desired to the results and
determinations of the Synod, and that they might join in consent and handing
them to the Churches, for the more receptive entertainment of them. Relic
ecclesiae hanc non secus ac matrem colebant. Calv in Act. 15.2.
Thus you see it was in that Synod, verse. 22, 23. Though indeed there be not so
great reason for other Churches concurrence, as there was here for Jerusalem,
because this was the most eminent Church, and of great esteem and account among
the Churches of Christ, consisting of many eminent members, able to be teachers
to others: and therefore there was some more reason why their concurrence might
be desired.

But we pass this, and we come to the third thing in the description.

3. You have the form of this Convention, expressed in these words [Met
together in the Name and Authority of Christ] As he tells us, Mat. 18.20. Where
two or three are met together in my Name; which is spoken of Churches, as well
as members. The Papists raise up great disputes upon these words [In my Name]
and say, they denote him, who has authority of calling and appointing such
conventions, which, say they, does not belong to Emperors, or Kings, or
Magistrates, but to the Pope, to whom Christ in Peter did commit the government
of the Church. And so by these words [in my Name] according to their
interpretation, is signified the efficient cause, not the form of such a
Convention. But to leave that to Chamier. Tom. 2 l. 1^ c. 10. Sect. 5.6, 7, 8.
Ob Christi gloriam and honorem convenire.
those who enter the long disputes with them. Chrysostom expounds it, To meet
together in Christ's Name, is to meet together for the honor and glory of
Christ. Nomen Christi p^cem and charitatem interpretatur. H^lar.
Another, To meet together in the peace and love of Christ. Another, Propter
me, est mea cau^a quia res facit ad honorem meum Luc^s Bru^e^s.
To meet together for me, and for my cause, and for my glory. Another N^h^l
aliud est in Christi nomine congregari, quam una fide, uno redemptore, unoque
consensu, quae al^aeternam vitam pertinent mutuo confer
says, To meet together in Christ's Name, is to meet in one faith, in one
Christ, with one consent, mutually to confer about the things which do
belong to eternal life. Take but one more, To meet together in Christ's Name,
is Ita congregari ut sol^s Christus praefideat, ut nullu^ collegam habeat, sed
omnes subjectos. Cal^^.
so to meet that Christ alone may be president, and he may have no fellow, but
all his Subjects. So that now to gather all this together, To meet together in
Christ's Name, is to meet in the cause, in the faith, in the love, for the glory
of Christ, to consult about spiritual and divine things, in which they desire
to make Christ their Counselor and Lawgiver, and give up themselves to be
guided and directed by him: Quomodo possunt duo aut tres in nomine Christi
colligi, quos constat a Christo, and ab ejus Evangelio separari? Cypr. In
Christo nomine non congregantur, qui abjecto Dei mandato, pro arbitrio quidvis
statuunt. Calv.
by which many a Convention is evidenced, not to be of Christ, nor to meet in
his name.

4. You have the proximate or immediate end of this convention, and that is, to
determine. In which you have,

1. The object of those determinations.

2. The rule by which they are to be determined.

1. The object, and there you have it is Extents. Restraints.


1. It Is extents; all controversies; to determine of all controversies.

2. It Is restraints, yet not of all, but Church-controversies only, which are
summed in these three heads, viz. 1. Doctrine. 2. Government. 3. Manners.


2. The rule by which they are to be determined, viz. The Scriptures: all
determinations of Councels and Synods, etc. are to be rejected, so far as
they are not consonant and agreeable to Scripture.

5. You have the ultimate end of all, which is, 1. Supreme, the glory of God.
2. Subordinate, viz.


1. The Comfort of the Churches of Christ.

2. The Peace of the Churches of Christ.

3. The Order of the Churches of Christ.

And all this you shall see in some degree in that great Synod, which we read
of, in Act. 15. which is left for an example and pattern of Synods to us.

1. There was a consociation of Churches: we read of two Churches consociated,
Jerusalem and Antioch, and how many more is not evident, only it is probable
there were others also.

1. De jure, it ought to have been so, the case was no less theirs in Syria
and Cilicia, then theirs in Antioch, it was every way their case, they were
alike concerned in the case and cure; they were troubled with the same
doctrine, and their souls were subverted, as well as Antioch, as it appears by
Act. 15.23, 24. And being alike interessed, and their case the like, and
knowing of the remedy, it may be probable, I say, that the Churches of Syria
and Cilicia had their Elders there, as well as Antioch.

2. The acts, determinations and decrees are sent unto them all conjunctly, I
say, to them, even as to Antioch; and messengers appointed to report the
determinations of the Assembly to them, as to the other; as you see, verse. 23.
And therefore as they ought to be here in their delegates, and messengers, as
well as Antioch: that which concerns all ought in this case to be handled of
all: and by the Letters sent to them, as to Antioch, it is probable they joined
in the referring the Question and cause to the results of that Assembly.
Besides, they sent to these Churches, but we read not that they sent to other
Churches, but yet other Churches were bound by this decree; and why therefore
did they send to these and not to other, if that these, and not the other had
not deferred the same cause, and sent their Commissioners to Jerusalem with
Antioch? Neither have we any thing in Scripture to the contrary, to prove they
were not there, and therefore it may be probable they were there in their
delegates. But this shall suffice to show you here was a cons^ciation.

2. Here were Officers and delegates sent, you see that, in Act. 15.2. They
determined that Paul and Barnabas, and certain other if them should go up;
they determined, they made a Church-ordinance, as I said before, to send Paul
and Barnabas as Church-messengers, or Church-commissioners to the Assembly. It
was not an Apostolical journey performed by Paul as an Apostle, but he went as
a Messenger of the Church of Antioch; and as a Messenger Paul returns with
Barnabas, and gives an account of his Commission to the Church, who sent him,
verse. 30. as in the 14th Chapter 27. And besides them, here is certain other,
They determined that Paul and Barnabas (...), and certain other of them should
go up to Jerusalem. There is some controversy about these [certain other] some
would have them to be the opposite party, whom they sent with the Apostles to
speak for themselves, or that they might have a fair hearing: and there is
something to countenance this in the 10th verse, where Peter says, Now
therefore why tempt you God? by which words there seem something to strengthen
such a conjecture as this, that this was spoken to the opposite party,
therefore they were present. Rutherf. Due right. p. 40^.
But I rather concur with the learned Professor of Scotland, and with
Junius, that by these, other, do conceive might be meant Pastors and Elders
of Antioch, who were delegated and chosen by the Church for that service. And
it may be so conceived, because it is said certain others [of them] which seems
to relate to some other in office, or to some other of the same spirit, now
officiated, or sent as Messengers from the Church. But that shall suffice for
the second. Here were officers and delegates sent.

Obj. But you will say, here was more then officers and delegates sent: here
was the whole Church, verse. 23. and not only present, but had their liberty in
decision, Ames. Bell. enerv. de council. l. c. 2.
and the letters and decrees to the Churches were sent in their name also.

Answ. 1. It was not possible that the whole Church, consisting of so many
thousands, were able to meet in such a place as this is rendered to be, being
but a private house, and therefore not of that large reception to receive the
whole Church.

2. It was not fit and convenient they should: the presence of great multitudes
is not proper, for the decision of causes, and d terminations of Questions. But
yet,

3. Admit there were many present, which I am not unwilling to do, the 12th
verse tells us, The whole multitude kept silence, Beza.
which although some do interpret not to be meant of the number of believers,
but of the company of Officers and Commissioners sent from the Churches: yet I
am willing to allow that many of the Church were present here at this time, and
in this Assembly; but certainly not as Commissioners, but rather spectatours
and hearers, though they were present, yet it does not follow, that they had
the power of voting and determining, that was peculiar to the Apostles and
Elders; neither was their presence necessary, but only occasional, in respect
of their vicinity and neighborhood of place, where the business was debated:
if their presence had been necessary, then had it been alike necessary for the
Church of Antioch, and the other Churches to be there, being more nearly
interessed in the decision then they were. And

4. For the other part of the Objection, That the letters were written, and the
decrees sent in their name, as, verse. 23. The Apostles, Elders and Brethren
send greeting.

1. It will be said, There is a difficulty what these Brethren are; Judas,
surnamed Barsabas, and Silas were two of them; and they are called (...),
chief, or leading men among the Brethren, verse. 22. If you look into the 23.
verse, you shall see what these were, they were Prophets and Teachers, men in
office.

2. But admit they were such Brethren as were members, not in office, yet it
will not follow that they joined in the imposition of these decrees upon the
Churches, but only were drawn forth, being choice Disciples, to express their
liking and assent unto those determinations, to advantage the reception of them
among the Churches: nor can we conceive of it in the former sense. For as
ordinary members they had no power to send decrees to bind their
fellow members; nay, if it had been the whole Church together, they had no
power to lay burdens upon other Churches, no more then other Churches to
impose burdens on them; Sister, and equal Churches have no power or authority
one over another. But so much for the second. I will be brief in the rest.

3. Here was in this Synod the form of the Convention, they met in the Name of
Christ; they were two or three, not persons, but Churches met in Christ's Name.
They met in the cause, in the faith, in the love, for the glory of Christ, to
consult about such things as made for his glory, and the peace, edification and
stability of the Churches.

4. You have here the proximate end of this meeting or convention, which was,
as is granted on all hands, dogmatically to determine. In which you have also
two things observable.

1. The object.

2. The rule of these determinations.

1. The object of them, which was not merely a Question of faith, but also how
the Churches were to be regulated; what they were to observe for the avoiding
of scandal, and peace of the Churches.

2. The rule by which they determined, that was, Apostoli haec decreta ex
Scripturis sanxerunt. Whitak. Do ^ec abso* scandalo peniti^^ omitti queant.
Chamier. Tom. 3. l. 15. c. 10. 4. Ex lege haec omnia dicunt. Chrysostom. See Whit.
contr. 3 q 6 c. 2 p. 610. a.
by the written Word of God, So you see verse. 15, 16, 17. And those decrees
imposed, were no new law established, but an old one repeated, till without
scandal it might be left wholly off, and buried. All the determinations of
this Council were according to the Word. And if other Councels do determine
and define nothing, but what is in the Scriptures, as this Council did not, if
they follow the voice of Scripture in all their determinations, they may then
say with the Apostles here, It seems good to the holy Ghost and us.

5. Lastly, We have here the ultimate end of a Synod, which is,

1. Supreme, the glory of God.

2. Subordinate, viz. 1. The Comfort. 2. The Peace. 3. The Order of the
Churches. And so much shall serve for the first Query, what a Synod is: we will
now come to the second. Possunt alia legitima concilia similiter asserere,
decreta sua esse decreta spiritus sancti, si huic co^cilio sim^^^a suerunt, and
si eandem regulam servaveri^t, quam in hoc concilio servarunt, and secuti sunt
Apostoli. Whitak. ibid. Si nihil nisi ex Scripturis statuerunt, etc.


2. That God has set up this Ordinance as a means for the suppressing of
error, and reducing of erroneous persons. That God has set up this means for
this end, you read in Mat. 18.15, 17. If thy brother trespass against thee, go
and tell him his fault: where I told you, by trespassing, was not meant civil
injury, but spiritual scandals, it is not expressed by such a word as
signifies injustice, but sin: not is it meant of scandals only in life and
conversation, but of scandals also in Doctrine and opinion. And the remedy for
them as well as the other, when more private and brotherly means will not do,
then they are to g^e and tell the Church?

Ob. But you will say, this Church here spoken of, is a particular
Congregation: where do you read you are to tell it to a Synod.

Answ. There is the same reason in one as in the other: mark the proportion,
Christ commands that from the admonition of one being despised, you proceed to
the admonition of two or three; if that be contemned, to the censure of the
Church: and therefore by proportion, if the Church be despised, why ought we
not to complain to a Synod of Churches, a Church of Churches, as some of the
brethren call it? there is the same proportion: if indeed thy brother will hear
thee, thou ought not to go tell more of it, or if he will hear more, thou ought
not to tell the Church; But in case that more private means will not do, we
are to make use of that which is more authoritative and public; So here, in
case one Sister Church cannot prevail with another, then may we by the like
proportion make use of a consociation of Churches. And to this argument of
proportion, we may give you the instance of a pattern, by which might be
evidenced, that this means of a Synod is warranted for such an end, the pattern
you may read in Act. 15. where you see, ver 1. There was false Doctrine
broached, error and heresy taught, Certain came down from Judea, and taught
the brethren, that except they were circumcised after the manner of Moses, they
could not be saved. Now when all means within themselves were found to be
insufficient to suppress this dangerous error, and reduce these erroneous
persons, they determined to make use of some further means of Gods appointment,
and thereupon ordered that Paul and Barrabas, and others of their Elders should
go up to Jerusalem, and there in a Synod or consociation of Churches to
determine and conclude this Question: so you see it was a means ordained, and
a means practiced; yea, Fulk de^er or ec^l. go. p. 11^, 116 117, 118, etc.
and not only by the Apostles, but continued by their successors 300. years
after, as Fulk says, before ever there were any Christian Emperors, and long
time after, even as long at any purity continued in Religion, until both
Emperors and Synods were both thrust out of all lawful authority, which they
ought to have in the Church, by the tyranny of Antichrist.

So that you see this ordinance is appointed of God for this end, but yet let
me add. It is not an ordinary, but an extraordinary means, a means to be used
in want of skill, or want of power in particular Churches. I conceive it is not
to be used as diet, but at physic; God has set up other ordinary means, which
has been effectual, but this is a means when ordinary means proves too weak
and insufficient. Ru^herf. due Right. p. 306, 307
Synodicall Churches are not ordinary, but occasional. A Synod is not the
prime proximate means, which God has appointed, but a secondary, remote and
ultimate means to be used, and in case the other is insufficient. You see here,
in Act. 15.2. that the Church of Antioch did not presently run to a Synod with
this controversy, but first they labored to their utmost to take up, conclude
and determine this controversy among themselves, it is said, Paul and Barnabas
had no small dissension and dispute with them about it. And for other means,
besides disputation, viz. censure, it is probable they wanted either sufficient
light, or power in the Church in respect of the adverse party, to proceed to
censure; when therefore they had used what means they could, and had found that
means used insufficient, to settle the brethren, and to stop the mouths of the
false teachers, then they determined to send Paul, and Barnabas, and others to
Jerusalem about this matter. So that you see, It was not the prime, proximate
and immediate means, but a secondary, remote and ultimate means which they
used, upon the deficiency of other. And that caution I shall only annex to it,
it is a means, and a means ordained of God, but to be used when other means are
unavailable. M. Cotton, p. 23.
Some of our brethren lay down three grounds of Synods.

1. In case a particular Church wants light or peace at home.

2. In case any Church lie under scandal, through corruption in doctrine and
practice, and will not be healed by more private means, as one brother being
offended with another, and not able to heal him by the mouth of two or three
brethren privately, it behooves him to carry it to the whole Church; so by
proportion, if one Church see matter of offense in another, and be not able to
heal it in a more private way, it will behove them to procure the Assembly of
many Churches, that the offense may be heard, judged, removed in a more public
way.

3. It may fall out the state of all the Churches in a country may be
corrupted, and beginning to discern their corruption, may desire the concourse
and counsel of one another, for a speedy, and safe, and general Reformation.
Thus far that learned author. By all which it is granted, The use and
necessity of Synods, as an ordinance of God to suppress error, and reduce
erroneous persons. Now we are to show you.

Thirdly, That this means has been blessed of God with power and efficacy for
these ends.

And you see the truth of this in that first great Apostolic Synod and
Council, Act. 15. There was an error broached, the Question and cause
referred, and by common consent and decree, Reynolds conf with Heart. c 6. d 2
p. 206.
says Reynolds, the controversy was ended, the truth of doctrine established,
error condemned, the false teachers branded, and the souls of the believers
established, and peace maintained in the Churches, as is evident, Act. 16.4.5.
And as they went through the Cities, they delivered them the decrees of the
Apostles and Elders -- and so were the Churches established in the faith, and
increased in number daily. After which example the Churches which succeeded
made the like Assemblies, upon the like occasions, and by this chiefly of
judgment (as he calls it) healed breaches, suppressed errors, removed
scandals, and extirpated heresies out of the Churches. The Primitive times of
the Church were blessed with such conventions, and found Gods blessing in them.

Whit. cont. 3 q. 5 p. ^1^.
The Arian heresy, that struck agianst the Deity of Christ, was convinced and
condemned by the first great Council of Nice. The heresy of Nestorius, that
made two persons in Christ, was overthrown by the Ephesine Council. The
heresy of Macedonius, that denied the Divinity of the holy Ghost, was
suppressed by the Council of Constantinople. The heresy of Eutiches, which
affirmed but one nature in Christ, the Council of Chalcedon was famous for the
extirpation of that. And besides these many other might be named. Eusebius. eccl.
H^st. l. 6. c. 42 l. 5. c. ^4. l. 7. c. 26, 281 M^g Cent. 3. l. 7. Col. 161.
Cent 3. c. 9. de Syn Col. 192, 193. Park. 3.9. 330. Nullum n c melius, nec
certius remedium. Cal^.
Eusebius records how the error of Montanus, was judged and condemned by many
Synods in Asia, l. 6. c. 42. Besides which, there are the examples of many
others, as will be seen, if any do please to peruse the places cited in the
margin.

And indeed it was the ordinary way, when any difficulty, or any heresies did
arise, presently the Churches would run into a Synod, as finding there the
best strength and remedy to oppose them, judging themselves best able in
consociation to oppose those rising opinions and heresies which threatened the
ruin of the Churches.

New England, when those dangerous opinions grew up among them, had spread
far, gotten power, poisoned many; some of their Worthies were in danger to be
drawn away from their steadfastness. It pleased God to stir up their hearts to
meet in a Synod, where they found Gods assistance, and since Gods blessing, and
I think can say by experience, that there is no better, no surer remedy
against error, no better way to find out truth then a Synod. There is no age,
wherein the use of Synods has not been found needful, and the right use
blessed and successful. Zepperus alleging, Act. 15. for a pattern of Synods,
declares, That after the Apostles, the Primitive Churches, under the new
Testament, Concilia non sunt simplicit^^, and absolate necessaria, tamen multum
conserunt, and valde utilia sunt. Wa^tak. de Council. q. 1 p. 22. E^seb l. 1. c.
4^.
being most studious of this consociation or combination of Synods, did not
only communicate by letters, but meeting together in National and general
Councels, did hear causes, try doctrine, and convinced condemned heresies, etc.
and sent their decrees unto all Churches, with the names of the persons, and
heresies which were condemned. And indeed there is no age of the Church, where
Synods have been rightly used, but they have been successful. The Papists,
Arminians, Socinians decry them, as unnecessary and unprofitable, they dare not
bring their opinions to the test. Indeed they are not simply, not absolutely
necessary to the being, but they are necessary to the well-being of a Church.

Eusebius does exceeding celebrate the piety of Constantine for assembling the
Nicene Council, wherein Arius was condemned, and he does as much charge
Licinius for seeking to ruin the Churches, by depriving them of Synods.
Nazianzen has indeed a sad complaint, I am minded (says he) to shun all
assemblies of Bishops, because I never saw any good event in any Council; Ego,
si vera scribere oportet, ita animo affectus sum, ut omnia op^scoporu^ concilia
^ugiam, quoniam nulli us Concilij finem loetu^ fou^tumque vidi. Epist. 42. ad
pro cap B^z. tract. Theo^. vo^. 2. p. 211, 212.
every one rather increasing, then diminishing our evils. Calvin calls it, dura
quaerimonia, a harsh complaint. Beza opposes against this complaint the
Apostolical example, the history of things done.

Indeed, says he, the Nicene Synod did not quite allay the furies of Arius, no
nor some that followed after: but who will therefore judge, that there has
been no fruit of that Synod, which even at this very time we do abundantly
reap^ yea, the Apostolical Synod has not altogether restrained Cerinthus, and
those obstinate maintainers of circumcision; but who would therefore say, it
was not necessary for the Church? And a little after, he says, The sentence of
Nazianzen does not concern Synods rightly ordered, unless we think that he
would detract from the Synod of Nice, which indeed is very absurd, seeing it is
well known how great a Defender he has been thereof: if nevertheless Arians
ceased not to rage through the world; how much the more may we think that they
would have done it, if the authority of that holy Synod, agreeing with the Word
of God, so often objected against them, had not repressed their renewed
endeavors? The same we avouch (says he) concerning the Macedonians,
Nestorians, Eutycheans, and their issue, whom as many Oecumenicall Synods, if
not with one wound, yet with reiterated blows, have by the Word of God stricken
down, Concili^r^i in ecclesia saluberrima authoritas Aug. epist. 118. Whitak.
de Council. (...) 1. c 3. p. 13, 14, 15.
in so much that they do afford us arms against the like errors, springing up
again in this our age. Thus far he. Besides him, learned Whitaker also,
opposes to this complaint of Nazianzen, the speech of Austin, The authority of
Synods in the Church of God, is most wholesome. The same Author says, It may
seem strange that Nazianzen denies that ever he had seen any good issue of
Synods; for in those two Synods, viz Nice and Constantinople, truth got the
victory and heresy was put down; And though it be certain (says he) that
Arianisme was increased, and grew stronger then before, yet this is not to be
imputed to the Synod, but to the perverseness and ambition of men. Again (says
he) Nazianzen was to be pardoned, because he lived in the worst and most
turbulent times of the Church, when by means of Valens the Emperor, who
degenerated from the Catholic faith, heresies more prevailed. Again, he
objects to Nazianzen, Christ himself Mat. 18.20. When two or three are gathered
in my Name, I will be in the midst of them.

Vrsine also answers this complaint of Nazianzen after the same manner, and
tells us, Ursin. admon. de lib. concord c. 12. op. tom. 2. col. 686.
That he spoke of the Synods of his time, whereof some were Arian, others
confusedly undertaken and governed. But admit that he never saw that success
of Synods that was desired; suppose that errors did grow the more for being
sentenced and condemned in Synods, yet shall men be discouraged from doing
their duty? There have been good effects of Synods. After that in Act. 15. the
Churches were established, Act. 16.4, 5. Admit we see no present fruit, yet it
is our duty to wait as well as work; if it do not appear in our age, yet
something may be laid in for future generations.

Such consociations upon earth, are like the conjunctions in the heavens, the
fruit whereof comes not in, perhaps in many years. Nay, admit in steed of good,
we see evil, in steed of abatement of errors, we see the increase of them; yet
should not this discourage us; accidental evils, not springing out of the
nature of an ordinance, are no arguments to prove the unlawfulness of an
ordinance, especially, when as the ordinance it self, and in it is own nature
serves for the preventing, or removing of such evils, as are complained to be
the fruit of them. Men are usually worse at their first taking physic, yet is
this a means to remove the distemper: So errors may, like bad humors stirred,
rise the higher, grow and conflict the more under this physic, yet is this a
means for the helping and removing of them. But of this sufficient; we will
come to the fourth particular, which indeed is the main, viz.

Quest. 4. What power God has endued and enabled a Synod withal, as
serviceable to this end, viz. The suppressing of error, and the reducing of
erroneous persons.

About which I find three several opinions, whereof the first does certainly
give too much; the second is questioned to attribute too little; the third is
thought to set down the just bounds of power.

1. The first which certainly gives too much, is that of the Papists, in which
they attribute to Synods and Councels, an absolute infallible binding power,
against which none are to dispute, to which all men are bound to yield
obedience. An opinion, which as abominable in it self, so has it been justly
opposed, and as fully confuted by our famously learned and godly writers.

2. A second opinion which is questioned to give too little, is that which
denies all jurisdiction unto Synods and Councels, and says, Though God has
afforded further means of suppressing error, and reducing erroneous persons,
then a particular Congregation, yet has he not afforded any further
jurisdiction.

3. A third opinion says, That God has given to a Synod, a power of
jurisdiction, yet that not absolute, but ministerial; not privative, any way
robbing and depriving of particular Congregations of their just rights and
power, but cumulative, to strengthen and uphold particular Congregations in
their power and privileges; they take not the power out of their hands, but
strengthen and direct them in the use of it.

I shall not speak to all these separately. The first of these is justly
exploded and cast out; the second and third are controverted: one is thought to
give too much; the other is reputed to attribute too little. It suits not with
my Discourse, nor yet with my purpose, to examine and dispute them here. That
which I intend to pursue, is to lay down such evident grants of power, as may
happily suggest some mediums of reconciliation in this difference.

First then, a power there is, that is granted on both hands; but what that
power is, what are the limits and bounds of it, there is the controversy.
There is, potestas arrepta, potestas data, a power given, a power usurped, a
power truly granted, and a power falsely claimed. But what that is, which is
exercised under a false claim, there is the dispute. Thus far we agree in the
negative, What their power is not.

1. A Synod or a Council has no civil power; they have no power either to make
or impose civil laws, or to punish the breach of them; nor have they power to
enforce any laws upon men, upon any civil mul^ts or penalties what ever: the
power they have is of a spiritual, not a civil nature, it does not reach to
the bodies, estates, liberties, privileges of men; the object of it, is their
spirits, their souls. Chamier. Tom. 3. l. 15. c. 8. s ct. 5. 6, 7, 8, 9.


2. In this we agree also, That a Synod has no absolute, but only a
Ministerial power. The Word of God is both the rule and limits of their power;
they can do nothing against the Law of Christ; they may ordain nothing, Bez.
de ecclesia c. 5. p. 125. D^ven. de judic. and nor c. 27. Whit. cont. 3. q. 6.
p. 612, etc. Etiam con. 4 q. 7. p. 884.
but by warrant from Christ. It does not belong to Synods (says Beza) to make
new Articles of Religion, nor to bring any thing into Gods house, which he has
not commanded in his Word. Another says, Ministers are stewards, whose duty is
not to prescribe new laws unto the family, but faithfully to keep the laws of
the householder, and to do every thing according to his command. The power of a
Synod is not magisteriall, but ministerial, not absolute, but limited by the
word and will of Christ.

3. In this we agree also, Co^s Whit. contr. 3. c. 2 q. 6. and Daven. de jud.
and nor. fid. c. 22, 24 p 133, 142. Ruthers. 3^4, 335. Due Right of Presb, par.
^.
That a Synod has no infallible power. Synods and Councels may err, and
therefore their decrees are to be examined, and not to be received further then
they are consonant to the Word of God.

4. In this we agree, That a Synod has no power to make things indifferent
necessary. I say they have no power to make things in their own nature
indifferent necessary. The Papists indeed infer from Act. 15.28, 29. That it is
in the power of a Council or Synod to alter and change the nature of things
indifferent, and to make those things which are indifferent in themselves, by
their authority to become necessary: we have had such doctrine preached; but
this is to give power to Synods and Councels over and above the Scripture: they
have no power to alter and change the nature of things, and make those things
necessary, which are indifferent, no more the^ to make those things
indifferent, which are necessary. Adverte, ne intelligas haec necessaria una
and ende^ ratione recessitatis, nam ra^io necessario vitandi fornicat^on^m
divini juris est, ra^io a^^e^ abstinendi ab esu sanguinu^, etc. Est ut ^morem
geratis ijs quibus vivitis ^udaeis. Cajet
Indeed the Apostle there calls those things imposed, necessary things, but
they were not all alike necessary, some were simply and absolutely necessary at
all times, viz. this of abstaining from fornication; but the three other were
only extrinsecally and accidentally necessary in respect of the present
occasion: nor were they necessary, because they commanded them; but because
they were necessary, therefore they commanded them. Chamie, tom. 2. l 15 c. 8.
sect. 5, 6, 7, 8. (...). and (...), ut Chrysostom. vid Cham. tom. 3 l 15. c. 10
sect. 4
Besides these were no new laws imposed, as the Papists contend, but only old
Laws repealed, repeated for a time, Donec absque scandalo penitus omitti
queant, till without scandal they might be left off. Ex ege ^ec dicunt, and
ve^era retinere, long aliu^ est, quam nova instituere. Cham ibid
And there is much difference between the retaining of an old law, and
instituting of a new.

5. In this we also agree, That no act of a Synod, as theirs, is binding to the
conscience. Conscience is under no bonds or obligations save Gods only. It can
neither be enforced, nor can it be engaged by any ties or bonds of men.

There is no power on earth, that can properly and immediately reach the
consciences of men. Conscience is a thing out of man's jurisdiction, it will
neither be beholding to man for it is liberty, nor is it capable of his
restraint, it is out of the reach of all humane power. Indeed, the matter of
the things decreed or commanded may reach the conscience, but not as they are
impositions of men, but as the commands of God: conscience is bound to observe
and obey such things as are commanded according to the Word, but yet not by
virtue of any humane decree, but divine ordinance, or the law of God, who alone
can lay the obligation on conscience. Indeed, the Papists do urge from these
decrees of the Apostles, imposed on the Churches, that the decrees and acts of
a Synod or Council do in themselves, and because imposed, bind the
consciences of men. Against which I need to produce no more then what Chamier
urges in the foregoing place, where he lays down three Arguments out of
Calvin, to prove that these decrees of the Apostles were not imposed as
necessary and binding to the conscience. I will hint them to you, and so
proceed.

1. Because the Apostles should then have overthrown their own decrees; it was
the end of these d^crees to free their consciences from the burden of the law,
and not to bind their consciences to the Ceremonies of the law: and that their
end was to free them, it appears, 1. By the state of the Question propound^d in
the Council, Act. 15.1, 5. 2. By the debates and suffrages themselves, both
which shows their intent was to free their consciences, not to bind them. It
will not suffice what Bellarmine says, Non tollitur servetus quamvis ^u^etur
Dominis. Cham.
That they went about to free them from the laws of Moses, but yet to bind
them under the commands of a Council, for this is not to set them free, but to
change their servitude.

2. Because these precepts did expire, when the reason of them was expired;
when the scandal was removed, the precepts were expired; which shows the cause
of these decrees, not to be any necessity in the things themselves, but the
avoidance of scandal.

3. Because Paul, who was at this Council, and understood these laws, does so
expound them, 1 Cor. 8.7, 8. 1 Cor. 8.7.8. and 10.25 28, 29.
etc. and 1 Cor. 10.25. The Apostle there bids you, What ever is set before
you, to eat, and ask no question for conscience sake: Yet, says he, If any say
that this which is set before you is offered in sacrifice to Idols, eat not for
conscience sake, conscience, I say, not thine own, but of others etc. By which
the Apostle shows it was not absolutely, and in it self unlawful to eat, but
unlawful in a case, because for the present it was offensive and scandalous to
the conscience of the weak brethren. And this shall suffice for the fifth
agreement. I will name but one more.

6. We agree in this, That a Synod has no power to deprive a particular Church
of its rights, power, privileges, but to direct, maintain and strengthen them
in them. So that what ever is the proper and inherent right of a particular
Congregation, no Synod or Classes can weaken them in it, much less invade
them, and deprive them of it; it being their work to cherish and strengthen
them in the execution of them.

The power of a Synod, as I told you, is not privative, but cumulative. It is
not for lessening and weakening, but for the strengthening and confirming the
proper rights of particular Congregations. It does not take away due power, but
hinders or remedies the undue exercise of that power, and directs and
strengthens them in cases of difficulty, in the right exercise of it.

And thus you see we do agree in the negative, What their power is not. We
will now come to the second, What their power is: What is the power wherewith
God has enabled a Synod as serviceable to this end, the suppressing of error,
and r^ducing of erroneous persons?

You see here I am not to deal with the power of Synods in the several
branches laid down by holy and learned men, viz.

Dogmaticall. Diatacticall. And Critical.

The first has relation to Doctrine; the second to Order; the third to
Censure; which threefold power they hold forth from Act. 15. In which seems to
be discovered three great evils, which were the occasion of that meeting of the
Apostles and Elders.

1. There was heresy taught, some that had preached the necessity of observing
the Ceremonial law, yea and telling them, Except they kept the law of Moses
they could not be saved, v. 1.

2. There was the scandal and offense of the weak Jews, with the alienation of
their minds from the Gentiles, who did neglect to practice those Ceremonies.

3. There was the schism and stasis raised by those who troubled the
Disciples, verse. 2. And according to this threefold evil, is discovered the
footsteps of a threefold power, exercised and put forth in this meeting.

1. The dogmaticall power, confuting the heresy, and vindicating of the truth,
verse. 7, 8, 9, etc.

2. The Diatactick power, making a practical Canon for avoiding the scandal
and abstaining from such things as gave the occasion of it, verse. 20, 29.

3. The Critic power, verse. 24. branding those teachers with the black mark of
liars, subverters of souls, troublers of the Church, ver. 24. A threefold
remedy, answerable to the thr^e fold evil.

I am not here to enquire or deal with the power of Synods in this latitude
laid down, being only to consider of their power, as relating to this
Question, which is a power proper to the suppressing of error, and reducing of
erroneous persons. Nor shall I be able to enumerate all the particulars of
their power; as relating to this Question; but I shall speak unto the chiefest,
under these three general heads.

1. They have a power relating to erroneous doctrines and opinions.

2. They have a power relating to erroneous persons.

3. They have a power in reference to erring Churches. And of these in their
order.

1. They are endued and enabled with a power in relation to erroneous doctrines
and opinions. And we will lay it down in these three branches.

1. A Synod has power to examine, enquire, debate of any erroneous opinion or
doctrine that is on foot, and this I think is granted on all hands. And Act.
15. is plain for this: there was error taught, and the Apostles and Elders are
said to meet together about this matter, verse. 6. they met to examine, to
consult and debate about it. There is a twofold examination, the one private
and personal, the other ministerial and authoritative; every man has power,
and is bound to exercise personal and conscientious examination, but every one
is not to exercise a ministerial and authoritative, only such as are chosen
and called to it: we speak here of ministerial examination, in which we shall
find few dissenters. And say a Synod has power to examine, enquire, debate of
erroneous doctrins and opinions.

2. A Synod has power to determine and Patres in concilio (...) sol^mmod^
inquisiteres sed jud^ces. Deus judical, (...) and (...): Synodus, (...) and
(...), u^usquisque (...), and (...) Da^. de jud. and norm fid.
judge of errors. A Synod has not only power to examine, but it has power to
judge. There is a threefold judgment.

1. Absolute and supreme.

2. Ministerial and Synodicall.

3. Private and personal: the first is only proper to God: the last belongs
to all: the second to them only who are chosen and called to this work. Though
nothing is to be allowed contrary to the Word: yet Synods have ministerial
judgment, according to that Word; They have power, says Junius, to make
inquisition, and consult, determine, both of controversies of faith and
manners. And this also you see, Act. 15. The Apostles and Elders in that
consociation did not only enquire and consult, but they also judged and
determined those opinions, which had been taught to be disturbing, destructive
and subverting errors, v. 24.

3. They have not only power to enquire and judge, but they have power to
censure and condemn errors. All which is but yet a d^gmati^all or doct^inall
power of declaring and determining of truth or of error, which I conceive will
be granted on all hands, even by those who are most shie and tender in weighing
forth any power unto them. And indeed, Act. 15. does make all this evident;
there they examined, they judged, they censured the error which was broached
among them. And after ages they followed the same pattern. The first great
Council of Nice, as I showed you, did censure and condemn the heresy of Arius.
The Council of Ephesus did condemn the heresy of Nestorius, the Council of
Constantinople did censure and condemn the heresy of Macedonius. Eusebius eccl.
hist l. 6. c. 42.
The error of Montanus was judged and condemned by many Synods in Asia. So
that this is clear, a Synod has power to examine, to judge, to censure and
condemn errors.

Obj. But it will be said, Councels may err. That famous Council of Nice it
self had yet it is errors, one of which was, That heretics should be
rebaptized, etc. And if Counc^ls may err, Concilium Nic enum primu^^, quod
suit omnium nobilissi ^um and ^eleber ^^mum, tamen erravit. Whit. ^o^t. 2 c 2.
q 6 p 6, 8, 620.
then may they censure and condemn truth as well as error, and that is
fearful.

Answ. This is one of the Scepticall Objections of this age: we have too many,
who, themselves being sure in nothing, seek to weaken all determinations what
ever; as if they, because they are subject to error, might not be certain in
truth: but for answer.

1. It Is granted, Councels may err, and the best of Councels may err. That
famous Counc^l of Nice had it is errors, which Whitaker, in respect it was so
famous, is tender of uncovering. But though they may err, does it follow that
they do always err. This is a non sequitur?

2. Again, though they may err, does this take away their right of judgment
of error and truth? weakness and subjection to error in judgment does not
take away right of judgment. God has allowed this way of judgment, to
determine of doubtful doctrines, and decide controversies, and he has said,
Let the spirit of the Prophets be subject to the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.32. A
place which Junius applies to this, and the error of some must not nullify
the ordinance of God.

3. Though they may err, yet they are not so likely to err, as others: an
Assembly of godly and learned men met together in Gods way, they are under a
promise to be led into the way of all truth.

4. Though they may err in some particulars of lesser moment, yet points of
greater moment are clear and evident.

5. In what they err we are not to follow them. Ministerial judgment is
theirs, private and practical judgment is yours, and you are not to receive
and embrace their determinations further, then they shall appear to you to be
consonant and agreeable to the Word of truth; you are not to obey, because they
say it, but because they say it authoritatively from Gods word. Official
authority they have, as a Church of Christ, but objective authority they have
not; so that what they say, because they say it, is therefore to be closed
with: Thus the Papists say, not we: We say, that Synods have no perempto^y,
absolute, illimited authority to determine as they please, but their power is
Ministerial, and limited to the Word of God; and we may say for our own
practice, Tantum valet ^ecretum Con^tl^j, quantum va^et ejus ratio. Am^s.
The decrees of Councels are no farther binding, then the reasons of them are
evident to be of God.

And so much shall serve for the first general branch of the power of Synods.
We come to the second.

2. As they have power relating to erroneous doctrines, so they h^ve power as
relating to erroneous persons. And this we will lay forth in these branches.

1. They have power to conve^n them, and call them before them, if by their
writings, or otherwise their persons are known. Indeed in Act. 15. we do not
read of any summons of those false teachers, nor was there any need, for they
may be conceived to be personally present, and rebuked in the face of the
Synod, as subverters of souls. And if they were not present to whom does Peter
speak, verse. 10. Now therefore why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of
the disciples? Certainly it was not to the Apostles and Elders, they were not
guilty of that fact, but those who sought to obtrude the observation of the
Mosaic Law upon the Brethren. Again, who were they that made much disputing in
the Synod? ver. 7. sure it was not the Apostles, nor any others besides
themselves: but had they not been there, I think there is no question among
rational men, but the Apostles and Elders conveened, had a power to call them,
and that it was their duty to come. Certainly, if we be bound to be ever ready
to give to any that asks us a reason of the hope which is in us, much more to
such an Assembly as this, authorized of God for such ends as these were. So
that I take the first for granted, they have power to call erroneous persons.

2. They have power to admonish and rebuke them, this is evident also from Act.
15. those disturbers were rebuked in the face of the whole Assembly. There is a
threefold rebuke, Fraternall, Concionall, Judicial; the one is done by a
brother: the second may be done by one single Pastor, as is commanded, 1 Timothy
4.2, 3, 4, 5. Preach the Word, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering:
the last is done by a consociation of Pastors and Elders. If one single
Pastor has power to rebuke authoritatively an erring brother, how much more a
consociation, a Synod of Pastors and Elders.

3. They have power doctrinally to censure such persons, and to condemn them.
Thus you see in Act. 15. They censured those for liars, troublers, subverters
of souls. And thus may a Synod censure and condemn an erroneous person. Thus
did the Council of Nice censure and condemn Arius, not only his error, but the
person also. Tom. 1. epi^t. ad ub^^j, orthodoxos. Act. 1. ult.
Athanasius desired and vehemently supplicated his fellow-pastours of other
Churches to meet together in a Synod, to vindicate and redeem the Church from
error, and that they would (...), by their suffrages condemn and reject the
authors of such mischiefs. There are usually laid down three ways of
censuring and condemning erroneous persons.

1. The first is (...), politically, when an erroneous person is censured by
civil censures, viz. to be imprisoned, or to suffer in his body, or in his
estate, etc. Ch^mier. tom. 1. l. 15 c. 10. 35.
which censures are among the Papists, not with us.

The second is, (...), divinely, when a man is judged to eternal torments;
which judgment belongs alone to Christ, Joh. 5.22. Church-judgement is
medicinal for salvation, not for destruction.

3. The third is, (...), ecclesiastically, Dog nata imp^a and ab haeretici^ pr^
ecta argu^re and a^^^hematizare op^r^et ^ominib^s autem parcendum, and ^ro
salute ip^orum orandum. Sermon. de anathe^. to^. 5. p ^90 Rutherf. Due r^ght of
Presb. p. 36^. and 370.
which is no more but to determine and judge such a doctrine, to be an error,
and such persons, who do maintain such doctrine, to be erroneous persons. I
like well of that speech of Chrysostom, It is the duty (let me say) of the
Church to censure and Anathematize wicked doctrines, proceeding from heretics,
but the Church is to spare their persons, and pray for their souls.

4. They have power to send to the Churches, whereof they are members, to
excommunicate and cast them out. So that though it should be granted that a
Synod has not corrective power, the power of censures formally, yet vertually
it does reside in them, having power to send to other Churches to do it, to
which I should most fully agree.

It is a passage of the learned Professor of Scotland, We do not say that
power of jurisdiction is in a Provincial or National Synod, as in the
Churches, who have power to excommunicate; and he gives two reasons.

1. Because this power of jurisdiction in Synods is cumulative, not privative.
The second is yet fuller.

2. Because it is in a Synod, rather according to commanded, Qu^a^ actus
imperatos potiu^ qu^m actu^ ^licito^
then elicite acts, For, says he, the Synod by an ecclesiastical power, added
to that intrinsecall power of jurisdiction in Churches, does command the
Churches to use the power of jurisdiction, rather then to use it actually her
self.

And in another place, Rut^^rf. Due ri^ht of P^esb. p. 41^.
the same reverend and learned Author has this passage, I could easily yield
that there is no necessity of the elicite acts of many parts of government,
such as Excommunication, Ordination, etc. in Synods Provincial or National;
but that Synods, in the case of neglect of Presbyteriall Churches, command
these particular Churches, whom it concerns to do their duty. And in this
sense the Synod in Act. 15. is to remit the censure of Excommunication, to the
Presbytery of Antioch and Jerusalem, in the case of the obstinacy of these
obtruders of circumcision.

But you will say, though he do not allow it to be the act of a Synod, yet he
affirms it to be the act of a Classis; but, with submission to better
judgments, I conceive upon the same ground it is denied to a Synod, upon the
same ground it may be denied to a Classis, nor do I know the difference
between them. The consociation of Churches makes a Synod; and what is a
Classis, but such a consociation? If it be said, that one is a consociation of
more Churches then the other, I see not, with reverence to them of the contrary
thoughts, how this should put the difference, unless upon this hand, that if
these acts of jurisdiction, or at least some of them be denied to a Synod,
which is the consociation of many Churches, they cannot be allowed to a
Classis, which is a combination of a few. And let me add thus much more, if
the convention at Jerusalem, Act. 15. evidently no greater, probably not so
great as an ordinary Classis, especially if it were, as our Brethren affirm,
only a consociation of two single Churches, viz. Jerusalem and Antioch. I say,
if this Convention was yet called a Synod; And that this Synod, as the learned
Professor grants, was to remit the censure of Excommunication, to the
respective Presbyteries whereof the offender was a member. I see not but a
Classis also may have the same name, yea, and is to do the same thing, viz.
having judged of the fact, to remit the censure of the offenders to those
Congregations whereof the parties offending are members.

And thus much shall suffice to have spoken of the second branch of the power
of Synods, viz. as relating unto erroneous persons. Possibly I have not gone so
far as others, and I must say, neither could I, unless J went upon other
men's legs, not my own: thus far J could walk, though J did walk more alone.

The third branch of power in a Synod.
We now come to the third and last branch of power in a Synod, as relating to
erring Churches. And J conceive that a Synod may put forth these acts of power
toward erring Churches.

1. They may declare their opinions to be erroneous. And this is plain from
Act. 15.24. where you see there was a Dogmaticall or doctrinall declaration of
the falsehood and error of their opinions, who sought to obtrude Circumcision,
and the observation of the Mosaicall Law upon the Churches: this was judged by
the Apostles and Elders in this Convention an heterodox opinion, a dangerous
error, not only troubling, but tending to the subverting of their souls. And
in this we shall find a good agreement, the key of knowledge; and a power
doctrinally to determine and declare the error of opinions, being granted on
those hands, who otherwise deny the power of jurisdiction to Synods; all grant
a Synod to be a teaching, though all will not allow it to be a governing
Church; and that it has the power of doctrine, though not the power of
jurisdiction.

2. A Synod has power to counsel an erring Church, that they lay down their
errors, that they persist no further in those erroneous opinions. And in this
we shall also agree; they who deny the determinations and acts of Synods to
bind, as authoritative Commandments, do yet acknowledge them to oblige, not
only as friendly advices, but as authoritative counsels; and this upon two
grounds.

1. Because they are a company of Elders, to whom, See Cotton Keys.
as to the Priests of the Lord, Whose lips are to preserve knowledge, the keys
of knowledge, and consequently a Synodicall authority is g^ven.

2. Because as a private man's power is inferior to a Pastor: so is the power
of a Synodicall convention of Elders above a single Congregation. And a Synod
in dogmatical power arises so higher then these, as a divine institution does
fall upon it.

Every brother indeed has a power to counsel and advise a brother, and this
warranted,

1. By the Law of Nature.

2. By the Law of God, Levit. 19.18. Lev 19.18


3. By the Law of brotherly charity, Colos. 3.15. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. Heb. 3.13.
Heb. 10.24. Col. 3.15. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. Heb. 3.13. Heb. 10 24.
But this is only as a gifted and enlightened brother: every Pastor has power
also to counsel, and it is his duty to do it, but he does this by the key of
knowledge, the power of order, not the power of jurisdiction. And though our
Brethren do not allow the power of jurisdiction in a Synod, yet some of them
grant an authoritative power, not only differing from the former gradually, as
a greater power to advise differs from a lesser, but specifically, and in
nature different from the other; indeed their brethren grant not so much in
this kind; they say, the power of a Synod differs from the power of
Congregations only gradually and extensively, not essentially and specifically.
And could that specificall difference of power be fully made out; certainly it
would be a good medium to our reconciliation in this point of difference.

3. A Synod has power not only to declare and counsel, but to admonish and
rebuke an erring Church: if one brother may admonish another, and if he will
not hear him, he may tell it to two or three; and if he will not hear two or
three, he may tell it to the Church; then by the same proportion, if one sister
Church will not hear another admonishing her from her error or scandal, she
may tell it to more; if yet they will not hear, they may go and complain of it
to a Synod or Church of Churches. That Scripture which bids me to admonish and
rebuke an erring brother, does warrant by way of proportion one Church, much
more a Church of Churches, to admonish and rebuke one erring Church. And in
this also we agree.

4. A Synod has power to promulge and publish their errors to other Churches.
I say, a Synod having first examined and debated any opinion or doctrine by the
Word, and found it to be erroneous, they may promulge and publish those
doctrines, as they have found them: thus you see they did in that great
convention in Act. 15. having examined and debated that opinion of theirs, Act.
15.^4
and upon debate had concluded it to be eroneous, they sent their letters to
the Churches of Antioch, Syria, Cilicia, wherein they published the error and
danger of those doctrines to them, as you see, verse. 24. charging them to be
destructive and subversive to their souls, where by the way let me tell you,
though the resolution of this Question was the end of this Convention; For Paul
and Barnabas was sent from the Church of Antioch unto Jerusalem, (...),
concerning this Question, verse. 2. ver. 2.
And the Apostles and Elders came together to consider, (...), verse. 6. ver. 6.
of this matter, yet I conceive it was not the adequate end: if it had been the
total and adequate end of this meeting in a mere doctrinall way to resolve the
Question, then had Peter, verse. 10, 11. made a clear issue of the Question,
when he said, we are saved by the grace of God, both Jews and Gentiles: And it
was to tempt God to lay the yoke of the Law of Moses upon the brethren; here
was a full determination of the Question. And if the resolving of this Question
had been the adequate end of this Synod; why is there more done? why do they
censure and brand the false teachers for subverters and liars? Why do they
publish and promulge this to other Churches? send binding decrees to be
observed by all the Churches of the Gentiles? All this shows, that though the
resolving of the Question was the end of their meeting, yet was it not the full
and adequate end of it: nor did the Church of Antioch send to them, merely for
the help of their Council in the dogmaticall determining of the Question in
doubt, but for the assistance of their authority in strengthening those
determinations, and healing those present ruptures and divisions among them:
The determinations of Paul for the dogmaticall part might have been as valid as
the sentence of them all, he was an Apostle as well as they; or if his
Apostleship were more questionable among the Gentiles, by reason he had not
gone in and out with Christ in his life, as the other did, yet the sentence of
the other Apostles at Jerusalem might have been valid enough to have settled the
controversy for the doctrinall part; and if no more had been required, why are
Elders joined with them in the determination? they could contribute nothing to
strengthen the doctrinall part, the sentence of the Apostles was strong enough
without them; and therefore there was some further end of this Convention, then
merely Counsel, the settling and determination of the Question, which might be
the joint authority of a Synod, not only to make decrees, but to bind those
decrees upon the Churches. And so not only to discover, and doctrinally to
declare those opinions obtruded to be errors, but also to publish and promulge
them as errors to the Churches, that they might avoid them. And thus it was
the practice of the Primitive times in their Conventions, after they had
censured and condemned errors, they writ letters to the Churches, which were
called literae communicatoriae, or Communicatory letters, wherein they let them
know that such opinions were censured and condemned for false and erroneous
opinions: and that is another branch of the power of a Synod toward erring
Churches.

5. A Synod has power to send to other Churches to beware of such a society. I
say, upon the publishing and declaring of the danger of their erroneous
opinions to other Churches, they may caution other Churches to take heed and
beware of them: if the Pastor of one particular Church may Caution his people
to beware of such and such errors, as do arise among them, much more may many
Pastors and Elders in consociation do the same to many Congregations. And
this was another ground of these Communicatory Letters in the Primitive times;
after they had published their errors to other Churches, they did also by
these Letters caution them, and warn them to take heed of them. Thus Alexand^r
Bishop of Alexandria, Theod. l. 1. c 3. Chamier. l 14 c ^. sect. 8, 9.
after Arius his heresy had been sentenced in a Synod, he sent to all the
Churches of Christ to beware of that dangerous h^resie.

6. They may declare such Churches unworthy communion with the Churches of
Christ. I say, they may in an authoritative judicial way, in the name and
authority of Christ, declare these erring Churches are not worthy communion,
nor to be received into fellowship with any of the Churches of Christ; nor to
have communion one with another in the Ordinances of Christ: nay, and yet more,
they may send to other Churches, and charge them as they are the Churches of
Christ to withdraw all fellowship and communion from them: which certainly, if
it be not all, yet it seems to be proportionable to what is contended for. Par
in parem non habet potestatem.
It is a censure, and this shows there is authority in Synods, for no equal
can censure or give out the sentence of non-communion against another equal.
Nor would Christ have one Church to forego communion with another Church, but
upon presupposed censure, some foregoing act of authority: if he would not have
a brother to renounce communion with a brother, but upon some foregoing
Church Authority, Mat. 18.15, 16. much less would he have a Church. And as it
is a censure, and so declares authority in Synods, so it is to me a censure
proportionate to excommunication, and so certainly the brethren would have the
Churches to receive it, otherwise I conceive they were not to withdraw
communion from them.

Ames says, Ames. cas. consc. l. 4, c 29 q. 11. th 26. Rutherf.
though whole Churches and members of another Church cannot properly be
excommunicated by a Synod, yet for manifest heresy a Synod may, 1. Condemn. 2.
Forsake. 3. Reject such a Church, which, says he, is proportionable to
Excommunication. And is Excommunication in the essence and substance of the
act, as the other brethren say. Of which I shall speak more by and by.

Now in the close of all this Discourse of the power of Synods, we have two
main Objections, which we shall endeavor to answer, and so conclude this
Discourse.

Ob. 1. But it will be said, Are the Churches to obey such a sentence, merely
because the Synod commands it? If indeed a Synod were guid^d by such an
extraordinary and infallible spirit, as that in Act. 15. and could say with
them, It seems good to the holy Ghost and us, then were the Churches bound to
obey: but our Synods now are not assisted with any such inf^llible spirit; nor
have they that extraordinary concurrence of the spirit, therefore we are not
bound to obey.

Answ. For the first part of this Objection, viz. Whether the Churches are to
obey, because a Synod commands and enjoins such things? I answer, No, and
demand what Protestant Author ever said so? Certainly the power of a Synod is
not absolute, but limited; not magisteriall, but ministerial, a power only in
the Lord: nor are we to be mere instruments moved by the will of those in
authority, as the Papists say: but are moral Agents, and ought no l^sse to
obey in faith, then they command in faith, and are to give c^re and diligence,
we be not accessory to unjust sentences, lest we also partake in other men's
sins. But though we are not to obey merely, because they command, yet are we
to obey, because we are commanded in the Lord; A Synod is to be looked upon as
a solemn ordinance of Christ. And the Elders are to be looked upon as the
Officers of Christ, and they decreeing and commanding in the Lord, Manuscr.
quoted by Rutherf. Due right of Pre^b. p. 365.
we are to obey. Our brethren say thus much, Though every particular Church of
Christ has right and power to exercise its own Ordinances Christ has left
them, yet in difficult cases we are bound to seek advice of other Churches, and
to give so much authority to the concurrence of judgments in a Synod, as shall
and ought to be an obligation to us, not to depart from any such resolutions,
as they shall make upon any consideration what ever, but where our conscience
and our peace with God is apparently concerned.

2. For the second branch of the Objection, which is taken from the different
concurrence with, and the assistance of the Spirit to our Synods, and to that
in Act. 15. they were guided by an extraordinary and infallible Spirit, and
could say, It seems good to the holy Ghost and us; our Synods have only, at the
best, the ordinary assistance of the Spirit, nay, and may err, and therefore
there is a vast difference.

An. I answer to this. 1. This Argument strikes against all jurisdiction in a
particular Congregation, as well as against all power in a Synod: for a
particular Congregation is not infallible neither, they may err in their
administrations, and therefore shall they not administer censures at all: who
will say this? Nay

2. This strikes against all authoritative delivering of doctrine, in single
Pastors, ^s well as the Dogmaticall and doctrinall power of delivering
doctrine in Synods: ordinary Pastors, they have not that extraordinary
concurrence of the spirit, they are not infallible, they may err, therefore
are they not to preach?

3. A man, and so a Synod may be guided by an infallible spirit, although his,
or their spirit be not infallibl^. And the results of a Synod may be
infallible, and founded upon a certain word, though a Synod it self be not
infallible.

4. I conceive these two are not convertible, an infallible, and an
extraordinary spirit. A man may be guided by an infallible, yet not by an
extraordinary spirit, the ordinary presence and guidance of the spirit of
truth, in the word may be infallible, yet but ordinary. It is not an
extraordinary assistance and guidance.

5. But fifthly you suppose that here, which cannot be made evident and clear,
that the Apostles were guided in this Synod by an extraordinary spirit, or by
the extraordinary assistance of the spirit. The Papists indeed do affirm it,
and hence take, a ground to infer the infallibility of their Councels and
Synods. Non sequit^^ spiritus sanctus huic Concilio adsuit, ergo and a^iis
adest. Whitaker.
And many famous Protestant Authors in their Tracts against the Papists affirm
the same, and make use of this as a medium to prove the fallibility of
Councels, that Councels may err, because they are but men, and subject to
error, and not guided with such an extraordinary assistance of the spirit as
the Apostles were in th^s great Council.

Chamier Tom. 3. l, 15. c. 10. sect: 3. Illis aderat extraordinem spiritus
sanctus, adeo ut quae illi propo^erent ad^^ simpliciter manarent, at reliquis
pastoribus adsistentia spiritus nulla extra ordinem.
One speaking of this Convention says, The holy Spirit was extraordinarily
present with them, in so much that whatever they propounded was simply Gods
communications, but God affords no such extraordinary assistance to ordinary
Pastors. The like Whitaker also, Whitaker. de authoritate, Sac. Scrip. l. 1. p.
78 etiam controv. 3. q. 6 c. 2. p 610. Certum est hoc fuisse singular
concilium and singularibus privilegiis donatum, etc.
It is certain this Council was a singular Council, and was endued with
singular privileges in regard of the presence of the Apostles. Shall we
compare (says he) the Council of Trent, yea that famous Council of Nice to
this, in which there were so many Worthies, endued with the extraordinary gifts
of the holy Ghost? far be it from us to make such a comparison. And a little
after, he says, Omnes defin^tiones ecr^^ (...). and Scripturis pares fuere.
Ibid p. 115.
All their determinations were inspirations of God, and equal to the
Scriptures. And in this opinion runs the stream of our famous Writers against
the Papists. With reverence to the vast abilities of these famous Worthies,
Champions for God in their generations, Shall I take the boldness to say, That
I conceive how ever the Apostles in the penning of Scriptures were assisted and
directed with an immediate inspired spirit; Yet in this Synodicall Convention
they did not proceed by their Apostolical authority; nor had they an
extraordinary concurrence, or immediate inspiration of the Spirit of God. I
shall give you these reasons, and shall then leave it to your thoughts to judge.

1. We read, verse 2. That Paul and Barnabas were sent from the Church of
Antioch to the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem about this Question: now Paul
as an Apostle, and a man immediately inspired, did need not to go to Jerusalem
for the assistance of the other Apostles, for he was able as an Apostle to have
determined the Question himself, he knew the whole mystery of the Gospel. Gal.
1.16, 17. Gal. 1.16, 17. Gal. 2.6.
and was inferior to none; therefore he went not as an Apostle, but as an
ordinary Elder. One Apostle as an Apostle might have determined the Question
without the help of a Synod.

2. The persons here assembled together do declare, That they were not directed
by an immediate inspired Spirit. It is said, The Apostles and Elders came
together to consider of this Question. Now, if the Apostles were to act as
Apostles, what light and assistance could the Elders add to the Apostles as
Apostles? But you see the Elders, as well as the Apostles, met together to
consider of the matter, and in Act. 21.18, 25. Act. 21.18, 25.
All the Elders of Jerusalem with James take upon themselves these acts and
decrees, as well as the Apostles, and in Act. 16.4. they are called the decrees
of the Elders, as well as the Apostles; but now the Elders of ordinary
Churches, such as these were, here conveened in this Synod, could not be
collateral actors with the immediately inspired Apostles, as in this Synod
they were, nay, the whole Church, say our brethren; therefore certainly they
did not act as Apostles.

3. The manner of the Apostles proceeding in this Council holds forth to us,
that they did not act as Apostles, nor were immediately inspired, because they
proceeded by way of communication of Counsels. It is said, They met together to
consider, that is one phrase of speech shows it was not acted by an apostolical
spirit: where there are inspirations there is no need of considerations. (...).
Act. 15.7.
And it is said there was dispute, nay much dispute, great and earnest
disputation, verse. 7. When there had been much disputing Peter stood up. So
that there was much debating to find out the truth, a great dispute. And every
one delivers his thoughts in order, first Peter speaks, verse. 7, 8. then
Barnabas and Paul, ver. 12. and after James, ver. 13. So that you see here was
a great dispute; now immediate inspirations are not gathered up by disputes:
what the Apostles do as Apostles, they do not by conferring, and debating,
and seeking light one of another, but they are directly and immediately
inspired of God.

Indeed the immediate inspired spirit, it may discourse and infer a
conclusion from such and such premises, as Paul does, Romans 4.4, 5, 6. and Romans
3.28. But the immediately inspired spirit of God in arguing does not take the
help of disputing one with another; things immediately inspired, are not
gathered up by disputations, but by revelations. There is no concurrence of man
to them, they are done without the help of our own reason, and without the help
of others also.

4. If they had been guided by an immediate inspired spirit, then should every
of them have rested in the sentence of another, for the immediate inspired
spirit, is a like perfect in all his determinations, and so Paul should have
subscribed to Peter's, or Peter to Paul's, and James to them all, and not all to
James, especially when he does, for ought the phrase imports, but set down his
own judgment, (...), verse. 19. I judge, and the manner and phrase of speech
implies as if it were his private opinion, with reverence to what Peter and
Paul said, to which yet all submitted. Now, I say, if every one were guided by
an immediate inspired spirit, why should any recede from his own sentence? And
why should they all submit to the sentence of another? seeing they were better
able to clear the spirit, whereby themselves spoke, was infallible, then the
spirit by which another spoke.

5. If here the Apostles speak by the immediate inspired spirit, the Churches
had been here left in some doubt which to follow; for though one Apostle does
not speak contrary, yet they speak diverse one to another. James speaks of
abstaining from blood, and things strangled, and things offered to idols, which
the other Apostles did not speak of; and therefore if the other did speak, as
they were immediately inspired, the Churches would have been left in doubt,
whether to follow what James said, or what Paul and Peter said.

If it be said, the occasion of doubt which of them to follow was removed,
because all of them afterward agreed to what James said.

I say, 1. Though the occasion of the doubt was thereby removed from them, who
were willing to be satisfied, yet here was a great advantage given to them, who
would except against these results, because the other Apostles, who were yet
directed (say you) by the immediate inspired spirit, laid no such burdens, nor
imposed no such commandments of abstinence, etc. upon the Churches in what they
had said, and therefore they might say, either this ultimate determination was
not the mind of the spirit, or the spirit was diverse from himself in the
procedure of these determinations.

2. In that they all agree to James, it is a plain evidence that they had not
spoken by the immediate instinct of the spirit, neither had been directed by
any extraordinary dictate and assistance of him, because they decline, if not
recede from what themselves had spoken, and now, as it were upon further and
second thoughts, do wholly concur with James.

6. And indeed which may be a sixth instance of the thing in proof; though that
which Peter and Paul said was a truth, that the Gentiles should not be pressed
to the observation of Moses Law upon necessity of salvation, yet they did not
so fully speak to the resolution of the Question; nor would that they said have
satisfied the consciences of the Churches in their present practice, if James
had seen no further, or spoke no more in the resolving of the Question then
they did. For, notwithstanding what Peter and Paul said, They might have eaten
things offered to Idols, and blood, and things strangled, which at that time
had been a sin against the law of nature, and a great scandal and offense to
the Jews, and so notwithstanding this determination, the divisions would have
been greater, the rents wider, the scandal more dangerous then before; the
Jews they should have gone on in a total abstinence of all Ceremonies, which
might have been scandalous to some Gentiles; and the Gentiles should have gone
on in eating blood, meats offered to Idols, and things strangled, which had
been highly scandalous to the Jews; which certainly had Paul or Peter acted
here as Apostles, by virtue of the immediate inspired spirit, they could not
have overseen, nor had they let it pass^. By all which to me it seems clear
that the Apostles and Elders in this Convention, did not act by virtue of an
immediate inspired spirit, nor had they any further extraordinary assistance of
the spirit, Possunt alia legitima concilia similiter asserere decreta sua esse
decre^a spiritus fancti, si huic concilio similia fuerint, and si eandem
regulam servaverint, quam in hoc concilio servaverint and secuti sunt Apostoti.
Wh^t cont. 3. q. ^. c. 2. p. 610. a
but as ordinary Pastors and Elders in this act. That this Synod or Convention
was led by the holy Ghost, is evident by verse. 25, 28. where it is said, It
seems good to the holy Ghost and us, -- But that this was the holy Ghost
immediately inspiring the Apostles and Elders upon these grounds alleged, I
deny. But that it was the ordinary concurrence of the spirit, such as ordinary
Pastors and Elders may have in the truth; And thus Whitaker himself
(notwithstanding all those former passages) affirms, saying, That other
lawful Councels may in like manner assert their decrees to be the decrees of
the holy Ghost, if they were like to this Council, and if they did observe the
same rule which the Apostles did observe and follow in this Council, meaning
the word of truth.

And indeed if otherwise, then either we have no pattern for Synods, or else all
Synods do act with the same spirit. I say, either we must with the Papists
say, That all Synods are infallble; or we must say with the Socinians and
Arminians, we have no pattern for Synods at all. And thus I have showed you,
that the Apostles and Elders in this Synodicall Convention were not immediately
inspired, nor had they an extraordinary concurrence of the spirit; nor did they
act by their Apostolical spirit, but as ordinary Pastors. And in this we have
the concurrence of some of the Brethren, who have written on this subject, The
Apostles did not in this great Convention determine the matter by Apostolical
authority, Cotton. Keys, p. 48, 49.
from immediate revelation, but they assembled together with the Elders to
consider of the matter, ver 6. and a multitude of brethren together with them,
verse. 12, 22, 23. And after searching out the cause by an ordinary means of
disputation, verse. 7. Peter cleared it by the witness of the spirit to his
Ministry in Cornelius family; Paul and Barnabas, by the like effect of their
Ministry among the Gentiles; James confirmed the same by the testimony of the
Prophets; wherewith the whole Synod being satisfied, they determine of a
judicial sentence, in which they censure the false teachers, as troublers of
the Church, subverters of souls: They reject the imposition of Circumcision, as
an insupportable yoke: They impose on the Churches none but some necessary
observations, and them by way of that authority, which the Lord had given them,
verse. 28. By all which you see, it is fully granted by some of the Brethren
themselves, That the Apostles in this Convention did not act as Apostles, or as
men immediately inspired. And so much for the first great Objection: we come to
the second.

Object. 2. But it will be said, Though it be granted that a Synod has power
to counsel, admonish, rebuke an erring Church; nay, and to publish their
errors to other Churches, to caution other Churches to beware of them; yea,
and to declare those erring Churches unworthy communion, and to charge other
Churches to withdraw from them; yet notwithstanding all this, suppose that an
erring Church will yet persist in it is error, and will not be healed and
reclaimed, has a Synod no further power to put forth to the gaining of them?
May not a Synod proceed to further censure, viz. the Excommunication of such an
erring obstinate Church?

Answ. And here indeed is the great knot of the controversy; this is the great
dividing point between some of the Brethren on both parts at this time. In the
perusal of Discourses, I find men various in their thoughts concerning this.
I will lay down five several opinions about this Question.

1. Some say that no Church, or member of any Church, is under the jurisdiction
of any Church, or Church of Churches whatever, but that every single
Congregation is a Church of Christ, and has full and entire power within it
self to administer ordinances, dispense censures, and independent upon any
other, or others, either for the enjoyment or employment of this power; and
when they seek to other Churches, it is for assistance and direction, not for
precepts and injunctions: It is not to add to their authority, but to
strengthen their ability in the managing of it. Park polit. eccl l. 3. p. 335.


2. Others say, That not only person's, but Churches also are subordinate unto
the power and jurisdiction of a Synod, or Church of Churches; and that a Synod
has not only power to excommunicate erroneous persons, but erring Churches
also, if they will not be reclaimed. And this they establish by way of
proportion upon Matthew. 18. Go tell the Church; of which before: and say there
is the same reason for the Excommunication of whole Churches, as of some
persons in them, viz. the taking away the scandal, the conversion of the
sinners, and the preserving of other Churches from seduction. As two or three
persons may scandal and give offense to one Church; so may two or three
Churches give offense and scandal to many Sister Churches. The Apostle implies
so much, 1 Cor. 10.32. 1 Cor. 10.32.
where he says, Give no offense, neither to the Jew, nor to the Gentile, nor
to the Church of God. And if Churches may be offended, certainly Churches may
offend. And therefore without doubt Christ, who has provided remedies for the
scandal and offenses that may arise among a few, in a particular Congregation,
has not l^ft many Churches and Congregations without some remedy against the
scandals and offenses of a few. Certainly remedies there are. And some think
th s, viz. Excommunication: and say, a Church falls under a twofold
consideration.

1. As having communion with it self. Pagets power of Classes and Synods, p.
109. in answ^^ to D. Ames.


2. As having communion with other Churches. Though a Church cannot be cast out
of communion with it self: Yet it may be cast out of communion with other
Churches of Christ. So Paget in answer to D. Ames.

3. Some again think that a whole Church is not to be excommunicated; and yet
not upon D. Ames grounds, because a Church cannot be cast out of communion with
it self, etc. Ames. Cas. consc. l. 4. c. 29.
Nor yet upon this ground, because the other remedies alleged are sufficient
remedies. But for this reason, because probably the whole Church is not
corrupted, and it were better to spare many offenders, then to censure one
innocent. And therefore it is judged safer that this censure of Excommunication
should be dispensed distributively, rather then collectively, by singling out
the chief offenders in a Congregation, rather then by the cutting off the whole
body and society. And this is one thing objected against the sentence of
Non-communion, that it does without any distinction or difference cut off a
whole Church from communion and fellowship with other Churches of Christ, when
it may be the whole Church is not corrupted and guilty.

4. Some think the way to deal with an heretical Church, if I may so call it,
is not by Excommunication, but by dissolution of the society. But this not
being a Church-censure, I have nothing to do with it here.

5. And lastly, Some think, That though a Synod cannot excommunicate an erring
Church, yet may they do that which is proportionable to it, they may censure
them, condemn them, forsake them, reject them, and render them odious to other
Churches for their errors. And if this be not Excommunication, yet certainly
it is analogicall and proportionable to Excommunication. Ames. cas. consc l 4.
c. 29 q 11. these 26.
So Ames. And is held by some to be it self Excommunication. The learned
Author of the book entitled, Observations and annotations upon the Apolog.
Narration, p. 43. has this expression to those Brethren, It is a mistake in
you to think that in declaring of your non-communion with other Churches, you
do not excommunicate them; for what is Excommunication, but a privation of
Cimmunion? etc.

And indeed Excommunication being an ecclesiastical word, and not found in
Scripture, and the substance of that we find in Scripture being done, why do
we lengthen out the contention.

Object. 3. But it will perhaps be said by some, That all this is not
Excommunication, this is but the half of it, the negative part of it, and not
the positive part of it, which indeed is that wherein the proper nature of
Excommunication does lie, viz. a d^livering up to Satan.

Answ. And here we are now come up to the highest step of the controversy:
This is the -- the very point of the difference.

1. For the first part of the Objection, That this is not Excommunication,
because it wants the positive part. To me it seems evident, that which is
granted by Ames in the fifth opinion, and which our Brethren grant in the
sentence of non-communion; has something positive, as well as negative in it:
Yea, but you will say, here is not the delivering up to Satan, and in that
consists the formality of this sentence of Excommunication.

Indeed this is a great Question, and requires more pains and time, then I can
spend about it.

1. Some there are indeed that think in this to lie the formality of the
censure, viz. The delivering up to Satan.

2. Some again think it a higher and more dreadful degree of the sentence.
The author of the Observations, on the Ap^l. Nar p. 43.

3. Others think this, Delivering up to Satan, to be a fruit and consequent of
the sentence, and not of the formality of it.

4. And there are some that think, that this delivering up to Satan, is
neither of the formality of the sentence, nor yet a fruit and consequent of it,
but an act of Apostolical power, put forth by the Apostles toward eminent and
great offenders: And such an act as ordinary Pastors and Elders, neither in
the Apostles days, nor ever since could put forth, being a power proper to the
Apostles only, Pet. Molin. vat. c. 11. p. 10^. De potestate Apostolorum in
corpora.
whereby they delivered up the bodies of great offenders to be tormented by
Satan, That the soul might be saved in the day of Christ.

And this they call that virga Apostolica, which you read of, 1 Cor. 4.21.
Shall I come to you with a rod? Such a rod as Peter came withal to Ananias and
Sapphira: such an one as Paul put forth to Elymas the Sorcerer, and such an one
as he put forth to Hymeneus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1.20. and toward the
incestuous person, 1 Cor. 5.3, 5. I have decreed that this man shall be
delivered to Satan for the destruction of the flesh. That is, say they (for I
will give you their thoughts) for the punishing and tormenting of the body by
weakness, sickness, griefs, etc. for so by flesh they understand the body.
Cum spirit^^ manifest hic significat animam, necesse e^t per ^a^nem spiritui
o^positam corpu^ intell^g^ Mol. p. 10^.
And say the opposition here between flesh and spirit does make much for it;
for if by spirit be meant the soul, as in this place it must, then by flesh to
hold the opposition must needs be meant the body: and the sense will then be,
he has delivered such an one to Satan for the d struction of the flesh, that
is, for the punishing and tormenting of the body; which they exemplify in Job,
that the spirit, that is the soul, may thereby be brought to repentance, and
saved in the day of the Lord; and this extraordinary and miraculous power of
inflicting torments on the bodies of eminent malefactors, in the Apostles
days, is conceived by some to be afforded to the Apostles for to supply and
make up the defect of the Magistrates power, which they wanted in those days.

But yet they deny not but that Paul would have the incestuous person to be
cast out of Communion with the Church; but this he would have done by the
Church of Corinth, and by the authority of the ordinary Elders, as appears,
verse. 7. Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump: so in
verse. 13. Put away therefore from among your selves that wicked person. But
when the Apostle speaks about delivering to Satan, he does not expect the
consent of the Church of Corinth, but decrees this by his apostolical power
and authority: to which decree of his, he requires the Churches consent to be
joined, as he says, I, as absent in body, but present in spirit, have decreed,
that he that has done this thing should be delivered up to Satan. And that
which he adds, When ye are gathered together, and my spirit; it is not to be
understood (say they) as if the decree of the Apostle did depend upon the
consent of the Church, but having decreed, he requires their assent to it. And
this they prove in the example of Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom he delivered up
to Satan without the consent of any Church what ever.

So that you see there is a great deal of difference in men's thoughts
concerning this delivering up to Satan.

1. Some you see would have it an act of apostelicall power, and a punishment
inflicted upon the body, and not Excommunication; they find it not in the
first institution of this ordinance, Matthew. 18.17. nor do they think Satan a
fi^ instrument to bring about those holy ends, for which this ordinance was
instituted. And how ever Satan may do much good to the souls of Gods people
against his will occasionally, and accidentally by his buffetings and
temptations, yet it sounds harsh to them that God should set up so solemn and
holy an ordinance as this is, to continue in the Church, while Christ has a
Church on earth, wherein Satan is so far honored, as to be serviceable and
isntrumental in the saving of souls, etc. --

2. Some will have this delivering up to Satan, of the formality of the
sentence, urging the Apostles phrase of speech, in the 1 Cor. 5. to import so
much to us.

3. Some again assert it to be a further and more dreadful degree of this
censure.

4. And others say, it is not of the formality of the censure, but a fruit and
consequent of it.

Now, if it be the first of these, viz. an act of apostolical power, as many
conceive, who yet hold up this ordinance of Excommunication, yea, and from that
place also, 1 Cor. 5.2, 7, 13. then did it die with the Apostles, and we have
nothing to do with it: It is utterly inimitable and impracticable, by ordinary
Elders and officers. And if it be the second, viz. That this delivering up to
Satan be the formality of Excommunication, then it will follow, when there is
not such a delivering up to Satan, there is no Excommunication: which I think
few will say. And the condition of persons, not only censured, but censuring,
does prevail much with me not to think: and if it be the third, viz. a further
degree of the censure, then either a degree prudentially to be annexed
according to the atrocity and heinousness of the fact; of which I see not any
warrant: or it is a degree necessarily to be added: and if so, then is it
inseparable from the censure, nor can the censure be dispensed without it, and
so it is of the formality of it; which to me is not so evident. But if this
delivering up to Satan be the consequent and fruit of the censure, as the
fourth opinion says, and many upon good grounds do choose rather to affirm;
then the controversy will be at an end in this particular. For those brethren
of the Congregationall way do affirm, That when a Synod met together in the
Name of Christ, Borough. Heart division, p. 44.
have in the authority of Christ solemnly judged, condemned, and censured such
an erring Church, to be such an one as has no right to any Church-ordinance,
nor is to have any communion with the Churches of Christ: if this judgment be
right, then such a Congregation is thereby put out of the kingdom of Christ,
and consequently is put under the power, and kingdom of Satan.

And thus I have done with the answer to the Objections, and with that have at
length finished this discourse of Church power, as relating to this Question,
The suppressing of error, and reducing of erroneous persons. Yet give me leave
before I shut up this work (in regard it is a better work to unite, then to
divide; to compound differences, then to heighten and increase them) to lay
down the grants of our brethren of the Congregationall-way unto this Question.
In which we shall tell you what materials they will afford us to the making up
of this Fabric.

And first, though they expressly say, that every particular Congregation is a
Church of Christ, and has right to decide it is own controversies, and to
conclude it is own differences, (instancing in the Church of Antioch, whose
endeavors among themselves to end their difference, and conclude the
controversy which arose, ^. H^^rt divisions, p. 43.
before ever they purposed to go to Jerusalem, does clearly demonstrate that
they had right, though they wanted power) yet they affirm that such a Church is
to render an account to other Churches of Christ of their actions. And this is
not arbitrary that they may, or may not do it, but they are bound in
conscience to it, as a duty they ow to God, and to their sister-Churches.

Ibid.
2. They grant that a consociation of Churches in Synods, consisting of
Ministers and Elders, is a precious ordinance of Jesus Christ for the
preserving of the Churches against errors, schisms, and scandals.

3. They grant that in case a particular Church or Congregation, either want
light or unity among themselves, that they are not able to determine and
conclude their own controversies, Cotton Keys, p. 48
either they are too difficult, by reason of want of light, or too hard, for
want of love, or by reason of division among themselves, that then it is their
duty to repair unto a Synod, or consociation of Churches, for their help and
assistance to the determining of their doubts and controversies. And this they
conclude upon these two grounds or reasons.

1. The want of power in such a Church, to pass a binding sentence. Where
error or scandal is maintained by a fa^tion, the promise of binding and
loosing made to the Church, Ecclesia errans vel li^igans, no^ ligat.
is not given to the Church, when it is leavened with error and variance. It
is a maxim, The censure of an erring or disagreeing Church does not bind; it
is required a Church should agree, and agree in Christ's name, that is, in the
truth, Matthew. 18.19, 20. otherwise their censure is of no power.

3. They conclude this from the pattern, in Act. 15. which pattern clearly shows
to whom the power and authority is committed, when there grows offense and
difference in a Church, even to a consociation of Churches, etc.

4. They grant these Synods thus conveened have power further then to counsel
an erring Church, they have a power from Christ to admonish men or Churches in
his name, Cotton. K is. p. 53.
when they see a Church to walk in any way of error, and their admonitions are
more then brotherly persuasions, for they carry with them the authority of
Jesus Christ; and that a Church fallen into error and offense, is subject both
to the admonitions of other Churches, and to the determinations, and judicial
sentence of a Synod for direction, in a way of truth and peace. And this, say
they, arises from that was spok^n before; The sentence of an erring nor of a
disagreeing Church does bind: and therefore in case a Church fail in either,
viz. truth or peace, a Synod is the first subject of power, and such a Church
does fall under the censure of a Synod.

5. They grant that if there be cause given, either of error, or of scandal,
A Synod has power in the name of Christ to declare such Churches to be
subverters of the faith, Heart divisions. p. 43.
or scandalous and offensive, to shame them to all Sister and neighbor
Churches.

6. They grant that a Synod may by a solemn act, and in the name of Jesus
Christ, renounce any further communion with such Churches, till they be
reformed, Ibid.
and may in the same name declare and publish those erring Churches are not to
be received into fellowship with any of the Churches of Christ; Cotton, Keys,
p. 25
nor to have communion one with another in the ordinances of Christ. Here is
now a great deal. And one of the brethren hints something more in that
expression of his. We dare not say that the power of a Synod reaches no
further then to give counsel: For, says he, such as their ends be, for which
according to God they do assemble, such is the power given them of God to
attain those ends: as they meet to minister light and peace to such Churches as
lie in error or variance: so they have power by the grace of Christ, not only
to give light and counsel in matter of truth and practice, but also to command
and enjoin things to be believed and done: the express words of the Synodicall
letter imply so much, Act. 15.27. It seems good to the holy Ghost and us; to
lay upon you no other burden. This burden therefore, to observe those
necessary things, which they speak of, they had power to impose; it is an act
of the binding power of the keys to bind burdens, and this binding power
arises not only materially from the weight of the matters imposed, -- but also
formally from the authority of the Synod, which being an ordinance of Christ,
binds the more for the Synods sake.

So that here you see is a great agreement, all the difference is in point of
Excommunication; they conceive a Synod has not power to excommunicate either
Churches or persons.

1. And for Churches, in that many of the brethren agree with them, and say, as
I told you, a whole Church is not to be excommunicated: and for those that
dissent and say, whole Churches may be excommunicated, to them they grant not
only the half of it, but the substance of the thing, for what is condemning,
forsaking, rejecting of a Church, etc. but Excommunication in the substance of
it? and so some of the Brethren take it: the least that can be made of it, is
Analogicall and proportionable to Excommunication.

2. And for the second, viz. the Excommunication of persons by a Synod, to me,
they grant the thing, though not the name; and the Brethren of the other mind
say, they think that Excommunication does not belong to a Synod, Secundum
actus elicitos, sed imperatos; It is rather the work of a Synod to enjoin it to
be done, then to do it themselves: yet if delivering up to Satan be not of the
formality of the sentence of Excommunication, as many of our brethren think,
but the consequent and fruit of the censure, Bur. Heart divisions, p. 4.
then I see not that there is any difference, as I showed you before.

And thus I have showed you what materials our brethren will afford us to this
building, which I could for my own part rather be content to sit down withal,
then by raising it higher, but heighten our confusion, run the mischief of
division among our selves, then which no penal evil can be sadder and more
uncomfortable. I wish we might all remember the Apostles rule, Phil. 3.15, 16.
Let us therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded, and if in any thing you
be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you. Nevertheless,
whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, mind the same
things.

And thus we have done with the first great means for the suppressing of
error, and reducing of erroneous persons, viz. Ecclesiastical. We come now to
the second means propounded, which we call civil and magisteriall. No^ tantu^
sermo meus quantum mandatum tuum Naz.


And this is a point of no less concernment, then it is of controversy at
this time. The second means to s^ppresse error.
It were a sad thing if there were no bounds for error; and as sad it were to
go beyond Gods bounds for the suppressing of them. I told you in the entrance
upon this last Question, it was a tender point, an intricate, subtle
controversy, diversely asserted, and as differently maintained. I shall not
here deal with this controversy in the latitude of it, only as relating to the
Question here propounded: And that I may not lengthen out this discourse too
far, by multiplying needless Questions, and entering upon collateral
disputes, I will sum up all that I shall speak to this Qu^stion under these
five general heads.

1. We will show you what power the Magistrate may be said not to have.

2. We will show, what the power of the Magistrate is asserted to be, as
relating to this Question.

3. We will examine, whether such a power be ordained and warranted of God.

4. Whether such a power be needful in the Church.

5. And lastly how this power is to be dispensed.

1. We will begin with the first, viz. What power the Magistrate may be said
not to have. In the entrance upon which, let me tell you, by power I mean not
(...), but (...), not the power of might, but the power of right, not a power
taken, but a power given, and that not by men, but by God; an authoritative
power wherewith he is invested of God; for, Id possumus, quod jure possumus.
And in that sense I speak of the Magistrates power through this discourse. And
first then,

1. The Magistrate has not an absolute power to do what he pleases in the
things of God. The object of religion is a supernatural good, and for that we
are not to depend upon the will of man, but the will of God, that which he has
commanded we must do, Ezekiel. 20. When Magistrates go beyond the bounds of the
Word, they take upon them a greater power then God has given them: they are
Gods Ministers, Romans 13. and therefore their wills are to be subordinate to the
will of their Master, and upon all their injunctions should be engraven, what
the Apostle says to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 14 38. The things that I write
unto you are the commandments of the Lord. It is the Prerogative royal of God
and Christ, to command things, because they will, and cannot be usurped by any
mortal man, without high injury to Jesus Christ. Tertullian has a passage to
this purpose, Iniqua^ exeractu do mi^atione^, si ideo r^g^vis licere qu a
vultis. non quia ^^buit non licere. Tertul. A pol a^vers. Gent.
You exercise an unjust dominion over others; if you therefore deny a thing may
be d ne, because you will, not because it ought not to be done. It was a h^gh
presumption of Constantius, who when he would compel the Orthodox Christians
to embrace Arianisme, uttered these words, Quod ego volo, pro canone sit, That
which I will, shall stand for a law. In this also Jeroboam and Nebuchadnezzar
offended, when they would command things upon their own will, not only without,
but contrary to the will of God. This proved a dangerous rock to them, and will
be to any who shall follow their steps. God is a jealous God, and cannot brook
with any rival in matter of his worship. As they cannot command, so we cannot
thus obey without sin and dishonor to God. Christ bids us in this sense,
Call no man Rabbi. And the Apostle enjoins us not to be the servants of men,
which then we are in a high measure, when the warrant of our actions is only
taken from the will and pleasure of men, Vid. Pare^^. in Romans 13 praecog. 3.
and propos. 6. Justinianus im^erator agnovit Catholicam fidem nullam
innovationem posse recipere ex authoritate principu^s, sed solunmodo
confirmatiore^ and virdicationem. Po estates suo loco humanas suscipin^us,
donec contid Deum suas eriga^t voluntates. Synac.
when we shall subjugate and vassal our understandings and consciences, to the
mere commands and dictates of men. And so much for the first.

2. The Magistrate has no power against God. God never set up a power against
himself: he is the minister of God, and all his power is subordinate to the
will and glory of God. All which being granted, I need not to say any more of
it.

3. The Magistrate has no power to enforce the conscience of any. Conscience
rightly understood falls under no power, but the power of God alone. I have read
it was the speech of Stephen King of Poland, I am King of men, and not of
consciences, a Commander of bodies, and not of souls. All power is usually
expressed in Scripture by this Metaphor of Keys: and though God has committed
many Keys, much power to man, yet there are three Keys which God does reserve
and keep in his own hands only.

1. The Key of the womb, he shuts it, Genesis 20.18. and he opens it at his
pleasure, Genesis 30.22.

2. The Key of the grave, 1 Samuel 2 6. The Lord kills and makes alive, he
brings down to the grave, and brings up; he, and he alone does this.

3. The Key of the conscience, Act. 16.14. He opened the heart of Lydia, and he
opens so as none can shut, and shuts so as none can open. This power over the
heart and con^cience, God has reserved in his own hands. It was the speech of
one, God has reserved three things to himself, 1. To make some thing of
nothing. 2. To know things future. 3. To rule over consciences. A dominion that
is proper to God alone: men may tyrannize, but they can never rule over the
consciences of men. Conscience falls under no subjection, but Gods alone. The
Turks and Persians themselves, though they have upheld and propagated their way
by the sword, yet they acknowledge that the conscience neither can, nor ought
to be compelled. Conscience is like a Virgin which cannot be forced, [ Lex
nostra non se vindicat ultore gladio, Tertul.] Men may persuade, but they can
never compel conscience, according to that old maxim, Religio suaderi potest,
cogi non potest, Men may be persuaded into a religion, but they can never be
compelled unto it. Nihil est tam vo^un tarium qua^ religio, in qua s^ animu^
sacrifican^es eversus, jam sublata, ja^ nulla est. Lactant. Instit. l. 5. c.
19. Procop in ^eca histo.
It lies as a blot upon Justinian, that he compelled the Samaritans to embrace
the Christian faith. And it is more condemnable in the Papists among the
Indies, of which they find no more fruit, then with the Moors of Granado, who
were forced to Mass in the morning, and freely practiced Mahome tanisme in the
afternoon. Like those we read of, 2 King. 17.33. who, because of the Lions,
feared the Lord, but served their own gods. Those acts of conscience which are
internal, are free and uncogible, they fall not under man's cognizance; nor, if
they did, do they fall under man's power. No power on earth, can either judge
or punish the internal acts of the mind. The Question is not here about the
elicite acts of conscience, but the imperate, commanded and external acts: It
is easily granted, That no power on earth is able to compel the former, the
internal acts of the mind and conscience; but the dispute will be about the
later, the external acts, either in the restraint or constraint of them. Of
which more anon.

4. The Magistrate has no power properly called Church Power; though he have a
power about the business of the Church, and the affairs of worship, yet he
has not any power properly called Church Power. He is helpful to the
government of the Church: but in this sense, no Church-governour: The Church
has the exercise of her power from him, but not the power it self: the
Magistrate gives ability, but does not give the authority: The Church, say
Divines, has protection and encouragement from him, but has her authority and
power from Christ. I find diverse opinions among men about this.

1. Some say that the Magistrate has all power.

2. Some say he has no power in matters of Religion.

1. Some say he has all power, and that the government of the Church is by God
devolved upon the civil Magistrate, whereby the Magistrate is the head of the
Church, and has a Nomothetick and legislative power in things ecclesiastical;
which power, say they, is not only ecclesiastic in respect of the object,
being exercised about Church matters, but in respect of the subject, or person
exercising, whom they make to be a mixed person, and has a mixed power,
Salcobridgensis, p. 121.
and by virtue of his office can act and exercise it.

I shall not speak much to it, it is a discourse by the by: only I shall tell
you, that Pareus (who gives more to the Magistrate in this particular then
others of his brethren; yet) says, That the civil Magistrate is not to assume
to himself any proper parts of Ecclesiastical ministry, as to preach, to
administer censures, Sacraments, etc. and he gives these two reasons of it. 1.
Because he is not called to this office. Vedel. de Episcop. Constant. q. 2.
Christ did not say to him, Go and preach the Gospel and baptize: and therefore
being not called to it, he ought not to assume it; No man (says the Apostle)
takes this Ministry upon himself, but he that is called of God, Heb. 5.4.
Pareus in Romans 13. prop. 3.
nor is he (says he) (...), to intermeddle in other matters not proper to his
station, 1 Pet. 4.15. but every one is to abide in the same calling, wherein he
is called. And he gives a second reason, lest they incur the sin and
punishment of Jeroboam and Vzziah; one of whom had his arm dried up; the other
was stricken with leprosy, 1 Kin. 13. 2 Chronicles. 26. And the same Author a
little after, answering this Question, Par. in To. 13. dub. 5. in append.
adsol. arg. resp. 1.
Whether ecclesiastical power does reside in the Prince? He says
ecclesiastical power is twofold, 1. Proper and internal. 2. Improper and
external. This distinction he foundeth upon that speech of Constantine to the
Bishops, Vot quidem intra. etc. The first of these he affirms to be exercised
by ecclesiastical persons, ecclesiastically: The other, vix. External, and
improperly called Church Power, he says may be exercised by the Magistrate.
Calvin speaks more home, Calvin in Amos. c. 7. v. 13.
They are (says he) inconsiderate men, who make Magistrates too spiritual ^
this evil (says he) prevails in Germany, and in the countries round about us;
we find what fruit grows from this root; namely, that those who are in power,
think themselves so spiritual, that there is no other ecclesiastical
government; this sacrilege comes in violently among us, because they cannot
measure their office within it is due bounds. Thus he.

Indeed it has usually been distinguished, between Church Power, and civil
power; and between officers in the Church, and officers of State; and that the
one is Gods officer, or Christ's, as God; The other is Christ's officer, as
Mediator; the one belongs unto his general kingdom, and rule over all; the
other belongs to his Mediatory kingdom, or government over his Church. Christ
is a head of supereminence to all, but a head of influence to his Church only.
As he is God, so he is head of all principalities, and all powers govern by
him; but as he is Mediator, so he is head only of his body, and all officers
therein, Ephesians. 1.21.
have their authority from him, and are said to manage their office under, and
for Christ. In the name of Christ they do assemble, Matthew. 18.20. In his Name
they preach, Luke 24.27. Act. 4.17, 18. In his Name they baptize, Act. 2.38.
Ast. 4.12, 16. Act. 19.2. In his Name do they administer censures, 1 Cor. 5.5.

And if the Magistrate be invested with such a power, then either as a
Magistrate, or as a Christian Magistrate. Not the first; for then every
Magistrate has it without exception, even Pagans and Heathens, and such as
know not God and Christ, not were ever yet baptized, not any member of the
Church: if you say, as he is a Christian Magistrate, it will be said that his
Christianity does add no further authority to him, but further ability to
execute his authority; this is but potestas executiva, the gracious ability to
exercise that power which he had before, and sinned in that was a talent buried
up, and not employed for Christ. And for that place which is usually alleged,
1 Cor. 12.28 God has placed, (...), Governments in his Church: I say first
that the Apostle does there speak of ecclesiastical and spiritual officers;
and therefore it is strange that civil government should come in the
enumeration of Church Officers.

2. I say the Apostle spoke there of such government as the Church had at that
time; he says, God has placed in his Church: and thence Calvin takes up an
argument to prove that the Apostle in that place spoke of ecclesiastical, and
not of civil government, because at that time the Church enjoyed not such a
privilege. But of this sufficient. We come to the second, which certainly is
an extreme on the other hand, viz.

2. That the Magistrate has no power in matters of religion. It was the speech
of Donatus, What has the Emperor to do with the Church? Quid est imperatori
cum ecclesia? Imperator in div^nis nullu^ j^^ habet. Optat. l. 3, cont P^rmen.
par. 1367.
The Magistrate has no right to meddle about things that are divine. We shall
speak fuller to this by and by; only here I shall clear some expressions, which
we usually read among learned men, from some mistakes that may be fastened on
them, and give too much strong^h to such a position as this, viz. That the
Magistrates power does not reach to matters of Religion. We often read in the
writings of learned men of a difference made between Church Power and civil
power, chiefly in their objects, and in their ends. 1. That the object of the
Magistrates power is, (...), earthly things, or the things of this life: the
object of Church Power is, (...), spiritual things, and matters concern a
better life. 2. They say, The end of Magistracy is the preservation of peace,
and the external tranquillity of the Commonwealth: but the end of
Church Power is the good and edifying of the body of Christ. We had need to
speak something of this, it has been too far extended. And therefore.

1. To the first of these. I say. 1. That though the things of this life be the
object of the Magistrates power, yet are they not the sole and adequate object
of it. Spiritual and heavenly things do fall in under the object of his power
also, as well as temporal: He is called a nursing father to the Church: he is,
Custos and vindex utriusque inbulae, Sed ita distinguuntur, ut in modo
procura^^i, rex politice sua parts oget, and sacerdos ecclesiastice suas Ame.
de consc. l. c. 25 these. S. Ames. Medul. Theol. l 2. c. 17. these. 48, 49.
the keeper and revenger of both tables of the Law, Deu. 17.18 Josh 1.8. Romans
134. The affairs of Jehovah, and the matters of the King are not so different
(says Ames) as that the care and knowledge of the things of God, belongs not
to the King. But they are thus distinguished, that in the execution of them,
the King performs his part in a political way; the officers of the Church, in
an ecclesiastical way.

2. I say yet further, That though the power of the Magistrate, and the power
of the Church do not differ in their material objects, yet they differ in
their formal objects. The Magistrate, as a Magistrate, and the Church, as the
Church, in the name of Christ, may command and forbid one and the same thing,
viz. They may command the sanctification of the Lords day, or they may forbid
blasphemy, idolatry. Here their objects are materially the same, But now they
differ formally; the Magistrate he commands or forbids upon penalty of bodily
punishment; but the Church upon pain of ecclesiastical censures; Leg Ames. Med.
Theol. l 2. c. 17. these 48.
the Magistrate upon civil mulcts, the Church upon spiritual penalties. And
this may be thought one reason, why many holy and reverend Divines have
asserted the object of the power of the Magistrate, qua talis, to be the
external man, and the things of this life, because that he does bring about
higher ends by more external, and not such spiritual ways as the Church does.

2. And what I say hereof the object of the power of the Magistrate, I may say
also of his end. The end of the Magistrate is not so different from the Church,
but they may meet together, and as they agree in their objects, so these powers
may also agree in their ends. Though the preservation of peace, and the quiet
of the Commonwealth, be the end of Magistracy, yet I conceive it is not the
only, not the adequate end; external peace to me seems too narrow for to be
the end of Magistracy, who is a nursing father to the Church, and whose power
reaches as well to the settling and advancing the true worship of God, as to
the external peace, and safety of his kingdoms; and to the helping of men, as
Christians, as well as helping them, as men, though he do endeavor to
compass and bring about these ends, in a different way to the Church, the one
by carnal, the other by spiritual weapons; the one more externally, the other
more internally and divinely. And this, I conceive, is plain from Romans 13.4. He
is the minister of God to thee for good, but if thou do that which is evil, he
afraid, for he bears not the sword in vain; where by good and evil, which the
Magistrate, as a Magistrate, does procure, I conceive is not only meant the
natural happiness and quiet life of civil society; but also the good and evil
which concerns us as Christians. And therefore his end is higher then mere
civil peace and tranquillity, being he is a Magistrate, not only of our good
and evil, as men, but our good and evil, as Christians: but yet the way he
procures this is different from the Church, the one, as I told you, being in a
more spiritual and heavenly way; the other in a civil and external way. And
thus much shall serve for the answer to the second opinion, and also to the
fourth particular branch laid down, What the Magistrates power was not. Besides
these there may be other branches laid down, but I shall desire to wave them,
and shall fall upon the second Question.

Qu. 2. What the power of the Magistrate is asserted to be, as relating to this
Question.

And here I find three several opinions, two of them are extremes, the third
is the middle between both, and conceived nearest to the truth.

1. The first extreme is that of the Papists, who say, That the Magistrate is
by fire and sword to extirpate all error and heresy, that is, all religions
which do not agree with Rome; See Suarez de triplici virture. Tract. 1.
disput. 23. Sect. ^.
for they call all those Heretics that are not of the faith of Rome, that so
having put us into a bears skin, they may with some color woorty us.

2. The second extreme is, That the Magistrate has no power to deal with any
opinion whatsoever by civil coercive means. Others more warily inf^rt, If it be
not evidently and manifestly destructive, and disturbing to the peace of the
Commonwealth. But the meaning is this, that there ought to be a liberty for
all opinions; and the Magistrate is only to be an indifferent spectatour, and
not to take care what religion men are on, whether Papists, Jews, Pagans,
Socinians, Macedonians, or what ever: If they be not inconsistent with the
government of the Commonwealth, they are to look no farther, they are not to
matter, how or whether they worship God at all, or what their opinions and
practices are. And so in effect the Magistrate must say with Tiberius, Tacit in
Tiberio.
Deorum injurius Dijs curae, Let the Gods make care for wrongs done against
themselves. Or with the Emperor Alexander, Iuris jurandi contempta religio
satis Deum ultorem habet.
It is sufficient that the breach of an oath has God to be the avenger: with
G^llio, they must care for none of these things. They may revenge injuries done
against them, but may not meddle with those done against God; they may
suppress their enemies, but must not meddle with Gods enemies; They may punish
those who seek to draw away a people from the obedience of the Magistrate, but
not those who labor to draw away a people from the truth of the Gospel, and
obedience to God. An opinion certainly as wide as the former. Without doubt the
object of the Magistrates power, is not simply a peaceable life, and the
external peace of humane societies, as I showed before: he is a nursing father
to the Church; he is the minister of God for good, and religion is the chief
good, and therefore the object of his power is not simply external peace, but
godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2. which he may endeavor to advance by his
secular power, and in civil and politic ways. It was the speech of Augustine,
Will any one that is in his right wits, say unto Kings, It does not concern you
in your kingdom, who will be religious, or who will be sacrilegious? Intimating
it was a madness for any, to think the King had nothing to do in matter of
religion. Quis mente sobrius dicat regibus, non ad vos pertinet, quis in regno
vestro velit esse rel^giosus vel sacrilegut^ Au. de correct. donat. c. 13.
Certainly, though it should be granted that the Magistrate were Gods officer,
not Christ's, as Mediator, yet it will not weaken this truth, which we assert;
for it cannot be but that God who has made it his design to preserve and
advance the kingdom of Christ, should especially aim at it in the constituting
and setting up a government in the world. Julian saw this well enough; and
therefore it was the counter design of that Apostate, to tolerate and grant
liberty to Paga^s, and all sorts of heresies, that by suffering all these weeds
to grow up, he might choke up the vitals of Christianity, and weaken the
kingdom of Christ, and overthrow the truth of the Gosp^l, which was the object
of his envy and malice. This was also the practice and sin of other
Emperors, Valens the Arian did the like: and indeed such a course is the
speediest way, to destroy all godliness, to suppress the truth, and to bring
in all mischief to Church and State. It is the speech of one, Liberty for all
opinions, is the speediest way of embroyling States, of ruining Churches, of
erecting a Pantheon in every City: That of omnium Deorum among the Romans, of
omnium sanctorum among the Papists, offends less then this of omnium sectarum
here in England. Sure I am, one God, one faith, one Mediator was Catholic
doctrine in Paul's time; every variation from a unity, is a step to a nullity:
if ever England come from one ^eligion to all, she will quickly go from all to
none.

Certainly the toleration of all Religions, as it is against nature, against
Scripture, against reason, so it cannot choose but be destructive to peace and
truth. But of this more afterward. These are the two extremes, which certainly
are wide of the truth. We come to the third opinion, which lies between these
two, and is conceived to be most agreeable to truth. It is this.

3. That the Magistrate has power, and it is his duty to suppress and punish
heresy and error, less or more, according to the nature and degree of the
error, and the evil or disturbance brought upon the Churches or State. And in
this order he may proceed, when some dangerous opinions do arise.

1. He may call a Synod, or an Assembly of godly, holy, learned men to examine
those opinions.

2. After examination, the opinions being evidenced to be dangerous and
erroneous, he may prohibit them.

3. He may also make laws, Serviant Reges terrae Christ^ etia^ lege^ ferendo
pro Christo. Aug. Par. Romans 13. prop 4. Cod. l. 1. Tit. ^.7. Socrat l. 5. c. 7.
and penal Statutes against such opinionists.

4 He may also put those laws in execution, when other means will not reclaim
them. And thus the Princes and Emperors did in former times: if those examples
of Constantine, Theodosius, Valentinian, Justinian, etc. be of any weight,
which I confess will be but of little, if the word will not allow it. And
therefore we will come to the third Question, which is,

Quest. 3. Whether this power, which is asserted in the former Question, be a
power which is warranted and ordained of God?

And this is needful to be cleared; it is the main of all; for, if it cannot
be evidenced that the Magistrate is endued with such a power, it will then
follow, that he is an usurper, and brings guilt upon his own soul in the
exercise of it.

1. First then it is clear (de facto) that Magistrates have exercised such a
power, as appears in the examples of Asa, Josiah, and others; as is evident
from 1 King. 18 40. 2 Chronicles. 15.13. 1 King. 15.13. 2 King. 23, 20. 2 King. 10
11, 24. All which places do evidence, that pious Kings and Magistrates have
exercised such a power. There is not any scruple of that. All the Question will
be, whether they did exercise this power de jure, by virtue of any divine
precept, or upon Gods ordination: To which I say.

Secondly, That these Magistrates did exercise this power upon Gods warrant,
and by virtue of his ordination, is evident by Deuteronomy. 13.5, 6, 7 8, 9, 10. where
you read of a law enjoined for the stoning and killing those who secretly
attempted to entice the people of God to go after other gods. You have another,
Exodus 22.20. He that sacrifieth to any god, save only the Lord only, he shall
be utterly destroyed. You have another, in Levit. 24.16. He that blasphemeth
the name of the Lord, he shall surely be put to death. Another, Deuteronomy. 17.2, 3,
4, 5.

Object. But it will be said, We read this in the old Testament, but where have
we any precept or president for it in the New?

Answ. 1. We read that this was commanded and practiced under the old
Testament. And we do not read that ever that command was repealed, or this
practice prohibited, and forbidden in the New.

2. If those precepts and presidents in this point do not concern us, then it
must be showed, that those rules and paterns, which we read under the old
Testament, were not intended by the holy Ghost to bind us.

3. The very same thing was prophesied of the times of the Gospel, now under
the new T^stament, Zech. 13.3. It shall come to pass, that he that takes upon
him to prophecy, that his father and mother that begat him, shall say unto
him, Thou shall not live, for thou speak lies in the name of the Lord; and
his father and his mother which begat him shall thrust him through when he
prophesies: that is, they shall be the means to procure punishment to be
inflicted on him: So shall their hearts be overcome with the love of God, and
truth under the Gospel, and set against lies and falsehood, that they shall not
indulge and spare it in their dearest relations. So, Isa. 49.23. Revel. 21.24.

4. This power was juris naturalis, it was of common and natural equity: and
such things being constant and immutable, are to be exercised at all times, in
all places. Besides

5. This power was established and exercised upon moral grounds, and for moral
ends, as you may see in Deuteronomy. 13.5, 11. In the 5th verse you see the ground of
the establishing of this power, Because they would turn the heart of the people
from the Lord; and this was moral. And in the 11th verse you see the end,
wherefore it was to be exercised, That all Israel might hear, and fear, and do
no more such wickedness, which was moral also. Now I say, that power, the
ground and end whereof is moral and perpetual, even that power must needs be
moral and perpetual; but the ground and end of this civil coercive power is
moral and perpetual, as I have showed you: therefore is the power perpetual.
This cannot be denied; certainly, if the reason, if the ground and end
wherefore God ordained this power, be still in force, then is the power also
still in force; but the reason, the ground and end wherefore God established
this power, and for which he would have it exercised, is still in force, viz.
To prevent seduction, and drawing the hearts of people from God, and to make
men afraid of publishing, promoting and entertai^ing such destructive opinions.
And therefore the power is still in force.

6. All men are to improve their talents, and lay out their utmost power and
abilities for the service of God, and the advancement of his truth and glory,
etc. And the power of the Magistrate being such a talent put into his hands, of
the use of which he is to give account; Certainly he is bound to lay it forth
for the advancement of God now under the new Testament, as well as under the
Old. If there be any difference, undoubtedly it is in this, that seeing the
Magistrate has received greater favors of God now under the new Testament,
then were dispensed under the old; he lies under greater obligations and
engagements, by all his power and authority to serve God, and advance his truth
and Gospel, then those under the old.

7. But seeing places are desired out of the new Testament, to prove that God
has enabled the Magistrate now under the Gospel with such a power; we will
therefore see what strength the new Testament will afford us for the proof of
it.

And first let us examine that, To. 13.4. If thou do that which is evil, be
afraid, for he bears not the sword in vain, for he is the minister of God, a
revenger, to execute wrath upon him that does evil. Where the Apostle does not
speak of Magistracy in the use, or rather abuse of it, but as it is in Gods
ordination. And, 1. He calls him the Minister of God, by which be declares he
is not to judge for man, but for God; and not only to look to the things which
belong to man, but to those things also which appertain to God. 2. The object
of this power he makes evil doers, without any limitation, or exception. And we
use to say, Non distinguendum ubi Scriptura non distinguit; we are not to
distinguish, when the Scripture does not distinguish, and therefore the
Scripture not distinguishing of evil doers, such persons may well fall under
the Category of evil doers. And should we restrain this unto evil doers only in
a civil sense, then the state of the Church, in regard of the civil Mag^strate,
should be worse under the new Testament, then under the old; for if then he was
to maintain it by his civil power, and now he neither do, nor can, then it
must needs follow, the condition of the Church, in resp^ct of the civil
Magistrate, is worse now under the new Testament, then under the old. Besides,
it would be strange, that it is the duty of the Magistrate to punish injuries
done to the state, but not injuries done to God: that he is to punish those who
destroy men's bod^es, bu^ not those who destroy men's souls; that who ever draws
away the people from the obedience of the Magistrate, and the laws of the Land
must be punished, but they who will draw away a people from the truth of the
Gospel, and from the ways of God (as Hymenaeus and Philetus, who ov^rthew the
faith of some, 2 Timothy 2.17, 18.) they must not be censured.

And therefore seeing the new Testament declares the power of the Magistrate,
and makes the object of this power evil doing in general, and requires
submission in such general terms, therefore may we conclude, that the Lord
did leave his people for their subjection to the Magistrate, to the light of
nature, and to the equity of those general rules in Scripture in former times.
Other places might be alleged, as 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Submit your selves to
every ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as to the
suprem^, or unto Governors, which are sent for the punishment of evil doers,
and the praise of them that do well. So in the 2 Timothy 2.1, 2. where the Apostle
exhorts us to pray for Kings, and them in authority: and he gives this reason,
That we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. By
which is evident, that the object of his power, is not only things concerning
external peace, but such things as concern godliness also; he is to be the
promoter of the one, as well as the preserver of the other. And this was
prophesied of Magistrates under the Gospel, Isa. 49.23. Kings shall be thy
nursing fathers, and Queens thy nursing mothers. And the preservation of the
civil peace is not enough to afford such a denomination nor adequate to the
appellation or title of nursing fathers, and nursing mothers to the Church
under the Gospel. And it is said, Revel. 21.24. of the future times of the
Gospel, That the Kings of the earth shall bring their glory and honor to the
Church. There will be such a time, which declares that they are to be more then
mere protectours of their external civil peace. Nor will this, which is usually
alleged, weaken this assertion, that if this power do belong to the civil
Magistrate, as civil, then to every civil Magistrate, then to Pagan, as well as
to Christian Magistrates. For we say, though this power do belong to
Magistracy in general, and to all Magistrates, yet all are not fit and abl^ to
exercise it, the authority belongs to the Pagan, as well as the Christian
Magistrate, say Divines, but in a different sense, one has this power, in actu
signato, the other, in actu exercito; one has the right, but he wants the
ability to exercise it, because being ignorant of Christ, and the principles of
Christian religion, and thereby wanting the directive power, he cannot use the
commanding and executive power.

And thus much shall serve for answer to the third Qu^stion. I have purposely
waved Objections, that I might not unnecessarily lengthen out this Discourse,
knowing this maxim to be true, Rectum est index sui and obloqui. We come to the

Quest. 4. Whether such a power be needful to the Church.

To which I shall give an answer in these few Conclusions.

Conclus. 1. This civil coercive power i^ not only unnecessary, but unlawful
to be exercised in the planting of the Church, and bringing men to the faith of
Christ. Churches are not to be planted by weapons, Lactant instit. l. 5. c. 10.
but by doctrines; not by the power of the sword, but by the efficacy of the
Word; not by carnal weapons, but by spiritual means. The Commission that
Christ gave his Apostles for the spreading and planting of the Gospel, was only
this, Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19, 20. the like, in Mark 16.15.
And Christ tells us his Kingdom is not of this world, for then his servants
would fight for him, Joh. 18.36. but that was not the way, to plant or advance
his kingdom. Christ has no need of such carnal weapons for the planting of
his Church, or the settling him in his kingdom: the Apostles had a warfare to
fight, but the weapons of their warfare were not carnal, but spiritual, and
yet strong to pull down the strongest helds of sin and Satan, and to bring
every thought in obedience to Christ, 2 Cor. 10.3, 4. They had a sword to
weild, but that sword was no other, but the Word of God, the sword of the
Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. Revel. 19.15. here were Armies to subdue even Nations to
Christ, but these were armies of teachers, not of soldiers, as the Psalmist
alludeth, Psalm. 68.11. External force is not the way of Christ for the
spreading his Gospel, and planting of his kingdom: It is true here, Religio
suaderi potest, cogi non potest, Men may be persuaded into a religion, but they
can never be compelled. All external acts of power are not able to beget
internal acts of faith. That is the first.

Conclus. 2. This civil coercive power is not absolutely, simply, and
indispencibly necessary to the being of the Church of Christ upon earth. The
Church of Christ had being, and was perfect in it is being and operations, when
they wanted the privilege and comfort of a civil Magistrate. The Church of
Corinth, when the Magistrate was Pagan, 1 Cor. 6.1, 2, 3. was yet a Church
sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, 1 Cor. 1.2, 4, 5, 7. had power
of Excommunication, 1 Cor. 5. 7, 13. was a perfect body of Christ, 1 Cor. 12.
was able to edify the whole body, 1 Cor 14 12, 25, 26, 27. and had power of
the seals of the Covenant, 1 Cor. 11.20, 21. All which shows this power was not
absolutely necessary to the being of the Church of Christ.

Conclus. 3. This civil coercive power is not absolutely nenecessary to the
propagating and increasing of the Church and kingdom of Christ. And this we
see clear, 1. Vsque ad Constantini tempora Imperatorum judiciaria authoritas
religionem ethnicam mandavit, haec tamen conculcata ind^es suit, nostra autem
fides caput exeruit. Grae. am Philosoph^a^ si quivis Magistratus prohibuerit,
ea statim perit, doctrinam Christiana^ oppugnant reges, and tamen crescit
Clera. Alex. Strom.
By instance and experience of the Primitive Churches. The kingdom of Christ
was not only planted, but it was propagated and increased by the industry and
labors of a few fishermen, when the Kings of the earth, Non modo minime
faventes, sed frementes, were so far from yielding their concurrence and
assistance, that they set all their power and malice against it to suppress
it. And till Constantines time, which was not till the fourth century, some 300
years and upwards after Christ, the Gospel never found any assistance from the
secular power, those former Emperors putting forth all their power to condemn
and suppress Christian religion, and to command and advance Heathenish
superstition and idolatry; yet notwithstanding that it might be evident, our
faith is not of man, but of God, the Church increased, the Gospel was
propagated, and Paganism and superstition, notwithstanding all these outward
supports and props, was dead stro^k and died daily. All which shows the mighty
power of God, and of his Go^pel. ^f any Magistrate (says one) had prohibited
the Greek Philosophy, it had quickly perished: but the Kings of the earth
oppose Christian Doctrine, and yet it increases. All which, as it shows the
power of God, and of his Gospel: So it tells us, that there is not an absolute
necessity of any secular power, for the planting or propagating of Christ's
Gospel and kingdom.

2. This is also demonstrated by the efficacy: if not sufficiency of spiritual
means, wherewith Christ has furnished his Church for the advancement of these
ends, though the Kings of the earth should not lend their assistance.

1. Christ has ordained and set up a ministry, which is to continue to the end
of the world, Mat. 20 19, 20. and this being strengthened by the Spirit of
Christ, is of might to carry on his own ends, to advance his own kingdom, To
throw down all strong holds of contrary reasonings, and to bring in subjection
every thought to the obedience of Christ, as the Apostle does declare, 2 Cor.
10.3, 4.

2. Besides this, Christ has ordained and appointed censures in his Church,
which being faithfully and duly administered, may be effi^acious means to
preserve the truth, suppress error, and remove out of his kingdom what ever
does offend. And the Primitive Churches in the want of any other assistance,
though they were indeed infested with many heresies and dangerous errors, yet
had plentiful experience of the efficacy and blessing of these means, whereby
the Churches did in a great measure preserve and free themselves from those
poisonous errors that did arise among them. All which shows, that the civil
coercive power is not of absolute necessity, either to the planting or
propagating of Christ's Church and kingdom. But yet,

Conclus. 4. Although this civil power be not absolutely necessary to the
being, yet it is very conducefull, and apprimely requisite to the well-being
and flourishing condition of the Churches of Christ in peace and godliness.
This the Apostle intimates, in 1 Timothy 2.2. where he exhorts us, To pray for
Kings and them in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in
all godliness and honesty. And this the Primitive Churches in the first
Centuries found, by experience, though in the want and opposition of it, they
were kept in being (for God will have his Church on earth, though all the
powers of the earth should set themselves against it) yet they were miserably
infested, not only with disturbing, but with d structive errors, which
threatened the very unbeing of the Churches of Christ. All which tells us how
conducefull and requisite this power is, for the preserving of the Churches of
Christ in their well-b^ing. Nay, and I say yet further, though this power be
not absolutely necessary, yet is it necessary by Gods ordination; God has
ordained Magistracy to be the fence of his Churches, the protection of his
people; he has promised they shall be nursing fathers, and nursing mothers to
the Churches of Christ under the Gospel, Isa. 49.23. A great honor as well as
duty. And it is our special duty to pray for such in the want of them, and in
the enjoyment of such to rejoice under them, and bless God for them, as the
highest outward privilege the Churches of Christ can enjoy on earth. And thus
much shall serve for the fourth Question. We come now to the fifth and last
propounded, viz.

Qu. 5. How this power is to be dispensed?

In answer to which I shall lay down six necessary rules, or cautionary
advices, to which I shall only annex my desires, and some ways for a happy
accommodation between the brethren, and so conclude this Discourse. We shall
begin with the Rules necessary to be observed in the dispencing of this power.
And

1. This power is to be dispensed rightly. Magistrates have not an absolute
power, to establish what they please in point of religion, but a power
subordinate unto, and to be regulated by the will of God. He is Gods minister,
and therefore is not to set his will above, or against his Master. Reget cu^ in
errore sunt pro ip^o leges contra veritatem faciunt, cum in veritate sunt,
co^tra errorem pro ipsa verita e decernunt. Aug. cent. Cresc. l. 3. c. 51. Cum
catholici sum reges, been utuntur hac potesta^te, cum haeretici, abutuntur
cadem.
It were better the Sword should rust in the scabbard, then it should be drawn
forth against God and truth: better to bear the Sword in vain here, then to
manage the Sword to the disservice of God. It will be far more easy to
render an account of not using, then for ill using of this talent of power.
Certainly this power may be lawfully used, and it may as sadly and as
dangerously be abused: It is lawful to suppress some errors, but it is
fearful to lend the sword to the suppression or extirpation of any truth. It
is better not to do, then to do wickedly. How miserably Kings and Emperors
have failed, nay abused their power in this, is known to all. When Kings have
been in an error, they have established laws for that against the truth, when
in the truth they have made decrees for the truth against error, which may be
a trembling consideration to those who write of this power, and an awful
caution to them, who are to use it. Volumes might be written, how miserably the
Kings and Potentates of the earth have been abused, in lending their Sword to
suppress those for errors, which have been the precious truths of God, and to
advance those things for truths, which have been pernicious and destroying
errors. S^ e ictum imperato^is sit, ut propter verae fide profess^o
empersecutionem subcamus, parati s u^nus om ne^in martyr^um, non in ob^e ^uium.
Atha in epist. ad solitar. vita^ agentes. 1. Princip^s de^et ^ogere subditos ad
illam religionem quam ipsi in conscrentiis sais ^ud ca^t esse vera^ ^^ Subdeti
non debent profiter^ re^gi^nem a ^rincipe inperatam, n^si and ipsi simul judi
cave^int illam esse sanam and ^^tho^oxa^.
Of which more in the next particular.

This is certain, there is no power against God and his truth; if therefore the
Kings of the earth, either out of pride, or negligence, or ignorance should
establish error in stead of truth, we are to say with the Apostles, It is
better to obey God then you, as Athanasius said, If the Kings of the earth
should command that we should undergo persecution for the profession of the
truth; we are prepared for marty^dom, rather then other obedience. Brentius
has two propositions, which by many are said to be asystata, inconsistent.

1. That Princes ought to compel their Subjects to that Religion, which they
in their consciences do judge to be true.

2. That the people ought not to profess that Religion, which is commanded of
the Prince, unless they do also judge it to be sound and orthodox.

Indeed these two seem repugnant one to another. But certainly he does not mean
by the first proposition, that the Prince is to compel his people to the
practice of that which he does simply judge to be truth, but what God in his
word does assert for truth; if the Prince be in an error, he is not to enforce
his erroneous judgment upon his people, but to lay down his error, and search
out the truth; yet this perplexity he stands in, if he do enforce his people
to error, he sins directly against the law of God, and if he do not do it,
he sins against his conscience, because he neglects to advance that which his
conscience tells him is a truth. And upon this ground, I conceive he says,
that a Prince is bound to enforce his people to that religion which he in his
conscience does think to be truth, because (unless another medium, which I
think may, be given) he sins, if he do not do it, either against the law of
God, if he be in the truth, or against his conscience, though he be deceived.

2. The second Proposition is more clear, That the people are not bound to
profess that Religion which is commanded, unless they do also judge it to be
according to truth. The power of the Magistrate does not bind to obedience,
unless his commands be consistent with the will of God. It his commands be
contrary to Gods will, Quando re ges pro er^ore contra veritatem constitu^nt
ma^as leges, probantur been ^relentes, and coro^a^tur persever^ntes. Aug. de
correct. Don. ^. c. 13.
Patiendum potius quod Rex minatur, quam faciendum quod ab illo jubetur. It is
better to suffer what he threatens, then to do what he commands. Hence
Augustine has this passage, When Kings do make laws for error against the
truth, believers are tried, and perseverers are crowned. So much for the first.

2. This power is to be dispensed knowingly; not only rightly, but knowingly.
We have no Altar to the unknown God, blind worship, and ignorant service is a
sinful service; though you do not sin in the matter done, you may do
rightly, yet you sin in the manner of doing, if you do not do it knowingly;
that word that has put power into the hand of the Magistrate, must be his
light and guide in the managing of it. It is a high abuse of this power to
exercise it rashly and inconsiderately; with what reason or religion can others
be commanded to the obedience of that, which we our selves have not the clear
and undoubted demonstration is of God. If it be required that we are to be
fully persuaded in our own mind before we do, much more is it requisite that
there should be a full persuasion, a clear evidence from the Word, before we
do command others to do, lest we be partakers of others sins; and in this run
the hazard of opposing God. Those things which we do not knowingly, we can
never do surely; a man may strike his friend, as well as his enemy in the dark,
and not to do surely here, is to do sinfully. In matters of fact the Magistrate
has done his duty, and is clear in the doing of it though the witness prove
false, Deuteronomy. 17 6. At the mouth of two or three witnesses, shall he that is
worthy of death, be put to death. And the Magistrates going according to this
evidence in matters of fact is clear, though the witness be false. But I
cannot think it so in matters of faith; he is to go by another rule, and by
surer demonstrations. It is not here what this man says, or that man says,
but what God says. He must enquire and know fully, before he require any thing
of his people. It is his duty to study what is Gods will, to read Scripture, to
compare Scripture with Scripture, to confer and labor to be resolved of
difficulties, he must pray, and he had need to assemble godly, humble,
unbyassed, uninteressed men, to enquire and find out the mind of God; there
cannot be too much done, before actions of such a high nature are attempted. If
notwithstanding the best and fullest means upon earth used, a Magistrate may be
mistaken, then how fearful a thing is it to attempt actions of this nature
without any considerations at all. Upon what dangerous rocks and precipices do
the powers of the earth run themselves under Popery, who never enquire into the
truth, but blindely lend their utmost power to establish and maintain by fire
and sword, Par in To. 13. prop. 3.
what ever the Pope commands? Indeed they had need to believe him to be
infallible, and that he cannot err, who are to execute his commands, because
he requires them. Those who act such things, because any man or men on earth
say it, had need of such a belief. Certainly a Magistrate in the execution of
this power had need of better security, then either man or men can give him.
Former times do tell us, how miserably the powers of the earth have been
abused, even when they have been desirous to establish the truth, and suppress
error, yet they have been deceived with a shadow of truth, and in stead of
truth have established error. Fefellerunt A^i^ni^ ignorantem regem, ac persua
seru^t, ut falsam credendi formula^ e^clesijs impo^eret. H^lar. de Synod advers
Ar a.
It was so in the days of some of the Emperors, when Arianisme reigned, and
many ages have made it good since by woeful experience. And therefore certainly
there had need to be good security, before such a power be exercised. It has
been usually said, that a Synod is to go before, disquirendo, dirigendo,
docendo, in enqu^ring, directing, teaching; and the Magistrate is to follow,
jubendo, sanciendo, cogendo, in commanding, ^stablishing and compelling. I am
sure there is more reason that the one go before, then there is necessity the
other should follow after.

Yet mistake me not, I speak not this to countenance the skepticalnesse of
these times, as if a man should be afraid to speak, write, act against any
opinion what ever, for fear it be a truth: I leave that to them who have their
God and religion to seek. Nor do I think Gamaliels speech to be so good
divinity, as many make it, Act. 5.38, 39. to me he seems no better then a mere
Politician and a nullifidian, by his speech, doubting whether the Apostles
doctrine was from God or men. Such Skepticalnesse is better in Philosophy then
in divinity. Certainly we are not to fluctuate and doubt in a pyrrhonian
vacillation and uncertainty. As there is such a duty, so there is such a sin,
to be ever learning, and never coming to the knowledge of the truth: And it is
a greater judgment then men are a ware of, to be given up to this
Skepticalnesse of spirit, certain in nothing; how ever men look upon it, yet
sure it is no better then a diffusive Atheism. Scruples are not ever the
arguments of a broken heart, but some times of a broken head; and how ever men
look upon such a spirit, yet sure I am such a spirit argues, 1. Weakness of
knowledge of the truth. 2. And slenderness, sleightnesse of faith in the
assenting to the truth of the Word: and, 3. In many it is no better then a
temptation to divert and turn the stream of their desires, affections,
endeavors, from things certain, to the search and enquiry into things
uncertain, that they may spend their money for that which is not bread, and
their labor for that which will not satisfy, Isa. 55.2. And I wish that those
who are now laying out their money in such ways, would hear God speaking to
them in the heat of the market, why do you spend your money for that which is
not bread? for my own part, if I were an assertour of liberty, and against all
coercive power, yet I should abominate this medium to prove and defend it by,
which overthrows all religion, and wounds the soul in the belief and certainty
of all known truth. Certainly there are errors, there are heresies, there are
strong delusions, which carry many away, yea, and these errors, these heresies
may be known, else truth cannot be known; a man may be as certain that this or
that is an error, as that this or that is a truth, he that says we cannot be
certain of the one, does, or would alike say we cannot be certain of the other.
It is easily granted, That we know but in part, yet we may know certainly,
though not fully: this is knowledge in part, has respect to the measure and
degrees of knowledge, not to the nature and certainty of our knowledge, in this
life, fulness of knowledge is not required to acting, but certainty of
knowledge, though that be capable of improvement also: there may be certainty
of knowledge, though there want fulness of knowledge: it is not required I should
know all the will of God, but know that this which I do, is the will of God.
And of that I speak, when I say the Magistrate is to act knowingly, that is, he
is to act from the certainty of faith, though not from fullness of knowledge.
1. He is to be fully persuaded, that what he opposes is an error. 2. That it
is such an error as is the object of his power to suppress. And, 3. That he
does a thing pleasing to God in the suppressing of it. And this certainty of
knowledge will be sufficient to enable a man to act in this nature, though
there want fullness of knowledge. And so much shall serve for the second, he is
to act knowingly.

3. This power must be dispensed wisely and prudentially. Not only justly and
knowingly, but wisely and prudentially. And this prudential dispencing of this
power lies in these three things, viz, in the dispensation of it, with
distinction.

1. Of errors. 2. Of persons. 3. Of penalties.
1. It must be dispensed with distinction of errors. Certainly it is not every
difference in judgment or practice, no, nor every difference from the truth,
no nor every error maintained that is to be the object of the Magistrates
power, this were to deny a Christian latitude to men; this were to kill flies
with beetles. The remedy may be worse then the evil is. It is said of Domition
the Roman Emperor, that he spent his time in killing of flies; it was a work
unworthy such a person as he was. Certainly the Roman Empire was not so much
disturbed with a fly. It is unworthy the power of a Magistrate, to make every
puny difference, every dissent from the apprehended truth, or common rule, the
object of his coercive power. Without doubt there is a latitude to be afforded
to men of different judgments, yea and of different practices in smaller
matters; otherwis^ this power in being a relief, would be a scourge to the
Churches of Christ* There must be a distinction made of errors. I have told
you that some were errors in doctrine, some in practice. And both these,
either such as were principal, or less principal, either fundamental or
circafundamentall, or but circumstantiall. I shall not run into the many
distinctions that might be made. Certainly there are some errors, of which I
may as well as of some truths, that their suppression is their growth; this way
of lessening them, is the way of increasing them. That by which you think to
be their death, does but give them life: And this arises,

1. Either from the crossenesse of men's spirits, Nitimur in vetitum, Men love
still to taste of forbidden fruit.

2. Or from the conscientiousnesse of men: they are ready to think there is
some good in that way that is opposed and suppressed, the world lies under
prejudice, it has seldom been a friend to truth. And that jealousy that is
in men concerning earthly powers, having so many interests and engagements to
tempt and bias them, does persuade much with men, who contemn the world, to
think there is something in that which the world (as they look upon it) does
oppose.

3. Or it may arise from the rigorous and violent causes that may be used
against some opinions, which has been ever harsh to men of tender and
conscientious spirits. Insomuch that often times those opinions, which
otherwise would expire, and breath out of themselves; By this means their date
is lengthened, and their asserters increased, and breaches are multiplied. And
what ever others do, yet God forbid that we who but even now came out from
under a cruel tyranny, should ever so far forget, as to be oppressors of
others, even for differences of the like latitude, which we complained under,
and desired relief of, but could not enjoy it. Yet I speak not this to
countenance toleration of all kind of errors; Errors are to be suppressed,
yet are they to be dealt withal in distinctions; some, but not all.

There are four kind of errors, which I conceive fall under this power, and
are not to be suffered.

1. Such as are eminently and highly dishonorable to God, whose honor should
be more dear to us then our lives. Of which sort, are blasphemy, idolatry, etc.
These men have sinned away the very light of nature; they, have plucked up the
common fences, and bounds of nature, and are not to be suffered.

2. Such as are subversive to faith and godliness: Carnal weapons are good
enough for carnal opinions; just it is that those men should be commanded, who
are under no command of conscience, that they should fall under civil power,
over whom the power of God, and the power of conscience has no command.

3. Such as are destructive to civil government. Men whose opinions are
destructive to a State, may justly be destroyed by a State, be their plea of
conscience what it will; and upon this ground are Jesuits and Priests cut off
with us, because their opinions are subversive to government, and tend to
seduce the people from their allegiance, and to bring all under the vassalage
of Rome; they teach, that every one is bound to resist an heretic, of which
sort they make all Protestants, arctissimo conscientiae vinculo, with the
st^ictest bond of conscience, and that heretical; and excommunicated Princes
by the Pope, may be killed by their Subjects: that no faith is to be kept with
heretics, etc. All which tends to the subversion of any civil Protestant State.

4. All such as are evidently disturbing to the peace of the kingdoms. Such as
cuts asunder the sinews of humane society: these certainly are not to be born
withal.

And for other differences, if they be not destructive to faith, and the power
of godliness; or, if those differences be not seditiously and turbulently
promoted, but managed humbly, prudentially, holily, though they may be many
from the common received rule. I say, as another before me, in the words of
Job, Job 3.4. Let that day be darkness, let not God regard it from above,
neither let the light shine upon it, wherein it shall be said, that the
kingdom of Christ is divided, that the children of God are turned oppressors
and persecutours one of another. And so much of the first.

2. This power is to be dispensed with distinction of persons. I think these
considerations might come in, 1. The quality 2. The quantity
of them.

But I will deal only with the first.

1. The quality of the persons. And here it is to be considered, whether they
be men of tender, or of turbulent spirits, whether they be conscientious or
contentious men, whether the scruple be the fruit of an erroneous judgment or
perverse will. There is no question, but there ought to be all tenderness to
tender consciences: he that pursues his conscience, though he err in things of
less moment, may be saved; but he who acts against his conscience, in things
of the same indifferency, condemns himself. And certainly, though other
considerations may be taken in, as whether they be men of godly, of peaceable
lives; whether they be meek and humble, or proud and impetuous, yet this is the
grand and main enquiry, whether they be men truly conscientious, whether they
are men and women truly of tender consciences. There is no doubt but many use
conscience as an empty plea, and set conscience as a bulwark against all, and
will say, This is my conscience, and what has any man to do with my
conscience, I am only accountable to God for that, and not to any man. Thus
many get hold of conscience, and shelter themselves under the plea of
conscience. We read, when Joab would shelter himself from the wrath of Solomon,
he runs to the horns of the Altar, there he takes refuge and sanctuary: yet was
not Solomon afraid to deal with an ungodly person, though he had taken a holy
refuge, though he would not leave his refuge, yet his refuge left him, and
could not be a shelter to him. There may be many thus, who seek refuge for
their errors by the plea of conscience, whom yet their refuge delivers up, and
lays them naked, notwithstanding all their refuge. It would be worth enquiry,
how we might find out conscience in an error, from an error in conscience; A
man truly conscientious, from a man pretending conscience. Though something
have been said by others, relating to this, yet I shall give you my thoughts on
it, in these few discoveries.

I. Conscience in an error, is truly conscientious in an error.

1. He has been conscientious in the entertaining.

2. And he is conscientious in the maintaining of his opinion.

1. He has been truly conscientious in the entertaining of an opinion, he has
not been biased with corrupt affections, with carnal interests, with secular
aims and ends; he has studied, read, prayed, and has taken up his judgment,
as the answer of all these; He has stripped himself when he has gone to read,
has carried no mind thither, but went to take a mind thence, he went
resolved to yield up himself, and to be cast into the mould of truth, he went
willing to be conquered and fall down under the light, and thought it spoil
enough, to be the spoil of truth. When he went to pray, he stripped himself also,
and went without a prepossessed or engaged heart, ready to receive Gods stamp,
and go which way so ever God should incline him; he sought not God, as the
Israelites enquired of the Lord, Jer. 42. with a heart preresolved and
preingaged to go his own way, but did wholly yield up himself to go the way
of God. And now has taken up his way as the result of all his pains, and all
his prayers,

2. He is conscientious in the maintaining of his opinion. He does not maintain
it perversely, proudly, factiously, but meekly and humbly, though steadfastly and
strongly. He acts in all his dissentings with conscience and humility; he will
not vassal any truth of God to maintain his error; he will not make use of
any means unlawful to advance his own opinion; but you shall see the same
conscience in the maintaining, that was in the entertaining of his opinion.

Now then on the contrary, if men have been bribed into an opinion, tempted in
by base ends, and worldly advantages, if they have been biased by interests of
friends, relations, or any thing without them; if they have taken up an
opinion, because others took it up, etc. it is a sure sign that this man is
not conscientious in his error. And I know not what should put the difference,
if a man may be bribed into an error, why may he not be frighted into a truth,
at least from his error, inasmuch as it is better to be frighted into truth,
then to be bribed into error. And what I say of entertaining, I may say of
maintaining of an opinion, etc. But I pass this.

2. Conscience in an error is able to hold forth some evidence, some light out
of the Word (though mistaken) he is able to say something for his opinion,
conscience is not prevailed withal, but by some show of truth, some appearing
demonstration from the Word: such a man he is able to tell you, what that is
which does overpower him in the belief of such Doctrines or opinions; he is
not led by example, nor carried away with a faction; nor does he take up this
opinion, because others do; nor do interests and relations prevail with him,
but it is some show of reason, some evidence of Scripture that has
overpowered him. If any thing below this has wrought him into an opinion,
certainly the opinion has not power over his conscience, and something below
this may bring him out again. This is a good discriminative discovery of men;
if conscience be truly in an error, he can say something for it, he can tell
you what has prevailed, what has overpowered his conscience. No man can say,
this is an error, or this is a truth, because I am so persuaded, but because
God has so revealed, To the word, and to the testimonies, if they speak not
according to this truth, it is because there is no light in them, Isa. 8.20.
And therefore conscience in an error can give you some grounds out of the
Word, it can tell you what has prevailed with his spirit, what has commanded
his soul into the belief of that which he holds for a truth.

3. Conscience in an error, is willing to receive, to let in, and submit to
further light, if it can be held out to him; if any can make out by the Word
his opinion to be an error, he is willing to submit to it, and fall down at
your feet, blessing God for it, and humbly thanking you for the discovery of
it, which certainly is the genuine disposition of conscience in an error, as
light brought it in, the appearance of light, so light shall drive it out, the
evidence of light. And he thinks it honor enough to be conquered by truth, as
I told you, he would rather be the spoils of truth, then carry away the
trophies of error. So willing is he to give up himself to truth, and to
retract his errors, which makes me sometimes wonder at Luther, who you know
held Consubstantiation, and did violently maintain it against many learned
Divines of his time; yet a little before his death, talking with Melancthon,
whom he had often opposed in it, does ingenuously confess, that in the point
of the Sacrament he had gone too far; here was something; the acknowledgement
of the truth, but yet taking counsel of men, rather then of God, for fear lest
if he retracted those opinions, the people would have suspected his other
doctrines also, he would not publish it, but left it to others who succeeded
him to root it out insensibly: which has been the ground of so many divisions,
D. Reyn. praelect 4. in l. Apoc. p 53. Col. 1
and so much blood between the Calvinists and Lutherans, and is such a breach
to this day.

4. Conscience in an error (bear with my expression) fears no storming. There
is error in conscience, and conscience in error: when error is in
conscience, it has conscience for its buckler, it takes conscience for its
shelter and defense, it gets into conscience as its strong hold, being
otherwise afraid of sto^ming; but when conscience is in error, it holds out
error for its buckler and defense, which because he apprehends it to be truth
(for it is conscience in error) therefore he fears no storming, no power or
opposition what ever. He apprehends it to be a truth, and therefore is
confident of its strength, that it is able to hold out all opposition; if it
will not, he is glad to revoke it, and will conclude it an error, because it
will not hold out opposition, and so will no longer make lies his refuge.

5. Conscience in an error is firm in the truth. If you see men to yield up
truth, and yet are stiff in their error; if you see one to wave a truth, which
is received of ^ll, and yet is pertinax in an error, peremptory in an opinion,
which is opposed by all, you may suspect that man. Try then, if such men have
the like firmness to truths of common reception and agreement, as they have to
those things wherein they are singular and differ from others, if so, certainly
here is not conscience truly in an error.

6. Conscience in an error is uniform; conscience truly conscience is uniform
and regular in all the acts of conscience. We say that temper of body is not
good, which is hot uniform, if it be hot in one place and cold in another; nor
is that temper of conscience neither; see then if there be the like conscience
in other things, whether he be in all his actions under the power of
conscience, as he professes to be in this; whether he do not make conscience
of tithing mint and anise, and none of the great things of the law; or as the
Priests, who made no conscience of murdering Christ, and yet they made
conscience, as they said, of suffering his body to hang upon the cross,
because it was the preparation for the Sabbath. This was devilish hypocrisy.
Conscience is uniform, and he that is truly under the power of conscience in
one thing, is also under the power of conscience in all things. St James says,
He that bridles not his tongue, that man's religion is in vain.

7. Conscience in an error will not make use of any sinful, unlawful way to
uphold his error. He will not make other truths a stalking horse to hold up
that; he will not stretch a place of Scripture to serve his ends; he will not
cast dirt upon another truth to give more luster to his; he will not make use
of other truths of greater concernment to serve, as a threshold, to advance
his. Indeed, where error is maintained out of faction, or a spirit of error;
there they will make all to serve their own ends; they care not to pull down
the very pillars of religion, nor what they ruin to raise up a structure for
error; he cares not to weaken the power of such Scriptures, which afford
foundations of comfort to a soul, if he may make them serviceable and useful
to him, he will give up a place for comfort, loosen the foundations of comfort
and holiness, if by that he may lay the foundation, or strengthen his own
fabric and error: which is a high piece of devilishnesse. And, I say, this
age is too guilty of it.

And now by these rules you may be able to know whether conscience be truly in
an error, or whether only error be in conscience; whether it be truly
conscience, or only a pretense of conscience: if it be truly conscience, and
such a conscience, as I have spoken of, God forbid that any should lift up a
hand against such an one. I will say of such, as Augustine says to Procutianus
the Donatist, Such persons erring from the truth, must be drawn home by mild
instruction, and not by cruel enforcement. Spiritual weapons are most proper
for such a conscience. Carnal weapons will never accomplish their end, this is
sure, A conscience that cannot be bribed, cannot be frighted; he that is above
the favors, he is above the tenours of the world too. When the Emperor
offered Basil great preferment to tempt him from the faith, he rejects them
with scorn, saying, Offer these things to children, after he threatened him most
grievously, Basil contemns all, and says, Threaten your purple Gallants who
give themselves to their pleasures. In vain are promises or threatenings to
them, to whom the whole world is despise d. A man truly conscientious, though
in an error, he is too bigg for the world to conquer: moral weapons are the
only way to deal with him, his sufferings they do confirm and establish, yea
and comfort him, in stead of shaking and unsetling him in his way. What ever is
taken up upon conscientious grounds, will not be left upon worldly
discouragements; if it be, certainly there was no conscience in it; or if any
conscience, it will quickly check him for it.

Men merely forced from an error, certainly had either no conscience in it; or
if they had, they injure conscience, if merely upon such grounds, they do
recede from it. It is therefore my earnest and vehement desire, that men of
conscience, and such as are truly conscientious, would separate themselves from
those who falsely pretend conscience. All march under your banner, all shelter
themselves under you, and pretend conscience with you, who are men of no
conscience. You that are truly godly and conscientious, Come out from among
them, and be ye separate,; be not numbered up among Atheists, Papists,
Socinians, Arminians, etc. rid your selves of that generation, who hold such
destructive, and soul-murthering errors, and yet pretend conscience with you,
and we have done, we will follow you no longer.

And thus I have done with two of the Rules to be observed in the prudentiall
dispencing of this power, viz. that it be dispensed with distinction of
errors, and with distinction of persons. We come now to the third, which is,

3. This power is to be dispensed with distinction of penalties. There are
degrees of error; all errors are not alike culpable: some errors are more
sinful, more dangerous and destructive then others are; and as all are not
alike culpable, so should not all be alike punishable. Besides, there is
difference also in the persons, who are in the ways of error, some are
seducers, others seduced; some are the promoters, others but the followers;
some again are of proud, arrogant, turbulent spirits; others are of meek,
humble, conscientious and peaceable spirits; all which lays down an
unquestionable ground of distinction and difference to be made in the
dispencing of this power. Calvin lays down a threefold distinction of errors.

1. There are some, says he, which ought to be tolerated and born withal, by
a spirit of meekness, and are not by any means to divide and separate between
brethren.

2. There are others, which though they deserve chastisement, yet says he,
Modicum castigationem sufficere, gentle correction is sufficient.

3. And there is a third sort of errors (says he) which plucks up religion by
the roots, overthrows the foundations, are full of blasphemies against God, and
carries poor souls into destruction, etc. And these, says he, are to be cut
off with the severest punishments. And with this consents Bull^nger, Beza
against Bellius and Monfortius, etc. By which is evident from them, that as
they held a difference of errors; Calv refu. error M chapter Servet p. 694. inter
opusc.
so did they also affirm distinction of penalties. All errors are not alike
sinful, nor are all errors alike punishable. Certainly, there will be
differences in opinions, We know but in part, and every one has need of his
grains of allowance, otherwise the best may be found too light. Frate^nam inter
ecclesias evang licas co^mu^^o^e n non esse rescindenda^ ob diversas de
questiooni^us controversis opiniones, etc. Dave^. ad frater. communionem inter
eccl. evan. ^estaur. adbort. Z^n^h. in quart praecept. Fox Acts and Mon.
And it is as certain that there are some errors, which are better healed by
patience, then by punishment. And I could wish that those which may be cured by
patience, may never taste of any outward punishment. Pity it were that things
of small moment should ever divide or alienate the affections of those, whom
one God, one Lord, one faith, one spirit, one calling, bands of so great force
have linked together. Certainly much in this case is to be borne withal, The
bonds of the brotherly communion between Churches evangelical, ought not (says
Davenant) to be dissolved upon every difference in opinion, but only for the
denying and opposing fundamentals. And as their communion is not to be
dissolved; so is not the Magistrates power to be provoked against such
differences. It is a pass^ge of Zanchy, That those who would stir up Princes,
to have all people, Kingdoms, Commonwealths, which (not overthrowing the
fundamentals of Religion) differ from them in any thing, to be condemned of
heresy, excluded from favor, driven out of their coasts, those certainly are
no friends either to their Princes, or to the Church of Christ. There is a
Story in M. Fox in his Acts and Monuments, taken out of Guil. de sanct. Amor.
whom he commends for a valiant Champion of Christ, and opposer of Antichrist,
among other marks of false Apostles, he sets down this, True Apostles did not
procure the indignation of those Princes, with whom they were esteemed and
regarded, against such persons as would not receive and hear them, according as
we read in the life of Simon and Jude the Apostles: the chief Ruler being very
angry, commanded a great fire to be made, that the Bishops might be cast into
the same, and all other who went about to defame the doctrine of Christ and the
Apostles: but the Apostles fell down before the Emperor, saying, We beseech
you, Sir, let not us be the Authors or causes of this destruction or calamity,
nor let us who are sent to be the preservers of men, and to revive those dead
through sin, be killers of those that be alive. Upon which the learned author
after this manner infers, They then who have the favor of Princes, and use
it as an Engine against them who are contrary minded to them, are no true
Apostles. I relate not this to give the least countenance to that licentious
liberty which men take in differences in these days. Certainly this was far
from the intention of the author, nor would I have it extended beyond the
bounds laid down, but to caution men that they do not devide their affections
upon every difference, much less stir up that power, which they have an
interest in, against those, who do not seditiously or fundamentally differ
from them.

And this shall suffice for the third general Rule laid down for the
dispencing of this power. We will be brief in the rest. The fourth is this.

Rule 4. This power is to be dispensed orderly.

There are to be no corrections, till foregoing instructions. Arguments are to
go before punishments: moral convictions and persuasions are to be used,
before political and civil corrections do come in. Nay, there is more
necessity that the one should go before, then there is the other should follow
after; many things may be the subject of argument, which are not to be the
object of punishment. We are bound to do the one, even under such differences,
where to do the other we are under no such engagement. Yet where that power is
engaged, it is not to precede, but follow all moral ways for the convincing
and persuading of them. To enforce the judgment, merely by compulsive ways,
is to make a man to forgo the essentials of a man, and to put off his own
reason, which, as he is a man, is to be the guide of his actions; Beasts indeed
their corrections are their instructions, but men are to have other T^utorage;
Beasts are capable of no other way, therefore we beat it into them: but man is:
And therefore is he to be dealt withal by the power of arguments, not the
smart of punishments: nay, to make a man to put off his judgment by mere
compulsive ways, is not only to un-man him, but in a kind to un-Christian
him, For whatever is not of faith is sin, says the Apostle. It was the
speech of Henry the third of France, a great persecutour of the Protestants,
unto the chief Commanders of his Armies, being himself now at the point of
death, That Religion which is instilled into the souls of men by God cannot be
enforced by man. I have read that Frederick Duke of Saxony, when his person and
possessions were ceised upon by Charles the fifth, because he would not renounce
his Religion, He asked his adversaries, what they would have him to do: I am,
says he, convinced, that the Religion I now live in is a truth, and should I
profess another, I should either dissemble with God, and the Emperor, or draw
near to that unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost; with which answer
(says my Author) Charles the fifth was well pleased, and did more honor the
Duke afterward.

But you will say, What is all this to the purpose? these labored to force
them from the truth, not from error.

It is true, they did, but yet, I s^y, conscience truly conscience in an error
(as I have showed) can be no more enforced, then conscience in the truth.
Certainly conscience is to be dealt withal in an orderly way, precedent
instructions, and moral satisfaction is to be given, before other means are to
come in. And though other means in some cases may be used, yet are they nor, 1.
The only means. 2. Nor the first means. 3. Nor are they means to be used alone.

1. They are not the only means. I have showed you many other in the discourse
of the Church-wayes to suppress error, viz. Such as were Fraternal, Pastoral,
or Judicial, etc. God has set up many other remedies, which have been very
mighty and successful for these ends: and therefore this is not the only
means. And

2. It is not the first means; without doubt it is the last remedy, and is not
to be taken up till other means have been used and found insufficient, or
insuccessefull. There must precede,

1. A conscientious endeavor to convince them. I have sometimes wondered at
the Story of Theodosius the Emperor, who caused a public dispute to be
afforded to the Arians themselves, although they had before been sentenced and
condemned by the Council of Nice. If he did not too much, certainly we may do
too little; which then we do, if all foregoing means, and conscientious ways to
convince and persuade with men are not attempted.

2. And if convictions will not do, if moral persuasions can take no place,
yet is there to be waiting also; and how long in these cases, I cannot
determine. Certainly either till some eminent good, or some evident evil do
appear. And it is probable in a short time, one or the other will be
discovered, by which either the censure may be justified, or the forbearance
rejoiced in.

3. Nor is it a means to be used alone. Correction and instruction go together
in Gods dispensations, and so should they in man's; brute creatures, their
corrections are their instructions; but here, Vexatio non dat intellectum,
these corrections will be confirmations, and often provocations, if instruction
be not joined with them: and therefore when these are used, all meek and
powerful ways are to be practiced, which may persuade and reclaim from
error. And so much for the fourth.

Rule 5. This power is to be dispensed piously and religiously. In particular
it is to be dispensed,

1. Upon religious grounds and principles. Certainly the Christian Magistrate
is set up of God, for higher ends then merely to look to, and preserve the
civil peace. The things of this life are too low, and too narrow to be the
adequate object of his care and trust: he is a nursing father, the minister of
God for good, etc. And as his ends are higher, so his grounds and principles of
working, are to be higher also, and such grounds as are not only suitable, but
adequate to those ends: if indeed his ends were only secular, and the things of
this life, then might the grounds of his working be secular also, and merely
upon State principles; Sal mas. de primatu. par 1 p. 291, 292, etc.
but the end of his ordination being also the affairs of Jehovah, spiritual
and heavenly things; therefore are the grounds of his working to be
proportioned to the ends, and so are to be spiritual and heavenly; which sure
none will deny, but those who say the Magistrate has nothing to do in the
matters of Religion.

2. It is to be dispensed in a religious manner. A man may do a thing
materially good, and yet formally, and in respect of the manner of doing it, it
may be evil. Jehu's work in cutting off the Baal-worshippers, 2 King. 10. was
materially good in it self, agreeable to a former law; Pet. Mat. in loc.
if he had no particular commission for it at this time, yet the ground, the
manner, the end of doing was corrupt, he aimed at himself, not God; he acted
his own displeasure, rather then Gods, and was rather his own revenger then
Gods, whose he ought to have been; if he did the work for God, as the Apostle
sets it down, Romans 13.4. It is a dangerous thing, when we should exercise Gods
graces, to act our own corruptions; when we should be acted with the zeal of
God, to be kindled with our own fire, and transported with our own revenge.
That action cannot be good in the end, which is bad in the principle. And it
does lose the glory of it is acceptance, when it is corrupt in the manner.

3. It is to be dispensed for religious and pious ends. To have corrupt
designs, is sinful; and to have mere politic ends, is too low for the
exercise of this power. Great ends befit great persons. It is too low merely to
aim to make themselves great, and not God; and to advance their own kingdoms,
not Christ's.

1. That God may be glorified.

2. That sin may be suppressed.

3. That the Kingdom of Christ may be advanced.

4. That the Church may be purged.

5. That Gods people may be preserved, are ends suitable to such a spirit, and
wel-worthy such a power. And so much for the fifth Rule.

Rule. 6. This power is to be dispeeced mercifully and charitably.

1. Mercifully; and that has respect to the measure of the censure. They that
are to deal in business of conscience, had need to be conscientious, men of
tender and compassionate spirits. God would rather h^ve mercy above justice,
then justice above mercy. Luther, though he was a man, whose spirit was
thoroughly heated, yet in his Epistle to the Divines of Norimberg, upon occasion
of the dissensions risen among them, he showed more mildness of spirit then
ordinarily he expressed; he has this passage, Servire ^e bet judiciu^, non
dominari charitati, etc. Luth. ep. ad Theol. Norimber.
Judgment must serve, not rule over charity, otherwise it is one of those four
things which Solomon says troubles the earth. Certainly this power is to be
dispensed mercifully. It were a sad thing to make them suffer more then Christ
would have them; this were conscience-oppression; it is much safer to do too
little, then to do too much, when yet it is evident, it is our duty to do.

2. It is to be dispensed charitably; and that has respect to the end of the
censure: Punishment, as it is not the mere end of the making any law; So
neither is it to be the sole end in the execution of it. This seems too harsh
to me -- If the Magistrates power be ordained of God to be helpful in these
cases, I see no reason why it should be so restrained; but in the exercise of
it, he may aim at amendment, rather then punishment; and to reform, rather then
to ruin. But it is high time to conclude this Discourse.

I have you see at last done with the Rules, how this power is to be dispensed.
And in them have shut up the last great Question. I should now conclude, were I
not engaged by promise to say something by way of accommodation of our present
differences, especially those which are between the brethren (yet not excluding
other who are peaceable and godly) at this time. I know what I shall speak
concerning this subject is in more respects then one born out of due time,
which were enough, were not engagements upon me, to silence me in my entrance.
And indeed though it do not prevail with me to desist in my purpose, yet does
it persuade me to move in a narrower compass, then at first I intended. I had
thought to have proceeded in this method.

1. To have laid down the motives persuading to it.

2. The obstacles impeding or hindering of it.

3. The means subservient to the procuring of it.

But because much has been said for, and so little has been done alate, in
the compounding and healing of our differences; and not knowing how to add to
the one, or to recall the other, I shall be the briefer in what I shall say.
Give me then leave to say,

1. That this accommodation is not impossible: if indeed it were, God does not
bind us to the seeking after it; he does not bid us attempt impossibilities.
The Apostle tells us, Romans 12.18. If it be possible have peace with all men: he
engages us no further, neither in a civil, nor an ecclesiastical respect. And
therefore we will lay down this for a foundation, possible it is. And I will
name in these respects.

1. It is possible in respect of God, wi^h whom nothing is impossible, nothing
difficult: things wonderful to us, are easy with him; mavelous to us, are
familiar with him, as he tells us, Zech. 8.6. Because it is mavelous in your
eyes, is it therefore mavelous in my eyes, says the Lord of hosts? He that
reconciled man to God, is able to reconcile man to man. It is possibl^. Nay,
and we are not only under a possibility, in respect of his power, but we are
under, or rather in the possibility of a promise. He has said, Jer. 32.39. He
will give us one heart, and one way -- Have we the one, we are under the
possibility of the other: he that has done the one, can effect the other also.

2. It is possible in respect of our differences. If we look upon the nature of
the things wherein they d^ff^r, they are not of such moment as to divide
between brethren; their differences are not about fundamentals, but
superstructures: there is no opinion expressly maintained by either side,
which is directly contrary to the substance of faith, or destructive to
salvation^ nay, what ever are such, they are condemned by both. Nor ^ the
difference in those matters wherein they differ so wide, but they may be
composed and brought together, if men will act humility and self-denial. It was
said of the differences between Luther and the Helvetians, That there was not
any impossibility in respect of the things themselves, if their spirits could
be reconciled, Bucer in epist. ad Luther.
their causes might easily be reconciled. Bucer said of the reformed Churches,
they agreed in the thing, and differed merely in words, and manner of
expression. I would not lay such a charge upon the brethren, it were a sad and
heavy charge; there are some things wherein they differ: but this, I say, in
many things the difference to me seems rather to be in words, then in
substance: and where the difference is substantial, I do not see, but if
humility and self-denial might take place; if interests might be waved; if
preingagements might be slighted, even in those things there might be an
agreement; Certainly, God does not make the difference so great, as we our
selves do make it.

3. It is possible there should be an accord in respect of the persons
differing. It was the speech of one concerning the reconciliation of the
Germane Churches, It is possible for the most hot and rigorous spirits to be
reconciled, but it is easy for peaceable and moderate men to be agreed. The
differences are not between enemies, but between brethren, and neither of them
proud, imperious and contentious, but both of them humble, holy and peaceable:
Insomuch that when any does look upon their agreements in tempers, in natures,
in grace, in doctrine, in Covenant, and in their ends too, they cannot choose
but wonder at their diff^rence in ways; that those who do agree in so many
things, should differ in one, nay in one thing, in many things, whereof they
also do agree. I may s^y here, as it is subscribed at the foot of a complaint
concerning the differences of the Reformed Churches, Oh that we should agree in
so much, and differ for so little! It is a s^d thing, and speaks more evil to
us, then all our evils upon us.

2. Shall I say, as this agreement is possible, so it is exceeding desirable?

1. It is desirable to Christ, witness his prayer, Joh. 17.21. That we may be
one, even as God and he is one. Shall I say it would be the joy of Christ in
heaven, to see this accord on earth? it is that which he sweat for, that which
he did bleed for; it is a part of the travel of his soul, the income whereof
will be desirable to him. And do but think what a grief it is to your
Savior, to see his people, members of his body, heirs of the same hope, that
lay together in the same bosom of election, are sharers in the same
privileges, born to the same hopes, that they whose names he carries together,
and presents before the Father continually in heaven, should be divided and
rent asunder upon earth. It is a patheticall passage which Luther has in an
Epistle to the Ministers of Norimberg, Suppose (says he) you saw Jesus Christ
standing bodily in the midst of you, and by his very eyes speaking thus unto
your hearts, What do you, o my dear children, whom I have redeemed by my blood,
renewed by my word, that you might mutually love one another? -- There is no
danger in your difference, but there is much in your dissension, -- Do not thus
sadden my spirit: Do not thus spoil the holy Angels of their joy in heaven: Am
not I more to you then all your matters of difference, then all your
affections, then all your offenses? Can any unjust trouble pierce your heart so
much, as my wounds, as my blood, as I the whole Savior Jesus Christ?
Certainly, as it is the grief of Christ in heaven, so (let me speak after the
manner of men) it would be his joy and glory in heaven to see the hearts and
spirits of his own people united, and made one in the truth.

2. As it is desirable to Christ, so it is desirable it self; the miseries we
feel in the want of it, do exceedingly heighten and advance the worth of it to
us. This indeed will be the crown of all our conquests, the glory of all our
deliverance; the ruin of our enemies is nothing to the union of our friends:
nor are all sad calamities upon us to be compared to the divisions among the
Saints. Eusebius says of Constantine, He was more troubled at the dissensions
in the Church, then with all the wars in his dominions. Indeed these are the
saddest of divisions, and carry desolation in the face of them. The
Philosophers tell us, that each natural body does no less desire it is unity,
then it is being: and how much more should the body mystical, without which
unity it cannot long subsist in being? Every difference from unity, is a step
toward a nullitie.

3. It is desirable to us; It is the subject of all our prayers, of all our
tears, and so desirable that nothing will satisfy without it, though God have
done much for this kingdom, and is still riding on in his glory to do more,
yet we cannot but say with Abraham, What will all this profit us, if thy people
be not one? Alas, how can we give up one another? Those who have wept together,
prayed together, worked together, taken sweet counsel together, hitherto been
one; how can we now be two? how sad were it, if that those who have been
fellow-mourners, fellow-suff^rers, joint prayers and contenders with God for
these deliverances, should not now be joint enjoyers of the mercy and
deliverance? Certainly this is desired of all: as the way to it, let us breath
after, and hasten that of the Prophet, Zeph. 3.9. When all that call on the
name of the Lord shall serve him with one consent: And that of the Apostle,
Romans 15.5, 6, 7. That God would grant us to be like minded one toward another,
according to Christ Jesus, that we may with one mind, and one mouth glorify
God. This is sure the desire of all, and o that we should be at one in our
desires, to be one, and at difference in the ways whereby we may be one!

4. It is desirable to all the Churches of Christ. Where has Christ a Church
on earth that is not now in travel to see the birth of this unio^? where has
he a people that do not pray, and wait we may be one? What the Historian said
of Ormus, I may say of England, If all the world were a ring. England were the
jewel: It is so looked upon as the Jewel of all the Christian world, for
eminency of grace and holiness: And as our differences are the sadning of the
spirits of the Churches of Christ; so our union would be the j^y of their
souls, even life from the dead, a sufficient income for all their prayers,
their tears laid out for it. Certainly, it is desirable to all, but those who
desire to dance in our ashes, and would rejoice in our ruin, the speeding of
which does lie in our differences one with another.

Thus I have showed you, that this agreement is possible, it is desirable. I
might show you the necessity of it, the mischiefs which are like to follow if
it be not: but being done so fully by another hand, I shall wave it. And now in
the last place, unto these weak desires, cast in some few thoughts which may be
subservient in this happy union and accommodation.

1. I wish that both parties would get their hearts more overcome with the love
of union and peace; this very love of peace would carry us a great way toward
an union; we can talk of it, but our hearts are not taken with it; we can play
the Orators, say much in the commendation of it, but who pursues it, who makes
it the business of his life to attain it? Do we not rather side with our
dividing interests, then with our uniting engagements? and seek rather to be
well alone, then to be happy together? Who is it that says resolvedly, we must
be one, we cannot live without you, nor you without us? It was a superlative
expression of Luthers, writing to the Pastors of Stratsburg, I pray you (says
he) be persuaded that I shall always be as desirous to embrace concord, as I
am desirous to have the Lord Jesus propitious to me. O that we had more of this
spirit! That our hearts were so overcome with the love of union, that we could
be content to be any thing, that this might be, and to tread upon our choicest
privileges and interests, if they might be a rise and advantage to this
desired union.

2. Silencing all discriminating, characterizing names, which are nothing else
but badges of faction, bellows of strife, marks of division, fuel of debate,
stampes of difference, trumpets of discord, and mainly obstacle a happy and
desired union. These making us two, and in aliquo tertio, two opposite one to
another. It has ever been Satan's design to sow the seeds of division in the
Church of Christ, hoping that Christ's kingdom if once it be divided, will
quickly be ruined: And that he might effect this design the better, he has
still labored to brand men with siding and dividing names, which has been too
succesfull, not only to beget and keep up, but to fuel and increase strife and
divisions in the Churches of Christ. The Germane Churches can tell you the
truth of this in their sad and woeful experience, whose names of divisions,
Lutherans, Calvinists, Zuinglians, Hussites, etc. have so long torn and divided
them, that it is a wonder that any of them have so much as a name. Some of the
Fathers (not without cause) did exceedingly declaim against these names of
division. Epiphanius, who though he himself writ against 80. Epiphan. ^er. 42.
and 70. Non Petrianos, non Paulianos, sed Christianos nos oportet vocari.
heresies, yet he would not allow the Christians to bear (...), any other name
to be super added to the name of Christian. And I have read it was the speech
of Nazianzen, We ought not to be called Petrians, or Paulians, but Christians.
Certainly he that sees any thing, cannot but see these characterizing names, to
be the very bellows of strife, the trumpets of faction, and carry division in
the very forehead of them, and I know no end of them, but to enlarge the
differences among the Saints, and under these ill names to render up one
another to be wooried by the multitude, Nullum criminis nomen nisi nominis
crimen. Tertul.
who see no further then the name, and think the name crime enough, when all
the crime is often but the name.

3. Bury up, and forget all bitter and distastefull passages: Let an act of
oblivion be made, in which all disrelishments either in language or action,
word or deed may be buried up in silence: and let him be unworthy the name of a
brother, who does either renew them, or revive them. Bitter pills had need to be
swallowed, not chawed: It was said of the Polonian Churches seeking union,
Though they could not conclude all their controversies, yet they could bury up,
and banish all contentions. I wi^h we might do the like, though we cannot
strait conclude our controversies, yet let us banish all contentions. And in
seeking to compound our differences in judgment, let us not by mutual
provokings, beget a disunion in affection, which will enlarge our differences,
and make them more irreconcilable. Differences at the first are often times
small, but like rivers, the further they go, the greater they grow, and the
incandid, unbrotherly, harsh proceedings in them, are none of the least means
of the enlarging of them. It were a happy thing, if in all debatings and
writings for the future, harsh and unbrotherly passages, like rock^, might be
avoided, and what ever in this kind has escaped any in the heat of the
contention might be expunged, obliterated and forgotten. Lest seeds of future
division (if our differences may not be compounded, which God forbid) should be
left to succeeding posterity, who will be ready to imitate, if not out-act
those who have gone before them. We see a sad example of this in the
contentions among the Germane Churches, which stand up no landmarks to sail
by, but sea-marks, rocks to shun and avoid. It would be a preparing way to our
union and agreement, if by consent of all, there might be a mutual act of
oblivion pass, whereby all former exasperatings might be forgotten and buried
up in an eternal silence, and a mutual obligation never to provoke or
imbitter the spirits of one another more: we had all need rather to carry
buckets than fagots, and to seek to lessen, than to enwiden our differences;
unbrotherly proceedings makes a difference, where there is none, and where
there is any, it makes it twice as great; so that at the last, though the
controversies might be easily accommodated, yet the minds and spirits of men
exasperated, imbittered and provoked, become hard to be reconciled.

4. Retract unjust charges in consequentiall, or strained deductions fastened
upon either. It is a usual fault in controversies, to extend disagreements
beyond the purpose or thoughts of the persons dissenting; if they do not
differ, they will make them differ; if they disagree in a little, and come not
up to their thoughts, they will make their disagreements too wide ever to be
composed. How ordinarily do men by drawing deductions and consequences from
their adversaries assertions, fasten such opinions and tenants on them, which
they abhor, and neither apprehended nor granted? I grant there is some use to
be made of such reasonings; we may labor to make an opinion odious to the
maintainers of it, by discovering to them what consequences and absurdities do
follow, and what deductions may be made from such a doctrine, but we must not
strain their assertions, and make inconsequentiall deductions, much less must
we be so unbrotherly as to fasten all those consequences and deductions we make
upon them, as their own sense, and professed assertions. Though Tertullian and
others held the propagation of the soul, which certainly was an error, yet
they never held it to be mortal, they expressly disclaimed that, and yet who
sees not but from the one, the other might be inferred. The Calvinists charge
the Lutherans with Eutychianisme, which they utterly disclaim, but yet may be
inferred from their erroneous doctrine of Consubstantiation. They again charge
us for making God the author of sin, which we deservedly abhor, and yet they
think it may be gathered from our assertions of predestination and providence.
Nostrum est, no^ quid per se ex quovis sequa^ur dogmate, sed quid in illorum
sequatur conscientia spectare qui tenent illud dogma, etc. Dave^. adhort. ad
frat con inter e^an e^cl p 12.
One of our own learned Divines, who did cast in his labors to the healing of
the differences of the German Churches, alleges this passage out of Bucer, We
must not so much consider what will follow in the thing it self from every
assertion, as what will follow from it in the judgment of those who do ma ntain
such assertions -- And he gives this reason, for as he who assents to the truth
of some principle, cannot therefore be said properly to believe and understand
-- what ever may be deduced from it, so neither can he who maintains an error,
justly be thought to hold all those absurdities, which abler men may infer from
such an opinion, etc. It should therefore be our care not to strain or force
such consequences from their assertions which differ from us, as the matter
will not bear, much less to fasten such deductions upon them as their
professed judgment; and if such things have been done, it were a good way to
agreement to retract those unjust charges, which obstacle and block up the way
to a happy union.

5. Let there be a truce and cessation from all matters of strife and
contention agreed on. Print not, preach not, spread not your differences; let
there be a mutual consent not to publish several opinions, which makes the
people like a troubled sea without rest, tossed with contrary winds, and does
but heighten disagreements, and make them more difficult to be composed and
reconciled, partly, because in so doing men are more engaged, and so harder to
retract, and their parties are increased, whom it is more difficult to satisfy.

6. Lastly, Set upon a brotherly and amicable conference. And here, I fear (I
speak it with grief) I am as a man born out of due time: yet I will speak my
heart in it, though former attempts in this kind have been abortive, yet after
endeavors may be succesfull; miscarrying wombs may be fruitful -- let it be
again, again commanded and attempted. In this conference let it not be thought
presumption, if I humbly suggest the consideration of four things. 1. The
persons undertaking it. 2. The intention with which. 3. The manner how to be
carried. 4. The obligations in it. I will speak to them in brief.

1. The persons undertaking it must be considered; it is the main requisite to
a happy agreement. Certainly they are to be holy men, principled from above,
and not biased with carnal and corrupt interests, humble men, not great in
their own thoughts and opinions, not too big to close wi^h any truth, nor so
little as to side with an error. Meek men, such as are under the reign of
reason, not the command of passion, and in the acting of the one, can silence
the other. Self denying men, such as can trample under foot their own
concernments, Quis non vita sua redimat submotum istuc infinitum disfidij
scandalum.
to advance the interests of Jesus Christ. It was the speech of Bucer, Who
would not purchase the removing that infinite scandal that comes by dissension,
even with his life? Men truly of such spirits might do much for the composing
of our differences. And yet alas I dare not but persuade my self, such we have
had, and yet may say in the words of the Prophet, We looked for peace, but
there is no good, and for the time of h^aling, but behold trouble.

2. A second thing to be considered in this conference, is, The intention with
which it is to be carried. Not to non plus, silence, or conquer one another,
much less to search out disagreements and enlarge them, but brotherly and
humbly to find out the truth, and conscientiously to soader and compose our
differences.

3. A third thing to be considered, is, The manner how it is to be carried;
certainly, not passionately and contentiously as adversaries striving for
mastery, but brotherly, friendly, humbly, as men mutually seeking out for truth
All strife is unsuitable, unles it be this, Who shall be furthest off from
strife. If once men fall to crossing and contending one with another, they will
never be able to persuade, much less to procure and settle any happy
agr^ement. Noluit ha^c laudem ad versae parti concedere, quod pacis, and
concordiae stud o^^ores, quam ipse essent. Daven. p. 4
It was the speech of Luther at the agreement at Marperg, That he would not by
any means suffer the adverse party that honor, to outstrip him in the desires
of peace and amity. O that we could thus out go one another in the desires
after this happy agreement, and pursue it in an humble, brotherly way; in which
should we happily prevail with either party, they would not look upon
themselves conquered, but conquering; nor would they be ashamed, like those
overmatched and overcome by their adversaries, but would rather rejoice at
those bettered by their friends.

4. A fourth thing to be considered, is, The obligations in it. And it were
well, if such persons, meeting for such ends, were under some solemn
obligations or covenants, to lay aside all other interests and engagements, and
faithfully, impartially and conscientiously to search out for the truth, and to
embrace what ever overtures and hints of agreement God in his Word will afford
them. When men's spirits are under such weighty and solemn bands, they will not
without clear and demonstrable grounds from the Word oppose or dissent one from
another, nothing but God and truth shall part them. And I read of this practice
in some former Synods and Conventions, we need to go no further then that of
late, the Synod at Dort wherein the members of it, first the President of the
Synod, then all the Professors, Pastors and Elders of the Netherlands deputed
to the Synod, and lastly all the Divines of other Nations, did all jointly
bind themselves in a solemn oath, wherein they engaged themselves unto an
impartial examination, and decision of those five Articles in controversy,
according to the Word of God, and undoubted rule of faith; promising in this
whole action to propound nothing to themselves, See Paget power of Class. and
Synods, p. 239.
but the glory of God, the peace of the Church, and preservation of the truth.
And it were very requisite that those who are singled out, and set apart for
such a work, might be under such engagements, that in the whole procedure of
the work they might act as such, who have the vows of God upon them, and might
not be in such danger to be led aside with their own interests, engagements,
affections or disaffections, but might faithfully and singly seek after truth
and peace.

And thus now a conference being settled, there are but three main things to be
looked after. 1. To avoid all unnecessary controversies. 2. To conclude and
establish agreements. 3. To accommodate differences.

1. All unnecessary controversies are to be avoided. As in doctrine there are
fundamental and superstructive truths; Videl de episc Constable. praefat.
so in government there are (...), and (...), some things immutable and
unalterable, and some things prudential and changeable. It was one way which
Epist. of Casaub. to Car. Perro^.
K. James advised for agreement, That there should be care to distinguish
between necessary and unnecessary truths; the one is to be preached, pressed,
urged by the sons of peace and truth, and a consent therein to be obtained; the
other was to be forborne, and place given to Christian liberty, being but a
needles occasion of difference and dissension. It was said by a learned man
concerning the healing of the differences of the Germane Churches, That as
often as Divines of both sides have set themselves seriously about this work,
they still effected in it, as much as they desired to effect, and they might no
doubt have done more, if their own wills had not stood in their way. We cannot
say the first; Daven. ad frat. com. adhort p. 3, 4.
hitherto our endeavors in this kind have not been so prosperous and
succesfull. And it speaks sadly to us, if all ways of union shall become means
of disunion; if all ways of agreement shall beget matter of strife; if all
reasons for accord shall prove but arguments of further distance, and if our
very pursuits of peace and accommodation, do set us farther from it, and render
our agreements more difficult, more impossible. This is a sad omen. So that it
is our misery we cannot say the first; and I am persuaded it were our sin to
say the second. It cannot but be imagined that all parties know how scandalous,
how dangerous and destructive our divisions are, and how sweet, how desirable
and beneficial both to our selves and others who love us, our union and
agreements would be, and therefore it cannot in charity be imagined that our
differences are lengthened, because we have no mind to conclude them. What
worldly thing is it that can compensate or balance such an evil as this?

-- Pax una tryumphis
Innumeris potior --
Agreement in it self alone is more to be valued, then the triumphs and
trophies of strife; but is not here our misery, do we not stumble in the
threshold? do we not in the very entrance, or first lancing forth into this
mare pacificu^, cumber our beginings with needles remora^^? and split our
selves upon the rocks of unnecessary disputes, which blast all our hopeful
beginings, retard us in our way, and ends in nothing but s^rrow and f^rther
divisione.

2. A second thing to be looked after, is, To conclude and establish our
agreements. We d^ffer in some things, but we agree in more; what is there
asserted by one in point of doctrine, but is as zealously maintained by the
other: and for matter of government, though in some things we d^ffer, yet in
many things we do agree. It were a good step toward this desired
accommodation, to conclude and publi^h our agreements, that as men have taken
notice of our differences, which by too much artifice has been rendered, and
so apprehended wider, then in truth it is: so they might take notice of our
agreements also, and be comforted in the one, as they are troubled for the
other. And it cannot but be wondered at, that we hear so much of the one, and
no more of the other. Indeed it is a work requiring an abler pen, but it is
well-worthy the best endeavors of the eminentest sons of men, it being a
better work to unite, then to divide; to build, then to pull down; and to heal
differences, then to enlarge and increase them.

3. A third thing to be endeavored is, To acc^mmodate our difference; of which
we may say, as one said of the divisions among the Protestant Churches, Europae
speculum p. 173.
That unless God did stir up some, and clothe them with a mighty spirit for
this work, the end of them may be, that our enemies will laugh, when we shall
weep. And indeed (...), who is sufficient for these things? It is easier to lay
down accommodating motives, then accommodating media's. We have accommodating
motives, enough and enough of them. And I am confident there is not want of
accommodating graces, both parties are replenished with love, with humility,
with self denial, Here is fire and wood, but where is the lamb? O that we could
say with the same fullness of persuasion, Deus providebit, or, God will
provide, or God will discover mediums of his own to soader us together. This we
breathe after, certainly none but he can, and we are now within the ken of it.
Two things would hid fair for it, if not wholly accomplish this desired
accommodation.

1. To settle the power of particular Congregations.

2. To allay the jurisdiction of Synods.

In the first there was a great agreement, and if God would but clear up the
second, all other differences would fall in with them.

It is our work to be mighty with God that he would show the might of his own
grace to make all difficulties easy, and rough things plain, That the glory of
the Lord might be revealed. And let me breathe out the desires and travels of
my soul in the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.10. Now I beseech you, brethren,
by the Name of the Lord Jesus, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there
be no divisions among you, and that ye be perfectly joined together in the same
mind, and in the same judgment. To which let me add what the Apostle says by
way of argument to it, Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6 We are one body, have one spirit, one
calling, one hope, one Lord one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all
-- Oh that we should be one in so much, and two for so little! I will conclude
all with that vehement exhortation of the Apostle, Rhetoric above
withstanding, Phil. 2.1. If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if
any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and
mercies, fu^fill you my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love,
being of one accord, of one mind. And the God of peace direct our hearts into
the ways of all truth, love and p^a^e.

FINIS.

