A True RELATION Of several OVER THROWS Given to the Rebels, BY Colonel
Crayford, Colonel Gibson; AND Captain Greams. The Relation being sent from
Dublin in two Letters, by the last Post, Septem. 13. 1642. Together with the
Names of the chief of the Rebels that were slain at the said Overthrow.

Sept. 26. London, Printed for Joseph Hunscot. 1642.

Dublin, September. 13. 1642.
Sir.
I Have not written unto you these two last Posts, for that there has been
nothing done worth remembering, or acquainting you withal. The Earl of Ormond
has been sick of ^ate, and is now somewhat well amended, but does not stir out
of his chamber: This last week Col. Craford has been in the County of Wicklow,
relieved the black Castle of Wicklow, which was in great distress, saw
multitudes of the Rebels on the hills, but none of them came near him; he went
up to the hills, and charged them with his horse, but they would not abide him,
but fled, and would not fight: It must be starving that must end the War, and
therefore to begin that way, he has fired all the Beer and Rye, which in this
Country was already in Stack, and so returned.

About the beginning of the last week, the Garrisons of Athie and Maryburrough,
with the assistance of Captain George Greames, made out 400 foot, and 80 horse
for to relieve the Burres in Ossory, an house belonging to the Duke of
Buckingham, in which were several English in great distress; it was no sooner
resolved on, but two of our own soldiers, being of that County, Irish, fled,
and gave them notice of our coming; the Lord of upper Ossory did prepare
himself to give them resistance, with above 800 foot, and 60 or 80 horse, and
on a strait, on a Bogside, set on our men; they received them with great
resolution, and 40 of Captain Greames Troop charged and routed them, with the
assistance of Musketeers which were sent to clear the passage, yet they stood
again and in the sight our foot killed about 80 of theirs on the place; their
horse retreated farther off, on the Bogge side, made a stand; which being
perceived by Cornet Wi^row, Cornet to Sir Adam Loftus, he rid up to them, and
seeing them stand so confidently, at first conceived them to be some part of
our horse; but coming more near, and discovering them to be enemies. taking the
advantage of the place, charged them home; they had the Bog at their back, and
could not flee* our horse so bestirred themselves, that they slew 40 of the^^
best Freeholders, and amongst them a brother of the Lord of upper Ossory was
slain, and Florence Fitz-Patrick^ they say is dangerously wounded: this done,
they marched quietly through the Country; the Freeholders being slain the poor
made no resistance; and in my opinion, if there were some course taken to take
in the poor, their multitudes would quickly be lessened, and the poor might be
serviceable for a while, and might be well ordered afterward, when things are
better settled with you.

We are at this present making a great Trench about this City, to keep of the
enemy for adventuring to fire us in the Winter. There is this morning a meeting
of the Protestants of the best quality, of this City, on a Commission directed
to them, to search the houses of all such as are Papists, or married to
Papists, for Arms and (...), and to take it from them and deliver it (...) as
likewise to enquire what strangers or others are come to dwell in the City or
Suburbs since the (...) and twentieth of October last, and what Citizens have
since that time gone out of the Cit^e and returned again, to enquire how many
of the Town Papists are in the Army, and to consider of the plucking down of
thatched houses in or near the City, with some other particulars which for the
p esent I remember not: this Commission is to be put in execution weekly, and
the Commissioners have power to examine on Oath, I believe it will be duly
executed.

So, praying God to compose the disorders with you, as the only probable way
to make us happy, I rest

Your assured loving friend, J. B.

The Names of the chief of the Rebels that were slain.
DErmot mac Teage fitz-Patrick, uncle to the Lord of upper Ossory, and Dermot
Oge his son, Captain Lager, a Low Country Soldier, and Burk his Lieutenant;
Captain Dermot mac a Boy; Patrick Cashin, of the Cross; Bryan Conner, heir to
Patrick Conner; Capt. John Cashin, and Morgan Cashin, Gent. Will. Ocaroll, a
chief Freeholder; Donnogh fitz Patrick, Gent. Also a younger son of Brian mac
William; besides Lieutenant Bryan O More, prisoner at the Burrus, for the
relief of which he was to be ransomed; moreover were slain Loughlin, and
Patrick Castigan, Friar John Castigan; Patrick Hoar, priest, Matthew Dulany, a
sub-Sheriff; John Tebin, a Merchant of Kilkenny, besides Sergeant Bryan Burk,
now prisoner at Athie.

From DVBLIN, this thirteenth of SEPTEMBER, 1642.
MOst loving and kind friend goodman Randall, my love remembered unto you and
to my mother and to my wife, this in brief, I recieved your Letter from Robert
Willson which you sent me, but at that time I lay very sick, for I came sick
out of the Army.

As for news, we were out the last bout two and twenty days, we were but
seventeen Colors at the first, but afterward there came nine Colors more
to us, five from Dublin, and four with my Lord Moore from Tredagh, then we
marched for Castle Suddane, where we made a Hundred shot with our great
Ordnance and four, before we could take in the Castle, but we killed three
hundred of the rogues and more, then we marched for the Castle of Newstowne,
and the rogues run away, there we left a Garrison and likewise at Coakstoane,
these Castles are near Dundalke within six or eight miles, then we marched for
the Nubbar, near the Navan and Kells where there lay an Army of the rogues
horse and foot, but we could not reach thither that night, but we lay a mile
and a half short of the Nubbar, the next morning sent our forlorn Troop of
horse and foot out, and the rogues were all run away, then we returned home for
Dublin. We are going to entrench Dublin round about, they are gone forwards
with the work already: The rogues has burned Reamines, two miles from
Dublin, as fine a house as any was in Ireland; There is five hundred
Musketeers gone for the Castle of Wicklow, Colonel Crayford is gone Commander
of them, they took it from the English, but as yet they are not returned; But
when we were at Castle Suddane, Colonel Gibson my Colonel Commanded in chief.
Remember my love to my Children, Friends, and Neighbors, and to all my Noble
friends at Sir John's in general, giving them thanks for their loves: And as
for my coming home God knows when; but if God lend me life and send us money,
I will be with you at Christmas or else near Shroue-tide. I never recieved any
means since I came in the Country, but one Months means, look not for any Money
till I come my self, for if I had any, I know not who to send it by with trust;
And thus I commit you to God.

Your ever-loving Husband, till death, JOHN BACON.

FINIS.

