FOUR TABLES OF Divine Revelation Signifying What GOD in himself is, without
Nature; and how considered in Nature; according to the THREE PRINCIPLES.

ALSO What HEAVEN, HELL, WORLD, TIME, and ETERNITY are; Together with all
Creatures visible and invisible: and out of what all things had their Original.

Written in the German language by JACOB BEHM, and Englished by H. B.

LONDON Printed for H. Blunden, and sold at the Castle in Cornhill 1654.

TO THE READER With an Account of the following Tractate.
IT IS no less common with men would seem wise, than inconsistent with those
that are really so, to find a facile Faith for what they like, and a sturdy
Diffidence for what they dislike: Like the twins of a biased Judgment, the one
favoring of Affection, the other of Prejudice, and both of Partiality.

That some Passages in the precedent Life will meet with such, I make no
question, and therefore thought it not unnecessary to acquaint them with this
Truth, that what therein is related concerning our Author, by the learned
Gentleman that penned the Narrative, was received not form uncertain wandering
Reports, but Authentic Information, from the Tongues and Penns of those, that
(during his life upon Earth) were his familiar Associates; Men conscientious
both in Words and Deeds, well knowing what strict account must be rendered of
both. And how sad an Account have they then to make, whose Throats, like open
Sepulchers, blast with their breath (as far as their venom reaches) the most
eminent Gifts of God in men that bear his Image? whereof did they know the
danger, it could not but make them tremble to consider how their poisoned
Arrows will return and stick in their own Souls: Yet have some not feared
maliciously to defame this deep illuminated man of God; A man whose Writings
(though not to us made Canonical by Miracles) manifestly appear to have been
the Dictates of God's Spirit; and the Will of God, the Rule of his whole life;
always resigning himself (as his own Pen testifies) to the Divine Will: to
will and work nothing but according to the will of God. Yet against the spirit
of this pious man (as if they feared an Ecclips of their Evening splendour, by
the Daylight of his writings) have some (especially among the Lamps of our
Tabernacles) spit forth their Venom, in Aspersions so injuriously false, and
palpably absurd, that neither Reason nor Religion, Prudence or Piety, could
yield any motive thereunto; only the Monster of their own frailty. Thus does
the Prince of the Air blind men with self-love; that though in others they
abhor unrighteousness, yet themselves can rashly proceed to sentence, before
they understood him, yea some of them, before they had read one Leaf in his
Writings: Whereas others that have seriously studied him, and (with divine
assistance) understood much of him, can justly as clearly evidence the true
concordance of his writings, with the word of God in Holy Writ; and their
inconsistence with conceited Sects, corrupt Doctrine, both of our own and
former Ages, and all Heterodox Opinions whatsoever. Well may be said of him,
what an experienced Philosopher writes of Paracelsus;

Cur praestantis viri famam, omni laud dignissimi, periclitari sinemus?
Scripta sua non nisi ad Dei Gloriam, proximique emolumentum edentis; lucrum
utique, ut calumniantur, ex aliorum per scripta ipsius seductis incommodis
nequaquam quaesitum ivit; neque, quod inimici ipsius factitare solent, ideo
Medicinae dedit operam, ut ex aegris salutarem faceret; sed quicquid fecit,
bono animo fecit, absque mercede, quam nec accepit, nec opus habuit, artibus
suis ipsi absque aliorum detrimento abunde sufficientibus. Omnes prudentes
veritatis amatores neminem ei unquam parem fuisse etiamnum credunt. Quod vero
ignorantium quorundam invidia contemtim habetur, ipsi nihil derogat, ipse enim
manebit Paracelsus, and hi imperiti convitiatores, suam tantum impudentiam
prodentes, etc.

It Is true, in respect of the common style of most Authors, his language may,
to some, seem somewhat monstrous; So do the Characters of Letters to Children,
primo intuitu; and many, even Scripture expressions, to the Ears of the Natural
man Besides, he proceeds much by affirmation; not Disputing, but Convincing
Error; having not received his Knowledge from men, or from the imperfect
fallible Principles of the Schools, but from the true Fountain of Wisdom and
Knowledge. Nor did he write, as most do, by transcription out of other men's
Books; nor were his Dictates neither, the Products of his own Fancy, but by
Divine influence; and (as is his own expression) out of his Three-leav'd Book,
which the Hand of God had opened in him: wherein he found the Knowledge, not
only of all that Moses, the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles taught in Sacred
Scripture, but of all Mysteries also in Heaven and Earth, as himself affirms in
his Epistles, and many other of his writings. But lest his own Testimony
should seem invalid, I make bold to insert what a learned German writes of him.

Now ( says he) when Reason supposes that it is ascended up to the height,
with its Wisdom and Arts, God has stirred up this our dear Jacob Behmen (a
plain unlearned Tradesman) and gifted him with such a noble endowment of the
Universal Knowledge of God and Nature, and shown him the Center of all Beings;
How all things arise from God Originally, consist in God, and again return and
flow into him etc. thereby to call man to the knowledge of God, of himself, and
all things; That he might turn from the corrupt Dark being of this World to
Christ the only Light etc.

This high, rare, and precious Gift (which has not been manifested in the like
manner and Degree, Height and Depth, Breadth and Length before these times) our
Jacob Behmen learned in God, has employed in all faithfulness and simplicity,
and laid it forth as it was given and imparted to him: And in all his writings
has laid his ground in God, and has reared up his whole Building, very
deeply founded, from Him: As Christ speaks of the wise Master Builder, that
he dug deep, and laid his foundation on a Rock, whereupon he built his Tom'r
on High. As it is clearly to be seen how he does all along, drive and press at
God, Christ, and his Spirit; at Faith and Love; at the mortifying of the old,
and the renovation of the new-man; And in brief, at the Restoration in Christ
of God's Image in us, which did disappear in Adam; Also he shows the Order,
Harmony, and Birth of all things; and how they subsist by the power of the yet
uncessantly working word of Gods FIAT, and hold their Analogy and orderly
proportion in the wisdom of Gods wonders: But he does not set it forth with
words of Scholastic knowledge, and contrived Art of Wisdom in Babel, and of
her Builders; but as it was given him according to the knowledge of Nature, in
his own Gift. And though such Terms and Phrases as he uses seem hard and harsh
at first, yet the diligence of an observant Reader, that earnestly defireth
knowledge for his Edification, will (by the indwelling Grace of God) so bring
him into a right apprehension thereof, that what before seemed difficult and
dark, will at length be plain, clear, and easy, as it has happened to my self.

Thus far his own Countryman and Accquaintance.

Moreover he had the knowledge of that wonderful Mystery (containing the
Secrets of the whole Creation) The language of Nature, and that in his Native
tongue; whereby the very name of every thing gave him clear Inspection into the
Nature of it. This Knowledge had Adam in his Innocence, but by his Fall lost
it: Else it had been understood (as our Author affirms) in the Language of
every Nation.

Now to the incredulous, if they could but fathom his depths, I should only bid
them ask themselves this Question; Whether Art or Nature ever did or can
produce such sublime Knowledge, such pure and distinct knowledge of the highest
Mysteries? knowing that upon debate with their serious. Thoughts, they must
speak the Negative. But there is a malicious Ignorance possesses many, by
which they condemn all things above their, Sphere, and cry down that excellency
in others which exceeds the fathom of their own Comprehensions: I need not
travail for Proof or Instance, Istorum plena sunt omnia, They are no where not
to be found.

Concerning the following Tractate, it contains Four Tables with their
Explication; wherein may be seen, by a spiritual eye, the Ground and Foundation
of all the Authors Works, and profound Mysteries; Yea there is also clearly
decypher'd, that so much sought, and so rarely found Secret Cabal of the
ancient Rabbis. These Tables indeed contain the Sum of all the Authors
writings, of all his Knowledge, of all in Heaven and Earth, yea of all the
highest Mysteries that Man, in this life, is capable of knowing.

The First Table, as the Radix, briefly includes the rest; The other three are
Branches of the First, and all together are properly termed an A.B.C. to all
that the Author has written; which when I perceived, I could not but much
desire their publication; and not knowing when or by whom that might be done, I
furnished my self with all necessaries thereunto; and so by God's enablement
performed it with that care and diligence, which the Majesty of the matter
requires. And though I know it a general Expect, that the skill of a Translator
should illustrate his Author, yet that, in this and some other of his Writings,
can not well be done; for whoever (not perfectly baptized into his Spirit)
shall render them in the genuine phrase of other language, and not punctually
verbatim, will force his Reader to a double loss, both in the significancie of
expression, and in the mind of the Mystery.

In a word, this following Tractate I have annexed to the Author's Life, and
both, not unfitly, to his Mysterium Magnum: For the first ten Chapters of that
Book, are not only introductory to the following Commentary, but likewise an
excellent illustration of these Tables; wherein the pious Reader, by a due
search, may happily find ( pulsanti dabitur) a greater Treasure than the World
can afford, and that to his infinite satisfaction; which I heartily wish him,
together with the Life, Light, and Love of Jesus Christ; In whom I rest

His Servant H. BLUNDEN

1 Table What GOD is without Nature and Creature.
What God without Nature and Creature is, and what the Mysterium Magnum is: How
God, by his breathing forth or speaking, has introduced himself into Nature
and Creature. 1 Abyss NOTHING and ALL Father 2 Will of the Abyss. JE Son 3
Delight or impression of the Will. HO Spirit 4 Science or Motion. VA 5 GOD in
Trinity. Thus is GOD without Nature and Creature considered. 6 WORD in GOD. 7
Wisdom.

Beginning of Mysterii Magni of the Eternal NATURE
Here begineth Mysterium Magnum as distinction in speaking the WORD; where the
WORD by Wisdom is made distinct, Natural, Sensible, Comprehensible, and
Invenible.

The Eternal beginning of the Principles is here also understood, with Gods Love
and Anger, in Light and Darkness.

GOD in LOVE GOD in WRATH 9. The First principle Spiri- 8 The second Principle
Moving, Thinking tual Dark, Feeling, Mind, Nature V Angel, Light, Love-fire. 10
Tincture or speaking of the Trinity. I Desire, II. Prick or Science, III
Angu^sh, IV Fire, Angelical World Root of the four Elements. VI Sound or
Distinction. VII Essence, or essential wisdom. Austere Cause of Enmity, Fire
root of heat. Hard, Hellish-life, Hell, Sub- Growing or Greening in the
Spiritual World. 12 Pure Element. Paradise. Sharpness cold fire Root, Devil,
stan- SAL, MERCURIUS, SULPHUR tial.

14 Beginning of the external World.
Here begineth the external visible World, as the out-spoken visible WORD.

1 Is understood the good Life of the creature which stands in the
Quint-Essence.

2 The poison and grossness of the Earth and Earthy Life.

3 The Reader understanding these, all Doubts and Queries cease in him: and
Babel is lost in Ignominy.

The third Principle 15 Heaven. Stars 16 Quint-Essence Good Powers. The 17 The
4 Elements. Devill's Poison introduced. Out spoken WORD. 18 Earthly Creatures.

A Brief Explication of the first Table, of GOD revealed; how out of himself he
continually begets, and breaths forth himself: And how this Table is to be
understood.
NUmber 1. Is the Abyss, the Nothing, and the All. There we begin to consider,
what God in himself is, without [or besides] Nature and Creature; and this
consideration of the hidden God, extends unto Wisdom, Numb. 7. Therein is
understood how God dwells in all, and how all things from him have their
existence; but, himself is to all Incomprehensible, and as a Nothing; yet
through that All, he makes himself visible, sensible, and Invenible Finditch.
attainable.

Numb. 2. Is the Will of the Abyss. And by it, at the right side, FATHER, and
on the other side, J E. This signifies the Will of the Abyss, which is the
Father of all Beings. And the J E signifies the Eternal One, as the Name
JESUS from the Eternal One.

Numb. 3. Is the Good pleasure, Beneplacitum.
Delight [Lubet] or Impression of the Will; by which (toward the right)
stands SON, and opposite to it, H O, signifying how the self will includes
it self in the place of its possession: The place is the procreation out of it
self; where God begets God; according to the good pleasure of his propriety.
The HO is the breathing of the will, through which the Delight passes.

Numb. 4. Is Science or Motion: at the Right stands SPIRIT, and over against
it V A. Science, is the attraction of the Will to the place of God; where the
Will comprehends the Delight which proceeded to the Son, or to the breathing;
by which outbreathing is understood the Spirit of God. And here is understood
the great Name JEHOVA, as the Three in one.
Tri-une Being; how the Father of himself begets the Son; and how the Holy
Spirit proceeds from both, and yet they be but one Being, which has nothing
before it. For the Science, in the drawing in, is understood a Root of the
Eternal knowledge, or motion.

Numb. 5. Is God in Trinity, signifying that the Tri-une Being, may be known,
as a Similitude of the Will, Mind, and Senses; wherein lies the eternal
understanding. Thus is the Ternarie, the one Eternal understanding, and cause
of all things.

Numb. 6. Stands WORD, signifying distinction in the understanding, as
speaking, the Or sensibilitie. Emp^ndligkeit.
Perception of it self; which word abides Eternally in God himself; and God as
the Power of Perception, is the Eternal good.

Numb. 7. Stands Wisdom, signifying the outspoken Word, as the power of the
Divine Contemplation; wherein God to himself is Intelligible, Perceptible, and
Revealed. And thus far is God to the Creature, Invisible, Incomprehensible, not
Natural, nor Creatural.

Below the line stands Beginning of the Great Mystery, or of the Eternal
Nature; As of the Separability, Perceptibilitie, and Sensibilitie of the
Properties; wherein is understood, the Divine Extrication or Revelation, how
God introduces himself in the eternal Nature, in Love and Wrath; and not in
himself, for himself is the one Eternal good, but without Distinction, were not
perceptible or manifest.

Here is to be Noted, that the 7. Capital Forms of Nature, are marked (to
distinguish them from the other Numbers) with I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII.

Numb. 8. The second Principle, stands to the Right. And Numb. 9. The first
Principle, to the left. Thus Numb. 9. signifies the Fathers Property, through
the speaking of the Word in Wrath; And the second Numb. 8. signifies the Sons
property in Love; where the Love of God by the expressed Word is revealed. As
that in Love, Numb. 8. shows the Angelical power-world; and that in Wrath,
Numb. 9. signifies the Dark power-world of Painfulness, wherein God is an
Angry God.

Numb. 10. Stands Tinctur, signifying the Temperature of all powers, how
there through speaking they go forth in Distinction and Forms; as first in the
7. Capital Forms, the Desire, Science, Anguish, Fire, Love-Fire, Sound, and
Being. And further, there stands by every Capital Form, what Properties are
born and proceed out of themselves.

For, if there must be a speaking; then the power must first contract it self,
that it may breath forth it self; then it begets that Comprehensive or
Magnetic Impression, the something (which is the Beginning) wherein the Fiat
which attracteth the powers is understood.

I. Is the first Capital Form of the spiritual Nature, and stands with Numb.
I. Desire, which Desire sharpneth it self, from whence existeth Sour, Hard, and
the cause of Cold; and is the ground of all Saltish properties Spiritual, in
the Spiritual world; and Essential in the External world. So also the Desire of
Impression is cause of its own overshadowing, or Darkness in the Abyss; as all
these Forms belong to Numb. I. To the desire of Infassligkeit.
Comprehensibility.

II. By the second Capital Form, stands Pricking.
Compunction or Science; signifying the contraction of the Desire; where the
first enmity or contrary will arises; for hardness and motion, are not alike.
Now in this form arises moving and feeling; as the root of pain; wherein is
understood the Mercurial Poyson-life, both spiritual and Essential.
corporal; and in the Darkness the pain or Torment of the wicked life;
Neither was the good life without the root of the Evil manifest unto him; and
that is the root of Gods wrath, according to the Perception [sensibility] of
the eternal Nature.

III. The third Capital Form is Anguish; which arises from the desire of
Impression, and from the Enmity of Compunction, where the will stands in
Cruciatus. Qual.
Torment, and is there the cause of feeling, and of the five Senses: for in the
Anguish all Forms grow Painful, and then are they sensible of one-another.
And here is the Word become distinct; and is the root of Sulphur, both
Spiritual and Essential, [Corporall] wherein is rightly understood the
Hellish Fire in Darkness, in painful life, as appears in the Table downward.

IV. The fourth Capital Form, is called Fire; where is Understood the kindling
of the Fire, from the painful Sulphurish root; for the Will goes out of
Anguish again into Liberty; And the Liberty goes to its Revelation in
Anguish: In which Conjunction comes that terrible [like a flash of lightning]
Coruscation, where the Abyss, as the Eternal good, is revealed; And is in the
Forms of Nature, the Understanding and Life, in the dark Enmity; and in the
Liberty is the root of Joy, or rouzing up the Faculties. Kraffen.
Powers; and is the kindling of the Fire; in which kindling the Abyss becomes a
shining Light, as Material.

V. The fifth form, is called the Love-Fire; where is understood how the
Eternal good, through kindling the painful Fire, introduces it self into an
elevating burning Love-Fire, which Love-Fire was first in God. But thus only it
Infoldeth Wickeit.
windeth up it self that it becomes sensible and moving, where in the good
Powers are operative.

VI. Stands Sound, or Distinction, as the sixth Capital Form; signifying,
that the Natural manifested Life, where the Eternal Divine Word, through the
Forms of Nature, has infolded it self; and where all the Powers of Wisdom
stand in N^yse Shave.
Sound: therein stands the Understanding Life; which in Light, is Angelical
and Divine; but in Darkness it is Diabolical; As at the right, Numb. 11.
stands Angel.

VII. Stands Essence or Essential Wisdom, of the out-breathed word; wherein
all other Forms are revealed; and is even the Essence of all Forms; as good and
Divine, in the Light; but in the Darkness Evil and Devilish: And therein is
chiefly understood Mysterium Magnum [the great Mystery;] the Angelical world
is also therein understood; and likewise the Internal spiritual body of Man,
which disappeared in Adam, when the Souls will departed from Gods will; but
revived again in Christ, that gives to him for the Essence of this
Power-World, which is that heavenly flesh. Joh. 6. And it is the dry Rod of
Aaron, which in the Spirit of Christ, again springs up in Man.

Numb. 12. Stands Pure Element, signifying Motion in the Angelical world in
Essence; and is the One, Holy, Pure Element; wherein the four Elements, in the
Temperature, lay, and is a root of the 4. Elements.

Numb. 13. Stands Paradise signifying the Eternal springing, Thus has this
place been before the fall of Lucifer and Adam; namely, in an equal temperature
or Harmony, of the 7. Planets and 4. Elements.
or spiritual growing, in the Spiritual world; from which the external
visible world, out of good and evil (as out of both Eternal Principles) is
breathed forth: In which Source and Regiment, Adam in his Innocence stood; when
the four Elements harmoniously existed in him, as in the holy pure Element.

Numb. 14. Stands Beginning of the External World; signifying how God by his
Word, has breathed forth that spiritual Mysterium Magnum, as the Eternal
Nature of all Spiritual Properties, into a visible external formal Being;
and through the Fiat, as the Divine Desire, has fashioned it into Creatures;
There stands the third Principle, where 3. Worlds in one another, must be
understood: as the dark world of Gods wrath; the Eternal light world of Divine
Love; and this visible fading world.

Numb. 15. Stands Heaven; signifying the Heaven is the parting-mark out of
the spiritual fire and water between the Heavenly and Earthly.
parting Mark, between the internal and external world; as of the visible and
invisible Essence; which Heaven stands in the Essence of the spiritual fiery
water.

Numb. 16. Stands Quintessence; signifying the spiritual Powers, as the
Paradise-Ground in the four Elements; as well the Astrall, breathed forth by
internal powers at the beginning of time; ^^d is that good in the four
Elements wherein the light of Nature shines) as an outbreath'd Or shine Glast.
fulgor of the Eternal light.

Numb. 17. Stands four Elements, viz. Fire, Air, Water, and Earth, as the
created world, out of the dark and light world, which is the framed word spoken
out of the Eternal Natures Essential power; therein did the Devil cast his
poison, which after the fall of Man, was accursed of God.

Numb. 18. Stands Earthly Creatures; Man having 2. Eternalls in him; may be
saved or damned.
signifying that out of the Quintessence and the four Elements, were all
Creatures of this visible World created, and only from them have their life.
But the animated Man has also in him both inward spiritual worlds, according
to the internal soul of man; therefore may Gods love and wrath be manifested
in him: for wherein the will impresseth and kindles it self, of that Essence
it partaketh, and the same is manifest in him; as is seen in Lucifer.

Thus have you a brief Intimation of the first Table, and [consequently] of all
the Authors writings; faithfully imparted, out of a good Christian affection to
his loving friends; and [is] as an A B C. to beginners.

II. TABLE.

In this second Table, God is considered according to his Essence in Unity;
what he is in Trinity without Nature and Creature, whereby he fills all
things, and yet needs no place.

AD Father Will IE O Son Delight HO N Spirit Science VA A Power Word Life I
Colors Wisdom Virtue TETRAGRAMMATON.

In this Table is considered the efflux of the Eternal Divine WORD; how the
WORD through Wisdom brings it self from Unity into Separation and
Multiplicity; as well in the Eternal Nature and Creature (according to which
God calls himself angry jealous God, and a consuming fire; as well as a
merciful God wherein is understood the foundation of Angels and Souls, and
how they may receive salvation or damnation.)

Gods Wrath, or Dark World Gods Love, or Light World The first Prin- ciple The
Second Prin- ciple. Similitude 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 T I N C T V R E Desire or
Comprehending Science or Drawing Anguish Fire Light Love-fire Sound Essence T
Dark Feeling or Moving Willing Painful Life Love-Life Understanding Working ER
Austere Hardness Enmity Mind Terror Joy Five Senses Form NAL Sharpness
Elevating Wheel of Life Killing Power Love Sperm In the Septenary without by it
self, is understood the Mysterium Magnum, as the 7. properties of the Eternal
Nature.

In the Novenarie downwards, are signified the properties of Life.

In the fourth Form, as in Fire, 2. Principles separate themselves from each
other, as Darkness and Light.

N Fury Pride Despair Hell Glory Giving Taking, or Co^prehending A Greater
Death False will Lesser Death Souls ground Devil Souls Spirit Angel Praising
Increasing T Standing still Breaking From Original separating Folly Wisdom
Highness Humility VR Impotent Self-will Robbing Fantasy Knowledge Strength
Throne

The second Table Expounded.
THe word ADONAI signifies an Or expansion.
opening, or free motion of the bottomless Eternal Unity; how the Eternal
generation, expansion, and effluence of the Trinity of God is in it self.

A, is a triple I, which comprehends it self Cross-wise, as in a Beginning,
Entrance, and Effluence.

D, is the motion of the triple I, as the opener.

O, is the Circumference of the triple I, as the birth of Gods place in it self.

N, is the triple Spirit, issuing forth of the Circumference out of it self as
a triple I.

A. This lower A, is the object, or operation of the threefold I, or Spirit;
from whence eternally spring Motion, Colors, and Virtue.

I, is the essential Effluence of the triple I, where the Trinity flows forth
into Unity. And in this whole word ADONAI, is understood the Eternal life of
Gods unity.

The word FATHER, is the Eternal beginning of operation and will in the
threefold I of the Unity.

The word SON, is that Operation of Power, as comprehension of the will into
which the triple Spirit incloseth it self as a place of the divine Egoitas
Ickheit.
self-hood.

The word SPIRIT, is the living, issuing motion in the comprehended power; as
by comparition may be understood in a Flower: where the opening or working of
the growth, is the beginning; the power of the working, is the circumference
and corporal comprehension of the growth; and the Scent [or smell] which
proceeds from the power, is the motion, or the growing issuing joy-life of
the power, whereout the flower springs; by which comparition may be seen, how
the birth of divine power is typified.

The word Power, signifies the breathing, going forth, understanding, and
sensible life; as the foundation and fountain of the outflown knowledge of
Distinctness. Vnterscheiedligkeit.
distinction.

The word Colors, signifies the subject, or object of Power, where the
distinction and Original of the sensitive life and knowledge is understood;
whence an Eternal contemplation existeth.

The word Will, signifies the ebullition or motion in the opened Unity;
whereby the Unity wills it self into Trinity, as the Nothing, into its
proper something, wherein it has its Motion and Action.

The word Delight [or Lubet] signifies the effectual sensibility of the Will;
as the highest ground of original love; where (...) will of the Abyss finds
its self in its Aliquid Etwas.
something, where it yields it self to something as to its sensibilitie, in
which sensibility it works and wills in its own Taste.

The word Science, signifies the effectual sensible knowledge and
understanding in the love-tast; the root of the five Senses, and the ground of
Eternal life: thence flows the Understanding; and therein the Eternal Unity
Groundeth.
planteth it self.

The word, Word, signifies how the Eternal love of the sensible unity with
knowledge speaks forth it self eternally into an object: The Word is the
speaking or breathing of the will out of the power by the understanding: It is
the driving and forming of the eternal power into an infinitness of
Multiplicitie; as the Creator of powers, out of the sole power in virtue.

The word Wisdom, is the outflown word, as an object of the divine knowledge
of divine will; as essential power of the great love of God; from whence all
things have received their motion and possibility: the ground of all the three
Principles; A Revelation of the Unity of God; A passive essence of divine
Operation; the foundation of all humility; the Genetrix of all knowledge of
Creatures: An Eternal domicil of the active love of God, and a Ray and breath
of the Omnipotent Spirit.

The word JEHOVAH, is the most holy Name of God, as the Divine sensual life,
the only good; whereby the Holy Trinity, with Glory and Omnipotency, is
understood; the life of the Abyss, as of the Unity; which chiefly stands in
the only love: And therein also is understood the most holy Name JESUS: as the
egress'd I. is the ground and fountain of the breathing of Gods Unity, and a
forming of the understanding.

For the egress of the Unity, leads it self with the I into E, as in the
sight or beholding of a Chaos; wherein the Mysterium magnum (according to the
Divine manner) is understood; and is a triple breathing of the powers.

J E, is the breathing of the Unity. H O, is the breathing of the J E. V A, is
the breathing of the H O, and yet is only one breathing; but makes a triple
egress, of the 3. Centers or comprehensions. And therein is understood, how the
triple I, at last closes it self in A, as in a beginning to Nature.

Under [V A] stands Life, signifying, that this threefold breathing, is a
real life and power.

Under that, stands Virtue, which signifies, the immense Virtue of such a
breathing life.

Now in this Table is rightly understood, what God, without Nature and
Creature, is, in Trinity; as in a triple breathing of the Unity in it self;
where nothing can be said of the place, or dimension of his habitation: for God
is neither here, nor there, but every where alike; as the Abyss is considered,
namely the Eternal Unity without Nature and Creature: and thus is he an
active power and essence of Unity. But that really such power and virtue is
therein, may well be understood, in the effluence of the world, and the
Creatures therein, generated by the breath of God: and there is nothing in the
being of this world, which bears not witness thereof, if truly considered.

TETRAGRAMMATON.
In this Table is also manifested how the holy Name of the Eternal power; with
the knowledge hereof, from Eternity to Eternity; bringing it self into
properties, in Nature to eternal light and darkness; and how the word of
breathing forth, brings it self into a subject, and how self-will and
acceptance of properties arise in the subject; wherein two Essences are
always understood; as Gods own effluence; and then the properties own
acceptance in the free will; in which acceptance another external kind of
subject is understood; whereby the Unity in its Effluence becomes more
external; and thereby the Eternal love brings it self into a sensiblenes, and
like a fiery flame, as in the working of divine Power.

At the upper end of the Table stands Dark World; and under, The first
Principle: and over against it stands Gods Love, Light World; and below it,
from the figure 4. to the figure 7. the second Principle; which signifies how
the outflown will does enclose and overshadow it self, with acceptance of its
own desire; In the Eternal, is an Eternal light; but in the time he^e on Earth,
darkn^ss ^s the gr^und of Nature; and light the ground of the Kingdom of joy,
the Revelation of God* that we may behold his works and our selves.
and with the self desire brings it self into properties, and causes
Darkness; in which Darkness the egressed one by fire in the Light is revealed
and made sensible; and is the cause of the Light; in which Light Gods love
assumeth a fiery operation, from the fire of eternal Nature, and shines in
fire through the dark painful acceptance; even as the light from a Candle, or
day in the Night; whence day and night have their names in Time; but in the
Eternal, there is also an Eternal light and darkness in one another: the
Darkness is the ground of Nature; and the Light is the ground of the joyful
Divine Revelation.

The Dark world, as the ground of the properties of self-desire and will, is
called the first Principle; because it is the cause of Divine Revelation,
according to sensibilitie; and also makes a Own Eigen.
proper Kingdom in it self, as namely painful torment; according to which God
calls himself an Angry Jealous God, and a consuming fire.

And the Light which is revealed in the fire, wherein the unity of the divine
effluence of Love is understood, is called the second Principle, as the divine
Power-world wherein Gods love is a love-fire, and active life; as it is
written, God dwells in a Light which no man can approach unto: for the power
of the unity of God works in the Light, and is God; and the fiery quality in
the Light is of the eternal Nature; wherein the Eternal love of the unity
Perceives and loves it self.

Below the first and second Principles (in the 7. spaces) stand seven numbers;
which signify the seven properties of the Eternal Nature; And under it
stands TINCTUR, distributed in the seven spaces; which signifies the Divine
Word in the Moderation or mean.
Temperature, or equality of the seven properties; wherein the divine powers
lie in an equal will, action, and being; as the outflown name of God, wherein
is understood the great Mysteries of Divine power and operation; with the
characters of the letters [on the left side] divided into the seven Properties.

For the word Tinctur, is that separating word, from whence flow the seven
properties.

T, is the Tau, or the opening of the Unity [ monas] the cross of the triple I
a ground to the breathing.

I, is the effluence from Tau, or the egress of the Unity, as the cross-Angle
of life.

N, is the effluence of the sounding Threefold spirit.

C, is the cutting of the sound; where the I as the effluence of Unity,
separateth it self again from Darkness, and where the Or a willing receiving.
Annehmligkeit.
acceptance of the Eternal will breaks.

T, under the figure 5. is that holy Tau, or the opening of Glory, in the fiery
sensibility opens with Fewrenden Lieve.
firing love, as with Gods Kingdom: and signifies the great strength of the
Light-Power.

V, is the true Character of the Holy Spirit with three points, the two upward
signify the Fire and Light, and the third downward signifies the Unity in
love, as the meekness.

R, with this the holy fire and light, is comprehended in an active natural
essence; for it signifies the Kingdom, as the Throne; and hereby is intimated,
how the holy Name with the outflown will introduces it self in Mysterium
Magnum, as into the Eternal mystery, whereout Originalis, is outspoken.
existed the visible world.

The great Mysteries of the Tinctur, or the highest ground of Gods Trinity.
T, is the triple I, the Father. I, is that begotten I, JESUS. N, is the
threefold I, in Spirit. C, signifies CHRIST. T, in the fifth Space, is the
Father in Christ. U, is the Spirit of Christ in the Word, which quickneth. R,
is the Royal Throne, about which Darkness and Light strive; there Satan and
Christ stand against one another; namely according to the assumption of Satan's
self-will, as an Erroneous Spirit, and according to the Unity, Christ; where is
understood Love and Anger in one Ground; but in a twofold Revelation. Here are
understood those that belong to God; the other, Ein Shcios darier an diesem
Orthe.
a Lock rather, at this place.
In this Table in the 7. Spaces is the ground of Angels and Souls; as that
Great Mystery of the change, in which lies all Possibility. Sidewayes, after
the seven figures, the efflux from Monas.
one into seven, is understood. The first Principle is to be understood, unto
the Fire; out of which the Light is manifested: And from Fire to Essence, the
Second Principle. And downward under every Property, is understood, what kind
of Effluence, out of every property, in the cooperation of other properties,
does proceed; yet not so to be understood that One property alone, gives the
efflux; but all seven afford it; though the first Form is predominant therein,
and retains the higher Regiment.

As under the figure I. stands Desire or Comprehending, whereby is
understood, that the Desire is Magnetic, and incloseth, and darkneth it self,
which is also the ground of Temporal and Eternal darkness, and from that Orig.
Drawing in.
attraction, comes (under it) Sharpness, Austereness and Hardness; and is the
Original of wrathfulness, whence arises the Great Eternal Death. For this
Magnet, draws the Powers into it self, and in it self incloseth them; so that
the working Stands still, and steps into Impotency; as under the Number 1.
appears.

Under number 2. stands Science or Drawing, which is the second Form to
Nature; as the motion of the Magnetic attraction, from whence the sensibility
of Nature existeth; and is the ground of all Contraries, for Hardness and
Motion are Enemies; Motion breaks the hardness again, and yet also begets
Hardness by attraction. Thus two Essences have their existence in the desirous
out-flown-will of God; as the drawing of the Magnetic power, gives Motion and
Sensibilitie; and the thing attracted affords Essence; wherein is understood
the cause Orig. to.
of Spirit and Body; as in the attracting of Sensibilitie is caused the Spirit;
and in the extracted, the body or cause to Corporietie. Now if this attraction
and Essence be not able to reach the Light of Gods Unity, whereby it may be
mollified; then in it self remains only a Mere Enmity, and is the cause of
the torment of Fury and ambition: whence existeth self-pleasing, and Pride; for
the will of self-pleasing is a false-will, a continual corruptor of it self,
and its Essence.

And in these two Forms, Desire and In-drawing, in their out-flown Properties,
is understood Gods Wrath; and though they be the ground of the sensible life,
Yet if the light shines therein, then are they the ground of the Joy-Kingdom,
as an inward motion of Gods Unity; and a ground of the five Senses; whence
also the creatural life has taken its beginning; and therein stands its
Consumption. Verterbnus.
corruption, so far as it loses the light: for it is the Spring of Hellish
Anguish, as the cause of painfulness; and is also the Root of Natural life.

In the third space stands the third Form of Nature called Anguish, as a
spiritual Sulphur-source, according to its property: This takes its Ground
from the first and second Form; as from the Magnetic Desire, and from the
Motion of Drawing; where the out-flown Eternal will, in that unquietness
stands in Anguish. This Anguish is the cause of Natural Will, Mind, and the
Senses, and is the Wheel of Life, as the cause of the Firing-life: for when the
out-flown will of Gods Unity stands in Anguish, then it longs again after
Unity, as after Rest, and the Unity or Rest longs after Motion and
Revelation, for in the Unity there can be no Revelation without Motion; and
therefore the Divine will freely flows out of it self; and the Divine Lubet.
good pleasure in the out-flown-will, brings it self into a Desire and Motion
unto a sensibility; that it may perceive it self, and remain two in one
Essence; as the sensible Divine delight, and the cause of sensibility; wherein
God calls himself a Loving God, according to the sensibilitie of Divine
Love-delight; and an Angry God according to the cause of sensibility; as after
the Eternal Nature. And thus, we understand by Anguish (when the divine Light
is not revealed therein) the Hellish fire, and an Eternal despair and Terror:
where the Self-will of Nature continually stands in a dying Torment; ever
desiring to be released from such a condition, which I therefore call the
Little.
lesser Death; it is the Eternal dying Death; but in the Hardness, it is the
great still-standing Death. This Form if it has not Light, is the head spring
of the false mind; but if it perceives Light in it self, then is it the
spring and ground of the sensible mind, and the right root of fire, as
appears in number 3. downwards.

The fourth Form, numb. 4. is the Fire of the Eternal Nature; understand
spiritual Life-fire: and that existeth from a continual conjunction or
conjoyning of Hardness and Motion. Understand, that thence arises the
Painfulness; but the Splendour existeth from the Delight of the Free Will; where
the Unity of the Delight [good pleasure] is acuated in the properties; then
like a flash [ of lightning] it shines through the continued Conjunction, of
the great meekness of the Unity, and the Fierceness and Motion of the three
first Properties; for then it is in the Essence of the Conjunction, as if Steel
and Stone were rubbed together; whence the flash arises. Such a Flash, is the
true Natural Life of the Eternal; for it is the Revelation of Divine Motion,
and has the properties of Nature; and also the Revelation of the Unity of Gods
effluence in it self. Now which of these two gets predominancy, in that
stands the Life.

The splendour of the Fire, is the Light from the effluence of Gods Unity; and
the Essence of the Fire is the out-flown will, which has brought it self with
the desire into such Properties. Thus in the out-flown fiery will, we understand
Angels and Souls; and in the sensible sharpened Lights power from the Unity, we
understand the Spirit wherein God is revealed, and understood in the spiritual
essence; and in the Fire two Kingdoms separate themselves, as the Kingdom of
Glory from the efflux of Gods Unity, and the Kingdom of the properties of
Nature; and yet [these two Kingdoms] dwell in one another as one. The Kingdom
of Nature is in it self, that great Eternal Darkness, but the Light is the
Kingdom of God; of which S John says, The Light shines in darkness, but the
darkness comprehends it not. As day and night dwell in one another, and yet
the one is not the other.

Thus from the Fires own property, comes the painful life, if it break it self
off from the Eternal Light, and does (as in the property of selfhood) enter
the object; then is it only fantastic and foolish; even such as the Devils
were, and the Souls of the Damned are; as appears Numb. 4. downwards.

In the fifth Property of Nature, is the second Principle, with its foundation
understood; as the Essence of the Unity in the Light-power) where in the
out-flown Unity is a fire-flaming-love understood, whence existeth the true
understanding-Spirit, with the five Senses.

The first three Forms are only the property to Life; and the fourth is the
Life it self; but the fifth is the true Spirit. When the fifth property is
revealed out of the Fire, then she dwells in all the rest, and changes them
all into her sweet love, that no more painfulness nor Enmity is discerned, but
even as the day changes the night.

In the first 4. Properties, is that life like the Devils; but when the
Lights-power (as the second Principle) is revealed in the property, then is it
an Angel, and lives in divine power and holiness, as appears in the Number. 5.
downwards.

The sixth Property, is the Understanding, as the Sound, where the properties in
the Light stand all in an equality; then they rejoice, and the power of the
five Senses is manifest, and all the properties rejoice in one another; and
thus the love of the Unity leads it self into working, willing, sensibility,
finding, and Highness Hochkeit.
celsitude. Thus is there a contrary in the Eternal Nature; that the Properties
existing therein, the love is known, and that there might be something, to be
beloved, wherein the Eternal Love of Gods Unity may work, and God may be
praised. For if the properties of life be penetrated with the Divine
love-flame, then they praise the great love of God, and yield themselves all
again into the Unity of God. Such rejoicing and knowledge could not be revealed
in the Unity, did not the Eternal will bring it self into painful moving
properties.

The Seventh Property, is that Essence, wherein all the other are essential;
wherein they all act, as the Soul does in the Body: wherein the Natural,
Essential, Eternal Wisdom of God (as the Mysterium Magnum) is understood; out
of which the visible World, with its Essence and Creatures, did arise.

Thus by this Table is understood the hidden Spiritual world, as the Eternal
manifestation of God; from whence the Angels and Souls of Men received their
existence; therefore may they turn themselves to evil or good, for both lie in
their Center.

This Spiritual world is no other than Gods revealed Word, and has its being
from Eternity to Eternity; for therein is Heaven and Hell understood.

III. TABLE.

The seven Properties of the visible World, or external Nature.

MACROCOSMUS

In this Table is signified, how the hidden Spiritual, Eternal Word, (as the
Mysterium magnum) by the motion of Gods Word issued forth, and became visible,
manifest, and Material; And how the inward Powers, through Gods working, have
comprehended and fashioned themselves; how good and bad in every thing is to be
understood; and yet there was no evil in Mysterium magnum, but existed through
the sensibility and assumption of self-desire. Here also is showed what in the
working issued forth from every property, and which have the predominancy;
according to which every thing is formed and governed.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Ground of Nature Pure Element Para- dise Cold, Earth, Snow
Original of Air Fire of Essence Heaven Light of Nature Stars Water Saturn
Mercury the planet Mars Sol Venus Sost Jupiter Luna Sal Mercury thunder Sulphur
Flesh Sal-niter Oil Power Body Black, Gray Mixt-colours Red Yellow Green, and
white within Blew White without within Red and Green Melancholy Collerick
Sanguin Phl^gmatick G^ossness of S^one Metal, Stone Rust Growing Pearls Jewels
Menstruum Lead Quicksilver Iron, St^el Gold Copper Tinn Silver Bone Wood Herbs
Res^n Tincture in the Earth Swe^t Bitter Grass Sour Poison (...) Opening
Healing Srengthning Flesh Stopping Smelling Feeling Seeing Tasting Hearing
Loathing of Nature Dying Lying Wrath War Richness Noble Reason Own possession
Lord Craft Force Justice Faithful Truth Simplicity Stealing Deceiving Losing
Finding Earthly Love being friendly Lightminded Obstinate Sad Confounded Senses
Careless Constant Pure Jo^full Ignorant Earthly Beastly Evil H^^venly Modest
Sensible Low ^olfe Fox Dog Lion Bird Ape Great Beasts Worms Venomous Worms
Evil Beasts Good Beasts Flying Beasts Tame Beasts Fish.

An Explanation of the third Table, MACROCOSMUS.
IN this Table is understood, how the hidden spiritual world has made it self
visible; and with its own breathing forth, has made it Gegenwurff.
an object where the Eternal Principles are out-flown; and the powers therein
became co-material. For the External Nature is no other than an efflux or
object of the Eternal Nature. The 4. Elements exist from the first 4 Properties
of the Eternal Nature; as the Earth and grossness of all Essences of the Dark
desire, where the other six Properties always became co-material; as we may
conceive of Metals and Powers, good and bad. The Air existeth from the motion
of the Magnetic Impression; The Water from the abruption [breaking off] of the
Impression, where Heat and Cold are in Strife; the Fire of the spiritual fire.
The cold is Perceived in the Magnetic sharpness, as in the right root to Fire.

Before the seven Properties, above the Table, stands Ground of Nature
distributed in the three first Forms. And in the fourth and fifth Form or
property, is divided the word Pure Element.

With the word Ground of Nature, is understood the root of the 4. Elements, The
Pure Element is the equality in the Elements; and is called the Quint-essence
of the Elements; as the Tincture of the equality of Nature: both are the occult
Arcanum so much sought for.
as the four causes of Motion and Sensibility. By the word Pure Element, is
understood the Temperature, or the equality of Nature, and the four Elements;
where the Light also is sensible, Moving, and Elemental. Thus is understood,
how the Eternal Element, as the motion of Divine Power is accuated by the
ground of Nature, and revealed in the Light; where the pure Element is the
motion of the inward Spiritual world; and at the Creation of the world, went
forth into a Being; and is understood of the fifth Essence.

The word Paradise in the 6. and 7. Properties, signifies the spiritual work
in the Lights Essence; as a springing up, or spiritual growth, which at the
beginning of the world, sprung up through all the 4. Elements; and out of the
Earth formed it self into all manner of fruits, and changed all the properties
of wrathfulness into a Temperature. But when those fierce properties, with the
4. Elements, were awakned, by the alienated desire, and false will in Adam, and
attained the Dominion, then the Greening [springing forth] retired back; that
is, it remained in the Tincture of the inward Ground, and is yet in the 4.
Elements, but, in the Inward Pure Element only; and may not be attained but in
the New Birth of the inner man; and in the material Tincture, wherein the
Paradisical working is also fully manifest to our understanding.

This Table shows from whence all Essences [or Beings] in this world did
arise; and what the Creator is; namely that the Creator has been the divine
power-world; which the Monas
Unity, as the Eternal will, has moved, Einheit. God made first the Angelical
light world, which in this place (after the Devils Apostacy) separated into
this external visible essence.
which will, is God himself, But the Separator or Divider, was the owt-flown
will in the spiritual world; in such motion, he issued out of himself, and made
him a subject for his working; in which motion, one subject issued out of
another continually, until the external matter of the Earth (through the
divine motion) was drawn into a Mass or Chaos: and this drawing of the Motion
stands thus still: all things therefore fall in the deep toward the Earth;
and that is the reason, that all Power of motion, even to this day, and to the
end of Time, continues so.

The seven Days, and seven Planets, signify the seven Properties of the
spiritual world, The three Principle in Spiritu Mundi, as Sal, Sulphur, and
Mercurius, signify the Trinity of the divine Revelation; as an everlasting
Spring or Fountain, whereout all external Creatures are flown, do flow, and
will flow, even to the end of this time; and therein the Separator, with the 7
Properties, is understood. In this Table we see what proceeded from the 7
Properties; and how the Spiritual power has brought it self into a Material
one (as in the seven spaces downwards appears) whereby we may understand whence
Good and Evil sprung up in this World.

IV TABLE.

MICROCOSMUS.

In this Table MAN is held forth; What he has been in Paradise; as also how
the Properties in him (without assuming Self-desire) equally stood in the Image
of God: and what he is become through Satan's Deceits: what that Monster of the
Serpent (whereby he is become earthly and mortal) is in him.

And then how Gods Word and LOVE came in to help him again, new born in CHRIST,
daily destroying that Serpentine Image: also in what danger and misery he
stands in such an Image, either on the ground of Hell or Heaven.

Also a similitude of Divine Revelation and Knowledge in the seven Properties
according to Time and Eternity, formed out of all the Three Principles; for a
further understanding how he is wisely to regulate his Life; and unto what
driving [impulsion] he should yield himself.

Humane before and after the 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 T I N C T U R S OU L E S PIR IT BODY
Saturday Wednsday Tuesday depiction of sun Sunday Friday Thursday Monday Adam
in Paradise Desire Motion Sensibility Seeing Loving Rejoicing Heavenly flesh
Erring sp. Sharpness Anger Pain Bitter woe Hating Despair Passion Christ Gods
word Life Acceptance Sweet Glory Power Divine Essence Adam in Paradise
Similitude Out going Spirit Heating High Humble Will Praising Unity Satan
self-seeking Self-knowl. Self-will Dominiering Pride Reproaching Folly Christ
Gods unity Resignation Suffering Yielding Desire Equality of Power Wisdom Adam
in Paradise Tasting Thinking Mind Understanding Spirit Speaking Evestrum of
Nature Satan Desire of division Lying Anguish Doubting Fall Stinck Extruding
Christ Baptism Law Breaking Hopeing Humility Believing Genius or Type Adam in
Paradise Strength Pentrating Might Holy Modest Powerful Throne Satan Lord
Potent Malice Thirsty Wanton Mad Self honor Christ Humility Obedience Mercy
Forgiving Going Generating reverence Adam in Paradise Angel Officious Mild
Friendly Beauty Virtue Diligent Satan Devil Perverse Theevish mind Murder
Belial 's Whore Poison Earthly flesh Christ Christ returning repentance New
life Holy Restoring Sophia Adam in Paradise Heaven Child like Secret Manifest
Singing Sounding Paradise Satan Hell or Perdition Strife Torment Ever falling
Fantasy Changing A Den of the Deep Christ Christ's Calling, Teaching,
Dissolving, New mind, Rejoicing Praying, Springing.

An Explanation of the fourth Table. MICROCOSMUS. What Man is in his Trinity;
as first according to Paradise; Secondly, according to he Spirit of Error;
Thirdly, according to the New birth, which Christ teaches and will have, John
3.

IN this Table, Man is held forth as a similitude of the Three worlds,
according to the Soul, Spirit, and Body; What he has been in the beginning,
according to his Creation; What he is become in the fall, by the Spirit of
Error; and What he will be in the new birth through the Spirit of Christ; which
is a true Essential Image, out of the three Principles of the Divine
Revelation; as from the outflown Word of the Divine will.

Man according to the Soul, is an Eternal Nature of the firing quality, as a
spark out of the Center, from whence the fire existeth: If this ground cannot
reach into the divine Light; then is it a Darkness of the Magnetic attractive
desiring power; but if he reaches out of the fire, unto the light, that his
Magnetic desire feeds on the out flown Unity of Gods Love; then arises from
that fire the good true Spirit, even as light shines out of a Candle. These
are now two Principles, the Soul, in the fire of Eternal Nature; and the Spirit
in the light of Divine Power. But the Body is the third Principle; as an
Essence of the visible world, from the Stars and Elements, formed into an
Image, out of the seven Properties of Nature.

The Soul has the seven Properties of the inward Spiritual world, N. B. The
Difference between the Soul, and the Spirit of the Soul which without God, is
but a dead Image.
according to Nature; But the Spirit of the Soul is without these Properties;
for it stands out of Nature, in Gods unity but through the Souls fiery
Nature, is manifested in the Soul; for it is the true Image of God; as an Idea,
in which God himself works and dwells; so far as the Soul brings her desire
into God, and submits unto Gods Will: if that be not done, then is this Idea,
or Spirit of the Soul, dumb and actless [not working], standing like an Image
in a Looking-Glass, which soon vanishes, and has no being, as it befell Adam
in the Fall. But if the Soul submits to God, and brings its Magnetic hunger
into Gods Love, the Soul then attracteth divine Essence, namely, the Essential
Wisdom of God; then her Idea or Spirit becomes Essential in the Lights power,
and obtains a pious life; as being then the true Temple of God, wherein Gods
Unity is revealed and operative.

But if the Soul herself with her desire, bring in self-love; and with her
desire turn herself into the seven Properties, to try them; and feeds on the
vain delights of the seven Properties; then she extolls herself, and makes to
herself an Evestrum is a continued Astral Influence in the 4. Elements, and
likewise, an Astral Spirit in Man.
Evestrum, as an Astrall Object; which Evestrum presently hungreth after the
vanity of the false delight; even as it befell Lucifer and Adam, where the
Evestrum of Lucifer imagined it self into a Fantasy; and the Evestrum of
Adams Soul, into the Animalish Properties of the External world; whereby the
Soul was poisoned, and the Body (out of the Earth's Limus) was suddenly
infected; that the Animalish properties awakened in him, How the holy
similitude of God in Man became quenched, and a monstrous Image assumed.
and longed after Earthly, Beastly sustenance; as Heat, Cold, Sharp, Bitter,
Sweet and Sour; and with these Properties introduced it self into a springing
fountain of such delights; and so with the desire, Fed on Good and Evil;
whereby the Image of God, as the Idea, became obscure and unactive. Thus the
true Spirit (as the active Idea) became dumb and dead, even as an Image in a
Looking-glass; and so was the Soul cut of from God, and stood in a Natural
will; but Gods will in the Spirit worked worked no more; and the will of the
Evestrum (as the Opposite Image of the dark eternal world began [to work], for
the holy Genius was changed.

At the head of this Table stands TINCTUR divided into the seven Properties;
which signifies the Equality of the seven Properties according to the Soul
and Body that in the first man before the fall, the property [or inclination]
to separation, Acceptabilitie Annehmligkeit.
and Acceptance, stood in a like will; and all its desires were brought into
Gods Unity: thus were they the true Paradise; for the Essential Spirit with
the Unity of God, was revealed in them, who were to work through Gods love in
all things. But the Devil envied them, and with his false Lust deceived the
seven Properties of life, and persuaded them, it would be good for them, and
they should become wise; if the Properties (each one according to its kind)
would introduce themselves into self-Acceptance, then should the Spirit taste
and know what was Good and Evil: but then it could not subsist in Gods Unity,
of that he told them nothing.

But no sooner had they brought themselves in their own lusts, than such a
strife and contention awakned in them, that all the Properties began to be
formed in their self-hood.

Thus the Unity, as the Element, was broken [or divided], and the four Elements
strove for predominance; whereupon suddenly from without, fell in the
Inequality, as Heat and Cold, and the Astral division working in the Body; Thus
was our nature first corrupted: which ground was never before so plainly
discovered.
and Gods wrath (according to the Dark worlds property) in the Soul; which
caused in them (according to the Soul), Horror, Anguish, Necessity, and Eternal
despair; and in the Body, arose Heat, Cold, Woes, Sickness and a Mortal life.
Thus Gods Image, the whole man, fell from his Ordinance; and became a disguised
monster: and the awakened Properties presently began to set up their
Government, with Envying, Murdering, Raging, Tearing and Tormenting. Love was
changed into Pride and self-love; Desire, into Covetousness; Sensibility, into
Envy; and the life's fire, into wrath: Thus was the Hellish foundation, in the
whole Man, revealed, and ruled both in Soul and Body.

Now this Hellish Foundation, is the Spirit of Error; for which man must have
been damned, had not the Divine mercy, the Serpent-treader (as the efflux of
Gods love) after the fall, been presently Origin is in-spoken.
promised to the New birth, in the Holy Name Jesus. Which holy Name has, in
mere mercy, and great humility for man's soul and body, given it self forth,
assumed humanity, broken the power of the diabolical Spirit of Error, killed
the lives self-will, and brought again the Properties into Gods Unity. There
the true Spirit (as the human Idea and Gods Image) is renewed again, and filled
with the Divine Love-Essence. And thus the human Soul, through Christ's Soul and
Spirit in that love and divine Essence, has again attained an open Gate unto
God.

Thus in this Table is held forth [or drawn to the life] what Adam has been;
what, through the Fall, he is become; and how he is again Redeemed; and what is
his New Birth out of Christ Spirit. Souls ground. 1, 2, 3. first Princip. Souls
Spirit out of God 4, 5, 6. second Princip. the Body. 7. Heavenly, now earthly.
And these are delineated in the seven Properties under the Word TINCTUR. In
which Properties the Soul has its Center, and in which the Spirit, and in
which the Body [have their Centers also] of which the Reader may further
consider; for under them stand the seven Days of the week, intimating, that
Man is even the same.

This Table shows what Man is internally and externally; first according to
the good Adam, and then according to the corrupted Adam; and also what he is
again in Christ. Whereby, we may understand, how Evil and Good is man; and
whence exist the Property of good and evil, both in the mind and senses.

By the word Satan (signifying the Spirit of Error) is not understood a
Creaturely-Devill; but the Spring [or fountain] of the Spirit of Error.

And by the word Christ, is understood the New-Man (according to the internal)
in the Spirit of Christ. The other spaces, are understood as in the other
Tables; wherein is understood the cause of mutation.

FINIS.

