A BLOODY SLAUGHTER AT PEMBROOKE-CASTLE IN WALES WHERE Colonel POYER opposes
the Parliament, and has killed and wounded 11 men, batters down the houses in
the Town, and refuses to submit to the Ordinance of Parliament.

WITH The Treaty of Colonel Flemming, and the Gentlemen of the County with
him, The danger of Tinby Castle to revolt from the Parliament.

AND A Declaration from the Chief Officers under Major General Laughorne,
Subscribed by their own Hands.

March 21. 1647. Imprimatur Gil. Mabbot.

Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, near the Queens-head
Tavern. 1648.

The Copy of a LETTER FROM PEMBROOKE: Concerning The Transactions in reducing
of Pembrooke CASTLE.
Sir,
COllonell Fleming, received Letters and Orders from the Parliament and his
Excellency, and upon receipt thereof, (after advice with his Officers) he sent
a Drum, with the Ordinance of Parliament, and the summons; as the last to be
sent to him, to deliver up Pembrook Castle, within twelve hours, or he and all
with him to be proclaimed Rebels and Traitors.

An answer was hourly expected by Collonell Fleming, but came not within the
time limited. Yet at last the Drummer r^turned not with Collonell Po^ers
consent, to surrender, but with Propositions to this effect.

1. That 1000 li. might be paid unto him, which he says she has disbursed.

2. That the Officers and Soldiers he paid part of their Arrears, according to
the proportion of others, and sufficient security for the rest.

3. That the Governor (and also the rest of the Officers and Soldiers have
liberty to go whither they will, with security.

And so far is Colonel Poyer from surrendering of the Castle, that he has
discharged several pieces of Ordinance upon the Town, and battered several
houses, to the great prejudice of the Inhabitants.

He also made shot by diverse Ordnance, with small shot at the Soldiers, and
has wounded eleven, some of which is feared to be mortal.

After this Collonell Fleming, (with the advice, and upon the desires of the
Gentlemen of the Country) treated with him, and promised to give him 200 li. in
moneys. And to have the same terms for himself, and the Officers and Soldiers
with him, as other supernumeries, that are, or have been disbanded elsewhere.

Also that his Arrears should be Audited, and security given to him, for
payment of what shall be upon account due to him.

And it was also further offered unto him. That he should have the security of
the Gentlemen of the County, whom he has much oppressed: that they would
relinquish all suits and actions in law against him.

But all these fair offers from Coll. Fleming, and the Gentlemen of the County
could not, prevail with him, but he put out his flagge of defiance, and will
not yield.

There is some fear of Tinby Castle to revolt from the Parliament.

Captain Penn (according to the Order of the Committee of Safety) has prepared
assistance for Col: Flemming, with Ammunition and other necessaries for the
refusing of him.

Pembrook March 15. 1647.
A DECLARATION IN Vindication of the Officers and Soldiers under the Command
of Major General Laughorne, from diverse false reports, and slanderous
aspersions cast upon them.
FOR the clearing of our selves and the rest of the Commanders, Officers and
Soldiers under the command of Major General Laughorne, from such false
reports and scandals as are raised upon us: And for the satisfying of the
Public, we have thought fit to declare that our intentions are real to
submit, and yield obedience to the Ordinance of Parliament, and his
Excellencies Orders thereupon for disbanding, and are resolved accordingly to
disband at such time, and place as the Committees of the several Counties
shall think fit, and appoint, (so that the Forces be altogether) and on the
delivering us our Debenters, and our payment of the two Months pay complete in
the said Ordinance allowed: And notwithstanding the scandalous reports bruted
through the Counties that we endeavored to seize upon and imprison the
persons of some of the Commissioners and Treasurers appointed for the service
of disbanding. And that the Forces that are lately sent into the Garrison of
Tinby are intended shall hold the said Garrison against the Parliament and his
Excellency, And also that others of our forces are intended to resign Poyer in
the castle of Pembrooke, we for manifestation of the truth do further declare
that it was never in our intentions to seize upon any one or more of the
Commissioners or Treasurers, nor shall we ever presume to attempt it. Neither
had we ever the least thought or intention to strengthen that Town of Tinby
against the State, and his Excellency; But we do engage our selves, that when
and wheresoever the said Commissioners shall please to appoint a Randezvous for
the disbanding the Forces together, That the Soldiers that are now in Tinby,
shall likewise appear before them to disband.

And for Collonell Poyer, we declare our selves innocent of his actions, as may
appear by our former desires to his Excellency, for power to reduce him to the
obedience of the Parliament.

Pat: Cozen Will: Shuttleworth Rich. Powell Hugh Laughorne Ad. Beale Hen. Addys
Phi. Bowen Will. Marichurch.

Carmarthen the 10. of March. 1947.
FINIS,

