THE BLOODY TREATY: OR, Proceedings between the KING and Prince RUPERT.

As ALSO, Between Pr. RUPERT and Capt. PICKERING.

Who has brought in 4. of the Kings Colonels, to the Parliament; With the
whole proceedings of Ruperts perambulation from the King at Newark, and his
return to Woodstock with 400. Horse.

And how cruelly they used Captain Pickering during the Treaty; who by the
help of Colonel Willis, Colonel Honywood, Colonel Fisher, and Colonel
Roulston, is now returned safe to the Parliament, and has brought them in from
the KING.

With Ruperts Letter to the King, about a bloody massacre.

Die Saturn. December. 13. 1645.

Appointed to be printed, and is published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for J. C. 1645.

Sunday Octobr. 26. 1645.
Prince Rupert, General Gerrhard, and Sir Richard Willis, came into the
Presence when the King had almost dined. Prince Rupert came in discontented,
with his hands at his sides, and approaches very near the King. Whereat His
Majesty presently commanded all to be taken away; and rising from the Table,
walked to a corner of the room, the Prince, Gerrhard, and Willis, presented
themselves before His Majesty, and first Willis spoke after this manner.

Willis. WHereas your Majesty bath put me out of this Commands, and placed
another in my room, which tends very much to my dishonor, who have been
always ready to spend my blood in your service; my humble suit is, that I may
know my Adversaries, and be brought to a fair trial, to answer what mine
Enemies shall bring against me.


Prince. By God this is done in malice to me, because Sir Richard has been
always my faithful friend: it is not enough that I must undeservedly suffer,
but all my friends must suffer with me.


Willis. What I have done, has ever been in loyalty to your Majesty, for it
has pleased your Majesty to place the Prince as General over me: I hoped that
in obeying him, I have served your Majesty, and not done any thing to disserve
this dishonor.


King. Say no more: this is a time unseasonable for you to command here.


Ierr. All that Sir Richard Willis desires is very reasonable, for if Gentlemen
be put out upon every occasion and aspersion, it will discourage all from
serving your Majesty.


King. What does this concern you? you for your parts have received honor, as
much as any man, and I did not think you would have come to me in this manner.


Ierr. The same persons that have worked out Sir Richard, may work out me; and
so they have partly already, having been the cause that I was put out of my
command in Wales.


King. Its false: the reason that you stayed not there, was because you were not
able to subsist, the Scots approaching to besiege Hereford.


Ierr. I was able to make good Army and Garrisons against the Scots.


King, Tell me I lie.


Prince. I beseech your Majesty let not Sir Richard suffer for being my friend.


King. By God he does not.


Prince. Then I defire he may be restored to his command.


King. It shall not be: I know what I have to do.


Prince. By God the cause of all this is Digby.


King. It Is false.


Gerr. I am sure, and can prove that Digby was the cause that I was outed of my
command in Wales.


King. Whosoever says, it lies. Gentlemen I am but a child so you esteem of
me: Digby can lead me by the nose, but you shall find --


Prince. I wish that Digby prove not a traitor at the last.


King. By God Digby is an honest man, and they that say otherwise are in effect
traitors.


Gerr. Then we must be all traitors.


King. Perhaps you have spoke the words: otherwise you would never have come
and raised such mutinies, and that publicly.


Gerr. No we are your Majestyes most loyal subjects, and we will spend our
blood to serve your Majesty.


King. Where was a mutiny if this be not, and what do you tell me of spending
your blood for me: by God I hazard my life for you, and what I do, is for the
good of my people.


Willis. I beseech your Majesty be pleased not to think that we come in any
mutinous way, for we are your Majesty's most obedient subjects.


Gerr. I by God to lay our lives at your Majesty's feet.


King. Why do not you obey me, but come to expostulate with me?


Gerr. Because your Majessie is ill informed.


King. Pardon, me I am but a child, Diggby can lead me. where he list! what
can the most disperate Rebbels say more.


Prince. Will you be pleased to restore Sir Richard Willis to his command.


King. No by God, not a bit. I know what I have to do.


Willis. I never appeared disloyal to his Majesty


King. I do not say you have, but you and some with you, have notheen so wise
in my service, as you might have been.


Willis. I am disgtaced every where, boys point at me; I have nothing to live
upon but my reputation, and that's now gone, for no cause given to your Majesty.


King. What have I left to me, I am sure the Rebels have possessed themselves
of all my goods, Towns, Magazines, etc.


Gerr. I beseech your Majesty to consider of that which Sir Richard proposes.


King. Gerrhard keep your self well, and do not mediate for others.


Prince. I beseech your Majesty to grant me your gracicus leave and pass to
go beyond Seas.


King. Oh Nephew, it is of great concernment, and requires consideration. Here
the Prince said something concerning Bristoll, whereat the King said, oh
Nephew! and stopped there, and said no more.


Prince. Digby is the man that has caused all this distraction betwixt us.


King. They are all Rogues, and Rascals, that say so; and in effect Traitors:
that seek to dishonor my best subjects.


Here Gerrhard bowed himself, and went out.

The Prince showed no reverence, but went out roundly with his hands at his
sides: all the Train following them, and the King left in private, with Sir
Richard Willis.

Sir richard told the King, that a Corporal and ten boys, were able to do
his Majesty as much service, as all his Majesty's Commissioners at Newark,

Prince Rupert sending for Passes to go with his attendants beyond Sea, it was
granted by the Parliament, and he passed through our quarters with all relpect
to Worcester; he desired to come to London and pass this way at his pleasure;
but that was not thought fit: Captain Pickering was sent to treat with him, and
50 l. was allowed Captian Pirkering for his journey, but he may now be glad he
has got off safe with the expense of fourscore, besides the affronts, and
abuses that he has received at Worcester; and the danger he was therein.

At Captain Pickerings coming to Worcester, having had a Pass from the
Governor, he expected to be used as a Gentleman, and as a soldier; but found
it not. The Princes were civil toward him, but the Governor abused him
unworthily; and as soon as he came thither, set a Guard upon him; and not only
so, but some officers in Worcester came into his chamber, and several times
affronted him, and called him Rogue, and other affronts they put upon him; and
had he not had stiends there, he had bin in danger not to have got away.

But that that is no wonder they should so affront an officer of ours, for they
do much rail against the King himself, and use very base words against his
Majesty for keeping them so poor.

Prince Rupert seeing that he could not obtain his own ends in procuirng leave
to come to London, to remain in our quarters, so long as he pleases; he would
not treat any further, but with his brother Maurice, Genesis Gerrhard, and about
400 in all, marched from Worcester, and robbing, and plundering the Country as
they went, continued their journie to Woodstock, not presuming to go into
Oxford as yet, the reason of which is not yet known; it being concived to be
only a plot, all this while: and every thing they do frame to cheat the world
by making a taigned shadow, of that which is not; yet Colonel Pickring kept on
some correspondencie with some Gentlemen in Worcester, about their coming in,
who offered to take the oath never to be ayding or assisting to the King, only
to have passes to go beyond sea, to serve in other wars; and were it so that
these Gentlemen had not helped Captain Pickering, he had not then got away,
but was by the enemy kept prisoner in Worcester, and that for the space of 5
weeks in all from his first coming thither, till the time he got away. Captain
Pickering having before sent some officers to our quarters elsewhere, brought
away 4 Coll. now out of Woreester, at his coming away: viz: Col: Wilsis, Sir
Rich: brother, Col: Hunniwood, Col: Flesher, and Col: Ralston, who have been
active men for the King; but are now so low, that they are forced to desire
passes to go beyond Sea to some other wars, where they may live by the sword.
One of these Colonels is left sick by the way, the other 3 came with Captain
Pickering to London, who did all tender their persons to him before the date of
the day according to the Declaration was expired, what the reason is of Ruperts
removing at Woodstock, and that he goes not in to Oxford, is not known, bu
probably it is either to go on with the design carried on by agreement on all
sides on the enemies part, or else because he dare not go to Oxford till he
knows his Majesty's pleasure, but some letters Prince Rupert has sent to the
King to Oxford about some design in hand.

It is said that Rupert tenders a Massacre or bloody blow to be given in the
Kings behalf (some where) to redeem himself into his Majesty's favor, if it
may be accepted; they are in a desperate condition, and working desperate
designs; the Lord direct them, and prevent all their bloody plots, and
conspirscies; some say that the eleventh of this month was the farall day
intended, but was after prorogued; but God is our protector, who has and will
defend his people that trust in him.

Soli Deo gloria.
FINIS.

