The Bloody VINTNER: OR, Cruelty Rewarded with Justice.
Giving a true Account of one Edward (alias) Edmund Kirk, Vintner, who being
privately Married to a Servant Maid, did, on the 25th. of May, delude her from
her Masters House, under the pretense of visiting some Relation; But having of
her all alone in a private Road near Paddington, he most barbarously and
cruelly Murdered her; for which Fact he was Indicted and found Guilty, and also
received due Sentence of Death, which was accordingly Executed, on Friday the
11th. of this Instant July, 1684.

To the Tune of, Aim not too high:






OH it would make a Christians heart to ache,
To think that Men they will no warning take,
^ut will run on, as being void of fear,
^lthough they know their Lives must pay full dear.
^ne ^dward Kirk, a Vintner was he,
^ho was the actor of this Cruelte;
(...)h ^hi^ to the World I here will now lay plain,
i^ hopes they may take warning by the same.
^^is Vintner was Married privatele
to a Servant-Maid of low Degree;
^^t yet, alas! her self for to maintain,
^e fo^ced was in Service to remain
(...)
And importuned her with him to go,
But yet it proved her dismal overthrow.
What cruel Wretch such thoughts could entertain?
Sure Satan in his very heart did Reign:
For though he see the Coach-maker to dye,
That he should act this Bloody Villainy!
This Cruelty his very heart possessed,
And with the thoughts of Murder in his Breast,
She went with him a Cousin for to see,
As if in Love and perfect Unity.
And thus alas! alone with him (...) went
(...)
He beat and bruised her, the more to blame,
Until the Ferril flew from off his Cane:
Undoubtedly it did her then surprise,
To see grim Death appear before her eyes.
But then he pulled forth his Bloody Knife,
Poor Soul! she strugl'd with him for her Life,
As by her hands it plainly did appear;
Also, he cut her Throat from Ear to Ear.
And thus he left her Bleeding on the ground,
When he had given her the Fatal Wound;
Immediately he homeward went withal,
And seemed not to be concerned at all.
This Murder was found out in God's good time,
And he was Apprehended for his Crime;
Then he confessed the Fact, and laid it plain,
Though he denied it afterward again.
But being brought unto the Bar at last,
The Bill was found against him; he was Cast,
Though he the Fact before them all denied,
No Creature there could witness on his side.
He was found Guilty, and Condemned to Dye,
A just Reward for such like Cruelty:
Though she was mean, she was his Lawful Wife,
With whom he might have lived a happy Life.
But let his dismal end a Warning be,
That we may live in Love and Unite;
In true content, and prefect joy, and peace,
That Murders may not daily thus increase.
For sure it is a dismal sight to see,
That Men should end their days so shamefulle:
And those that might have lived longer time,
Are cut off like a Flower in their prime.
O that all Men would learn to be more Wise,
And set the fear of God before their eyes;
That when we dye, our joys may then increase,
And that we may lay down our heads in peace.
FINIS.

