A Remonstrance OF DIVERSE Remarkable PASSAGES and Proceedings of our Army in
the Kingdom of IRELAND, BEING An Extract of a LETTER, Sent out of DUBLIN from
Doctor ARNOLD BOAT, Doctor to the State, and Physician General to the Army, to
his brother Doctor GERARD BOAT, Doctor to the Kings MAJESTY, living in
Aldermanburie.

As also the certain Death of Sir Charles Coote, and the manner thereof.

May 18. Ordered to be Printed and Published.

LONDON, Printed by R. BADGER, for RICHARD LOVVNDS, at his Shop next without
Ludgate. 1642.

26. April. 1642.
Lieutenant Colonel Monk, being gone to Lyslip (a Castle upon the Siffie, 17.
miles from Dublin) with a thousand men, and having battered the Castle all day
with two great pieces of Ordnance, without making a breach; in the night time
the Rogues all ran away, the Castle being not beset round about by our people
but a way left open, by which they did escape. Their flight being perceived as
soon as they were all gone, and not tilthen the firelocks and Dragoneers made
after them, and killed some of them, the rest flying into a wood, whether our
men did not think it fit to venture after them.

The next day morning, Wednesday, 27. April, our men returned to Dublin,
having left a Garrison of an hundred men in the Castle.

Friday, 29. April, some of our foot and horse having gone a forraging six or
seven miles off, wide of Swords, were unexpectedly set upon by a company of the
Rebels who killed diverse of the Carmen and their wives and two Troopers, the
rest with all speed retiring to Dunsaghlin, where a Troop of ours lay in
garrison, by whose help they fetched off the dead bodies, and burned the town
and Castle whereout the mischief had been done, the rogues by that time being
all fled away.

This week, the Ministers in town having petitioned to the Lords that all the
Friars, Nuns, and Priests about Dublin, might be imprisoned, that they might
serve as hostages whereby to release those of their coat, who still in great
numbers are in the hands of the Rebels in several parts of the Country. A
Commission was granted to that purpose, and put into the hands of Captain
Ipslea (after that several other Captains had refused it) who with great
diligence executed it, apprehending as many as he could find out, and
committing them to the Marshallsies.

Sir Charles Cootes Expedition.
My Lord Lile and my Lord Di^bie being gone to the Mace on thursday, 28.
April, with three troops: Sir Charles with them, and three troops more, and
eight score foot (partly Musketeers, and partly Firelocks) ma^ched out the
same night, carrying good store of Ammunition with him for the place to be
relieved, not in Carts and Wagons, but upon horse, for the more expedition,
that night they marched ten miles, and the next day they came to
Castle-Iordains ten miles further: In which place sir John Gilford, with my
Lady Iepson his mother, had defended themselves against ehe Rebels, and a great
many of their English neighbors, ever since the rebellion.

Saturday morning they went from Castle-Iordain to Geshell, where my Lady of
Ofaly, mother to the Lord Digbie, very courageously had held out all this
while. In their march thither coming to Philips town, they found the town
empty, all the men and women to the number of three score, having retired
themselves within the Castle, out of which the Rebels with their pieces
continually playing upon our men who marched up to them through a broad open
street, where the^ had a very fair aim at them, yet did them no other hurt,
than that they shot one soldier through the body. Our men being come under the
walls, and out of danger of their shot, broke open their gates with their
Muskets: and harming none of the women (which they observed in all this
journey) of the men they hanged some, and the rest they carried prisoners with
them, and among them one Conne, a great man among the rebels in those parts.

That night having lodged there, the next day being, Sunday the first of May,
they marched to Geshell, and having relieved that place, returned the same day
to Castle-Iordaine, from whence the next day (having first hanged all the
prisoners brought from Philips town) they marched to Trim. A mile at this
side of Trime, a troop of the Rebels of the matter of an 100. Horse met them 2.
ort 3. of the Lords of the Pale being amongst them, for they came so near that
they could perfectly be discerned, but before our men could come to charge
them, they turned their bridles and rid away with full speed, neither could our
men pursue them, having lost too much time in the passing of a brook, between
them and the rebels, having a verry narrow ford. Therefore omitting them, they
marched up to the town, and entered it without resistance, three or four
hundred of the Rogues, who lay there, having forsaken it immediately before,
having set a fire some houses, and Reekes of Hay and corn, that under favor
of the smoke they might get away the more freely. A few rogues that were found
loytering in town, were knocked Down: and all the women and children, whereof
there was there a great number, Sir Charles commanded upon pain of death to
leave the town within two days; intending forthwith to plant it with English,
in the same manner as he has done at the Mace. Our soldiers got a great deal
of good pillage here, Sir Charles being come so unexpectedly upon them, as they
had no leisure to convey away much. Th^s Town is seated upon the Boin, the same
river that geoth down to Droughda from whence it is distant 15. miles, and
twenty from Dublin: standing in a very pleasant and fruitful country, and was
the resinence of sir Hugh de Laar, the first conqueror of Mead. It ^ath
abundance of stone houses and castles in it, and may easily be fortified; being
of great consequence for the securing of all Mead and Fingall. At the Navan a
town upon the same river, half way between Trim and Droghda, were the
matter of two thousand rebels at that time, when Trime was taken: who hearing
thereof, were so possessed with terror, as thinking themselves nothing secure so
near sir Charles (whose very name is exceeding terrible to the Rebels)
although the town might easily have been made good by a far less number
than theirs, and against far greater forces than those which we had then at
Trime; they forsook the town, and fired it. This little army fired but a few
places, till they came to Philips town, but from thence to Geshell, and from
Geshe^l to Trim, they fired all the country as they went, and in the whole
journey they killed as many men as fell in their hands, but those were not very
many, all being fled before them. From Trime sir Charles sent 50. Dragoneers to
Dublin on tuesday the third of May, with Conner the rebel prisoner; and to
demand some forces to lie in Garrison at Trim: whereupon it was ordered by
the State, that one thousand foot should be sent thither, not any whole
Regiment, but companies out of the three several Regiments of my Lord
Lieutenant, sir Simon Harcourt, and Colonel Crafford: which forces are to
march thither to morrow, Saturday, 7. May.

The taking of the Nevvrie and Carlingford.
The joyful news of Sir Charles COOTS prosperous proceedings, brought to us
on Tuesday Evening, the third of May, was the next day, seconded with as good
news from the North. For on Wednesday Evening came to Town Captain Cadogan
with twelve Horse, being that morning come from Dundalke, and brought along a
Message from the Newrie, sent by my Lord Conway, to the Lords Justices and
Counsel: Whereby we undestood that my Lord Conway with an Army of partly
English, and partly Scotch, being come to the Newrie on Saturday 19. April,
found the Town empty, the Rebels being fled out of it upon the approach of our
forces, and fired it before they went. The Castle was kept by a Garrison, but
the Ordnance being placed against it, they were soon daunted out of their
resolution, and came to Parley; Wherein at first they talked very big, and of
marching out not only with their goods but with their Arms also, their pieces
charged, their matches burning, bullets in their mouths, and their Colors
flying: but were glad to come to a composition for their lives only, and to
march out with nothing but white staves in their hands. And thus much it self
would not have been granted them, but in regard of our Prisoners with them
(Sir Edward Trevor, Sir Charles Po^ns, and a many more, both men and women,
most of them of good quality) whom all they would have knocked on the head, if
they could not have obtained quarter for themselves.

About this same time the Rebels left Carlingford (a Town seated near the
mouth of that Bay, whereunto the little River running by the Newrie,
discharges it self) and fired it, leaving a Garrison in the Castle: under
which Castle a Ship, sent from Knockfergus by My Lord Conway, at the ^ime of
his coming away, with command to wait on him in that haven, coming to Anchor
the same time that the Newrie was taken, they hung ou^ French Flags: Whereupon
some of the Rebels being come abord, they told them that they were sent by the
French Cardinal to relieve them with Arms and Ammunition, and that they would
deliver it, if some of their principal men would come to receive it. This
news being brought to the Castle, the Commanders of the garrison went abord,
whom the Captain having laid by the heels, went a shore with a good number of
his Soldiers, to take the Castle, now deprived of its Commanders. Just as he
was landed, and putting his men in order, there appeared Sir Henry Tichburne
coming down the Hill with an Army, who knowing nothing of what was past
either there or at the Newrie, was come thither with an intent to make himself
Master of that place. The Captain ^artled at that sight, as thinking they had
been enemies, began to retreat, and went to get himself to his ship again:
When Sir Henry still approaching, they perceived them to be their friends, and
so both met with great joy on both sides, and mutual congratulations, and
having put a garrison into the Castle, the Captain returned to his Ship, and
Sir Henry to Dundalke.

An Ext^act of a Letter from Deane Barnard to me, dated at Droghda, 28 of
April, of some exploits there about.
The last week Sir Henry Tichburne marched out from Dundalke three or four
miles to Bates Wood, where he had bin informed of Collo Macbrians lurking with
a hundred men, burnt the Town, and killed about one hundred and fifty Rebels,
without the hurt of one man of ours. Yesterday Captain Gibson with some foot
and horse marched out from hence, near a dozen miles, killed about a hundred,
fired all the Country, and returned without the least damage to any* yet they
appeared in diverse little bodies. We have now settled another Garrison at
Mellifont, and make some work that ways also.

Of the proceedings of Connaught.
The same day, that we heard the Newrie was taken, news also came out of
Connaught, whereby we understand, that matters there also begin to go very
well on ouo side, and that my Lord President about Atl^ne, Sir Charles Coote
the younger (old Sir Charles his eldest son) about Castle-Coote, and the
Garrison of Elfin, did bestir themselves bravely, had beaten the Rebels
several times, and with small numbers had given to great bodies of theirs man^
a notable overthrow; so that now they dare not come near them in many miles:
but our people many times march out against them.

The City of Gallowa having temporised a great while, at last run into open
Rebellion, and besieged the Fort: upon notice whereof the State sent a ship
from hence to go and relieve it with ammunition, and other necessary provision,
this ship safely arrived there, and put those things into the For^, the
Townes-men vain in having endeavored to hinder it with their Ordnance, and
while, they were discharging their Canon at her, one of the pieces broke
asunder, and few the matter of Twenty men of their own, and amongst them one
Sir Thomas Blake, a man of great note at Galoway.

This some week we also heard out of Mounster, and of the brave ^ats, which
Sir Charles Vavasour and my Lord of I^chequeen had done upon the Rebels; and
how fallying out of Cork, with only 300 men, they had put my Lord of
Muskerrie, with an Army of 3000. men to the worst, and killed a great many of
the Rebels: whereof I will say no more because I know you have had that news
in London a good while since, and before we had it here in Dublin.

From Dublin the Eleventh of MAY. 1642.
THese occurrences have happened, and come to our certain knowledge, first out
of Connaght, That the Noble Earl of Clan^c^ard stands loyal and right to
the King, and has relieved the Fort of Galolway:

2 Out of Munster that Muskerry has been met with by our forres and is shot
into the shoulder, and that Captain William Iephson has relieved the CASTLE
of Rothgogan, upon whom 500. of the rogues approached, supposing to devour
him, but he by a dissembling flight, drew them into a plain, and slew 240. of
them, and took the Lievetenants, and Ensigns Prisoners.

Thirdly, Out of Vlster, and the parts of Lynster, bordering upon it, That the
Lord Conway attended with the Scottish Major, together with their forces, have
taken the Newry, and a Castle adjoining thereto, called Narrowater Castle,
whence were delivered Sir Edward Trever, S. Charles Peynes, Captain Smith, and
others, etc. And that an English Sea Captain, by a witty policy putting forth
the Spanish Colors, has gained Carlingford; when they saw the Colors, twelve
of the chief Commanders of the Rebels went aboard, in hope to have Ammunition;
but as soon as they were aboard they put them in hold, and sending his
Musketeers on shore, took the town: Sir Henry Tichborne being in Dundalke,
having intelligence that there were 300 Rebels in a Wood call d Babes Wood,
beset the Wood with Horsemen and Pikemen, and sent his Musketeers into the
Wood, and some of the Rebels got into Trees, and others fled out, but there did
not escape above fifty men.

Fourthly, That the Lord Lisle, and others, marched with Troops of Horse, a
small number of Dragoneers, and a few Firelockes to Philips-Towne in the Kings
County; they took the Fort, and sacked the Town, and burned it. In their
return Sir Charles Coote closed with them at the Naas, where he has been
since the battle: they all marched to Tryme, where the Lords of the Rebels
were; namely, the Earl of Fingall, Gormonston, Slany, Trimbleston, and
Nettervyle; who upon their approach fled, but without loss, only of four
men, Mackham is slain with some few that went with him.

The Lord Ravellogh has slain O Connor Dunne his eldest son, and taken
four Colonels, and has got good store of Corn, and has got two hundred
pound, for ransoming a Merchant of the worshipful Town of Athlone. Sir
Charles Coote junior, who follows his Fathers steps, met with his forces, and
made his work with fire and sword amongst the enemies on that side.

Since which time, Sir Charles Coote is killed accidentally by one of his own
Lievtenants, who when he perceived the accident, he would have run himself
upon his own Sword, had not a Captain prevented him.

FINIS.

