BOANERGES, OR The Parliament of Thunder WITH Their sharp Declarations against
those rebellious Malignants that revolt and fall away from them.

For which they are Voted evil members of the COMMONWEALTH,

Rebels, and such who are the cause of all our present and bleeding miseries.

feb. 8 1642 LONDON Printed for the serious consideration of all men who desire
to have a permanent and lasting Peace.

M.D.C.XLIII.

The Parliament of thunder.
IT is usual in time of public calamity, for carnal men to seek redress
for themselves alone by carnallmeanes, but if we would demean our selves like
faithful servants to the Lord, we should examine our selves, and find out the
accursed thing that provokes God to anger, God strikes us not to destroy, but
to bring us under the wing of heaven, when we often creep into the black Cave of
hellish practices, our crosses are as messengers to summon us before him, who
will freely pardon where he finds true sorrow: God that is King above all Kings
and Princes, Emperors and Monarchs whatsoever, who sits in the royal throne
of Princely glory, eternally at his right hand sits Jesus Christ in Princely
state, with all the Saints and Angels about them in the upper house of heaven,
clothed with the Parliament robes of righteousness, lined with inocencie; And
in the lower house of this world God has his house of Commons, where his
servants meet to honor and do him worship, in which house his Prophets the
Penmen of the holy Writ, are his Clearkes, and his Ministers are his Speakers.

Gods Judgments here on earth is the Bar where sentence is denounced, and hell
the place of final execution upon Malignants.

Jn this high Court are decreed and established many permanent Laws, for the
peaceable and well governing of the Church and commonwealth, with many
Judgments thundered out by Proclamation against the disturbers thereof, for
which purpose God has appointed to take vengeance on such as do evilll. Romans
13.

1. The Prophet Esaias, thunders against the the Sodomitish Isaralitea and tells
them that they are Rebels and traitors, and by their superstitious Jdolatrie
had revolted from Gods Law, confirmed in this high Court, they thought their
superstition would be thought a blessing, but the Prophet told them that God
loathed it, and that therefore their Land should lie wast, their Cities should
be burnt with fire, and that strangers should murder them, and make them
desolate, Esaias 1.

If we would have our Kingdom to be preserved (which God Almighty grant) we
must take heed that we be not as rebellious as them, nor revolt from the cause
of God, and permit Idolatry, and superstition abide peaceably amongst us, such
peace will not bring a blessing, but make us to be loathed of God, and provoke
him to lay our Land waste, to suffer the Enemy to burn our Cities, as they have
done in Ireland already, and we shall be in danger to have strangers fall upon us
on a sudden, and murder us in our Beds, let us make our peace first with God,
then he will send us such a peace as will make us happy.

2. The Prophet Jeremiah he thunders against Jerusalem, for their lusts and
uncleanesse, and tells them that the Caldeans and the Assyrians should come like
a seething pot out of the North, to make their wickedness to boil up, and
that they should be plagued with them, insomuch that they would submit to no
rule but their own will, denying obedience to any Law.

Oh what a Judgment is it upon this Land at this day, wherein the desperate
Cavaliers in the North, boiling with their lust and filthiness, do despise
Religion, and the people of God, fight against the high Court of Parliament,
and bring such troubles and effusion of blood in the bowels of the Land, God
turn away his wrath from us, that his Judgment may be removed from us, for it
is a very sore one.

3. The Prophet Ezekiell another member of this great Parliament, he is sent to
a rebellious Nation, impudent children and stiff-hearted,, and because the Lord
knew how he should be hated of the Rebels, therefore says the Lord, fear them
not, neither be afraid of their words, although Rebels, and thorns be with
thee, and thou remainest amongst Scorpions, fear not their words nor be
afraid of their looks, for they are a rebellious house. Ezekiel, Chap. 2.

And have not the Worthies of this Parliament been maligned and scorned by
Rebels, impudent stiffnecked Papists, and popishly-affected people, but fear
them not noble Senators, fear not the words of these Rebels, and scorpions,
that are so full of thorny prickles, fear not, be not afraid, for Gods work,
the labor you are about, God will perfect in due time.

4. The Prophet Daniel he was in captivity with the Jews under Nabuchadnezar
King of Babylon, but God provided for his safety, Chap. 1 and in the 3. Chap.
three righteous servants of God were delivered from the fiery Furnace, which
most cruelly was provided to burn them to ashes, but had not power so much as
to touch their garments.

And how many fires and tortures are at this day provided to grieve and trouble
the righteous souls of Gods Saints, but God is al sufficient, and he will
provide for the safety of his People either to protect them, or to go through
and deliver them from, and in all their troubles.

5. The Prophet Hosea, he by his first child declares how God will visit the
blood of Iezraell upon the house of Iehu. 2. By his Daughter he threatens to
take Israel quite away, but to have mercy on the house of Judah whom he will
save. 3. By another son he declares that because Jsraell had forsaken god,
therefore God would fo^sake them. Chap. 1.

Did not the wicked zeal of the Prelates, cry for vengeance on their bloody
designs, who though they pretended to do it for religion, yet it appeared
plain enough that it was out of pride not conscience; And has not the Lord
wrought by wonders such great things, which by his proceedings have been
brought to pass since the Parliament sat, that we have cause to trust God, if
our rotten hearts will but hold out, that Popery will quite be banished, and the
true reformed Protestant Religion flourish, which God grant: Oh let us pray,
and do you noble Senators labor still till you have perfected a thorough
reformation, the Lord ^^osper you in it.

6. The Prophet Joel he tells them of Judah, what a famine was ^ike to fall
amongst them, because the palmer worm, the grasse-hopper, the canker worm,
and the Caterpiller would destroy the vines, and that the drunkards should weep
for want of drink to squench their thirst, Joel chap. 1.

And what a lamentable thing is it, to see how the Seperatists the Palmer
Worm; the Cavaliers the Grasse-hoppers; the Jesuits, Priests and Friars, and
other Papists, the Canker Worms, and Monopolies the C^terpillers of the Land,
have taken pains not only to bring a famine of Bread in our Land, but a famine
of the bread of the soul, the word of God; nay, how have many cruel hearted
wretches fretted, with a kind of inward weeping, that they could not satisfy
their greedy stomachs with the blood of the people of God, God deliver us from
their power over us.

7. The Propher Amos, first he denounces a thundrin^ Judgment against
Damascus, because they have threshed in Gilgall. 2. Against Azzah. 1. For
captivating the people of God; and shutting them up in prisons in Edom. 3.
Against Tyrus because they broke the Covenant. 4. Against Edom for killing
their Brethren and plundring them, and using cruelty against them without all
pity. 5. Against Ammon for ripping up the woman with child, and wicked rapine,
Amos chap. 1.

And if poor England, Scotland and Ireland, would have hope to escape
destruction, the cruel enemies of the City must sease their threshing and
malice, cruelty in prisons must be changed to mercy, men must have more respect
to keep that solemn Protestation which was taken when we entered into Covenant
(before the Lord) with the King and Parliament, the murder, rapine, plundring
and cruelty against those that stand for Gods cause, must not be suffered, for
for such things as these God is highly provo^ed to anger.

8. The prophet Obadiah threatens the Cavaliers of Edom that fortify
themselves in Rocks and Castles, that God would pull down their pride and lay
them low; Obadiah, chap. 1.

And let the deboist Cavaliers of our days be sure, that God beholds all their
actions, and will pull down the pride of their hearts and lay them low.

9. The Prophet Jonah was sent to thunder judgment against Nineveh, because
the cry of the wickedness thereof was gone up before the Lord, chap. 1.

And it is the cry of abominable Popery in our Land: It is the cry of cruel
oppression, the cry of swearing and drunkenesse that may justly make us to
fear that our misery will be greater except we repent and these evils be
reformed.

10. The Prophet Mica he thunders destruction against Iudals and Jerusalem for
their Idolatry, for which he tells them that their Cities should be made heaps
of ruin, and strip them naked, and leave them howling and mourning, and
rouling in the dust Mica, chap. 1.

This would be in great danger to fall upon us if Idolatry should bear sway
amongst us, it would bring our famous Cities to ruin, strip us naked of Gods
holy word and worship, and make us to houle and mourn and roll our selves in
the dust till they utterly destroy us, and root us and our religion our.

11. The Prophet Nahum thundreth vengeance against Nineveh and tells them how
God will destroy them utterly for their wicked Imaginations, but will send true
peace to his people cap. 1.

And let the highest inventions of wicked policy think of it what they will,
let them be sure of this, that God will scatter and destroy them that use their
policy against him or against his people, but to his servants he will send
peace in an acceptable time.

12. The Prophet Habakuk thunders out the destruction of the Caldeans, those
bitter furious Cavaliers that go upon the bre^ of the Land to possess those
dwelling places which are not theirs, they are terrible and fearful, their
judgment and their dignity shall proceed of themselves, who are ^s fierce as
wolves that come all to spoil, and make a mock of the King and Princes, chap.
1.

And have not we as bitter furious Cavaliers as any of them were, that plunder
and kill and do what they please, not regarding Law, but doing their own will,
and make a mock of the King and Parliament, but God was ever highly displeased
with such courses.

12. The Prophet Zephaniah denounces judgment against the People for
worshipping the hosts of Heaven.

And do not the Papists do the same, and yet are tolerated and bear great
power and sway in some places of this Kingdom.

If this thundering Parliament will not work upon us, nor move us to turn to
God, then nothing can be expected but sudden ruin and destruction. The Lord
give us grace to repent and relieve all our wants, and settle us in a permanent
peace to his glory.

FINIS.

