BLOODY NEVVES From the Isle of WIGHT SINCE The return of the Parliaments
Commissioners from THE KING, WITH The particulars thereof, and the number
killed, and taken prisoners; And His Majesty's Declaration concerning the said
Fight.

The Demands and Proposals of the Army, touching His Majesty, and their full
Resolution thereupon; presented to the Lord Genesis Fairfax, to be communicated to
the Parliament.

Likewise, a bloody Fight at Sea, and the full Relation of a great Victory
obtained by the Prince of Wales his Fleet, Prince Rupert mortally wounded, and
diverse other Commanders slain and taken prisoners.

London, Printed for Nathaniel Gibson. 1648

BLOODY NEWS From the Isle of WIGHT SINCE The return of the Parliaments
Commissioners; and the sad accidents which befell thereupon.
Right Honorable,
SInce the return of the Parliaments Commissioners here has happened very sad
accidents, occasioned by a Disputation between the Royalists and the
Parliamenteers, the manner thus: On Thursday night last Diverse of the Royal
party resorted to the George Tavern, where they began their Sovereigns health
lustily; and upon a conference touching his Majesty's last Concessions to the
Bill of abolition of Archbishops, etc. they resolved to declare to the
contrary, and theseupon made great Protestations to avenge their quarrel upon
some of the chief Instruments thereof: But heidg diskovered in the height of
their Arguments, four Files of Musketeers were sent to apprehend them, and to
bring them before the Governor; but upon their motion to secure them, the
Royalists resisted, drew their swords, and discharged their pocket pistols,
insomuch that a bloody conflict began to ensue, both parties engaging and
disputing the place with great resolutenesse and gallantry, for the space of
half an hour, till at last Ensign Smith entered the Room where they where,
killed two of them, and secured the rest, with the less of three men; which
done, he guarded them to Carisbrook, and upon examination were ordered to be
committed to safe custody.

And his Majesty being informed of the said Riot and Commotion declared a great
dislike thereof, saying, That He desired justice to be executed upon all such
Contemuers and Covenant-breakers.

His Majesty (since the Commissioners departure from hence) has declared a
very good liking of the Army, touching their constancy and great fidelity to
the trust reposed in them.

Dated from Newport in the Isle of Wight, the 11. of October, 1648.
A Declaration of his Majesty's last Condescensions in reference to the Army.
viz.
That his Majesty is pleased to condescend that Justice be executed upon all
Delinquents and Offenders who have acted contrary to the fundamental Laws of
this Kingdom.

That his Majesty desires such a Peace may be concluded of, that may tend to
the preservation of the Liberties and freedoms of the people of this Nation,
without violating their just rights and privileges, or inslaving them by
oppression and cruelty, either from King, Parliament, or any other Courts
whatsoever.

That his Majesty is willing that provisions be made for the payment of the
Soldiery, even from the highest to the lowest, and that they may have a
general Act of Oblivion to protect and secure them for what they have done or
acted, in relation to the wars, etc.

These particulars are said to be dispersed throught the Western Regiments,
with a desire, that his Majesty's will and pleasure may be published at the
Head of each Regiment throughout the Army.

The Duke of Lenox, and the rest of the Kings Council, presses his Majesty
much to write to the General for a happy compliance, and to endeavor a
uniting upon honorable terms and conditions, and for the better accomplishing
the same, they advise his Majesty to confer great Honors and Titles upon the
supreme Officers, as the Lord General Fairfax, Lieut. Cen. Cromwell, and
others.

And it is said, that his Majesty has something to propose to the General,
and Lieut. Genesis in relation to the same.

A Declaration of Mayor Genesis Skipon concerning the ARMY.
MAjor Genesis Skippon having received information of diverse Plots and
Conspiracies agitating by the adverse party against the Commonweal of this
Kingdom, declared to both Houses, the danger the Parliament and City was in by
the confluence of disaffected persons to London and parts adjacent, together
with their plots tending to the assassinating of many of the Members, also his
inability to protect them, and the reasons why, and offered that they might go
all armed, that Blunderbusses be in the House, and chiefly (if it would relish
well) that some of the Army come to guard them, which besides the saving other
charge, will free at present the Country of giving so many free quarter.

The Desires and Proposals of the Army.
May it please your Majesty,
MAy it please your Majesty, Whereas, the Officers and Soldiery under the
immediate conduct of his Excellency the Lord General FAIRFAX, are possessed with
diverse fears and jealousies, that they cannot be safe for the future, unless
speedy Justice be executed upon the capital Offenders of this Nation; and that
this present Treaty may not conclude a peace with his Majesty, without care
taken to preserve the Liberties and Freedoms of the people of this Nation; the
which, being granted and confirmed, we do declare, that none shall be more
isntrumental for the settling of a safe and well-grounded Peace, then our
selves. And that so soon as your Majesty shall be pleased, to enact and make
provisions for the freeborn people of England, that both we and future
Generations may defend our selves against insulting tyranny and oppression; We
shall use our utmost endeavors for there-investing of your Royal person, and
making You and Your Posterity happy and glorious throughout all Ages.

The Proposals.
1 That execution of Justice may be done upon those ho raised the former and
the later wars against the Parliament of England, And that there not be any
exemption of persons from Justice, to neither King nor Subject. 2 That the
Treaty may not conclude a peace with the King and his party, without care taken
to preserve the Liberties and Freedoms of the people of this Nation. 3 That
limits may be set to bind Kings for the future, that they shall not have power
to inslave the people by tyranny and oppression, and triumph upon them as over
conquered slaves. 4 That provisions be made for the people of England, that
both we and future Generations may defend our selves against insulting Kings. 5
That there may be some course taken for pay for the Soldiery, that have served
and been faithful to the Parliament. And sufficient security thereunto for
them, to guard them in what they have done. 6 That these, and such other things
as shall be agreed on by the General Council, may be sent to the House of
Commons by the Lord General, and his Excellency to desire a speedy answer
therein.

Signed by the new Agents of the Army.

A bloody Fight between the English and the Dutch.
ON Sunday November. 12. Letters from the Navy say, That there has been a late
Fight aboard the Princes Fleet between the English Commanders and the Dutch,
the manner thus. Prince Rupert having received Commission from the Prince of
Wales, to command in chief aboard His Highnesses Fleet, the Mariners began to
mutiny, and resisted his power, denying submission to his Orders; whereupon the
Prince, and the rest of his Irish and Dutch Commanders, called a Council, and
disputing the quarrel, resolved to make the chief Fomenters thereof exemplary;
but the Seamen unanimously resolved to live and dye together, and upon the
Princes Demands, to have some of the Ringleaders delivered up to answer it
before the Prince of Wales, they gave him a volley, killed two of the Irish
Commanders, wounded Rupert, and took prisoners Cap. Hamon, and Cap. Fog, and
forced the rest of the Royalists ashore; it is thought they will speedily come
in upon Indemnity.

Gowry November. 10. 1648.
FINIS.

