A Bloody Tenent confuted, OR, BLOOD FORBIDDEN: SHOWING The unlawfulness of
eating Blood, in what manner of thing soever.

Wherein is clearly proved by Scripture, that eating of Blood was always
unlawful both to Jews and Gentiles; and is still unlawful for Christians
under the Gospel.

WITH An Answer to all Objections to the contrary: And the vindicating of this
Opinion from Judaisme.

Levit. 17.10. And whatsoever man there be of the house of Israel, or of the
strangers which sojourne among you, that eats any manner of blood, I will
even set my face against that soul that eats blood, and cut him off from his
people.

Deuteronomy. 12.23, 24. Only be sure thou eat not the blood, for the blood is the
life, etc. Thou shall not eat it, thou shall power it upon the earth as water.

Thou shall not eat it, that it may go well with thee, and with thy children
after thee, when thou shall do that which is right in the sight of the Lord.

LONDON, Printed for H. S. and W. L. 1646.

A Bloody Tenet confuted, OR, Blood forbidden.
BEing to discourse upon a point, which almost all men deny; and being to show
the unlawfulness of that which most men count lawful, it will be expected*
should make some Apology for the noveltie, or newness of the opinion.

That which I shall say is:

First, that the objection of noveltie, or newness of an opinion, taken in a
(...) sense, is a sure rule to convince an error: viz. when an opinion is
broached cont^^^ and besides the Scripture, which is the good old way, that
ancient standard, by w^^^ all opinions must be measured.

Secondly, that the objection of the noveltie, or newness of an opinion, (...)
any ^ther sense, as it is usually now taken, for a differing from what our
for^-fathers (...) hold, is a veri^ weak and unreasonable objection, as easily
might be proved at larg^^

Thirdly, the objection of noveltie is not only weak, but mischievous, as might
be showed in all ages, hindering men from the s^^rch of the Scriptures, and is
the gr^^^ of the implicit faith now in Rome, and a great cause of the
quarrels in all Chr^^^ Churches, and of the present troubles of this our
Kingdom, as easily might (...) showed.

Briefly to answer these Antiquaries with the words of St. Cyprian, whom (...)
sure they will not count a Sectarie, or Novellist: His words are, Quid his,
(...) ^nte nos fecerit, aut docuerit, sed quid is qui ante ^^mes est,
Christ^^s, etc. What this or that man did, or taught, before us; but what he
did who was before all, (...) Christ himself, who only is the way, the truth,
and the life, from whose precep (...) we ought not to digress: Cyprian. ad
Caecil. lib. ^. ^pist. 3. So to Pa^^p against S^^^. Om^es quippe antiquitates,
etc. All antiquity and custom not grounded o^ the truth, is to be accounted
no other than an ancient error. To which Austin (...) against the Donatists,
lib. 2. cap. 3. and Jerome in his Epistle to Minerium.

Briefly, if this opinion against eating of blood, upon due examination, find
not (...) foundation in the written word of the ^ncienter days, let it be
rejected as a no (...)* but if it find footing there, let the greatest
Antiquarie in the world reject it, if he (...)*

Briefly to the point, three things I shall do to clear it.

First, ci^e the Scriptures which expressly forbid the eating of any manner of
(...). Secondly, I shall show, that these Scriptures which forbid ^^ing of
b^ou^, (...) all men, both Jews, Gentiles, and Christians. Thirdly, answer the
objections to the contrary.
For the first, the Scriptures to this purpose are many, express, plain^, and
obvious to every man's eye, s^ar^ely any thing set out more cleer^ly; some of
which I shall cite at large: Le^it. 7, 26, Ye^ shall eat no manner of blood,
whether it be of foul, or of beast, in any of your dwellings: mark what
follows: whatsoever he be (Prince or Potentate, Gentle or Simple) that eats
any manner of blood, even that soul shall be cut off from his people, that is
penalty enough. So Levit. 17.10, 11, 12, 13, etc. Whatsoever man there be of
the ^^^se of Israel, or stranger which sojournes among you, that eats any
manner of blood: What of him? What? Sentence severe enough: I will (says God)
even set my face against that soul that eats blood, and that is not all
neither; but I will cut him off from his people. A heavy sentence. What is the
reason of it? Not because blood was ceremonially unclean, as some would have
it; but because (as it is fou^^ or fi^e times repeated in the following verses)
I say it is the life of the beast: but more of that afterward. Then it
follows, Therefore said I to the children of Israel (twice repeated in this
Chapter) no soul of you shall eat blood, neither shall any stranger among you
eat any blood, etc. And in the fourteenth verse he repeats it again,
Whosoever eats it shall be cut off. See the latter part of that Chapter at
large. What can be more plain, if there were no other Text? No manner of
person, nor no manner of blood. For, it is the life of the beast; and, it is
the life of the beast, again and again, and, I will set my face against him,
and I will cut him off, twice repeated. If this be not plain enough, no
Rhetoric in the world can make it plain. So Deuteronomy. 22.16. where God tells
them, they might eat flesh, what their souls desired, only, that they should
not eat the blood, but should power it as water upon the ground. And in verse.
23, 24, 25. having told them what beasts they might eat the flesh of, he
concludes, only be sure (observe that) that thou eat not the blood: No what is
the matter? is it unclean? No, no: It is the life of the beast: Be you not so
cruel, that when I give you leave to eat the flesh, that you will eat the
very life of the beast. And it follows, And thou may not eat the life
with the flesh: Nay, as if God did fore-s^^ our foolish custom of eating black
puddings, on purpose to beat it into our heads, whether we will or no, he
repeats it, Thou shall not eat it: No? What shall we do with it then, shall we
lose good victuals? yea, says God, You shall power it upon the ground like
water; yea, but I hope though we must let it power out of the beast, yet we
may save it in a dish, to make puddings with it, or else we should be counted
very ill huswives. Well, if you will be counted ^^tter huswives than God would
have you, who can help it: But God tells you expressly, Levit. 17.13. that you
shall not only power it out, and out upon the ground, but that you shall cover
it with dust; and if you will make puddings of dust, I doubt your market will
be spoiled. And it follows Deuteronomy. 12.25. Thou shall not eat it, that it may go
well with th^^, and with thy children after thee, when thou shall do that which
is right in the sight of the Lord. Lo, here is both blessing and cursing, to
keep us from eating of blood: Arguments strong enough, if we are flesh and
blood, much more if we are Christians.

So Genesis 9.4. God takes care the first time that we read flesh allowed to be
eaten: yet he commands Noah; But the flesh with the life thereof, which is the
blood, ye ^^al^ not eat: So Levit. 19.16.

Nay, what say you to a Text in the New Testament, not to the Jews, but to the
Christian-Gentiles: Well, such a Text there is, Acts 15.28, 29. For it se^
(...) good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no other burden than
these necessary things; That ye abstain from meats offered to Idols, and
from blood, and from things strangled, and from fornication, from which if you
keep your selves, you shall (...) well. You see that neither Old nor New
Testament can feare^ mention the ^^^b^dding of eating blood, but it annexeth
either a blessing to them that abstain, or a (...) to such as practice it.

It is true I confess, many think this Text of Acts 15.28. makes against my
opinion, and for the lawfulness of eating blood; for (say they) abstaining
from blood is here forbidden to the Christian-Gentiles, only as an indifferent
thing to avoid ^n offense, amongst other indifferent things.

Answ. We answer: For them that hold that opinion, if they will hold it upon
any ground, they must not beg the question, when so many plain express
precepts, both of the Law with penalty and blessings annexed, and before the
Law to Noab, do expressly forbid and prohibit it, men must not think upon
another Text in the New Testament which forbids the same thing, and no
intimation of making it indifferent, but rather sinful; I say men must not
without some better ground count the eating of blood forbidden, Acts 15. to be
forbidden as an idifferent thing only.

But they say blood is there joined with meats offered to Idols, an indifferent
thing; Ergo, Blood is indifferent.

Answ. We answer: whether the eating of meats offered to Idols, in that sense
there spoken of, be indifferent or no, more shall be said in the answer to the
objections.

But in case it should be indifferent, and blood joined with it, my argument is
every whit as good thus.

Forbidding to eat blood is joined with fornication, a sin against the Moral
Law, and is punished with damnation, 1 Cor. 6.9. Ergo, the eating of blood is a
sin against the Law of God, and is punishable with damnation: For blood is as
well joined with fornication, Acts 15. as with meats offered to Idols.

So much for that point, the Scriptures that forbid to eat blood.

The second thing is, to prove these Laws to bind us, as well as the Jews:
That I shall do thus: First, because this Law of forbidding to eat blood, was
given to Noah, the father both of Jews and Gentiles, long before the
Ceremonial Law, as is clear Genesis 9 4. Thou shall not eat the flesh with the
life, which is the blood: A Text express enough, long before the Ceremonial
Law: So that from hence we may argue thus. 1 This Law was given to the father
of both Jews and Gentiles, for him and his posterity. But all the world are
the posterity of Noah, to whom this Law was given. Ergo, All the world are
bound to this Law, of forbidding to eat blood. 2 Thus the Ceremonial Law was
given to the Jews only, and to such as should become their Proselites. But the
Law of prohibiting to eat blood, was given to the Gentiles in their father
Noah, and that long before the Ceremonial Law to the Jews. Ergo, the
forbidding to eat blood is no part of the Ceremonial Law.
Secondly, I prove this Law of forbidding to eat blood, to be Moral, and to
bind all, both Jews and Gentiles thus.


Because it was given upon a moral reason, viz. Because blood is the life of
the beast, Genesis 9.4. that is, it were a token of extreme cruelty, and
unmercifulness, to eat that when the beast is dead, which was the life of it
whilst it was living: A cruel thing to eat life it self; and therefore almost
continually that reason is given, why blood should not be be eaten, because it
is the life of the beast; not because it is an unclean thing, as things
forbidden in the Ceremonial Law; but as a cruel thing forbidden, as a Moral
Law.

From hence we may argue thus:

Things forbidden to be eaten in the Ceremonial Law, was for some positive, or
typical uncleanness put upon them.

But blood was not forbidden to be eaten, as having some positive or typical
uncleanness, but as a token of a merciless cruel heart and disposition.

Ergo. The Law of forbidding to eat blood was no part of the Ceremonial Law.

But some may say it seems to be a greater token of cruelty to kill the beast,
then to eat the blood when it is dead, for in the one the beast feels pain,
not in the other.

Ans. The killing of the beast is permitted to us as of necessity, to make it
fit for our use, and cannot be avoided; and the eating of the blood after a
beast is dead, though the beast then feels no harm nor pain, yet may it be a
greater token of cruelty then to kill it whilst it was alive.

As may appear by this familiar example.

It is a greater token of cruelty and inhumanitie to tear the flesh of a dead
man, or to kick it up and down the streets, or to abuse it, though the dead
body feels no pain, than it is to kill a man by hanging him, in case the Law
has condemned him, and delivered him over to execution, and yet that puts the
party to pain and not the other.

So here it is a greater sign and token of cruelty in us to eat the blood of a
dead beast, being the life of it whilst it was, though the beast feels no
pain, then it is to kill a beast which God by his permission has delivered
into our hands for food, although by the slaying it seeks pain, and in the
eating of the blood none.

So I conceive this second thing is clear that the Law is not ceremonial but
binds both Jews and Christians.

I might add the Text again, Act. 15. forbidding the Gentiles, but more
afterward.

Who for the third thing to answer objecteth.

Object. 1. Against this it is objected, that it is the eating of the blood
with the flesh that is forbidden, and not when it is separated from the flesh.

Ans. 1. Then by this objection, things strangled are forbidden, that is to eat
such things who lose their lives by strangling or otherwise, not having their
blood taken from them.

Ans. 2. The Scripture is so clear in answering this Objection, that there is
no color of an Objection left; for it does not only contain to let out the
blood of b^^sts, but to let it out as water upon the ground, and sure it cannot
be intended (...) should be gathered up to be eaten. Nay, to put it out of
doubt that you may have no plea left for saving the blood to make puddings, God
tells you not only that you shall power it as water upon the ground, that
cannot be gathered up, but that you shall cover it with dust, Levit. 17 13. and
then your puddings are all spoiled.

Object. 2. It is objected this law belonged only to the Jews, and that in
that vision to Peter, Act. 10.13, 14. it was there declared, that nothing is to
be accounted unclean now under the Gospel.

Ans. Blond was never forbidden under the notion of an unclean thing only,
but upon a morrall reason, as it was a token of cruelty, and that Text in the
Acts speak only of unclean beasts, so that vision never cleansed the cruelty
of eating blood, neither is it any thing at all to the purpose, but that men
catch at any thing to maintain their fancies.

Object. 3. In the third place it is objected, that Acts 15.29. blood and
things strangled, are counted indifferent things, and forbidden to the Gentiles
only for (...) time to avoid offense.

Ans. We answer, this is a mere begging the question, we say eating blood
an^ things strangled, are not indifferent, but sinful, and this Text does not
so much as once intimate that they are indifferent, but rather the contrary,
when it ranks it with fornication, a sin against the Moral Law, unless you
will account fornication to be a thing indifferent as some have held from this
Text, and with as good reason as they who held blood and things strangled are
indifferent, from this Text.

Oh but some will be ready to say, you must not shift off this Text so, for
here is meats offered to Idols forbidden, and that was a thing indifferent;
only forbidden for scandal as Paul shows, 1 Cor. 20. so therefore was blood.

Ans. 1. If it should be granted that things offered to Idols are things
indifferent, and blood is joined with them, yet this makes not the eating blood
to be indifferent, no more then it makes fornication indifferent, with which it
is likewise joined.

But secondly it is qustionable, whether that the meats offered to Idols here
forbidden were indifferent or no; for there was in eating of things offered to
Idols, at the time and place of the offering, as well as of the flesh which was
left afterward, and I never heard any reason yet, why it was not the eating of
meat at the time of offering and in the presence of the Idol which is here
forbidden, and then I am sure that was never counted an indifferent thing, but
a sinful thing, and so is to this day.

Object. 4. Oh but it is objected, Romans 14.14. Paul says, that that there is
nothing unclean of it self, etc. Ergo, not blood.

Ans. 1. This is one of the worthy objections; for we do not say blood is
unclean or forbidden as an unclean thing, but as a cruel thing.

Secondly no man is so mad to apply Paul's words so universally, as to every
individual thing in the world, as if every thing were clean and fit for food,
for then it comprehends toads, poison, man's flesh, nay stones and trees; which
I think none will say are clean food, nay that soon of them are lawful, as
man's flesh, etc. so there is no ground this Text should extend to blood;
neither is Paul's scope or drift to show any such thing, as easily might be
showed.

Object. 5. It is again Objected, 1 Timothy 4.5. every creature of God is good,
and nothing to be refused if it be received with thanksgiving.

Ans. The same answer might serve this as did the former objection, but we
answer, Paul must be understood of all such things as are not forbidden. As
when he says 1 Cor. 10. all things are lawful to me, but all things are not
expedient. No man is so mad, is to think Paul meant under the word all, that
it was lawful for him to murder, or commit adultery, etc. but his words must
be restrained to the things he spoke of; so here, when he says every creature
is good, you must neither extend it to things unwholesome for food, or unlawful
for food, as we have showed blood to be.

Object. 6. It is objected, Tit. 1.15. to the pure, all things are pure, Ergo,
blood lawful to be eaten.

Ans. There is no ground in this Text to show that Paul speaks at all with
relation to food, to conclude all meats to be pure. I rather think the
contrary, considering whom he speaks of, namely the Cretians, whom he says
Verse 12. that were evil beasts and slow bellies, and it is not like they who
minded to fill their guts so much, should trouble themselves so much about the
lawfullnesse of food, neither is it like that Paul here confutes them in any
such thing.

It Is not to our purpose to search out the particular concerning which Paul
speaks, it suffices he speaks not concerning meats, or if he did, yet this
universal phrase must be expounded, by such exceptions as the Scripture makes
to it, and no otherwise, and cannot extend to the lawfullnesse of blood.

Object. 7. It is objected, Deuteronomy. 14.21. there God forbids to the sewes that
they should eat any thing that dies of it self, but they should give it to a
stranger to eat, or they might sell it to an alien. The force of the objection
lies thus:

A beast that dies of it self has the blood in the flesh still remaining, but
is allowed to strangers or aliens to eat it notwithstanding, although the Jews
might not.

Ergo, This Law concerning e^^^g of blood, concerned the Jews only, and so was
temporary.

Ans. To this we answer, that indeed this objection has more force of reason
then all the rest; but we answer thus:

First, that by a beast that dies of it self you may understand, a beast that
is sick of a disease which is commonly mortal, or causes death, and upon the
sight thereof the beast is slain, and his blood taken from him, yet because of
the disease which was mortal, he is in a sort said to die of himself, and
because the food was not therefore so wholesome, as of beasts which were slain
in a common way for food, therefore the Jews were to sell it to an alien, and
not to eat it; and take it so, then it makes nothing to the eating of blood.

But secondly, taking it for granted, that it is spoken of a b^^st, that wholly
dies of it self; yet it seems, if it be taken whilst it is yet warm, and
stuck with a knife, some blood will come from it, and so the case will be but
in a manner with the case of a beast killed by an unskilful butcher, or which
by some other accident only part of the blood, is taken from the beast and part
remaining in his flesh, and yet it is (...) unlawful to eat such flesh,
although there be some blood in it: otherwise, th^^ would scarce be any meat
eaten lawfully, because heardly any beast or foul that is killed, voideth all
his blood, neither is Gods forbidding to eat blood to be taken so strictly, as
that no flesh might be eaten except every drop of the blood were out, (...) it
requires we should use our endeavors to void the blood out, and not to eat it
wi^^ the blood in the flesh, much less that we should eat it when we have
severed it from the flesh.

And so we conclude, that a stranger might be permitted to eat such a beast,
which died of it self; and that it was not forbidden to the Jews, because of
some blo^^ which unavoydably remained in it, and would not be voyded out, but
for some other reason of typical impuritie, or uncleanness, or the like, and
so is nothing to the p^int in hand.

Thus have we briefly and clearly (as we conceive) proved the unlawfulness
of eating blood, and answered all objections to the contrary.

To conclude therefore, let us lay aside this cruel custom of eating the lives
of beasts, as it is used thorowout all England, in unhallowed black puddings,
as we will show our selves therefore to be merciful men, not inhumane; as we
will not be found to be disobeyers of God in such express precepts, but
obeyers of his will, and doers of those things that are right in his eyes, as
we would have the favor of God, and to prosper both us and our children, and
not to be cut off from our people, and have the face of God continually set
against us for evil; let us speedily lay aside this barbarous custom of
eating black puddings.

FINIS.

