St. Georges DAY Sacred to the CORONATION OF HIS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY CHARLES
the II. By the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.

Caesaris alma Dies! and Luce sacratior illa,
Conscia, Dyctaeum, qua, tulit Ida Jovem!
Omnes cum Jove, nunc sumus Beati:
At nuper pudet, ah! pudet fateri
Omnes, cum Jove, Pauperes eramus. Mart.
-- Quod optanti, Divum promittere nemo
Auderet, volvenda Dies en! attulit ultro. Virg.
By Hen. Bold olim e N. C. OXON.

LONDON Printed for R. Crofts at the Crown in Chancery Lane, 1661.

-- Non Displicuisse meretur
Festinat, Caesar, qui Placuisse Tibi.
St. Georges Day Sacred to the CORONATION Of his Most EXCELLENT MAJESTY CHARLES
the II. By the Grace of God, KING of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
Triumphs! and Halelujahs! let us Sing!
Hallowing the Day to our three- kingdom'd King!
Thus Upper-Jove (once) when secured, and free,
From Heaven assayling- Gigantomachie,
Convened the gods, at his Commanding Call,
Like Charles and's Peers, at George's-Festivall.
'Twixt Those, and These, there is but one -- Non erit uncia tota
Decidat Tecu^ qua Pater ipse Deum,

Remove:
Lieutenants here, to the Supreme above.
St. George for England! Andrew! Dennis! They
Are, but as Vigils, to our Holy Day.
A Roman-Triumph is, Compared to This,
A Whitson-Ale: A mere Parenthesis.
Scarce has the lazy Sun his Circuit gone,
But! Ad reducendum litat Ara Jovem.
Revolution! Revolution!
Our King Proclaimed! Restored! and Crowned! A Year
Like Plato's, sets us Even as we Were.
Blessed be the Time! oh may it henceforth be,
Calendar'd Englands Year of Jubilee!
For ever Sacred, to the Crown of Charles,
And early Fame, oth' (Arch) Duke's Albemarles.
He that does claim, the Ends oth' Earth his Own,
May boast more Kingdoms, but not such a The Kings of Spain not crowned
Crown.
A Crown which over your fairer Temples, hurled,
As Drake did once, encircles all the World.
Thanks to the Eternal Powers! Who preserved
For You, so Long, what You so Soon deserved.
Shame on the Vile-Usurpers! what their Source
Of Violence Swayed, Your Patience won per-force.
When, they were died in grain, with Royal Blood,
And nothing Was, but as They made it Good.
When Hell had so enhanc'd Rebellion,
To Kill the Heir and take Possession.
(Oh it is Forgiven! May it be Forgot!
He came to 's Own, and they received Him not.)
When we oth' Loyal, in Despair were hurld,
As if Your Kingdoms, were not of this World,
When Doubts and Horror, as at Day of Doom,
Had seized us All, Then! lo! Your Kingdoms Come!
See! where He Is Clatius in toto nil videt orhe Dies.
Crowned! A King of Kings! like Saul!
As Proper too, it may be not so Tall
As Glorious, as the Sun, on Easter Day,
York, like the Morning-Starre, does gild the Way.
Glocester's translated to another Sphere,
To Celebrate a Coronation, -- Paciunt ipsi nunc puto sacra Dei,
There.
A sacred Treason to His Brother Prince!
Seizing His Birthright, and Pre-eminence!
He took Possession first, received a Crown,
Not-like-to-fade, an Everlasting One.
As if the Grand Disposer, had assigned,
Eternity to Heirs by Gavel-kinde.
But -- Maximilian.
He that Wished Himself and Heir were gods,
The next Son King of France, (as no great odds)
Had he but known, the Wealths your Nations bear,
TO had been his Wish, to have Lived a Subject Here.
When the Great Lord of Light, with his fiery Horse,
Does, Gyant-like, rejoice to run his Course.
The Beasaunts of the Sky, are Sabled quite,
Suffering Eclipse, from such redundant Light.
But Charles his Starry-Peers, about Him Shone,
As if They meant, to rival with the Sun.
(Yet had an Eagle-Eye been Scrutinous,
Sol in's full-Glory, was less Glorious.)
Oh may Those Planets, that so Stately move,
In The Lower-Orb, be lately fixed above!
The Exalted Heads, oth' Higher minded-Crew,
Had they their Lights again, to take a View,
Of this fair Prospect, where Divinity,
Is so well tempered, with Humanity.
Graces, and Virtues throned alike in You:
'Twould e'ne -- Infernis Ditis ab umbris,
Si Cato reddatur Caesarianus erit.

Convince them, Their Conceits were True.
Had they kenn'd Likeness, the ad never grudged You room,
On Earth, as His Vicegerent till He Come.
Their King, and Our's, are Name sakes: for- It Is true.
Y' have been our Savior, and Redeemer too.
Safety was, erst, ill-sorted with Committee,
And Sub Quo Libertas Principe tanta fuit!
Liberty, with Keepers, (more's the Pity!)
You are Anointed too, and so was Christ,
And to the King, must be annexed the Priest,
And Prophet too, for, till You Priscis servatur honor,
Te Praeside, Templis.

came, the Elves,
Did serve God, Worser, then they served Themselves.
He that refused the Host, because it came,
As Christ did once, into Jerusalem)
Upon an Ass, had he seen What ours do,
He had Received it and been Thankful too.
The Devil's a Saint! Both Prester-John and Joan,
Handle the Word, without a Mitten on.
Works are Apocripha'd, as little worth,
Every She- Hinter, would be holding forth,
The Surplice, Table, Railes, are rayl'd upon
As the Appurtenance of Babylon.
But You Debantur quae sunt, quaeque fucre Tibi.
Undiffering Sect, and Protestant,
The Church will cease, from being Militant.
Here Lord increase our Faith! for he that tells
Your Worth, and Gests, must needs write Miracles.
At fatal Worcester, when Your Arms were grown
Wearied and faint with Execution,
By Multitudes oppressed, which still pursue,
(Though utter Quis neget Curam esse Te Deorum?
Propter quem fuit innocens Ruina?

Ruin could not injure You.)
Just as the Soul is from the Body flown,
Unseen, You escape their Inquisition;
Like Bird from Snare: But -- like You there was None:
'Twas like Te protexit Superum Pater and Tibi Caesar,
Pro jaculo, and parma fulmen and aegis erat.

Your Self: Without Comparison.
Wonders are not yet ceased: here is Divine Care!
Kings have their Sospite Quo, Magnos credimus esse Deos.
Angels truly- Tutelar.
But! have! my Muse, unto the Posse Deum pariter Rebus, Musisque vacare
Scimus --

Muses King,
And low, present Him, with this Offendunt nur quam Thura, Precesque Deum.
Offering!
Know! and advance Your Quae nondum Data sunt Stulte Negata putas?
Friends! Your Foes keep down!
And may no Argyle-Hand come near Your Crown!
And when the Princes of the World, shall dare,
In an ambitious-strife, to Cull the Rare
Accomplished -- Tecum sociales impleat annos
Quae nisi Te, nullo Conjuge digna fuit.

Lady, of such eminent Worth,
As Romance never feigned, nor Age brought forth,
To serve You as a QUEEN; oh! may She prove
One, that shall still atchieve Your Princely Love!
Let the continuing- pleasures of the Bed,
Be iterations of a Maydenhead!
And as in years, so in Affection grow,
That when She Is Illa Marito
Tunc quoque cum fuerit, non videatur Anus.

Old, You may not Think her so!
Peace be for ever here! no Disputes rise
But which awes Most, Your Armies, or her Eyes.
May from Your Royal Loins an Cui Pater aeternas post saecula tradat habenas
Issue come,
To Govern all the Tribes of Christendom!
And let that Race supply this Scepter's sway,
While Stars shall rule the Night, or Sun the Day:
May all Your Sons be like You in the Extreme!
And ('it is presumed) None ere shall be Like Them.
Else we despair when Fate shall lead You home,
Of One, like You, lest Tu si properas Juppiter ipse veni.
Jove Himself should Come.
Go Pro meritis caelum tantis Auguste dederunt
Alcidae Cito Di sed Tibi sero dabunt.

late to Heaven! (though too soon I fear
They Will spoil us Here, to be enriched There)
Where (Course being finished) take (as St. Paul has)
A Crown of Glory! -- You have kept the Faith.
This Days Commemoration still remain!
But -- May I never see the Like again.
HEN. BOLD olim e N. C. OXON.
Haec, si Displicui, fuerint solatia nobis.
Haec fuerint Nobis Praemia, si Placui:
Mart.

FINIS.

