SCOTLANDS THANKSGIVING FOR THE RETVRNE OF THEIR ARMY. TOGETHER With a true
Copy of a Letter from DUBLIN of their last Proceedings, sent to John Bibie
Drum-Major for the Tower and City of London.

LONDON: Printed in the same Year, The Scots Army did retire.

Printed for T. Pain and M. Simmons. 1642.

SCOTLANDS THANKSGIVING FOR HER ARMIES safe, joyful, and prosperous return
from ENGLAND.
Blessed be the living Lord, who reigns above,
To Scotland, who has shown such signs of love:
And maugre ravenous Rome, and spiteful Spain,
Kept us abroad, and brought us safe again
Unto our native soil, with Songs of joy,
Foyling our Foes, who would us all destroy.
Who would have looked when first we marched over Tweid,
So long, and well, in England we should speed,
Curbing all those did threat us to withstand,
And feeding on the best fruits of their Land,
Having Christ's Word, and Sacraments in peace,
And purity, in Superstitions Place,
Returning with such credit, joy, and fame,
And blessings great, which no Pen can proclaim.
Seeing our Princes sweet and gracious face,
And feasting with contentment; with his Grace,
Foes gnasht their teeth, so blessed a day to see,
When Scot's (who Traitors were proclaimed to be)
Now counted are best Subjects, by our King,
Which joys our hearts above all earthly thing.
Blessed August, joyfullest Month in all the year,
In thee we marched over Tyne, and did retire,
With joyful hearts, and songs of endless praise
To GOD, who has us blessed, in all our ways;
Gods Israel no more mavelous favors fand,
Nor we brave Scots, into a strangers Land,
They marvels great did find from God most high,
But all were worlds of wonders, we did see.
Ah wretched vipers, to your native soil,
Who would have wished your Countries final foil,
Who can paint out your woes, sin, shame, and scorn,
By God, your King, and all true Scots, forlorn.
Rome hang thy head, thy hellish plots are gone,
And bailfull Bishops your bad change bemone,
Your dririe train no help from Laud can find,
And by Saint Peter's Chair, is left behind,
Newcastle, Durhame, and you Towns by Ties
Keep what you heard from us, and saw with eyes;
Return not to your wonted dregs of Rome,
Lest you be cursed, and doleful be your doom,
And one day we to your just condemnation
Bear witness of your breach of Protestation.
Lord bless our wise, and valiant General,
Our Nobles, Cavaliers, and Soldiers all,
Who for Christ's cause, and their dear Countries good,
Devoted honors, life, name, means, and blood.
Fame (times eternal Herald) shall proclaim
To Ages all, your never dying Name.
Cursed be those hellish spirits (who hence shall move)
Sturs us among, to break the bonds of Love:
England farewell, Lord plant his truth in thee,
That thou with us, in Peace and Purity;
May worship God, and hate that Man of Sin,
Whose brood too long has Britain breathed within:
Welcome sweet Scotland, who is like to thee?
Pay God thy vows, so blessed thou still shall be.
Lord bless our good, our great, and gracious King,
That long in these Three Kingdoms, he may reign:
And that his seed, the Scepter still may sway
While Titan cease, to rule the glistring Day;
That grace and Peace may flourish in our Land,
And blessed Astrea have the sole command:
That they who love Sion's felicity,
His Counselors, and Courtiers may be.
Lord from his Throne all Parasites remove,
And firebrarnds Sion hate, that Rome do love.
So he a blessed King shall reign on Earth,
And Ages all, shall blaze his fame and worth.
God shall be honored, and the Kingdoms three
Shall bless the time, they did King Charles see.
A LETTER SENT FROM John Bacon, an Officer (under Sir Simon Harcot in Dublin)
to John Bibie an Officer in the Tower of LONDON.
Dear Friend, for all your former favors I heartily thank you, and in
requital thereof, I can do no less than impart to you the heads of our late
proceedings.

We have lost two Lieutenants and two Ensigns of our Regiment on service that
we have been upon; We drew out three thousand foot and horse with us, and
went twelve miles into the Country, we drew out with us four field Pieces,
thinking to give the Rebels a pitched Battle, but they run away like dogs,
where we took twenty and odd of the Rebels, and hanged them up, that had
formerly burned a Town called Newerd-Castell, and another Castle close by it
called Castle-Lyons; and then we marched for the Nase, where we lay one night
and a day, and took the Town, and fired eleven Towns besides, and there we
lay four days in the fields horse and foot: Our Forces were under Command of
Sir Simon Harcot, and Sir Charles Coote, and Collonell Crayford. The Horse was
under the Command of the Earl of Ormond, Lieutenant General of the Field.
Since that we went to a Castle called Artaine, where we took good provision,
and had good pillage, and are now safe returned to Dublin, thanks be to the
Lord for it.

We may well say, the Lord has been with us in six
troubles, and in the seventh he has not left us.
If it had not been the Lord, who was on our side,
when men rose up against us:
Then they had swallowed us up quick: when their
wrath was kindled against us.
Blessed be the Lord: who has not given us as a prey
to their teeth.
Dublin Feb. 12. 1641. I rest yours to use, JOHN BACON.

FINIS.

