BLOODY NEVVES FROM THE NORTH Declaring The Engagement of the FORCES, commanded
by Lieut. Genesis Crumwel, and Major Genesis Munro; the particulars of a Fight, and
the number killed and taken.

Also, a gallant Victory obtained in Cleveland, beyond the City of York,
against Sir Philip Musgrave and his Forces, with the exact and full relation
thereof.

Likewise, strange and terrible News for the Kingdom of Scotland, the like
never heard of before.

And a Declaration of the Prince of Wales, his proceedings at Sea, and sailing
toward Holland; and the Earl of VVarwick's Resolution touching the same.

September 8. Printed for G. VV. 1648.

BLOODY NEWS FROM THE NORTH
SIR,
THe Scots Army grow numerous, their Body incre^ses, and diverse resorts to them
daily, Major General Munro is Commander in chief both of horse and foot,
having near upon fifteen Regiments under his immediate command, who executes
the same cruelty as the Hambletonian Army, deflouring of women, burning and
plundering of houses, driving away all sorts of cattle, forcing diverse
Ministers and others along with them. But no doubt, but God will punish them
for their many insolences, plunderings, and cessing the country with
extraordinary burdens and taxes in their late expeditions into England, who for
breach of Covenant will receive a condign guerdon and punishment, it being a
sin odious before God and Man.

We hear that their Army of English, Irish, and Scots are between five and six
thousand, whose headquarters are about Appleby in Westmerland, resolving to
fight Lieu. Genesis Cromwell, who is hastening toward them with a very
considerable Body of horse and foot, and (as it is redorted) is within two
days mareh of the main Body.

And it is said, that some action has already happened between parties, who on
a sudden engaged, disputing the place with great difficulty, but the English
Iron-sides in policy retreating, drew the Jockies from a place of advantage,
rallied, and charged them with great fury and courage, the Irish Jockies
received them, and stood many a desperate charge, but finding the dispute too
hot retreated, our men pursues, who with great gallantry maintains the pursuit
to their very heels, doing execution: but being somewhat weary, returned,
taking near upon 30. prisoners, and killing almost as many, with little or no
loss. A sudde Engagement is daily expected, Munro being resolved to fight.

It is likewise reported, that some of the Lieu. Genesis horse have lately beaten
up the Scots out-quarters in Westmerland, and have taken diverse prisoners,
putting many of the Irish to the sword, the two Bodies advance, and are very
near an engagement, both parties proceed forward, and a field is suddenly
expected, policy is the chief Engine which the two Generals make use of, who
are exceeding vigilant, in relation to an engagement.

We hear that Sir Philip Musgrave, Sir Robert Stricland, and Sir William
Blackstone, with a party of horse consisting of about five hundred came into
Cleveland on Monday last, and began to levy the Country for the Trained Bands,
but the Inhabitants rising, and the Dale men coming into their assistance,
they durst not stay long, but presently retreated.

And haaing plundered diverse horses, and other Goods in and about the parts
adjacent to Cleveland, the Inhabitants of the Middle Dale put themselves into a
posture of defense, and hastened to a passage where the Cavalry were to march
through, who lay in Ambuscado for their coming, and upon their approach near,
gave them a volley, which somewhat startled sir Philip Musgrave and his forces:
Whereupon they made a stand, and Sir Philip sent a Trumpeter to know the
meaning thereof, the Dale men returned answer, That they were resolved to lose
their lives, rather then to be plundered of their estates and goods, and
therefore desired reshitution of what had been taken from them or their
neighbors.

Sir Philip understanding this, gave order, that all horses, or any other goods
or cattle whatsoever should be restored to the right owners, and that for the
future, no man shall dare to take the worth of a penny from any man, upon pain
of death: the horses being restored, they were convoyep through the Country.

Helmsly 4. September. 1648.

A Declaration of the Prince, and his drawing off from the Earl of Warwick.
SIR,
WE have just now received intelligence, that his Highness the Prince of
Wales, and the Right Honorable the Earl of Warwick, have lately faced each
other with their two Fleets, some of the L. Admirals ships came up, and sailed
within a league of the Prince, but did not engage, the revolted ships not
daring to make one shot against them but perceiving the rest of the Lord
Admirals ships advancing up, drew off and durst not fight

Since which time, it is reported, that his Highness made toward Yarmouth
Roads, thinking to have victualled the Navy, and therefore sent these ensuing
Desires to the Aldermen of the town, viz.

Intimating, that his Highness desired admittance into the town, to recreate
his person, and to furnish himself with such necessary provisions, as his
Highness stood in need of, promising upon his Royal word, that no injury or
molestation should be used to any.

The Aldermen having received this message, after some debate thereupon,
resolved to oppose his landing and returned answer, humbly des^^ing his
Highness to persist no further therein: For having seriously weighed the great
danger that might befall that town, if once an in road were made by the adverse
party, resolved to secure the Inhabitants, and forthwith raised the trained
Bands, and other additionall forces for defense thereof, which accordingly they
did: yet notwithstanding the Prince attempted to land, and diverse Gentlemen and
others, betook themselves to long Boats, thinking to come ashore, but upon
discovery thereof, the trained Bands fired, whereupon they returned, and made
no further opposition.

After which, a party of them in the night landed at a Village within two miles
of Yarmouth, brought diverse Boats and empty Casks to the shore, filled them
with fresh water, and other necessaries and returned. But diverse of the deboist
Seamen letting Time slip, were left a shore, who having been plundering up and
down the parts adjacent, were set upon by the Countrymen, who fought with them,
took two priso^ers, and the rest escaped.

That which does most induce the inhabitants in these parts to stand upon their
Guards, and to oppose the adverse party, is their affection to the Parliament,
and zeal to their Country, who hearing of the Generals advance toward these
parts, takes courage, and with a handful of men dare oppose a very pregnable
party.

It is generally reported, that the Prince intends for Holland, being much
discontented at the present proceedings of the Lord Admiral Warwick, who
conceived, and were oftentimes told by diverse attending his Royal person that
they were assured Warwick dared not to appear upon the Seas to fight his
Highness.

Langdale Point 5. Sept. 1648

Letters from the North further say. That since the defeating of the
Hamiltonians, strange sights has bin seen in the Sky, as a sword in a man's
hand in a flame of fire, streeming toward Scotland, and was seen to fall
about Tweed: a good Omen that the vermin of mankind is going over Tweed, lame
and halting many has presaged their shameful overthrow, as we see at this
day. The Scots prisoners call the English Army the Independent Conquerors; But
Munro says, That he doubts not but to become the Presbyterian Conqueror, and
to destroy both root and branch of Independency: so said his predecessor, the
great Duke; but mark what followed, his breach of Covenant, by invading England
calls for perpetual ignominy and disgrace.

Letters from the Navy say, that the Prince declining an engagement, is gone
into Holland, the Earl of VVarwi^k pursues, and is resolved to fight.

FINIS.

