THE TREE OF Christian Faith: BEING A True Information, how a Man may be one
Spirit with God, and what Man must do to perform the works of God: In which is
comprehended (compendiously) the whole Christian Doctrine and Faith.

ITEM, What Faith and Doctrine is: An open Gate of the Great Mystery of GOD out
of the Divine Magia, through the Three Principles of the Divine Being.

Written in High Dutch by JACOB BEHMEN.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN MACOCK, M.CX.L.IV.

The Tree of the Christian Faith.
Chapter the First.
CHrist says, Mat. 6.33. But first seek the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you.

2. Item, My Father, will give the Holy Ghost to those that ask him; when he
comes, then will he lead you into all truth; he will put you in mind of all
what I have told you of.

3. For he will take it of me, and inform you of it; he will give you speech,
and wisdom what you are to speak.

4. And St Paul says, We do not know what we shall pray or speak, but the
Spirit of God intercedeth powerfully according to the pleasure of God.

5. Now Faith is not an historical knowledge; that a man should set down
Articles unto himself, and depend only upon them, and so force his mind into
the works of his Reason: But Faith is a Spirit with God; for the Holy Ghost
goes into the spirit of Faith.

6. True Faith is a Power of God, a Spirit with God; it works in God, and
with God.

7. It is free, and not bound to any Article, but only to true Love, from
whence it fetches the power of its life and strength; and the opinions of men
are of no consequence.

8. For as God is free from all inclination, he does what he pleases, and is
not accountable for it; so true Faith also is free in Gods Spirit, It has but
one Inclination, viz. unto the Love and Mercy of God, to cast its will into the
Will of God; and it goes forth out of the starry (sydereal) and elemental
Reason.

9. It does not seek it self in fleshly Reason, but in Gods Love; and if it
does so, it finds it self, and then it finds it self in God, and works
with God, not according to Reason, what she pleases to have; but in God, what
the Spirit of God wills.

10. For Faith esteems not the earthly life, that so it may live in God, and
the Spirit of God be in it, the will and the deed; It submits in all
humility unto Gods Will, and sinketh down with Reason into Death, but springs
up with Gods Spirit in the Life of God; It is as if it were not, and yet it is
in God in All.

11. It is a Crown and Ornament of the Deity, a Wonder in the divine Magia; It
makes something where there is nothing, and takes something where nothing is
made; It works, and no body sees its Being.

12. It exalts it self, and yet has no need of any ascending; it is of a
mighty Power, and yet it is the lowliest Humility; It has all, and yet
comprehends no more then Meekness: thus it is free from all Malice.

13. And it has no Law, for the fury of Nature touches it not; it holds or
subsisteth in Eternity, because it is not comprehended in any ground; it is not
shut up in any thing.

14. Even as the Abyss of Eternity is free, and rests no where but only in it
self, where there is an eternal Meekness; even so does true Faith in the Abyss.

15. It is in it self a Being (the Being,) it lives, but seeks not its life,
but it seeks the life of the eternal still Rest; it goes out of the spirit
of its life, and possesses it self.

16. Thus is it free from Torment, and dwells in the eternal Freedom of God.

17. It is with the eternal Freedom of God as a nothing, and yet it is in all;
all comes well to pass to it, what God and Eternity has in his power; It is
comprehended of nothing, and yet it is a fair habitation in the great Power of
God.

18. It is a Being, yet is it not comprehended of any Being; it is a companion
and friend to the divine Virgin of Gods Wisdom; in it stands the great Wonders
of God, and yet it is free of all.

19. Even as the light is free from the fire, and yet is continually begotten
of the fire, and yet it can neither touch nor move the quality of the fire; so
in like manner we give you to understand, that Faith is begotten out of the
Spirit of Life, as out of an ever-burning fire, and shines in that fire; and
fills the fire of life, and yet is never comprehended.

20. But if it be comprehended, then it self is entered into Reason, as into a
prison, and is no more in the Freedom of God (Gods Freedom,) but it is entered
into (pain) torment.

21. It tormenteth it self, whereas it might be at liberty: it works in
Reason, the Wonders in the Fire of Nature; and in the Freedom, it works the
Wonders of God.

The Second Chapter.
1. NOw seeing Faith is thus, viz. one Spirit with God, we are then to consider
its Original; For we cannot say it is a Form or Image of Reason, but it is the
Image of God, it is Gods Similitude and eternal Form.

2. And yet during the time of this life, it may break it self, or be changed
into an Anguish quality.

3. For it is in its own Being in the Original merely a naked Will, and the
same Will is a Seed, which the spirit of the Fire (the Soul) must sow into the
Freedom of God.

4. Then there grows a seed out of that Tree, upon which the Soul feeds,
and mitigateth her fire-life, that she becomes powerful, and gives strength to
the root of this Tree, whereby the Tree grows in the Spirit of God, and
springs up in Gods Paradise.

5. And though it be so, that in this we might be dumb and ignorant, for Reason
would fain comprehend and know all, therefore we will hold it forth clearly to
the light, why Faith and Doubt are one by another, and are as it were chained
together, so that there is a vehement strife in man all his time so long, as he
is a guest in the cottage of this earthly life.

6. Unless he sink so much in himself, that he can bring the Fire of Life into
the Freedom of God; Then he is as it were dead in Reasons-life (or in the life
of Reason,) and if he lives, he lives to God.

7. Which indeed is a most precious dear life in a man, and is seldom or rarely
found in any, for it is like unto the first Image which God did create.

8. And although the mortal part sticks unto him, yet it is as it were dead,
just as if a dead image stuck unto him which belongs unto the corruption
(breaking) in which the true man does not live.

9. For the true Life stands turned, and is in another World in another
Principle, and lives in another quality (or source.)

10. Therefore understand us now in this way; You see and know the original of
man's life, how the same existeth in the Mothers womb, and you see also wherein
it does qualify and moves, as chiefly in four forms, viz. in Fire, Air,
Water, and Earth.

11. And though it stands therein thus, yet is it no more in it then an
animal life, for he receives his Reason from the Stars; and it is found, that
the Sun and the Stars make a Tincture in the four Elements, from whence comes
Reason and qualification, lust and unlustiness, or indisposedness.

12. And is yet far from the true humane life; for this Reason seeks no
further, but her self in her Wonders.

13. Yet in man it is a desire, and a great longing after a higher, better and
eternal life, in which there is no such quality.

14. Though Reason does neither comprehend nor see it, yet there lies a
Mystery in Reason, which tastes and knows from whence existeth the languor
or gnawing.

15. Whereby we know that the same Mystery was implanted, also in or at the
first Creation, and is man's propriety; and we find it thus, that it stands in
a desire or longing, as in a Magical groaning.

16. Moreover we find, that we are in a strange lodging, with the same Mystery;
that the same Mystery does not stand in the spirit of this world, for it
comprehends it not, neither does it find it.

17. Here we know the heavy Fall of Adam; for we find that Mystery in the will
of the mind, that it is a hidden Spring (or Fountain,) which opens it self in
another Principle.

18. We understand also, how that Mystery stands hidden in the
Anguish-quality, and opens it self through the anguish of the Will.

19. And then, thirdly, we find, how the same Mysterium is held imprisoned by
the Spirit of this World.

20. And how the Reason of the external life has power to enter into it, and
to corrupt it, whereby that Mystery cannot come into the light, because it does
hide it, that the Genetrix may not bring forth her fruit, and so lies hid as a
Mystery.

21. And if the Body dies, then the will has not another which might reveal
the Mystery, therefore the Spirit of the Fire, or of the Soul, abides in
darkness, and the Mystery stands hid in him eternally as in a Mystery.

22. Thus we know the Mystery to be Gods Kingdom, which stands hid in the
Soul, which gives a Lust and Desire to the Soul that it imagines into that
Mystery.

23. Where she is magically impregnated in the same Mystery, from whence
arises a Will unto her to go out of the life of the Fire into Gods Mystery.

24. And if it so come to pass, that she lifts up the Will, and casts the
same into the Mystery, then is the Will impregnated with the Mystery.

25. For the Will is longing, and gets the body of the Mystery, as the Being
of the Mystery, which is Gods Being, which is incomprehensible unto Nature;
Thus the Will of God does attract the similitude or image.

26. Now if the Will be begotten out of the Souls fire, then it stands also
with its Root in the Soul, and there is no Division betwixt the Will and the
Soul, but the Will becomes a Spirit with God, and becomes the Garment of the
Soul, so that the Soul is hid in the Will in God.

27. And although she dwells in the Body, yet is she encompassed with her Will,
and is hid in God; and thus is she in the Will (which is the true earnest
Faith) a Child of God, and dwells in another world.

28. This is not to be taken for an Historical Will, where Reason knows, that
there is a desire after God in her, but keeps that Desire imprisoned, in
wickedness, that the Will cannot go out of the Soul, and enter into Life, or
Gods Mystery, but causes opinions, and sets the Will into a Fancy.

29. Where the Will is not able to reach the Mystery of God, and thus abides
in the Fancy, or quite bid in the Soul, so to be judged at a future time, where
Reason holds the Will imprisoned in the Flesh, groaning in the syderial
Magia, and still says, To morrow shall thou go forth and seek the Mystery of
God.

30. There is truly no self-power of finding, he that thinks so is deceived:
neither is there any liberty in any Fancy where the Will might enter and see
God, that Reason durst imagine to make or to do any thing, and so to please God
thereby.

31. For there is not any way which is more direct then to go with the Will out
of Reason, and not to seek it self, but Gods Love, and to cast himself wholly
into Gods Will, and to let alone all what Reason can object.

32. And though they were great sins and crimes committed into which the Body
was entered, only pass them over with the Will, and esteem Gods Love more
highly then the filth of sins.

33. For God does not accept of sins, but he regards and accepts the
obedient Free Will, he suffers not sin to come unto him.

34. But an humble Will, which goes out from the house of sin, and refuses
sins, and sinketh himself beyond Reason into his Love as an obedient humble
Child, that he receives, because it is pure.

35. But whilst it stands in the Fancy, then is it encompassed with the Fancy,
and is not free.

36. Now as God is free in himself from Malice, so must the Will also be free,
then is it Gods Similitude, Image and Property; for that which comes unto him
into his Freedom, he will not turn it out, as Christ teaches us.

The Third Chapter.
1. UNderstand us now further in the way; We know, and the holy Scripture also
speaks of it, and it is discernable also as well in the light of Nature as in
all other Beings, That all things descend from the eternal Being, Good and Bad,
Love and Anger, Life and Death, Joy and Misery.

2. Now we cannot say for all that therefore that the evil and death comes
from God, for in God there is no evil nor death, and in all Eternity there
comes no evil to him.

3. But the Fury descends out of the Fire of Nature, where Life stands as in
a Magia, where the one form desires and exciteth the other, from whence arise
the essences of Plurality; out of which are born the Wonders in which Eternity
reveals her self in similitudes.

4. And yet we must needs say, that there is a desire in Gods Will, which
causes the Magia, out of which existeth Multiplicity.

5. And yet this Multiplicity is not the Will of God it self (which is free
from all Being;) But in the groaning of the Will, Nature begets her self
with all the Forms; so then, every thing existeth out of the Desire, as out of
the eternal Magia.

6. And we must further know, that whatsoever gets Life (which imagines
into Longing, and sets his Will into Nature) is the Child of Nature, and a
Life with Nature.

7. But whatsoever goes out of Natures longing (groaning) into the free Will
of God, the same is received and owned by the free Will, and is a Spirit in God.

8. And though it be of Nature, as Nature from Eternity still begets her
self in Gods will, yet is his Life-spirit without Nature in the Free will; and
thus the Wonders stand in God revealed, and yet are not in God himself.

9. And if the spirit of the will of the Soul goes out of the Reason of Nature
into the free will of God, then that spirit of the Will is the Child of God,
and the Spirit of Nature is Gods Wonder, and the creature stands turned into
her self, as God himself.

10. For the sydereal or rational Spirit seeks in his Magia in himself in his
Center the Wonders of Eternity, to which end God has created the Soul in the
Body of the external Nature, though they be comprehended only in the internal.

11. And the spirit of the Will goes into the Freedom of God, where the holy
Spirit leads him into the divine free Mystery; so that the Deity stands
revealed in the spirit of the Will, and in the rational Spirit stands the
Magia of Nature revealed with her Wonders.

12. Now if the Soul be the Center, where the true spirit of the Will goes out
toward the Freedom of God into the Fredom of God, as into the Divine, then has
she the sydereal Spirit bound up.

13. And if she tameth him, that he do not work wickedness, she may bring the
sydereal Wonders, which in the Elemental Mirror are made into a Substance,
before the Majesty of God, into the free will of God; so that the Wonders
appear in the Divine Freedom, as a Similitude of the Will of God.

14. Yet not to be understood (thus) as if the Freedom of God does mingle with
the Wonders of Nature, and with the Similitude to be one; No, God abides free
eternally.

15. He dwells in the Wonders, as the Soul does in the Body; as little as the
Body comprehends the Soul, or the Fire the Light, even as little
comprehends Nature the Deity.

16. And yet is one Being, and is separated into two Beings from Eternity, even
as the Fire and the Light.

17. Where we understand by the Fire the life of Nature, and by the Light the
Mystery, the Spirit of Life without qualm or pain, though the Fire be also a
Mystery.

18. Thus, understand us, is Man's condition; The Soul is the fire of the true
humane life, which God breathed forth out of the eternal Nature in Adam, with
his Spirit, as out of the Center of God.

19. And the Spirit which was born out of the Souls fire, forms Gods Spirit
into his Image; he has the Divine Mystery out of which the Will toward Gods
Love is begotten, from whence existeth the Divine Magia or Longing, that the
spirit of the will is desirous of God.

20. Now if he does elevate himself (that is, goes out of the hidden Mystery
into the Freedom of God) there is he a twig or branch in Gods Kingdom, sprung
up out of Gods Mystery, and works into Gods Will, and reveals still the
Wonders in Gods Kingdom.

21. Not so as if any new thing were begotten in God which had not been from
Eternity, which has neither ground nor end.

22. Only in the Souls spirit, the eternal infinite Mystery is revealed in its
self, to Gods honor, and wondrous Deed, and to his own, namely, to the
creatures own or self eternal joy.

23. Now, whereas the earthly corrupted Longing mingleth it self with the
Astral quality, and the Soul at the heavy Fall of Adam has imagined with her
Will into the Astral Longing, as also into the earthly, and has brought into
her self the strange Magia, then the Will was begotten, and the divine Image
was destroyed.

24. And the heavenly divine Image of Man became earthly; so that the true Will
stands turned upside downward, as into the spirit of this world, as into the
Reason, which is born out of the stars.

25. Now, the true Image of God (which was thus destroyed, and is become
earthly) has need to be new born again.

26. And there had not been found any Remedy to help this Image, if the Word
out of Gods Center (as Gods own Life) had not assumed Humanity, and had not the
poor soul, whose Image was now corrupted, been new born again in him: Here the
true Image was restored again, else she had been bereaved eternally of the
Freedom and Majesty of God.

27. Seeing all souls are descended from one, therefore are they all born out
of one corrupted Root; and the new regenerated Life is returned again into the
soul of Christ, therefore is it required of us to cast all our wills into
Christ's Regeneration.

28. For in Christ are we born again in God with our souls, and in Christ have
we gotten again the Image.

29. For our Mystery in the Soul stood merely in the Magia of Nature, which in
her Center is a fire, and the Image was turned out of Gods Freedom into the
outer Magia, as into the external principle (of this world.)

30. Now if that breaks in the Being, then the poor corrupted Image of the
Soul stands merely as a lost Child, where in her own Center she can stir up
nothing but the furious fiery quality, for she is gone out of Gods Word into a
corruptible Mirror, as into the spirit of this world, which has a beginning and
an end.

31. Therefore the body of the soul is become wholly earthly, and is fallen
home into corruptibleness and death.

32. Therefore it is requisite for us (because God has graciously turned his
Love to us, and has turned our souls again in him) in Christ, into the
Freedom, and made the divine Mystery in the Image moving; so that the Image can
dwell again in God (as in the Wonders of Paradise) that we break off our will
from the external Center, as from the corruptible life, and bring it into the
free will of God.

33. And hereunto belongs not an historical knowledge for one to say, I
believe, that is, I know it, or I desire it, and yet abides with the will in
the external principle, as standing in the outward infection.

34. No, it is said, You must be new born through water and the holy Spirit,
else you cannot see the Kingdom of God.

35. An earnestness is required here, the will of Reason must be broken, there
must be a living motion of the will, which breaks through Reason, and
fights against Reason.

36. And though it be not easy for the soul to do it (being mightily
corrupted,) yet is there no better Remedy for her, then to make her self Dead
in her Reason and senses, and so to unite merely with Gods Mercy, and yield her
self unto it, that no more room be left; for Reason must be compelled.

37. And if the Will thus beats down Reason, then is she as it were dead
though she be alive, and she becomes servant to the true Will, or else she will
be Master without him.

38. For Gods Will must be the Master over Reason, if so be that Reason shall
do some things that are good and stand before God.

39. For nothing subsisteth before God, unless it be born in Gods will.

40. But if the will turns into good, then the spirit of the will becomes to
be Gods Child.

41. And the Wonders also stand before God, which are made by Reasons spirit,
for they are made in the Will of God, and are transplanted from the beginning
unto the Eternity.

42. And although we cannot say, that our works are to last for ever, yet their
shadow or image abides, and yet they abide really in the Being, but in the
Mystery, as in the Divine Magia before Gods Wisdom.

43. Wherein only the external Principle breaks, as the external Government
in the four Elements.

44. And those four are set again into one, where all the Colors and Forms of
the four Elements are known, with whatsoever is born therein.

45. Therefore has God appointed in Nature a final day of separation, where
all must be approved through fire, what is born in Gods Will or no, that each
principle must make harvest of its own.

46. And there is many a one will leave much of his works in the fire, because
they are not born in Gods Will, for into God no unclean thing enters.

47. But whatsoever is born out of another Magia is impure, the Earth is an
example unto us of that which is corrupted.

48. Do you ask why? The Devil sat with his Legions in the place of this Worlds
Creation, where indeed he was created an Angel in the Sulphur, or in the Center
of Nature, out of which afterward the Earth was created, he has excited the
Fury in Nature.

49. So that the Earth has an evil, impure sickness, although she be enclosed
in death, and reserved for putrefaction.

50. Where she must be approved in the eternal Fire, and return unto that which
she was before the Creation, as to the eternal Magia of the eternal Nature.

The Fourth Chapter.
1. SEeing all is enclosed in Gods Will, which is born out of Nature, and we
understand it thus, that nothing can enter into Gods Will unless it be first
made or born in Gods Will.

2. Therefore we understand plainly, that it is requisite for us, that we
submit our selves wholly with our Reason and senses unto the Will of God; and
so work with our hands in the world to provide food for the belly, but not to
set our will unto it, as to esteem any earthly thing for our Treasure.

3. For where our will and heart is, there is our treasure also: if our will be
in Gods Will, then have we the great Mystery of God, out of which is born this
world, as a similitude of it; and thus we have it both as the eternal and the
corruptible also, and something more; we bring the wonders of our works into
the eternal Mystery, for they depend from the spirit of the will.

4. But if we turn away our will from the eternal into the earthly Mystery, and
esteem Money to be our Treasure, and the beauty of the body for our splendour,
Honor and power for our best Jewels, then is our will captivated in it, and
depends only upon the Mirror, and attains not unto Gods Freedom.

5. For the Mirror as the external Kingdom must be approved through Fire, and
the Fury must be separated from the pure, where the Fury will be an external
Burning.

6. Now if Reason brings the animated mind with the spirit of the will of the
Soul (in which stands Gods Image, and the true Man) into the external Mirror,
as into an hypocritical Infection, needs must the Image and true Man be
captivated thereby, and (with the external Magia, as with its disease) be
infected.

7. Where the Image puts on the external Entity, not only as a garment, but
it is an infection, and a total mixture.

8. Though the animated Fire does not mix with the external Kingdom, yet the
Souls spirit of the will mingleth, which is Magical, and the Image of God is
destroyed, and transmuted into an earthly, where the Souls fiery life abides
crude, and has an earthly Image in the will of the spirit.

9. Now if the Body breaks and dies, then the Soul holds her Image as her
spirit of the will is now, that is, as he departed from the body's image, for
at the dying there is a dividing; Then there appears the Image with and in
such things which she has taken in, wherewith she was infected; the same
quality she has in her.

10. What she has loved here, the same has been her treasure, into which the
will of the spirit is entered, and after the same shapeth her self also the
animated Image.

11. If one has turned his mind and heart into pride in his life time, then
the same quality springs up continually in the Souls fire in the Image, and
goes beyond Love and Meekness, as beyond Gods Freedom, and cannot comprehend
nor possess Gods Freedom.

12. But springs up thus in it self in that anguish quality, and still
shapeth the will of the spirit after earthly things, wherein his will is
entered, and so glittereth with it in the Souls fire, and still rises in pride,
and will go beyond Gods Meekness in the Fire.

13. For he cannot draw or make any other will, because he cannot go into Gods
Freedom into the holy Mystery (where he might make another will,) he lives
merely in himself.

14. He has nothing, neither may he reach unto any thing, but only unto that
which he had comprehended in him in his external life (or whilst he lived in
the world.)

15. And so it fares with a covetous person, he has in his will and image the
magical greedy disease, and coveteth much continually, and forms that in his
will of the spirit, which he dealt withal in the life of his body.

16. But because that has left him, and his being is no more earthly, yet he
carries the earthly will, which tormenteth and plagueth himself with it, for
he cannot reach any other.

17. And much worse it goes with falsehood, against which the poor cries and
curses him by reason of his oppression.

18. For all that is wrought in wickedness, which he has caused, follows
after him, for it has been wrought in the mystery of wrath; then the corrupted
soul after the body's dying falls into it.

19. There she must be bathed in those abominations, that if it were possible
to unite with the will in Gods Love, yet the same abominations and wickedness
keeps him back, for they bring him to an eternal Despair.

20. Where at last the Soul presumes, and renounceth God, and desires only to
ascend in the same abominations, and to live so.

21. And that is her joy to calumniate or blaspheme God and his Saints, and
exalts himself in the Abominations above God and the Kingdom of Heaven, and
yet comprehends none of them.

22. Thus we give you to consider, what Will and Confidence is, namely, that it
is the Master and Guide, which brings man's Image both into Gods Love, and
also into Gods Wrath.

23. For in the Will is begotten the right true Faith, wherein subsisteth the
noble Image of God: For in Faith we are born again through Christ in God, and
obtain again the noble Image which Adam had lost, and Christ has brought it
again with Gods Life into the Humanity.

24. Also a false Will destroys the Image, because the Will is the Root of
the Image, for he attracteth the Mystery of God.

25. And the spirit of that Mystery opens that fair Image, and puts on it
the Divine Mystery, viz. Gods Entity, understand Christ's heavenly Body, who was
born out of God in the dear and beautiful Virgin of his Wisdom, which fills
Heaven.

26. Now if our mind and will is set into the same, and the will desires it,
then is the Will magical, and enters into it; and if he be hungry, then he
may feed on Gods Bread.

27. Now grows up in him the new Body, which is the pleasant or gracious Tree
of Christian Faith, for every body loves himself.

28. Now if the Soul gets a body out of God which is so sweet and gracious,
needs must she love him, being given unto him for a propriety, in whom she
dwells and lives, and from whose power she eats and strengthens her self.

29. Therefore let no man deceive himself, and continue in his falsehood and
unrighteousness, and comfort himself with an historical belief (or faith,) when
he thinks, and says with himself, Is not God gracious? will he not forgive
me? I will gather a Treasure, and enjoy the same, make use of it, and leave to
my Children great Riches and Honor; I will repent at one time or other: This is
a mere deceit.

30. Thou gatherest in falsehood, and drawest into thy self unrighteousness; and
when it is done in the best manner, yet it is but earthly, and thou have sunk
thy heart and will into an earthy vessel, and clotheth thy noble Image with it,
and so have wholly infected it.

31. Besides, thou leavest to thy children only Pride for an Inheritance; that
they only fix (set) into it the spirit of their will:

32. And puts on the worst thing upon thee, and thy children, when thou
think to do good unto them.

33. True, external life must have sustenance, and he does foolishly who gives
his goods to a wicked man.

34. But he does more foolishly, who turns with his goods unto wickedness,
hanging his heart thereon, and holds in higher estimation temporal and
corruptible pleasures, then the eternal incorruptible Good, which is infinite.

35. But he is blessed, which helps the poor; for they wish all happiness
unto him, and pray to God to bless him in his body and soul.

36. Thus their wishes and praying go to the Giver into the Mystery, and
embraces him, and follows after him, as a good work born in God; for that
treasure he takes along with him, and not the earthly.

37. For when the Body dies, then the Image goes into the Mystery, that is,
she is revealed into the Mysteries of God.

38. For in the time of the earthly Life the external principle has been a
cover for it, which falls away when the body dies; then appears the Divine
Mystery in the Image, and therein also all good works and deeds which were born
in Love in Gods Will.

39. The wishes and prayers of all Gods Children stand in the Mystery, and
makes a propriety with the Image: For the children of the poor, if he has
helped them in their miseries and afflictions, have sent their will in their
prayers into Gods Mystery, and so united thereby with their Deliverer and
Comforter, and gave to him that likeness in the Divine Mystery.

40. And if that Benefactor comes into the Mystery, that the earthly life
falls away, then all things are revealed, and each does stick to his own,
whither the Will has appointed it.

41. And all this is reserved unto Gods Judgment of the holy Spirit in the
Mystery, where every one shall reap that, what he has sowed here into his Acre.

42. Where all shall spring up, grow and bring blossoms in a heavenly new
Earth, in which man in his divine Image shall put on the body of the perfect
Mystery upon his divine Image, and will see, standing before him, namely before
his bodily Image, his Righteousness, why he is so fair.

43. He will know the Causes thereof, and rejoice therein eternally, and
comprehend his Hymn therein unto Gods Honor and wondrous Deed.

44. On the other side, the multitude of the wicked will have heaped on them
Ignominy, avarice, pride, wickedness, and the curse of the oppressed gathered
in the Mystery of Wrath, which will follow after them, and shall know the
causes of their torment, and therefore will be an eternal enemy of God, and of
his Children.

The Fifth Chapter.
1. ALl this the multitude of the wicked cannot comprehend; the reason of it
is, there is no will in them thereunto, or to desire to comprehend it.

2. For the earthly Being has captivated them, that they cannot draw any will
unto Gods Mystery; they are to God as dead men, there is no breath in them of
the Divine Life; neither have they any mind to it, they are locked up (bolted)
in Gods Wrath (Mystery) that they cannot do it.

3. Not that God has done-so to them, but they are entered thereinto with the
spirit of the Will, and sunk themselves therein, therefore they run like mad
men.

4. And whereas the noble Jewel stands hid in them in the noble Center in the
divine Principle, and could very well go out from their earthly Being and
wickedness with theirs into Gods Will.

5. Yet they wilfully suffer themselves to be held by the Fury, for the proud
self-honored Life pleases them too well, and that does hold them.

6. But after this Life there is no more remedy; if the Souls fire be naked and
crude, it cannot be quenched with any thing, but only with Gods Meekness, with
the Water of eternal Life in Gods Mystery, and that they cannot reach unto;
there is afterward a great Cleft or Gulf betwixt them, viz. a whole Principle.

7. But in this time of Life, as long as the Soul swimmeth in the Blood, and
burns, it may be very well, for the Spirit of God moves on the wings of the
Wind; God is become Man.

8. The Spirit of God goes with the Will into the Soul, he desires the Soul,
she needs only to open the door, for he goes willingly unto it, and reveals
or opens the noble Corn (or seed) unto the Tree of Christian Faith.

9. But this is the most smarting thing which is to man most bitter, he must
break off his spirit of his Will from the earthly Being, he must bring forth
the spirit of his Will out of the earthly Treasure, as out of Pride,
Covetousness, and Envy, as also out of Wrath and Falsehood, toward the Spirit of
God.

10. His mouth must not play the hypocrite, nor his heart nor will must not
persevere in the earthly Mystery; there must be an earnestness from the bottom
of the heart and soul.

11. The Will must turn into the divine Mystery, viz. into Gods Love, that the
Spirit of God may have place in him to blow on the divine Spark, else there is
no Remedy, no flattering or dissembling avails.

12. And if a man learned all the Scripture by heart, and did sit all the days
of his life in the Church, and yet continued in the Image of the Soul an
earthly beastly Man, who endeavoreth merely after falsehood in his heart, his
Dissembling helps him nothing.

13. A Preacher who handles the Mystery of God in the outward, but has not
Gods Image in the Inward, but striveth only after honor and covetousness, he
is as near unto the Devil as the meanest, he is a mere Juglar with Gods
Mysteries, he is a hypocrite, no efficacy is in him.

14. Himself has not the Mystery of God, how should he give it unto others? he
is a false Pastor, and a Wolf to the sheep.

15. For every one that bears Gods Mystery, that is, he that has rouzed it
in himself, and yielded himself unto it, Gods Spirit does drive him, he is Gods
Priest, for he teaches out of God; none can teach truly, unless he teach out
of Gods Mystery.

16. But how shall he teach, who is without the Mystery? does he not teach by
Art and earthly Reason? what is that unto Gods Mystery?

17. Though Reason be a noble Being, yet she is blind without Gods Spirit; for
Christ says, Without me you can do nothing.

18. Those that are driven by Gods Spirit are Gods Children: He that enters
any way else into the sheepfold, then through Christ's Spirit, he is a Thief and
a Murderer, and comes only to rob and steal, and seeks his own profit; he is
not a Pastor of the sheep, but a Devourer like a Wolf.

19. Thus are we to conceive of the Tree of Christian Faith, it must be living,
and not a dead history or knowledge; The Word of Life must be new born in the
Image, that the Soul may bear Gods Image, without it she is not Gods Child.

20. No flattering nor delaying of Repentance upon hopes avails any thing; as
long as one bears the earthly Image on the Soul, he is without Gods Mystery.

21. Neither needst thou to think I will turn one time or another, but I will
first gather enough, that I may not want, that afterward the earthly business
may not lie in the way.

22. No, this is a trick of the Devil; but through persecution, crosses and
affliction, through ignominy and contempt, we must enter into Gods Kingdom.

23. For the Devil leads his Government in the earthly Image, and he mocketh
Gods Children in his proud Seat, when they will run away from him; thus the
multitude of the wicked serves the Devil, and helps him to drive his work.

24. A man that intends to come to God, must not regard this; he must think
that he is in a strange Country among Murderers, and is a Pilgrim, which
travelleth to his true home, he falls amongst Murderers which torment and
rob him.

25. And if he bring but so much away that he preserves his noble Image, he
has Goods enough, for he gets the heavenly Mystery for it, in which lies
all, out of which the World is only a Mirror (of it.)

26. And he is a very Fool that changes the Reflex of a Mirror (or
Looking-glass) for a substantial Being; for when the Looking-glass breaks, he
that loved it, is bereaved of it.

27. He is like unto one which builds a house on the sand near a great water,
where the water carries away his house; so is it with the earthly hope.

28. O son of Man, thou noble Creature, live not under Reasons power, else it
will cost thee loss of an eternal Kingdom; seek thy self, and find thy self,
but not in the earthly Kingdom.

29. How well is it with him that finds himself in Gods Kingdom, that puts
on the heavenly and divine Mystery, and enters into it.

30. All the worlds ornaments are no more but dirt in respect of the heavenly,
and they are not worthy that a man should set his love into them.

31. And though it be so, it must be brought into the Wonders, to which God
has created it also; that man (understand the external man) must reveal the
Wonders of the external Nature, as in the external Mystery, both from within
the Earth and above the Earth.

32. All what the Stars are able to do, and what the Earth contains, Man is
to bring into wondrous Forms and Beings, after the external Figure, (which in
Gods Wisdom has been foreseen before the times of the World.)

33. But he ought not to set his will on them, and hold them for his treasure,
but he may use them to his joy and ornament; but with the inner man he is to
work in Gods Mystery, then the Spirit of God will help him to seek and to find
the outward things.

34. Seeing we are thus corrupted by that heavy Fall, that our mind is turned
out of the heavenly Mystery into the earthly, as in a Mirror, that we are
become as it were half dead; therefore it is most necessary for us, that we go
out from the earthly splendour with our mind and will, and seek our selves
first, before we seek the earthly ornament, that we learn first to know where
we are at home, and do not make our mind earthly (or be earthly minded.)

35. For man though he stands in Gods Image, is in a threefold Life; but if
he loses Gods Image, then is he only in a twofold Life.

36. The first Life is the Souls Life, and existeth in the Fire of the external
Nature, and stands chiefly in seven Forms, all after the spirit of Nature, as
in our second and third Book has been demonstrated at large.

37. And the second Life stands in the Image, which is begotten out of the
Fountain of the eternal Nature, as out of the Souls fire, which Image stands
in the Light in the second Life, and has his living spirit, as you may judge of
it by the Fire and Lightening.

38. For the quality of Fire is not the quality of the Light, and yet the Light
arises out of the Fire, for by the quality of the Light is understood the
meek, pure, and pleasing, or gracious spirit, and the causes of it are in the
quality of the Fire.

39. For you see how Air comes out of the Fire, which is the Spirit: and the
Air also is understood in four Forms; as a dry one, after the fury of the Fire;
and a wet one, as water by the sharp drawing; Thirdly, a meek one, as from the
Light; and fourthly, an elevated one, from the furious Crake of Fire.

40. Whereby we understand, that the Light is the Master in all the Forms, for
it contains Meekness, and is a Life which is begotten by furious Death, as by
an Anguish quality in the sinking as another Principle, which consists
(subsisteth) in the Fire without feeling, yet it has its feeling as the
pleasant taste.

41. Whereby we understand, that the Water is begotten through Death by the
sinking through the anguish of the Fire; and we understand further, how it is
no death at all, and for all that it is a death.

42. But the Light makes it spring up, that there is a Life in it, which Life
stands in the power of the Light, where Life springs up out of Death.

43. And we understand the Entity as the Palpability; for the Water in it self
is dead, but the fiery Life, and the power of the Light, is its life.

44. Thus is the Ens esteemed as dead, in which Life is a proper thing, and
possesses it self in it self.

45. Where the death of the Ens must afford a body into it, as in our third
Book is demonstrated; where we understand also two Forms in the Life of Light,
and in the Water of Death, and after the Anguish the third in the Fire.

46. As first, in the Anguish of Mortifying in the fury of Fire we understand a
furious Water, by reason of the first four Qualities unto Nature, as Sharp,
Bitter Anguish, and Fire, is like unto poison, and it is a poison also, a
hellish Entity in the Fury after the Original of the Principle into which the
Wrath of God springs.

47. And secondly, we understand the second Water in the Lights-crack, when the
Quality sinketh through the Mortifying, and becomes in Death as a Nothing: For
in the Nothing is the eternal Freedom, being the eternal Abyss of Eternity,
attained unto.

48. Now if the incomprehensible Light sinking in it self gives a glimpse into
the Eternity, and continually replenisheth the sinking, then in the Light
springs up the power of the Light, that is, a Life out of Death which is sunk.

49. For the Fury of the Fire abides in the furious Quality of the fiery
Water, and does not go along into Death; neither can it be, for the fierceness
is the sharp omnipotent Life, which cannot dye, and that cannot reach unto the
eternal Freedom, for it is called, and abides in Eternity, the Life of Nature.

50. And though that in the Life of the Light there is found also a Life of
Nature, yet is it neither painful nor hellish, as that in the Original of
Nature, after which God calls himself a zealous angry God.

51. For in the quality of Light comes the Water abroad, which through Death is
sunk into Liberty, a quality and water of the eternal Life of Joy, in which
Meekness and Love springs eternally.

52. Where it is no more a sinking, but a springing up, which is called
Paradise.

53. And the Moving out of the Waters Spring is called Element, that is, pure
Element, in the Angelical World.

54. And the Cause of the Fire in the Light is the eternal Firmament, in which
is revealed the eternal Knowledge in Gods Wisdom, a similitude whereof we have
in the outer Firmament and Stars.

55. Thus we understand two Worlds one in another, where the one does not
comprehend the other; as, one in the fury of the fiery Nature in the Water of
Poison and Anguish quality, in which the Devil does dwell.

56. And then also one in the Light, where the Water of Light out of the
Anguish is sunk into the eternal Freedom, which the poison Water may neither
comprehend nor reach.

57. And yet is not divided but only through Death, where it does separate it
self in two Principles, and is divided in two Life's, as the one in Wrath, and
the other in Love, which Life is known to be the true Life of God.

58. And herein stands the Ground, that as we went forth with Adam out of
this Life into an external Life, for whose sake God also became Man, which was
to bring us again through this Death, and out of the furious Quality out of the
Anguish of the Fire of Life through Death into the Light and Life of Love.

59. Where indeed the door of Death was locked in the Fury in the humane Soul,
where the. Soul stood in the Anguish quality in the inner Nature in the Fire of
Poison, as in the Water of Anguish.

60. There the Prince Christ broke the lock of Death, and is sprung up again
with his humane Soul through Death in the Light of God; and now its Life
leads Death captive, and Death is become an Ignominy.

61. For by this Closure Lucifer intended to become a Lord and an omnipotent
Prince.

62. But when the Closure was broken, then the Power of the Deity in the Light
destroyed his Kingdom, there he became an imprisoned Servant; for Gods Light
and the Water of Meekness is its Death, for Wrath is killed thereby.

63. Thus went Love and Light into Wrath, with the Paradisical Element, and
also the Water of eternal Life, and Gods Wrath was quenched.

64. And continues only in it self an anguishing furious quality, when its
body is a Poison, a quality of a poisoned water.

65. And is turned out of Gods Fire into the Matrix of eternal Nature, as into
the austere Sharpness, which begets eternal Darkness, wherein the the Devil
leads the severe Government in the anguishing Mercury, and is as one that is
put to shame, or that is expelled.

66. Who at the Original was a Prince, but goes now only for an Executioner, a
graceless Servant, who remains in the Fury of God like a Hangman, which does
execution upon evil doers, being commanded by his Superiors, further he has no
power.

67. Though he be a Deceiver, and catches after many to increase his Kingdom,
that so he might be numerous, and not be ashamed in a few.

68. He is like a Whore, having many of her condition, she excuses the matter
that she is not (alone) a Whore, she is as others are; so he coveteth after a
numerous multitude, thereby to mock God.

69. For he still blames God for his Fall, as if his Fury had thus drawn him,
and precipitated him into such a will into Pride, that he could not subsist.

70. He supposes that he can draw many unto him to increase his Kingdom, that
he gets a great many which will do like himself, and curse God, and justify
themselves; that this is his strength and pleasure in his dark sharp Anguish,
when he still rouzeth the Fire up unto himself, and goes above the Thrones, so
he still counts himself a Prince and King.

71. Though he be evil, yet he is a Prince in his Legions in the Wrath in his
creatures; but with the Wrath (without his creatures) he has no power, whereby
he remains an impotent Prisoner.

72. Thus understand the humane Life in two Forms; the one after the Fire of
Nature, and the other after the Fire of Light, which burns in Love, in which
the noble Image of God appears.

73. And we understand herein that the will of Man must enter into Gods Will,
and then he enters into Christ's Death, with Christ's Soul, through Death into
the eternal Freedom of God, into the Life of Light, and there is he with Christ
in God.

74. And the third Form of Life is the external created Life out of this World,
as out of the Sun, Stars and Elements.

75. Which the Spirit of God breathed into Adams nostrils, with the spirit of
the Macrocosm, where he became also an external Soul, which moves in Blood and
Water, and burns in the outward kindled Fire, as in a Warmth.

76. That same external Life should not reach into the Image in the inner Life,
neither should the Image let it come into the inner Light, which appears
through Death, and springs up with his Power in the eternal Freedom; for the
external Life is only a similitude of the inner Life.

77. The inner Spirit was only to reveal in the external Mirror the eternal
Wonders, which were seen in Gods Wisdom in the Abyss in the divine Magia, and
bring it to a formal Mirror, as to a wonderful Game to the honor of God, and
to the joy of the inner Man born out of God.

78. But his will should not have gone thereinto, to draw the external Wonders
into the Image, as we now know in our misery, how man draws an earthly
treasure into the mind, and imagines, and thus destroys the pure Image of
God in the second Principle.

79. For the spirit of his will goes into the earthly Being, but brings his
Love, in which the Image stands, into the earthly Being, as into an earthly
treasure, into an earthly vessel.

80. Now the Image grows earthly through imagination, and so goes again into
Death, loses God and the Kingdom of Heaven; for the spirit of the Will
stands with the Love in the external Life.

81. Now the external Life must dye and break, that the created Image of the
inner Kingdom may appear.

82. Thus the spirit of the Will strikes with the Love into the external
Wonders, and brings them at the death of the external Life (along) before
Gods Judgment.

83. There the spirit of the Will must go through (pass) the Fire, and the
Image must be approved in the Fire, and all Earthliness must burn away from the
Image; she must be pure and without spot.

84. Even as the Light subsisteth in the Fire, so the spirit of the Will must
subsist also in Gods Fire, and if it cannot (there) pass freely through Gods
Fire, then this Image is spued out into eternal Darkness.

85. And this is the heavy Fall of Adam, that he did set the spirit of his Will
into the external Life, into the outer Principle in the false Infection, and
imagined after the earthly Life.

86. And thus he went out of Paradise, which springs up through death in the
second Principle, in the outer, and thus entered into Death; and thus he dyed,
and thus was his Image destroyed.

87. This by an Inheritance we had from Adam, and from the second Adam Christ
we have Regeneration.

88. Where we must enter into Christ's Incarnation, and with him into his Death,
and from Death with him spring up in the Paradisical World, in the Entity of
Gods Freedom.

The Sixth Chapter.
1. THus we understand that Lust is the Cause why Corruption is come in, and
still does.

2. For Lust is an Imagination, where the Imagination windeth her self into all
the Forms of Nature; so as that they become all impregnated with that thing,
out of which the Lust arises.

3. And we understand the external spirit of man (who is a similitude of the
Inner) did lust after the fair Image, and therefore has set his Imagination
into the Inner, whereby the Inner was infected.

4. And because he did not feel death instantly, therefore has he brought the
spirit of his Will to the Outer; thus the Outer went to lodge in the Inner, and
at last is become Host in the Inn, and has obscured the Inner, so that the
fair Image deceased.

5. There the Image fell amongst the Murderers, and among the seven spirits of
Nature, and the Originals of Life; these kept the Image imprisoned, and pulled
off her Paradisical Garment, murdered, and left her half dead.

6. Now there was need of Christ the Good Samaritan, and this is the Reason why
God became Man.

7. And if the Wound could have been healed by speaking of a word, or a verbal
remission, then God would not have become Man.

8. But God and Paradise was lost, and then the noble Image was destroyed and
wasted, and must be new born again out of God.

9. Therefore did God come with his Word, which is the Center in the Life of
Light, and became Flesh; And so the Soul obtained again a divine Paradisical
Mansion: Conceive it thus:

10. That as Adams Soul had opened the door of the Essences of Fire, and let in
the earthly Essences, whose Springs were turned into the Paradisical Image, and
made the Image earthy.

11. So the Heart of God opened the Door of the Essences of Light, and embraced
or encompassed the Soul with heavenly Flesh; and thus the Essences of the Holy
Ghost imagined after the Image, after the Essences of the Soul.

12. Thus was the Soul impregnated again, so as she entered with the spirit of
her will through death into the Paradisical Life.

13. And from hence came the Temptation of Christ, that he was tempted, whether
the Soul would feed on the Lords Word, and whether she could enter again
through death into the Life of God.

14. Which was accomplished upon the Cross, where the Soul of Christ went
through the Fire of the Fury, through the severe Qualities, through death, and
sprang up again in the holy Paradisical world, in which Adam was created.

15. Thus we Men were helped up again; and it is requisite for us to turn away
our wills, or the senses of our will and mind from all earthly things, and turn
it into Christ's sufferings, dying, death, and Resurrection.

16. That we still crucify the old Adam with Christ's death, and still dye unto
sin in the death and dying of Christ, and arise with him out of the anguish of
death in the new man, and grow up in the Life of God, as there is no other
Remedy, nor no other Help.

17. We must dye unto the earthly world in our will, and must (still) be new
born again to the new world in Faith, in the Flesh and Blood of Christ; we must
be born out of Christ's Flesh, if we intend to see the Kingdom of God.

18. It is no easy matter to be a True Christian, it is a most difficult
business; The Will must become a Warrior, and fight against the corrupted Will.

19. He must sink himself out of the earthly Reason in Christ's death, into Gods
wrath, and break the power of the earthly will, like a valiant Champion.

20. And he must hazard hard, and spend his earthly life about it, and by no
means give over, unless he have broken the earthly will; This indeed is a sharp
War, where two Principles fight for the Victory.

21. Here is no jesting, earnestness must be used in fighting for the Garland
of Valor, for none obtains it unless he get the Victory; He must break the
power of the earthly Will, which yet out of his own power he is not able to do.

22. But if he does sink himself out of the earthly Reason into Christ's Death
with his inner will, then he sinketh through Christ's Death, through Gods Fury,
and through all the lets and stops of the Devil, into the Paradisical World,
into the Life of Christ.

23. He must make his will as if it were dead, then he lives unto God, and
works into the Love of God, though he lives in the external Kingdom.

24. I speak of the warlike Garland which he geteth in the Paradisical World,
if he once presses through, for there is then sowed the Noble Seed, there he
gets that most dear Pledge of the Holy Ghost, which afterward leads and
guides him.

25. And although he must walk in this world in a dark vail, when the Devil and
the worldly wickedness, still assaulteth him, and many times flingeth the
external man into abominations, and hides that noble Mustard Seed, yet it
cannot be hid.

26. But it springs up and grows to a Tree in Gods Kingdom, against all
the raging of the Devil and his accomplices.

27. And the more the noble Pearl Tree is sought, the more forcibly and
powerfully it grows it will not be suppressed, though it should cost the
external life.

28. Thus my dear mind, search after the Tree of thy Christian Faith rightly;
it does not stand in this world.

29. True, it must be in thee, but thou must be with the Tree with Christ in
God; so that the world does only as it were hang about thee, as it did hang on
Christ.

30. It is not my meaning as if this world were worth nothing, or of no use
before God; it is the great Mystery.

31. Man is created into this world to that end, as a wire Governor of it, that
he should reveal all the Wonders which are in the Sulphur from Eternity, out of
which this world with the Stars and Elements is created, and bring them after
his will into Forms and Images, all to his joy and glory.

32. He was freely created without any Law, he had no Law but only the Law of
Nature, viz. that he should not mingle one Principle with another.

33. The inner man should not have permitted any earthliness to have entered
into him, but should omnipotently reign over the external Principle; then no
death or dying would have entered into him.

34. Neither could the external Elements stir him, neither heat nor cold could
have touched him.

35. For as the Noble Image must hold in the Fire, even so the same noble Image
throughout the whole Man should rule and govern all through all the three
Principles, and fill it with a Paradisical Quality.

36. But seeing it could not be, and the flesh is become earthly, therefore we
must now be born in Faith, where indeed the earthly life covers the true Life.

37. Therefore we must put on the true Garment, which is called Hope, and set
our will on Hope, and still work on in the Tree of Faith, that he may bring his
fruits, as that gracious Love toward God and his Neighbor.

38. He must do good not only for his own sake, but he may edify his Neighbor
by his godly life and conversation.

39. He must think, that he is a Tree in Gods Kingdom, that he bears fruit to
God, and grows in Gods Air, that his fruit belongs to the Lords Table.

40. And that he take in his works and wonders into the true Love, and walk in
Love, that he may bring her into Gods Kingdom.

41. For God is a Spirit, and Faith is a Spirit also in him, and God is become
Man in Christ, and the Spirit of Faith is born Man also in Christ.

42. Thus the spirit of the Will walks in God, for he is one Spirit with God,
and works with God divine works.

43. And though it be, that the earthly life hides him, that he knows not
his works which he begot in Faith, yet will it be revealed at the breaking of
the earthly body.

44. For Hope is his Chest, and a Mystery into which the works of Faith are
sowed and kept also.

The Seventh Chapter.
1. NOw Man standing thus in a threefold Life, each Life is then a Mystery unto
the other, and is desirous of the other, to which this World with all its
Beings is created.

2. For the Divine Entity desires the Mirror or Similitude.

3. For this World is a similitude after Gods Being, and God is revealed in an
earthly similitude: For the Wonders of the Mystery could not be revealed in the
Angelical World in the lower birth.

4. But in this World where Love and Wrath is mingled, there is a twofold
Genetrix, there it might be.

5. For all things exist out of the Root of the Fire, but are encompassed with
the Water of Meekness, so that it is a pleasant Being.

6. But if the Fire in the Angelical World be not known, for the Center of the
Genetrix stands in the Light, and is the Word of God, then the Wonders of
Nature may not any other way be revealed then in a spiritual Magia, that is,
are foreseen in Gods Wisdom.

7. But because the same is almost incomprehensible to the Angels, and Souls of
Men, and seeing that God will be known in Angels and Men, therefore the
Angelical World lusts after the great Wonders to know them, which stood in
Gods Wisdom from Eternity.

8. And these are brought to a Being in the earthly Similitude into Forms and
Images, all after the eternal Essences of the Center of Nature, that the
Wonders may stand eternally.

9. But not essentially, but in Forms, Images and Similitudes in Figures, after
the Will, Magically indeed, but yet the Genetrix is in the Center of Wonders.

10. For she was once excited out of the Fire, but is swallowed again into the
Mystery, and stands as a hidden life.

11. Therefore all Beings must be revealed as it were in a shadow in the
Angelical World, and such as are brought into Gods Will into the Mystery.

12. For there are two sorts of Mysteries, which are eternal, as the one in
Love and the other in Wrath, where the spirit of the will turns in with his
wonders, there stand also his works and wonders.

13. So we are in like manner to know, that the outer is vehemently desirous of
the Inner, for all runs after the Center as after the Original, and is
desirous of the Freedom.

14. For in the Fire of Nature is anguish and torment; Now the form or the
image of Meekness in the quality of Love will be free, and yet may not be free
in the quality of the fiery Essences, till the quality in the breaking
separateth, then each steppeth into its own Mystery.

15. Therefore the fire also will be free from water, for water is a death unto
fire, and is a mystery unto it.

16. And we see also hereby, how the water holds the fire imprisoned, and yet
there is no dying in the fire, but is wholly a Mystery in the fire.

17. As it is apparent, how it breaks forth in the water, and reveals it
self, that it reveals it self out of the Center of its own Genetrix as it is
apparent in lightning and is known also in a stone which is but a Water.

18. And we see chiefly, how all the Forms of Nature are desirous of the
light, for in the same desire the Oil is begotten in which the light is known
for it existeth out of meekness.

19. So we are to know our life, that in us stands open, the Center of fire,
for the life burns in the fire.

20. And then are we to consider the desire unto Love, which existeth in the
word of life in the Angelical world, where the heart of God stands with his
desire toward us in his imagination, and draws us also into the Divine
Mystery.

21. And thirdly we are to consider the Magical Kingdom of this World, which
burns also in us, and draws us vehemently into its wonders, for it will be
manifest.

22. And man is created unto that end, that he should reveal the Mystery of it,
and to bring the wonders to Light and into Forms, after the eternal Wisdom.

23. Now if he shall do so and burn thus in a threefold fire, then the true
Spirit in whom the Angelical Image sticks, is in great pains, and in great
danger, for he walks in a very narrow path.

24. For he has two friends which still draw him, each will be in the Image,
and bring his quality into it as the inner fire, and also the external fire:
The inner Kingdom of the fury, and also the outer earthly Kingdom of the
Mirror of this world, and thus the true Image sticks in the midst of the
pressure.

25. For the Inner Kingdom will reveal the wonders through the external.

26. But because it is too sharp, then the external kingdom flies from the
Inner, and reaches after the means, as after the Image which stands in the
freedom of God, and so involveth her self into the Image, for all reaches
after the heart of God, and after the Center of the Joy Kingdom.

27. Now there lies a necessity upon the Image, to defend her self, and not to
let the earthly guest come in, much less the fiery one, and yet it is born out
of both, as the life out of the fire, and the wonders out of the external.

28. Therefore it is much required of man that he lead a temperate sober life,
and not to be pampered too much with the external Kingdom, else it makes an
habitation in the Noble Image.

29. And herein we understand the mighty strife in man, about Gods Image; for
there are three which fight about her, as first, the severe fiery life, and
then the Divine Life, and thirdly the earthly Life; thus the Noble Image
sticks in the midst and is drawn by these three.

30. Now it is needful for him that he hide himself with Faith in the Mystery
of Hope, and let him stand still in that Mystery.

31. Where the Devil in the Inner fiery life, still rides forth into the outer
earthly life, in pride, covetousness, and falsehood over the noble Image, and
will bring her into the fire and anguish life, and breaks her.

32. For he still supposes that the place of this world is his Kingdom, he
will not endure any other Image in it.

33. Now falls the Noble Image into Crosses, Affliction, into Anguish and
Misery, and here belongs a strif thereto, to fight about the Noble Garland of
Gods Kingdom.

34. Hence arise Prayers, that the Image goes out continually out of the
in-brought earthly Being, and out of the proud hellish abominations with
praying, and still enters into Gods life in his Love.

35. Thus the true Image still Mortifieth the earthly Adam, and also the
hellish proud Devil, and must still stand like a Warrior.

36. And the most useful thing for her is, That she wrap her self up in
patience, and throw her self under the Cross, and still spring up in Love.

37. For that Love is her sword, wherewith she strikes at the Devil and
expeleth the earthly Being; she has never another sword wherewith to defend
her self, but only the meek water of eternal life, which does not please the
proud furious Spirit of fire, for it is poison unto him, and he flies from it.

38. Now if we will speak rightly of the Tree of Christian Faith then we say,
its Root stands, in Mystery of hope, its growth stands in Love, and its
Body in the comprehension of Faith.

39. That is, where the Image presses in, with her earnest desire into Gods
Love, and comprehends Gods entitie, that is, Christ's Body, now this is the
Body in which the Tree stands, grows, and springs up, and bears fruit
in Patience, all these belong to the Angelical World.

40. They are the Food of the Soul on which she feeds and refreshes her
fiery life, that it is changed into the light of meekness.

41. And thus the Tree grows in Gods Paradise, whom the outward man knows
not, and no Reason comprehends it.

42. But it is well known to the Noble Image, and is revealed unto her then
when the external life breaks, and after him follow all his works in the
Mystery of hope, into which he has sowed.

43. Therefore let all those which travail like Pilgrims in the Way of God,
think that they must not look for good and jolly days in this world, in worldly
honor for affliction, contempt and persecution, will wait on them hourly.

44. He is here only in a vail of misery, and must continually stand in the
fight; For the Devil goes about him as a roaring Lion, he raises all his
children of wickedness against him.

45. He is counted a fool, his Brethren will not acknowledge him, his mothers
house makes a mock of him and despises him.

46. He goes along, and sows in affliction, and tormenteth himself; but
there is no body which takes notice of him, or that does take it to heart:
every one thinks his own folly does plague him so.

47. Thus is he hid in the World, for he is not of the World with his noble
Image, but is born out of God.

48. He sows in affliction and reapeth in Joy, but who can express his Glory
which he has to receive for a reward? Or who can speak of the victorious
Garland which he gets?

49. Who can express the Crown of the Virgin of Gods wisdom which the Virgin of
Gods wisdom puts on him? Where is such a beauty which exceeds Heaven?

50. O Noble Image, art thou not an Image of Gods holy Trinity, in whom God
himself dweleth? God puts on thee his fairest ornament that thou should
rejoice in him eternally.

51. What is the Being of this World, it is corruptible and brings man only
into anguish, perplexity and misery, besides into Gods wrath, and breaks the
fair Image in him, and puts a vizard on him?

52. O What a shame will it be unto that man who shall appear on the Judgment
day of God with a beastly Image, besides that what follows, in which he is to
abide for ever!

53. Here begins a penitet me, it repents me, here will be the sighiug and
howling about the lost talent which may never be attained unto.

54. Where the Image shall stand in eternity before the Devils, and do what the
terrible Prince Lucifer will have.

The Eighth Chapter.
1. MY dear seeking and desirous mind which art hungry and thirsty after Gods
Kingdom, pray take notice of the ground which is shew-unto thee.

2. It is not so easy a matter to become the Child of God, as Babell teaches,
where Consciences are lead into Histories, and are courteously tickled with
Christ's sufferings and death, where Remission of sins is taught Historically.

3. Like unto a worldly judgment, where a man's crime is remitted graciously
though the man abide a Rogue in his heart; but it is no such thing here.

4. God will not have hippocrites, he does not take away sins from us, because
we depend upon knowledge, and comfort our selves with Christ's sufferings, and
abide yet in our consciences in the Abominations.

5. It is said you must be new born again or you shall not see the Kingdom of
God.

6. That a man should please himself with Christ's sufferings and death and
apply it unto him, but is unregenerated, with his will, in the Adamical will,
he does as one who comfort himself, that his lord will bestow his land upon
him, not considering that he is not his son, and he has promised that his son
alone should have it, as it is here.

7. If thou will possess thy lords land and have it for a propriation, then
you must become a true son unto him, for the son of the maidservant does not
inherit with the free born, the son of the History is a stranger.

8. Thou must be born out of God in Christ, that you be a natural son, then art
thou the Child of God and an heir of the sufferings and death of Christ.

9. And Christ's death is thy death, his resurrection out of the grave is thy
resurrection, his ascension into Heaven is thy ascension, and his eternal
Kingdom is thy Kingdom.

10. If thou art born his true son out of his flesh and blood, then art thou an
heyr of all his Goods, else thou can not be Christ's Child and heyr.

11. As long as the earthly Kingdom sticks in thine Image, then art thou the
earthly of corrupted Adam, no hippocrisy avai^eth, give as good words as thou will.

12, Yet art thou a stranger and Gods Goods do not belong unto thee unless thou
returnest with the lost son unto the Father, with a true repentance for thy
lost Inheritance.

13. Thou must go out with thy spirit of thy will out of the earthly life, and
break the earthly will which payneth the mind and the spirit of the will, as
to forsake a possessed Treasure in which the spirit of the will was born, and
thou must enter into Gods Will.

14. There you sow your seed into Gods Kingdom, and art new born in God as a
fruit which grows on Gods Acre, for thy will receives Gods Power, Christ's
body, and a new body grows unto thee in God.

15. Then art thou Gods child, and Christ's goods belong unto thee, and his
merit is thy merit, his sufferings, death and resurrection all thine; thou art
a member of his body, and his Spirit is thy Spirit, and guides thee on the
true way, and whatsoever thou do, thou do it to God.

16. Thou sowest in this World and reapest in Gods Heaven, thou art Gods wonder
work, and revealest in the earthly life his wonders and drawest them with thy
spirit of thy will into the holy Mystery.

17. Thus observe it ye coveteous, ye proud, ye envious, ye false Judges, ye
wicked men, which bring your wills and desires into earthly goods, into moneys,
into pleasures of this World, and money and goods you esteem to be your
treasure, and you set your desire upon them and yet you would be accounted Gods
children.

18. You stand and dissemble before God as if he remitteth the sins and you
continue with your Image in Adams coat, in Adams flesh you comfort your selves
with Christ's sufferings, and you are me er hippocrites.

19. You are not Gods children, you must be new born in God if you will be
children, otherwise you deceive your selves with your dissembling, which paint
to you a false color.

20. They teach, and are not known of God, neither are they sent to teach, they
do it for the bellies sake, and for worldly honors sake, and are the great
whores in Babel, which dissemble with God with their lips, and with the heart
and spirit of the willl they serve the Dragon in Babel.

21. Dear Mind; if thou will be Gods Child, then prepare thy self for
Temptation and affliction; it is not easy to enter into a child's life,
especially if Reason lies captivated in the earthly kingdom.

22. She must be broken and the will must be gone from Reason, he must sow
himself into Gods Kingdom, in a humble obedience, as Corn is sowed into an
Acre; he must make himself in Reason as dead, and submit unto God, then the new
Fruit grows in Gods Kingdom:

23. Thus man stands in a Threefold life, and all belongs unto God.

24. The Inner fiery Essences of the first Principle are incorrporated with the
new Body in Christ, that they spring up in Christ's Flesh and Blood out of Gods
Will, and their Fire is Gods Fire, out of which burns Love, Meekness and
Humility.

25. Where the Holy Spirit goes forth and helps him in the Combat against
earthly Reason, also against the corrupt flesh and the Devils will; his yoke of
the Earthly will grows easier unto him; but he must continue in the fight of
this world.

26. For unto the Earthly life, belongs sustenance, which he must seek, but
must not hang his will and heart thereon.

27. He must put his confidence in God, and his Earthly Reason, still steppeth
into doubt, that he will come short, she will always see God, and yet cannot,
or God does not dwell in an Earthly Kingdom; but in himself.

28. Thus Reason must be forced into hope because she cannot see God.

29. There Doubt runs against Faith, and will destroy Hope, then the earnest
Will must fight with the true Image, against the Earthly Reason, here it does
smart, and great sadness ensues, especially if Reason looks on the course of
this world and thinks her spirit of her will to be foolish, in regard of the
course of this world.

30. Here it is said, Be Sober, Watch, Fast, and Pray; that is subdue the
Earthly Reason, and mortify her, that Gods Spirit may find place in you.

31 If he appears he soon overcomes Earthly Reason and looks on the will
in the anguish, with his love and sweetness, where always is begotten a fair
twig out of the Tree of Faith.

32. And all tribulation and affliction serves for the good of Gods Children;
for as often as God permits him to be brought into anguish and calamities,
then they always stand in the Birth of a new twig out of the Tree of Faith.

33. When the Spirit of God appears again, then he always rayseth a new
growth, at which the Noble Image highly rejoices.

35. The first serious assault must do it, that the Earthly Tree may be
conquered, and the Noble Corn be sowed into Gods Acre, that it may learn to
know the Earthly man.

35. For when the Will of God receives light, then the mirror beholds it
self, the one essence sees the other in the light, and thus the whole man
finds himself in himself, and knows what he is, which he cannot know in the
earthly Reason.

36. Therefore let no man think that the Tree of Christian Faith is seen or
known in the Kingdom of this World, external Reason does not know it.

37. Although the fair Tree stands in the inner man, yet the outer earthly
Reason doubts of it, for the Spirit of God is a folly to her because she
cannot comprehend him.

38. And although it happens, that many times the Holy Ghost reveals
himself in the external mirror (or glass) that the outward life rejoices
much at it, and quaketh for Joy and supposes, now have I gotten that worthy
guest, now I will believe it, yet there is no perfect constancy in it.

39. For the Spirit of God persevereth not always in the earthly quality he
must have a pure vessel; and if he goes into his principle as into the true I
mage, then the external life grows pusilanimous and timorous.

40. Therefore the noble Image must still be in fight aginst the external life
of Reason the more she fights, the greater grows the fair Tree, because she
works with God.

41. For as an earthly tree grows in wind, rain, cold, and heat, so does the
Tree of the Image of God under crosses and tribulation anguish, and torment in
ignominy and contempt and springs up in Gods Kingdom, and in patience bears
fruit.

42. We knowing thus much, let us strive for it, not to be kept back by any
fear or terror, because we shall enjoy it eternally and reap that what we have
sowed in anguish and pain, which will be an eternal comfort to us:

Amen.
Finis hujus tractatus.
Anno 1620 mense Maji. Soli Deo Gloria.
Written by the Author JACOB BEHMEN.
FINIS.

