BLOODY PLOTS Against the PARLIAMENT, the CITY, and the KINGDOM, AND Against
the godly Protestants, and such as seek the peace of the Kingdom.

And a Letter found in Martins Church, on Sunday, May 31. 1646. about a
general rising threatened.

This is Licensed according to Order.

LONDON: Printed for E. P. June 4. 1646.

Bloody Plots against the Parliament, the City, and the Kingdom.
THe crimson hearted Jesuit (as if tyranny was the only way to be happy) bids
Kill, Murder, Root out, and destroy the Protestants, and therefore barbarously
cries out Blood, Fire; Let the Heretics be cut off, and Rome shall (like a
grateful Matron) Canonize you: If you spare neither man, woman, nor child, you
shall be remembered by the higher dignities, this is the damnable doctrine of
the Papists, that so much envy against the Parliament, City, and Kingdom.

Many bitter Cups have been prepared for London, yet the dregs given to those
that mixed the poison; and thus; Let all thine enemies perish O Lord.

What plotting had wear the beginning of the Parliament, to get the Lord
Strafford (Deputy of Ireland, out of the Tower: And first, men in arms
appointed to break in, and a second, and their commotions to follow it till he
was rescued; and yet, by a Letter, it being discovered, then tools were
brought unto him, by which he cut the hand from bars, and a Vessel was
prepared to have met him on Tower Hill to have escaped, but all was prevented;
Then Articles were prepared against some Members to take away their lives,
because they Acted so faithfully and courageously, for the Kingdom that
entrusted them, and the like was against some godly Ministers, and others; The
Papists, bloody Bishops, all this while went Jesuitically on in their designs,
to make a strength to rest in this Kingdom, as they had barbarously murdered
so many in Ireland, and the Lord Herbert of Rag^^^^, now Earl of Glamorgan,
made his house in Wales a strong Garrison, where ^^te the council of Jesuits,
and to this day do still continue and order the business there for the
Papists, as the Lords do at Oxford for the King: they have (to this day) their
Agents in all parts of the Kingdom, and Scouts and Spies, and do exceedingly
dis^urbe our peace.

A young man, that was a Tailor in White-crosse-s^^eet, heard some, that there
was a Plot to murder diverse of the Parliament men, and those who was their
chief men in the City, and the rest of the work would be the more easily
done; but they espying him, drew their Swords, he ran, they after him, and
one of them run his Rapier through his cloak, short coat and breeches, hardly
escaping with his life, and before he could Alarm any to pursue them, they were
vanished.

A Letter was intercepted, which declared the manner how the Papists and
Malignants had ordered the business in their intentions, and given directions
to massacre the City, viz. That as several Churches, where the most populous
meetings are, that on a Lords day appointed, when they were all at Church, and
unprepared then to rise, and with several parties fall on the Congregations at
the said several places, and put them all to the sword, but a strong guard
being that day in all parts of the City, they durst not attempt their intended
design.

Then they fell to particular ways of Acting, as amongst the rest, a Cavalier,
Jesuited Rogue, took the plaster of a Plague sore, with the matter on it, and
enclosed it in a Letter, directed to John Pym Esquire, telling him, that he was
sick of the Plague, and had sent him that, and that if it went not to his
heart, his dagger should, this was brought to him to the house of Commons by a
Porter, but (through Gods mercy) did no hurt at all.

And to act their designs the better, first Lunsford, then Byron, were made
Lieutenants of the Tower, who were notable Agents for the Popish party, and
have since been there great Champions, the one at Ragland with the Jesuits,
the other at Chester with the Irish Rebels; but these, by the consent of the
King and Parliament were soon turned out, which was a great mercy, but they
are still in arms against the Parliament, and the very nest of Romish frogs
swarm, in Wales, with them.

They never rested til they had raised a war against the Parliament, and by
men, arms, and moneys, got into the Kings Camp, and have murdered many godly
Protestants, and still labor, by all their wiles and subtilties to ruin the
people of God, but the Lord has still effectuated all their counsels, and
turned their bloody devises upon their own pates.

They have sought by treachery to have had many Towns and Garrisons betrayed to
them, as Bristol, Abington, and others, where Digby and the rest of them have
been shamefully foiled; yet some they have gotten by treachery, as Waymouth and
others, which they have not bin able to keep, but have shortly after been
beaten out again, with very great loss.

They have sought by all their wiles and stratagems, to have London betrayed to
them, corrupted the Lord Major, who for his malignancy was ordered to be
committed to the Tower, and the malignant Recorder Sir Tho. Gardener, fled to
the King.

Then they plotted with Tompkins, Chall^n^r, and the rest of that conspiracy,
to destroy the City, but the chief plotters were apprehended and hanged.

And foreign forces were sent for, one army of P^pists from the Duke of
Loraine, another of Irish Rebels, but those Irish Rebels were but a moth and
a canker to the rest many thousand of those murdering Villains have bin slain
in England, for there is justly a great heart burning against them, especially
for their bloody massacres at Boulton, Middlewith, and elsewhere, and we hanged
13 of those Popish Irish Rebels at Shrewsbury, Prince Rupert then hanged 13
godly Protestants for them.

The plot also carried on with Mr. Ryley (whose simplicity instead of advancing
him, was his overthrow) the Scout-Master-Generall of London, that design of
their working with him, they were defeated in.

But they had other ways besides all these, and those very subtle, the
Malignants about London, got many hands to a petition pretending for peace, and
by that way endeavored by petitioning the parliament, to have made an uprore,
but they were quelled.

Many treaties have been propounded, which were only plots for the carrying
on of their designs against us; amongst the rest, when the Commissioners were
within the Line, and after sat at Uxbridge, and gathered, and carried away
much moneys from London, and gained upon the neutrall affections.

Then one Herne a malignant Lawyer came up, and having power from the King,
caused a common hall to be called, and the City met at Guild, hall, where some
malignants were discovered in Gowns that were no Common Council men; amongst
the rest a Proctor of Paul's.

Others brought Writs and Proclamations from the King, who lay here as
leaguer-Spyes, and once a month, or so, went to Oxford. One Kniston one of
them, who was discovered, and hanged before the Exchange.

But their petitioning by the Malignant party here of men failing, then the
women they petitioned, presuming they might take upon them the more liberty of
their tongues, and they would have made a mutiny that way; which not taking,
because suppressed by the care of the Parliament, then they sent their servants
and thought to have made an insurrection by the London prentices, but the
greatest part were better qualified, and those who labored it, were soon
over-powred, and still God preserved the City and the Parliament.

They got Agents into the Lord Genrals Quarters, who blew up his Train, and
then his Army should have been fallen upon, and at other times did us much
mischief, yet God preserved him, that they never conquered him. They corrupted
Hotham and his son, that they opposed the Lord Fairfax when they should have
supplied him, which was the breaking of the northern Forces, yet God preserved
him, and those two treacherous wretches both were beheaded at Tower Hill.

They had Agents to raise Forces in the Association for them, but were several
times subdued in Kent, diverse plotters taken: And the like at Lin Regis, where
Master Le Strange, being apprehended, was tried in London by a Council of
war, and condemned to dye; and still God preserved the Association. They have
several times complotted with their Agents in London, to have massacred the
City, to have murdered the Parliament, and cut the throats of the most godly
and sincere Protest^nts, and have set out to themselves who shall act in their
several parts, and to bring to effect all this upon us and then who shall have
their shares in plundering such and such streets, and such and such houses,
being resolved to ravish the Citizens wives and daughters, and take all their
estates, and possess themselves of their houses, and murder their husbands and
the godly Ministers, and place Jesuited, Episcopal, Papal, deboist fellows
in their stead, even such as should applaud all these bloody and wicked
actions, and encourage them therein.

And we may remember how the last year they had their Agents here in London to
fire diverse parts of the City. Some houses were fired near the Magazine at
Guild Hall, others in Newgate-Market, and others in the Old Bailey, where had
they not been quenched, they had burnt to Newgate and the Fleet, in both which
places are many of the Cavaliers and a fire was begun (not long since) in the
Fleet prison, and diverse other places in London, as near Tower Hill, and in
Southwarke, and other places were the last year set on fire, to the great
loss of many honest godly people.

When Sir Thomas Fairfax had newly been entered General with an handful of his
Army, then they plotted to have Abingdon, Plymouth, and diverse others of our
Garrisons betrayed to them, but failed, and at Nayseby they were confident to
have destroyed him, yet God gave us then a most glorious victory by him.

They labored to decide between the Scots and us, and the Presbyterians and
Independants, and so to get in with one party to destroy the other; and in the
acting hereof they have had very cunning Jesuits, but God has hitherto
blasted all their plots, and it is to be wished of all that love peace, that
the more they labor to foment, the more we should strive to unite.

But there is again another plot in hand, and diverse of them that are gone
beyond Sea, say, that they have a party in London for them, that are so
considerable, that they hope to conquer us still, and at last to have their
ends: Sir Jacob Ashley when he was taken, told our men, that they should yet
conquer us by our own divisions: But all this while, the plot against the City
goes on, and that no less then fire and sword to burn the City in diverse
places, to break open the prison doors, and rise at the same time, set the
City in an uprore, and presently make a massacre upon the City and the
Parliament; and therefore the Parliament have thought fit to publish an Order
for the turning of the Malignants out of the Line; and one Neale was committed
close prisoner to the Provost Marshiall of the Court Martial.

On the Lords day, May 31. 1646. a Letter was found in the Parish Church of
Martins in the fields near Charing-Crosse, which was showed to the honorable
the Earl of Salisbury, and others, where was written thus:

If the King come not immediately, we will all rise presently, etc.

FINIS.

