A Rope Treble-twisted, FOR JOHN TAILOR THE WATER-POET.

Or Rather For his Malignant friends in London, which make use of his to Name
to slander and abuse the PARLIAMENT, and well-affected party, in their
Pernicious Pamphlets; and particularly, Mr. JOHN BOOKER, a Man of known
honesty, and one who scorns to Calculate for the Meridian of OXFORD.

Snarle not, Malignants: If you do, here is Rope
Enough for you, and all that love the Pope.
LONDON, Printed according to Order, of G. Bishop. September. 27. 1644.

A Rope Treble-twisted, FOR JOHN TAILOR THE WATER-POET, etc.
THere is another vile Pamphlet come abroad under the name of John Tailor, the
Title running after this manner: John Tailor being yet unhanged sends greeting
to John Booker, etc. Now you must suppose that this Pamphlet came from Oxford,
or from some such desperate place, that dares own a Treasonous Calumny
against the Parliament: But I am confident, that if you wander through those
many confused sheets of audacious Aulicus, or those infinite other pernicious
Papers, the very vomit and filth of Malignant Presses, thrown at the very
faces of the most High and Sacred Senate in Christendom, and you shall find
that this piece of Ribaldry framed in London, (I dare boldly say in London)
has out-stript them all: For whereas others have delivered themselves more
mysteriously and closely, yet plainly enough; this wretch is more downright
than any, and spirits his venom most contemptibly, without fear or wit. I
petition The most High and Honorable Court of Parliament, to take this into
consideration, and give order that enquiry be made concerning the Author and
Printer^ It is supposed that the Author of the many-leav'd Pamphlet called
Sacra Nemesis, should pen it: But whosoever it be that made it, it is evident
enough that a London Press sent it abroad: I shall name no body, lest being
forewarned they be fore-armed, but remain in silence till a fit opportunity.

This I have said in earnest; but because it is good now and then in these sad
times, to be in jest; we will suppose that very Knave, not merry Knave, John
Tailor, to be the Author, and that it might be Printed in Oxford, though it be
known it was in London very featly, and madly, and odly, and ungodly penned and
contrived. For it seems this Fox, this Daniel intden, this Scar-crow Jack
Tailor, strives not so much to clip Mr. Bookers credit with his Popish Sizzars,
as ^o wound the Parliament, and all those that are well-affected to their Cause
and just Quarrel. First he calls the Parl^ament, A mere Conventicle, or not
the shade of a shadow of what it should be My Masters, is it not time to look
about us, and visit our new, Oxford in London, I mean the Viperous Nursery in
Ald^rsgate street, and her Sister in iniquity upon Holborn-Hill? It seems the
Belialists have left off prying into the Controversies of Purgatory, and Limbus
Patrum, and the reconciling of Luther, and Calvin, to Bellarmine and Maldonat,
Protestantisme to Popery, the Church of England, to the Church of Rome and
un^^rtaken another Bellum Episcopale, a wa^re with paper-pellets against honest
Mr. Booker, in the behalf of John Tailor, the Water-Poet; or rather in the
behalf of Popery: But how can they hope for success now Canterbury their
Reverend Father in -- halter is like to be hanged? Me thinks his very Diary
should be enough to convince the veryest Sot in Fly or Peter-House. Well, well,
Jack Tailor, thou art a brave fellow; for thy Water-workes being now of some
standing in Bolley's Library the Divines will are long begin to quote thee; for
they maintain Controversies for thee already; but their false Comments are too
too obscean and railing against the State, savouring more of scurrility and
malice, than reason or wit: And on the other side, according to former custom,
and the later of Maxims of Parasiticall Theologasters, (one whereof was this;
That it was better to be a Spaniell at Court for a while, than to Kennell in a
Coll^dge all ones life time) their flattering of the King, Q^eene, and Court in
wicked ways, is as shameful and ridiculous as ever. But I must let them alone
(it seems) and stick close to my Single Water-man in the Title page; for it
seems the best heads in Peter House will amount to no more but John Tailor.

I will not ask you, John Tailor, of how long standing you have been in the
Malignant Corporation of Peter-house, nor whether you are the Rat that was
hanged lately in a Boat upon a ^ar of Oars, or the Ghost of that meanest of
watery inhabitants, poor John at Oxford; but I perceive thy writing relishes of
his Malignant spirit: Thou strivest to delude, and make as believe the King,
the Queen, the Lords, (when I mention them I do not reckon Harry Jermyn)
Clergy, University, Army, Magistrates, and Commons, are true Protestant
pen-proofe. But why then was his Majesty's Signet in a Commission to the Irish
Rebels, to cut the throats of all true Protestants there? and another
Commission sent to the Marquess of Ormond to make a Cessation with those
wretches, which to any man not void of sense and reason, did at the first, and
since also Experimentally has appeared most destructive to the Protestant
Cause? For the Rebels by this means, have had leisure so to furnish and
provide themselves, that they appear now in the Eield more in number, and
better armed, than ever they could possibly have been. How can the Queen be
pen-proofe, after all these Murderings and Massacrings perpetrated in England
and Ireland, by her Counsels, wherein also she was and is a principal Agent,
when as in the very height of her pomp and power, she was neither pen-proofe,
nor tongue-proofe, even amongst her own Courtiers and Parasites? How many dry
jests have been broken upon Her and Harry on the Public Stage? As, I prithee
where shall we find Jermyn? -- At the Queens Arms; Add to this the bandy
Songs sung ordinarily at Court, wherein Hall and Mall met to make Rhyme; and
another beastly Song, not fit for a woman's ears; which if any of that Sex can
delight in, a man may guess at the Constitution without Calculating her
Nativity: And because now it is no time to dally, when they dare be so
impudently abusive on the other side; as they unjustly charge us with many
falsehoods most basely; I think it cannot be amiss to repay them again with
truth, though I intended for Honors sake, if there were any hope of
returning, never to have put it to the common view: I will therefore Print
Harry's delight, the limber Gentleman (I mean) that rode away hence in
Spanish-leather boots, with a little more haste then ordinary, having a
Parliament Spur in his Conscience.

JERMYNS SONNET.
Pox take your Philters, and your Charms,
No Witchcraft like a Lovers Arms;
Nor any fond device to bind
So sure, as cling, aad lie close twined:
A certain Spell, that will Enchaunt,
Is off r home, and keep the haunt.
Then Chemists, out upon your trash,
Your letter-coniur'd Balder-dash,
Your Amulets, charmed bracelets, rings
Valued with the Crowns of Kings;
Your Calcined, parcells of dead men,
Sperme caught from Cocks treading the Hen,
And used I know not how: Pull down
Your Stills, and ^ease to cheat the Town.
But let them stand to make Elix^r
For us Madams that cry Quick-Sir,
Or you will h^are on it; because we then
Shall find no differences in Men.
And will it not be strange alack,
That since my Lord has a weak back,
We may not diet him or his Page!
It Will put us all into a rage,
And make us take our Grooms, by stealth,
To breed base blood in the common wealth.
It Is fit (Sirs) then, you let them stand,
To keep the Gentry of the Land
In able plight, that they may serve,
As men of the more solid Nerve,
And strenuously go through stitch
Without a Lever at the breech.
I hope John Tailor, you will not be angry that I have broached this piece of
Closet-conversation: I have printed thus much to show you that her Majesty is
not altogether pen-proofe: And I could also make a long Discourse to show you,
that neither you Peers, Clergy, University, Army, Magistrates, are Pen-proofe,
because they are neither Parliament-proofe, nor Reason-proofe: But my
principal aim is to take notice of the many villainies, and intolerable
abuses, heaped up in thy vile Pamphlet against the Parliament, and those that
are well affected: But as you have a trick of Vilifying such men; so also of
Magnifying those of your own partee, though never so bloody and desperate. And
therefore thou art in great wrath with Mr. Booker for calling Rupert plain
Rupert, without addition of His Highness, and for giving him the terms of
Saladine and Sarazen, which thou say are Turkish Titles; and therefore I
say, they are the fittest for him, who has Murdered and Plundered himself into
a capacity for the worst of Titles, to express his Cruelty.

Thou rail^st against Mr. May, Wither, Britannicus, the Scout, the poor
innocent Dove, and say that they are not able so much as to scratch or touch
thy reput^tion, or Aulicus and Naworth. Alas, thy reputation is neither to be
scratch't, nor touched, it was lost long since upon the Bankeside: And as for
thy Abe^tors in Ely-house and Peter-house, the wretched unchurched Priests
there, they never were in repute any where but at Rome, and the Court; which
(by none of the Simplest Conversions) might ver^ well have been called the
Court of Rome: Aulicus has utterly lost his credit both with friends and foes,
in so basely belying the business at York, and setting them to make Bon-fires
in Oxford for a victory, when the Malignant Forces were shattered into an
impossibility of re-uniting, and qui e beaten out of the Field, which has made
the Planet Mercury very dull ever since in his Influence, and given a Quictus
est to George Naworth, for ever daring to Prognosticate again in the behalf of
Popery, Tyranny, and Rebellion against the State. Thou say that Naworth
never knew of the Printing thy former Book answered by Mr. Booker; but that
Pamphlet was part of the fruits of hungry George's old malice, inspired into
thy detestable brains: And if thou should fail, every Centurian, that is,
every scandalous and Malignant Priest, that deserves a Name in another
Centurie, can find a Pen to Apologize for Naworth, and vilify honest Mr.
Booker: But it is no small argument of his Integrity, to be ill-spoken of by
thee, and them.

But I shall leave taking notice of any thing else in thy vile, base, and
scandalous Pamphlet, besides that filth and venom which thou, (thou Counterfeit
John Tailor) have vomited out against the Parliament. I much wonder that any
Press in London should dare to be defiled with such lewd, and abominable
stuff, and with what confidence any durst write these words, under the Name of
John Tailor, against the State. Your Nick name Parliament does not only
maintain and retain a scattered heard of scribbling villains, but also they
do allow must respect, favor, countenance, and means, to him that can lie,
rail, and slander most: therefore I conclude, if they were a Parliament, the
Sacred Name and Honor of His Majesty should not be suffered to be abused so
transcendently (beyond all precedents) but that they would by Law and
Parliamentary Authority, send ye all to Gregory's market, and feed Crows with
your traitorous mischievous heads, and filthy, treacherous, rebellious,
stinking quartered Carcases; therefore no Parliament. And then a little lower
these words follow: But as they are, and the condition they now are in, they
have no other way of supportation, but what proceeds from the black mouths of
your z^alous, Atheistical long winded Preachers (or Tantologicall prating
Lectures) with the aid of your holy Tribe of accursed Pamphletmongers: It is
you that, with your spiritual and temporal damnable devotions, and infernal
practices, do uphold the usurped dignity of that Idol. Dagon-Senate, etc.
Therefore it is no marvel, if they maintain you, for you are the only props
that uphold them; when you give over lying, them their Honor will lie in the
dust, and when they fall you will be in danger of sterving: For as Phocas by
the murder of his Master (Mauritius the Roman Emperor) gate the Empire to
himself, but was held in an odious estimation amongst all good men, so that his
usurped ill got Estate stood tottering, and his life in daily hazard (by the
friends of the assassinated Emperor) at the same time, the Bishop of Rome
(Boniface) ambitously sought to be chief and Universal Bishop over all
Christian Churches, which pride of his was opposed by all the Godly and zealous
Bishops in the world: But at last the Murderer Phocas, and the aspiring Pope
made a bargain, which was, that the Pope should by his dreadful thunderbolts
of Excommunication, aff ight the people into obedience with the Emperor; so
the Emperor (by force of Arms) would bestow the Primacy of the whole earth
upon the Pope; this match was made, and the most significant application of it
is, that by as good right as Phocas reigned, by the like right does Bookers
Parliament rule, and by the same right do those forementioned villains, and
they may defend each other by murder, Sacrilege, Ambition, Treason, Rebellion,
and ruin of this ancient, famous, late flourishing, and now most wretched and
miserable England.

Was ever such language as this vented against the honor of a Parliament! I
once more petition that Honorable Assembly, that Order may be given, for the
enquiring out the Author and vender of this unreasonable railing paper; and I
question not, but they will be quickly found out, to be made an example to
others, who drive a trade with these, and such like pernicious Pamphlets; which
usually sell so much the better, by how much the more audaciously they
dishonor the Parliament. I thoughts Master Booker had set forth a Cordial
sufficient to cure all their Malignant sits: But I perceive that the best
Physic a vailes little without a Method and orderly course: Therefore upon
better advice, it is thought convenient, that all desperate Malignants should
be thus handled; first, because the Sign is in the Heart, let them blood in
the Basilicke vein, Afterward, Rs. Half an Ounce of Spanish Figgs, codled at
Court in an Italian Skillet. Of the quint-essence of Cock-sparrowes, according
to the Queen Mothers prescript, one scruple and a half. Gelly of Harts-horne,
of Iermyns own making, one Dram. Protestant Religion, Root and Branch, ana.
one handful. Plundered Penny-Royall, one bagfull. Of Time, no less then Three
years Rebellion in Ireland, and as many in England. ana.


Boil these in as much as you can get of His Majesty's tears of Repentance
for bloodshed, over an Oxford Bon-fire, the length of a Cathedral Letany:
Then strain it through the Cape of Cottingtons Cloak, and at length season it
with a grain or two of Northern News, and so make a a clear purging Potion:
Let every stubborn and stupefyed Malignant, that is troubled with a
Congelation of Popery in his Brains, drink three ounces of this with due
observance, and I question not, but it will purge so effectually, that their
bodies will ever hereafter, be the better prepared for Master Bookers most
considerable and wholesome Cordial; the use whereof I still commend unto them,
as most convenient after this so necessary a Purge.

FINIS.

