A Short TREATISE of the QUIET of the SOUL.
CHAP. I. Of the natural Conditions of our heart, and how it must be Governed.
YOU ought to know that God has given you a very noble heart, only created to
love him; and in his love to be melted and consumed: By his love you shall
easily perform what you will, and being enamored with virtue, any difficulty
shall be soon overcome: Whereas contrariwise, if by your own forces you attempt
to do any thing, you shall effectuate nothing. Let the intention of your heart
be well grounded, in such sort, that the exterior operation do proceed from the
interior.

And though penance and penal Exercises be laudable, when they be moderated
with discretion answerable to the condition of the Persons by whom they be
wrought; yet very frequently the better part of them evaporate into vain
complaisance without any profit; wholly loosing your labor, unless they be
Ruled and Governed by that which is interior.

Man's life upon Earth is a continual warfare, as holy Job witnesses: In this
War you must watch, and your watching must consist in settling, purifying and
quieting of your Spirit in all your motions. When any sudden storm of passions
and sensual unquietness arises in your own Soul, be always ready with speed to
settle and pacify the same, in not granting it too much Liberty, to start or
wander out of the right way.

Observe this so often as unquietness shall assault you, either in Prayer, or
out of Prayer: Then shall you be able to pray well, when in this manner you
know how to work well. And note, that when you practice the aforesaid
observation, you do it without force or violence, but rather with pleasure: For
your principal Exercise must be to quiet your Soul and Heart, and suffer them
not to be disordered, or to stray, but that always they be at rest.

CHAP. II. Of the care which the Soul ought to have to settle her self in
quietness.
WHerefore before all things you are to place this peaceable Watchman and Guard
over your senses, and thereby without toil and travel you shall be led to great
matters with great quietness and security; by which quietness, sent by God
Almighty, you shall Watch, Pray, Obey, and suffer injuries without opposition:
Yet till you be satisfied in your self, you are to sustain some labor, for want
of practice herein, but your Soul shall rest quieted and comforted in
whatsoever contradiction befalls you, and every day more and more your spirit
shall be quieted: And if at any time you find your self so afflicted that you
cannot attain to this quietness, then have recourse to Prayer, wherein you must
persevere, after the example of our Savior, who thrice prayed in the Garden,
thereby to teach you, that all your refuge and trust must be in Prayer; and
depart not from it, till you find your Will conformable to Gods Will, being
pacified, and reposed.

If you be employed in some corporal work, force not your self to make an end
of it to soon, nor limit your self with any time, in which it must be finished:
But rather work the same with ease and tranquillity; for your principal
intention must be to have God before your eyes, with great quietness, without
all kind of respect of contenting any other besides him: For if you make any
mixture of other affections, you shall soon perceive the vexation and
unquietness which in your Soul shall arise; so by falling down, and rising up
again, you shall observe and clearly see that all your hurt proceeds from
self-love, whilst we endeavor that all things be done conformable to our will,
and what otherwise falls out, does afflict, trouble and disquiet us.

CHAP. III. How this peaceable habitation may not be built on a sudden, but by
little and little.
TAke care thou never suffer thy heart to be troubled, sad, or altered, or
mingled with any things which may disquiet it, but labor always to keep it in
peace; for our Lord says, Blessed are the Peaceable: Which when you do, our
Lord will build a peaceable City in your Soul, and make it his house of
pleasure. What he requires of thee is only, that as often as thou stand up,
thou should sit down again; (that is) keep thy self quiet in all thy works,
thoughts, and motions. And as in one day a City is not built, so thou must not
think in one day to attain to this peace and inward rest, for it is our Lords
building, and he himself must make thee his House and Temple; otherwise thou
do labor in vain. And observe, that the principal Foundation of this is
Humility.

CHAP. IV. How the Soul must deprive her self of all comfort, for to attain to
this quietness and peace.
FOr to enter in by this door of Humility, thou must be earnest to embrace
tribulations, and esteem them as thy sisters, and wish to be despised of all
men, and that none do comfort thee but God: And let this be thy settled
persuasion, that only God is thy total Joy, and that all other things be Thorns
to thee: So that thou art to accustom thy Soul to be alone with God,
representing unto thy self, that if thou were led to a place where thou
should receive some disgrace and affront, thou would go willingly and
with joy to suffer it, being sure that God is with thee; and to wish or desire
no other honor than to do that which is to his Honor and Glory, and to suffer
for his Love. Thou must also force thy self to be glad when any one treats
thee with injurious words, despises or rebukes thee; for under this Cover,
rugged as the Bark of a Tree, lies hid a great Treasure. Tribulation well
suffered is a sort of Soap, that washes out all the dregs of our imperfections
and offenses.

Finally, thou art not to seek for Honor, nor yet that any love thee in this
life, nor make an account of thee: But if thou suffer with Christ Crucified,
beware of thy self as of an Enemy; follow not thy own Will, Judgments or
desires, if thou will not be cast away. To this purpose thou must be armed;
viz. for to defend thy self against thy self.

Where thy will desires to attain to any thing, although it seem very Holy,
yet represent this with a profound Humility before our Lord, beseeching him
that his Will may be done in thee. And let this be done with a hearty desire,
without any mixture of self-love, acknowledging thy small forces, and how
easily thou may be deceived by thy own opinions, that are shadowed with the
shape of Holiness, and indiscreet Zeal: Of which our Savior says, Beware of
the false Prophets, that come in sheepskins, and are ravening Wolves: By their
fruits you shall know them. Their fruits therefore are to leave behind them in
the Soul vexations, and unquietness.

Any thing that separateth us from Humility, and this inward peace and
quietness, under what color soever it be, it is a false Prophet, and a ravening
Wolf; for under the shape of a Sheep it comes to rob and deprive us of
Humility, and the quietness which is altogether necessary to him who intends
to profit: And it so falls out, that what has been gotten in many days, and
with much labor, is in little time lost and stolen by these Wolves; and the
more appearence any thing carries of Holiness, the better also must it be
examined, and with greater rest and inward quietness, as already has bin said.

And note, that if at any time thou chance to fail in these observations, be
not therefore troubled, but humble thy self in the Presence of our Lord, and
acknowledge thy weakness, and be advised against some other occasion: For it may
be our Lord permitted it should so fall out, to abate some secret Pride which
is in thee, unknown to thy self. And if at any time some sparks of vice do
touch thy Soul, be not therefore troubled, but vigilantly watch, and sweetly
draw thy Spirit aside; and settle it in quietness, in such sort that thou be
not troubled, or altered, neither overjoyful, nor heavy; but keep thy Soul
peaceably, and clean to God, whom thou shall find within thy self; assuring
thee that the Divine intention seeks nothing but thy profit.

CHAP. V. How the Soul must keep it self in a solitariness; that God may work
in it.
THou must make great account of thy Soul, since it is the Temple in which God
does lodge and remain. Make such account of it, that thou suffer it not to be
mingled with any other thing. Let thy attendance to our Lords coming be in
solitariness; for alone he desires to find thee, alone without thoughts, alone
without wishes or desires, alone even without thy own Will. Seek not
indiscreetly, but with the Council of thy Ghostly Father, for Crosses, to
suffer for God; but dispose thy self rather to suffer for his Love what
pleases him. Do not thy Will, but Gods will be done in thee. Let thy Will be
free, and united on all sides: My meaning is, that thou desire nothing; and if
thou desire any thing, desire it in that manner, that if it take not effect,
thou be not therefore afflicted; but that thy Spirit remain as quiet as if thou
desiredst nothing: Therein consists true liberty, that one be not tied to any
thing. God expects to find thy Soul alone, to work in it his wonders.

O Solitariness, in which is builded the high City of Jerusalem!

O Desert of Joy! O Wilderness wherein with great felicity we may enjoy the
Almighty!

Set not thy self to rest in this passage. Take off thy Shoes and enter, for
the Land is Holy.

Stay not to salute any Body by the way. Let the dead Bury the dead: For thou
go toward the Land of the living; Death has no part in thee.

CHAP. VI. Of the Prudence that must be used in loving our Neighbor, to the end
this Peace be not interrupted.
EXperience will teach thee, that this is the manifest way to life everlasting:
For the love of God and thy Neighbor shall be poured into thy Soul. I came,
says our Lord, to kindle fire on Earth, and my Will is that it burn. Although
the Love of God has no limits, yet the Love of our Neighbor has, in which
Moderation is to be used: For if you be not moderate and advised, it will be
your destruction; and by endeavoring to edify others, thou shall cast away thy
self. So thou must love thy Neighbor, that thy own Soul suffer no danger or
damage. Do not any thing only with that respect to give example to another, or
for to gain others: For hereby thou shall not reap much unto thy self. Do all
things simply and sincerely, to please God Almighty in them, without any other
regard. Think humbly of thy self in all thy works, and then thou shall perceive
how little thou art able to benefit others by them. See that thy Zeal of
gaining Souls be not such, that thou come thereby to lose thy peace and
quietness. Be thirsty and desirous that all men come to know the truth, which
thou do know, and that they be drunk with the Wine which God promises all
men, and gives good cheap. This thirst of thy Neighbors health thou must
entertain when thou have received it from our Lord; and not when thou have
procured it by thine own diligence and indiscreet Zeal: For being planted in
the solitude of thy heart and Soul by the Almighty, he will gather the fruit
when it shall please him. In the mean while see that thou sow nothing, but only
keep thy Soul always solitary, and tending toward God: For God willingly
finds the Soul solitary and loose on every side, thereby to bind and tie it
the stronger to himself. Suffer thou thy self to be tied, and dispose thy self
to sit idle in the quietness of thy Spirit, attending him which will come to
hire thee, Cast off all cares, and walk alone and free on every side, to the
end that God apparel thy Nakedness with himself; and thereby thou shall attain
to the felicity which thou can not imagine; and having forgot thy self, his
love only will live in thy Soul.

In conclusion, with all diligence (or rather without all diligence, which may
disturb or disquiet thy peace,) thou must pacify thy zealous intentions with
great moderation, whilst God preserves in thee all peace and tranquillity: For
such silence is more effectual than loud crying, and by this want of care, all
is provided and procured, that we would have, which in substance is nothing
else but a whole delivery of the Soul to God, being abstracted from all other
things, wherein thou must beware to think that of thy self thou art able to do
any thing; for it is God that must perform all, who requires nothing else of
thee toward this silence than that thou think humbly of thy self in his
presence, and that thou present to him thy Soul, separated and abstracted from
all Worldly things, with an inward hearty desire that Gods Holy Will be done,
and perfectly fulfilled in thee.

CHAP. VII. How free from all self-desires the Soul ought to present her self
in the sight of God.
IN this manner thou must begin by little and little, with Sweetness Reverence,
and Hope in the same Lord, who calls thee, saying, Come to me all ye that
labor, and I will refresh you: And in another place; All ye that be thirsty,
come to the Fountains of Water. This motion or Divine vocation thou must always
follow, not precipitating your self by preventing or running before the
inspirations of the Holy Ghost; for it is he who must take you by the hand and
guide you, and then you shall be carried where the Waves of all Mercy flowing
from the Sea of God's sweet Goodness will carry you. When thou art come thus
far, then labor with all possible diligence, as well inward as outward
assurance, to draw near with all the powers of thy Soul, to think on such
things as make God Almighty worthy of praise, love, and to be desired; and see
that herein thou use no force to thy heart in such sort, that thou should
harden it, for that would be a great impediment of attaining to quietness, or
disposing thy self to it. Follow my counsel, and exercise thy self always, (and
once again I say always,) both by will and by effect in the contemplation of
God's Goodness, and of his continual loving Benefits: And receive with all
Humility such influences as from his inestimable goodness shall fall upon thy
Soul. Beware thou procure no Tears or other sensual Devotions, using force to
thy heart; but rather quiet thy self in this inward solitude. attending only
that the Will of God may be accomplished in thee, and when he pleases to send
thee Tears they shall come without any force, but rather with sweetness and
tranquillity, and then admit them with great Humility, as being God's work in
thee. And know that thou shall endure loss, if of thy self thou presume to
attain to any thing.

This is my first and last advertisement, and the Master-key of all this
matter, viz. That thou learn to renounce thy self, and to sit thee down at the
feet of our Savior with Mary Magdalen, harkening what he said to thy heart; and
not be busied with Martha, which is thy Body. Beware that thy Enemies, (of
which thou art the greatest thy self) do not hinder thee in this Holy Silence.
Be well advised that when the wings of thy meditations and affections transport
thee to a desire of union with God, and to a full repose in him that thou limit
him not within the straitness of certain comparisons, drawn from finite or
terrene Objects; for he is above all comparisons, being infinite in all places,
and in all things, and all things are in him. Thou art to consider an
incomprehensible Immensity, altogether infinite, altogether admirable. Such are
to be thy considerations, or admirations.

Likewise thou must believe, that he is every where to be found, even within
thy own Soul, when thou look for him there: Because his only pleasure is to
converse with the Children of men, thereby to make us worthy of himself, he
having no need of us. This truth being found out by the light of thy
Understanding, let thy Will rest therein, with the aforesaid quietness.

In thy Meditations, or Devotions, prefix not thy self a Task, or number, in
such sort that thou be tied to do, think, or pray so much, or thus much; but
let thy heart be free, to the end that where thou find repose, there thou
rest to enjoy the sweetness of our Lord, to what part soever of thy exercise he
be pleased to communicate himself: And though thereby it fall out that thou
do omit what thou have ordained to do, be not troubled therefore, but without
any fear: For that the tasting, and enjoying of God, and the embracing of him
in our arms is the end of this Exercise: To which when one does attain, then
the means ordained thereunto must needs cease; and there is nothing so contrary
to the true peace and quietness, as the care which one takes while he works
in tying the Spirit by force to finish this or that; nor permitting God
Almighty to lead the Spirit what way he pleases, but that of necessity it must
go on the way that man has imagined, esteeming more therein the accomplishing
of his own Will than the Will of God; which in effect is nothing else than in
seeking for God to shun him, and endeavoring to please him, not to do his Will.
Wherefore if truly thou desire to advance thy self in this way, and to attain
to thy wished end, intend or attend not to any other thing than to find God,
who wheresoever he be pleased to manifest himself unto thee, remain there
without passing any further, until he grant thee leave; forgetting withal that
there is any thing else in the World, whereof thou should think, or take
care, saving only of resting in God. But when his Divine Majesty is pleased to
withdraw or absent himself; then toward the finding of him out thou may
return to thy Exercises, with the same purpose to find out by them thy beloved,
whom when thou have found again, observe what has been said of omitting all
other things; because thou have attained to what thou would have.

Mark this point well, for many spiritual Persons are cast away, and much
endamaged, in their progress, and quietness of Spirit, by being wearied, and as
it were tired with their Exercises, esteeming themselves to have done nothing
if they finish them not, and placing therein their perfection: So reserving to
themselves the propriety of their own Wills, and living a weary life of
Hierlings, never attaining to the inward peace and quietness, in which our Lord
does truly remain.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Faith, wherewith we must believe the Blessed Sacrament, and
how a Man must offer himself to God.
THou must endeavor every day more and more to increase in thy Soul the faith
of the Blessed Sacrament; and never cease to admire so incomprehensible a
Mystery; and rejoice thy self by considering how God does exhibit himself under
the common Forms of Bread and Wine; reverently observe how he abaseth himself
to exalt thee, and by his Humility works thy Glory. O blessed be they who
believe, and see not.

Seek not that he show himself to thee in any other manner, than as he does
under the Vail of the accidents: Draw near unto him, to the end his Divine
Majesty do convert thee into himself, and not that thou convert him to thy
self. Endeavor to inflame thy Will in him, and that he inflame thee in his
Love, and teach thee his holy Will.

Always when thou do enter into this Holy Sanctuary, thou must be resolved
and ready to suffer for his Love all torments and injuries that may befall thee:
Likewise all dryness of Spirit, or want of Devotion in Prayer, or out of
Prayer, for such shall often befall thee, all which thou must accept for good;
(but take heed thou be not the cause of them) embracing and esteeming them as
thy Sisters; and thy only joy must be to suffer with thy beloved, and for his
love be not unconstant in that which thou beginnest; but when thou art entered
in these holy Exercises, remain firm in thy Resolutions, and advance in the way
of sweetness and peace, of which the more thou take, the more thou will
desire; Insomuch that thou shall not be able to live without this peace; it
will seem an intolerable torment unto thee to be out of this quietness for an
hour.

CHAP. IX. That the Soul must not seek any comfort or delight, but in God alone.
THOU must always make choice of afflictions, and be glad to be there where
least Friendship is showed unto thee, and where thou art to be most in
subjection. Finally all things are to serve thee as occasions of going forward
toward God, so that nothing stay thee from advancing thy self in this way, and
in this thou must rejoice, that all things seem troublesome unto thee, to the
end our Lord be thy content, in whom thou must always rest.

Address all thy Labors to thy Lord, who is Mediator between God and Man. Love
this Lord, and impart thy heart freely unto him, for he will resolve thy
doubts, and will lift thee up when thou shall fall; he will absolve, and
communicate thee spiritually, when thou make thy self ready; for he is an
Eternal Priest: When thy Ghostly Father shall cast thee off, and will not
Minister thee the Sacraments as often as thou desire, come then thirsty unto
this Lord, who though he has given Power to St. Peter, yet has not deprived
himself of the same: He will grant thee a Jubilee so often as thou do come
unto him; and finally if thou do love him, thou shall want nothing.

Offer thy self to God as a Sacrifice in all peace and quietness of Spirit. And
to the end thou go the better in this way, and that thou pass over this journey
without heaviness or weariness, it is expedient thou make ready thy Soul at
every step by enlarging thy Will, and making it fit that Gods Holy Will be
fulfilled in thee; for if thou have a great deal of room to hold much, thou
shall receive much. And let thy purpose be seconded by works, to the end it
befall not thee as it befell St. Peter, who resolutely said that he would die
with Christ, but failed very soon, for that his determination came from
himself, and from his own Will, and desire; which although it be good, (as in
this Example it was) yet it is dangerous, and the beginning of a great fall, if
our Will begin to think or desire any thing without the help of God, Desire
always, and yet desire nothing; that is, let thy desire and Will be free on
every side, as already we have said; and as I say again, always and upon every
occasion, determine with thy self with all thy forces, to be conformable with
God; and never determine with thy self in any thing which is not to be done in
that instant in which thou workest; but keep thy self at Liberty.

Yet note hereby, that none are forbidden to use a prudent care in things
necessary and belonging to their state; for that operation is in God and
according to God; and thereby the peace, and the true spiritual profit is not
hindered.

In all things purpose and perform speedily what by thy self inwardly may be
done, and outwardly desire nothing.

In this present Instant, what thou art to do, is nothing else but to offer thy
will to God, and furthermore to desire or seek nothing: Be like unto a poor
man, who of himself knows he is unable, and thou shall always be joyful.

To conclude. This Liberty of Spirit is the Key of thy perfection and
perseverance, which in substance is nothing else, than that the inward man does
consist within himself, and that he enlarge not himself to wish, desire or
procure any outward thing; and so long as one shall remain in this manner, he
shall enjoy a Divine, and pleasant Bondage.

CHAP. X. That the Soul must not be dismayed though it find resistance in it
self, or disturbance of this Quietness.
COnsider that full often notwithstanding thy Pious endeavor in this matter,
thou shall find thy self troubled, and deprived of this Solitariness, and
Liberty, and that the Whirlwind of thy own passions will raise up the dust of
unquietness, and trouble in thy Soul; which our Lord so permits for our
greater good, because that a Dew from Heaven shall be sent thee, by which the
dry land of thy heart shall be fatned, and not only the dust shall be laid
thereby, but also flowers of a new and fragrant odor shall spring up, by which
every day thou shall be made more acceptable and more pleasing to the Almighty.
This is the battle in which the Saints gained Crowns and great rewards.
Whenever thou art troubled do but say,

O Lord, Lo here thy Servant.

Thy will be done in me.

I believe, O Lord, that thy Word shall never fail, and therein I only trust.

Behold me; Therefore here do with me what thou will.

I stand wholly at thy disposition.

Blessed is the Soul that offers it self in this manner, in time of
tribulation, as a Sacrifice to God.

If this battle do last, or continue for any long time, and thou can not
conform thy self to the Will of God so soon as thou would wish; be not
therefore dismayed, for that this is the Cross which Christ will have thee to
carry, and follow him; according to the example which in himself he has showed
to thee; to which effect, consider, if it please thee, the battle which Christ
fought in the garden, when his Humanity shrunk; and said, Father if it be
possible let this Challice pass from me.

But he presently called his Soul to his self, (for Christ's desire was free,
and not tied at all to his own Will,) and said with a profound Humility. Yet
thy Will be done and not mine. These be the Labors and Combats, which we must
learn, by Christ our pattern, who did propose himself as an Example to us. Be
not dismayed, though oftentimes thou wish to be rid, and free from these toils,
but continue in Humility and Prayer, until thou come to lose thy own Will, and
that Gods Will be fulfilled in thee. Labor earnestly, that no other thing
(having only God) do Lodge in thy Soul, though it were for never so short a
time; let nothing at all seem better unto thee, nor observe other men's malices,
or evils; but pass through all things like a Child, without grief or
irksomness, and without any hurt.

CHAP. XI. How diligent the Devil is to deprive us of this Quietness: And
contrariwise, we must beware of his craft.
OUR adversary the Devil, his fashion is to seek out for such as he may
swallow; and therefore he expects nothing rather of thee, than that thou
foregoest both Humility, and Simplicity, and that thou attribute something to
thy self, to thy own industry and endeavor; and that thou esteemest others as
inferior to thy self, in diligence, and disposing of themselves to receive
God's Gifts: Whereby thou may come to despise some body, or other, in thy own
thoughts: For by this means he will easily find a passage to enter into the
Soul; the Door by which he desires to enter in, is that of our own-self
estimation. If thou be not therefore well advised in such occurrences speeedily
to step backwards to confound, pull down, and annihilate thy self, (as already
we have said) thou shall fall at length into the Pharisee's Pride; of whom
mention is made in the Gospel, that he boasted much of his own goodness, and
judged other men for bad. And if by this means the Devil come to take
possession of thy Will, he will be soon Lord over it, planting therein all kind
of Vice, to thy great damage, and loss. For which cause our Lord warns us to
Watch and Pray. Wherefore thou art to stand on thy Guard, to the end thy
Adversary deprive thee not of so great a treasure, as is the peace and
quietness of thy Soul: For that he labors much to deprive thee of this rest:
And procure that thy Soul live in unquietness, wherein he knows does consist
all damage and perdition; because a quiet Soul does work with facility, it
works much, and works well, persevereth, and easily withstandeth all
impediments: Whereas contrariwise the Soul which is troubled, or unquiet,
works but a little, and that little very imperfectly; it is soon wearied, and
finally endures an unprofitable martyrdom.

If therefore thou desire to gain the victory, and that the Enemy hinder not
the profit of thy husbandry, be advertised before all things, not to suffer any
tribulation to enter into your Soul, (nor be disquieted) though it were but for
a Moment. And to the end thou may the better look to thy self, and beware of
the Devils deceits, hold it for a certain rule in this matter; That any thought
that separateth from the greater love of God, or greater hope in him, is as a
Messenger from Hell; and as such, thou must not admit him, but with all speed
thou ought to drive him away, because the function of the Holy Ghost, is
always to draw souls nearer and nearer to God, inflaming them in his love, and
increasing in them new Hopes: And the Devil works always contrary unto this;
using all possible means to effectuate his own designments, which is against
this: As for Example, when he goes about to breed fear in us; he aggravateth
excessively our ordinary imperfections; giving us to understand, that our Soul
prepares not it self as it ought to confess, communicate, and Pray: Whereby a
distrustfulness is raised in the Soul and also trouble, and fear.

Likewise he procures us to take impatiently the want of Devotion, or
delectation in Prayer, or other Exercises; giving us to understand, that our
labor is lost therein; and that it were better to forbear the performing of
such Exercises. Finally he works such unquietness and distrustfulness in the
Soul, that it thinks all whatsoever is done to be to no profit or purpose,
whereby great fear and discomfort is increased in such sort that the Soul
thinks it self to be forgotten of the Almighty; which indeed is not so, but
wholly contrary; for the benefit which comes unto us by these drinesses and
want of Devotion, are innumerable, if we could but consider Gods purpose
therein, requiring only at our hands, and for our part that we be patient, and
persevere in working; for as St. Gregory says; God is much pleased by the
prayer which is made by faith, and hope. Being also continued with a true
fidelity, though the Soul therein be dry, and deprived of all delectation; and
though the Soul be distracted, and as it should seem, cannot produce one good
thought; it is not therefore that the Prayer is lost: For that the very
tribulation born with patience is a good Prayer, and obtains much in the
sight of God, and the bitterness of affliction does shine bright before God.
And as the same St. Gregory says: Inclines, (or as we may say) inforceth God
to favor us more than any other Exercise. Whereof it follows, that no good
work is to be omitted, how destitute of devotion, or unquiet soever the Soul
finds it self; for the omitting of it should be nothing else, than to accord
to what the Devil would have, and to deprive the Soul it self of wonderful
benefits.

To the end this be the better understood, and that the thing that is good, and
profitable of it self be not hurtful unto any, for the want of understanding;
we will lay down briefly the benefits which we receive by the humble
continuance of these steril and unsavory Exercises, that having understood the
matter well, it befall not that by them we should leave our quietness.

CHAP. XII. How the Soul ought not to be disquieted for inward Temptations.
INfinite great good does redound to the Soul by the aforesaid indevotions, and
spiritual dryness, if they be born with patience, and Humility, which if the
Soul did once understand, it would not so much be disquieted, or afflicted by
them. And though there were no other consideration to commend them unto us; yet
this only ought to suffice, That ordinarily, God sends them, not to the end
they should be an occasion of heaviness or discomfort unto us, but rather of
joy and gladness, so that we ought to receive them not as arguments of our
Lords hate or dislike of us, but rather of his great Love. And therefore we
should accept of them, as a special favor done unto us.

The truth hereof shall appear very manifestly if we do but consider that such
accidents do not befall to others, than such as especially apply themselves to
Gods service, and do separate themselves from all occasions, which may offend
him: For we never see that great sinners, or such as be much addicted to this
World, do make account or complain of such Temptations; so that it appears
manifestly, that it is the fruit by which God inviteth such as he loves well;
and though it seem unsavory, and that the Temptation it self be very foul, yet
there issues from it a wonderful great profit unawares to us: Even though the
Temptation be such, whose only imagination may astonish or scandalize us,
because the more horrible and foul the Temptation is, the more also shall it
terrify, afflict and make us humble, and serve to the purpose which God
intends, though as then the Soul does not under stand it so, and therefore
abhors the same, and is loath to walk in that same way, because it would not
willingly be deprived of delectation and comfort; esteeming that what is done
without them, is but loss of time and pains taken in vain.

CHAP. XIII. How our Lord suffers these Temptations to come upon us for our
good.
MAnkind is so naturally Proud, Ambitious and addicted to its own Opinion, as
if we did challenge it by inheritance from our Father Adam, who by a sad
Example, fell from the obedience which was due to Almighty God, whereof it
proceeds, that always we presume more of our selves than we are in effect.
This our self-estimation is so noisome toward our true spiritual progress, that
the only smell or smoke of it, is able to hinder us from true perfection; and
because it is so dangerous, our best Friend and good Lord has a care of
keeping us in that plight, by which we may always escape the danger, and as it
were of necessity, come to hold the true knowledge of our selves: As he has
done with the Apostle St. Peter, by suffering him to fall into the denial of
his Master, that thereby he may come to know himself, and not to presume any
more. And God did send upon the Holy Apostle St. Paul, a troublesome Temptation
of the flesh, that thereby acknowledging his own infirmity, he should think
humbly of himself; to the end that Gods manifold revelations exhibited unto
him, should not puff him up into Pride, (as he himself witnesses.) By which we
see that our Lord taking pity on our misery and perverse inclination, does
suffer both horrible, foul and sundry Temptations to assault us, to the end,
that by them we may be made humble and careful of our selves, though in our own
Opinion we profit nothing by them; wherein his great Wisdom and Goodness does
appear, by procuring our greatest good, by that which we think to be our
greatest hurt. For hereby we attain to Humility, (which is the only virtue we
have most need of) for that it happens ordinarily, that he who feels the said
thoughts, and dryness of Spirit, with want of Devotion, persuades himself it
proceeds from his own great imperfections, and that no true Servant of God
could have such a distempered Soul, or serve God with such coldness and
remisness as himself does, and thinks that the like thoughts befall only to
such as be forlorn, whereof it follows, that he who a little before, rather
esteemed himself somewhat, now by this Physic sent him from Heaven holds
himself the worst Creature of the whole World, and unworthy to bear the Name of
a Christian; to which selfknowledge and profound Humility the Soul would never
attain to, if that the great Tribulations of the horrible and extraordinary
Temptations did not force it thereunto. Wherein God Almighty does a singular
favor in this life to the Soul. which he sees in need of the like Physic.

Besides the aforesaid benefits which such Temptations and want of Devotion do
work in the Soul, many other benefits do also follow: For the afflicted Person
by these means is in a manner forced to make his recourse unto God, and ask him
such virtues as may remedy his torments.

Furthermore to the end he may be rid of the Martyrdom which his Soul does
suffer, he judges it expedient to eschew all kind of sin, and what may seem
imperfect; wherein the Tribulation which first seemed to have caused his hurt,
serves for a spur to set him forward with fervor to find God, and separate
himself from any thing which he may think not agreeable to his Divine pleasure.

Finally, the toil and Tribulation which the Soul endures in the said
Temptations and want of Devotion, is a Loving Purgatory, wherein it endeavoreth
with Patience and Humility: And it helps toward the attaining of a great
Crown of Glory in Heaven.

Thus much I have said, to the end it be understood, what small occasion we
have to be troubled or sad, for the want of Devotion, or for spiritual
afflictions, as some Persons of small experience herein be troubled, which do
attribute to the operation of the Devil, or to their sins and imperfections,
that which comes from God, and do esteem the tokens of love to be Arguments of
hate, and do think these Divine favors, to be signs of forgetfulness, judging
all their labor lost, and without Merit, and their losses to be without
recovery: Whereas indeed they have lost nothing, and thereof ought rather to
receive these afflictions, as demonstrations of Gods holy remembrance of them;
which if they did but once well understand, they would not be disquieted, or
lose their peace for enduring the like Temptations, or want of Devotion in
Prayer, or other holy Exercises; but rather they would with a new perseverance
humiliate their Souls in our Lords sight, purposing in all and above all things
to accomplish his Holy Will, in what manner soever he be pleased to use them in
this World; endeavoring to keep themselves in peace and quietness, accepting of
all things that befall them, as proceeding from the hands of the Loving Father
of Heaven; rendering new thanks with inward joy, in place of sadness and sorrow,
persevering herein without any loss of time, until at length they attain to
work with peace and rest.

CHAP. XIV. Of the remedies the Soul may use, to the end it be not disquieted
by the faults and imperfections it has.
IF at any time thou chance to fall into any light offense, or negligence
either in Works or Words; such as to be angry at any thing that happened to thee;
to murmur, or hear others murmuring; to yield much to laughter, or other
curiosity; to suspect the worst of others, or that by any other means thou
offend either once, or more often falling into the same fault, notwithstanding
thy purpose of taking heed from falling again; be not therefore troubled, or
discomforted, nor apply thy self to treat of what is past with affliction;
confounding thy self with new sorrows and afflictions, and imagining with thy
self thou shall never amend; thinking thou do not perform, or force thy self
as thou should, which if thou had done, thou should not have fallen so
often: Likewise considering the more thou purposest well, the more also do
thou find thy self inconstant: Out of which cogitations, and considerations, do
proceed great heaviness and distrust, and a Thousand fears which overwhelm thy
Soul; such as be to despair of ever being rid of the said imperfections; to
think that thy own weak and unperfect determination causes all thy hurt;
Representing to thy self that thou do not serve God truly as thou ought to
do, by which means, confusion and shame shall so much invade thee, that thou
shall not dare to address thy self to God, nor appear in his sight for having
carried thy self unloyally toward him. Such Persons as employ themselves in
such thoughts, do lose much time therein, whilst earnestly they search how long
they stayed or remained, and how far arrived their faults, if they consented,
and if wittingly, and willingly they continued in them. And the more earnestly
they applied themselves to think thereof, the less they understand; and so
become more afflicted: Out of which there follows a great perplexity toward
the confessing of their sins, to which they come with fear, and after having
confessed, yet they attain not to the quietness of Spirit, for that they will
not persuade themselves to have confessed wholly and entirely; so that they
lead a miserable life, bitter and unquiet, omitting to merit, and loosing great
part of their labors.

All this proceeds from hence, that they consider not their own natural
imperfection, nor know not the manner how to negotiate with God Almighty, with
whom (notwithstanding their often falls into infirmities,) more is effectuated
with one loving Conversion, than with heaviness and discomfort, that proceeds
from an over serious examination of faults, especially if they be venial
offenses or ordinary. Such in the occasion of their unquietness ought to
content themselves with the opinion of some learned man, or their Ghostly
Father.

Furthermore, I add that the said Loving Conversion and confidence in God, is
not to be understood and used in occasions of Light and daily sins only; but
also of greater offenses: If God do permit any to fall into them, not only
once, but also more often, and though they be not committed only by infirmity,
but malice; because that the contradiction of an unquiet Soul, and scrupulous,
is not the means to reduce the Soul to a perfect estate; if it be not adjoined
to a lovely confidence of Gods goodness and mercy; and this observation is
particularly necessary for such persons, as do not only desire to be rid of
their miseries, but also to profit in virtues and the Love of God. And because
many will not understand it so, they go forward without spiritual courage and
hope, in such sort that they can scarce apply themselves to any good thoughts.
So they live a lamentable life, because they follow their own imaginations, not
harkening to the true, and wholesome Doctrine.

CHAP. XV. The manner how the Soul may quiet it self in all occasions, without
loss of time, or profit.
OBserve therefore this Rule; so often as thou perceivest thy self to have
fallen into any defect, either great or small; and though more than a thousand
times a day thou had committed the same, even voluntary, and without any
urgent occasion thereunto.

Observe I say infallibly this Rule; That when thou see thy self fallen into
any fault or defect; persist not troubled, nor disquieted in the consideration
thereof, but straitways with Confidence, and Humility in regard of thy own
weakness, lovingly fix thy eyes upon God, and with thought and word say unto
him.

O Lord I have done like a sinner as I am: And nothing else can be expected of
me, than these and other such faults. Neither only should I have done this but
much worse and more if thou had left me to my self.

I render thee infinite thanks, O Lord, I am heartily sorry for what I have
committed; pardon me, O Lord, for thy own self, I beseech thee, and grant me
Grace that I do not offend thee any more.

When thou have done this, lose no more time in unquietness, doubting that our
Lord has not forgiven thee, but go forward in peace, and rest with thy
Exercises, in that manner, as if thou had committed no error at all: And use
this manner of operation at every time, and if need be at every moment, with
the self same quietness and confidence at the last time, as thou have in the
first for that, besides the particular Service done to God Almighty.

This observation avails for other thousand good uses; as namely, that
thereby the Spiritual profit is not hindered. Time is not lost in that which
serves to no purpose: And one gets out of sin with great advantage, and
Perfection.

This point I could earnestly wish that the disquieted and afflicted Persons
would but believe, and understand; which if they did, then should they easily
perceive the peace, and quietness of Spirit, from the blindness in which they
themselves walked, always losing their time.

Let not this seem much unto thee; for that it is the key of Spiritual profit,
and the means by which in a little time it may be attained unto.

There are wanting other necessary instructions for this Exercise, which
afterward may be given, when first good use is made of these: Let them be read
with attention, and with desire to benefit by them, which our Lord of his
goodness will grant more than men can think or understand.

And it is to be noted, that this treatise according to the Authors intention
expressed in the Prayer following, is not published for others, than such as
profess a course of life of special progress in Virtue, and are far from giving
themselves over to deadly sins; for unto such as live carelessly, offending God
Almighty grievously upon every light occasion, this remedy is to no purpose:
Such I say have just cause to be troubled and to bewail often their offenses,
and to have an especial care in confessing them, to the end that by their
negligence or carelessness they be not deprived of their due remedy.

A Prayer to the Prince of Peace.
O King of sweetness, and God of Peace, I cast my self at your feet with all
submission: Begging of your Majesty, to speak to me the Divine Word Peace.

I humbly beg the true Peace, which is desired of all: Bestow that sweet repose
upon my Soul, which is its Center and Sovereign good; rally by your Authority
the forces of my spirit distracted and tired by so many enemies who draw it
from you; Appease all her disquiets caused from abroad, whence arise all her
miseries.

Your word, Sovereign Verity, is engaged not to deny me, your Mercy and Justice
have interest not to permit these Wars betwixt my passions and reason, no more
than betwixt you and me: Your Divine Empire appears more glorious in Peace and
quietness than in confusions and divisions.

You do not call your self the Creator, Prince, and Distributor of other things
in the same style as you do of Peace, which your holy Angels who study in all
things your Divine Will, published at your Birth, and composed a Canticle of it
surpassing all Songs of Triumphs or Victories.

O my Savior cause to flow in me the River of Peace, that Torrent of pleasure,
which your Prophets have so much spoken of; give me that blessing of peace,
which you have so often bestowed on your Friends, and which none can give but
your self: And since after your departure you have left it under the protection
of your Holy Spirit, where can it be better lodged than in a Soul which is
empty, and desires nothing but to entertain it alone? I have great confidence
in your Sovereign goodness, that you will not refuse me, that my cries shall
turn your eyes of mercy to assist me, that I be not numbered amongst the
impious, who have never known the way of Peace, nor never shall enjoy it,
except they amend their wicked lives.

Amen.
FINIS.

