THE STATES STABILITY: A SERMON PREACHED IN EXON Before the Deputy Lieutenants,
Captains, and other Military Officers and Soldiers of the County of Devon.

By JOHN BOND Minister of the Wotd of God in the City of Exon

London printed, 1643.

PROVE. 25.5. Take away (or remove) the wicked from before the King, and his
throne shall be established in righteousness.


IT is not mypurpose now to move affection, so much as to inform and convince
the judgments and consciences of men, concerning the two sides that are now an
end in this Land. I have observed it to be one of the maine engines which the
Devil makes use of against the right side since the late troubles began, to
seduce whole Parishes by several rotten Priests, and that concerning the
Lawfulness or unlawfulness, of the one side or the other that are in Arms.
What is more common then those stumbling blocks that you meet with in in every
high way (as I may say) that say this side fights against the King, they take
up Arms against the Lords anointed, and therefore they shall receive to
themselves damnation. The maine piece I intend at this time, is to cashiere all
such stumbling blocks: Yet in the beginning I make this serious protestation,
that I shall do every thing, that I am now to deliver, from the very bottom of
my conscience, and shall deliver no more, then I desire to answer for at the
great and terrible day of the Lord Christ. And because I will not rest there
alone (brethren) do but trace me in the Scriptures I shall quote to you,
(because those of unstable minds wrest Scriptures to their own perdition, and
the destruction of others) view my reasons, read over the Scriptures, and be
you the judges.

Take away the wicked from before the King, and his Throne shall be established
in righteousness.

My time is scanted, and my preparations I fear are too tedious, I shall
contract them as much as I may.

This Book is a Book of Proverbs, and a proverb is a short, smooth, pithy
sentence, in which the Author sums up a large matter in a few words, as men
use to change Silver for Gold, that it may be the more easily carried.

The whole book of Proverbs, I cannot better compare it to any thing upon the
sudden, then to that Mannathat fed the Israleites in the wilderness, as it is
described, Numb. 16.31. It is said it was a small round thing as coriander,
white, and like wafers made of honey; so these are bright and sweet, and
withal small and round, discontinued and independent, all the Chapters and
verses of this book almost; and therefore we may not look for coherence. Only
thus; the first seven verses of this Chapter contain observations about Kings
and Subjects. The verse preceding my Text, is an introduction to, and a proof
of the same matter, by a comparison that is here absolutely set forth; the
comparison is this, take away the dross from the Silver, and there will come
forth a vessel for the refiner. The dross, that is the wicked in my Text; the
Silver, that is supreme authority; and the vessel for the finer, that answers
to establishing his Throne in Righteousness.

Take away the wicked from before the King, and his Throne shall be established
in Righteousness.

The words, without exception, they proceed from the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords originally: Instrumentally they were dictated by the wisest King that
ever swayed Scepter, and therefore must needs be good divinity, and accurate
politiques.

The chief motive that put me on them in these times, and in this place, is
the late protestation that we all have made, and withal the perverse glosses
and interpretations that corrupt minds have put on it.

This verse is a proverb, and therefore cannot fitly be handled in parts; only
if any curious eye be willing to see it anatomized, we may take it assunder and
show it in two branches but: we must bind them together before we can give the
conclusion as a posie of all; look on the branches, and here is

First, the means to perform the duty, Take away the wicked from before the
King.

Secondly, the issue or end upon it, And his Throne shall be established in
Righteousness.

The duty or means, Take away the wicked from before the King. The end premised
thereupon, and his Throne shall be essablished in Righteousness.

But my conclusion (as I said) must be a posie made up of these two branches
bound together: thus it lies (I walk on a narrow edge, an therefore I will
keep as close to the words of the Text as I may) this is the conclusion:

The taking away of the wicked from before the King establishes his Throne in
Righteousness.

There is that that shall be the bottom of all my following discourse at this
time.

The Lord has generally said this here, for all Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in Righteousness, 2 Timothy 3.16. And this was spoken
by the Lord who is the blessed and only potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, 1 Timothy 6.15.

Next, the Penman was the richest King that ever swaved Scepter, and therefore
this must needs be a prosperous way; and the wisest King that ever swayed any
Scepter, and therefore this must needs be a judicious way, 1 King 10.23. you
shall read what Solomon this Penman was.

Finally, the servants of King Hezekiah were the transcribers, or the
collectors, as we read in ver. 1. these parcel of parables were collected by
Hezekiahs men King of Judah.

But to look further for confirmation that the taking away of the wicked from
before the King establishes his Throne in Righteousness (for brethren this is
the great work, that the great Counsel and all that are employed by them are
now upon.) Note,

First, that this precept of the greatest of Isreal's Kings, and the wisest of
all Kings, is seconded by his own practice; look in 1 King. 2. there are
diverse instances.

One in cutting of Adonijah, that traitorous ambitious fondling (though he were
Solomon's eldest brother) Solomon says, no more here then he practiced there;
here he says, take away the wicked from before the King, and his throne shall
be established in Righteousness; there he takes away the wicked, that one that
could not be wrought on by mercy for pardon before, that could not be fetched
over, he cuts him off, ver. 25.

Secondly, in that Chapter he casheers Abiather, a guilty fals-hearted Priest,
that followed Adonijah, ver. 26.

Thirdly, he cuts off Joab a man of blood, that had trecherously slain two
Captains more just then himself, ver. 31, 32. And the King said do as thou
have said, fall upon him and bury him, that thou may take the innocent blood
which Joab shed, from me and from the house of my Father, and the Lord shall
return his blood upon his own head, who fell upon two men more righteous and
better then he, and slew them with the sword.

Fourthly, in punishing cursing Shimei, that rayled against the Lords anointed
in his affliction, ver. 44. all in that Chapter. So Solomon says no more here,
then there he made good in two several paires of examples, all done it seems
in conformity to this proverb or introduction.

But look briefly a little further for more testimony, look in the same Royal
line and state King David the father of Solomon; and indeed David gave Solomon
this Copy, and he did but write after his fathers hand in the penning and
recording this, and in the execution of justice in conformity to it, as we see
in 1 King. 2. David gave him charge concerning bloody Joab and cursing Shimei.
Thus we find it from the Father and the Son, the Father a man after Gods
own heart, the Son the wisest King that ever swayed Scepter, and we find it
from him by precept and by practice.

But before I proceed to further testimony (for this is the great point, and
will be the great question too as we shall see anon) it is good to enquire
here concerning the expressions in the Text, to open them a little by the way,
though I shall give you a brighter candle to see them anon.

First, what is meant by removing.

Secondly, who are meant by wicked.

Thirdly, what is meant by before the Kings throne. First, what is meant by
removing?

By removing (brethren) we must understand executing, banishing casheering,
displacing, or any other kind of punishment, whereby those evil ones may be
justly chastized, and royal Majesty preserved and secured; so the meaning is
this, to take effectual courses that God and the Law may be satisfied, and
that such may do no further mischief. Thus this King Solomon executed
Adonijah, and Joab, when fair means, and pardon would not prevail with
Adonijah; thus he casheered Abiather a great Priest, and cut off Shimei a
railing Subject as I said before, this is briefly removing.

Secondly by wicked, we must understand all known transgressors, and
delinquents against the Law of God and man, all dangerous malignants? Shall
David give you a list of them, in Psalm. 101, he tells you of the wicked that
turn aside, ver. 3. Secondly of a froward heart and wicked person, ver. 4.
Thirdly, of privy slanderers and proud spirits, v. 5. Fourthly, of secret
workers and tellers of lies, ver. 7. Or shall Solomon add somewhat to the
Catalogue, 1 King. 2. hear what he says, First an ambitious traitorous
favorite, so he took off Adonijah. Secondly, a rotten Priest, so he casheered
Abiather. Thirdly, a bloody treacherous Cavalier, so he executed Joab. And
fourthly, a railing Malignant, and so he cut off Shimei. Thus all wicked are
comprised, all dross as it is in the former verse; dross is good for nothing,
and while it is mixed with the Silver it hinders the refiner of a vessel.

What is meant from before the King? That is, from all special office,
especially in spirituals under and about the King; so Abiather in spiritual,
Joab in martial affairs, Adonijah for intimacy and counsel, and Ahaz mother
Maacah for Idolatry. Primarily, by wicked is meant all wicked Counselors,
Courtiers, Officers, Servants, under and about royal Majesty, and the Throne,
their sinful Counsel and service must all be casheered, and rejected.
Secondly, and more remotely, all wicked persons in a Kingdom as far as they
are convict, must be brought to punishment, discarded, and discountenanced, and
dealt with according to Law; for so the phrase is here, remove the wicked from
before the King, etc. but so much for the lesser candle by the way.

The maine piece I intend at this time is (for I told you I am altogether upon
undeceiving of men's judgments, and untangling of their consciences, the maine
piece I shall stick on, are) grounds of this truth; that is the ground and
bottom of the whole question and business not only disputed among Lawyers,
but among Soldiers; I say the grounds of this, why, and wherefore the wicked
must be removed from before the King that his Throne may be established in
Righteousness; or why the taking away of the wicked from before the King, is
a means to establish his Throne in Righteousness.

I will give you but two grounds in general, but the latter will yield
several particulars.

The first general ground is, because the wicked that are before the King are
a high provocation of the Almighty. You shall scarce find out, nay, you cannot
find out such a parcel of provokers in a whole Nation, as the wicked ones
that are about the King: If there be wicked ones about the Throne God is more
displeased with that parcel of wickedness, then with any parcel that
nationally can befall a Kingdom, Isa. 1.22, 23, 24. Thy Silver is become dross
(a sad case) thy wine is mixed with water. Silver, the best, that becomes
dross it is the worst; wine, of all liquors the most lively and vigorous,
mixed with water, it is worse then if it were all water, how so? in ver. 23.
Thy Princes are rebels and companions of thieves, every one loves gifts, and
follows after rewards. Therefore says the Lord, ver. 24. Ah, I will ease me
of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies. Here is a burden under
which the spirit of the Almighty groans (as it were) so that he sighs again,
as a man that his back is on the nick of breaking; ah, I will avenge me, etc.
What was the matter? The greatness of the butthen of wicked great ones near
about the Throne; wicked Nobles, wicked great Governors in those days that
were next the Prince (for so I understand it) next the supreme; so in, Hos.
9.15. All their wickedness is in Gilgal, for there J hated them for the
wickedness of their doings, I will drive them out of mine house, I will love
them no more, all their Princes are revolters: For the wickedness of Gilgal,
where was that? At Gilgal they chose, (they solemnized at least) their first
King, and that was not an act according to Gods mind; therefore the word
Princes is added to show that great provocation and wickedness about the
Throne, the wicked near about the King. Also in Micah 3. (for I can but feed
you now with Ciphers) see what was their sin, ver. 1, 2, 3. and their
punishment, ver. 8, 9, 12. their sin was evil; Wicked great ones, near about
the Throne; and their punishment utter desolation and destruction, and sweeping
away from the Earth. So in, Jerem. 5.5. he speaks of the sin of great ones;
not only the poor, but the great ones were obstinate and stubborn and did
break the bands, and despise the coards; hereupon their punishment is
direliction in the verse following, A Lion out of the forest shall slay them,
etc.

No mervaile then if the Lord in the matter of Peor, Number. 25.4. when he was so
highly provoked, calls for the heads of the people to hang them up before the
Sun; Take all the heads of the people; we must not understand the heads of
all the people, as if he should cut off the heads of all the people, but the
chief, the great ones that were next to Moses, Take the heads of the people and
hang them up before the Lord, that the fierce anger of the Lord may be turned
away from Israel.

This is my first reason, because wicked great ones near about the Throne, are
one of the most desperate provocations that a Land can make to provoke the eyes
of the jealousy of the Almighty. It is good reason they should be taken away,
and that the taking of them away, establishes the Throne in Righteousness,
because the letting of them alone, provokes the Lord to shake the Throne, and
Crown, and Scepter and all.

The second reason (for this is the great one that I shall insist on) it is
taken from the manifold mischiefs, and dangers that wicked ones about the
Throne do, the manifold mischiefs that are like to follow, and do usually
follow, when wicked ones are about the Throne. Those mischiefs and dangers of
wicked counselors, or great ones about the King are many; but I will reduce
them to three heads, and in every one (brethren) I hope I shall be part and
proper.

The first danger is of fraud and flattery, of seducing and misleading a
Prince by fraud and flattery; when wicked great ones are about the Throne?
when such Eare-wigges take place about the Scepter, they may seduce a pious and
Religious Prince from justice and Religion. I speak no more then I will
repeat, and that I repeat I will prove out of the Scripture. I say they may
seduce a pious and Religious Prince from justice and Religion, from the truth
of Religion, and the execution of justice in government. See both these (for
all this while I show you the great concernment of the service you areon, the
greatest that ever God honored soldiers within the English Nation.) See it in
point of Religion, for the seducing of a pious, and well meaning Prince there.
You will say that the Penman of my Text Solomon was a pious Prince; he that
looks upon his prayer in Gibeon 1 King. 3. for wisdom above all things,
wisdom spiritual and civil: he that looks on that prayer before the Altar,
1 King. 8.22, 23. He that looks on his munificent building of the Temple, and
the great charge he was at for the utensils, 1 King. Chap. 5, 6, 7. he must
needs confess that as Solomon was an extraordinary wise, so he was a pious and
a Religious intending Prince; yet the wicked before the Throne, near about the
Throne, nay his case was such, the wicked in the bosom of the Throne, in the
lap of it, they did draw aside this well meaning, pious, and wisest of all
Kings, 1 King. 11.1. There we read that his strange Idolatrous wives, drew him
aside from the right worship, contrary to his intentions, and contrary to all
those prayers: therefore to prevent this mischief, it seems that Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15.16. took away Maacah his mother from being Queen, because she had
made an Idol in a grove.

Would you have another example, how wicked ones before the King are in danger
of seducing of a Prince, though he be a pious, and well meaning Prince, even
from the truth of Religion. Look upon Joash, lively is that example, 2 Chronicles.
24. There I read that Joash was a Prince that was orthodox, and so continued
during the time of Jehojadah the Lord protector: But Jehojada was full of
days, and he died, ver. 15, 16. and now Joash was left to stand on his own
legs, and to the Princes, and Courtiers about the King; And what were they?
When Jehojada was in his grave, The princes came and made obeisance to the
King, and he hearkened to their voice, and they left the God of their fathers,
and worshipped Groves. These Idolatrous Courtiers, though they lurked in the
Court all that while, and durst not show their heads, for their heads, as long
as pious Jehojada was alive, do when he was gone; take this Spoke out of the
wheel and all crackes: So we see a double proof, when Jehojada was about the
King, as Atlas he bears up Religion, but when he was gone, the wicked prevail
with the King, 2 Chronicles. 24.17, 18. I note these three circumstances on the
words.

First, the time, after Jehojada, he had made a covenant before in the time of
Joash; the Kingdom had made a Protestation, just such as ours that we have
lately made 2 Chronicles. 23.16. Jehojada made a Covenant between him and all the
people, and between the King, that they should be the Lords people. Therefore
they durst not show their heads, to seduce the King when Jehojada was alive;
because he was the chief stickler in the protestation. That was the time; they
watched when Jehojada was gone; as now a days wicked Counselors labor to
remove the godly from about the King; take away Jebojada, and then they have
their opportunity.

Secondly, the Persons; the Nobles, the Grandies; but Idolatrous Nobles,
corrupt in Religion: It seems they went to Church before, they discovered not
themselves in Jehojada's days; they took the protestation, therefore they were
Church Papists, Church Idolaters, conformable in Jehojada's time, so much the
worse. These were the men that when they had staid and lived so long
conformable, when that good man that was the Kings support was taken away they
seduced him.

Thirdly, mark the manner, and means to bring about the project, Obeisance;
they came and did obeisance; by insinuation and flattery: they adored his
sacred Majesty, and ascribed more (perchance) then he expected, and more then
was fit to be ascribed to a man. By this you see my first instance confirmed;
the danger and mischief of the wicked before the King, in respect of seducing
and flattery; you see I have proved it by the wisest King that ever lived, and
by King Joash, a man in whose days they had made a covenant against Idolatry;
yet the wisdom in the one, and the covenant in the othet, when good
Counselors were taken away, and a hedge of evil Counselors surrounded
them, were not able to stand against the stream.

Secondly, for perverting a Prince from Justice, Judgment and Law (for still I
am upon the point of seducing by Flattery.) First, from the truth of Religion,
and then from Justice and Judgment, take an instance or two there. Thus Doeg
seduced Saul against the Lords Priests (though he bore them a little good will
before) see what a mischievous Edomite may do with a King; he was an Edomite,
one of another Nation, and of another Religion; but it seems the King had
admitted him to his Privy Council, at least to his Council of War, 1 Samuel
22. ver. 9. Then answered Doeg the Edomite, which was over the servants of
Saul, and said, I saw the Son of Saul coming to Ahimelech, the son of
Ahit^b. When Saul heard that David was discovered, Saul said to his servants
that were about him, hear now ye Benjamites, is there none of you will show me
that my Son has stirred up my servant against me, to lie in wait, as at
this day. Saul spoke not to Edomites, but to Benjamites. But see his
forwardness, then answered Doeg the Edomite, etc. verse. 9. And he tells such a
tale, that he kindled the King against all the Lords Priests, that he sent
speedily for them, and commanded them to be slain; and when none else would
do it, the complainer was the executioner, verse. 18. And the King said to
Doeg, turn thou and fall upon the Priests; and Doeg the Edomite turned and
fell upon the Priests, and smote with the edge of the sword, man, woman, and
child; he does more then he is commanded to do. That is one instance.

But you will say, Saul was a King deserted of God, the spirit was gone from
him and he was a wicked King.

See then in a good King, the force of the wicked before the King, that is,
about the Throne; they are of force to draw a holy King, a man after Gods own
heart, contrary to his protestations and intentions; they are of force to draw
him aside, and to keep him from doing of justice. Look on Ziba in David's time
and reign; the 101. Psalm. is David's protestation, where he promises and
protests in the presence of God (and doubtless the man did mean as he
speaks) To do justice and judgment, to walk in his house with a perfect
heart, and no evil thing should abide in his sight and presence; him that
slandered his Neighbor he would destroy, and he would cut off the wicked from
the Land. But Ziba tells a tale of Mephibosheth, a slanderous lie, that he did
not come to meet David, because he hoped the Throne should be established upon
the house of his Father. Hereupon David gives a rash sentence, that
Mephibosheths lands must be forfeited, and Ziba shall have them; and afterward
when Mephibosheth tells ye truth, that he was a loyal Subject, and so
sympathized with the King, that he did not cut his hair, nor wash his hands,
nor shave himself during the Kings troubles; yet Ziba being near about the
King, so prevailed that he could not do judgment at the last, compare 2 Samuel
16.3, 4. with 2 Samuel 19.29. where he says, J have said, thou and Ziba divide
the lands: Is this according to his protestation? Would not a man have
believed, when he said J will walk in my house with an upright heart, that he
did mean according to his expression? Yes without doubt he did; but it is not
as David means, but as the Court stands affected, and the Courtiers about him:
for though the Princes meaning be pious, if there be such about him, their
seduction, and fraud, and flattery, may carry him against his own intentions,
by the efficacy and power of fawning Courtiers to seduce a sincere Sovereign
to wrong his best and loyallest Subjects. David had not a more loyal Subject,
then that honest hearted mortified spirited Mephibosheth, yet notwithstanding
that he was so deserving a man, notwithstanding David was so sincere a King,
and made so full a protestation, he draws him aside and miscarries him. Many
other examples I could produce. This is the first mischief and danger of the
wicked before the King, the danger of flattery and seducing.

The second danger is of misinformation, (for these are of serious
consequence, and if they be seriously considered, they will put a sharper edge
upon the sword of justice in your hands, (for it is the sword of justice that
you carry) then any other argument whatsoever.) Secondly the danger of the
wicked about the King, is in misinformation, and evil Counsel, and
over-counselling, and overbearing a Prince in counsel; they may draw aside a
Prince: The example of Rehoboam is famous, he was the son of this Solomon, 1
King. 12. There were two sorts of Counselors about the King. First the old men
that sat before his Father, the grave Counsel, the old Parliament of Israel,
as we read ver. 6, 7. and what do they advise him to? Gentleness and
moderation, to speak kindly to the people, and to be their servant that day,
and they were his for ever. The other were the young Counselors, the
Calvaleeres counsel, hot spirits, high spirits that were younger, and they
contrary give advice; they will have him that he shall be a King by the sword,
by power, and might, and scourges, and whips, and scorpions to fetch them in;
and they shall try whether he shall be a King or none; and the sad issue we
read of in ver. 16. It was pernicious though it were pleasing Counsel; thus in
Rehoboams case.

Another instance I could give you in Ahasueros, that mighty Prince, that had
so many score of provinces; yet Haman was too hard for him in Counsel. In
Hest. 3. there we read of Hamans Pur; he cast lottes, he went to the Devil,
and to witches, that he might find a way to compass it to bewitch the King.
His insinuation to the King, was, that it was not for the Kings profit to
suffer them; and they were a people that were scattered, and had other laws,
contrary to other Nations (the same laws that were used in the Northern
troubles, and are now used in all England) and so he prevailed, and enclosed
King Ahsuneros with these arguments, being too hard for him in Counsel, that
he made him to sign away the life of his own wife, that he did not know or
understand till afterward.

But besides those two that I have named, which both prove the danger of the
wicked about the King in respect of counsel; take in the third place, the
instance of King Darius, that comes pat to our times. The Courtiers were too
hard for Darius, they captived him in their counsels, they over-mastered him,
they inwrapped him that he could not see the truth, he could not see the
bottom, Dan. 6.4, 5, 6. we are a notable parallel for it; the Malignants, they
had a design upon Daniel, because he was of a more excellent spirit then they;
and because the King set him above the rest of the Presidents. Then in the 5.
ver. say they, we shall not find occasion against him, except it be concerning
the Law of his God; and they assembled and made a decree, that whosoever should
ask any petition of God or man for 30. days but only of the King, he should
be cast into the den of Lions. In verse 9. Darius signs the writing, he
gives it under his hand and seal, he consents to it and likes it well, because
it was according to his present information; he saw not the depth of the
design; but after he saw it, when the design was unmasked and unvizarded, and
he espied the bottom of the project, the King was far enough from consenting
in that sense, and to that end that they intended; for in ver. 14. when the
King heard these words, that is, that they meant to accuse Daniel, he was sore
displeased.

If a man had asked these men the question, or had taken up Arms against them,
or had supplicated against it, they would have said, It is the King, oh we come
in the name of the King, we have it under his hand and seal: They had it by a
wyle, an invention that turned it another way then the King intended; but after
when he saw it, he was willing to recall his hand and seal; but they pressed
him, thou have signed a decree, etc. Therefore you shall find that afterward,
He set his heart to deliver Daniel, and to revoke his own decree upon better
information, and to recall that that he had not only spoken, but had given it
under his hand and seal, but the men were too hard for him in counsel.

I speak this mainly, because there are those, that if they can (though upon
misinformation) get but the word, or the hand, or person of the King to
confirm, and sign what they do, it must be accounted rebellion, and treason,
and what not for men to labor better to inform the Prince, and to undeceive
him: when we see it is common in Scripture, that Princes have given more
thanks to them that have undeceived them, and delivered them from their own
hands and seals, that they have been ptevailed upon to give upon
misinformation, then ever they did to them that obtained them at their hands.
Therefore in verse 9. King Darius sealed the writing; but in verse 14. He was
displeased with himself and set his heart upon Daniel to deliver him. That is
the second. First the danger of seducing by flattery; secondly, of evil
Counsel.

The third is the danger and mischief of force and violence; The taking away
of the wicked from before the King, is a means to establish his Throne in
Righteousness, because of the violence, and the force that a King is in danger
of; when the wicked are about the Throne, his person is in danger to be
mastered by their force, and power, and strength. 2 Samuel 3.38. See it in David.
Malignants may be too hard for a King by force, and violence, as well as by
flattery and Counsel. The King said to his servants, Know ye not that a
Prince, and a great man is fallen in Israel? I this day am weak though
anointed King, and these men the sons of Zerviah are too hard for me. This
was the case, Joab had killyd Abner trecherously, David was King, Joab was the
General of his Army and his kins-man, David was Uncle to Joab and his brother,
they were his nephews; Joab had slain Abner basely, it was a murder, and a
treacherous murder, and David was King and should have done justice, and he had
protested it, yet these were too hard for him, not in point of seducing by
flattery, or of evil Counsel, but by force and violence. David could not make
his party good against Joab, because he was Governor of the Army, and he was
afraid that Joab might make more force then he, and so he mastered the King,
and kept him from doing of justice, though he were a just King, and had vowed
to do justice, and blood called upon him: Yet these sons of Zerviah (for
there were three of them, but one was slain) these grand Cavaleeres, when they
had gotten the sword in their hand, though their pretense were to help David,
yet afterward they over-mastered him, and would kill and slay, and David could
not check them for it.

The like may be said of the great ones about King Zedekiah, that example
though it be large is pertinent, Jer. 37. he was a friend to Jeremiah, but the
Princes bore him down and would have the blood of Jeremiah; he had great ones
about him so long as they would have what they listed, contrary to the King,
and mastered him, ver. 21. Then Zedekiah commanded to put Jeremiah into the
court of the prison. Here the King favors the Prophet according to his
request, he frees him out of the greatest strait he was in: Yet after, the
power of the Nobles turned the stream, as we find, Ier. 38.4. read ver. 1.
what the Princes were, Shephariah the son of Mattan, and Gedaliah the son of
Pashur, and Iucal the son of, etc. four of the Kings great favorites about
him, they said, we beseech thee let this man be put to death: for thus he
weakneth the hands of the men of war that remain in this City, and the hands
of all the people, in speaking such words unto them; for this man seeks not
the welfare of this people, but the hurt. Then Zedekiah the King said, behold
he is in your hands, etc. Yet before he had done him good, and favored him,
and intended to favor him; but they forced the King by violence, they did
overmaster him, and over-beare him, and made him go contrary to his mind and
intention: And afterward when Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, a good Courtier, had
informed the King that Jeremiah was innocent, as we read ver. 8.9. Ebedmelech
went forth out of the Kings house, and spoke to the King saying, My Lord the
King, these men have done evil in all that they have done to Jeremiah the
Prophet, whom they have cast into the dungeon, and he is like to die for hunger
in that place where he is, Then the King was of another mind, and in ver. 10.
he commanded him to take thirty men to take Jeremiah out of the dungeon before
he died. And Ebedmelech took the men with him, and went into the house of the
King under the Treasury, etc. Then in ver. 14. Zedekiah the King sent and took
Jeremiah into the third entry of the house of the Lord, into a secret place,
for the Princes about him were too hard for him, and he durst not be known to
his Courtiers that he had any correspondency with Jeremiah. See how lamentably
a King may be captivated by the wicked that are about the Throne. Ier. 38.14.
Zedekiah sent and took Jeremiah into the third entry of the house of the Lord,
and said, I will ask thee a thing, hide nothing from me. Then Jeremiah said
unto Zedekiah, if I declare it unto thee will thou not surely put me to death?
And if I give thee counsel will thou not hearken unto me? So the King swear
secretly to Jeremiah saying, as the Lord lives that made us these souls, I
will not put thee to death, neither will I give thee into the hands of these
men that seek thy life. Then said Jeremiah, thus says the Lord; he gives him
counsel. In ver. 24. says Zedekiah, let no man know these words and thou
shall not die: and if the Princes hear that I have talked with thee, and they
come unto thee, and say unto thee, Declare unto us now what thou have said unto
the King, hide it not from us, and we will not put thee to death; also what the
King said unto thee. Then thou shall say unto them, I presented my supplication
before the King, that he would not cause me to return to Ionathans house to
die there. The King bids him pop them off with another answer, and durst not be
known that he had talked with the man of God: he was over-mastered by his
Courtiers that hedged him round, they overmastered him by their power. Is there
not need then, and is it not just to take away the wicked from before the King
that his Throne may be established in Righteousness? If there be danger of
mischief all these ways, of seduction by flattery, though a King intend never
so sincerely; and of evil counsel in over-bearing him, and circumventing him,
that he shall not be able to sound into the depth of their designs; and of
violence, when they have gotten swords enough into their own hands, to make a
prisoner of the King, and yet to do all in his name as if he were the chief
Commander: there is good reason that the wicked should be taken away from
before the King; and that the taking them away is the stablishing his Throne in
Righteousness.

But here an objection must be cleared before I touch the application.

The objection is this, you will say it is true, we all agree that the taking
away of the wicked from before the King is the stablishing of his Throne in
Righteousness, and that the wicked should be taken away from before the King;
But stay,

Who must be the takers away?

And how must they be taken away? For this seems to be the nick of the point,
and the whole question is tripartite,

Who must be removed? By whom?

And how must they be removed? and so shall my answer be. Briefly,

First, who must be taken away, I touched before, but now shall more fully and
clearly answer.

First, generally, the wicked; originally, it is the evil and ungodly thing:
but so it includes all wicked persons, things and acts that are before the
throne, Prove. 23. Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach to
any people. That is the general: all provoking evil things, persons and acts.

But secondly, and more particularly, all evil things, acts and persons.

First, in point of Religion; so Maacah and her Idol must go down, 2 Chronicles.
15.16. So treacherous Abiather the Priest must be banished, 1 King. 1.26. So
Joashes Princes must be casheered, 2 Chro. 24.

Secondly, as in Religion, so in the Camp; bloody Joab, though he be near the
King, must have justice; and Adonijah if need be, because he is a Subject, must
be cut off, 1 King. 2.25.

Thirdly, in the Court; Doeg and Ziba, and Haman, with Zedechiah's Counselors,
and Princes that were too hard for him; and Darius Princes that were too hard
for him; they all must be removed and taken away. All in short that David names
in Psalm. 101. I will early destroy the wicked of the Land, that I may cut off
evil doers from the City of my God. That is, as far as they are known and
convicted, they may not be protected but yielded up to justice.

Secondly, who must remove, which is the man that must do this? There is the
question; who must be the removers and takers away? (I go still with a clew of
Scripture in my hand.)

I answer, the Kings authority must do it, I have Scripture for it, Pro. 20.8.
The King that sits in the Throne of judgment, scatters away the evil
with his eyes. Let me explain this Text, and the great knot is untied. The
King that sits, etc. By the King in the Throne of Judgment, we are to
understand, not the pleasure and will of a King, no nor the very strict person
of a King; but we are to understand the Royal authority as it is exercised
according to Law; therefore he says the King sitting upon the Throne, that is,
the King in the Court of judicature; he scatters away the evil with his
eyes, he affrighteth and judges, and removes wicked persons and things, by
looking narrowly after them. So that in two words, if you would know who must
be the removers, it is Royal authority, The King upon the Throne of judgment,
that is, the King in all his Courts of Justice: for concerning the will of a
Prince, none can be so unreasonable as to imagine that the will of the Prince
must tell, who shall be taken away, and who shall be saved; for then it is not
Monarchy, but Tyranny. Then for the person of the Prince, he sits not in the
Courts, he is the Center and therefore is unmooveable, and all the lines are
drawn from him; the judicature of Parliament, as the highest Court, the
greatest line drawn from the Center of Royal authority, and all other petty
lines under it.

But you will say, if the King were in the Parliament, then there were the
Royal authority, that should take away the wicked from before the Throne.

I answer, can the tything man do his office, and the Constable, and petty
Courts, and the presence of the King not be required for the execution of them;
and shall the Supreme Court of the Kingdom have leffe power then Court Leet,
or Court Baron? Let reason and sense judge: So when it is asked who shall
remove them? I say, Royal authority. This is that that Peter means, 2 Pet.
2.13, 14. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man, for the Lords sake;
whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as them that are
sent of him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that
do well. This Text is commonly perverted by our rotten Divines. Submit to
every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake: the Ordinance is of man, the stamp
of it is of God. There be diverse Ordinances of man, of Monarchy, of
Aristocracy, suppose of Democracy. Whatsoever the Ordinance of man be in the
land thou live in; if it be in the Low Countries, submit to the Ordinance of
Aristocracy for the Lords sake; if it be in England, submit to the Ordinance of
Monarchy for the Lords sake; if in another place submit to that Ordinance for
the Lords sake; still the Ordinance is of man, theirs is the mettle, and the
stamp is of God. For the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as the Supreme,
or to Officers sent of him; why? for what? For the punishment of evil doers,
and the praise of them that do well; so the Ordinance is to the praise of them
that do well, and the punishment of them that do evil. Now the Ordinance in
out Kingdom you know what it is, it is upon a pact or compact, and the
greatest privilege of the Subject in that pact, is the great assembly of
Parliament.

But how must this be done? If Royal authority must do it, the King in his
judicature, from the Parliament to the Constable must take away the wicked from
before the King, that is, as far as they are convicted, and as far as his
Office extends.

But how must they be taken away?

I answer, by diverse swords.

First, by the sword of the mouth, if it be possible by gentle admonitions, and
sharp reprehensions. So Solomon dealt with Adonijah, and with Shimei; first he
gave them gentle monitions; and if words will do, it is a thousand pitties
that blows should be used: But if monitions, and reprehensions, and summons,
and warrants will not do it,

Then the sword of Justice, as in those two cases; so when Adonijah would not
take admonition, when Shimei would not take reprehension, but both transgressed
the Law after, both suffered by the sword of Justice.

But what if Delinq make a party against the sword of Justice, and there be a
sword of rebellion against the sword of Justice, that that cannot prevail?

Then in the third place the sword of war; if the sword of the mouth will not
do it (as you know what great trying and laboring there has been by the
pen.) Next the sword of Justice has been endeavored to bring them to
condign punishment; but if that will not do, the sword of war, if rebellion
make head against Justice; I speak not this of my self but from the Lord; look
in Judge. 20. the history of the men of Gibeah, they had committed a notorious
fact, they had ravished a Concubine, and ravished her to death. Here was first
the sword of the mouth used; the Tribes came together, and sent to the
Benjamites to deliver the delinquents; and then they offered the sword of
Justice to end the business. But they draw the sword of war, and resist
Justice, and come and make head against the assembly, and determination of that
Parliament. Hereupon God bids them draw the sword of war, and fetch the
delinquents by force; they met together and wept, and God bad them go up; the
cause was his, it was not properly a sword of war, but a martial sword of
Justice.

But you will say, then there was no King in Israel.

What of that? Is there less authority to fetch out delinquents because there
is a King? Is he the obstructer or the promoter of Justice? not the obstructer,
but promoter of it.

Besides, though there were not the name of a King, there was regal authority,
the Scepter was then in Judah; as we tead in Judge. 1.2. Judge. 20.18. Judah must
still go up first.

The use (which I intend to be but short in) is for information. If the taking
away of the wicked from before the King establish his Thron in righteousness,
then let this my brethren convince your judgments and show you a clear
warrant, nay the necessity of the cause and service you are on, and is now on
foot through the Kingdom; I know the rotten Clergy and all Malignants will
tell you that this party fight against the King; yet the Scripture tells you,
that such men as labor to remove the wicked in a legal way from before the
King, establish his Throne in Righteousness. Now I put it to the quere, Are
not these wicked that are endeavored to be removed? Are they not robbers,
traitors, ravishers, rebels and delinquents? And it is the removing of them in
a legal way, because you are called to it by authority and by every branch of
your protestation.

These are the heads of the Protestation: First, Religion, and that calls on
you, because Papists are in arms, and are great Commanders, and are now
fighting against our Religion.

Secondly, your Sovereign calls upon you in his highest Court of Parliament;
his soul, and his body both call for it: for they must needs be both in danger
amongst unreasonable and bloody men.

Thirdly, the Parliament, and in it all the Parliaments for time to come. If
this Parliament fail, you may all write, Lord have mercy on us, as you do
upon infected houses; you may write it upon the doors of the Parliament, and
upon all the houses of the Land.

You will say, not so, for there is a trienniall Parliament granted.

Is it possible to gather a trienniall Parliament hereafter, if we be not able
to keep together a Parliament that is set, for which we have as good an Act as
for the other? He that will be blind may be, by supposing that we may get a
Parliament if we cannot keep this now we have an Act for it.

Fourthly, your Laws call upon you; they be all trampled under-foot: there is
no punishment for robbers, killing is now no sin, rapes and ravishings are
not questioned, they are not to be taxed.

Fifthly, your Privileges call on you: who can say, what is mine, if these
things go on?

But you will say, his Majesty in his Declarations seems to dislike of this
course of going to war.

We must distinguish of his Majesty's being among his Cavaliers, and his
Majesty sirting in his Parliament. Among his Cavaleeres as he is now, he is a
prisoner (for ought I know) by force, or by fraud, or under their Counsel;
that we all see clear. His Majesty among the Cavaleeres, and the Declarations,
and Ordinances, and Messages coming through their hands, that is one thing;
but take His Majesty as in his Parliament, and I think you will think that
when he were better informed and advised, he would be of another mind.

You will say, if we were sure of that, that he would be of another mind, we
should be satisfied.

What could God do more? Has he not given you a pledge in your own hands
already? Within these two years, His Majesty gave out all His Declarations and
Protestations against Scotland; we see a great deal of difference, between
His Majesty with the Malignants, and with His Parliament, for we see afterward
he gave the Scots thanks, and gave thanks through all the Kingdom; when the
spectacles were taken off his nose, and he saw aright, then they where
brethren, and dismissed in peace. What could the Lord do more to prepare you
for this time, and against this stumbling block? If His Majesty were misled so
lately, is it not probable he would now return again if he could get out of
these men's hands; considering especially that these were the special
sticklers, the committers, and promoters of the Northern troubles.

But His Majesty promises to maintain Religion and the Laws.

Though he do graciously, yet the Cavaleers promise the contrary, and therefore
as I said of David and Zedekiah, and those that were surrounded with flatterers
and evil Counselors, It was not what David promised, but what Joab would give
leave to be done; It was not what Zedekiah promised, but what his Princes would
give way to. Now we read His Majesty's promises, and we feel the Cavaleers
denial. We question not but His Majesty intends the things that he speaks;
but when I feel on my skin, the quite contrary, I must conclude, that how ever
His Majesty promise, and intend this, yet they resolve the contrary.

Would you have instance? His Majesty promises the defense of the true
protestant Religion; the Cavaleeres take in Papists, and they are the chief
Commanders in the Army. I hear His Majesty's promise, and I believe His
intentions, but I feel the Cavaleeres practice directly contrary. So I hear
His Majesty say he will deliver delinquents to punishment; and Cavaleeres
promote them, and they go in the head of the Army. I hear His Majesty protest
and promise that He intends to maintain the Laws, the privileges of
Parliament, and the propriety of the Subject; but the Cavaleeres rob, and kill,
and slay against all Law, so that no man can say this is his own. So that this
must be the answer, His Majesty protests these things, and we take them as His
purposes; but the Cavaleeres do the contrary, we feel it on our skins, it
sticks close to us.

Therefore abruptly for the result of all; for His Majesty's protestations and
promises, we cannot but thankfully accept them; and what better way to express
our thankfulness, then to go against wicked men that go against His
promises, and redeem Him from the hands of these wicked creatures, that he may
be able to make good His Protestations indeed, from which they keep Him by
over-counselling Him, and over-mastering Him? I have been abrupt, But I hope
that some seeds of that that has been spoken may take impression.

FINIS.

