A ROPE FOR A PARRET, OR, A Cure for a Rebel past Cure.

BEING An Appendix or Rejoinder, to A Caveat to all People of the KINGDOM, In
Answer to Mercurio Coelico Mastix, A Scandalous and Scurrilous Pamphlet lately
published by that Arch Turn-Coat, George Naworth, Sometimes a Calculator for
the Bishopric of DURHAM, and now an Infamous Lying Chronologer at OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed for John Partridge. 1643/4. March. 6.

A Rope for a Parret, Or A Rope.
a cure for a Rebel past Cure.
Mr. Geor. Naworth,
I Know you not, and therefore much wonder you should with that wicked
impudence (through my sides) so violently seek to wound the Parliament, and in
it the whole Kingdom, Religion, Law, Liberty, etc. You defame his Execellency,
the Parliaments Lord General, the Lord Say, the Lord Wharton, etc. Nay, you
cannot speak well of the dead, the worthy Patriot of his Country Mr. Pym; Take
heed his Ghost appear not at Oxford, and drive you all thence very shortly. But
what shall I say to thee, thou lying Tongue, can no man tame, it is an ungodly,
evil, full of deadly poison, Jam. 3.8. You are one of the Generation of
Vipers; read the third to the Romans, from the beginning of the tenth verse, to
the end of the eighteenth: You are one of those very people; your name may be
turned many ways, and you are so like in every respect, that unless one of
you, or all of you come to London, and take the National Covenant, and
subscribe your true name, I shall mistake one Knave for another: Your friend
Aulicus is sometimes like a Sculler, and his brother Aquaticus together, make
use of Oars; you row all alike, with your faces from London, and your backs to
Oxford, for you dare not do otherwise: You George Naworth, with your two
Brethren, are Homines trium literarum; If you love scolding so well at Oxford,
there shall be a Cucking-stool ready for you at Belinsgate, one after another:
He that is born to be hanged, needs not fear drowning, as some of you (I mean
Aquaticus) have escaped many times betwixt the Old Swan, the Bank side, or some
of those places, and Whitehall. Tell your two Brethren and the rest of your
friends, Solamen miseris soci^os habuisse dolor.

You tell me, you are not fearful I should calculate the nativitie of your
infamous Chronology, No! I know that well enough, because I know it was
conceived when the Mother was troubled with --, and the Father had the --. I
pray thee be not ashamed of thy own Nativitie.

Was not thou born when most of the Planets, especially the Luminaries were in
Conjunction (and much afflicted by an Opposition of Mars) with Caput Gorgonis,
Medusae, Rasdalgol, Diaboli, in domo Mortis; read Cardaen's Aphorisms Segmont.
6. circa Medium. The influence is almost Vertical over Oxford. Remember the
Lord Strafford but once more, I believe he had that Configuration in his
Nativitie in Medio Coeli; you know what a dismal Aspect he had; Caput Algol
was in his very forehead; what a Burgundian, Gregorian back blow he received. I
wish all Byrons, all Hispaniolized Dons, Frenchified Monsieurs, all Romanized
Englishmen, to take heed, lest their heads Hop off their shoulders: I rather
believe thou had the Dragons tail in Conjunction with those dismal Stars,
Saturn and Mars, in thy Ascendent in some Aeriall Sign; For thy breath stinks,
and thou have a very foul mark in thy mouth: Thou know how strangely they
dye that have this Constellation. If I be mistaken in my Judgment, send me the
time when thou wa'st born, I desire not to know the place, (for I hope the
Scots will keep thee from ever returning to Durham.) And I Will try, if by Trutina
Hermetis, I can find An sis legitimus filius; Sure thou had a Father, or
else how came thou at Oxford? Cum Videris quod Decreta patris non Evenerint
ei, quod nutrit Filium tanquam suum, tertus esse debes, quod Adulterinus ^^t.
The Tree is known by the fruit; and if I find my Trutina hit, then the Lord
have mercy upon thee.

As for the word Rebel, I tell thee Rogue (it is thy own name) I can give thee
no other Title; and I meant thee, and all thy Adherents, that have thus rent
(almost in pieces) the most flourishing Kingdom in the Christian World: Rent
said I? You have divided the King from His Parliament; the Head from the Body;
of which Body, you are a rotten Member (it is a part of your name) and many more
such like as your self; all of you must be cut off, or else there will be a
grievous pain in the Head; and when the Head is unquiet, akeing, and
distempered? In what condition is the rest of the Body; I bid you not ask your
Quacks, your Empericks at Oxford, they ^l intoxicate the Head, and destroy the
Body; No, I heartily and hourly pray God that the King would return to His
Parliament at Westminster, where under God, both the Head and the rest of the
Body, by the wholesome Advice and Council of (I tell thee again) this thrice
honored, never to be forgotten Parliament it Westminster, where the true
Physicians and Chirurgians of the Kingdom, are in daily Consultation, maugre
all your opposite malice at Oxford, and will cure (in time) all the distempers
and distractions thereof. But they have already Voted, and resolved to cut you,
and many more such rotten Members as your self off, that the rest may be
preserved.

You tell me that I happened to be mistaken in a figure once, erected for a
Mercer of Wakefield in Yorkes^ire, many strange lies have been fathered upon
me, the best of it is, it will not own me, nor ^it; If the man and his wife be
reconciled, and left their own home, to live at Oxford, it is an ill Omen; I
can make Anagrams as well Ass your self, you shall see by and by, Nemo, It wa^
some such Body: But suppose there was such a mistake; It may be the question
was Radical with you, and having erected a figure for the woman, she confessed
where the money was; Take heed you spend not your Radical humors thus vainly,
thus wantonly, thus lavishly; Fine doings at Oxford you agree like Cats and
Dogs; But I am sure you divide the King from His Parliament, and set the
Kingdom against itself.

You tell me of one, who in his learned Book, written in defense of Astrology
against Master Chambers, that condemns Horary Questions: I know that learned
Author Sir Christopher, you know his other name better then I; you Judas, you
long to be Chambered, I shall make you cry Hey down, by and by; If you move a
question once more, I fear me it will prove Radical indeed, in such an hour
that you would know your fatal destiny; I will tell it you anon.

Thou say Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft; I confess it, and I verily
believe the Conjurers at Oxford have raised all the devils in Hell (a Black
Regiment.) For since they cast their figure, made their circle about Oxford,
they have raised, fetched over more Barbarous Inhumane bloody Irish Rebels, then
ever was in England, since the confusion of Languages; Nay, they have not only
raised the Devils in Ireland, but many turbulent Spirits in England, and if
God prevent them not, they will inflame all Christendom, all the World, for the
Devil has been let loose for a season, but we may see by his raging, his time
is but short; you are excellent proficients in Conjuration and Witchcraft at
Oxford, many of you commence Doctors, remember Faustus, Lopuz, etc.

You tell me I am extreme capable to apprehend, and find a thing before I hear
or see it, or else I could never have found Cain or Cannibal in all your Book
(your lying Almanac,) I confess, I did not find either of them there, but
reading the word Rebel so often there, I thought upon Cains and Cannibals, and
Irish Rebels, and Traitors, and Naworths, and N^worths, and Rogues, and now at
last I have found out a way to make one of you.

You bid me remember what the Earl of Strafford said at his death: yes I do,
and had you been the same day carried in a Cart from Newgate, up Holborne, to
Tiburne, (I cannot endure these Ornes, and these Vrnes,) I would have left
Tower Hill, for I am not Vir Sanguinum, I do not love to see Heads lopt off,
(this is leap year) I had rather see the fruit (yourself) hang on the Tree.

You bid me take heed I come not to Oxford as a Spy, lest the vigilant
Governor make me curse my Ascendant; I tell thee I am otherwise employed, then
to come to Oxford, yet I thank thee for thy Council, I see day at a little
hole; you may chance lose your eyes, when you put your head through one a
little bigger, a Rope; I spy out your Knavery: Call you him vigilant Governor?
I pray thee what is his name in your Rebellious Catechism? Is he not a Papist?
He and I have contrary Ascendants, we shall never agree, Procul a Jove, procul
a fulmine; I Will give thee the like advice, Take heed you come not within the
sound of Bow Bell, for fear there be a Gibbet (or Crog-Bren, the Welsh her can
English it,) set up for you where Cheapside Cross (I told you before) once
stood; nay, rather beware of ^ouse in Cornehill, where one of your friends,
mistaking his way from Oxford, going up a Ladder, had a Cap pulled over his
eyes against the Exchange, and was hanged for a Spy.

Thou talkest of differences of Latitudes and Longitudes, of Oxford and Durham,
of London and Fraucofurt; I tell thee the greatest difference betwixt any two
places, now in the Christian World, is between Oxford and London: Very strange!
For you at Oxford have divided the King from His Parliament at London, and have
set three Kingdoms (thou Homo trium Literarum, thou Homo Trioboli) together by
the Ears; I am no Carpenter, nor Heylin, nor will be of any your Religions,
till you be reformed. But I am almost persuaded to be of Copernicus his opinion
(thou Brazen Nose) and hope (since there is no difference between England and
Scotland, in respect of the National Covenant) that all the World will shortly
turn round; Return you Rattle Head, for we shall have a Spring at London, when
it is fall of Leaf at Oxford.

You tell me the Scholars in Oxford long to see and dispute with me, whether
Newcastle Coal be the Element of Fire, or not. Dispute with the Scholars at
Oxford! No! Cambridge is nearer: I wonder how many Wayn load of wounded
Scholars, or Cart-load of their dead Carcasses were brought from the Battles
of Keynton or Newbury to Oxford, tell me, and you shall see some part of my
Arithmetic in Substraction, if you use not the Rule of falsehood, you
Logarithme, you Birken, Buffle, Rattlehead, vel Quocunque nomine Apellaris.
Newcastle Coal the Element of fire, No? But had you some at Oxford? You have an
Art there, can make two Eggs three; you can transform all the Elements, by
your Reasonlesse Railings, and chopped Logique; you can make a true Parliament at
London, to be counterfeit one at Oxford; you can pretend Parliaments, but you
never mean to come here; you counterfeit to be tried, you dare as soon be
hanged; I hope we shall tell you shortly from London what Newcastle Coal is

You dream of the fire of Purgatory, It is an Article of your Creed; but take
heed you descend not Ad Inferes, from whence there will be no Redemption; You
are a Pythagorean, and talk of the Transmigration of Souls; I pray thee tell
me, how many are at All Souls, since the two Battles I told you of, I am afraid
to come to Oxford, there will be a Resurrection there this Spring; I dare not
meet such Spirits or Ghosts, as some of you will be shortly.

You speak of Effects of a contrary nature, as if the Conjunction of Jupiter
and Mars did not often so operate by their influences; Yes! One man's fall is
another man's rising, many times; you may be hanging on a Gallows, and I stand
beneath, to see your neck set awry, when your friends pull you by your Legs, to
put you out of your pain.

You talk of Hull, I Will tell you, that place is to keep you out, and then by
and by, you think of Hell, That place is prepared for you, to let you in, and
all other thy Companions; remember three letters hereafter.

You talk of the Opposition of the Sun and Mars, and still are afrighted at
Keynton Battle, I told you before; the Cause precedes the Effect, if the
Conjunction happened the twenty two day, you know what followed the twenty three
day; you are a Rebel indeed; you will not leave till Britannicus has beat out
your Brains with his Battle Axe: Remember Caversham Bridge, and Brainford, from
whence you ran away.

You cry, alas what mischief did Cheapside Cross do; I told you once before, I
bid you beware that Bow Bell, or Rouse, or Sepulchers do not ring a Knell for
you, and the Irish Rebels, who will cry in a pitiful tone shortly, O hone.

In another place you talk of looking thorpw a Millstone, etc. and that I go
about to confirm your Predictions; and that I conclude them somewhat abruptly,
with an etc. I pray thee remember thy self in thy Almanac for 1642. in thy
Epistle to the Reader, in thy Verses after thy Judgment of the Eclipses; yea,
and in the remainder of thy Judgment after that etc. thou say I made: Let me
see the Firebrarnds you speak of, the Insurrections, The intended Invasion of
the Scots; the Book is to be seen: I Will tell thee that Bellum Episcopale was
raised by the Prelates, Papists, Atheists, etc. you have confirmed your own
Predictions very well, have you not? yes, and you shall find the displeasure
of the Scots, and then what will become of your Ave Mary's? It is true, it must
needs be, that offenses must come, but woe be to that man by whom the offense
comes, it were better that a Mill stone were hanged about his neck, and that
he were drowned in the depth of the Sea. But you need not fear drowning; a Rope
you do.

In your marginall Notes you quote Statutes: I pray thee let Statutes alone;
for they are making such Ordinances at London, that you will be forced shortly
to leave your Acts at Oxford behind you: Answer M. Prynne, who will call you
to an account for corrupting the Statutes.

In another Marginall Note you bid me let Latin alone. I tell thee, G. N.
Coeg-Bobl. are thy companions at Oxford; ask the inhumane bloody Irish Rebels
what is the English of it: if they cannot tell thee, the barbarous and
heathenish Welsh can; for it is as natural to them, as milk is to a Calf. I
need not be a Ductor in Linguas; for there is with you some, I think, of every
Nation, besides the Irish: You see I can spell something else besides Latin,
and hope to see the time when you may come to your neck-verse. You Puppy, You
hic, haec, hoc; You qui, quae, quod, You Neuter, You Commune of two, of three;
You Doubtful, you Epicene Gender: Tu quae Genus, Tu Heterocliton, Tu
Disjunctive, Tu Metathesis, Tu Antithesis, Tu Apocope, Tu Paragoge; Thou
Aulicus, Thou Aquaticus, Thou Mercury very Ridiculous, Thou Bloxford fly, Thou
Moon calfe, born that very hour, on that very dismal fifth day of the month
(you remember the Gunpowder Treason) when thy brother G. Faux was caught with
a dark Lantern; Thou Vocativo o Georgi, Thou qui mihi discipulus, Thou As in
praesenti, perfectum format, Ut no, nas, Naworth Georgi te Vocitavi: I pray
thee help me to make a true Verse of it; but it cannot be done handsomely, till
Ge: be made shorter by the head, or his neck stretched longer with a halter: It
was your own Latin, when I transcribed it out of your Almanac. Thou have eyes
like an Owl: I know who quae signifies, and the difference between that and
qua. I see now, the way to be a mere Ass, is to be a mere University-Schollar:
All the Errata's that are made at Oxford, are yours, not the Printers; it is
quite contrary with us at London; and yet Lapsus manus non est Error mentis.
There has been, now is, and shall be vi ia Scriptorum in the Schools, when you
shall be expelled the University.

Another Note you have margin'd, and say the Pope is glad at the demolishing of
Cheapside Cross (this Cross sticks in your stomachs) And that he will be a
gainer by it. I pray thee read the Popes Destiny; you shall find it in the
Sybills-Oracles, cited by that learned Napeir Lord of Marchistoun in Scotland,
after his plain discovery of the whole Revelation of S. John, which he
dedicated to King James, 1593. The words I would have you remember are these:
For in a Rope his ending shall he make,
The potent people and the Rome.
Town shall wrack.


The residue of that, and the rest of that Book you may read at leisure (if
your Governor at Oxford will suffer you; but I believe he is too vigilant:
Has he not procured an Index expurgatorius for it?) and then ask the Pope,
your unholy Father, how he is pleased with a Rhythmus, tuned after a pair of
Scotch Bag pipes.

You tell me the Scholars had a very good opinion of my skill, since that year
I prognosticated how fallacious and wantonly disposed young women were likely
to be. I know many of you Scholars are St-Priests: But I pray thee tell me
what year of our Lord it was, and I Will search who did Penance for having of two
Bastards in one year, if the Records be not imbezzelled, and carried to Oxford;
it is most like they are there, where that Antichristian Rabble of the late
Spiritual Court now reside: I was born in Manchester, where if thou will go,
they will use thee kindly for my sake: But O Strange, Derby is in the way: I
have a sister in Maryland, what her faults may be I know not; are you without
at Oxford? This Country is a parcel of fruitful earth, and was sometimes (I
suppose) a part of Virginia, Nova-Francia, Hispaniola, New England, or some of
those Islands; but now the Seas have part them, the German, and other Oceans
are betwixt us and them: it lies between the Latitudes of 38 and 40 North; but
what Longitude it has I know not, about 300, etc. I pray thee, let it be 666:
But now I think on it, the greatest Longitude is no more then 360. Let Longitude
alone. The Lord Baltimore (a Papist) had a Patent for it, and in the year 1634
named the Country Maryland; and the Town which before was named by the
Indians, Yoacomaco, he named, St. Mary's Augusta Carolina. That very year in
which that Antichristian Arch-Prelate, Will: Laud, the Archbishop of Canterbury
(the numerall Letters of which name make the number of the Beast, 666) together
with his Associates, the bloody Inquisitors of the late High Commission Court,
summoned me thither, questioned me for my Almanac 1633, fined me 500 l.
suspended me from writing, and imprisoned me eight weeks in the Gate house. But
where is his little Grace now? in the Tower. And what is become of the
High Commission Court? So let thine enemies perish, O Lord.

What Bastards were got or born that year, 1634. I am ignorant of; But I have
heard that in Mary land the Hoggs and Poultry are much increased; And although
the Scots will not go thither to eat the flesh of those Beasts, I hope they
will help to unroust the Poultry at Oxford. Take heed, G. N. that these two
Bastards be not there; one of them may chance be a Goodcoale, an Ordinary to
look over your left shoulder, when you cannot read Miserere mei: And the other
shall be (a namesake of one of your friends, sometimes Pope) a Gregory to look
over yo^^ right shoulder when you are hanging: you know Tyburne stands where it
did, though Cheapside Cross do not.

I know not what you mean by my cunning in making of Circles, of Crosses, of
Coins, or round things, etc. But you have made a Noose for your neck, and I
have made A Rope for a Paaret, a Prater, for you, G. N. you Anagram-maker.

Do not so wickedly, so ungratefully abuse the Parliament the Lord Genreall,
the Lord Admiral, the Assembly of Divines, the Scotch Commissioners, the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and Common-Councell-men of London, the meanest of whom is as
much above thy malice as thy slanders.

You talk of Mariana's Book that was burnt at Paris, and wish that it were
reprinted by Order, that it might persuade some Rogue or other to attempt the
Act to kill the King and Prince. Quecunque modo, etc. Thou Cavillar, Thou
Ravillac: There Is a name, an Anagram for you, Mr. G. N. and the rest of the
Cavaliers. I beseech your Majesty look round about you; There be many such
Cavillars, many such Ravillacs, many Jesuits, Papists, bloody Irish Rebels,
etc. near you: Think upon the untimely death of the Queens Father, Hen. 4.
there are many Assassinates. You, George Naworth, I know no Rogue, no Regicide
so likely as your self, to do such a bloody Act, had you but an Irish long
knife, such as the women brought from thence lately; how like Ravillac you
would look? you remember his end: you love to make Anagrams, you shall have
one, two, or three by and by, you homo trium literarum. Trioboli, etc.

You tell me that I am not yet out of my School Books, and that it were best
for me to get to Lincolns-Inne and scrape Trenchers. I tell thee, I am, and
that ^ Horn Book am sent you George Naworth to learn you to spell by, and make
Anagrams, I shall tell you your Fortune out of it by and by. As for the scraps
of my Trencher, I left them behind me at Lincolnes-Inne; I pray thee look in
the Bog house there, where you shall find spoon meat enough, I warrant you, as
much as will fill an egg for your Breakfast that morning you receive this:
And, if you stay a little longer at Oxford, you will be glad of some my scraps,

You are mightily given to mistake, and mis-call one name for another at
Oxford; and you use many Languages there: and between English and Latin, you
have made an Anagram of my name. You Romanists, you Scholars have nothing else
to do: you were beholding to the Whore of Babylon, who has taught you the
Language of the Beast: I am sure some part of it is at Oxford, but it will not
bite me: You have learnt, That h, proprie quidem litera non est, sed
Aspirationis nota; yet I shall have an h in my name, when thou have no breath
in thy body. The figure Casura is more used in that letter then in any other; I
pray thee, by Poetica licentia, grant it me, and then it will be thus, I be no
Rooke: you see how you mistake at Oxford. But because I will not add or
diminish one letter, take the true Anagram of my name, which is, Honi-Brooke;
so I have my h again. Thou have given me a new name, Mastix; I tell thee,
Mastick is very good for thy Gummes, and being chawed in thy mouth, will purge
malignant humors from thence: Now if thou want any Honey, thou may have
English enough, from the place I make it, to sweeten thy mouth: I was
Christened, but not in Rags of Popery, as though would fain have me: Thou Es,
if thou were Christened Georgius, and thy Fathers or thy Mothers name Naworth,
thou have another name, it begins with a W, and ends with an N: Be not ashamed
of it, do not defile thy own nest, hide not thy self in a hole or a Saw-pit.
Take this Anagram out of the same Language thou speak to me in, Georgius
Naworth, Thou own's a Greg'ri: But because I will give thee thy du^, thou was
Christened George, and thy Surname Naworth, take these two Ana's, A (...) rot'n
Rogue, or, Hang o true Rogue: The sense of which words are thus, Thou own's a
Greg'ri, A huge rot'n Rogue. These Anagrams thou make, Hang o true Rogue,
Convenient Rebus nomin^ saepe suis; Here Is plain English, M. G. N. you see what
you must trust to, Respi e Funem, that is your end, and there I leave you. I
told you before, That I should make Naworth, No worth, and if the Rope hold, it
will be too late to call George again; a living Dog will be better then a
dead Lion.

I have now done with you, G.N. only me thinks I see you, what an ill-favored
name you have, how like a Rogue you look, Quisque fortunae suae faber; who
cries A and O now? I found you O Rogue, and I leave you in A Rope, where you
shall make a wry mouth, thou man in the Moon. The time of Action is near; the
Spring is coming on apace, and therefore I have sent you A Cure for your
Malignancie; which if your Physician Gregory perform not, you may do it your
self; It is no more but put a Rope about your neck, and a swinge or two, And so
farewell and be hanged.

POSTSCRIPT.
IF you be such a fool as to reply, I will be so wise as not to surrejoyn:
Only if you will send me your Nativity, I will take as much pains as Lucius
Bellantius did for that learned, but Arch-Anti Astrologer, Picus Mirandula, and
return you directions, whereby you may see in what a desperate condit^^^ you
are. I confess you have very long ears at Oxford, and you Intelligence from
London is quicke^ then ours from thence; And therefore so soon as I had yours,
I drew up an Answer in as short a time (...) you speak of: But you may see you
hard destiny; mine bears dare, from

LONDON, the next day after the first of March, 1643/4. Remember me to Friar
Bacon, Brazen face, Time is past.
I have made use (you see now) of that Text of Scripture you bid me, Proverbs
the 26 and 5. and have answered you accordingly. Read the 109 Psalm, from the
beginning of the second Verse, to the end of the twentieth; And do not abuse it
as you use to do (non bonum est ludere cum Sanctis) but apply it to your self,
and all the rest of your stamp; lay you hand on your heart, it belongs properly
to you, and is very near the accomplishment: The rest of that Psalm I have
made use of as an Antidote against the Poison of your malignancy. The first
Verse may chance be a Psalm of mercy for you (wh^^ your time comes) in the old
Missall of Salisbury (if you be capable of it) when the Bishop of Newgate hears
you say your Lesson.

Georgius N^worth. Anagram, Thus Woe Gregorian. I Georg was thro^'n.


Jo. Booker.

FINIS.

