A BOOK OF Fruits and Flovvers.

SHOWING The Nature and Use of them, either for Meat or Medicine.

AS ALSO: To Preserve, Conserve, Candy, and in Wedges, or Dry them. To make
Powders, Civet bags, all sorts of Sugar-works, turned works in Sugar, Hollow,
or Frutages; and to Pickell them.

And for Meat.

To make Pyes, Biscat, Maid Dishes, Marchpanes, Leeches, and Snow, Craknels,
Caudels, Cakes, Broths, Fritterstuffe, Puddings, Tarts, Syrupes, and Sallets.

For Medicines.

To make all sorts of Poultisses, and Serecloaths for any member swelled or
inflamed, Ointments, Waters for all Wounds, and Cancers, Salves for Aches, to
take the Ague out of any place Burning or Scalding; For the stopping of sudden
Bleeding, curing the Piles, Ulcers, Ruptures, Coughs, Consumptions, and killing
of Warts, to dissolve the Stone, killing the Ring-worme, Emroids, and Dropsy,
Pain in the Ears and Teeth, Deafness.

Contra vim mortis, non est Medicamen in hortis. LONDON: Printed by M. S. for
Tho: Jenner at the South entrance of the Royal Exchange, London. 1653.

Of Lemmons.
lemon at the end of a branch with two leaves Lemmon


A Lemmon Sallet.
TAke Lemmons, rub them upon a Grate, to make their rinds smooth, cut them in
halves, take out the meat of them, and boil them in fair water a good while,
changing the water once or twice in the boiling, to take away the bitterness
of them, when they are tender take them out and scrape away all the meat (if
any be left) very clean, then cut them as thin as you can (to make them hold)
in a long string, or in reasonable short pieces, and lay them in your glass,
and boiling some of the best White Wind vinegar with shugar, to a reasonable
thin Syrup, power it upon them into your glass, and keep them for your use.

To Preserve Orenges or Lemmons.
Take your Oranges or Lemmons, lay them in water three days, and three nights,
to take away their bitterness, then boil them in fair water till they be
tender, make as much Syrup for them as will make them swim about the pan, let
them not boil too long therein, for it will make the skins tough; then let
them lie all night in the Syrup, to make them take the Syrup in the morning,
boil the Syrup to his thickness, and put them in gally pots or glasses, to
keep all the year, and this is the best way to Preserve Orenges, Lemmons, or
Citrons.

To make Past of Lemmons.
Take half a dozen of thick-rined Lemmons, cut them through the midst, and
boil them tender in fair water, then stamp them in a Mortar, strain the
juice or pulp from them, and dry it, and put two pound of Shugar to it, then
make it into what fashion you will, on a sheet of white paper, dry it in an
Oven, and turn it often for two days and two nights, for in that time it will
be dry enough; box it thus up, and it will endure all the Year.

Sweet Bags to lay amongst Linen.
Take Orris, Cypris, Calamus, Fusis, all of them gross beaten, and Gallingall
roots, of each a handful, and as much of the small tops of Lavender, dried,
and put them into baggs to lay among your clothes. You may put in a handful or
two of Damask Rose leaves dried, which will somewhat better the sent.

Medicines made of Lemmons.
To take away the Spots, or red Pimpels of the face.
Take half a pint of rain water, and half a pint of good Verjuice, sees it
till it be half consumed, then whilst it boils sill it up again with juice of
Lemmon, and so let it sees a pretty while; then take it from the fire, and
when it is cold put to it the whites of four new laid Eggs, well beaten, and
with this water annoint the place often.

A very good Medicine for the Stone.
Make a Posset of a quart of Rhenish wine, a pint of Ale, and a pint of Milk,
then take away the curd, and put into the drink, two handfulls of Sorrel, one
handful of Burnet, and half a handful of Balm, boil them together a good
while, but not too long, least the drink be too unpleasant, then take of the
drink a quarter of a pint, or rather half a pint, at once, at morning, and to
bedward, putting therein first two or three spoonfulls of juice of Lemmons,
this is an excellent Medicine for the Stone in the Kidneyes, to dissolve and
bring it away. It is very good in these Diseases of the Stone, to use Burnet
often in your drink at Meals, and often to steep it in over night, and in the
morning put in three or four spoonfulls of juice of Lemmons, and to drink
thereof a good draught every morning a week together, about the full of the
Moon, three days before, and three days after.

To roste a Shoulder of Mutton with Lemmons.
Take a Shoulder of Mutton half roasted, out off most of the meat thereof, in
thin slices, into a fair dish with the gravy thereof, put thereto about the
quantity of a pint of clarret wine, with a spoonful or two at most of the best
wine Vinegar, season it with Nutmeggs, and a little Ginger, then pare off the
rines of one or two good Lemmons, and slice them thin into the Mutton, when it
is almost well stewed between two dishes, and so let them stew together two or
three warmes, when they are enough, put them in a clean dish, and take the
shoulder blade being well broyled on a grid-iron, and lay sit upon your meat,
garnishing your dishes with some slices and rinds of the Lemmons, and so serve
it.

To Boil a Capon with Oranges and Lemmons.
Take Orenges and Lemmons peeled, and cut them the long way, and if you can,
keep your cloves whole, and put them into your best Broth of Mutton or Capon,
with Prunes or Currants three or four days, and when they have been well
sodden, cut whole Pepper, great Mase, a great piece of Suggar, some Rose Water,
and either White wine, or Clarret wine, and let all these sees together a
while, and serve it upon Sopps with your Capon.

A Lemmond Sallet.
Cut out slices of he peele of the Lemmons, long ways, a quarter of an inch
one piece from another, and then slice the Lemmons very thin, and lay them in a
dish cross, and the peeles about the Lemmons, and scrape a good deal of Suggar
upon them, and so serve them.

Of Quinces.
The best way to Preserve Quinces.
FIrst pare and coare the Quinces, and boil them in fair water till they be
very tender, not covering them, then taking them out of the water, take to
every pound of them, two pound of Sugar, and half a pint of water, boil it to
a Syrup, scumming it well, then put in some of the Jelly that is washed from
the Quince kernels, and after that, making it boil a little, put in your
Quinces, boil them very fast, keeping the holes upward as near as you can, for
fear of breaking, and when they are so tender that you may thrust a rush
through them, take them off, and put them up in your glasses, having first
saved some Syrup till it be cold to fill up your glasses.

A special Remembrance in doing them.
When you Preserve Quinces, or make Marmalade, take the Kernels out of the raw
Quinces, and wash off the Jelly that grows about them, in fair water, then
strain the water and Jelly from the kernels, through some fine Cobweb laune,
and put the same into the Marmalade, or preserved Quinces, when they are well
scum'd, but put not so much into your Quinces, as into the Marmalade, for it
will Jelly the Syrup too much; put six or seven spoonfulls of Syrup into the
Jelly. Before you put it into the Marmalade, you must boil your Quinces more
for Marmalade, then to preserve your Quinces, and least of them when you make
your clear Cakes.

When you would preserve your Quinces white, you must not cover them in the
boiling, and you must put half as much Sugar more for the white, as for the
other. When you would have them red, you must cover them in the boiling.

To Pickle Quinces.
Boil your Quinces that you intend to keep, whole and unpared, quinces
attached to a branch; examples of letter Q in Roman, Syriac, Arabic, Hebrew,
and an unidentified alphabet Quince
Qq Qq Qq Qq q q ^ q qof


in fair water, till they be soft, but not too violently for fear you break
them, when they are soft take them out, and boil some Quinces pared,
quartered, and coar'd, and the parings of the Quinces with them in the same
liquor, to make it strong, and when they have boiled a good time, enough to
make the liquor of sufficient strength, take out the quartered Quinces and
parings, and put the liquor into a pot big enough to receive all the Quinces,
both whole and quartered, and put them into it, when the liquor is through cold,
and so keep them for your use close covered.

To make Quince Cakes.
Prepare your Quinces, and take the just weight of them in Sugar, beaten finely
and searcing half of it, then of the rest make a Syrup, using the ordinary
proportion of a pint of water to a pound of Sugar, let your Quinces be well
beaten, and when the Syrup is cand height, put in your Quince, and boil it to
a past, keeping it with continual stirring, then work it up with the beaten
Sugar which you reserved, and these Cakes will taste well of the Quinces.

To make Printed Quidony of Quinces.
Take two pound of Quinces, paired, coared, and cut in small pieces, and put
them into a fair posnet, with a quart of saire water, and when they are boiled
tender, put into them one pound of Sugar clarified, with half a pint of fair
water, let them boil till all the fruit fall to the bottom of the posnet, then
let the liquid substance run through a fair linen cloth into a clean basin,
then put it into a posnet, and let it boil till it come to a jelly, then Print
it in your Moulds, and turn it into your boxes. You shall know when it is
ready to Print, by rouling it on the back of a Spoone.

Of Roses.
To make sweet Bags to lay Linen in.
Take Damask Rose budds, pluck them, and dry the leaves in the shadow, the tops
of Lavender flowers, sweet Margerom, and Basil, of each a handful, all dried
and mingled with the Rose leaves, take also of Benjamin, Storax, Gallingall
roots, and Ireos or Orris roots, twice as much of the Orris as of any of the
other, beaten in fine powder: a piece of cotton wool wetted in Rose water, and
put to it a good quantity of Murk and Ambergreace made into powder, and
sprinkle them with some Civet dissolved in Rose water, lay the Cotton in double
paper, and dry it over a chaffia dish of coals: Lastly, take half a handful
of Cloves, and as much Cinnamon bruised, not small beaten, mix all these
together, and put them up in your Bag.

A very good Poultis for any Member swelled and inflamed, and not broken, to
take away the pain.
Take three pints of new milk, of stale Manchet crumbs two handfulls, or so much
as shall make the milk somewhat thick, and thereto put two handfulls of dried
red Rose leaves, and three ounces of Oil of Roses, boil all these together to
the thickness of a Poultisse, then let it stand and cool, and while it
cools take a spoonful of Oil of Roses, and with a warm hand rub the place
grieved, till the Oil be dried in, and then lay the Poultisse as warm as you
may endure it, to the part inflamed; do this morning and evening for three or
four days, as you shall see cause.

To make a sweet Cake, and with it a very sweet water.
Take Damask Rose leaves, Bay leaves, Lavinder tops, sweet Marjerome tops,
Ireos powder, Damask powder, and a little Musk first dissolved in sweet water,
put the Rose leaves and herbs into a Basin, and sprinkle a quarter of a pint
of Rose Water among them, and stirring them all together, cover the Basin close
with a dish, and let them stand so covered, all night, in the morning Distill
them, so shall you have at once an excellent sweet water, and a very fine sweet
Cake to lay among your finest linen.

Oil of Roses.
Take Sallet Oil and put it into an earthen pot, then take Rose leaves, clip
off all the white, and bruise them a little, and put them into the Oil, and
then stop the top close with past, and set it into a boiling pot of water, and
let it boil one hour, then let it stand alone night upon hot embers, the next
day take the Oil, and strain it from the Rose leaves, into a glass, and put
therein some fresh Rose leaves, clipped as before, stop it, and set it in the Sun
every day for a fortnight or three weeks.

Syrup of Roses.
Take Damask Roses, clip off the white of them, and take six ounces of them to
every pint of fair water, first well boiled and scummed, let them stand so as
abovesaid, twelve hours, as you do in the Syrup of Violets, wringing out the
Roses and putting in new eight times, then wringing out the last put in only
the juice of four ounces of Roses, so make it up as before, if you will put in
Rubarb, take to every two drams, slice it, string it on a thread, hang it within
the pot after the first shisting, and let it infuse within your Roses: Some use
to boil the Rubarb in the Syrup, but it is dangerous, the Syrup prgeth
Choler and Melancholy.

A Conserve of Roses.
Take red Rose buds, clip of all the white, bruised, and withered from them,
then weigh them out, and taking to every pound of Roses three pound of Sugar,
stamp the Roses by themselves very small, putting a little juice of Lemmons or
Rose water to them as they wax dry, when you see the Roses small enough, put
the Sugar to them, and beat them together till they be well mingled, then put
it up in Gally pots or glasses; in like manner are the Conserverves of Flowers,
of Violets, Cowslips, Marigolds, Sage, and Sea boise made.

To Preserve Roses or any other Flowers.
Take one pound of Roses, three pound of Sugar, one pint of Rose water, or
more, make your Syrup first, and let it stand till it be cold, then take your
Rose leaves, having first clipped off all the white, put them into the cold
Syrup, then cover them, and set them on a soft fire, that they may but simper
for two or three hours, then while they are hot put them into pots or glasses
for your use.

How to Preserve Barbaries.
First take the fairest Barbaries, and of them the greatest bunches you can
get, and with a needle take out the stones on the one side of them, then weigh
out to every half pound of them one pound of Sugar, put them into a Preserving
pan, strew the Sugar on them, and let them boil a quarter of an hour softly,
then taking out the Barbaries let the Syrup boil a quarter of an hour more,
then put in the Barbaries again, and let them boil a pretty while with the
Syrup, then take them from the Syrup, and let them both stand till they be
cold, and so put them up.

To keep Barbaries to garnish your Meat.
Take the worst of them, and boil them in fair water, and strain the liquor
from them, and while the liquor is hot put it into your Barbaries, being clean
picked, and stop them up, and if they rose with leaves, thorns, and a rose hip
A Rose
mould much, wash them thoroughly in the liquor, then boil the liquor again,
and strain it, and let it cool, then put it to your Barbaries again.

Conserve of Barbaries.
Take your Barbaries, pick them clean in fair branches, and wash them clean,
and dry them on a cloth, then take some other Barbaries, and boil them in
Clarret wine till they be very soft, then strain them, and rub them so well
through the strainer, that you may know the substance of them, and boil up
this matter thus strained out, till it be very sweet, and somewhat thick, then
setting it by till it be cold, and then put in your branches of Barbaries into
gally pots, or glasses, and fill it up with the cold Syrup, and so shall you
have both Syrup, and also Barbaries, to use at your pleasure.

Of Almonds.
To make Almond Biscate.
Steep one pound of Almonds so long in cold water, till they will blanch, then
put them in Rose Water, and beat them in so much Rose Water as will keep them
from growing to an Oil, and no more; take one pound of Sugar beaten very fine,
and sifted through a Searce, take the whites of six Eggs beat to a froth, as
you use to do for other Biscuit, with a spoonful of fine flower, set the
Almonds and Sugar on a soft Charcoal fire, let them boil together till they be
very thick, and so let them stand till they be almost cold, then beat the Eggs
and that together, put in a little Musk for the better taste, if you please,
then lay them upon papers, in what proportion you will, and dry them in an
Oven, with a flack fire.

To make Almond Milk.
Take a rib of Mutton or Veale, or rather a Chicken, boil it in fair water,
put thereto French Barley, a Fennill root, a Parsley root, Violet leaves,
Strawberry leaves, and Cinquefoyle leaves, and boil them all together, till
the meat be over boiled, then strain out the liquor from the rest, while they
are boiling blanch a proportion of Almonds answerable to the liquor, beat them
well in a clean stone Mortar, and then grind them therein with Rose water and
Sugar, and when they are well ground put in all your liquor by little and
little, and grind with them till they be all well Compounded, and then strain
it into a fair glass, and use it at your pleasure.

An approved Medicine for the running of the Reins.
Make Almond Milk of Plantine water, or else boil Plantine in the liquor
whereof you make your Almond Milk, take a quart of it, and put thereto three
spoonfulls of Lentive farine, and three spoonfulls of Cinnamon water, take of
this at six in the morning, a good draught, two hours before dinner another, at
four of the clock in the afternoon, a third, and two hours after supper a
fourth; and twice or thrice between meals, eat a spoonful of Conserve of Red
Roses at a time.

Oil of Almonds.
Take Almonds, blanch them, and put them into a pot, and set that pot in
another pot of water that boyleth, and the steam of the seething pot will arise
and enter into the por with the Almonds, and that will become Oil when they
are stamped and wringed through a cloth. Thus they make Oil of the kernels of
Filberts, Walnuts, etc.

A Barley Cream to procure sleep, or Almond Milk.
Take a good handful of French Barley, wash it clean in warm water, and
boil it ina quart of fair water to the half, then put out the water from the
Barley, and put the Barley into a pottell of new clean water, with a Parsley,
and a Fennel root, clean washed, and picked with Bourage, Buglos, Violet
leaves, and Lettice, of each one handful, boil them with the Barley, till
more then half be consumed; then strain out the liquor, and take of blanched
Almonds a handful, of the seeds of Melons, Cucumbers, Citralls, and Gourds,
husked, of each half a quarter of an ounce, beat these seeds, and the Almonds
together, in a stone mortar, with so much Sugar, and Rose Water as is fit, and
strain them through a clean cloth into the liquor, and drink thereof at
night going to bed, and in the night, if this does not sufficiently provoke
sleep, then make some more of the same liquor, and boil in the same the heads,
or a little of white Poppey.

An Ointment to kill the Worms in little Children.
For stomach Worms, annoint the stomach with Oil of Wormwood, and the belly
with Oil of sweet Almonds, for belly Worms take all of Wormwood, Oil of
Savine, and the Powder of Aloe Cicatrina, finely beaten, annoint the belly
therewith, morning and evening. You must not use Savine in Medicines for Maiden
Children, but in stead of Oil of Savine, take as much of an Oxes Gall.

To make the best white Puddings.
Take a pound of Almonds, blanch them, stamp them, putting in a little Milk
sometime to them in the stamping, then put to them three handfulls of fine
Flower, or as much grated bread first baked in an Oven, six Eggs well beaten, a
good deal of matrow cut in little pieces, season them with Nutmeg and Sugar,
three spoonfulls of Rose Water, and a little Salt; temper them all together,
with as much Cream as will serve to wet or mingle them; and so fill them up.

An Almond Caudle.
Blanch Jordan Almonds, beat them with a little small Ale, and strain them out
with as much more Ale as you mind to make your Caudle of, then boil it as you
do an Egg Caudle, with a little Mace in it, and when it is off the fire
sweeten it with Sugar.

To make fine white Leach of Almonds.
Take half a pound of small Almonds, beat them, and strain them with Rose
water, and sweet Milk from the Cow, and put into it two or three pieces of
large Mace, one grain of Musk, two ounces of Isinglasse, and so boil it in a
Chafin-dish of coals, a quarter of an hour, till it will stand, which you
shall try thus, set a saucer in a little cold water, so that none come into it,
and put a spoonful of the Leach into it, and if you see that stand, take the
other off the fire, then you may slice it in what fashion you please.

To make Almond Butter.
Blanch one pound of Almonds, or more, or less, as you please, lay them four
hours in cold water, then stamp them with some Rose water, as fine as you can,
put them in a cloth, and press out as much Milk as you can; then if you think
they be not enough, beat them, and strain them again, till you get as much
Milk of them, as you can; then set it on the fire, till they be ready to boil,
putting in a good quantity of Salt and Rose Water, to turn it after one
boiling, being turned, take it off, cast it abroad upon a linen cloth, being
holden between two, then with a spoon take off the Whey under the cloth, so
long as any will drop or run, then take so much of the finest Sugar you can
get, as will sweeten it, and melt it in as much Rose Water as will serve to
dissolve it, put thereto so much Saffron in fine powder, as will color it, and
so steeping the Saffron and Sugar in Rose Water, season your Butter therewith,
when you make it up.

olives and leaves on a branch Olives


To make Almond Cakes.
Take of Jordan Almonds, one pound, beat them as you do for Almond milk, draw
them through a strainer, with the yolks of two or three Eggs, season it well
with Sugar, and make it into a thick Batter, with fine flower, as you do for
Biscuit bread, then power it on small Trencher plates, and bake them in an Oven,
or baking pan, and these are the best Almond Cakes.

To make Paste of Almonds.
Take one pound of small Almonds, blanch them out of hot water into cold, then
dry them with a cloth, and beat them in a stone Mortar, till they come to
Past, putting now and then a spoonful of Rose water to them, to keep them from
Oyling, when they are beaten to fine past, take half a pound of Sugar finely
beaten and searsed, put it to your past, and beat it till it will twist between
your fingers and thumb, finely without knots, for then it is enough, then make
thereof Pyes, Birds, Fruits, Flowers, or any pretty things, printed with Molds,
and so gild them, and put them into your Stove, and use them at your pleasure.

To make a Marchpine.
Take a pound of small Almonds, blanch them, and beat them, as you do your
past of Almonds, then drive it into a sheet of past, and spread it on a botome
of wafers, according to the proportion, or bigness you please, then set an
edge round about it, as you do, about a Tart, and pinch it if you will, then
bake it in a pan, or O^en, when it is enough, take it forth, and Ice it with an
Ice made of Rose Water and Sugar, as thick as batter, spread it on with a brush
of bristles, or with feathers, and put it in the Oven again, and when you see
the Ice rise white and dry, take it forth, and stick long comfits in it, and
set up a staddard in the midst of it, so gild it, and serve it.

To make White-Broth with Almonds.
First look that the Meat be clean washed, and then set it on the fire, and
when it boyleth, scum it clean, and put some salt into the pot, then take
Rosemary, Time, Hysop, and Marjerome, bind them together, and put them into the
pot, then take a dish of sweet Butter, and put it also into the pot amongst the
meat, and take whole Mase, and bind them in a cloth, and put them into the
pot, with a quantity of Verjuice, and after that take such a quantity of
Almonds as shall serve turn, blanch them, and beat them in the Mortar, and
then strain them with the broth when your Meat is in, and when these Almonds
are strained put them in a pot by themselves, with some Sugar, a little Ginger,
and also a little Rose water, then stir it while it boil, and after that take
some sliced Oringes without the kernels, and boil them with the broth of the
pot, upon a chafin-dish of coals, with a little Sugar, and then have some
Sipits ready in a platter, and serve the meat upon them, and put not your
Almonds in till it be ready to be served.

part of strawberry plant with leaves, stems, flowers, and berries Straw-berries


Of Straw-Berries.
A Tart of Straw-Berries.
PIck and wash your Straw-Berries clean, and put them in the past one by
another, as thick as you can, then take Sugar, Cinnamon, and a little Ginger
finely beaten, and well mingled together, cast them upon the Straw Berries, and
cover them with the lid finely cut into Lozenges, and so let them bake a
quarter of an hour, then take it out, strewing it with a little Cinnamon, and
Sugar, and so serve it.

Of Hartichoakes.
How to make a Hartichoake Pie.
Boil your Hartichoakes, take off all the leaves, pull out all the strings,
leaving only the bottoms, then season them with Cinnamon, and Sugar, laying
between every Hartichoake a good piece of Butter, and when you put your Pie
into the Oven, stick the Hartichoakes with slices of Dates, and put a quarter
of a pint of Whitewine into the Pie, and when you take it out of the Oven, do
the like again, with some butter, and sugar, and Rose Water, melting the
butter upon some coals, before you put it into the Pie.

To keep Hartichoakes for all the year.
The fittest time is about Michaelmas, and then according to the proportion of
Hartichoakes you will keep, sees a quantity of water in a pot or pan,
seasoning it so with white salt that it may have a reasonable taste, then put a
fit quantity of white salt into the water, and boil them together, and scum
them well; then put a good quantity of good Vinegar to them, to make the liquor
somewhat sharp, and boil it again, then parboyle your Hartichoakes that you
mind to keep, in another liquor, take them out of it, and let them cool, then
set your first liquor again on the fire to boil, and scumming it thoroughly,
let it cool again; when it is thoroughly cold, put it up in some firkin, or
large earthen pot, and put in your Hartichoakes to them handsomely, for
bruising them; then cover them close from the air, and so keep them to spend
at your pleasure.

To Preserve Hartichoakes.
Heat water scalding hot first, then put in your Hartichoakes, and scald them,
and take away all the bottomes, and leaves about them, then take Rose water and
Sugar and boil them alone a little while, then put the Hartichoakes therein,
and let them boil on a soft fire till they be tender enough, let them be
covered all the time they boil, then take them out and put them up for your
use.

To make a maid dish of Hartechoakes.
Take your Hartichoakes and pare away all the top, even to the Meat, and boil
them in sweet Broth till they be somewhat tender, then take them out, and put
them in a dish, and sees them with Pepper, Cinnamon, and Ginger, then put them
in the dish you mean to bake them in, and put in marrow to them good store, and
so let them bake, and when they be baked, put in a little Vinegar and Butter,
and stick three or four leaves of the Hartichoakes in the dish when you serve
them up, and scrape Sugar upon the dish.

OF MEDICINES.
An Excellent Medicine or Salve for an Ache coming of cold, easy to be made by
any Country Housewife.
Take of good Neats-foot Oil, Honey, and new Wax, like quantities, boil them
all well together, then put to them a quarter so much of Aqua vitae as was of
each of the other, and then setting it on the fire, boil it till it be well
incorporated together, then spread it upon a piece of thin Leather, or thick
linen cloth, and so apply it to the place pained.

To eake the Ague out of any place.
Take Vervine and Black Hemlocke, of each an handful, boil them in a pint of
fresh Butter till they be soft, and begin to parch again, then strain the
Butter from the herbs, and put it into a gally pot, and two or three times
annoint the place grieved with a spoonful or two thereof, probat.

For the Ague in Children, or Women with Child.
Take Venice Terpentine, spread it on the rough side of a piece of thin
Leather, two fingers breadth, and strew thereon the powder of Frankincense
finely beaten, and upon it some Nutmeg grated, bind this upon the wrists an
hour before the fit comes, and renew it still till the fit be gone.

To strengthen the Back weak or diseased.
Take the pith of an Oxes back, wash it in Wine or Ale, and beating it very
small strain it through a course cloth, and make a Caudle of it, with
Muskadine, or strong Ale, boiling therein a few Dates sliced, and the stones
taken out, and drink it first and last as warm as you can, walking well, but
temperately after it. Toasted dates often eaten are very good for the same.

For a Pain or Ache in the Back.
Take Nepe, Archangel, Parsley, and Clarie, of each half a handful, wash them
clean, and cut them small, and then fry them with a little sweet Butter, then
take the yolks of three or four Eggs, beat them well together, and put them to
the Herbs, fry them all together, and eat them fasting every morning, with
some Sugar; to take away the unsavorinesse of the Herbs, some use to take only
Clary leaves, and Parsley washed, not cut, or Clary leaves alone, and pouring
the yolks of the Eggs upon them, so fry them, and eat them.

For a sudden Bleeding at the Nose.
Burn an Egg-shell in the fire till it be as black as a coal, then beat it
to fine powder, and let the party snuff it up into his Nostrills.

A Medicine for Burning or Scalding.
Take Madenwort, stamp it, and sees it in fresh Butter, and therewith anoint
the place grieved presently.

For the Canker in Women's Breasts.
Take Goose-dung, and Celedonie, stamp them well together, and lay it
plaister-wise to the soar, it will cleanse the Canker, kill the worms, and
heal the soar.

For the Canker in the Mouth.
Take the juice of Plantaine, Vinegar, and Rose water, of each a like quantity,
mingle them together, and wash the mouth often with them.

To make a Tooth fall out of it self.
Take wheat flower and mix it with the Milk of an Herb called Spurge, make
thereof a past, and fill the hole of the Tooth therewith, and leave it there,
changing it every two hours, and the Tooth will fall out.

To take away the cause of the pain in the Teeth.
Wash the mouth two or three times together in the morning every month, with
White Wind wherein the root of Spurge has been sodden, and you shall never
have pain in your Teeth.

For a Consumption.
Take Ash-keyes so soon as they look withered, set them into an Oven, the bread
being drawn, in a pewter, or rather an earthen dish, and being so dried pull
off the out side, and reserving the inner part, of the seed, or keys, beat
them to fine powder, and either mix it with good English honey, and so eat of
it, first and last, morning and evening, a pretty deal of it at once, upon the
point of a knife, or else drink of the powder in some posset Ale, or thin
broth. Mares milk, or Asses milk, which is best, being drunk warm morning and
evening, is the most sovereign Medicine for it.

An excellent Medicine for the Cough of the Lungs.
Take Fennel and Angelica of each one handful, the leaves in Summer, roots in
Winter, sliced figgs twelve, but if the body be bound, twenty at least; green
Licorice if you can, two or three good sticks scraped and sliced, Anniseed
cleaved and bruised, two good spoonfulls, two or three Parsley roots scraped,
and the pith taken out, and twenty leaves of Foale-foot, boil all these in
three pints of Hysop water, to a pint and half, then strain it out into a
glass, putting to it as much white Sugar Candy as will make it sweet, drink
hereof, being warmed, five spoonfulls at a time, first in the morning, and last
in the evening, taking heed that you eat nor drink any thing two hours before
nor after.

Of Violets.
The use of Oil of Violets.
Oil of Violets, Cammomile, Lillies, Elder flowers, Cowslips, Rue, Wormwood,
and Mint, are made after the same sort; Oil of Violets, if it be subbed about
the Tempels of the head, does remove the extreme heat, asswageth the head Ache,
provokes sleep, and moistneth the brain; it is good against melancholy,
dullness, and heaviness of the spirits, and against swellings, and soars
that be over-hot.

The Syrup of Violets.
Take fair water, boil it, seum it, and to every ounce of it so boiled and
scommed, take six ounces of the blew of Violers, only shift them as before,
nine times, and the last time take nine ounces of Violets, let them stand
between times of shifting, 12 hours, keeping the liquor still on hot embers,
that it may be milk warm, and no warmer; after the first shifting you must
stamp and strain your last nine ounces of Violets, and put in only the juice
of them, then take to every pint of this liquor thus prepared, one pound of
Sugar finely beaten, boil it, and keep it with stirring till the Sugar be all
melted, which if you can, let be done before it boil, and then boil it up
with a quick fire. This does cool and open in a burning Ague, being dissolved
in Almond milk, and taken; especially it is good for any Inflammation in
Children. The Conserves are of the same effect.

The use of Conserve of Violets and Cowslips.
That of Cowslips does marvelously strengthen the Brain, preserves against
Madness, against the decay of memory, stops Headache, and most infirmities
thereof; for Violets it has the same use the Syrup has.

sprig of violet flowers Violets


To make Paste of Violets, or any kind of Flowers.
Take your Flowers, pick them, and stamp them in an Alablaster mortar, then
steep them two hours in a sauser of Rose Water, after strain it, and steep a
little Gum Dragon in the same water, then beat it to past, print it in your
Moulds, and it will be of the very color and taste of the Flowers, then gild
them, and so you may have every Flower in his own color, and taste better for
the mouth, then any printed color.

Powder of Violets.
Take sweet Ireos roots one ounce, red Roses two ounces, Storax one ounce and a
half, Cloves two drams, Marjerome one dram, Lavinder flowers one dram and a
half, make these into powder; then take eight grains of fine Musk powdered,
also put to it two ounces of Rose water, stir them together, and put all the
rest to them, and stir them half an hour, till the water be dried, then set it
by one day, and dry it by the fire half an hour, and when it is dry put it up
into bags.

A good Plaster for the Strangury.
Take Violets, and Hollyhokes, and Mercury, the leaves of these Herbs, or the
seeds of them, also the rind of the Elderne tree, and Leydwort, of each of
these a handful, and beat them small, and sees them in water, till half be
consumed, and put thereto a little oil Olive, and make thereof a plaster, and
lay it to the soar and reins; also in the summer thou must make him a drink
on this manner, take Saxifrage, and the leaves of Elderne, five leaved grass,
and seath them in a pottell of staile Ale, till the half be wasted, then
strain it, and keep it clean, and let the sick drink thereof first and last,
and if you lack these herbs because of winter, then take the roots of
five-leav'd grass, and dry them, and make thereof a powder, then take
Oyster-shells, and burn them, and make powder also of them, and mingling them
together, let the sick use thereof in his pottage, and drink, and it will help
him.

A Medicine for sore blood-shotten, and Rhuematick eyes.
Take ground Ivy, Daises, and Celedony, of each a like quantity, stamp and
strain out the juice out of them, and put to it a little brown Sugar Candy
dissolved in white Rose Water, and drop two or three drops of this liquor at
one time into the grieved eye, with a feather, lying upon the back when you do
it an hour after, this is a most approved Medicine to take away all
Inflammations, Spots, Webbs, Itches, Smartings, or any grief whatsoever in the
eyes.

A Glister to open and loosen the Body being bound, which may safely be
administered to any man or woman.
Take Mallows and Mercury unwashed, of each two handfulls, half a handful of
Barley clean rubbed and washed, boil them in a pottell of running water to a
quart, then strain out the water and put it in a Skillet, and put to it three
spoonfulls of Sallet Oil, and two spoonfulls of Honey, and a little salt; then
make it luke warm, and so minister it.

To cleanse the head, and take the Ache away.
Chew the root of Pellitory of Spain, often in the mouth.

A Medicine that has healed old Sores upon the legs, that have run so long
that the bones have been seen.
Take a quantity of good sweet Cream, and as much Brimstone beaten in fine
powder, as will make it thick like Paste, then take so much Butter as will make
it into the form of Ointment, and herewith annoint the place grieved, twice a
day.

An Ointment for a Rupture.
Take of Sanicle two handfulls, of Adders tongue, Doves foot, and Shephards
purse, of each as much, of Limaria one handful, chop them somewhat small, and
boil them in Deers seuet, until the Herbs do crumble, and wax dry.

A Barley Water to purge the Lungs and lights of all Diseases.
Take half a pound of fair Barley, a gallon of running water, Licorice half
an ounce, Fennel seed, Violet leaves, Parsley seed, of each one quarter of an
ounce, red Roses as much, Hysop and Sage dried, a good quantity of either,
Hearts tongue twelve leaves, a quarter of a pound of Figs, and as many
Raisons, still the Figs and Raisons, put them all into a new earthen pot,
with the water cold, let them sees well, and then strain the clearest from it,
drink of this a good quantity, morning and afternoon, observing good diet upon
it, it takes away all Agues that come of heat, and all ill heat; it purges
the Lights, Spleen, Kidneyes, and Bladder.

To Cure the Diseases of the Mother.
Take six or seven drops of the Spirit of Castoreum, in the beginning of the
fit, in two or three spoonfulls of posset Ale, applying a Plaster of Gavanum
to the Navill.

To kill Warts: an approved Medicine.
Take a Radish root, scrape off the outside of it, and rub it all over with
salt, then set it thus dressed upright in a saucer, or some other small dish,
that you may save the liquor that runs from it, and therewith annoint your
Warts three or four times in a day, the oftener the better, and in five or six
days they will consume away, Saepe probatum.

For the Piles.
Set a Chasin-dish of coals under a close stool chair, or in a close-stoole
case, and strew Amber beaten in fine powder, upon the coals, and sit down
over it, that the smoke may ascend up into the place grieved.

A Medicine for the Piles.
Take a little Orpine, Hackdagger, and Elecampane, stamp them all together with
Boares grease, into the form of an Ointment, and say them to the place grieved.

A Diet for the Patient that has Ulcers or Wounds that will hardly be Cured
with Ointments, Salves, or Plasters.
Take one pound of Guaicum, boil it in three pottels of Ale, with a soft fire,
to the consuming of two parts, but if it be where you may have wild Whay, or
cheese Whay, they are better. Let the Patient drink of this morning and
evening, half a pint at a time, and let him sweat after it two hours. His
drink at his Meals must be thus used, put into the same vessel where the former
was made, to the Guaicum that is left, three pottels of Ale, and not Whey, let
it boil to the one half, let him drink thereof at all times, and at his
meal, which must be but one in a day, and that so little, that he may rise
hungry. Thus he must do for five days together, but he must first be purged.

sprig of cowslip flowers and buds Cowslips


Of Cowslips.
Oil of Cowslips.
Oil of Cowslips, if the Nape of the Neck be anointed with it, is good for
the Palsy, it comfort the sinews, the heart and the head.

The use of the Oil of Wormwood, and Oil of Mint.
Oil of Wormwood is good for strains and bruises, and to comfort the stomach;
it is made of the green Herb, as are the Oil of Cammomile, Rue, and Mint, are
made.

Oil of Mint comfort the stomach, overlayed or weakened with Casting, it
does drive back, or dry up Weomend breasts, and does keep them from being
soar, being therewith anointed.

Syrup of Cowslips.
Instead of running water you must take distilled water of Cowslips, put
thereto your Cowslip flowers clean picked, and the green knobs in the bottom
cut off, and therewith boil up a Syrup, as in the Syrup of Roses is showed;
it is good against the Frenzy, comforting and staying the head in all hot
Agues, etc. It is good against the Palsy, and procures a sick Patient to
sleep; it must be taken in Almond-milk, or some other warm thing.

To keep Cowslips for Salates.
Take a quart of White wine Vinegar, and half a quarter of a pound of fine
beaten Sugar, and mix them together, then take your Cowslips, pull them out of
the podds, and cut off the green knobs at the lower end, put them into the pot
or glass wherein you mind to keep them, and well shaking the Vinegar and Sugar
together in the glass wherein they were before, power it upon the Cowslips,
and so stirring them morning and evening to make them settle for three weeks,
keep them for your use.

To Conserve Cowslips.
Gather your Flowers in the midst of the day when all the dew is off, then cut
off all the white leaving none but the yellow blossom so picked and cut,
before they wither, weigh out ten ounces, taking to every ten ounces of them,
or greater proportion, if you please, eight ounces of the best refined Sugar,
in fine powder, put the Sugar into a pan, and candy it, with as little water as
you can, then taking it off the fire, put in your Flowers by little and little,
never ceasing to stir them till they be dry, and enough; then put them into
glasses, or gally pots, and keep them dry for your use. These are rather
Candied then Conserved Cowslips.

To Preserve all kind of Flowers in the Spanish Candy in Wedges.
Take Violets, Cowslips, or any other kind of Flowers, pick them, and temper
them with the pap of two roasted Apples, and a drop or two of Verjuice, and a
grain of Musk, then take half a pound of fine hard Sugar, boil it to the
height of Manus Christi, then mix them together, and pour it on a wet Pie
plate, then cut it in Wedges before it be through cold, gild it, and so you may
box it, and keep it all the year. It is a fine sort of Banqueting steffe, and
newly used, your Manus Christi must boil a good while, and be kept with good
stirring.

A Medicine to break and heal sore breasts of Women, used by Mid-wives, and
other skillfull Women in London.
Boil Oatmeale, of the smallest you can get, and red Sage together, in running
or Conduict water, till it be thick enough to make a Plaster, and then put
into it a fit proportion of Honey, and let it boil a little together, take it
off the fire, and while it is yet boiling hot, put thereto so much of the best
Venice Terpentine as will make it thick enough to spread, then spreading it on
some soft leather, of a good thick linen cloth, apply it to the breast, and it
will first break the soar, and after that being continued, will also heal it
up.

A Medicine that has recovered some from the Dropsy, whom the Physician has
given over.
Take green Broom and burn it in some clean place, that you may save the
ashes of it, take some ten or twelve spoonfulls of the same Ashes, and boil
them in a pint of White Wind till the virtue of it be in the wine, then cool
it, and drayne the wine from the dreggs, and make three draughts of the Wine,
and drink one fasting in the morning, another at three in the afternoon,
another last at night near going to bed. Continue this, and by Gods grace it
will cure you.

An especial Medicine for all manner of Poison.
Take Hemp seed, dry it very well, and get off the husks, and beat the
Hemp Seed into fine powder, take Mintes also, dry them, and make them into
powder, boil a spoonful of either of these in half a pint of Goats milk, a
pretty while, then put the milk into a cup to cool, and put into it a
spoonful of Treacle, and stir them together till it be cool enough, then
drink it in the morning fasting, and eat nothing till noon, or at least two
hours; do the like at night, and use it so three days, and it will kill and
overcome any poison.

Doctor Lewin's Vnguentum Rosatum, good for the heat in the Back.
Take a certain quantity of Barrowes grease, Oil of sweet Almonds, and
Rose Water, either red or damask, of each a like quantity, but of neither so
much as of the Hoggs grease, beat them together to an Ointment, put it in some
gally pot, and when you would use it, heat it, and therewith annoint the Back
and Reins.

Of Beans.
To defend Humors.
TAke Beans, the rind or the upper skin being pulled off, bruise them, and
mingle them with the white of an Egg, and make it stick to the temples, it
keeps back humors flowing to the Eyes.

To dissolve the Stone, which is one of the Physicians greatest secrets.
Take a peck of green Bean cods, well cleaved, and without dew or rain, and
two good handfulls of Saxifrage, lay the same into a Still, one row of Bean
cods, another of Saxifrage, and so Distill another quart of water after this
manner, and then Distill another proportion of Bean codds alone, and use to
drink often these two Waters; if the Patient be most troubled with heat of the
Reins, then it is good to use the Bean codd water stilled alone more often, and
the other upon coming down of the sharp gravel or stone.

Vnguentum Sanativum.
Take of Terpentine one pound, Wax six ounces, Oil of Commomile part of a bean
plant with two pods (or one pod split open?) and a blossom Beans
half a pint, put all these together in a pan, and put to them a handful of
Cammomile, bruised, or cut very small, boil them upon a soft fire till they be
well melted, and no more; then take it from the fire, and strain it into a
clean pan, and so let it cool all night, and in the morning put it up for your
use. This Ointment is good for any cut, wound, or breaking of the flesh, it
eats away dead flesh, and ranklings, and does heal again quickly.

A Serecloath for all Aches.
Take Rossen one pound, Perrossen a quarter of a pound, as Mastick and Deer
sewet the like, Turpentine two ounces, Cloves bruised, one ounce, Mace bruised,
two ounces, Saffron two drams, boil all these together in Oil of Cammomile,
and keep it for your use.

An Ointment to be made at any time of the year, and is approved good, and
has helped old Pains, Griefs, and Aches.
Take Steers Gall, Sallet Oil, and Aqua vitae, of each five spoonfulls, boil
them together a little, and therewith anoint the place pained, by the fire,
and lay a warm cloth on it.

An Ointment for the Sciatica.
Roaste a handful or two of Onions, and take Neats-foot Oil, and Aqua vitae,
of each a pint, stamp, or rather boil all these together to an Oil, or
Ointment, and strain it into a gally pot, and therewith annoint the place
grieved as hot as you can endure it, morning and evening.

A Water to drive away any Infection.
Take Draggons, Angelica, Rue, Wormwood, of each a handful, chop them pretty
small, and steep them in a quart of White Wind, twenty four hours, then distill
them in a Still, and reserve the water in a glass close stopped; give to the
sick Patient six or seven spoonfuls thereof at a time fasting, and let him
fast an hour and an half after, and keep himself very warm in his bed, or
otherwise.

An excellent Conservative for the stomach, helping digestion, warming the
brain, and drying the Rheumes.
Take two ounces of good old Conserve of red Roses, of chosen Methridate two
drams, mingle them well together, and eat thereof to bed ward, the quantity of
a hazell nut; this does expel all windnesse of the stomach, expels raw
humors and venomous vapors, causes good digestion, dries the Rheum,
strengthens the memory and sight.

An Ointment for any wound or sore.
Take two pound of Sheeps suet, or rather Deers suet, a pint of Candy Oil, a
quarter of a pound of the newest and best Beeswax, melt them together,
stirring them well, and put to them one ounce of the Oil of Spike, and half
an ounce of the Goldsmiths Boras, then heating them again, and stirring them
all together, put it up in a gally pot, and keep it close stopped till you have
cause to use it; this is an approved Ointment to cure any wounds or sores new
or old.

An excellent Ointment for any Bruise or Ache.
Take two pound of May Butter purified, power it out from the dregs, and put to
it of Broom flowers and Elder flowers, of each a good handful, so clean
picked that you use nothing but the leaves, mix them all together in a stone
pot, and boil them seven or eight hours in a kettell of water, being covered
with a board, and kept down with weights, keeping the kettell always full of
water, with the help of another kettell of boiling water ready to fill up the
first as it wastes, and when it waxes somewhat cool, but not cold, strain
the Ointment from the Herbs, into a gally pot, and keep it for your use.

A Plaster for a Bile or Push.
Take a yolk of an Egg, and half a spoonful of English Honey, mix them
together with fine wheat flower, and making it to a Plaster, apply it warm to
the place grieved.

An approved good drink for the Pestilence.
Take six spoonfuls of Draggon-water, two good spoonfulls of Wine-Vineger, two
penny weights of English Saffron, and as much Treacle of Gene, as a little
Walnut, dissolve all these together upon the fire, and let the Parient drink it
blood warm, within twenty hours or sooner that he is sick, and let him neither
eat nor drink six hours after, but lie so warm in his bed, that he may sweat,
this expels the Disease from the heart, and if he be disposed to a sore, it
will straight ways appear, which you shall draw out with a Plaster of Flos
Vnguentorum.

For the Rheum in the gums or teeth.
Boil Rosemary in fair water, with some ten or twelve Cloves, shut, and when
it is boiled take as much Clarret wine as there is water left, and mingle with
it, and make it boil but a little again, then strain it into some glass,
and wash the mouth there with morning and evening; this will take away the
Rheum in short time; and if you boil a little Mastick therewith, it is the
better.

For the Emroids.
Take Egremony and bruise it small, and then fry it with Sheep suet, and Heney,
of each a like quantity, and lay it as hot as you can suffer it to the
Fundament, and it will heal very fair and well.

An approved medicine for the Dropsey.
Take the Herb called Bitter sweet, it grows in waters, and bears a purple
flower, slice the stalks, and boil a pretty deal of them in White Wind, drink
thereof first and last, morning and evening, and it will cure the Dropsey.

A Powder for VVounds.
Take Orpiment, and Verdigreese, of each an ounce, of Vitriall burned till it
be red, two ounces, beat each of them by it self in a brazen Mortar, as small
as flower, then mingle them all together, that they appear all as one, and keep
it in bags of leather, well bound, for it will last seven years with the
same virtue, and it is called Powder peerlesse, it has no peer for working in
Chyrurgery, for put of this powder in a wound where is dead flesh, and lay
scrap't lint about it, and a Plainer of Disklosions next upon it, and it will
heal it.

An approved Medicine for the Green sickness.
Take a quart of Clarret wine, one pound of Currants, and a handful of young
Rosemary crops, and half an ounce of Mace, sees these to a pint, and let the
Patient drink thereof three spoonfulls at a time, morning and evening, and eat
some of the Currants also after.

A Medicine for a Pleurisy, Stitch, or Wind, offending in any part of the
Body.
Gather the young shutes of Oak, after the fall of a Wood, and picking out the
tenderest and softest of them, especially those which look redest, bind them up
together in a wet paper, and roste them in hot embers, as you do a Warden,
whereby they will dry to powder, of which powder let the Patient take a
spoonful in a little Posset Ale, or Beer, warmed, in the morning, fasting
after it two hours, or more, if he be able, doing the like about three after
noon, and two hours after supper, four or five days together, which thus done
in the beginning of the Disease, is by often experiments found to cure such
windy pains in the side, stomach, or other parts of the body; you may dry them
also in a dish, in an Oven after the bread is drawn; you shall do well to
gather enough of them in the Spring, and make good store of the powder then, to
keep for all the year following.

An approved Medicine for the Gout in the feet.
Take an Oxes paunch new killed, and warm out of the belly, about the latter
end of May, or beginning of June, make two holes therein, and put in your feet,
and lay store of warm aloaths about it, to keep it warm so long as can be. Use
this three or four days together, for three weeks or a month, whether you
have the fit or pain of the Gout, at that time or no, so you have had it at
any time before. This has cured diverse persons, that they have never been
troubled with it again.

For one that cannot make water.
Take the white strings of Filmy roots, of Primroses, wash them very clean, and
boil of them half a handful, in a pint of Beer or White Wind, till half be
consumed, then strain it through a clean cloth, and drink thereof a quarter
of a pint, somewhat warm, morning and evening, for three days, it will purge
away all viscous or obstruction: stopping the passage of the water, probatum.

To kill the Ring-worme, and heat thereof.
Take a quart of White wine vinegar, boil therein of Woodbine leaves, Sage,
and Plantaine of each one handful, of white Coperas, one pound, of Alum as
much as an Egg; when it is boiled to half a pint, strain out the liquor, and
therewith wash the soar as hard as you can suffer it.

To make a Water for all VVounds and Cankers.
Take a handful of red Sage leaves, a handful of Selandine, as much Woodbine
leaves, then take a gallon of Conduict water, and put the herbs in it, and let
them boil to a pottell, and then strayning the Herbs through a strainer, take
the liquor and set it over the fire again, and take a pint of English Honey, a
good handful of Reche Alum, as much of white Copperas tin beaten, a penny
worth of Grains bruised, and let them boil all together three or four warms,
and then let the scum be taken off with a feather, and when it is cold put it
in an earthen pot or bottell, so as it may be kept close; and for an old Wound
take of the thinnest, and for a green Wound, of the thickest, and having
dressed them with this Water, cover the soar either with Veale, or Mutton, and
skin it with Dock leaves.

For a Swelling that comes suddenly in man's Limbs.
Take Hearts tongue, Chersoyle, and cut them small, and then take dreggs of Ale,
and Wheat Branne, and Sheeps 'tallow molten, and do all in a pot, and sees
them till they be thick, and then make a Plaster, and lay it to the swelling.

Of Apricocks.
To dry Apricocks.
TAke them when they be ripe, stone them, and pare off their rindes very thin,
then take half as much Sugar as they weigh, finely beaten, and lay them with
that Sugar into a silver or earthen dish, laying first a lay of Sugar, and then
of Fruit, and let them stand so all night, and in the morning the Sugar will be
all melted, then put them into a Skillet, and boil them apace, scumming them
well, and as soon as they grow tender take them off from the fire, and let them
stand two days in the Syrup, then take them two apricots on a branch with
several leaves Aprecocks
out, and lay them on a fine plate, and so dry them in a Stove.

Clear Cakes of Quinces, or Apricocks.
Take of the best Sugar finely beaten and searced, one pound, to a pound of
Quinces, or Apricocks, set your Sugar upon a chasin dish of coals, and dry it
above half an hour, then cooling it, stir into it a little Musk and
Ambergreese finely beaten, and powdered, then pare your Quinces, and boil them
in fair water whole, till they be tender, and not covering them, for so they
will be white; then take them, and scrape off all the Quince to the coare, into
a filver dish, and boil it therein till it grow dry, which you shall perceive
by the rifing of it up, when it is thus well dried, take it off, let it cool,
and strew on the Sugar, letting some other to strew it, till it be all
thoroughly wrought in, then lay it out on glasses, plates, or prints of Flowers,
or letters, an inch thick, or less as you please.

The best way to Preserve Apricocks.
Take the weight of your Apricocks, what quantity soever you mind to use, in
Sugar finely beaten, pare and stone the Apricocks, and lay them in the Sugar,
in your preserving pan all night, and in the morning set them upon hot embers
till the Sugar be all melted, then let them stand, and scald an hour, then take
them off the fire, and let them stand in that Syrup two days, and then boil
them softly till they be tender and well colored, and after that when they be
cold put them up in glasses or pots, which you please.

Of Lillies.
The use of Oil of Lillies.
Oil of Lillies is good to supple, mollify, and stretch sinews that be
shrunk, it is good to annoint the sides and veins in the fits of the Stone.

To Candy all kind of Flowers as they grow, with their stalks on.
Take the Flowers, and cut the stalks somewhat short, then take one pound of
the whitest and hardest Sugar you can get, put to it eight spoonfulls of Rose
water, and boil it till it will roll between your singers and your thumb,
then take it from the fire, cool it with a stick, and as it waxes cold, dip
in all your Flowers, and taking them out again suddenly, lay them one by one
on the bottom of a Sive; then turn a joined stool with the feet upwards, set
the sive on the feet thereof, cover it with a fair linen cloth, and set a
chafin-dish of coals in the midst of the stool underneath the sive, and the
heat thereof will run up to the five, and dry your Candy presently; then box
them up, and they will keep all the year, and look very pleasantly.

To make the Rock Candies upon all Spices, Flowers, and Roots.
Take two pound of Barbary Sugar, Clarify it with a pint of water, and the
whites of two Eggs, then boil it in a posnet to the height of Manus Christi,
then put it into an earthen Pipkin, and therewith the things that you will
Candy, as Cinnamon, Ginger, Nutmegs, Rose huds, Marigolds, Eringo roots, etc.
cover it, and stop it close with clay or paste, then put it into a Still, with
a leasurely fire under it, for the space of three days and three nights, then
open the pot, and if the Candy begin to come, keep it unstopped for the space
of three or four days more, and then leaving the Syrup, take out the Candy,
lay it on a Wire grate, and put it in an Oven after the bread is drawn, and
there let it remain one night, and your Candy will dry. This is the best way
for rock Candy, making so small a quantity.

The Candy Sucket for green Ginger, Lettice, Flowers.
Whatsoever you have Preserved, either Herbs, Fruits, or Flowers, take them
out of the Syrup, and wash them in warm water, and dry them well, then boil
the Sugar to the height of Candy, for Flowers, and draw them through it, then
lay them on the bottom of a Sive, dry them before the fire, and when they are
enough, box them for your use. This is that the Comfet-makers use and call
Sucket Candy.

Of Grapes.
Syrup Gresta, or a Syrup of Unripe Grapes.
Take a good basket full of unripe Grapes, set them three days in a vessel
after they be gathered, stamp them, and strain out the juice out of them, take
thereof six quarts, boil it with a soft fire till the third part be consumed,
then four quarts will remain, let that run through a woollen bag, and stand
till it be clear in it self, then take of the clearest of it, seven pints, put
thereto give pound of Clarified Sugar, boil them together to the thickness of
a Syrup, and keep it in a glass; it is good for a perbreaking stomach,
proceeding of Choler, and for a swelling stomach, it takes away thirst and
dryness, and chollerick Agues, it is of great comfort to the stomach of Women
being with child, it is a preservative against all manner of Venom, and
against the Pestilence.

OF PURGES.
A Purge to drive out the French Pox, before you use the Ointment.
Take half a pint of good Aqua vitae, one ounce of Treacle of Gene, one
quarter of an ounce of Spermacaeti, boil all these together on a soft fire
half a quarter of an hour, and let the Patient drink this as warm as he can,
and lie down in his bed, and sweat, and if any of the Disease be in his body,
this will bring it forth, and bring him to an easy loosnesse; this is thought
the best and surest of all other Cures for this infirmity.

The Ointment for the French Pox.
Take Barrowes grease well tried from the filmes, beat it in a Mortar till it
be small and fine, put thereto of Lethargy one ounce, of Mastick in fine powder
two ounces, of Olibanum in powder, one ounce, of Oil of Spike one ounce, Oil
of Paliolum one ounce, of Terpentine one quarter of a pound, beat all these
together into a perfect Ointment, and therewith annoint these places.

What place to annoint for the French Pox.
The principal bone in the Nape of the Neck, without the shoulder places,
taking heed it come not near the channel bone, for then it will make the
throat swell, else not, the elbowes on both sides, the hip bones, the share,
the knees, the hammes, and the ankles; if the Patient have no Ache, annoint not
these places, but only the sores till they be whole; if there be any knobs
lying in the flesh, as many have, annoint them often, and lay lint upon them,
and brown paper upon the lint, and keep the Fatient close out of the air, and
this used will make him whole in ten days by the grace of God.

For a pain in the ears, or deafness.
Take a hot loaf, of the bigness of a Bakers penny loaf, and pull or cut it
in two in the midst, and lay the middle of the crummy side to the midst, or
to the hole of the ears or ears pained, as hot as they may be endured, and so
bind them fast together on all night, and then if you find any pain in either
or both ears, or any noise, put into the pained ear or ears, a drop of Aqua
vitae, in each, and then again binding more hot bread to them, walk a little
while, and after go to bed; this done three or four days together, has taken
away the pain, hearing noise in the ears, and much eased the deafness, and
dullness of and in many.

Of Marigolds.
A very good Plaster to heal and dry up a Sore or Cut suddenly.
TAke of Marigold leaves, Porret blades or leaves, and Housleke, of all two
handfulls, beat them all very small in a Mortar, and put to them the whites of
two new-layd Eggs, and beat them very well till they be thoroughly incorporated
with the Eggs, and apply this till you be well, renew it every day.

The use of Conserve of Marigolds.
Conserve of Marigolds taken fasting in the morning, is good for Melancholy,
cures the trembling and shaking of the heart, is good to be used against the
Plague, and Corruption of the Air.

Of Cherries.
A way to dry Cherries.
Take three quarters of a pound of Sugar, and a pound of Cherries, their stalks
and stones taken from them, then put a spoonful of clean water in the Skillet,
and so lay a lay of Cherries and another of Sugar, till your quantity be out,
then set them on the fire, and boil them as fast as conveniently you can, now
and then shaking them about the Skillet, for fear of burning, and when you
think they are enough, and clear, then take them off the fire, and let them
stand till they be half cold, then take them out as clear from the Syrup as
you can, and lay them one by one upon sheets of glass, setting them either
abroad in the sun, or in a window where the sun may continually be upon
them. If they dry not so fast as you would have them, then in the turning
scrape some loaf Sugar finely upon them, but add no greater heat then the
sun will afford, which will be sufficient if they be well tended, and let no
dew fall on them by any means, but in the evening set them in some warm
Cupboard.

How to Preserve Cherries.
Take the Cherries when they be new gathered off the Tree, being full ripe, put
them to the bottom of your Preserving pan, weighing to every pound of
Cherries, one pound of sugar, then throw some of the sugar upon the Cherries,
and set them on a very quick fire, and as they boil throw on the rest of the
sugar, till the Syrup be thick enough, then take them out, and put them in a
gally pot while they are warm; you may if you will, put two or three spoonfulls
of Rose Water to them.

To make all manner of Fruit Tarts.
You must boil your Fruit, whether it be Apple, Cherry, Peach, Damson, Pear,
Mulberry, or Codling, in fair water, and when they be boiled enough, put them
into a bowl, and bruise them with a ladle, and when they be cold strain them,
and put in red wine, or cherries (two pairs and one single) on a branch with
four pairs of leaves Cherries
Clarret wine, and so season it with sugar, cinnamon, and ginger.

To make a close Tart of Cherries.
Take out the stones, and lay them as whole as you can in a Charger, and put
Mustard, Cinnamon, and Sugar, into them, and lay them into a Tart whole, and
close them, then let them stand three quarters of an hour in the Oven, and then
make a Syrup of Muskadine, and Damask-water, and sugar, and so serve it.

To make fine Pippin Tarts.
Quarter, pare, core, and stew your Pippins in a Pipkin, upon very hot embets,
close covered, a whole day, for they must stew softly, then put to them some
whole Cinnamon, six Cloves, and sugar enough to make them sweet, and some
Rose Water, and when they are stewed enough, take them off the fire, and take
all the Spice from them, and break them small like Marmalade, and having your
Coffins ready made, not above an inch deep, fill them with it, and lay on a
very thin cover of puff paste, close and fit, so bake them, serve them in
cold, but you must take heed you do not overtake them.

To make a Tart of Butter and Eggs.
Take the yolks of sixteen Eggs well parted from the whites, three quarters of
a pound of Butter well Clarified, and strain it twice or thrice in a fair
strainer, seasoned with sugar and a little Rose water, wherein Spinach first a
little boiled, has been strained, to make it green; be sure your paste be well
made, and whole, and so bake it up, and serve it.

Of Goose-Berries.
To keep Goose-Berries.
Take a handful or two of the worser of your Goose-Berries, cut off their
stalks and heads, and boil them all to pieces, in a pottell of water, putting
into the boiling thereof, half a quarter of sugar, then take the liquor,
strain it through a hair strainer, and while it cools cut off the stalks
and heads of the fairest Goose-Berries, being very careful you cut not the
skin of them above or below; put them into a gally pot, and pour the liquor in
after them.

Purslaine must be used as you do the Goose-Berries.

The best way to Preserve Goose-Berries.
Gather them with their stalks on, cut off their heads, and stone them, then
put them in scalding water, and let them stand therein covered a quarter of an
hour, then take their weight in sugar, finely beaten, and laying first a lay of
sugar, then one of your Goose-Berries, in your Preserving Skillet or pan, till
all be in, putting in for every pound of Goose-Berries, six spoonfulls of
water, set them on the embers till the sugar be melted, then boil them up as
fast as you can, till the Syrup be thick enough, and cold, and then put them
up. This way serves also for Respasses and Mulberries.

Of Plums.
The best way to dry Plums.
Take your Plums when they are full grown, with the stalks on them, but yet
green, split them on the one side, and put them in hot water, but not too hot,
and so let them stand three or four hours, then to a spoonful of them, take
three quarters of a pound of sugar, beaten very fine, and eight spoonfulls of
water to every pound, and set them on hot embers till the sugar be melted, and
after that boil them till they be very tender, letting them stand in that
Syrup three days to plump them, then take them out, wash the Syrup from them
with warm water, and wipe them with a fine linen cloth, very dry, and lay
them on plates, and set them to dry in a Stove, for if you dry them in an Oven,
they will be tough.

To Preserve Damsons.
Take Damsons before they be full ripe, but new gathered off the Tree, allow to
every pound of them a pound of sugar, put a little Rose Water to them, and set
them in the bottom of your pan, one by one, boil them with a soft fire, and
as they leeth strew your sugar upon them, and let them boil till the Syrup be
thick enough, then while the Syrup is yet warm, take the Plums out, and put
them in a gally pot, Syrup and all.

To Preserve Bullasses as green as grass.
Take your Bullasses, as new gathered as you can, wipe them with a cloth, and
prick them with a knife, and quaddle them in two waters, close covered, then
take a pound of Clarified sugar, and a pint of Apple water, boil them well
together (keeping them well scummed) unto a Syrup, and when your Bullasses are
well dript from the water, put them into the Syrup, and warm them three or
four times at the least, at the last warming take them up, and set them a
dropping from the Syrup, and boil the Syrup a little by it self, till it
come to a jelly, and then between hot and cold put them up to keep for all the
year.

To Preserve Pares, Pare-Plums, Plums.
First take two pound and a half of fine sugar, and beat it small, and put it
into a pretty brass pot, with twenty spoonfulls of Rose Water, and when it
boyleth skim it clean, then take it off the fire, and let it stand while it be
almost cold, then take two pound of Pare-plums, and wipe them upon a fair
cloth, and put them into your Syrup when it is almost cold, and so set them
upon the fire again, and let them boil as softly as you can, for when they
are boiled enough, the kernels will be yellow, then take them up, but let your
Syrup boil till it be thick; then put your Plums upon the fire again, and
let them boil a walme or two, so take them from the fire, and let them stand
in the vessel all night, and in the morning put them into your pot or glass,
and cover them close.

Of Medlers.
To Preserve Medlers.
Take the fairest Medlers you can get, but let them not be too ripe, then set
on fair water on the fire, and when it boyleth put in your Medlers, and let
them boil till they be somewhat soft, then while they are hot pill them, cut
off their crowns, and take out their stones, then take to every pound of
Medlers, three quarters of a pound of sugar, and a quarter of a pint of Rose
water, sees your Syrup, scumming it clean, then put in your Medlers, one by
one, the stalks downward, when your Syrup is somewhat cool then set them on
the fire again, let them boil softly till the Syrup be enough, then put in a
few Cloves and a little Cinnamon, and so putting them up in pots reserve them
for your use.

three medlars on a branch with leaves Medlers


To make a Tart of Medlers.
Take Medlers that be rotten, and stamp them, and set them upon a chafingdish
with coals, and beat in two yolks of Eggs, boiling till it be somewhat thick,
then season it with Sugar, Cinnamon, and Ginger, and lay it in paste.

Of Cucumbers.
How to keep Cucumbers.
Take a kettle big enough for your use, half full of water, make it brackish
with salt, boil therein ten or twenty Cucumbers,, cut in halves, then take the
raw Cucumbers, being somewhat little, and put them into the vessel wherein you
will keep them, and when your liquor is cold strain so much of it into them,
as may keep the Cucumbers always covered.

To keep boiled Cucumbers.
Take a kettle of water, put salt to it, boil it well, then take your raw
Cucumbers, put them into it, and keep them with turning up and down very
softly, till they be as it were per-boyled, then take them out, and lay them
aside till they be cold, then put them up in the vessel you will keep them in,
and when the liquor is cold, strain it into them, till they be all covered.

To Pickle Cucumbers to keep all the year.
Pare a good quantity of the rindes of Cucumbers, and boil them in a quart of
running water, and a pint of wine Vinegar, with a handful of salt, till they
be soft, then letting them stand till the liquor be quite cold, pour out the
liquor from the rinds, into some little barrel, earthen pot, or other vessel,
that may be close stopped, and put as many of the youngest Cucumbers you can
gather, therein, as the liquor will cover, and so keep them close covered, that
no wind come to them, to use all the year till they have new; if your
Cucumbers be great, it is best to boil them in the liquor till they be soft.

OF COOKERY.
To make Snow.
Take a quart of thick Cream, and five or six whites of Eggs, a sauser full of
sugar finely beaten, and as much Rose water, beat them all together, and always
as it rises take it out with a spoon, then take a loaf of Bread, cut away the
crust, set it in a platter, and a great Rosemary bush in the midst of it,
then lay your Snow with a Spoon upon the Rosemary, and so serve it.

To make Spiced Bread.
Take two pound of Manchet paste, sweet Butter half a pound, Currants half a
pound, sugar a quarter, and a little Mace, if you will put in any, and make it
in a loaf, and bake it in an Oven, no hotter then for Manchet.

To make Craknels.
Take five or fix pints of the finest Wheat flower you can get, to which you
must put in a spoonful (and not above) of good Yest, then mingle it well with
Butter, cream, Rose Water, and sugar, finely beaten, and working it well into
paste, make it after what form you will, and bake it.

To make Veale-tooh's, or Olives.
Take the Kidney of a line of Veale roasted, with a good deal of the far, and
a little of the flesh, mingle it very small, and put to it two Eggs, one Nutmeg
finely grated, a good quantity of sugar, a few Currants, a little salt, stir
them well together, and make them into the form of little Pasties, and fry them
in a pan with sweet Butter.

To make a Barley Cream to procure sleep, or Almond Milk.
Take a good handful of French Barley, wash it clean in warm water, and
boil it in a quart of fair water to the half, then put out the water from
the Barley, and put the Barley into a pottell of new clean water, with a
Parsley, and a Fennel root, clean washed, and picked with Bourage, Buglos,
Violet leaves, and Lettice, of each one handful, boil them with the Barley,
till more then half be consumed; then strain out the liquor, and take of
blanched Almonds a handful, of the seeds of Melons, Cucumbers, Citralls; and
Gourds, husked, of each half a quarter of an ounce, beat these seeds, and the
Almonds together, in a stone mortar, with so much Sugar, and Rose Water as is
fit, and strain them through a clean cloach into the liquor, and drink
thereof at night going to bed, and in the night, if this does not sufficiently
provoke sleep, then make some more of the same liquor, and boil in the same
the heads, or a little of white Poppey.

To pickle Oysters.
Take a peck of the greatest Oysters; open them, and put the liquor that comes
from them saved by it self, to as much White Wind, and boil it with a pound
of Pepper bruised, two or three spoonfulls of large Mace, and a handful of
salt, till the liquor begin to waste away; then put in your Oysters, and plump
them, and take them off the fire till they be cold, and so put them up in
little barrels very close.

To make very fine Sausages.
Take four pound and a half of Porck, chop it small, and put to it three pound
of Beef sewet, and chop them small together, then put to them a handful of
Sage, finely shred, one ounce of Pepper, one ounce of Mace, two ounces of
Cloves, a good deal of salt, eight Eggs very well beaten before you put them
in, then work them well with your hand, till they be thoroughly mingled, and
then fill them up. Some like not the Eggs in them, it is not amiss therefore
to leave them out.

To cast all kind of Sugar works into Moulds.
Take one pound of Barabry Sugar, Clarify it with the white of an Egg, boil
it till it will roll between your finger and your thumb, then cast it into
your standing Moulds, being watered two hours before in cold water, take it out
and gild them to garnish a Marchpine with them at your pleasure.

To make all kind of turned works in fruitage, hollow.
Take the strongest bodyed Sugar you can get, boil it to the height of Manus
Christi, take your stone, or rather pewter moulds, being made in three pieces,
tie the two great pieces together with Inkle, then pour in your Sugar being
highly boiled, turn it round about your head apace, and so your fruitage will
be hol^ow, whether it be Orange, or Lemmon, or whatsoever your Mould does cast,
after they be cast you must color them after their natudall colors.

To make a Sallet of all kind of Herbs.
Take your Herbs and pick them very fine in fair water, and pick your Flowers
by themselves, and wash them clean, then swing them in a strayner, and when you
put them into a dish mingle them with Cucumbers or Lemmons pared and sliced,
also scrape sugar, and put in Vinegar and Oil, then spread the Flowers on the
top of the sallet, and with every sort of the aforesaid things garnish the dish
about, then take Eggs boiled hard, and lay about the dish and upon the Sallet.

To make Fritter-stuffe.
Take fine flower, and three or four Eggs, and put into the flower, and a piece
of Butter, and let them boil all together in a dish or chaffer, and put in
sugar, cinnamon, ginger, and rose water, and in the boiling put in a little
grated Bread, to make it big, then put it into a dish, and beat it well
together, and so put it into your mould, and fly it with clarified Butter, but
your Butter may not be too hot, nor too cold.

FINIS.

