A WICKED PLOT AGAINST THE PERSON OF Sir William Waller.

DECLARING, How one of his Soldiers either for hire or malice would desperately
have shot him, but (by the providence of God) his Musket not taking fire he
immediately was apprehended; and deservedly executed for it.

Showing also, The true passages of every days service, from the first
besieging of Arundell Castle, till the surrendering of it unto Sir William
Waller. Jan. the 6. With an exact Relation what Commanders were slain during
the siedge, and what Prisoners and Pillage was found in the Castle.

Together with the taking of a Dunkirk Ship, which (being chased by the
Hollanders, came up the Channel near unto Arundell Castle for harbor, very
richly laden, who intended to go to the relief of the English-Irish against the
Parliament.

Sent from the Army to a Gentleman dwelling in Mugwel-street, and by him caused
to be printed for the satisfaction of such as desire to be truly informed.

Published according to Order.

Ian. 11. London, Printed for Robert Wood. MDCXLIV.

A WICKED PLOT AGAINST The Person of Sir WILLIAM WALLER.
SIR,
I Doubt not but you have heard of our Siedge at Arundell Castle, but in regard
I am not ignorant how uncertain reports of this nature are at London, I am bold
to present you with a brief (yet true Relation) both of the whole Siedge, and
the yiedling up of the said Castle to Sir William Waller on Twelfe-day last in
the morning.

At our first sitting down before the Town and Castle of Arundell, the
Cavaliers showed themselves very bold and insolent, and seemed to be so
confident of their own strength that they took the offer of quarter in
defiance, and hung out their red flag, but within half an hours fight the
enemy was forced from their Out-workes, and above eighty of them taken
prisoners, the rest we pursued into the Town, who without any further
opposition fled into the Castle for shelter, and the streets were quickly
scoured by our Forlorn Hope, and one Captain and a Lieutenant with many other
prisoners taken.

The Town being thus cleared of the Enemy and won by our men, the Cavaliers
played out of the Castle with musket shot, but could command but very little of
the Town; for the greatest annoyance they did us by shooting from thence, was
on the Bridge, where one of our men was shot in the thigh, and Captain Butler
escaped very narrowly, for he was shot through the Holster as he rode over.

It pleased God that we lost not above three or four men (to my best
knowledge) in entering the Town, besides some few that were wounded, of which
number I must with sorrow remember that valiant Gentleman Lieutenant Collonell
Ramsey, who was killled, and Lieutenant Collonell Burcher, who received a wound
in the belly, but is pretty well recovered of it again, and our chief
Engineer was taken prisoner.

In the taking of this Town (which is by nature situate in a place of great
advantage, and was fortified by the Enemy) I may not forget the undanted
courage of our men, and especially the blew coats, who run up the Enemies
works, and beat them off with the but ends of their muskets: and indeed, to
speak the truth, those men which we took at Alton that joined with us, did very
good service.

Yet in this place I cannot omit to acquaint you of a perfidious rascal, that
for hire or some other wicked end, would have killed our Noble General, and
not certainly knowing his person, gave fire at the Sergeant Mayor General; but
it pleased God that his Musket went not off, so that his wicked design was
prevented, and himself deservedly hanged.

The greatest part of our foot were quartered in the town and a Regiment of
Horse kept a guard, that not only all manner of relief might be kept from the
Castle, but also to prevent their sallying forth, which within three days they
attempted to do, but were quickly driven in again with loss.

And after that they turned forth of the Castle about a hundred horse into a
Meadow, part of which was within Musket shot of the Castle, and yet most of them
were quickly gotten out by our men.

Some of their men being hunger-bitten, got over the Walls and slid down with
Ropes and were taken prisoners.

One Richard Smith escaped about four miles out of Town, that came out of the
Castle, and was taken at one of our Courts of Guard, where being by the
Captain of the Guard very strictly examined, he confessed, that he was sent
with a Letter to Sir Ralph Hopton for aid, but would not produce the Letter,
but said that he had lost it: So that it appearing that he had been an arch
Spy in our Army, and was now going to betray it into the hands of the Enemy,
he was condemned to be hanged upon the Bridge in the view of the Castle.

But we were much troubled, and did greatly fear lest that some of the chief
of their Commanders had escaped out of the Castle, for the last Week was found
(by some of our soldiers) upon the River which runs near to the East side of
the Castle, a Boat made of Horse Hides, which was brought from the Castle, and
it is a great presumption, that some use was made thereof; but it is rather
thought that it conveyed some Messenger away to Sir Ralph Hopton, then that any
Commanders escaped.

Much talk we had of Hoptons coming, for diverse days together, and some of
our Scouts did affirm that they saw some of his Scouts and were near his body,
but we heard no more of him until Wednesday last, at which time news was
brought that he had besieged VVaberton House about six miles from Chichester,
in which is a Garrison of about eighty men under the Command of Colonel Norton.

Upon Friday last a Drummer came forth of the Castle for a parley, but seeing
great store of Provision in our Army, and having been hunger-bitten in the
Castle, he yielded himself prisoner rather then to carry an answer back into
the Castle, so that they were constrained to send another, and a Parley was
granted, but in regard they would not accept of Sir Williams free proffer of
quarter at his first coming, he now utterly refused to give them any, but
would have them submit to his mercy. The Lady Bishop and many other Gentle
women of quality came out of the Castle: And the next morning being on Twelfe
day last, the Castle was surrendered upon quarter, but all of them were to
become prisoners; of which there was about eight hundred Common soldiers, and
about a hundred and fifty Commanders, of which the chiefest were Sir Edward
Bishop, Sir Edward Ford, Collonell Banfield, Lieutenant Collonell Rolls, Major
Massey, and Major Mullins, who are all very suddenly to be sent up to the City
of London.

It was my chance to be at Arundell at the very instant when the Castle was
yielded, and saw the Prisoners march out, but I never saw so many weak and
feeble creatures together in my life, for almost all the Common soldiers were
half starved, and many of them hardly able to set one foot before another. Yet
had they Beef very plentiful, but they certified us, that they had no bread
since Christmas day. There were great store of Horse, arms, and much treasure
found in the Castle: So that it is not a little weakening to the Enemy, and
strengthening to our Party.

The taking of this place has wonderfully encouraged our men, who are all so
forward in their service that they deserve great commendations, and the Lord I
hope will prosper all their undertakings.

Within a day or two after the taking of the said Castle, there fell out a
fortunate adventure, no less remarkable then all the rest. A man of War of
Holland had chased a Dunkirk Ship laden with good store of Merchandise and
linen Cloth, which is now very welcome to our Army.

She had in her twenty four pieces of Brass Ordnance, about a hundred Barrels
of Powder, good store of Arms, which (according to the Ordinary custom of
Imagination in this kind) was conceived and believed to be sent to the relief
of the English-Irish, that make havocke now in Cheshire.

Sir William Boarded the Ship, which came up the Channel not far from
Arundell Castle, on Tuesday last, and is now Master of it.

He has also sent two thousand horse and foot, with two Drakes, to besiedge
the Lord Lumleys house in Sussex, the taking of which will be of great
advantage to us, and it is thought, by the most juditious Commanders, that it
cannot long hold out.

This being done our Noble General, as we hear, intends to lose no time, but
having received the additions of the London Trained Bands into his Army, he
intends to march VVestwards, from whence we understand there are considerable
supplies coming to the relief of Sir Ralph Hoptan: And it is hoped that
Redding, Wallingford, and some other Towns thereabouts will soon be brought
to subjection.

Which I pray to the Lord they may in his due time, to his glory; and that he
would be pleased to send a period to these troubles. Which is the continual
prayer of him who is

Yours to command, DANIEL BORDER.
From Arundell January 9. 1644.
FINIS.

