The Explanation of the Frontispeece.
Mark and behold ye bloody Irish Nation
This Heavenly Figure; where my contemplation
Has been implyoyed: Your horrid deeds, me thought
Would into question in short time be brought.
Blood cries for Blood: me thinks I fear each hour
God will his vengeance on that Island power.
See Meger, Palefac'd, Saturn, Furious Mars,
In Taurus, Irelands Sign, most dismal Stars,
By God appointed; for to do his will.
Fire, Famine, Sword, the Plague: of blood their fill
Shall Be their portion: Phalaris did frame
A brazen Bull, But when the burning flame
Had heat the Engine, He himself first felt
The cruel torments, which he would have dealt
To others: Irelands case is far more worse
The children yet unborne that folk will curse.
Though Spain and France: The Pope, that man of sin
With his adherents you to aid begin.
And bring you succor, Vengeance cries aloud
It Is heaped as rain into a fearful cloud,
Unless that God restrain Heavens menaceing
This sad position will your ruin bring.
A BLOODY IRISH ALMANAC, OR, Rebellious and Bloody IRELAND, Discovered in some
Notes Extracted out of an ALMANAC, Printed at Waterford in IRELAND For this
Year 1646.

woodcut depicting astrologicall signs and figures East South West North


Whereunto are annexed some Astrologicall Observations upon a Conjunction of
the two Malignant Planets SATVRNE and MARS in the middle of the Sign TAVRVS the
Horroscope of IRELAND, Upon Friday the 12. of June this Year 1646. with
memorable Praedictions and Occurrences therein.

By JOHN BOOKER.

InenarranDVs DeVs est operIbVs sVIs, qVI transfere regna atqVe eXCIDIt ea.

Printed at London for JOHN PARTRIDGE, 1646.

To the Reader
BEing for some years late past publicly employed on behalf of the
Commonwealth of this Kingdom, I could not attend my Study of Astrology with
that earnestness and pains I desired, or with that former industry I for many
years had under gone; and indeed I was almost discouraged in prosecuting the
Writing of my Annual Prognostic, when as in Licensing the same, half my
Astrology or what was most pertinent to the present times was most maliciously
expunged, so that I ever appeared a lame and deficient Person, ambiguous, and
not easily to be apprehended: the fault not being mine, who desires to benefit
my Native Country, but those peevish Episcopal Chaplains who had sole License
either to permit, or disanull my Writings.

But the errors of that misty Faction being now by divine Providence cleared,
and liberty given by the Noble Parliament now resident at Westminster for
advance of any humane learning; I have assumed liberty to appear again in the
World (not in an Almanac, the least thing I ever intended) but in a notable
and eminent way of Prediction upon the famous Conjunction of the two Malevolent
Planets Saturn and Mars; I am herein much encouraged by those Labors of my
Friend Mr. Lilly, not only Printed in these times, but made more memorable in
the success I have observed has followed his Astrologicall Predictions: a few
of which I will repeat that the misguided in fancy against Astrology may not
be destitute of sufficient testimony in his only Writings of the verity of
that Art, by which Art at this time I write the ensuing Discourse. I omit his
Anglicus 1644, and shall relate some Observations out of his Prophetical
Merlin, Printed 1644. See fol. 43 upon his Judgment of the Comet 1618. In 1645
let those Princes that live near the Mordway Tartar look to themselves, etc.
Is not the Kingdom of China bordering thereon almost destroyed by the sudden
attempt of the Tartar 1645.

But we will come home to England, See fol. 98, and so it may be hoped toward
the later end of 1645 we shall have great likelihoode of being in a better
condition then now we are in: we were in a sad condition when he wrote that
Book in 1644. but in December. 1645, the whole Kingdom knows the words exactly
verified, by the continual successes of our Parliaments General, and the
inestimable losses of his Majesty and his partakers. Again in the same fol.
In 1646 all the Planets except Mercury saluting each other with one benevolent
aspect or other, do most undoubtedly declare, that the misery of the afflicted
English do draw near to a period: and this is like to be so. See again fol.
100. Indeed in 1646 Jupiter in the Figura Mundi being in the ascendant, etc.
Matters are not yet ripe and perfectly settled, yet better then formerly; some
Prince either fled or captivated, etc. whether things are not far better and
yet not rightly settled, and whether of late the Prince missed not of being
captivated, but since is fled the Kingdom; we all know: Let who will please
examine his whole Discourse upon the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, there
in that Book handled, and they shall see Astrology is not either vain or an
unnecessary Study.

Let us observe some passages in his Starry Messenger Published 12 June 1645
fol. 23 in his Premonition to Princes: Your Generals shall quake and tremble
and prove men of no courage, etc. Has not Prince Rupert fulfilled this, etc.
at the delivery of Bristoll, etc. Again, Your confederates shall fail in
real performances; Observe the good hand of God, not any man of his Majesty's
Friends has supported him with a man or money since that Prediction, no not
the beloved Irish Catholics. In the same fol. Your Children shall wander as
banished people all over the world. How like this may be truth, let all wise
men judge for Prince Charles is fled, and so may the rest for ought I know.

Again fol. 43. in answer to that Bifronted Bussard Wharton, he says it upon
that opposition of Saturn and Mars in September: we knock not our enemies
soundly, God is angry with us. I think we bastinadoed them soundly near that
time at Sherburne, and at Rowten more. So that it appears as Mr. Lilly wrote,
God is not or was angry with us. But in his Postscript of his Starry Messenger
in answer to lying Wharton, who published the Kings March from Oxford on the
last side, published the same the 12 of June there are his words verbatim. But
let me tell you, such shall be our victories before the time limited by you be
half come, viz. November. 1645) that me thinks I hear the many cursed oaths
the Dam-boyes spue out both against God and man. Oh what sculking sneaking,
running into Corners, mouse-holes, sawpits, Cunny-berries, tossing and tumbling
the ungodly out of one Country into another: do I foresee: face ab^ut
Gentlemen says one for our honor, as you did at Newberry, that is with a good
pair of heels, or alls lost I say: Oh the way to Bristoll, from thence to
Exceter then into Cornwall, thence into a sase harbor, if any can be found for
Malignants. Gods Providence has made those words true, for d^d we not first
take Bristoll, then beleaguer Exceter, and now this present March have we not
in Cornwall unhorsed these pure Swash-buckling Cavaliers, so that now they may
see these words to their shame and Gods glory fulfilled. But I am tedious,
although no need is thereof: let any indifferent man, judge on Mr. Lillies
Observations in this present March 1646. He says: the first week, News from
several quarters, and some town or fort surrendered, so we had, the surrender
of Ashby, and the town of Torrington Then he proceds: some proposition from our
weather beaten enemies Westward. Is not this true in the Lord Hopton his
surrender of 2000 horse upon modest propositions. Again, his Majesty stands
amazed: who thinks less then so, when he sees all is like to be lost. Here Is
struggling says he; this we in London know to be true. Again, Three days
promise our enemies success, but God may blind their eyes to make use of
none, that is, neither eyes nor time. The poor fellows were in Abington, 2
March: but were hastily and valiantly thrust out by the valor of the
Garrisons; this was one of their promising days. In the second week of March
they attempted it again, but to no purpose; the same week they missed our
Convoy of 20000 pound by contrary Intelligence so that its hoped, their three
days ore out of date, and their eyes quite put out, and they may wander with
Rupert and Maurice to Ireland to cry Oh hone: for here is no more plunder to be
obtained in England. These his predictions in favor of Astrology I have
repeated, because they are excellent and notable expressions in the Art and
manifestly visible. They that would be further satisfied repair to the books
themselves. For what I have performed in the ensuing Tractate, I leave to the
candid censure of the well disposed, and do hope as Mr. Lilly and my self
have the same principles in Art, so our judgments in the general, and my own
particular notion upon the sollid foundation of Art will have, answerable
success. I heartily wish all happiness to our present Parliament, and abundant
of blessing to the City of London, wherein I now inhabit, pray to God preserve
both States in Unity and Concord, that so the Affairs of the Public may more
vigorously be prosecuted, Religion established, and Peace universally succeed.

So wishes a true English man, an Abhorrer of the Irish Rebellion: One that
prays for the Peace of Church and State, and the utter extirpation of Popery.
JOHN BOOKER

A Bloody Irish ALMANAC for the YEAR 1646.
NOt many days after the Irish Cabinet, or his Majesty's Secret Papers for
establishing the Papal Clergy in Ireland came to public view (which is worthy
to be perused by all true hearted Protestants of England) There appeared an
Irish Almanac, entitled thus, A new Almanac for the year of our Lord God
1646. being the second after Leap year, and since the Creation of the World
5595. Calculated for the Longitude and Latitude of the City of Waterford and
may serve generally for all Ireland; By an Manapian. Waterford, Printed for the
Year MDCXLVI. Which Almanac I having had sight of, and perusing the same, I
found many remarkable and memorable Chronologicall Observations, agreeing so
exactly with the transaction of the forepassed and present affairs between
his Majesty and the bloody Irish, who are called his Majesty's Catholic
Subjects: That I held it a great injury to the English Nation if the same
should have been smothered, and not divulged; I mean so much thereof as
discovers the inveterate hatred of that inhumane people against the Parliament,
and the whole Kingdom of England, The other part being either Popish Saints
days, or vulgar Observations in most common Almanacks, I passed by as not
material to the present task in hand, and indeed the whole of it, and all of
them I judge worthy no other then the fire.

In the leaf next the Title page, Thus it is Printed. Our most Gracious King
Charles began his Reign over great Britain and Ireland the 27 of March, in
the year of our Lord 1625. And has Reigned 21 years complete the 26 of
March 1646. But the 27 day we write Anno Regni 22 Whom God prosper in all his
Designs against his Rebellious Subjects the ROVNDHEADS of ENGLAND.

I trust God will not hear, their prayer but turn it into Sin and
Abomination, Psalm. 109.7. Prove. 28.9. Has the King Designs against his
Subjects? Are his Subjects termed Rebels? Are they pointed out for destruction
by a bloody hand, and called the Roundheads of England? O God blast all such
designs! And all ye true hearted English men, look about you, unite your
selves against the common Enemy, the blood-thirsty Irish, Papists, Jesuits,
and their confederates, etc, Why do the Heathen rage and the people imagine a
vain thing? The Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers take
Council together, against the Lord and against his anointed, Saying, Let us
break their bands asunder and cast their coards from us; He that sits in
the Heavens shall laugh, The Lord shall have them in division, he shall speak
to them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure; He shall break
them with a rod of iron, and dash them in pieces like a Potters v^ss^ll; Be
wise now therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the Earth, serve the
Lord with fear and rejoice with trembling; Kiss the Son least he be angry,
and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little, But blessed
are all they that put their trust in him, Psalm. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 11, 12.

The next Irish note which I observe, is as follows; In the month of January
over against the 10 day in (bloody) red letters, this Manapian, one borne in
Menapia, a City or Town in the County of Weisford or Wexford in Ireland, or
Wexford it self, as Camden thinks in his Description of Ireland, fol. 89.
mihi, sets it down thus. The most pernicious Anarchicall Rebellion of the
Roundheads of England.

It may be remembered that January the first 1641, The Parliament petitioned the
King for a Guard, foreseeing a design upon them; And the next day the Kings
Answer was, He tendered their safety as his own, and their life as the life of
his children; But the fourth day he came in person to the House of Commons
attended with about four hundred persons, with Swords, Pistolls, etc. to
demand the five Members, which unparalled attempt discovered the design of
the Enemy to make war against the Parliament, which afterward followed; yea
and the next day after the King himself came to the Guild Hall in London at a
Common Council, to what intent, appeared in few days: for this tenth day
mentioned in the Irish Almanacke, The King, with the Queen, Prince, Duke of
York, left Whitehall, and went to Hampton Court; ever since which time to this
very day (having forsaken his Parliament, and left his people out of his
protection) has been the most horrible, bloody, unnatural war that ever
was in England, nay, in all the world, it being never known that a King
against his people, his Parliament, his Kingdoms, should raise war, till
soon after that time in the Irish Calendar mentioned. And now let all the
world judge whether this Manapian be not a most Malignant, lying, pernicious,
Antichristian Irish Rebel, that so falsely slandereth the Parliament and
Kingdom, by calling their just actions Anarchicall Rebellion, and the people
thereof the Roundheads of England.

Over againg the 23 of October in the Almanac, This Helhound in (bloody) red
letters, writes, thus, The happy Union of the Catholics eo die. This is that
infamous, that fatlla day, the 23 of October 1641, when that unparalled Grand
Rebellion of the barbarous Irish violently burst forth to the massacring and
destruction of many thousands of innocent Protestants in that Kingdom by a
crew of Devils incarnate, who plead Commission for this inhumane Act, and
call it The happy Union of the Catholics: This 23 day of October 1641 I could
wish were marked with Carbone nigre, or for ever were deleated out of the
Calendar: But when I observed that very day twelve month, viz. the 23 of
October 1642. How just God was in punishing (though not the Irish Nation yet)
the Abetters of them and their horrible Rebellion, in that memorable Victory it
pleased God to give the Parliaments Forces under the conduct of their then Lord
General, the Right noble Earl of Essex between Keynton and Edgehill against
the Enemy; I am struck with admiration, and with me it shall never be
forgotten. How the Oxford Naworths, and this Irish Manapians Almanac agree,
seems to me somewhat strange. The Oxonian calls it The Grand Rebellion, he
means the 23 of October 1642 when the Battle at Keynton was, But I mean that
black day the 23 of October 1641, when the Irish unparrallel'd Grand Rebellion
burst out, which this Manapian terms The happy Union of the Catholics, so
that the Grand Rebellion in the Oxford Almanac, and The happy Union of the
Catholics in the Irish are both one; Though there was a Rebellion but in one,
yet they were both united in the prosecution of a most bloody war; what was
intended by the Irish in 1641 in that Kingdom against the Protestants there,
was in 1642, on the same day vehemently pursued by their Confederates against
the Protestants here; There is a time drawing near when the Oxfords Almanac
Grand Rebellion, and, The happy Union of the Catholics in Ireland will be
remembered, and both of them called to a strict account for the same.

There are some admirable Astrologicall Observations which happened on these
two days viz. the 23 of October 1641: And that 23 of October 1642: On that in
1641 (though not visibly to be seen) was a great and terrible Eclipse of the
Sun in eleven degrees of Scorpio the opposite Sign to the Horoscope of
Ireland. The Moon then changing the 24 day causing such a darkness in him in
the morning, as if he were ashamed to behold the intended Irish massacring of
the Protestants, which was discovered the 23 day by Owen Ockanellee then
servant to Sir John Clotworthy. Eclipsis Solis si fuerit in Scorpione
fundamentorum ruinas, and inter Ecclesiasticos ^dia, simultates, and turbas
excitabunt, and plebis and turbae ignobilium interitus, diuturnaeque bellorum
seditiones etc denotat. Sic Jo. Anton. Giuffus in tractatu de Eclipsibus. That
is, If the Sun shall be eclipsed in Scorpio, it threatens destruction of
Ancient Foundations, and stirs up hatred and grudgings and debates amongst
Ecclesiastics. The death of the common, or ignoble people, and continual
seditions of war. And Proclus says if the Sun shall be eclipsed in the first
ten degrees of Scorpio, Tumultus bellicos movet, cades, odia, captivitates and
proditiones machinatur. That is, It stirs up warre-like tumults, slaughters,
hatred, captivities and treacheryes it does threaten; And if in the second ten
degrees of Scorpio (as this was) Regis cujuspiam perniciem, aversum exercitus
animum. Part of this prediction is already fullfilled, and if God prevent it
not, the residue is approaching very near. It began to operate that very day,
and has continued in much virulency to this very time. But the next 23 of
October viz. 1642: was most memorable when Mars who was Lord of the said
Eclipse met in opposition to the Sun, was that Signal great Battle fought at
Keynton: betwixt the Kings Army and the Parliaments. Both which days and
configurations Mars was extremely afflicted by being opposite to his houses.
In the first he was in Libra, and in the second in Taurus: very fatal to the
Irish, and that party their Associates. I gave a touch of that in October 1642
in my Almanacke, amongst other thus much, Caedes quoque cruentae, and lites
atrae hinc inde percrebescent, Edgehill Battle can witness this, The number
that was slain on both sides there, are not yet known; This 23 of October
1642: the Sun was in ten degrees of Scorpio, and Mars in Taurus retrograde in
the opposite Sign and near the degree opposing: And I well remember what
Origanus says Par: 3. de effectibus. Fol: 522: Pertinet ad fidem and
diligentiam Astrologorum, omnium quantum fieri potest Principum, Ducum,
Comitum, Nobilium, Consulum, praecipuorum quoque Theologorum, Episcoporum,
Consiliariorum, Medicorum, Genituras inquirere; Non enim magna solummodo laut
est, priori consulta experientia de ipsis in specie aliquid dicere: Sed publica
quoque fata ex eorum salute pendent: Quicquid enim delirant reges plectuntur
Achivi: That is, It is for the credit of Astrologers as much as in them lies to
search into the Nativities of Princes, Dukes, Earls, Nobles, Consuls. ( i. e.
Mayors) or chief Officers of Cities or Towns, Prime Divines, Bishops,
Councillors, Physicians, etc. For there is not only great praise (experience
being had of them particularly) But the Public Affairs or Commonwealth
depends on their welfare: And most men frame themselves to the mind of the
King. I am not ignorant of this, and have had some experience of late of this
Aphorism, And this I dare boldly say, that what ever he be from Caesarto
Codrus, if he have at the time of his Nativity the tenth degree, or within five
degrees, ante and retro of Scorpio, Leo, Aquary, but especially Taurus,
culminating, Horoscopicall, The Sun, Moon, or part of Fortune in the same or
near it, He, she, or they will suffer extremely in one kind or other, some
in their Honors, Estates, Dignities, Some in their Life, etc. and some in all
of them: I know some, and those no mean ones; But, Cynthius Aureno vellit; Our
King is either misled, or wilful: For the first, Take away the wicked from
before the King and his Throne shall be established in righteousness, Prove.
25.5. But if he continue in this strange unheard of absence from the
Parliament, whereby, not only through the neglect of due and just governing of
his people, both his and their ruin must inevitably succeed, I must remember
him of Pharaoh and the Red Sea; yea God changes the Times and the Seasons, He
removes Kings and sets up Kings, Dan. 2.21. Who knows but that the
Handwriting upon the Wall may be applicable to this present, miserable,
deplorable time we live in? for my part I tremble to think to what sad
condition many will be brought in short time if God Almighty prevent not: But
Quos vult perdere Jupiter hos dementat. And now though these two dismal
Aspects in October be past, their Effects continue; And this year in April are
many notable meetings of the Planets in the Sign Taurus (governing Ireland) As
first of Saturn and Mercury on the 12 day, Venus and Mercury the 14 day, the
Sun and Saturn the 17 day, the Sun and Venus the 18 day, and Saturn and Venus
the 20 day, all of them in the first Face of Taurus, between the 6 and 10
degree of the said sign; Lord, what preparations do the Irish, and their
confederate Friends the papal Party here, there, and from foreign parts
make? what Consultations, Messages, Embassyes, what Treacheries? what
combinations, what Conspiracies do they frame against the poor Protestants of
England, etc? But the longest day must have an end; And on that day this year,
Mars and Saturn Lerma Lerma resonabunt who meeting in conjunction in the midst
of Taurus, will sound fearful Alarmes in the midst of Ireland; but of these
more anon.

I thought to have found in the next Month, in this Irish Almanac, viz.
November on the 5 day, some commemoration of that damnable powder Plot 1605,
that Popish, hellish Conspiracy to destroy the Parliament; but they in Ireland
would be ignorant of that, as not long since our corrupt, ambitious Prelaticall
Clergy endeavored to have brought the same about here, but let us in England
for ever remember Gods mercy, and be thankful in our deliverance from the
damnable Treason of the Papists, on our 5 day of November, 1605. Where there
was both a Plot and powder: And let us not forget the fearful judgment of
God, in the downfall of Blackfriars upon the Papists, (the 26 of our October)
being the 5 of their November, 1623. where was no Plot, nor powder. O miranda
Dei Judicis aequitas, fraudis fraud^ sua prenditu Artifex, and quis alios
plagis irretire parabant h^sere impliciti pedes.

The wicked people in the pit, are fallen themselves that dug it,
Yea their own feet are fast ensnared, in hidden nets themselves prepared.
And thereby has the Lord been known, for having such a judgment shown
In that the wicked are surpised, even in the snare themselves devised.
They in Ireland begin their Michaelmas Term at Kilkenny, as this Irish
Almanac has it, on the 3 day of November, on which day of November 1640. this
happy Parliament in England (so much endeavored to be dissolved) began, but
their Term and our Parliament are heterogenean, Our Parliament ere long will
alter their Term, and as their Rebellion broke forth the 23 of October, so we
now begin our Term on the 23 of October, as if one should say, all the Courts
of Justice in England by a Divine providence, were opened to give Judgment
against the Irish for their Rebellion against them the 23 of October.

Well! This 23 of October will be remembered as a day of mercy by the
Parliament and whole Kingdom of England for their great deliverance out of the
hands of their cruel Enemy at Keynton Battle, when the bloody Irish His Race
and all his Generation,
Shall suffer utter extirpation,
And in the Age that next does follow
Oblivion shall his black name swallow.


It may very well be said of Ireland, Bona Terra, malu Gens. But when that
wicked Generation of men have drunk their fill of the blood of the Saints:
then shall they as deeply drink of the Cup of Gods wrath. Quod differtur, non
aufertur. The time hasteneth, and is nearer then they are aware of.

I have briefly run over these Irish Notes which this Manapian in behalf of
that Kingdom of Ireland, and to the same end as Naworth and Wharton the
Oxfordians publish theirs in malice against the Parliament and the Kingdom of
England have done; Thereby discovering themselves to be a most Viperous
Generation: There are some other observations I might have made on the Popish
Saints days, which in this Almanac are very thin: I hope in the next that is
written, there will be none at all. And had this Irish Manapian been as
learned in Astrology as Wharton is, and predicted as much as he did upon the
Kings (unfortunate) march the seventh of May the last year, I should have
hoped the like success as ever since has befallen that Party. My Friend
Master Lilly in his Postscript to his Starry-Messenger lately Printed, has
sufficiently refuted that Bloxford Astrolo-gazestar. We need not fear either
of them, one more then the other. There is a lying Spirit in the mouth of all
of them. 2 Chronicles. 18.21. Their Religion, their Learning, is one and the same;
their Knowledge in Astrology very near of kin. There is not a Lunation, that
is, A New Moon, Full Moon, or her other Quarters, mentioned throughout this
Popish Calendar, that is truly set down; Some of them twelve hours, some a
day, some two days, and many three days erring from the truth. I am sure of
it never a one of them fitted to the Meridian of any part of Ireland, for which
it was intended, nor for England, against whom it was penned, printed and
published; So that if the Oxford Writers take their Observations, and ground
their Judgments from the Lunations in the Irish Almanac, we shall not need
to be dismayed at their pradictions, And the fair weather in the Irish
Almanac will prove foul to them, when the English come to correct the
Printing Press at Waterford.

I am now come to the end of the Calendar, and in the next page I find set
down, The rising and setting of the Sun for every first and fifteenth day of
every month in the year. Why? God makes his Sun to rise on the evil, and on
the good and sends rain on the just, and on the unjust. Math. 5.45. There is
likewise the length of the day set down; If they please to remember the
Battle at Naseby the last year, they will have small cause to rejoice the 12
of June this year, (or not many days after.) Truly the longest day will be
for ever fatal to the Irish and their Confederates, if my Astrology fail
not, and they know it seldom does.

After this Table follows A Compendious Chronology of things Memorable.
From the Creation to Noah's Flood, Genesis 5.7.11. -1060 Years. From the Flood to
Abraham, Genesis 11.32 12.4. Act. 7.4. -356 Years. From Abraham's birth to Terah's
death, Genesis 11.32.12.4.- 80 Years. From Terah's death to Isreal's delivery,
Exodus 12.40, 41. -434 Years. From that time till Salomons Temple, 1 Kings
6.1.- 484 Years. From the building of Salomons Temple to Christ.- 1032 Years.
From Christ's birth till this years end. -1646 Years.
The full Sum from the Creation to this years end is 5092 Years.
This Irish Chronologer has computed by his false Arithmetic the abovesaid
numbers of years to be 5595, as he sets down both in the Frontispice of his
Almanacke, and in this place, but both are equally erroneous. It is true, Non
levis inter viros Doctos rerum historicarum annotationibus existit
controversia: That is, There is no small controversy amongst learned men in
their Annotations of Historical matters; Truly, there is great diversity
amongst them in many memorable Chronologicall Computations; But never any that
ever I read of computed less then 1656 years from the Creation to the Flood;
So that this Irish account is short of the truth (in this very particular) no
less then 596 years; now if we add these 596 years to 5092 they will make
in all 5688 which is too many by 93 years, so that there is no truth at all in
this compendious Chronology: Methinks when I see 88. I call to mind that Annus
ominosus and fatalis, The Spanish Invasion, Cum formidabilis illa Classis
Hispanica profligatur ab Anglis Duce Francisco Drake; That terrible Armado, The
lively portraiture whereof is represented in those curious Works in the Lords
House now in Parliament at Westminster; But as that Armado then was Ventorum
Ludibrium and was by Gods providence totally defeated by the English; So the
Irish Rebellion will have like success.

Then follows the remainder of this Compendious Chronology with Since the
destruction of Troy 2830 years.


This may be something near truth, for all Writers agree that it was before
Christ 1183 years; now if we add 1646 being the years since Christ Birth, to
1183 the years before his Birth, they will make 2829 since the destruction of
Troy.

Then follows, since Bartholenus entered this Island of Ireland 4235 years,
who this Bartholenus I cannot learn, but it seems he came in the year of the
world 1360, which was 296 years before the Flood, which I prove thus. If you
substract 4235 years from 5595 there will remain 1360, and if you substract
this 1360 from 1656, (the year of the World when the Flood was) there will
remain 296. I believe he was one of the Offspring of Cain, though Camden
relates (in his description of Ireland, fol. 64.) that the Irish
Historiographers say that he was a Scythian, (and then he came of Magog) who
descended from Japeth, and that he fought right doughty Battles with Giants:
In these times men lived many hundreds of years, but when the Flood came all
the People of the Earth were drowned, save eight Persons, which were Noah and
his wife with his three sons, S^m, Ham and Japeth, and their Wives: Now
amongst all these there was never a Bartholenus, and if there had been any such
a one, doubtless he had perished amongst the rest in the Flood; If he came not
from Cain before the Flood, surely he descended from Ham who was the Father of
Canaan after the Flood; from these three sons of Noah, all the Earth was
overspread; now Noah cursed Canaan and said, a Servant of Servants shall he be
unto his brethren; To what purpose this Bartholenus is mentioned to have entered
Ireland, or who he was, it much matters not, neither if the Irish came from
him, or from whom else; this I am sure of they are now a People far exceeding
the most barbarous Caniballs, and inhumane bloody men that ever I read of in
any History: Here may be moved a question, why Canaan being cursed, he should
possess the most fertile place and part of the World, a Land flowing with
milk and Honey; so may I say of Ireland, why such a good Country should be
bestowed on so wicked a People, I much wonder at it; it rather shows a
blessing then a curse, and that they should rather be Lords then servants; but
as one says, Cum Israelitae deletis omnibus istis gentibus (viz. Sidoniis,
Tyriis, Hethaeis, Jebusaeis, Amorhaeis, Gergesaeis, Hevaeis, Cannanaeis, etc.
terram Cananaeam ingrederentur: tunc save manifestata est veritas maledictionis
Nohae, dederuntque paenas impietatis suae, ejecti and excisi per populum Dei,
quem tandem triumphare oportet; It is just the State and Condition of Ireland
as then of Canaan; And they must look for the like measure of punishment by
the English and Scottish Nation, as Canaan did by the Israelites.

Then follows, since the building of the City of Waterford by Sitaracus 1491
years. This Sitaracus it seems was about the year of Christ 155. About which
time, Valentinian an Egyptian, that damnable Heretic, spread his wicked
Tenants, and about this time lived Higinus the first that styled himself Pope
of Rome; This City by the Irish is called Porth-Largy, as Camden says in his
description of Ireland fol. 79. And was built by certain Pirates of Norway But
I make a great question of the Antiquity of it, neither is it to purpose: Only
it is observable that Pirates were the founders of Waterford. I am sure of it
Printing was not then used, but it seems now they have got a Printing Press
there; Whether it and the materials came from Rome, Doway, Rhim^s, or any such
other Popish place I know not; But they there, and at Oxford of late and now,
print base and railing Pamphlets, and lying Almanacks, and in them most
grossly abuse the Parliament and Kingdom of England, who no doubt ere long
will suppress their Presses.

Now follows since the building of the City of Rome, 2397 years, about the
year of the world 3198. It is a great dispute amongst Chronologers and
Historiographers when Rome was built; Some of them as Berosus and R^usner say.
The first foundation was laid in the year of the World, 2341 by Roma daughter
to Atlas, or Kitim King of Italy, about thirty years before the Birth of Moses:
Some, yea the most think, that it was built by Romulus and Remus, as Livy,
Dion, and others relate; The Story is thus.

Procas King of Latium, or the Latins, having left his Kingdom, (after he had
reigned three and twenty years) to his two Sons Amulius and Numitor to rule
by yearly turns: Amulius having gotten possession, keeps the Kingdom by
strong hold, and causes Numitor his Brother to live privately; And because
Amulius would not live in fear of Numitors issue, he enticed Lausus or
Egestus, Numitors Son to go hunt with him, and then and there slew him; And
caused his daughter Rhea, or Ilia, to become a Vestall Virgin to keep her from
marriage, or children; But he was deceived; For in the fourth year of his
reign, which was (as some suppose) in the year of the World, 3158. She was
great with child (by an unknown man) but many think (by Amulius himself in
disguise) because he knew she should dye, if the breach of her Vow appeared by
a great belly) and was delivered of Romulus and Remus at a Birth; For which she
was buried quick, or beaten to death with Rods. But Dion says, she was saved
at the request of Amulius his daughter, but Romulus and Remus were delivered to
some to be cast into Tiber in a cradle, which could not be effected, because
the River was overflowne; So they were left upon a Bank. Faustulus the chief
Shepherd to Amulius, being at Court, having heard their doom, Followed,
Found, and carried them to his wife Acca Laurentia, called by the people for
her lust: and the Stews of her Lupanaria, Lupa, Hence arose this Fiction, That
they were nursed by a Shee-Woolse. She delivered them to a woman that had lost
a child a little before of her own. At the age of eighten years, these
Brothers fell out with Numitors Shepherd about feeding of their Flocks; But
when Romulus was absent, Remus was carried before Amulius, who upon their
Complaint delivered him to Numitor to put him to death; but Faustulus
perceiving the danger, revealed their birth to Romulus (who reputed Faustulus
till that time to be his Father) and to Numitor, upon a consultation, they
assaulted Amulius, slew him, and restored Numitor to the Kingdom, who gave
leave to them, to build Cities; Romulus chose the Mount Palatine, and built
Rome, and this was Anno Mundi. 3198 as the Irish Computator reckons, I will not
much trouble my self concerning the truth of this Story: Only it is
observable that Rome was built, founded by Blood, Murder, Lust, Treachery,
etc. And I know not why I may not suppose the Irish Nation to come from that
Lupa; For they are all of them of the same Religion, with those, nay, of Rome,
the Whore of Babylon; That Country of Ireland has had many Wolves in it, but
never more then now. And Camden in his description of Ireland Fol. 83. says,
some of the Irish and such as would be thought worthy of Credit, do affirm
that certain men (in the County of Tipperary) are yearly turned into Wolves;
Whether it be a mere fable, or no, I matter it not; Unless that malignant
humor of unkind Melancholy predominate in them, and so cause that disease
which Physicians call Lycanthropia, and so they imagine themselves to be
transformed into Wolves: However, that malignant humor has reigned amongst
them above this four years. That now the people are become more salvage and
bloody then Wolves, or any other creature whatsoever; But this Parliament the
Physician that can under God cure all distempers of Church and State, will cure
Ireland of its Lycanthropia.

England was many years ago rid of Wolves, by destroying them. And I have read
that King Edgar imposed a task upon Ludwall, a Prince in Wales, to present
yearly to him three hundred Wolves or their skins for a Tribute, which he did
for three years together; But the fourth year he gave over, protesting he
could find no more. What King Edgar did I know not, but thanks be to God there
are no Wolves in England (but of the Irish breed) Though there has been an
endeavor to bring over, has been, and now are, and are daily expected some
Wolvish Irish in England; This I am sure of, This Parliament has passed an
Ordinance of the 24 of October 1644 That no Quarter shall be given to any Irish
man nor to any Papists whatsoever borne in Ireland which shall be taken in
hostility against the Parliament, either upon the Sea, or within this Kingdom
or Dominion of Wales, But that they shall be excepted out of all Capitulations,
Agreements, or Compositions with the Enemy, And every such person to be put to
death; Nay, any Officer by Sea or Land, that shall be remiss, or negligent in
the observing the Tenor of this Ordinance, shall be reputed a Favourer of that
Bloody Rebellion in Ireland, and shall be liable to such condign punishment as
the Justice of both Houses of Parliament shall inflict upon the^. I trust this
Ordinance will be thoroughly, and duly prosecuted, and then I hope both
Kingdoms will shortly be cleared of the Wolves of Ireland, or the Wolvish
Irish.

After the building of Rome comes, since the Captivity of Babylon by Cyrus 2284
years; This should seem to be in the year of the world 3311, as the Irish
Computator reckons. But herein several Chronologers have their diversity of
Opinions: This cannot possibly be true; for Cyrus began to rule over Persia in
the first of the 55 Olimpiade, which was Anno Mundi, 3390. So that here is 89
years difference of this Computation; And in the year of the World 4409 Cyrus
invaded Babylon, and conquered it, etc. And in Anno Mundi 4420. being the end
of the 70 years Captivity, as Scaliger and others think, he was in a second
battle with 200000 men defeated by Tomiris Queen of the Scythians, where
himself lost his life: Tomiris cut off his head and threw it into a vessel of
blood. And now let the Irish remember her saying to dead King Cyrus, After
blood thou did thirst, and with blood thou shall be satisfied.

Next ensues since the desolation of the Temple of Solomon: 2251 years. This
should be in Anno Mundi 3344. In which year there was no such thing done; It
is true, the Prophet Jeremiah, Anno Mundi 3340, foretold of the destruction of
the City Jerusalem and Temple, which came to pass twenty years after: For
Anno Mundi 3360, Nebuchadnezzar took it, and destroyed it as Helvicus etc
reckons.

Then comes, since Augustus Caesar began his Empire 1686 years, And this after
the Irish Account was Anno Mundi 3909. But here are seven years error. For all
Authors begin it Anno Mundi 3902. And then the fourth Monarchy began in Julius
Caesar, who ruled Emperor but five years; After him came Augustus Caesar,
Anno Mundi 3906, and reigned 56 years, and in the 41 year of his reign,
which was Anno Mundi 3947, Our Savior Christ was borne: Or as the received
opinion is, Anno Mundi 3949. Now if we add this 3949 to 1646, They will make
5595: The years since the Creation, as our Irish Chronology reckons.

After this follows, since Jerusalem utterly destroyed by Vespatian 1563
years: This should have been Anno Christi 83. But then there was no such
matter, for it was in Anno Christi 70: So that there is an error of thirteen
years defective, then there will be since Vespatians destruction of Jerusalem,
1576 years, as most Authors agree.

After this follows, since Ireland first received the Catholic faith by the
preaching of the glorious Saint Patrick 1221 years, And this was Anno Christi
425. About this time, this Patrick lived: Caelestine the first being Pope of
Rome. The Nestorian heresy was much spread abroad; Many strange things have
been reported of this Patrick. In memory of whom the 17 of March the Irish
celebrate as a Festival. (But I shall take a course to cross him out of the
Calendar) Hiberniae fuit Episcopus primus, and imago illius exprimitur
Serpentibus ad ejus pedes abjectis, quoniam Divina illius virtute hoc
mirabiliter fieri traditur, ut nulla venenata bestia ibi vivat. Petrus
Galasinius ex Beda, lib. 1. cap. 1. Histor. Angl. That is, He was the first
Bishop of Ireland, and his Image is portrayed with Serpents cast under his
feet: for that by his divine virtue, it wonderfully came to pass that no
venomous Beasts can live there. This is a miracle indeed, if it be true; Surely
Panrick extracted all the Venom of Serpents, Toades, and such like odious
creatures then in Ireland; And by his preaching infused the same into the
people. There were before Patrick came such like creatures there: and there be
now in Ireland more Venomous and Serpentine people then the very creatures
themselves can be in any other Country in the world, which this late Horrid
Rebellion does sufficiently evince; But I hope there will be a Reformation
there, as well as here, more glorious preaching then that of Patrick, or all
Popish Bishops, Priests Jesuits etc. And the Faith (Catholic indeed) not in
a Popish sense; Though I conceive this Manapian, should have said since Ireland
first received the Popish Catholic faith, etc. This had been to purpose, and
then I should not have excepted against it.

The next Chronologicall Observation is, Since England first received the
Catholic Faith 1463 years. If he had said since England first received the
Christian Catholic Faith, etc. it had been somewhat near truth; For King
Lucius beginning his rule over the Britains, hearing of diverse miracles
wrought by the Christians, and amongst the rest, of the plenty of Water in time
of distress and want thereof; as of the great Victory obtained Anno Christi
173 for the Emperor Marcus over the Marcomanni, and Quadi by the prayers of
the Christian Legion, which he called Fulminatrix, sent to Eleutherius then
Pope of Rome to send him some learned men into Britain, to instruct the
people in the Faith; whereupon he sent Damianus and Fugatius, who Baptized King
Lucius and his people; He was the first Christian King of Britain, and lived
near the time of Christian Religions Primitive purity, when Popish Catholic
Religion was not heard of: If any of the Popes were ought, this Pope Elutherius
was none of the worst, He prohibited the superstitious refusal of eating any
thing which was man's meat, Et primus erat Episcoporum Romanorum qui non periit
morte violenta. King Lucius built Peter's Church in Cornhill London about 430
years before Paul's Church, which was built by King Ethelbert, who began his
reign Anno Christi 596.

After follows, since Henry the second arrived at this City of Waterford, and
the first Major of it, 474. years. This is near an historical truth; for Anno
Christi 1170. or thereabout; at what time that ambitious, turbulent, fiery
spirited Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Becket was slain: This King Henry
the second had wars with Ireland, and the next year he subdued it; and I
suppose King Henry the second at his coming to Waterford, made it a Major Town
(and indeed as most men that have been there report it to be the second City in
all Ireland, and that the Kings of England have granted great privileges to
the same:) Who this Major was, our Irish Chronologer does not name; I believe
he was an English, not an Irish man, for I cannot conceive otherwise, but they
were then rebellious as now; so that there is greater necessity of correcting
their present rebellion, by a new supply of valiant English men, who if they
land at Waterford, the present Major may chance to be displaced, and the
Citizens lose their liberty.

The next is since the use of Guns, invented in Germany, and the first making
of Powder by a Friar, Bartholdus Swartz, 263. year. This does not much differ
from the supposed time of their known use in Christendom, although I have read
that in the time of Charles the great, who flourished about the year of Christ
800. Camoscus Frisiae Rex Slopeti ictu Hollandiae Comitem, cum duobus filijs
transuerberavit: and Roger Bacan our famous Historian who flourished about the
year or Christ 1280. makes mention of Gunpowder; and I believe what Petrus
Maffeus writes, that Guns were of great antiquity, and known in China many
Centuries of years before they were used in Christendom: However let us
suppose, that Bartholdus Niger vulgo Swartz Monachus Franciscanus and
Alchymista usum Bombardae vulgavit pro ut nunc est anno Christi 1380. as
Alsteed says in his Chronology, Orig. var. page mihi. 256. I think the Adage,
Turdus sibi malum cacat, or as we in England have it, he has made a rod for
his own breech, will be exactly verefied this year: Look to it all ye Irish
Popish Friars, Monks, Jesuits etc. and the rest of that rabble of Locusts,
there are new Guns, new Ordnances inventing, preparing, that will purge and
clear the three Kingdoms of all of you.

Now this Irish Chronologer, Bellarmine like spets forth venom and rores out,
which since Lutheranism, Calvinisme, and such like heresies began in Germany
128. years; he that would be thoroughly satisfied touching this worthy Doctor
Martin Luther, this Malleus Paparum and Papistarum, may be pleased to peruse
the second Tome of Acts and Monuments, or the Book of Martyrs, written by that
reverend and learned man, Master John Fox, p. 60, 61. and deinde, of the last
Impression 1641. he shall have his life and doctrine at large described; he
flourished in the year of Christ 1515. etc. This is he of whom John Hus at the
time of his Martyrdom prophesied, 1415. Centum Revolutis annis Deo
Respondebitis; and Hierom of Prague 1416. at his Martyrdom, who said, Post
Centum annos omnes vos Cito; now 100. years after Martin Luther began first to
write against the Pope, which was exactly verified; Reformation began in his
time, he opposed the Popes supremacy, writ against his pardons, Decrees, Bulls,
and so stoutly defended himself against them, that he was excommunicated by the
Pope, and men hired to kill him; nay, the Devil, the Pope, the Emperor, and
almost all the Christian world were against him, and by open force and secret
fraud sought his destruction; yet God miraculously preserved him for about
thirty years space, in despite of them all, and at last he dyed in hia bed in
peace at Islebia in Germany, the 18. of Febr. 1546. from whence his body was
removed to Wittenberg, and there was buried the 22. of February 1546. it being
just 100. years since, this Febr. 1646. at what time I write this: and now I
may add a third Prophecy or prediction, to cite all Irish Priests, and popish
Friars, etc. Quod post centum annos Luthero respondebitis; this Chronologer
most falsely accusing him of heresy whose sound doctrine has so confuted the
errors of those ignorant times, that to this day the Papists could never
answer him, but most maliciously traduce him: As for Master Calvin, he was a
most reverend, orthodox man, and flourished about the year of Christ. 1535.
cotemporary with Bibliander, Marlorat, Viret, Musculus, etc. all learned, and
men very excellent; it is most true, that from the year of Christ 800. to the
year 1520. Paucae novae Haereses sunt Ortae, multa autem fuerant Scismata; ubi
excellunt Scismata Pontificum Romanerum; that is, A few new heresies sprung up,
and many were the Schisms, but those of the Roman Popes, Bishops, exceeded them
all, Alsted Chron. heresium, page 390. And a little after the same Alsted
says, Verum tamen enim vero, non fuerint heretici illi Doctores, sed
Reformatores hereticae pravitatis in Regno Antichristi Romani; these Doctors
were not heretics, but Reformers of the heretical pravity, or corruptnesse in
the Kingdom of the Pope, the Roman Antichrist; indeed if you will look a
little further in Alsted, he will tell you, that ab hoc anno, viz. 1520. Vsque
ad nostram Aetatem pestilentes haereses ab inferis fuerunt revocatae, nam
Principio Anabaptistae furere caeperunt, etc. Anabaptists, Antinomians,
Socinians, Ubiquitarians, Arminians, etc. were very busy, and these were the
Heretics here meant, though for my part I suppose the greatest Heretics are
Papists, Jesuits, etc. and of all in the world those in Ireland the most
damnable.

Next follows, since the virtuous and holy Queen Mary of Scotland was beheaded
in England, 46. years. Here is a manifest error, for if so, then she should
have been beheaded Anno Christi 1600. but that was not so, for she was beheaded
at Fothringhay Castle in Northamptonshire, the 18. of February 1587. which was
13. years before this Computist reckons; her body was buried at Peterborow, and
25. years after, viz. 1612. her body was removed to Westmninster; she was born
the 5. of December 1542. on which 5. of December 1560. Francis the second King
of France, who was her first husband dyed, being married to her 1558. the 13.
of October; if you please to read Buchannan, that learned Scotchmans books,
though they were prohobited 1584. some are extant, they will tell you more: I
have read in Alsted, in his Chronologia Regni Scotiae Maria haec Anno 1558.
nupserat Francisco Regi Galliae; quo defuncto, redijt in Scotiam, ubi nupsit
Henrico Arli, sive Stuarto; quem interfici curavit; unde in Insulam est
deportata post elapsa in Angliam, Anno 1568. postquam 18. Annos captiva fuisset
detenta, ibi est decollata; and in Saturni Ephemeride, Dedicated to King
Charles page 382, Sub Titulo Scotland, it is there said, that in the year 1564.
she fell in love with the Lord Darnley, son to the Earl of Lenox, got a
Dispensation from the Pope for consanguinity, and created him Earl of Rosse;
the next year after, he is made Duke of Albany, marries the Queen, and is
proclaimed King; and that year that Duke of Chatteralt with diverse Lords being
put to the Horn, fled into England, but returning are reconciled: The year
1566. Earl Morton and others fled into England, and having murdered David
Risius the Queens Minion in her Chamber, Thaunus in his History, Tom. 2. fol.
307. says, Hemo vili condition Citharaedi filius nomine David Rizius,
Angustae Taurinaurum natus; and a little after, he says, Faeminam per se
praecipitem postremo impulit Rizius, qui plus apud eam, quam aut aequum aut
ipsi decorum esset poterat; Earl Morton returns into Scotland, and is
pardoned; that year King James was born, and the next year, viz. 1567. the King
her husband was murdered by Earl Bothwell; which Earl marrieih the Queen, she
goes against the Discontented Lords, and is taken, Bothwell flies into
Denmark, and there dies in prison, the Queen resigneth, makes an escape,
raises forces, flies toward France, and is cast on the English shore; much
more may be read of her in the Scottish History, to which I refer you: I shall
use the words of Cambden in his description of Northamptonshire, speaking of
Fothringhay Castle, fol. 511. As for that disaster which even here befell unto
another most mighty Prince, Mary Queen of Scots, I had leiser it should be
enwrapped up in silence, then once spoken of; let it be forgotten quite, if
possible, if not, yet be it hidden, as it may, in silence.

The next Chronologicall observation is, since the birth of our gracious King
Charles, the 19. of November. 46. years. This I believe is true, for I have often
heard it reported, that he was born at Dunfermling in Scotland, the 19. of
November. 1600.

Then succeeds since King Charles his return from Spain, October the 5. 23.
years, this I remember was in Anno 1623. and it rained all, or most part of
that day at London.

Dic rogo cur toties Descendit ab Aethere nimbus
Grandoque de Coelis sic sine fine Cadit?
Mortales quoniam nolunt sua crimina flere,
Coelum pro nobis solvitur in Lachrymas.
Then follows, since the Birth of Prince Charles, May the 23. 15. years: This
is erroneous, for our Prince Charles was born the 29. of May 1630. which is 16.
years since, at the revolution of this year 1646. and I very well remember the
last of May being but two days after his birth, there was a great Eclipse of
the Sun in Gemini, the 19. degree, which was visibly beheld here, and most part
of Christendom; all Authors agree, that eclipses are very ominous, and we have
had sad experience thereof of late years.

Now comes again that memento with a witness, viz. since the happy union of
the Catholics, for defense of his Majesty, his royal Issue, etc. which day is
to be kept holy, for a day of Thanksgiving, being October 23. 1641. five years:
I have said enough already of this infamous 23. of October, and I hope it will
be remembered, to the perpetual ignominy of the bloody Rebels of Ireland.

And after that, are renumerated several victories since that Rebellion burst
forth, obtained by the Irish Confederates for his Majesty against the
Roundheads: I will not trouble my self or the Reader to mention them, for I am
confident they will sing O hone very shortly. And the Irish, Their days a
number small shall make,
Another shall their Country take;
Their Children Vagabonds shall be,
Walk up and down most wretchedly;
God shall them put to endless shame,
And quite cut off their hateful name.


If I should tell this Irish Chronologer of the several wonderful Victories
it has pleased God to give the Parliaments Forces in several parts of the
three Kingdoms against a potent, powerful, malicious, tyrannous and numerous
Army, since the beginning of this Parliament, or since the most horrible
Rebellion of Ireland was kindled: I should exceed and swel into a volume, I
will only desire all the three Kingdoms to (nay all the world may) take notice
of Gods, great and wonderful mercy he has shown to the Parliaments Forces, in
obtaining several Victories against, and strong holds taken from the enemy
since June 1645. to this present February, which may be read in a small
Tractate, entitled, Englands Remembrancer, abstracted in a short Catalogue
lately printed; the number there computed being seventy, all within ths space
of seven months; and since the publishing thereof, many more great victories;
but amongst the rest, I will only mention the surrender of Chester (the
backdoor for Ireland) to that faithful man to his Country, Sir William
Brereton; and now if I should tell the Irish, they are never like to hear or
say Mass there, or ever see their Unhallowed Candle again lighted, which was
extinguished the second of February last; they may chance to storm, fret and
fume at me, and and curse with Bell, Book and Candle; all which will do me or
any man else as much hurt just as the howling of an Irish Wolf, or the barking
of an Irish Wolf dog does the Moon.

The last Chronologicall observation (I perceive) troubles them exceedingly,
and that is, the downfall of their Dagon, the Cross in Cheap Side, which in
base railing language he utters thus; Since Cheap Side Cross was pulled down,
the third of May 1643. and immediately after all other Crosses from off the top
of Steeples in and about London, by a crew of Antichristian Parliamentary
Roundheads, enemies to Christianisme, 3 years. Indeed it would trouble any
Saint, any Christian, any Heathen to lose his God, or have his God taken from
him, or his God forsake him; but for a wooden stone, golden, silver, leaden,
iron gilt god, a headless, mouthlesse, earlesse, noselesse, handlesse,
footlesse god; is none but a papistical, senseless Irish Man-Apian, or a mere
man that has as much understanding as an Ape, would be troubled at it; I do
much admire at this third day of May, as at any day in all the year; the
Papists, Irish, and all Romanists, etc. celebrate the third of May as a great
Festival, in commemoration that the Cross of Christ on which he suffered, was
found about Anno Christi 326. on the third day of May, by Hellen Mother to
Constantine the great, with the other two Crosses (on which the two Thieves
suffered) unperished, as Ruffinus says; and the third day of May is thus noted
in the Almanac, Inventio Crucis: Saint Cyrill says, the whole world is full
of pieces of this Cross, and yet by a continual miracle (as Paulinus says)
it has never been impaired; and the County of Tipperary in Ireland, is called
The County of the holy Cross of Tipperary, and enjoys certain peculiar
freedoms, granted in honor of a piece of Christ's Cross, there sometimes
preserved; thus were Christians in ancient times persuaded; and incredible it
is, what a confluence there is even yet of these sottish, popish, Irish
Manapians, continually upon devotion thither, as unto an holy place, so firmly
do they persevere in the old, blind Religion of their forefathers, which the
careless negligence of their Prelates, Bishops and popish Priests and ignorance
together, has beyond all measure increased, when as there be none to instrust
and teach them otherwise.

It is true, that third of May, 1643. the Cross in Cheapside was totally
subverted and pulled down to the ground (yea, that morning Dagon was falled on
his face to the ground, the head of Dagon and the palms of his hands were cut
off, no not so much as the stump of Dagon was left unto him) by virtue of an
Ordinance of Parliament, and by the assistance of godly and honest men, friends
to true Christian Religion, but are enemies to, and have taken a Covenant to
pluck up popery root and branch.) And not long after, the crosses from off the
top of many Steeples: Yes and in diverse Churches and other places, many popish
and superstitious pictures, crosses, crucifixes and Romish Trinkets, etc. were
demolished, defaced and burnt; which are certain forerunners of the final and
utter destruction of Rome: Me thinks when I read Revelations the 18. I hear one
crying mightily saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become
the habitation of Devils, and the hold of every foul Spirit, and a Cage of
every unclean and hateful Bird, and therefore it is high time that we come out
of her that we be not partakers of her sins, and receive not of her plagues.

Now having briefly run over the Observations in the Almanac, and those others
in the compendious Chronology of things memorable; I thought to have found in
the Prognostic part thereof, some Oxonian Irish predictions against the
Parliament and Kingdom of England, but God be thanked it is hid from their
knowledge, and the evil they have wished thereunto will redound and fall upon
themselves: There are some monthly Observations touching planting, grafting,
sowing, and such like affairs, etc. but what they sow another shall reap, etc.
now in the conclusion of all, as if he were a profound calculator, an
Astronomer indeed, he says, there will be three Eclipses, two of the Sun, and
one of the Moon, but none of them to be seen; Only he doubts that of the Moon
the 17. of July; I will put him out of doubt, and do tell him, that there are
five Eclipses this year viz. three of the Sun, and two of the Moon, whereof
only one of the Moon visible in Europe, and that is already past; which was on
Wednesday the 21. of January last, about six of the clock in the morning, the
beginning thereof being about four of the clock in the morning, I my self saw;
but immediately after, by reason of a very thick mist and foggy vapor, the
light of the Moon, and visibility of the Stars was taken away from us about
London, that it could not be observed; this Eclipse this Irish Manapian takes
no notice of, as if there were not such a one to be seen in the Heavens; but I
shall tell him, it belongs to them, and the best of their friends; the effects
begins now to operate; some short Observations I have made in my Almanac of
this year, to which I refer you: As for the rest of the Eclipses, in regard
none of them are to be seen in any part of the Christian world, I will not
mention them; only I said I will put him out of doubt: And again, do tell him,
that the Lunar Eclipse the 17. of July next, shall not be seen in any part of
Europe, much less in Ireland; for the beginning thereof will be about three
quarters of an hour past one of the clock in the afternoon, the middle about
five of the clock, and the end about seven of the clock, all which time, for
the most part of Europe, the Moon is under the earth, and the Sun gloriously
shines above the Horizon: Indeed the Inhabitants in Finland, Litvania and
Muscovia shall observe the Moon to rise Eclipsed; and they that live in
Kirkithay, a Country in Tartary, in Turchestan, in India, within and without
Ganges, and in the Gulf of Bengala, and in Sumatra, and places near thereto,
shall have that Eclipse in their Miridians or midnight-sted: But those that are
in Anian and Quivira, shall have the Moon to set Eclipsed; now for that the Sun
is above the Horizon when this Eclipticall full Moon happens, being the 17.
of July; and because the Eclipse is past when the Sun sets, the Moon then
rising: There is no such doubt to be made as this Irish Almanac would possess
his Countrymen withal, notwithanding that Kingdom of Ireland amongst many
other places, shall partake of the effects of that Eclipse, and of some others
as well Lunar as Solar, lately passed, whose effects now most strongly operate,
together with a notable Conjunction of the two Malignant Planets Saturn and
Mars, which happens this year on Friday the 12. of June, forty minutes past
seven of the clock in the afternoon, in the longitude of 17. degree and a half,
and latitude 53. degrees and a half, agreeing nearest to that of Dublin, being
the chief City in Ireland; the position of the Heavens there at that time,
being as follows:

A Coniuction of Staturne and Mars on friday the 12 of June 1646 at Dublin in
Ireland
figure contains many astrological symbols in addition to textBefore I proceed
to give judgment Astrological upon this celestial Position at the time of this
notable Conjuction; it is to be observed, that there is a certain Sympathy or
Antipathy amongst the twelve Zodiacal signs, which manifest Experience
witnesses, agreeing or disagreeing with certain Countries, Kingdoms, Cities
and places of the earth; our Predecessors being most wise men, by accurate
observation, have diligently marked many notable events that have happened in
diverse such places; as the irruptions of people thereinto, devastations of
Countries, Earthquakes, Pestilence, Famine, scarsity of Victuals, unaccustomed
tempestuous winds, inundations of Floods and Rivers, and many other such
casualties, which they have observed to have succeeded not long after any
notable and great Eclipses, especially of the Sun, or ominous Conjuctions,
Aspects and great Oppositions of the superior Planets, and they have found
that sign of the Eclipse, Conjunction or Aspect to have a great consent and
admirable congruence with such certain places: Hence it is, that from famous
mutations and calamities to certain Cities and Countries happening, they have
found out the Signs whereunto they have been subject, although many places may
be questioned. As for Example:

IN the year 1419. there was a Quadrate Aspect of Mars and Saturn, Mars in the
latter degrees of Taurus, and Saturn in the latter degrees of Leo, the supposed
Sign under which Bohemia, among many other places is; and there was that year,
on the 26. day of March, a little before noon, a great Eclipse of the Sun in
the 15. degree of Aries, Mars being governor thereof: After which followed a
great tumult in Bohemia; Joannes Ziska, a noble Captain, and a man descended
from a great Family, one very ingenuous and skillful in Military Affairs,
favoring the Hussites, being sore grieved for the death of John Hus and Hierom
of Prague, raised a mighty Army, to the number of 40000. whom he called
Thaborites; almost possessed himself of all Bohemia, subverted the Monasteries
and Idolatrous Temples, pulling down, and breaking in pieces the Images and
Idols, driving away the Priests and Monks, which he said were kept up in their
Cloisters, like Swine in their Styes, to be fatted: His Army increased, and in
the year 1421. (having lost before one of his eyes) lost his other eye by a
Shaft, when he besieged the Town of Raby, but from hence being carried to
Prague, was cured of his wounds, and would not (though he was blind) forsake
his Army; and the next year defeateth the Emperor, and was Victor in many
battles against the Pontificians; and in the year 1424. he was stricken with
sickness, and dying, he gave order that a Drum should be made of his skin, to
terrify the enemy. Now others suppose that Kingdom to be under Cancer, because
that in the year 1424. there was a great Eclipse of the Sun the 26. day of
June, in the 14. degree of Cancer, in the evening; the effects succeeded the
next year, viz. 1425. at what time three powerful Armies from Saxony,
Franconia and Bavaria, entered into Bohemia, in three several places, but they
all fled without sight of an enemy, and left their Tents to the Bohemians.

In like manner Saxony and the maritine Cities near there, are supposed to be
under the Sign Capricorn, because after some great Eclipse or unfortunate
Aspects of the superior Planets being in the same afflicted, some notable
calamity has happened thereunto; so in the year 1548. there was a Conjunction
of Saturn and Mars, in Capricorn, in the Month of February, foreshewing the
many troubles that happened soon after in Saxony.

So also the City of Venice is said to be subject to the Sign Cancer, for that
many wonderful events have happened to that City, when an Eclipse or great
Aspect of the superior Planets has happened in that Sign, or in the Quadrate
or Opposite Aspect thereof; so in the time of Maximilian, the first Emperor in
Germany, 1505. who made peace with the Venetians, (there was a Conjunction of
the higher Plante^ in Cancer) they were extremely put to it, and suffered much
by him, and he by them: And 1508. the Emperor, Pope and the French, enter in
League at Cambray against the Venetians, and the next year after, they took
diverse places in Forum Julij, and other places from the Venetians, and in few
years after, strange transactions of Affairs happened between the Pope and
them; the French and them sometimes on one side, sometimes on the other, as
Historians relate.

In like manner the famous City of Noremberg (amongst many others) although the
time is uncertain of the first foundation thereof, yet from notable events, and
admirable, unusual accidents which have happened unto the same, it is strongly
conjectured to be under the Sign II Gemini, for when a notable Conjunction
happened in Virgo, which does afflict the Sign II Gemini by a Quadrate, and
Mercury be unfortunate, then some ominous matter has happened thereunto; and
so likewise if any Eclipse be in the said Signs, as in the year 1448. the 29.
of August, was an Eclipse of the Sun, in the 15. degree of Virgo, in Quadrate
to Gemini, with whom Saturn mixed his malicious influence; Marchio Albertus,
Sir-named the Achilles of Germany, fought nine battles with the Norembergers,
and was Victor in eight of them, with great destruction to the Citizens.

So likewise in the year 1551. was a great Eclipse of the Sun in 17. degrees of
Virgo, Mars being elevated in the middle of Heaven, above the Eclipse, but
placed in his Detriment in Libra; a little while after which, Albertus Marchio,
the son of Casimir, besieged the City, the Suburbs were spoiled and the
Citizens were compelled to dishonorable conditions of peace.

So likewise in the year 1560. another Eclipse of the Sun happened in the
eighth degree of Virgo, in Quadrate to Gemini; in which Sign of Gemini, Saturn
was in 22. degrees very much afflicting Mercury, who was Lord of the said
Eclipse in 22. degrees of Virgo; by which means the evil foreshewn by the
Eclipse, was duplicated, or much increased, and the effects continued to the
year 1563. in which space of time many thousands of the Norembergers were swept
away with the plague.

I might reckon up many other places which Historians make mention of, but I
shall much exceed my intentions, I will only remember some few Observations
concerning England; and all or most Astrologers think it to be under the Sign
Aries, for that when any Eclipse or great Conjunction happens in that Sign,
or the opposite Sign Libra, or the Quadrate Signs, Cancer or Capricorn, some
memorable occurence has befallen that Kingdom; as in the year 1345. there was
a total Eclipse of the Moon the 18. day of March about 9. of the clock in the
night, in the 6. degree of Libra opposite to Aries; in which year, such
unusual tempests, and violent winds, with great rains and inundations happened
throughout the whole Summer, and likewise in the time of Harvest, that in the
Northern parts Corn, and alll manner of Grain and fruits were corrupted and
putrified, and for two years following, was a great scarcity of all things, and
much famine, and a great mortality amongst Sheep: And in the year 1346. the 28.
day of August, was a most terrible battle fought between Phillip of Valoys,
King of France, and Edward the second, King of England, at Cresse, where the
English with 10000. men, overcame 60000. French; the King of Bohemia was there
slain, together with 30000, men, 11. Princes, 89. Barons, and 1200. Knights;
and in the year 1347. King Edward wins Calice, John Copland defeateth the
Scots, takes David King of Scotland prisoner, who is sent to the Tower; Copland
was made a Banneret, and rewarded with 500 li. per annum; and in the year 1348.
was such a mortality and pestilence amongst men, as scarce has been known the
like, 50000 were buried in the Charter House Churchyard; and many strange
matters happened in those times, which our Histories and Chronicles mention, to
which I refer you.

So likewise I will remember that terrible Eclipse of the Sun, which was on the
second day of October, 1605. about one of the clock in the afternoon, in the
19. degree of Libra, being the opposite Sign to Aries, under which England is
supposed to be subject: What a horrible, unheard of, damnable treason of the
Papists was discovered the 5. of November following, I hope will never be
forgotten in England: If I should but remember the Eclipse of the Sun which
happened on Friday the 29. of March 1633. in the 19. degree of Aries, I should
be over-tedious, I will refer you to my Almanac for that year and some years
following, in which the tyranny of the Prelates in these times manifestly
appearing, I my self not escaping their fury; So also that Eclipse of the Moon
the 8. of Octo. 1641. in the 26. degree of Aries: or that of the Moon likewise
the 4. of April 1642. in 25. degrees of Libra, and another of the Moon the 27.
of September following, in the 15. degrees of Aries; or that of the Moon
likewise the 17. of September 1643. in 4. degrees of Aries, I should but rub
the gold horse back, and put your in mind of the sad and deplorable condition
(too fresh in our memory) this poor Kingdom of England is in.

I will set down these following Tables, wherein you may understand unto what
Signs Astologers have placed (out of continual observation and experience)
many Countries and Cities, that thereby you may see when any Eclipse of the Sun
or Moon, or notable Conjunction or Configuration of the superior Planets
happens, what places are subject or likely to participiate of the influence
of any such Celestial position under such Signs, their opposite and Quadrate
Aspects; these Signs following.

Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Virgo, Is opposite to Libra, Scorpio, Sagitary,
Capricorn, Aquary, Pisces.

And this Aspect is an aspect of perfect enmity and hatred; and this is six
Signs asunder.

So likewise these Signs following do behold one another, though not so
violently, yet they do disagree very much in Nature and disposition, viz. by a
Quadrate.

Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo. Has a Quadrate Aspect to -- -- --
-- --.

Thus Aries beholds Cancer and Capricorn, by a Quadrate; Taurus beholds Leo and
Aquary; Gemini beholds Virgo and Pisces; Cancer beholds Libra and Aries; Leo
beholds Taurus and Scorpio; and Virgo beholds Gemini and Sagittary, by a
Quadrate Aspect, which is called an Aspect of imperfect emnity, or feigned
friendship, or treacherous amity, etc. and this is three Signs asunder.

But there is another manner of the Signs beholding one another, two ways,
viz. by a Trine Aspect, which is an Aspect of perfect amity and friendship, and
is when Signs of one Triplicity of Nature behold one another: As are of the
fiery Triplicity, hot and dry. are of the earthly Triplicicy, cold and dry. are
of the aerie Triplicity, hot and moist. are of the watery Triplicity, cold and
moist.
Thus we see the fiery Trigonagrees with the earthly Triplicity in dryness,
and with the Aerie in heat; and the earthly triplicity agrees with the watery
triplicity in coldness, and with the fiery triplicity in dryness, and sic e
converso. These three Signs do behold one another by a trine aspect; and for
the most part when any of the signs of one nature is well qualified or
affected, by a certain sympathy and agreement, the other signs of the same
quality participates of the same good or evlll influence: and this Aspect is
four Signs asunder.

The other Aspect is called a Sextile, and is more imperfect then the Trine:
and the Signs do thus behold one another, viz.

Has a Sextile aspect to -- -- -- -- --

Here we see the fiery triplicity agrees with the Aerie in heat, the Earthy
with the Watery in coldness; the Aerie with the Fiery in heat, and the Watery
with the Earthy in coldness by a Aspect: and this is when Planets or Stars
are two signs asunder.

Now I shall set down the twelve Zodiacall Signs, and such places, Kingdoms,
Countries and Cities as have experimentally been found to have been subject to
the said Signs: and they are as follows:

Under Aries these Countries. England North and East part, France, Germany,
Suevia, Silesia the higher, part of Polonia, Burgundy, part of Denmark,
Basternia, Syria, Palestine. Under Aries these Cities. Naples, Capua, Ancona,
Ferrara, Florence, Verona, Bergamo, Lindaw, Trajectum, Padua, Marseilles,
Epidaurum, Crackow, Augusta Caesarea, Vincentia. Under Taurus these Countries.
Russia, Polonia the great, the North part of Sweathland, IRELAND, Lorraigne,
Campania, Helvetia, Rhetia, Franconia, Parthia, Persia, the Islands Cyclades
between Europe and Asia, Cyprus, the Sea towns of Asia the less. Under Taurus,
these Cities. Bononia, Sena, Mantua, Tarentum, Panorme in Sicily, Perusium,
Parma, Caput Histriae, Brixia, Tigure, Lucerne, Nantz, Metis, Herbipolis,
Carolstade, Liepsig, Posnania, Gnesna, Novagrade. Under Gemini, these
Countries. Sardinia, part of Lumbardy, South and West part of England, part of
Flanders, Brabant, the Dukedom of Wittemberge, Hircania, Armenia, Mariana,
Cyreniaca, Marmarica, Egypt the Lower. Under Gemini, these Cities. Carduba in
Spain, Viterbiurn, Coesena a City in Lumbardy, Turin, Vercelli, Rhegium,
Lovaine, Bruges in Flaunders, LONDON, Mentz, Kitzing, Hasford, Bamberge,
Villacum, Noremberge, though Schoner and Cardan say it is under Sagitary, yet
Garcaeus proves it for many reasons to be under Gemini. Under Cancer these
Countries. SCOTLAND, Granado, part of Burgundy, HOLLAND, Zeland, Prussia,
Numidia, Africa, Bithynia, Phrygia, Colchis, Carthage. Under Cancer these
Cities. Constantinople, Tunis, VENICE, Genoa, Lucas, Pisa, Millain, Vincentia,
Bern, YORK, Saint ANDREWS in SCOTLAND, Lubeck, Magdeburge, Wittenburgh,
Gorlick, Under Leo these Countries. Gallia Togata, being part of Lumbardy, the
Alps, Italy, Sicyly, Apulia, Bohemia (but Garcius thinks it to be under Cancer)
part of Turkey, Aemilia, Sabina, Phaenicia, Chaldea, Orchinia. Under Leo these
Cities. Damasco, Siracusa, ROME, Ravenna, Cremona, Ulms, Confluence, Prague,
Lintz, Cremusium. Under Virgo these Countries. Achaia, Greece, Creet, Croacia,
Carinthia, Arthesina, the Dukedom of Athens, Mesopotamia, Babylon, Assyria,
part of Gallia Comata, part of Rhyne, Sylesia the lower. Under Virgo these
Cities. Jerusalem, Corinth, Rhodes, Papia or Pavia, Sigina, Brundusium, Cuma a
City in Campania, Aretium or Arezzo, Novaria a City in Italy, Toulouse, Lions,
Paris, Bazil, Heydelberg, Erphord, Uratislavia. Under Libra these Countries.
Austria, Alsatia, Livonia, Savoy, Daulphine, Bactriana, Toscanye, Caspia, Seres
in Aethiopia, Thebaida, Oasis a Country in Egypt called Azagar, Trogloditica a
Country in Aethiopia, Sundgavia. Under Libra these Cities. Lisbone, Arles,
Gajetta in Italy, Lauda a City in Mauritania, Suessa, Placentia, Felkirk,
Friberge, or Carda Bianca, Argentina, Spiers, Frankford ad Maenum, Hala in
Suevia, Winpina, Heilbrunna, Frisinga, Mospachium, Landshut, Vienna in Austria,
Anwerp. Under Scorpio these Countries. NORWAY, Bavaria the upper, Metagonitis
now called Biledulgerid in Numidia, a Region in Africa, Comogena a Country in
Syria, Cappadocia, Idumea, Mauritania, Fes, Gethulia, Catalonia. Under Scorpio
these Cities. Algiers, Valentia in Spain, Trabezond, Urbine, Aquilegia,
Pistorium, Camerinum, Tarecisium, Forum Julium, Messana, Vienna Allabrogum,
Aichstade, Monachum, Gedanum, Frankfod upon Oder. Under Sagittary these
Countries. SPAIN, Dalmatia, Sclavonia, Hungary, Moravia, Missina, Geltica,
Thyrrenia, Arabia the happy. Under Sagittary these Cities. Toledo in Spain,
Volaterra a City in Hetruria, Mutina, Narbon, Avenion, Colonia Agrippina, or
Colen, Studgard, Rottenburg, Judenburg, Buda, Gascovia. Under Capricorn these
Countries. Macedonia, Illiria, Thracia, Bossina, Albania, Bulgaria, part of
Greece, Masovia, Litvania, Saxony, Hassia, Thuringia, Marchia in Styria, the
Islands of the Orchades, India, Arriana, Gedrofia. Under Capricorn these
Cities. OXFORD, Mechlin, Juliacum, Clevonia, Berga, Gaunt, Vilna, Brandenburge,
Augusta Vindelicorum, or Ausburg, Constance, Derthona, Faventia. Under Aquary
these Countries. Amazonia, Sarmatia, Tartaria the great, Wallachia, Muscovia,
Swethland the South part, Denmark part, Westphalia, Mosell, Piemont, Bavaria
part, Aethiopia, Sogdiana, Media, Arabia the desert and stony. Under Aquary
these Cities. Hamborough, Breme, Mountferate, Pisaurum, Trent, Saltzburgh,
Ingolstade. Under Pisces these Countries. Cilicia, Calabria, Portugal,
Galitia, Normandy, Phasania, Nasamonia in Lybia, Garamantes, Lydia, Pamphilia,
Egypt the higher. Under Pisces these Cities. Alexandria, Hispalis Compostella,
Parentium, Rhemes, Worms, Ratispone, etc.
Now having shown what Signs are appropriated to certain places, and what
places Ancient and Modern Astronomers have in many respects found subject to
the influence of the said Signs, which has its ground from the like reasons as
are experimented in Nativities; for as when any terrible Eclipse of (the
Luminaries) the Sun or Moon shall be in the Ascendant of any man or woman, in
the mid-heaven, or the part of fortune thereof, or in the opposite or Quadrate
place to any of these in the Nativity; or when any of the infortunes or
malignant Planets, Saturn or Mars, shall pass by any of those places, or shall
aspect any of them hatefully, it threatens destruction or death, or some
eminent danger, or evil success in affairs to such a man or woman, especially
if any evil direction shall happen at or near the time of such Eclipse,
Conjunction, Aspect or Transit; and of the truth of this, innumerable examples
might be given: So likewise those Kingdoms or Countries, Cities or places that
have any familiarity with the Sign wherein the Eclipse does happen, or in that
wherein any notable Conjunction or other great Aspect is, for the most part
they have had grievous and sore afflictions and troubles, as I could instance
in many examples besides what I have spoken of.

But I shall proceed to some observations touching the dismal Conjunction of
Saturn and Mars, in the 14. degree 27. minutes or Taurus, both of them
culminating with that fatal Star Caput Algol, or the head of Medusa, so
ominous to, and obtruncating some great personages heretofore, and no less
minacious to others now living, who if they had some faithful Spurina about
them, Spurina predicted the fatal day to Julius Caesar the Ides of March
to tell them of their iminent danger, might perhaps, if not prevent, yet
mittigate that evil influence impending, or otherwise being forewarned, might
be the better provided against an inevitable storm; but not to meddle with
particulars (only I could wish men were more observing of the true time, or
nearest that can be of their nativities, together with some Accidents (as
imprisonment, banishment, sickness, and many other casualties incident to man
kind) for the verification thereof, which I have given notice of in many of my
Almanacks heretofore) I will therefore come to the generals of this
Conjunction; and as I said before, it happens on Friday the 12. of June 1646.
40. minutes past 7. of the clock in the afternoon, in the Meridian of Dublin;
it happens in the fourth house, two degrees distant from the body of Venus,
who some three days before, viz. the 9. of June is corporally with Saturn,
declining Mars, whom she finds so debilitated, as if she had no mind to conjoin
with him; Satun and Mars are peregrine, that is, out of all dignities; and when
any Planet is so, he is as it were a man deprived of all he has, or sequestered
from his estate; and unless the neernesse of Venus by her corporal presence,
and the Sextile Aspect of Jupiter to them both, does abate of their evil
positure, it is a very ill meeting of them to those places and people they have
influence upon, which are under Taurus, Scorpio, Aquary, and Leo, with is the
second Quadrangle of the Zodiaque, and most concerned in this Conjunction,
which happens in Taurus the night house of Venus, where she her self is, and
indifferently well fortified and irradiated, and does separate apace from these
two malevolents; yet the Moon (who conveys the influence of all the heavenly
bodies upon all sublunary creatures) has more to do in the said Conjunction
then Venus, for it is her exaltation, and she has a triplicity and face
therein; but if we observe how unfortunately she is placed in the very degree
of her fall; for as she is exalted in three degrees of Taurus, so she is
abased and cast down in three degrees of Scorpio, in which she now is exactly,
and is placed in the tenth house, which is the house of Rule and Dominion,
Kings, Princes, etc. the position will hold, whether it be reduced to London or
Edinburgh, so the Scheam will serve the three Kingdoms; and Mars who disposes
the place of the Moon, and the most part of the mid-heaven, is in his Detriment
in the opposite house; and the next day, the having been in a friendly Trine to
the Sun, meeting the like Aspect, from Jupiter imniediatly falls into the
opposition, a most hateful Aspect of Saturn, Mars and Venus, Quando Planeta
est in Aspectu sui hostis, est ut vir timens hostem suum; that is, when a
Planet is Aspected of his enemy, he is as a man that is afraid of his foe; and
such is the condition of the Moon now; Quando est cum host suo, est ut
virpugnans cum host suo; that is, when a Planet is Aspected of his enemy, he
fights with his foe; so is the Moon now, having two malicious enemies; Quando
est cadens a domo sua, vel a domo exaltationis suae, est ut vit absens a domo
sua, aut Civitate sua; that is, when a Planet falls from his house or
exaltation, he is as a man absent from his house or City; so are Mars and the
Moon now; Quando Planeta est cadens, est ut vir vexatus and timidus, he is as a
man vexed and fearful; so are Mars and the Moon at this time; Planeta in domo
non sua, est ut vir in domo aliena pulsans, jam deprimitur judicium suum, nec
est ei authoritas; a Planet that is not in his house, is as a man knocking at
another man's door, his judgment is depressed, and is without authority; so are
Saturn, Mars and the Moon now; Ex Centiloquis Bethem, 10, 11, 14, 18, 27. cum
duo infortunae conjunguntur and Luna congruit cum Saturno in latitudine, erit
fames and mortalitas; that is, when the two infortunes are conjoined, and the
Moon shall agree in latitude with Saturn, there shall be famine and mortality;
Si vero Marti mutabuntur Reges, and erit multa sanguinis effusio, and praelia
in loco qui signabitur ab ipso signo, and hoc non fallit, propositio Almansoris
132. that is, if the Moon shall agree with Mars in latitude, Kings shall
change, and there shall be much effusion of blood, and great wars shall be in
that place signified by that Sign: And this fails not, indeed the Moon has
five degrees, Saturn two degrees fourteen minutes, and Mars but 46. minutes,
all of them having South latitude; the Moon agrees nearest with Saturn thougn
their latitude is of one kind, viz. South: But I believe the whole Aphorism
will be in force, and not any part thereof mittigated, notwithstanding the
interposition of those friendly beams of the Sun and Jupiter, which in my
opinion are very weak, and not able to effect or procure that expected relief
and assistance to these Taurists and their Confederates.

Guido Bonatus, in part 4. Astronomiae, fol. 556. cap. 66. says, Cum fuerit
Saturnus in Tauro, fueritque in Angulo directus, significat contentiones and
bella, etc. that is, if Saturn shall be in Taurus direct in an Angle, he
signifies contentions and wars: And Alhumasar says, there shall be tribulations
and injuries, and tremblings and Earthquakes, the destruction of Cities, Towns
and Houses; and Guido says of Mars, in Capite 86. fol. 572. Si fuerit in Ta^ro
significat ventos validos venturos, and destructionem frugum, similiter and
Arborum and hoc ex causa Caloris excedentis debitum and naturalem modum,
significat etiam multitudinem nubium atque nubilarum; pluviarum quoque ac
tonitruorum and fulgurum; that is, if Mars shall be in Taurus, he signifies
very strong winds, the destruction of fruits, and also of Trees, and this to
proceed from an undue and disproportioned heat, exceeding its natural temper
and constitution; also very cloudy weather, with abundance of rain, thunder and
lightning; Albumasar says, significat mortem mulierum and Vaccarum, and
significat bella ventura inter Cives Orientis and Cives Occidentis; that is, it
foresheweth to death of Women and Kyne, and that there shall be war between the
Citizens (people) of the East, and those of the West: Haly part octava de
Juditiis Astrorum cap. 7. says, Si Saturnus in quarta domo fuerit, and ibi
malificus, significat quod res and aedificia cadent, minuentur plantationes,
abscindentur aquae, and erit in populo diminutio, and paupertas, and gens
illius Climatis erit obsessa, and non audebunt exire de suis villis propter
timorem inimicorum fuorum; quod eo fortius erit and magis affixum, si quarta
domus fuerit Signum fixum, quia tunc erit damnum fortius and durabilius; that
is, if Saturn shall be in the fourth house, and be there malevolent, it
signifies tha^ houses and buildings shall fall, come to decay and perish,
planting or seting shall be diminished, waters cut off, the people shall be
lessened or abated, there shall be poverty to them, and people of that Country
shall be obsessed or besieged, they shall not dare to go out of their Towns
(Cities, Castles or Countries) by reason of the fear they shall have of their
enemies; and this shall be more affixed (certain) if the fourth house shall be
a fixed Sign, and the hurt (damage) or loss, shall be more strong and
durable: This Aphorism agrees exactly with the position of the malignant
Planet Saturn at this time in every respect: Furthermore Haly says, in part
8. de Juditiis Astrorum cap. 25. Si quando Mars junctus fuerit cum Saturno
struet quilibet alteri frauds, and deceptiones and erunt inter homines
percussiones and vulnera, etiam accidet regi impedimentum and labor ab homine
qui est de terra parittionis illius signi in quo junguntur; that is, if Mars
and Saturn shall be conjoined, one man shall seek to entrap another, there
shall be many falsities and deceits, much woundings, fightings and quarrelings;
and impediment danger and trouble shall happen to the King, from a man which is
of that Country under the division of that Sign: And a little after, in fol.
392. Si applicatio Lunae cum Saturno fuerit adecima per oppositionem Accident
Regibus and Populis placita and discordiae, and Capientur multi de populis
propter discordiam Regum cum ipsis, and propter magnum metum quem habent de
eis. If he application of the Moon to Saturn shall be by opposition from the
tenth house, there shall be many debates and differences happen to the King and
People; and many of that People, by reason of such differences between them
shall be captived or taken, through the great fear they shall have of them.
The sum of all these Aphorisms amounts to thus much, That in regard at the
time of this Conjunction the mid heaven is so extremely afflicted, and Mars
Lord thereof, which is significator of men in greatest authority, whether they
be Kings, Princes, Lords, or other great persons and Potentates, whether they
be of the Families and race of the O's or Mac's, who so domineer and Lord it
with their Galloglasses and Kernes in Ireland; or whether we take our judgment
from the Moon, who is significatrix of the People there so miserably posited, I
cannot pronounce other then ruin and destruction to those great ones,
subversion of their ancient Families, and ruin to their stately Buildings,
Cities, Towns. Towers and Castles. That People shall be in most miserable and
deplorable condition. We see the Conjunction is in Taurus, under which, amongst
other places, Ireland is posited; and that the signs Leo, Scorpio and Aquary,
are sharers, and must participate in this influence; Famine, Scarcity, Plagues
and terrible warfare shall happen to many places under those Signs. If they
expect aid from Foraigne parts, they will be frustrated; Me thinks I behold
all the States of Europe involved in this Quarrel; the French and Spaniard
Matching, the Hollander busy, the POPE thundering his Bulls and
Excommunications, the Turk making great preparations, so likewise the Germane,
Dane, Swede, Polonian, Venetian, nay what State in the Christian World is not
disquieted? If I should recount the Eclipses and great Conjunctions of the
superior Planets in Signs, to which most or all Countries in Europe are
subjected, and the events that have succeeded within these few years in these
places, I might rather make an History then a succinct discourse; there were
not long since two or three Eclipses of both the Luminaryes in the Sign Leo,
the effects of all which are strongly operating, and for many years together
will produce admirable and unexpected occurrences, I believe the progress of
Saturn through the Sign Taurus, out of which he will not fully free himself
till the end of March 1648. will be very fatal to Ireland, and most chiefly
he will power out his influence upon that place rather then any other; For if
we consider the present condition thereof, since the Rebellion there broke
forth, The horrid Murders, and cruel slaughters by them committed upon many
thousands of English Protestants, whose blood cries for vengeance, do
authorize me Astrologically to pronounce a fearful doom of Fire, Sword,
Plague, and Famine to follow that bloody Nation, Let me tell the Spaniard,
French, or what other Nation soever that is ayding or assisting them, they must
not escape the Divine vengeance which God by the Stars, his Celestial
Ministers does menace them withal; If the Pope send his Agents to prosecute
their Designs, he may chance loose his Triple Crown in this unjust quarrel
they have raised. The Devil may rage for a season, Sed si Deus nobiscum quis
contra nos, The fight from Heaven, the Star in their Courses fight against
(CaesAR) Sisera; I hope I shall speak truth, if I tell the French, Spaniard, or
any other friend, the Irish or their Associates have, that though they never
made greater preparations, yet with as like success as that Invincible Armado
in 88 had, at what time fourscore of the Spanish Ships were lost with not so
few as twenty thousand men. The winds and Seas fighting at that time for
England, which was many years before threatened by the proud and insulting
Spaniard; This Armado consisted of 130 Ships, nineteen thousand two hundred
and ninty Soldiers, eight thousand three hundred and fifty Mariners, two
thousand and fourscore Gally-slaves, two thousand six hundred and thirty
great Ordinance: which Navy having been three years in preparing (and at no
small charge) within one month was often beaten and at length put to flight,
(and as I said 20000 of their men being slain, and not above one hundred of
the English were missing) the remainder of their Navy some in their slight were
cast upon Scotland, and some upon Ireland, and those few that escaped returned
with a great deal of dishonor into Spain, above 700 Soldiers and Seamen
were cast upon the Scottish shore, who were afterward sent over to the
Low Countries but those which by Tempest were driven upon Ireland found a
harder measure, for the wild Irish of their own accord slew many of them: I
suppose their cruelty is not inferior now to what it was then, but suppose the
French, Spanish, Irish Jesuit, Popish Friar, Priest, and the whole rabble of
Antichristians in all the World were combined together, against England, let
but an English man name 1588. or 1605. And without doubt the proudest and most
cruellest of them all will be daunted, and sink down with amazement; so
powerful has God shown himself in those times. That in the first the King
of Spain himself acknowledged the misfortune that befell him to have been the
handy work of God, and gave thanks to God and his Saints, (causing the like to
be done throughout Spain) that it fell to be no worse. And for that in 1605
certainly it was the eye of Gods Providence that discovered that horrid deed of
darkness, the Gunpowder Treason invented by the Divellish Papists, to the
destruction of the Parliament, and so consequently to the whole Kingdom.

Let us look back to the year 1587. (In which year Mary Queen of Scots was
beheaded) for the position of Saturn, and we shall find that from the first
of March that year, to the middle of April 1589 he walked through Taurus, the
Sign under which he now is etc. under which Ireland is subjected as I said
before, In the month of August the 28 day was an ominous opposition of Mars
from Scorpio, to him in the 16 degree, and if we observe this memorable year
1588. Upon the 28 of May Saturn and Mars were in Conjunction, in the 19
degrees Taurus not far from the place they now meet in, not many days after
which that Spanish Fleet was discovered on our English Coast. If we examine our
Chronicles we shall find most Memorable Passages in diverse parts of the World,
to have happened this year: Was it not unusual and strange, that Polonia this
year should have three Kings usurping the Title, while the fourth viz. Stephen
Battori was yet unburied? Namely Sigismond the Sweden, Maximilian the Emperors
brother, and Henry Valoys King of France, of which three Maximilian in the
beginning of this year was taken Prisoner, his Army overthrown by means
thereof, many thousands of men, women, and children, carried away Captives by
the Tartars, Thus says Gallobelgicus, and further that Suetia was all on fire
with tumults, and lost certain places of strength to the Muscovite; The
Muscovite himself ran mad and lost his wits. The King of Denmark Frederick
the second dyed; In France the Barricados of Paris, the flight of the King from
thence, The slaughter of the Duke of Guise, and his brother the Cardinal of
Lorrayne; The death of the Queen Mother, the poisoning of the Prince of Condee;
and the Overthrow which the King of Navarre gave unto Duke Mercury, (all which
Les derniers troubles de France do testify) and gave that Kingdom sufficient
cause to think that year 1588 to be an extraordinary year, At the same time
the Duke of Savoy prepared his Army, and surprised Carmagmall, the King of
France his chief Magazine in Saluze. The Turk suffered great overthrowes in
Hungaria. And in Constantinople by reason of false moneys, wherewith the
Jauizaryes were paid their wages, they fell into a Mutiny, and compelled the
Emperor of the Turks to deliver unto them his chiefest Favorites to be put to
death, and that likewise they might remove his Officers at their pleasure, yet
they were not coment herewith, they set fire on the Jews Houses, spoiled their
goods, and by that means above twelve thousand of their Houses were burnt
down to the ground in the same City. The Hungarians were continually molested
with the the incursions of the Turks; The Sophy of Persia dyed. And (if I may
use the words of Gallobelgicu^) ab ortu Solis usque ad occasum, nullus firm
remansit locus in quo non miratu dignum aliquid hoc Anno contigerit. That is,
from the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof, there was scarce any
place in which something worthy Memory did not happen. This year Regiomontanus
foretold, (a little before his death at Rome, viz. 1475. one hundredth and
thirteen years before it came to pass) to his effect.

The Translation whereof as I have read in Dutch is thus.

Tausen funfhundert achtzitchtacht
Das is it das iar, das ich betracht,
Geth in them de weltnixt under
Geschicht doch groz merklich wunder.
Post mill expletos a partu Virginis Annos,
Et post Quingentos rursus ab Orb datos:
Octogesimus octavus mirabilis Annus
Ingruet, is secum tristia Fataferet.
Si non hoc Anno, totus malus occidet Orbis:
Si non in nihilum terra, fretumque ruet:
Cuncta tamen mundi sursum ibunt atque retrorsum.
Imperia, and Luctus undique grandis erit.
Which is thus done into English by me.

From Christ's Birth count a thousand years complete,
And add five hundred more with eighty eight:
That year approaching! All men will affright:
With woeful Terrors, which on them will light.
If the whole World to ruin do not run,
Or into nothing Land, and Seas be done:
At least, most Kingdoms topsy-turny turn:
And men on all sides grievously shall mourn.
I mention this Astrologicall Prediction, and these many occurrences that
happened this year, yet in the memory of man to the end, remembering what
having already bin passed, we may in some measure conjecture of the like
Accidents to happen in these our days. It is true, Saturn passes through a
sign once in two years and a half, so that in thirty years he runs
through the Zodiaque or the twelve Signs. And as often as he returns to his
place, Quadrate or opposite Aspect, for the most part there happens
extraordinary mutations in many parts of the World, according to the diverse
and various positions of the other Planets to him, and amongst themselves, and
the Ingresse of the Sun to the Cardinal points with Eclipses etc. if we look
in our Chronicles for the year 1593 (in which year Saturn was in Leo in
Quadrate to Taurus) and so to the end of 1595 and upward, we shall find the
Irish to rebel: The story whereof is at large in Mr. Camden and others: And if
we come nearer to our time, viz. In the years 1600 1601 and 1602 all which time
Saturn was in Scorpio, we shall find not only them to rebel again, but the
Spaniards then landed, and had got footing in Ireland, but were with great
loss to them driven out, with many other remarkable Passages worthy memory by
all true spirited English men. I could much enlarge my self in these
Historical observations, and make them very fitly applicable to the
Celestial Motions of the superiors Stars and Planets, I suppose what has
already been spoke will suffice to inform any man of understanding, I do not
say that because there has such and such things happened to such and such
places, when such and such Conjunctions and Aspects of the Planets or Eclipses
have been, that the like must necessarily happen there again at the like
Congresse of the Heavenly bodies, No. Ipse Opifex Rerum voluit haec
ordinatissima Coelicorpora, esse in Signa, tempora, dies and Annos: God the
Creator of all things wills that these orderly Heavenly Bodies shall be for
Signs, times, days and years. Rideat igitur qui velit, and cum suo
detrimento, summo cum periculo conjuncto abiiciat, and secure and superbe
contemnat has qualescunque significationes Coelestes: Deus se derideri non
patietur. Phryx non emandatur nisi plagie. Prudentiores facile hinc haud dubie
Divinitus admoneri se animadvertent, ut discant matura poenitentia and vera
conversione, and ardenti pietate ad Deum confugere, and antevertere, and
praecavere, Iram Dei horrendam adversus nostra multiplicia peccata, and
paenarum futurarum gravitatem.

The Irish have ever been most rebellious and treacherous to the English
Nation, and of late have most barbarously and inhumanely murdered many
thousand innocent souls. Now they are at the height of their cruelty, and God
is pouring out his overflowing cup of wrath and vengeance upon them, and
their adherents. Jamque securis ad radicem posita est, ut in frugisera arbor
excidatur, and in ignem conjiciatur. When God threatens a Nation, People or
Family, he diverse ways forewarnes them, before he sends his Judgments upon
them: sometimes in the sea, upon the land, in monstrous births, in the fire by
strange apparitions, unusual tempests: sometimes by Comets in blazing Stars,
very often by Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, and more usually by the
Configurations of the Planets amongst themselves and the Hebdomaticall
Lunations, which if men would search into, they might observe most excellent
matters to contemplate upon, and raise their thoughts to an exceeding height of
Admiration of the most wonderful works of the omnipotent Creator.

I do much wonder at the harsh unadvised censure of many men: Divines and
otherwise learned enough, that say nothing can be foreseen by the stars or
their configuration: I must tell them Astrology is as ancient as our first
Parents, (but the Antiquity of it does not alone work upon me) that it is
allowed by Universities, Princes, Sages, Philosophers, from the first Infancy
of the world to this very time, and will be admired as long as the Sun Moon
and Stars move in the Heavens. It depends upon as good grounds as any Art, It
deals not by signs and effects, but by causes, whereof the motions,
configurations, and positions of the Heavenly Bodies are grounded upon
Mathematical demonstrations, and the propertyes or virtue of the Heavenly
Influence, upon the observation or known experience of great learned men even
from the beginning of the world. And if the Divine will do not counterchecke
the ordinary course of nature, or the matter of those Elementary Bodies here
beneath, be not unproportionable, and thereby unapt to receive their
impressions: there is no reason why in a natural and physical necessity,
Astrologicall Predictions made according to Art should not succeed and take
effect. It deals not with rare contingents unknown or undeterminate. But with
these things which fall out for the most part, such as are performed by Art and
nature; It deals not with man's will simply and directly, but accidentally it
does; It deals with men's inclinations, dispositions, temperature, affections
and humors; It meddles not with miraculous works, nor with fatal necessity,
except some contingency be joined with it, nor with Gods secrets: It is
necessary for Physic, Policy, Husbandry, Navigation, Military Discipline,
for health; It can yield reasons which other Arts cannot, as in Clymactericall
years, Critical days: Why children borne in the eighth month most part are
not vital. Of Tides: Why Customs, Rites, Manners, Laws and Temperaments, be
diverse in people inhabiting in several Clymates: Why certain Seasons be
turbulent; Why some years be dangerous. And many other things which may be
read in that great Book (of the most wise God) the Heavens; The Stars therein
differing in glory and brightness, one from another: but whose motions are
most wonderful Regular and Harmonious, which stares like several letters,
some being capitalls and others of less size, being as it were set together. A
man endued with an apt Genius and Knowledge therein, may not only spell, but
in some reasonable measure read the admirable Work of God therein in their
influentiall and secondary government of all sublunary Creatures.

Faelices anima quibus hac cognoscere primum,
Inque Domus Superas scandere cura fuit.
On the other side I do pity the blind ignorance of some others (who think
themselves as learned as wise) that not knowing the motions of the Planets and
stars if they chance to see a star in the day time, do wonder at the same,
possessing themselves with some strange conceit of some great matter to ensue
such an Apparition: So it was in the year 1625, when a little before the death
of King James, the glorious Planet Venus being occidentall of the Sun, and in
her greatest distance from him was thought to have been a Comet or some nova
stella, being Sunday in the Afternoon, the Moon and she seemed to touch one
another: or that as Kepler says she did quasi haerere in sinistro Cornu Lunae
which I my self being at York then with some others observed in the West part
of the Heavens.

So likewise what great wonder and amazement there was in the year 1630 at
that time when Prince Charles was borne, the same star Venus being then in
great distance from the Sun, and oriental or rising before him, was seen to
go before the Sun all day for the most part, I will set down the words of
Johannes Johnstonius in his Thaumatagraphia, Capite 3. Admirand. Coeli Artic.
2. de stellarum luce etc. Nona denique Junii hujus Anni, visa una in Anglia
ante meridiem, cum Gratia Deo propter nativitatem Principis Walliae agerentur,
visam eandem codem tempore Diepae in Gallia, a Gallis quibusdam accepimus; That
is, the ninth day of June in the foreign account, (the 30 of May being Sunday
in the English account) of this year one was seen in England before noone,
when thanks were given to God (at Paul's Church in London) for the birth of the
Prince of Wales: And we received intelligence from certain French men, that the
same Star the same time was seen at Diep in France; But by leave of this
Learned Gentleman I do not account this a wonder, for it is usual with Venus
once or twice in the year to show her self in the day time, being in her
greatest distance from the Sun either when she is oriental, or rises before
the Sun, or occidentall and sets after him, and this may be easily
demonstrated out of her Theory, If she presignified any thing she was the
prodromus of the miseries that since have ensued to this Kingdom. And now at
this very time the Royal party in some places as I am informed, flatter and
promise themselves strange matters by reason this Star Venus (none of them
having so much Astronomy, as to discover what she is) appears so bright and
glorious in the West after Sunsetting; if she betoken any thing, I suppose she
appears to our gallant General, and the rest of the Commanders and Soldiers
now in the West, as a bright lamp, to discover the dark, blind corners of the
West, the unknown ways of the enemy there and in Wales, to reduce that
miserable wasted Country, which God be thanked is in a good forwardness.

I never observed or read that the simple appearance of any Star in the day
time, foreshewed any thing, except what Hieronomus Cardanus in lib. 14. de
varietate rerum, cap. 70. mentions, whose words I will set down as they are
there, Stellas quoque die sereno bis vidisse Mediolani me memini cum tota
Civitate; alteram splendidissimam Anno 1511. cum pulsi sunt Galli; aliam Anno
1535. subobscuram cum mortuus est Franciscus Sfortia secundus: sed and tunc
quod sine filliis mortuus fuerit, mutatus est princeps, transiitque in Carolum
Imperatorem Civitatis Regnum, variato rerum statu; that is, I remember my self
twice to have seen Stars in a clear day at Millain, the whole City being
spectators, one very bright Anno 1511. when the French were expulsed, and the
other Anno 1535. somewhat obscure or dark, when Francis Sfortia the second
dyed, but then he dyed without Sons, the Prince was changed, and the government
of the City passed over to the Emperor Charles, with a various state of
affairs. I know not whether if God have so ordered the motion of the Stars,
that Stars appearing in the day time should foreshew any thing; for my part I
believe it not in that simple apparition; it is not proper for the Stars to
shine or appear in the day: God made two great lights, the greater light to
rule the day, and the lesser to rule the night; he made also the Stars, and God
set them in the Firmament to give light upon the earth, and to rule over the
day and over the night, and to divide the light from the darkness, and God saw
that it was good, Genesis 1.16, 17. verses. This I am sure of, that they work by
their influence incessantly day and night upon all creatures: Nay, in many
places of Scripture, God would not tell us of the dominion of the Stars upon
the earth, and the creatures therein, if they had no force, power and
influence; in many places therein, they are called the Host of Heaven, and the
Armies of Heaven, therein amplifying the most wonderful divine power and might
of God, by the force, influence and energeticall operation of these glorious
creatures; in some places, God expressly distinguishes between the sweet
influence of the Pleiades (or the seven Stars) and the binding influence of
Orion, under which two Constellations being of clean opposite nature and
effect, God comprehends all the rest of the Stars, and as it were by the figure
of Locution, he puts the part for the whole, thereby manifestly giving us so
much understanding, as to conceive all the other Stars of Heaven have their
several particular virtues: God says, He will hear the Heavens, and the
Heavens shall hear the earth, Hosea chap. 2. ver. 21. whereby we may be
informed, that the fruits of the earth do not vegetate, nor have their
dependence upon one, two or more constellations, but upon the whole Heavens.

We may read in Deuteronomy chap. 33. ver. 13, 14. that Moses amongst his
blessings upon the twelve Tribes, he blessed Joseph in these words, saying,
Blessed of the Lord be his Land, for the precious things of Heaven, for the
dew, and for the deep that coucheth beneth, and for the precious fruits brought
forth by the Sun, and for the precious things put forth by the Moon: Where no
man can deny but the virtues of the Heavens and the Stars are stirred up by the
two Luminaries, the two great Lights, where the increase of the earth is
referred to the comfortable influence of the Sun and Moon, who are there said
to bring forth, put forth, or thrust forth the fruits thereof, as the Original
has it: Quae quaeque Luna protrudit, they are not only thus declared in the
Scriptures evidently to exercise their dominion in vegetable things alone, but
they are further created for, and to the service of men: Nay, there is no
speech nor language where their voice is not heard; that is, there is no place
in all the world, where they do not operate and have influence.

We read in Deuteronomy 4. chap. ver. 19. that God in his exhortations to the
Israelites, bids them that they should not so lift up their eyes to Heaven, as
that when they saw the Sun and the Moon, and the Stars, even all the Host of
Heaven, they should be driven to worship and serve them, God having divided
them unto all Nations under the Heaven.

By which distinction we are not to understand the light which they cause between
day, and night, and the seasons of the year; but we must understand the
Ministry of the Stars to have a further construction, nay, if there were no
Stars in heaven, the Sun and Moon would be sufficient to distinguish between
night and day, Summer and Winter, and the other seasons of the year; without
question the influence of the Sun, Moon and Stars, extends to the constitution
and temperature of man; it is evident, that those that are lunatic, whose
distemper follows the course of the Moon, have their intermissions of their
grievous fits as the Moon is well irradiated, and on the contrary most
grievously tormented as she is afflicted, which is evident by the judgment of
all Physicians; Nay, certainly we read in 1 Chronicles. 12. chap. ver. 32. that the
children of Isachar, by their skill and knowledge of times, could advise the
Israelites in their actions; for the words are thus (and the children of
Isachar, which were men that had understanding of the times, to know what
Israel ought to do: And if so, then of the success, which is confirmed by
innumerable examples in all Ages; and in Scripture we read (as I said before)
that the Stars in their courses fought against Sisera, Judges chap. 5. ver. 20.
By which it is evident, that they have dominion over men, etc. Many Expositors
understand this place of Scripture, that this fighting from Heaven was by hail,
rain and Tempest, and true it is (says the Author of Astrologomania (G. C. or
George Carleton, sometime Bishop of Landaffe, afterward of Chichester, or the
publisher thereof, T. V. B. of D. or Thomas Vicars Bachelor of Divinity) fol.
105. That the Stars by their cosmicall rising or setting are observed to
further rain and tempest; for in the next words of the Text, it follows, the
River Kison swept thtm away, whereby is declared the inundation of the River
caused by the hail and rain which fell from Heaven, whereby the Canaanites were
overthrown by the Tempest from heaven and drowned in the River: This is evident
by the Text.

And because the Scripture mentions so much in that place, and no more, and
that many Translators have so expounded that Text, must it be inferred thence,
that the Stars have no other influence but in the causing of hail, rain,
tempests, etc. must the Stars be concluded from all other influence? all the
Creatures of God are at his command, and are used as Instruments to do his
will in the protection of his Church, and against his enemies; God most
miraculously plagued Aegipt, with turning their waters into blood, and
destroying their Fish, and sent Frogs, Lice, Flies, Murrain, boils and blains,
hail, with Locusts and darkness among them, and the death of all their first
born, and at last, Pharaoh (pursuing the Israelites) with all his Host, were
drowned in the red sea. Thus God wrought wonderfully, and beyond the course of
nature: But in this place it is said, the Stars in their courses fought, etc.
under correction, besides that exposition; I understand by courses, the various
motions, configurations, and diverse Aspects, the Sun, Moon, the rest of the
Planets and Stars have to one another, and amongst themselves; and by their
fighting, etc. I understand likewise, some notable configuration or position of
the Stars or Planets, from whost influence (God having so appointed from the
beginning) they cause wonderful mutations in the world; and it is usual, when
the superior Planets are in Conjunction, Quadrate or Opposite Aspect to one
another, very forcible; they do not only cause rain, hail and tempests, etc.
but wars, murder, and great dissentions, and other great changes have followed
such positions of those Stars, as I could instance in all Ages, in innumerable,
undeniable examples; I have named some already, I will only repeat the words of
that most excellent man Henricus Rantzovius, a noble Dane, etc. in his Examples
of Astrologial Predictions upon great Conjunctions, fol. 112. where he, amongst
other notable matters, says, in that Book, which was the third Edition of it,
and printed at Colen in the year 1585. Anno Domini 1583. Habuimus
Conjunctiones, Planetarum sedecim omnes in Piscibus, inter quas fuit etiam
Saturni and Jovis, Anno 1584. Quatuordecim Conjunctiones in Ariete, and
Eclipsim Solis and Lunae in Tauro, Anno Domini 1586. Conjunctiones etiam in
Ariete tredecim and unam in Tauro, Solis and Mercurii: Deinde Anno Domini,
1588. Conjunctiones duodecim in diversis signis: Has absque dubio sequentur
nefaria Consilia, ac facta, motus, seditiones, bella, caedes in Civitatibus
Regnis and Provincis, inaudita genera morborum, Pestis: Obitus magnorum Regum,
ac Dominorum, infinitae dissentiones, ac novae diversitates opinionum in
Religione, ac denique ingentes calamitates in toto orb terrarum, ut multi
rerum coelestium periti opinantur, colligentes haec ex eventibus quae secutae
sunt praterlapsas Conjunctiones quas recensui: That is, we have had in the year
1583. sixteen Conjunctions of the Planets, al of them in Pisces, amongst which
was a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter: In the year 1584. there was fourteen
Conjunctions of the Planets in Aries, and the Sun and Moon Eclipsed ih Taurus:
In the year 1586. there will be thirteen Conjunctions of the Planets in Aries,
and one in Taurus of the Sun and Mercury, and afterward in the year 1588.
twelve Conjunctions of the Planets in diverse Signs; without doubt after these
(Conjunctions) will follow or succeed mischievous, villainous and wicked
Counsels, and detestable Acts, commotions or troubles, seditions, wars,
slaughters or killing in Cities, Kingdoms and Provinces, unknown or unheard of
diseases, the plague, death of great Kings and Lords, Infinite dissentions, and
new diversities of opinions in Religion, and to conclude, very great calamities
in all the Countries of the world, as many skillful men in celestial matters
suppose, gathering these things from the events which are to follow these
forepast Conjunctions now rehearsed.

I shall hereunto add some particular predictions out of the same Rantzovius,
page 99. Friderici secundi imperatoris Astrologus ab eo interrogatus, cur
tantum honoris Rudolpho, Haspurgensi Comiti pauperi in Aula sua tunc versanti,
exhiberet, respondit, mortuis tuis filiis, quorum adhuc december supersunt, ipse,
and posteri ejus ad tua Regna pervenient, Author Albertus Argentinensis, quod
exitus ipse probavit. Nam Anno Christi 1273. Calend. October. Rudolphus a
Germanis principibus Francofurti in Regem Romanum eligetur, cum Basiliam
obsideret, and hodierno adhuc die videmus Rudolphi posteros Regnum Neopolitanum
and Ducatum Austriae, and Sueviae una cum Imperio and Regno Neopolitano
obtinere. Modernus nam Imperator Rudolphus ab eo nomen and ditiones haeditario
jure accepit, and Philippus Hispaniae Rex ex eodem natus Regnum Siculum and
Neoplitanum nactus est. That is, The Astrologer of the Emperor Frederick the
second, being asked by him, why he showed so much respect to Rudolph the poor
Earl of Habspurg, then frequenting his Court: To whom the Astrologer answered.
Thy Sons being dead, of whom ten are yet living, He and his Posterity shall
attain to thy Kingdoms; which the event proved, for in the year of Christ,
1273. the first of October, Rudolph besieging of Basil, was elected by the
Princes of Germany at Frankeford to be King of the Romans; and to this day we
see the posterity of Rudolph to enjoy the Kingdom of Naples, the Dukedoms of
Austria and Suevia, together with the Empire and Kingdom of Naples: for the
late Emperor Rudolphus, by hereditary right received from him, both his name,
dominions and Empire, and Phillip King of Spain, proceeding from him, obtained
the Kingdom of Scicily and Naples: This Frederick the second was elected 1212.
he reigned 38. years, he dyed 1250. the Empire was void 22. years, though
Conrade his Son, and Richard brother to Henry the third, King of England, who
was Earl of Cornwall, were elected in the interim; and in the year 1273. this
Rudolph was elected Emperor, and so continued seventeen years nine months and
sixteen days; it being sixty years before this prediction came to pass for
ought I read to the contrary.

In page 97. in the same Rantzovius, thus I find; Magister Christianus
Astrologus Pragensis, Ladislaum Jagellonem Regem Poloniae per Sacerdotem
praemonuit, ut mortem sibi imminentem praecaveret, quod multi Planetae
conjungerentur, and fieret Eclipsis Lunae sub Terra; mortuus autem nihil ominus
est eo Anno, qui fuit Annus Domini 1434. Anno Aetatis 49. That is, Master
Christian an Astrologer of Prague, admonished Ladislaus Jagello King of Poland
by his Priest, that he should beware of imminent death, for that many Planets
were conjoined this year, and there would be an eclipse of the Moon under the
earth; notwithstanding that premonition he dyed that year of our Lord, which
was 1434. in the 49. year of his age.

In the same page, the next adjoining observation is thus, Joannes Picus
Mirandulae Comes, edidit Librum adversus Astrologos, hi (inter quos fuerunt
Bellantius Senensis, Antonius Sirigatus Florentinus, and Angelus de Catastivis
Carmelita) ut Artem veram ostenderent, illum annum aetatis 33. non
transgressurum predixerunt, ex directione Ascendentis ad Martem, quemadmodum
hinc inde editis constat: that is, Joannes Picus Earl of Mirandula, published a
Book against Astrologers: These men (that is to say the Astrologers) amongst
whom were Bellantius of Sena, Antonius Sirigatus a Florentine, and Angelus de
Catastivis a Carmelite, that they might show it [Astrology] to be a true Art,
they foretold the said Picus that he should not escape the 33. year of his age,
by reason of the direction of the Ascendant to the body of Mars, as it appears
in the writings published upon this occasion: I mention this the rather for
that it is most appa^^nt these three men were Astrologers, and by Astrology
foretold to this Picus the time of his death, who flattering himself with a
false comfort, as if he could wrangle away Death by writing against Astrology,
endeavoring to prove the Art vain, his death concurring exactly with the time
predicted, confirmed the same Art to be true, and more actually confuted that
which he had written against it, then if all the world besides had conspired to
answer him.

I have rehearsed these things, and been the larger upon them (though I could
show above one thousand examples of rare observations Astrologicall,) and many
of my own experiment) to cure that Episcopomania, or, An examination of Sir
Christopher Heydons Defense of Astrology. For would any man, but a man not well
in his wits T. V.B. of D. publish and Print, that the Astrologer foretells
that is true, by the help of Satan; that Astrologicall predictions depend not
upon natural Causes; that Astrologicall predictions stand not by learning, but
by some instinct; that Astrology considers the fortunes only of Fools and
wicked men; that the first Inventor of Astrology was the Devil; that the
Astrologer attaineth not to his intended end in a Prediction without the help
of Magic; with many other absurd Tenants. I will tell you a story of himself,
as he writes it in his Epistle Dedicatory, where he says thus; That those
predictions do not always fall out jump and true as they would bear us in
hand, but that either the Devil does miss sometimes, or that his Instrument
does mistake his informations; this I am able to justify and make good by a
plain story of my self when I was a child, and went to School at Carleil, where
I was born; there came an odd fellow about the Country, he was reputed a
cunning man, and so called, for that he took upon him to tell fortunes; the
fellow was dumb or at least feigned himself speechless; but certain it was, he
had an instinct or familiarity with some Spirit: This fellow being on a time in
my Fathers house, there were some there more simply honest then religiously
wise, made signs unto him, to show what should be my fortune, and another
School-fellow's of mine that was then present: Whereupon this Wizard having
looked earnestly upon us both, and paused a little; For my School-fellow, he
takes me a low stool and gets up upon it, with a book in his hand, and began to
act after his fashion, sign^^ying thereby that he should be a Preacher: And for
me, he took a pen and a scrole of paper, and made is though he would write,
signifying thereby, that I should be a Scrivener: Now so it fell out, that my
School-fellow proved the Scrivener, and I prove the Preacher: By which it is
plain to be seen, that either the Devil himself did miss, or his Instrument
was mistaken in his informations: Thus far he that proved a Preacher and Bishop
would have been, if the dumb man could have spoken, he would have told him so;
A dumb man and tell fortunes! Risum teneatis Amici!

What Is all this to Astrology, or to Astrologicall predictions, or to any man
professing Astrology, bounded within this definition? Astrologia est Doctrina,
quae ostendit vires stellarum, cognitas perpetua experientia, and qualitates
temperamenta, and inclinationes in elementis and corporibus hominum, ortas a
Luce, and motu stellarum, quibus qualitatibus, temperamentis and
inclinationibus, respondent suae quaedam Actiones, nisi aut Divinitus, aut
aliis causis fortioribus impediantur. For the more satisfaction in this matter,
I refer you to my Almanacke for the last year 1645.

I will only repeat what I mentioned in my Prognostication for the year 1643.
(in some Astrologicall remembrances) and so close up this Discourse. In my
Observations of the Revolution of the year 1640. amongst others, I observed
that Belliger and iracundus Mars Anni hujus, Dominus, Vim irae and Rabiei
passim Capricornistis, and toti ejus Quadrangulo tam Dirum in medium immittit,
ut parum tranquilitatis illis remansurum sit, and quod malum maxim Conjunctio
Martis and Saturni tribus vicibus hoc Anno in Aquario, Humano generi
Hispalensis authoritate, igne and gladio exasperabit, Rosea Jovis prosapia
(that is, Archbishops, Bishops, Prelates, etc.) contentiones and multa nova
percipiet, and collabentur desiderabilia ipsorum, and claudicabit sanitus
eorum: I could wish T. V. B. of D. would English this to the Episcopals and
their party that cannot understand more then English; and in the same
Revolution of that year, having found Jupiter and Mars to have been in
Conjunction the fifth of March, in five degrees 34. minutes of Capricorn, where
Jupiter is cadent, and at the Suns entrance into Aries that year, Mars was
newly separated from Jupiter; I thought it a strange Conjunction, and that no
doubt it would produce as strange matters concerning the persons signified by
Jupiter and Mars, or the Jovialists and Martiallists: Whereupon searching some
of the Masters of Astronomy, I found in Guido Bonatus, his Astronomia, 4. part,
cap. 34. these very words; Si fueris suspicatis utrum in Anno quem revoluit
sint futura praelia, seu dissentiones and unde excitentur and a quibus; Aspice
illi rei secumdum modum quem tradiderunt nobis Antiqui, and specialiter ille
reverendissimus predecessor noster Albnumazar, qui fuit in Revolutionum Annorum
scientia, etiam in omnibus aliis partibus Astronomiae proficuus, and valde
astutus and audax; Eriges enim tunc figuram ad Revolutionem Anni. and constitue
Ascendens and caeteras Domos, and Planetas omnes in Domibus in quibus fuerint,
and aspice Martem, and vide a quo ipse separetur, vel a quo sit tunc seperatus;
Dixit enim Albumazar, quoniam ille est qui misit eum, and qui exitavit Bellum,
quamvis fuerit fortuna ille a quo separatus fuerit Mars, etiam si fuerit
Jupiter, tamen erit excitator Belli de personis, quae significantur per Jovem,
and de potentioribus and possibile erit, quod sit de genere Episcoporum and
similium; Thus far Guido Bonasus: I am sure there was then such a Conjunction,
and that then Mars was newly separated from Jupiter; there was then Bellum
Episcopale; How at that time and since to this day, the effects have answered,
let the world judge; and then fearing what since has come to pass, in another
place of that years observations, I made use of these words, Da pacem Domine in
diebus nostris, S. B. (Samuel Baker, then one of the Bishops Chaplains and a
Licenser) expunged all this, and defaced it with a Deleatur; I wonder how they
love truth or peace, that will not suffer us to speak of (praedict) or pray
against War? was not there good ground of fears and jealousies? If we should
remember the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon 1639. and since that time, and the
great Configurations of the Planets, such as the Conjunction of the two
Malignants, Saturn and Mars, three times in 1640. viz. in June, August and
September, and the Quadrate of them in the end of December. 1641. and the
beginning of January 1642. and thereto add the Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars
the middle of May; as likewise the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars again in the
same year, the 27. of May, with other great Conjunctions and Aspects of the
superior Bodies, and compare the times, occurrences; we may easily see God
forewarns us of his judgments by his Heavenly Militia, what bloody murders,
treasons and trecheries, what unheard of cruelties have been acted in Ireland
by the Rebels there, the powder-plotting-blood-thirsty Papists and their
Adherents, persons popishly affected? was there not great cause of Fears and
Jealousies? such a fire is kindled, that it is even come to our own doors,
threatening us with unnatural intestine wars: This and much more I mentioned in
that years Almanac, and thereto I refer you.

I have but one note more to commend to the Irish, and I have it out of the
above mentioned Rantzovius page 101 in these words; Richardus de rebus
Hybernicis; attendendum est hoc loco, unum insigniter diem Hypernicis infestum
and quasi fatalem illuxisse: Limericum die Martis Brittanni expugnabunt die
enim Martis Guesfurdia fuit dedita, die Martis Waterfurdia ab obsessoribus
occupata die Martis Dublinensis Civitas armis oppressa: that is, Richard (or
Richardson) of the Affairs of Ireland; in this place [that is Ireland] it is to
be observed or listened unto, one day has appeared famously hurtful, and as it
were, fatal to the Irish; the Britains or Englishmen, expugned or won by
assault Limerick upon a Tuesday; Weixford was yielded up upon a Tuesday;
Waterford was possessed by the Besiegers upon a Tuesday; and the City of Dublin
was oppressed by war upon a Tuesday; I know not why a Tuesday, yea every
Tuesday throughout the year should not be fatal to the Irish, for in this last
Conjunction, I have made this Discourse of; Mars (to whom Tuesday is
appropriated, and therefore it is called Dies Martis) is most unfortunately
placed: To every thing there is a time, and a time to every purpose under the
Heaven, Eccless. 3.1. The Lord has made all things for himself, yea even the
wicked for the day of evil, Prove. 16.4. That which has been, is now, and that
which is to be, has already been, and God requires that which is past,
Eccles. 3.15. But enough at this time.

Ad Deum.
Te nostrae moveant Deus quarelae,
Et tristes gemitus, gravesque luctus,
Quos nobis varios ferunt, cientque
Exorti Stygio Lacu tumultus.
Poenarum dedimus satis, superque;
Sat multi priere, sat feroci,
Bellonae licuit: Satis cruoris
Hausit Sacrilegi furor duelli,
Quare disidiis procul remotis,
Optate redeat quietis aura:
Hoc te supplici^us, piisque votis,
Et multis lachrymis Deus rogemus.
ILLVCens taVro MartIs ConIVnCtIo noVa nVnCIat hIbernIs satVrnI and IVrgla Clto.
1 M. 1000. 5 C. 500. 2 L. 100. 7 V. 35. 11 I. 11. 1646.

Tuesday, 17. Martii 1645/6 being Patricks day the Saint of Ireland.
FINIS.

