THE DOWNFALL OF OLD COMMON-COVNSEL-MEN.

BEING Their great Repulse at GVILD-HALL last Friday by the Committee, who
extruded the Old out of their corrupted Offices, and elected New in their
Places.

FIRST, Showing their manifold corruptions, and unequal Taxations, which they
imposed chiefly on their poor Parishioners, and connived on the Rich, which
has been too common an Abuse used by them.

THEN Exactly describing, how they have oftentimes robbed the poor of their
due, and detaining the Charity of other men from them, have put it up in their
own purses.

LASTLY, Showing the Manner of their Arreignment at Guild Hall, with the Cause
of their Downfall, and the others Vprising.

Composed by JOHN BOND, Scribimus, and scriptis consumitur igne Libellus.

LONDON, Printed for T.H. MDCXLJ.

THE DOWNFALL OF OLD Common Council Men.
THere is nothing more plausible, nothing more commendable, and nothing more
respected in the public eye of the world, then the impartial equity of
Justice, embraced by subordinate Officers. But e contra, on the other side,
nothing is more exploded, nothing more ignominous, and nothing lastly more
despicable in the common detestation, and epidemicall contempt of all men, then
the disparity of injustice executed by them. For inferior Officers are but
Vicegerents from Superiors, and if a blinded error, or temerarious relapse be
committed by the former, it must needs consequently be reflected on the latter.
So that their offense is not so great, quo peecaverunt seipsi, sed quo peccata
suae in alios injiciunt, is that they have offended themselves, but in that the
aspersion of their own offense is cast upon others.

(...) 4 Their abuse of connivance to the rich, exclaims highly against them,
and becomes so obstreperous, that it cries for necessary, and dependent urgency
of Justice against them, according to their impious demerits. The rich, able,
and sufficient men were excused oftentimes, and poor men were then coactively
urged to pay for them.

Thus like fortune, ubi nihil, aut minimum est, arripiunt, ubi omnia, aut
saltem maxima sunt, addunt amplius: they take away from those who have nothing,
or very little, and add more to those, who have all things, or at least the
greatest. And their offense is so vicious in this regard, that I blush, or at
least am ashamed to add any further a constructive addition to their coniving
malignity.

5 In saving themselves from all paiments whatsoever, they were very officious
in their Offices; and whether poor or rich, the wealthy, or indigent did pay,
they would be sure to pay nothing themselves: yea sometimes they would detain
money too, and putting it up into their own purses, they would oftentimes say
(poor honest men) that they were willing to pocket up such wrongs as those. So
that the meanest of the Parish did yearly pay more then the chiefest of them.
And this was a most shameful, unbeseeming, and intolerable abuse, and is so
basely incongruous to their Offices, that nothing but just execration can be
reflected on them, for their so voluntarily blinded equity and injustice. I
must retract my deviating pen a while, lest it should digress in a too distant
aberration from those three in that former Propositions. I must therefore
recall my self to the explication of the cause of those numerous varieties of
corruptions; The general and prime cause thereof, seriously conceive from
their too licentious liberty in committing those errors without any
contradiction, prohibition, or opposition: So that the continuance of their
corruptions, and duration thereof without interdiction, was the chiefest cause
of the varieties that descended from that inhumanity: and a second cause may be
deducted from the non annual election of them.

Wherefore these precedent particulars being maturely, and seriously
considered, and revolved by the City: All the old Common-Councell-men were
arreigned by the Citisens, and consequently a select Committee was appointed to
meet at Guild Hall, to regulate these abuses, which have bin by them committed.
And being accused, they were found so inexcusable delinquent and peccant, they
were incontinently excluded from their corrupt Offices, and New
Common-Councell-men elected in their Places.

FINIS.

