ESHCOL, OR Grapes (among) Thorns.

As they were delivered IN A Thanksgiving Sermon, to the Honorable House of
COMMONS.

BY JOHN BOND, Mr. of the Savoy.

PSALM. 76. ver. 10. Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee: the remainder of
wrath shall thou restrain.

Nam de eo quid dicam, qui in murmr and impatientia obstinato perdurat animo,
aut quem poenitet adhaesisse deo, and contra mortem, and contra rationem, bonum
factum poenitentia comitatur, qui sine dubio miserationibus Dei non modo non
habet gratiam, sed contumeliam reddit? etc.

Bern. de Sept. misericord: Sermon. 2. Quicunque Gratos esse docet, and hominum
caussam agit, and deorum. Senec. 2. de Benef. c. 30.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for Samuel Gellibrand, at the Brazen Serpent in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1648.

TO The Honorable House of COMMONS, Now Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Honorable Senate;
I Do at last present you with that Cluster of Grapes, which have been longer
in the Press then your Order does seem to permit: they are called the Number.
13. and 14.
Grapes of Eschol, because that Cluster was both a taste, and pledge of Canaan,
to the few believing spies; but to the rest, and to all other murmurers, they
proved Grapes of gall, and bitter Clusters, as Deuteronomy. 32. v. 33.
Moses says afterward. That History of Eschol would be seriously read by us
all, in this juncture of time, for we may there fully find our present
conditions and divisions, and guess at our future estate. If you would be in
the same side and case with Caleb and Joshua, I have two lessons to commend
unto you. 1. Ye must be men of Number. 13. v. 24.
another spirit, and must follow the Lord fully: an hard task at such a time;
but you may be excellently directed in it by that Buroughs Gracious spirit, ad
loc.
holy man now with God. 2. You had need to plead strongly with all murmurers,
both for God, and for their advance into the promised rest, yea, though they
bid Numb. 14. v. 10. v. 12.
stone you with stones; lest the Lord smite us all with pestilence, and
disinherite us. For mine own part, I know that there are not only a sort of
fierce enemies, which like the Turkish Ianizaries will be ready to stave, and
break the cask, because they are not to share in this wine; and to these I
say, as he in the Epigram -- Rode caper vites --; But there are also many
voluntary Jerem. 35.
Rechabites amongst our friends, which will not touch with these clusters,
because they like not (perhaps) the vine on which they grow. Alas! is there no
way yet to make us all of a diet at our necessary food? Surely, hunger and
thirst will bring us to it. In our History of Eshcol, I find two grand causes
of that murmuring.

1. Base carnal fear of the enemies strength. Number. 13. v. 27, 28.
Surely the land flows with milk and honey, and this is the fruit of it,
nevertheless the people be strong that dwell in the land, etc. The work is
like to be long and bloody. But what, shall we on that pretense Numb. 14. v. 1,
2, 3, 4. v. 9
1. Repent of our coming out of Egypt, and make us Captains to return
thither again? Or, 2. Shall we believe Caleb and Joshua, that say; Fear them
not, for they are bread for us? And will any man dislike a loaf of bread for
its bigness?

2. Cause was jealousy against, non-confiding in, the Cluster-bearers. The
Lord remove all stumbling blocks, and heart-divisions, now that we are upon
the borders of Eshcol, or of Hormah. Number. 14. v. 45.
They are Satan's last make against us, he could not beat us by a common
enemy, and therefore would now break us by one another; as that Juno in the Sen:
Her. Fur. Quaeris Alcidae parem? nemo est nisi ipse.
Tragedy, dealt with Hercules when he had conquered Hell, and was returned
safe from all his labors. She concludes, none can conquer Hercules, but
Alcides. None can conquer the conquering party but themselves. No Arrow can
wound us unless it be made with our own feathers. Melanctthonis dictum.
There are now but these four choyses left to us; either to continue still in
the wilderness, or to return back again to Egypt, or to submit to the
Canaanites, or to trust God and one another, and so enter into that good rest.
And it is notable, that these very Israelites which first murmured and recoiled
because of difficulties, they could, would, did endeavor and adventure upon
the work at last, when their unbelief and murmuring had shut the door, but
then it was too late; then Eshcol was turned to Cap. 14. v. 41, 42, 43.
Hormah, even discomfiture and desolation. Surely, there are common enemies and
dangers enough, Genesis 13.9.
there is work and wages enough in earth, or heaven, to employ us all, we need
not to Mic. 7. v. 2.
hunt one another with a net.

But I forget that I am writing an Epistle, and that to a Parliament. Pardon I
beseech you my necessary zeal at such a time, some men (they say) read
nothing of Sermons but the Epistles; and I would feign be some kind of (poor)
real Ligature to this broken bone. Now the mighty God, the wonderful
Counselor, the Prince of peace, strengthen, direct you, to Land the great
interests of our Religion, and Rights, without wrack or waste. So prays
continually,

Savoy, Aug. 12. 1648. The unworthiest of Your Servants, JOHN BOND.

Die Iovis 20. Julii, 1648.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That Master Hill do give
thanks to Master Bond, that preached before the House of Commons at the
Thanksgiving yesterday, and that his Sermon be forthwith printed and
published, and that he have the like privilege in printing his Sermon, as
others in the like kind usually have had.

Hen: Elsynge Cler: Parl. D. Com.

I appoint Samuel Gellibrand to print this Sermon.

JOHN BOND.

A THANKSGIVING SERMON before the Honorable House of Commons.
PSALM. 50.23. Whosoever offers praise, glorifieth me; and to him that orders
his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God.


THe work of the Lord in these times, and his word in this Psalm, do appear
unto me much alike: in our first war the Lord made it his work to Isa. 30.
v. 28.
sift these three Nations somewhat generally, and as it were, with a wider and
courser sieve: so wide and course it was, that much chafe and straw went
through it with the wheat, and only the grosser trash, as sticks and stones,
did stay behind. I mean (generally) the open profane and scandalous party in
these Lands. And there was a special providence in that, for should the first
sieve have been too shy and fine, it might have kept back so great a mass and
weight on that side, as might have borne and broken out the bottom or floor
of the sieve. Therefore the Lord did then sort and sift us as the work would
bear at that time. But now, behold in this second war, he is sifting the
sifted again with a much siner rince: The profane party was then sand out; but
now he is separating between the faithful and the formalist. Like that work,
runs this Psalm: for it Analysis of the Psalm.
contains the great Assise or Arraignment of the hypocrite. In which,

I. We read the convention of the Court, The Session.
and sitting down of the Bench: the witnesses are the whole earth, which is
called from East to West, v. 1.
from the c rising of the Sun to the going down thereof. The place is out of
v. 2.
Sion, the perfection of beauty. The guard and executioners, v. 3.
a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very Tempestuous round about
him. The Assistants, v. 4.
heaven and earth. The v. 1.6.
Judge, El, Jebovah, Elohim; if you will, the whole Trinity: The Lord is Judge
himself. And the summoned delinquents or malefactors, in general, visible v.
5.
Saints and facrificing Covenanters.

2 The process
II. The Process, or proceedings upon them: And these are of two sorts,
according to the number and kinds of the arraigned.

1. Sort of the Arraigned are called the Lords own v. 7.
people, his Israel, and he their God: And that as some conceive, in the
strictest sense, they were Etsi in ratione cultus errarunt, animo tamea erant
ad colendum Deum vere ac sincere dedito etc. Musculus ad loc.
sincere hearts though too carnal in leaning too much upon bodily exercises
and outward duties of religion, upon sacrifices and burnt offerings, in v. 8, 9.
Bullockes and He Goats. To these he has two words.

1. A reproof of their mere carnal, at least too v. 8.9.
carnal and extrinsecall services or form of godliness, in which they did
rest and bless themselves too much, neglecting (mean while) the inside and
power thereof. And the reason is, because God is not as a man or a beast, as a
Bell and a Dragon, that v. 13.
needs to be fed with carnal oblations, with meat and drink: Nay, if he
had need or desire to such brutish sacrifices, he has enough of his own, he
has them all in his hand and power, he needs not to beg or borrow from them,
v. 9, 10, 11, 12.
All beasts and cattle, all foul and wild beasts, they are his, or with him.
And therefore,

2 He does exhort them to Compositum jus, fasque animi, sanctos que recessus
Mentis, and incoctum generoso pectus honesto. Pers. Sat. 2.
real, spiritual, inward services. Of which sort three special ones are
named, viz. 1. The oblation of praise. 2. The payment of vows. 3. The prayer
of faith. All these are such hard and solid ground that if you try a founderd
formalist upon them, and put him to it, you shall soon find him halting,
though he seemed to run nimbly in some softer and easier duties.

1. v. 14.
Offer to God thanksgiving; this is no work for hypocrites: no, Psalm. 64. v.
10.
The righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust in him, and all the
upright in heart shall glory. But the unsound heart is as an Ass to this Harp.
Job. 27. v. 10.
Will he delight himself in the Almighty?

2. And pay thy vows to the most High. The hypocrite is as forward in
promising as any, yea commonly more large than the real Saint, because he does
purpose to give Verba dare.
no thing but promises.

3. v. 15.
Call upon me in the day of trouble. Herein also the hypocrite will quickly
tire, if he does begin it at all; Job 27. v. 10.
Will he always call upon God? King Iehoram wore sackcloth for a while, when
Samaria was distressed, 2 Kings 6. v. 30, 31.33.
but how soon grows he impatient and rayleth? This evil is of the Lord, why
should I wait for the Lord any longer? These are the Lords proceedings with
the better party of these Indicted ones.

2. Sort are called the v. 6. (...) expers omnis timoris dei and verae pietatis
etc. Mollen.
wicked, 1. inwardly; And yet a kind of professors too, for they do declare
his statutes and take his Covenant into their mouths, though in real practice
they are wide enough, for they are v. 17.
haters of instruction and they cast his words behind them. Thus they were
rotten at the core, and therefore it is not long before it comes out into the
Skin, yea they proceed to break the second Table, though not in the most
gross degree and manner; they v. 18.
consent with the thief, they are concealours and accessories, though not
principals; they partake with adulterers; that is, secretly under hand they
stick not to act such abominable wickednesses, or at least some way to share in
the profits and commutations. In short, they v. 19.
give their mouths to evil, and frame deceit with their tongues, Yea, finally
they v. 20.
fit in the seat of the scorner, and do slander their own brethren and
nearest kinsmen. And that which does encourage: them in all this, is the Lords
silence, and patience, because Eccles. 8. v. 11.
sentence against their evil works is not speedly executed, therefore they are
ready to justify themselves, and condemn the Lord. But, says he, v. 21.
I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes, I will bring
them forth, and marshall them against thee in battle array. And hence

3 The sentence.
III. The verdict and sentence upon the whole matter, which according to the
two parties is also twofold.

1. A censure of terror to the last and worst sort of delinquents, in case
they continue in their impenitency: v. 22.
Now consider this ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there
be none to deliver you.

Explication of the words.
2. A cordial and promise to the former and better sort of the arraigned, if
they return to real duty, and a well ordered way. v. 23.
Who so offers praise glorifieth me, and to him that orders his
conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God.

There is not much to do about the reading of the words.

[Who so offers praise] Or, he that sacrifices confession. There is a
Confessio gemina est, aut Beccati, aut laudis. August. in Psalm. 29.
twofold confession; of sin, and of praise; so above, v. 14.
Sacrifice or offer unto God a confession. And by [praise] in the text, we are
to understand the whole inward worship of God.

[Glorifieth, or honoreth mee] The (...)
Greek thus, the sacrifice of praise, in the abstract, shall glorify me.

[And to him that orders his conversation aright] In the Original, that
puts, composeth, disposes the way: for that word Way is left in its full
latitude in the original. But others read this in a far different sense,
thus, And there is the way in which I will show the salvation of God. Thus the
Papists generally, from their Et illic iter quo ostendam, vel ibi est via in
quaostendam.
Vulgar, and out of the (...)
Septuagint. Their difference and mistake (I conceive) did arise from the
likeness of two Monosyllables in the original; (...) ibi, illic.
One of which being an Adverb does signify, here, there, or thence. The (...)
posuit, apposuit, composuit.
other, a defective verb signifies, to put, order, compose, as before. But we
follow the fountain, and read it as in our last translation, To him that
orders the way etc.

[I will shew] Or, I will make, or cause him to see. And that not flatly or
barely, but with affection and delight: as elsewhere, Psalm. 112. v. 8. Quast
iucundo frui spectaculo.
His heart is established, he shall not be afraid, until he see his desire
upon his enemies.

[The salvation of God] By it understand we, either extraordinary great and
divine salvation, as, Psalm. 104. v. 16.
The Trees of God, and the Psalm. 34. v. 6.
Mountains of God, that is, fair and eminent ones: Or, that God will assure
and make good this salvation unto all such: Or, he speaks in the third person
that the emphasis may be the greater.

Division of the words.
The text, if we look upon it without dependence, does contain the whole
twofold end and duty of man; with the proper and special means to each of
those ends, and these cannot well be divided.

1. The Principal and Ultimate end of man, in respect of God, is to glorify
him.

And the means to that end, is all duty, but especially that of praise and
thanksgiving; Who so offers praise glorifieth me.

2. The next principal end of man, in respect of himself, which is also
subordinate to that former end, is to be saved, or to see the salvation of God.

And an especial means unto this end, is the right ordering of the way. Thus
the words do contain [the praise of Thanksgiving.]

Who so offers praise, glorifieth me.

This is true of every inward and right service that is performed by any son
or servant of God. Malach. 1. v. 6.
A son honors his father, and a servant his master. But it must needs be
eminently true of the service of Thanksgiving, which alone is here expressly
named in the words, and called a glorifying or honoring of God. Hence
Thanksgiving to God, is a very glorious and transcendent service.

There is a threefold Crown or Emphasis put upon the head of this service in
this Psalm and Text.

1. It is put (in this Psalm) in the front of those three Critical trying
duties which are set up as the standard to weigh all professors by them;
namely, Praise, Payment of vows, and Prayer. And the first of these you see is
Praise, v. 14.
Offer to God thanksgiving: therefore it is a duty of the first and highest
form; such a Key as no hypocrite can so counterfeit, but that he will easily
be espied; though he has the fiddle (as he said) yet he wants the stick: And
therefore that [Lord I thank thee] of the Luke 18. v. 11.
Pharisee, is not a praising of God so much as of self, not a thanksgiving but
an Saturatus ructabat. August. in Psalm. 49.
easing of himself, says one: yea every one that reads him spiritually,
finds him tripping at the threshold.

2. Again in the text, praising is put as I said, for all inward and
spiritual worship, and is opposed to all those carnal sacrifices and burnt
offerings before mentioned, as if it were the touchstone of all inward
sacrifices; [ Who so offers praise;] as if he had said, every one that does
and can praise me aright, Psalm 69. v. 30, 31.
he can doubtless perform all other parts of worship as he ought. Yea this is
the surpassing service; I will praise the name of God with a song, this also
shall please the Lord better then a Bullock that has horns and hoofes, better
then a calfe that is overgrowne, or of a Mich. 6. v. 6.
year old.

3. (...). Chrysostom. ad loc.
This duty especially is here said to glorify or honor God: this is an high
and hyperbolicall expression indeed, for honor we say, is in the Honor est in
honorante non in honorato.
honorer not in the honored; and what? can the poor worm man give or add any
thing unto God? it is elsewhere called a Psalm. 103 1.
blessing of God, Bless the Name of the Lord, O my soul: Now says the Spirit
to the Hebrews, Heb. 7. v. 7.
The lesser is blessed of the greater. Nay once more, it is called in the Word
a magnifying, that is, a greatning of God; an exalting, that is, an heightning
of his name: Psalm. 34. v. 3.
O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together.

Quest. But how can these things be? Ans. The Lord takes it as an honor, and
men look upon it as a giving of honor to God when we do so record, declare,
proclaim, the greatness and goodness of the Lord, whether of his being, or
works, that others do see more of him and in him then ever they did perceive
or believe before; Psalm. 26. v. 6, 7.
Sing praise to the Lord which dwells in Sion, declare amongst the people his
doings. That I may publish with a voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all thy
wondrous wooks. But for methods sake, which is the mother of memory, the
special excellency and transcendency of this service, may be demonstrated in
these particulars.

1. From the comprehensivenesse and perfection of this duty.
1. They appear by its comprehensivenesse and perfections. It is the Sea, that
is, both the fountain, and receptacle of all other duties. The Preacher says
of the sea, Eccles. 1. v. 7.
all the rivers run into it, yet the sen is not full, unto the place whence the
rivers come thither they return again: that is, all rivers run into the
sea, and (as some say) from the sea they arise again. Though this be quarreld
in Philosophy, yet I am sure it is true in Divinity, concerning the ocean of
thanksgiving. Let us lay our instance in the continual duty of prayer, which
(as one says) is the bread and salt at every spiritual meal; for it must be
one whatsoever is the other. Behold, thanksgiving is both the root and fruit,
the beginning, middle, and end; yea the both ends of this service. The
beginning, Colos. 1. v. 3.
We give thanks to God and the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, praying always
for you: there it is to prayer as the needle to the thread. The middle, Colos.
4. v. 2.
Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving: there are the
three conditions of prayer, Perseverance, Watchfulness and Gratitude. And unto
this last ( Dr Davenant. ad loc.
says one) we are always bound, whether we look to Gods gifts, promises,
delays, or denials; there is cause of thanksgiving for every one of these, and
he is merciful in them all toward his Saints. The like place is, Philip. 4.
v. 6.
Be careful in nothing, but in every thing, by prayer and supplication, with
thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God: there it is as the
Axle-tree upon which the duty of prayer does turn it self. Yea, see it at both
ends of prayer, Psalm. 105.1, 2.
O give thanks unto the Lord, call upon his name, make known his deeds among
the people; sing unto him etc. Nay we are commanded this duty in all cases. 1
These. 5. v. 18.
In every thing give thanks, for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus
concerning you: In every condition, say some; but I think it closer Divinity
and Exposition, to say, and with every duty, for praise is the best sauce to
God and man in every Gospel sacrifice: and therefore is put for the whole.
Heb. 13.15.
By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that
is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks unto his name.

2. From its Actors and Subject.
2. This service is glorious and transcendent in respect of its actors and
subject; It is not every one that is fit to learn Music; neither the
witless, nor the wicked fool can perform or counterfeit this duty
artificially. There is not any other outward service of religion (that I
remember) which I cannot show you some profane ones or gross hypocrites have
been acting it handsomely in Scripture, whereas I never find them (and I think
I am right) meddling with this; King Saul was at his sacrificing, though
unseasonably; at his Altar building, and enquiring of the Lord; and all this to
get victory and successes, some of which he did obtain, as against the 1 Samuel
11. v. 11.
Ammonites, against the 1 Samuel 14. v. 20.
Philistines, against the 1 Samuel 15. v. 7.
Amalekites. But do ye ever read a word of his Thanksgivings? King Ahab did
believe the Prophet and 1 Kin. 21. v. 27.
humbled himself, and was rewarded according to his work; but what thanks did
he ever return? No, no, the formalist that can go (as I said) soundly and
roundly in the smoother and softer ground of other duties, because they may
have more of self in them, yet turn him upon this grand service of
thankfulness and he will halt. Says the Holy Ghost, Job 27. v. 10.
Can he delight himself in the Lord? It is almost an uncounterfeitable
service. And hence it is that the Saints of the highest form are called upon
for this performance. Psalm. 22. v. 3.
Ye that fear the Lord, praise him. And, Psalm. 113. v. 1.
Ye servants of the Lord, praise ye the name of the Lord. Psalm. 33. v. 1.
Praise is comely for the upright. Ps. 149. v. 1.5.
Praise ye the Lord, sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise inthe
congregation of Saints. Let the saints be joyful in glory. No marvail then if
now adays the profane beasts amongst the people, do scoffingly bid the saints
and holy ones, to keep their Thanksgiving Days. Genesis 14. v. 18, 19, 20.
It is a service for a Melchisedeck, a King of Peace, and a Priest of the most
high God, for an Abraham, the father of the faithful; for a Moses, Aaron,
Miriam, for a Deborah, Baruck, etc. The truth is that the holiest and highest
Saints on earth, are too low, they are bunglers for this duty, whilst here
beneath; and their choicest songs are but a tuning of the instrument, toward
perfect praises. The heaven of heavens is the proper Quire, and the Choristers
are Heb. 12. v. 22.
innumerable companies of Angels, and the souls of just men made perfect: It is
to be their everlasting work and wages to sing Hallelujahs before the Throne,
and unto the Lamb. See them at it, in their glory. Rev. 7 v. 9, 10, 11.
Amen, Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and
power, and might, be unto our God for ever and ever, Amen. Thus Thanksgiving is
the only Celestial, Angelical, eternal service and Ordinance. So as what
Paul says of Charity amongst, yea beyond other graces, that may I apply unto
Thanksgiving beyond, above, all other religious duties, 1 Cor. 13. v. 8.
Thanksgiving never fails, but whether there be prayers, they shall fail,
whether there be preachings, they shall cease, whether there be Sacraments,
they shall vanish away; thanksgiving, like Moses his rod, shall devour, and
eat up all other Ordinances, and therefore the greatest of all is thanksgiving.

3. Because of its special ends and effects.
3. This service is so glorious, in respect of its special ends and effects.
It is a most unbottoming, unselfing, humbling, melting, kindling duty. It
strikes out the bottom of flesh and nature, carrying out all unto God. Joy
(they say) is an affection that carries out all the blond and spirits from the
heart and inward parts toward the object, as it were, to meet and welcome it.
Hear Jacob a little in his begging thanksgiving at Mahanaim, Genesis 32.9, 10.
O God of my father Abraham, and God of my father Isaac, the Lord which said
unto me, Return unto thy Country, and to thy kindred, and I will deal well
with thee: I am not worthy of [or, I am less then] the least of all the
mercies and of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy servant; for with
my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two bands. Do you not
seem to see the good Man holding his cudgel in his hand, and humbly looking
down upon it, whilst he speaks to this purpose? Alas! I was not worth this
stick in all the world when I was forced to flee for my life, on foot, alone,
from my fathers house, and was feign to take up an hard Stone-burrough for my
pillow, and the blew heavens for my Canopie, and now see what a little Army the
Lord has made me? Oh if one could have exchanged hearts with Jacob for an
hour at that time, how would his heart have warmed ones breast! Nothing to
Jacob, (says he) Nothing to Jacob, but all to Jehovah.

But the example and expressions of good old David in such a like case, are so
ravishing, that you had need to look to your hearts, and gird them up, before
you turn to the place. It was when he had been casting about to glorify God
by building him an house: his will is accepted for the deed, and to boot the
Lord sends a very glorious promise by Nathan concerning the building of David's
own house. 2 Samuel 7. v. 118.
Then went King David in and sat before the Lord. Good old man! was he so aged
that he could not stand or kneel? Or rather, had the Lords merciful message
so carried out his blood and spirits as to weaken his heart within? Sure I am
this was not an usual posture, to sit before the Lord. But we must conceive
him creeping and panting by the way, from his own house, unto the Lords; and
so al-to-be-melted, and half breathless, he falls down into his chair,
and says, Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my fathers house, that thou have
brought me hitherto? Who am I? What, had David forgotten his own name? or did
he not know himself, that he does ask, who he is? I read of some that
through length of time and brutish sensuality have forgotten their own names.
But surely neither of these had befallen good David; no, he had only lost
himself and all his fathers house in the sea of the Lords present goodness:
he is amazed to think how he got up to that condition, That thou have brought
me hitherto? and to consider whither the Lord was now farther carrying them;
ver. 19.
And this was yet a small thing in thy sight, O Lord God, but thou have spoken
also of thy servants house for a great while to come; and is this the manner of
man, O Lord God? Lord, says he, I am banckrupt, I am broken with the former
debt that I owe unto thee, I have nothing at all to pay my arrears, for old
unspeakeable favors and mercies; and will thou trust me, and mine with more,
greater, and future favors? Surely this is not the course of the world; for
men do require us to pay one score when we make another. But me thinks his
next words (if we could look thoroughly into them) are the most passionate and
emphaticall of all: ver. 20.
And what can David say more unto thee? Every word has its weight, and his
interrogation and appeal, have their especial weight; But the principal
thing to be noted is, that he does name his own name unto God, which is an
unusual and surpassing strain of rhetoric, though sometimes taken up in the
most melting petitions, and Genesis 14. v. 23.
earnest expostulations.

The same self-emptying effect of this grace of thanfulnesse is to be found in
other Psalmists, Psalm. 5. v. 1.
Not unto us, o Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory. He does
empty himself wholly, and as it were shakes the bag by the bottom after all was
out; he thrusts away self-glorying with both hands, that he might be sure
that nothing of the creature should be left behind. And in the next Psalm, that
thankful Saint does Ps. 116. v. 12.
catechize his own heart, and casts up his estate to see if there were any
thing in it worth the giving unto God, Ps. 116. v. 12.
What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits toward me? He does turn
the dish (as we say) for a bit worth the presenting, and at last not finding
any thing that he can think good enough, he does give the whole unto the Lord.
v. 16.
O Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant, without a complement, and
the son of thy handmaid, thou have loosed my bonds; I am doubly thy servant,
both by birth and redemption, thy creature, thy captive. This is the real
effect of thanksgiving.

4. For the extent of its matter.
4. Finally, Thanksgiving is transcendent for the largeness and extent of its
matter. 1 These. 5. v. 18.
In every thing give thanks; for all, that is in God, and for all that comes
from God. Ps. 119. v. 68.
Thou art good, and do good, and every good thing is matter of praise: as,
First, all his spiritual mercies, Ephesians. 1. v. 3.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ who has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things, in Christ; and afterward he
does reckon up particulars: v. 4.
Election, v. 5.
Adoption, v. 7.
Redemption and forgiveness, v. 11.
an inheritance, with the v. 13.
sealing and v. 14.
earnest thereof. And all this v. 6.12.
to the praise of the glory of his grace. Secondly, all his Prove. 16. v. 4.
creating and providentiall mercies. The Lord has made all things for
himself, even the wicked for the day of evil. All creatures shall be for the
praise of his mercy or justice, every tree shall serve him for fruit or firing,
every head shall give its milk, fleece, or flesh. Exodus 14. v. 17.
I will get me honor upon Pharaoh. Josh. 7. v. 19.
My son, give glory to God. Yea, all his works in heaven and earth they are
matter for this service, they were made for this Psalm. 148.
end. There is a short Psalm, that does contain a Systeme or Epitome of the
whole Creation, which is there severally called upon for this duty: the top or
highest round of that ladder does reach to the highest heaven, the foot
stands upon the earth below. Let us speedily run it up, it begins ver. 1.
Hallelujah Hallelujah, first calling upon them in heaven, where there are
three stories; In the first, v. 2.
Angels; in the second, v. 3.
Sun, Moon, and Stars; in the third, which is the v. 4.
heaven of heavens, Coeli Coelorum dicuntur in fimi Coeli, ut servus servorum
est infimus and abjectissimus servus. Foord ad loc.
below, there are the clouds. And all these are summoned to v. 5, 6.
praise the Lord. Next all on v. 7.
earth are called upon; all v. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
Elements, meteors, places, plants, living creatures, fish, beasts, fowl,
reasonable creatures, high and low, young and old, men and women, that is, all
ranks, ages, sexes. In short, as faith has promises and experiences as its
ground: fear has threatenings: Love has all that is lovely: so every good
thing is matter of praise, yea all these and every other Colos. 2. v. 7.
grace. Hence the purblind Haec est enim una virtus non solum maxima sed etiam
matter virtutum omnium reliquarum. Quid est pietas nisi voluntas grata in
parents etc. Cicer. pro C. Plancio.
Heathen could say, that this one virtue (virtue was grace with him) is not
only the greatest, but the mother of all the rest: for what is piety (says
he) but a thankful heart toward ones parents? Who are good Patriots, but such
as are mindful of the kindness of their Country toward them? Who is holy,
but he which pays his thanks unto the gods? Yea this duty-grace, should
run through all our very natural actions too. 1 Cor. 10.31.
Whether therefore ye eat or drink or whatsoever you do, do all to the glory
of God. Nay and through all our actions, speeches in general, Colos. 3.17
And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, giving thanks unto God and the Father by him. There is yet a more full
expression from the same Apostle; Ephesians. 5.20. (...)
Giving thanks always, for all things, unto God. And good reason, so long as
there is a promise that Romans 8. v. 28. Application. 1. Reproof.
All things shall work together for good to them that love God.

Then, First, I must take leave to reprove all that are enemies or back
friends to this duty, and to tell them from God; that he takes their
ingratitude for a dishonor to himself: To tell them from nature and the very
heathens, that their sin is too bad for a Ingratum dixeris, omnia. dixeris.
name; it is the In quo vitio nibil mali non in est liceco
Epitome of all sin. But that I may speak distinctly and justly, there are
two sorts of Offenders that must here bear a reproof.

1. To malignant enemies.
I. Such as out of mere wickedness and malignity, are enemies to our
thanksgivings; such professed Antipodes, to whom our high Noone, is a midnight;
that Lam. 1. v. 7.
mock at these our Sabbaths, and like that scornful daughter of King Saul,
do 2 Samuel 9. v. 16.
look thorough their windows upon these days, and despise us in their heart
for dancing before the Lord with all our might. But let all such Michals know,
that ver. 21.
It is before the Lord which chose us before them and their party, and
therefore we will play before the Lord, and will be yet more vile then thus;
yet at last, shall we be in honor, whilst perhaps their forces and hopes shall
go with barren wombes and dry breasts unto their graves. I confess the spirit
of ungrateful malignity is now risen to that height in these parts, that it is
scarcely an act of greater valor to get a victory, then to dare keep a
thanksgiving for it. I have heard that in France, the Papists do account all as
Huguenots and Heretics that do praise God by singing of Psalms, which is in
our language to say that a Prayser and a Puritan are both one: shall we come up
to that degree?

Quest. But what may be the cause of such an horrid sudden spirit of
blasphemous ingratitude? What ails the scorners?

Ans. Surely it is the abounding of unholinesse that causes this abundance of
ingratitude, ver. 22.
Unthankful, and unholy, 2 Timothy 3.
do usually go together. And this is observable, that the more of Devil there
is in any man, the greater enemy is that man to all holy praises; yea Satan
himself is not so much enraged against any or all duties of the Saints, as
against their Thanksgivings. He can better bear their prayers, fastings,
hearings, readings, because he knows whilst they are at these, they are but
begging, plowing or sowing; but when they are praising he knows they have
then received their alms, and are returning home bringing their sheaves with
them.

pretenses of reason, nay, religion, inducing them to abhor this duty they say;
let us hear and answer them.

victories (say they) are but lies and delusions, they are mockings of of God
and men, and therefore intolerable.

Rabshakeh? 2 Kings 18.28.
then Rabshakeh stood and cried with a loud voice, Let not Hezekiah deceive you
etc. But

false, why are you so troubled, impatient, enraged? Surely we gather that you
do secretly believe our news even whilst you cry it down for lies. Divines
say, that one good argument against Atheists, which pretend they believe there
is no God, is their own continual clamours, disputings, and railings against
the Deity; which seem to argue some secret he sitations and doubting qualmes
in their own spirits concerning that point.

will not know, nor believe, nor see, the truth of our good tidings and
successes; These things they are willingly ignorant of, 2 Pet. 3.3.
as Peter says of his scoffers. And because they are wilful, and as I
conceive absent, I shall spend no more time upon them; but do only desire to
send them a Token by some Neuter or other (for these two are much together)
whom I desire to turn down a leaf, and to show it them at next meeting, Isa.
26.10.
Let favor be showed to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness: The
men confess they have received more favor at our hands then ever we should
have found at theirs: But does this work upon them? No, In the Land of
uprightness will he deal unjustly, and will not behold the majesty of the
Lord. ver. 11.
Lord, when thy hand is lifted up (whether to strike or bear the Banner) they
will not see. Mark, the defect, the fault, is not in their heads or eyes, but
in their hearts, and wills, and there is no argument so fit to confute we will
not, as, you shall; But they shall see; Prove. 10.13.
a rod for the backs of fools) they shall see, and be ashamed for their envy
at the people, or toward the people, yea, the fire of thine enemies shall
devour thom: That is, as Judge. 8.16.
Gideon taught the Neutrall and Malignant men of Succoth with briers and thorns
of the wilderness; so the Lord will teach and convince these men, by devouring
fire at last, if they will not see by its light, they shall feel its heat. And
because some bitter, winking enemies will believe none other arguments: let us
leave them to the Lords convictions, and to the (...). Hippoc. Sect. 8 Apbor.
6. Amos 7. v. 4. Ezekiel. 2^. v. 13. Object. 2.
Aphorism of the great physician which says, what things soever medicines do
not cure, those Iron cures; what Iron does not cure, that fire cures; what
fire does not cure, those things are to be judged incurable. God has tried to
heal the land, and especially our enemies, by his word and by his sword in our
first war, and now he contendeth by fire, that is, by sharper, cleerer, works
and discoveries then ever; and if this will not do, woe unto them for
incurable. Thou shall not be purged from thy filuhinesse any more, till I cause
my fury to rest upon thee.

But suppose your victories true as you report them, (say they) yet we will
not, cannot join to give thanks unto God for the shedding of blood, and for
the killing of men?

Give me leave to answer these, as Christ did those Jews, Mat. 21. v. 24.
with some other Questions.

Can thou read? have thou a Bible? (for this is commonly the objection of
the illiterate and profane person) then turn to a place or two, and thou shall
see what Gods Spirit and Saints have said, and done in this case. Judge. 5. v. 2.
Praise ye the Lord for avenging of Israel, when the people willingly offered
themselves. This thanksgiving was by authority, Ver. 1.
Then sang Deborah and Baruk on that day saying. Yet that day of a song, was a
day of much blood, to Sisera and all his host.

Canaanites were strangers, and open enemies; we fight against our own Country
men and neighbors.

Luke 10. v. 36.37.
He that shows no mercy he is the veryest stranger. 2. Those Canaanites had
been Iud. 1. v. 4, 5.
conquered by Israel before; but for Isreal's sins, and through their own
treacheries, were grown considerable again, yea and cap. 4. v. 1, 2, 3.
mightily oppressed them, wherefore Israel does fight and break them the
second time, and blesses the Lord for their victories over them, and his
vengeance upon them. Nay, the Spirit of God elsewhere does warrant, promise,
command, such thanksgivings: Psalm. 58. v. 3.
The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance, he shall wash his
feet in the blood of the wicked.

Who is it that does shed blood, and kill m^n? The Assayllants, or the
defendants? they that offend us, or we that defend our selves? what, when a
sort of men have been beaten and conquered the first time, and being conquered
have received many confessed favors from their Conquerors; have promised,
covenanted, sworn (thereupon) never more to bear Arms against them, were
suffered to live peaceably amongst them; but after all this do rebelliously,
ingratefully, treacherously, arise in arms, surprise Castles, cut the throats
of them that were quiet in the Land; and are by Gods just justice and immediate
hand disappointed, cut off in battle a second time: Will you call this a Qui
jubet, is facit scelus. Sense.
shedding of blood, and a killing of men, for which the Lord must not be
praised? Is selfe-defence to be called murder? or execution of justice to be
accounted manslaughter?

Do but look I pray you impartially and seriously upon those famous examples
and proceedings of wisest Solomon toward Adonijah his elder brother; and say,
have we not used these men as brethren? 1 King. 1. v. 5.
Adonijah had committed a first fault, in usurping the kingdom in his fathers
life time, but upon his submission was pardoned by Solomon, upon a condition,
or with a proviso, Ver. 52, 53.
If he will show himself a worthy man, there shall not an hair of him fall to
the earth; but if wickedness be found in him, he shall die. And he is sent
away with this condition. After this, Adonijah is found faulty again, at least
in a close plodding pernicious design, to the old end: He would have Abishag
the Shunamite to be given to him to wife. 1 King. 2. v. 15. 16, etc. Ver. 22,
23, 24, 25. Ver. 26, 27.
For this second attempt he dies. Yea and some of his old accomplices do fall
with him, though it is not expressed that they had their hands in this second
design. Abiathar the Priest, he is sequestered and ejected out of his place,
though he has his life given him for former good services. And Joabs old
crimes, Ver. 32, 33.
they are remembered and punished. It is worth the while, to repeat the grounds,
upon which Solomon proceeds against them. Fall upon him, says he, that thou
may take away the innocent blood which Joab shed, from me, and from the
house of my Father, and the Lord shall return his blood upon his own head,
who fell upon two men more righteous and better then he, etc. Lastly, railing
Shimei, Ver. 42, 43, 44.
comes to an account, and justice finds him out in his old age, by his own
help and directions, because he kept not the oath of the Lord, and the
commandment that Solomon had charged him with. Now tell me, O thou adversary
of our Thanksgiving days, how much do the crimes of our vanquished enemies
exceed those of Adonijah, Abiathar, Joab, Shimei? And how much is the mercy of
our State above the severity of Solomon?

For whose blood shed? For what killing of men art thou so offended? Surely, it
is because it was the blood of Malignants, because it was not the Roundheads
blood: For had that party, which is beaten, gotten the day upon us; had they
slain thousands of ours, for hundreds of theirs, then thou would have given
thanks with a witness, even thanks for killing of men and shedding of blood:
thou would have kept such a revell or wake for it, as all the ten
Commandments should have been sacrificed by thee for a thank-offering. Away,
away, with this gross hypocrisy. God knows thy heart, and man may see thee,
though thou winkest.

It is not (God is our record, it is not) for bloodshed and killing of men (to
speak properly) that we give thanks: but for the prosperity of the Lords
cause, for the preservation of the blood of his servants; it is for a further
step toward peace and settlement, by removing implacable impediments out of
the way of a full deliverance and reformation, men who now let, and will let.
Shall a Robber on the way, 2 These. 2. v. 7.
fall upon me for my purse and life, so that nothing but the loss of his
blood, can be the security of mine: and must I not give thanks for mine own
deliverance if I beat him? We are wholly, unquestionably defensive in this
second war.

2. To male-contented friends:
II. There is another sort of persons, which though friends and brethren, in
the maine common cause; yet through some dissatisfaction, discontent, offense,
or jealosies, are no friends to so much victory, but are slow and cold at our
Thanksgivings; nay (perhaps) do look but sowrely and suspectingly upon such as
on these days, do dance before the LORD with all their might. I remember some
Ancients Chrysostom. Austine. Lactantins.
did condemn those for Heretics, that held there were Antipodes, that is,
people inhabiting the earth just underneath, and diametrally opposite to us.
Brethren, I beseech you, let us not come to that degree of ignorance and
disingenuity, as to account all men Erroneous that are hearty and hot in
affirming that we have direct Antipodes, I mean (in plain English) that
declare lowdly to the world that there are many mighty bitter opposites and
Malignants; and do act against them to their uttermost both in prayers and
praises. Let me have leave to deal freely this day, especially with our own
friends. Are there not many, very many amongst us, which are like a man
condemned, upon the Gibbet, ready to be presently executed, one comes to him
and offers him a Ladder to come down by, and save his life: but he stands
scrupling, objecting, doubting, whether the Ladder be firm or no, whether the
rounds be fast or loose, whether they may not deceive him, or break under him,
and so endanger a fall? yea, but O man, O friend, what will become of thy neck
if thou stayest there? Or by what other way can, wilt, would thou come
down? I hope not willingly by the rope? Honorable Senators, pardon my
plainness, and take me seriously, the neck of every thorough-godly well
affected man in England is now in danger, and the breaking or saving of it
depends upon the come-off, in which, the rounds, or nothing, must save us.
Beware therefore, how we grow shy or sullen at any necessary lawful means of
selfe-preservation, and so Jon. 2. v. 8.
forsake our own mercies. Let us therefore put on our wedding garments, and
Non potest autem quisquam and invidere, and gratias agere: quia invidere,
querentis and moesii est; gratias agere, gaudentis. Sen. de Benef. lib. 3. cap.
1.
countenances when providence does invite us to feast; And beware, lest when we
pretend to avoid Schismatic Thanksgivings, we run our selves over on the
other hand, into a kind of Orthodoxe ingratitude. For mine own part, far be
it from me, to plead for the extravagancies of any sort of instruments. I
believe we have all had our great and special opportunities and seasons of
doing much good for God, and have all neglected to improve them. Nay, perhaps
we have then sacrificed his Hos. 2. v. 5, 9.
Corn, Wine, Wool and Flax unto our own Hab. 1. v. 16.
nets and drags, and I am deceived if God does not take us up and scourge us of
all sides, for it, and for our self- divisions: perhaps upon the backs of one
another. And then, O we shall be willing like fighting Schoolboys, to forgive
each other, if our Master would forgive us. I say it again, that all our
selvish Genesis 27.
Kids flesh will be eaten with bitter herbs: and our 1 Samuel 27. v. 2, 6.
compared with chap. 30. ver. 1.
Ziglags will be but as new pieces in old garments: And perhaps our 1 Acts 15.
v. 39, 40. (...).
Paroxysmes may make us walk for it as far as America, as it was with
pettish Paul and Barnabas. But however this is not the way of amendment or
composure, to fall out with our meat, and to cast it from us, or to be sullen
toward the Lord when he smileth upon us with deliverances.

I read one example of such an April-Thanksgiving for a great victory in
Scripture: which gives us diverse proper passages and serious Observations. It
was when 2 Samuel 19.
General Joab and David's Army under his command, had slain Absalom, and
beaten the unnatural Army that was with him. It Is said, Ver. 2.
The victory that day was turned into mourning unto all the people, for the
people heard say that day, how the King was grieved for his son: Ver. 3.
And the people got them by stealth that day into the City, as people being
ashamed steal away when they flee in battle. Here was a strange kind of
victory and Thank giving indeed, considering the greatness of the mercy
received. But mark we upon it, (out of the same story) both its cause, and
consequents.

1. The Cause.
1. The principal cause of David's unseasonable sadness was his too much good
will and affections to the enemy. The Plurima beneficia continet patria, and
est antiquior parens, quam is, qui ut ajunt, creaverit. Cicer Fragment.
father (in him) was too hard for the Magistrate, and his private love toward a
son, swallowed up that public justice du^ to a Malefactor. Are there some of
the right party, nay and good men too sick of that dangerous disease? very
heathens shall rise in judgment against them. Gallant Brutus thou did
publicly scourge, and then slay thine own sons for attempting to re-inslave
the Commonwealth!

2. The consequents.
2. The consequents of David's unseasonable sadness are diverse: as,

Answer or high speech of General Ioab you must allow, for the Soldier, the
Courtier, and the kinsman, in his expressions, for he threatens, he swears,
he chideth. We will look only into the matter. ver. 5.
Thou have shamed this day, the faces of all thy servants, which this day have
saved thy life, and the lives of thy sons, and of thy daughters, and the
lives of thy wives, ver 6.
and the lives of thy concubines. In that thou love thine enemies and hate
thy friends, for thou have declared this day, that thou regardest neither
Princes nor servants, for this day I perceive, that if Absalom had lived and
all we had dyed this day, ver. 7.
then it had pleased thee well. Now therefore arise, go forth and speak
comfortably unto thy servants, for I swear by the Lord, if thou go not forth,
there will not tarry one with thee this night, and this will be worse unto
thee, then all the evil that befell thee from thy youth until now. This bold
speech needs no Comment, but there is in it a great deal of Marshall
politiques; out of which a Christian may draw many prudent and seasonable
instructions. You have read the story of those three Brethren, the Immaturum
virginisamorem ultus est ferro, citavere leges nefas: sed abstulit virtus
parricidam, and fa cinus intra gloriam fuit etc. Flor. lib. 1. ca. 3.
Horatii, how the sister of the surviving Conqueror, weeping to see the spoils
of her lover (but an enemy) upon her Brother, was paid with blood for her
tears. The fact I confess, was horrid in that Victor, but it may teach us that
the slighting of our deliverance is a dangerous provocation to nearest friends.

David, the perilous animosities arising between Israel and Judah about
bringing home the King. ver. 9, 10. ver. 41. ver. 42.
Israel charge Judah with King-stealing, Why have our brethren, the men of
Judah stolen thee away? Judah claymeth kindred in David and bearing themselves
high upon that relation, they endeavor to purge themselves from taking any
gifts, profits, places, for their service. And at last, the great quarrel is,
ver. 43.
who has the most share in the King and should have the principal hand in
bringing him back. A dispute that had like to have cost them dearer then all
the wars before.

weeping thanksgiving, and this royal contention, is an advantage taken from
both those by the 2 Samuel 20.1.
common enemy one of the old Malignant party. And there happened to be there a
man af Belial, whose name was Sheba the son of Bichri, a Benjamite. Mark it
well; The man was one of Saul's own Tribe; some think, a Prince of that Tribe,
because they followed him so readily, yea and it is conceived, he was of the
Pet. Martyr.
kindred of Saul, and was never well affected to David, and therefore now, he
blew a trumpet and said, We have no part in David etc. ver. 2.
Presently he was universally followed, and David wholly forsaken. See,
selfe-division is the next way to set up the old common Enemy again, and to
bring down the Kite upon the Mouse and Frog. which may sweep away both,
whilst they are a fighting. Away therefore with all sullenness and
selfe-divisions, all ye that are truly godly, well affected and thoroughly
engaged in this common cause against the common Enemy, whatsoever discontents,
provocations, injuries you have received from one another. Suffer not any
Gangrenes to strike to your wounds, for that will be noisome indeed to others,
but mortal to your selves, and to that good old godly Puritan Cause and
Interest, with which we must all now sink or swim. Revenge shows me to be a
man, but forgiving to be a christian; that, makes me even with mine enemy, but
this, sets me See Pro. 20.3. Eccles. 10.4.
above him; that may be just, but this is surely truly honorable. Plutarch.
in vita Aristidis.
O that carriage and language of Aristides was truly noble, of which we read
in the story; Aristides by the furtherance of Themistocles, had been banished
from Athens by the law of Ostracisme for ten years; but within three years he
was recalled again because Xerxes King of Persia, was come with a vast Army
into Attica; after Aristides his return, Themistocles is chosen the only
Lieutenant General of Athens, and Aristides, (notwithstanding all former
passages) does always faithfully aid and assist him in all things, as well
with his travel as with his Counsel, and thereby wan his enemy great honor,
but greater to himself, for he adventured through the midst of the enemies
ships in the night, and with great danger got from Aegina to Themistocles tent,
and calling him out thus bespake him. Themistocles, if we are both wise, it is
high time we should now leave off this vain envy and spite we have long time
borne each other, that we should enter into another sort of envy more
honorable and profitable for both: I mean, which of us two should do his
best endeavor to save Greece: you by ruling and commanding; and I by
counselling, etc. How clearly has this poor heathen taught us christians to
Privatas inimicitias Reipub. ignoscere.
bury all our personal quarrels in the wounds of the public Enemy? Well, my
Brethren, deceive not your selves with dreams, if you are godly indeed, you
may agree, you must agree, and I dare tell you that (at last) you shall agree,
either as fellow Conquerours, if you please, or as fellow prisoners, if you
will still be sullen; the dogs shall drive you together, or eat you severally.
Oh do but unite so near in affections as you are united in dangers, and you
have undone the Devil.

lesson of praises, it is worded for us by King David, Psalm. 34.2, 3.
My soul shall make her boast in the Lord, the humble shall hear and beglad.
O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his Name together. Magnify him
we should for spiritual mercies, and for temporal, for general, and for
particular, for former and for present favors; all these, yea, all our
Parliament mercies would require the volumes of a Thuanus or Baronius, rather
then this piece of a Sermon to set them forth. But I hope you have pens
employed about that subject all this while: I hope you have appointed some
Committee to audite the Debenters of the Lord of your hosts, as well as of the
soldiers. And let me have leave to tell you here (in a seasonable parenthesis)
that such Records are acts of Justice, for Gratitude is a branch of the Law of
nature: They are acts of Religion, for herein we honor God, as in my Text,
and then he has 1 Samuel 2.30.
bound himself to honor us: They are acts of prudence and policy, for they
do knit a knot upon the mercy received that it ravels not out again; and in
that knot they have a Vetus beneficium comemorando, invitas novum. Senec.
hook by which they catch in future mercies. Tamerlaine asked of Bajazet, when
he had taken him prisoner, in battle, whether or no he ever had been thankful
to God for making him an Emperor? He answered freely, he never thought upon
that matter in all his life. Tamerlaine replyeth, And why should God make you,
a man that has but one eye, to be King of the Turks? and me, a man lame in
one leg, King of the Tattars, above all other men? No mervaile if thou, being
so unthankful, have lost so great a Battle. Thankfulness is the way to bring
in more: and therefore, though I cannot lanch out, into this Sea of all our
mercies, yet I would, I must fish in the river of this days salvation. May it
please you to lend me your hearts but for half an hour, I shall endeavor to
warm them and return them back to you again, when I have given you some
special peculiar Observations upon the mercies and victories of this days
praise, and have set up a triumphant pillar, though but of brick, like that
ascribed to Noah's sons, to tell posterity what the Lord has done for your
souls.

Observation. 1. upon the mercies of this day.
1. Consider the number, the multitude, of this days victories. They are the
fairest and greatest cluster of mercies, (so far as I can find or remember)
that ever the Lord gave you at once. A cluster like that at Eschol, which the
Spirit of God thus records; Number. 13. ver. 23.
And they came to the brook of Eschol, and cut down from thence a branch, with
one cluster of grapes, and the bare it between Viz. Iosue and caleb. Sic aijt
Ambr.
two upon a staff; and they brought of the Pomegranats and of the figs. This
was a good earnest of their neernesse unto Canaan, and of the goodness of that
land. Why may not our Cluster be somewhat a like token unto us for good, even
of a speedy entrance into an happy settlement? This is the day of the Cluster.
I observe that the enemy, in this second war, has never (hitherto) brought
forth single births, but multitudes, Gads, troops, of insurrections, revolts,
surprisals, at once. It is observed by Naturalists, that your vilest and
venomest creatures, do bring forth most frequently, most numerously; as Rats,
Mice, Serpents; whereas the Partus Elephantinus. Adag.
Elephant is some years breeding, and the Royal Lion brings forth but one or
two at a birth. Surely, our enemies grow more venomous and more verminous now
in their attempts, plots, assaults: For this day we celebrate deliverances
from a numerous issue of mischiefs. Your own Order for this day, that
touches but generals, calls for a six stringed instrument; it mentions a
parcel of no less then six common-places of danger and deliverance. No
mervaile if the enemy did never rage more against any one day of Thanksgiving
then against this, I have found the cause of their fury: never were they so
manifoldly beaten, in so many places, plots, attempts at once, as this day
records. The following observations will express some of the particulars;
Mean while, let this first be crowned with that blessing, Psalm. 68.19.
Blessed be the Lord who daily loadeth us with his benefits, even the God of
our salvation. Selah.

universality and spreadings of this days dangers and deliverances. The
garment of gladness reaches over all the Quarters of the Land. It is not
only for some Northern, or Southern, for some Eastern or Western mercies,
that we now give thanks: but the Robe reaches from Cocquet-water in
Northumberland, in the North, to Horsham in Sussex in the South: there is its
latitude. From Dover-Castle and all Kent in the East, to Pensands, the utmost
part of Cornwall, in the West: there is its longitude. Besides all the Inland
victories, all over the kingdom, with which this Robe is poudred throughout;
to wit, in the Counties of Westmerland, Northumberland, Bishopwrick, York
(both City and County) Nottingham, Lincoln, Rutland, Huntington, Cambridge,
Norfolk, and Norwich, Suffolk, Cheshire, Hereford, Worcester, etc. Both North
and South Wales, Kent, Sussex, Surrey, Middlesex, and Westward even unto
Cornwall. Crown this, with that interjection. Psalm. 107. v. 1, 2, 3.
Oh give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: Let the redeemed of the
Lord say so, whom he has redeemed from the hand of the Enemy, from the East
and from the West, from the North and from the South, the oil of gladness
has Psalm. 233. v. 2.
run down like the ointment of Aaron, from the head to the hem.

secrecy, treachery, and slinesse of our dangers, and thence, the greatness of
our deliverance. In the first war the common enemy, had in him more of the
Bear and Lion, he did roar and bark when he would bite, did profess himself
an open and armed Enemy: But now, in this second war, he has more in him of
the Fox and Serpent; he cries, Peace, Psalm. 55. v. 21.
peace, when war is in his heart. Their present hostilities have in them more
of the Powder Treason than of Eighty eight; more of a Massacre than a war. They
seem to say now in this second Edition, as Sanballat and the rest with him,
against Nehemiah and his party; Neh. 4. v. 11.
They shall not know, neither see, till we come in the midst among them, and
slay them, and cause the work to cease. How many mines of surprises, revolts,
insurrections, had they prepared ready to spring and play in all parts of the
Land (yea and of the Sea too) at once? Only the Lord he did countermine them
whilst we thought not of it. Yea, had not the Lord confounded their language,
so that they could not time it exactly as they intended, they might have
swallowed us up quick. But the truth is, they marred their music by
ill-timing it. It was with them as they say it is in throwing of a Granada, or
fire-ball into a Castle, if you throw it too soon, before it is ready to
break, the Enemy within may presently cast it back upon you, and destroy you;
if you hold it too long, it may fly abroad in your hand and destroy your self
ere you can put it off. There is a certain nicke of time to be taken, which
our God, who has all times in his hand, did hide from them, that they knew it
not, and so their Eccles. 8. v. 6.
misery was great upon them. For some of them did arise up and attempt too
soon, others of them stayed too long, and so all were broken in pieces with,
by, their own fire-workes, according to that promise, Psalm. 7. v. 16. Nec enim
lex justior ulla est, quam necis artifices art perire sua^.
His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall
come down upon his own pate. Add we also, that very many of these
new-old-enemies were Covenanters, or such as had taken the negative Oath, that
is, never more to bear Arms against the Parliament. They were Benhadads, that
had been kindly entreated, and sent away with an oath, as he: for 1 King. 20.34
Benhadad took a Covenant, or some kind of negative oath: and by this means
our credulity and their engagements, had put into them a greater capacity and
cruelty to deceive and destroy us. Besides, with those were joined many a
treacherous Doeg, you know he was a kind of 1 Samuel 22. v. 9, 10, 22.
Spy-professour, that betrayed and destroyed the Priests of the Lord. Many a 2 Samuel 16. v. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Ziba, that belyed, betrayed, his own Master, to get his sequestration. Now if
2 Samuel 15. v. 7, 8, 11.
Absoloms pretense of a vow at Hebron, gave advantage to his treason, and drew
with him many men, in their simplicity: if Benhadads taking that negative Oath,
made him the more apt and able to conquer Israel; then what snares, what rages,
what deaths, have we escaped, in being delivered from false and hypocritical
enemies! Let this Observation be crowned with that acknowledgement, Psa. 118.
v. 12.
They compassed me about like bees; they are quenched as the fire of thorns.

fundamental and radical; I mean, they came most and nearest to our head and
heart, to our most noble and vital parts. The tooth-ake, I confess, is a very
smart and tormenting pain: but yet not accounted mortal. The Gout is very
painful, and may prove dangerous: but yet being in the hand or foot, it is
more safe than the stone and Collicke, which sit closer and are more perilous.
But yet a Malignant fever upon the spirits: a Pestilence or a Gangreen, that
aims speedily, immediately at the heart; these are accounted present death,
and therefore a recovery from those is more highly esteemed. Now, these fits
and distempers of our second war, have all, generally, struck at the heart
and vitalls. Formerly, the war kept it self more abroad, in the West, or
North, or North-west parts of the kingdom, for the most: and those parts were
reckoned by some, but as the exterior members of the body. But now, as if the
Enemy had learnd of King Benhadad, Not to 1 Kings 22. ver. 31.
fight against small nor great, in comparison to the heart and head: As if they
had learned of Bishop Acts and Monuments.
Gardner, that one Salmons head was worth many Herrings; they have lately made
all their blows at our Parliament, and this great City. Our insurrections,
tumults, fightings, have been in Kent, Sussex, Essex, Surry, yea in very
Middlesex it self. Now, the whole head was sick, and the heart heavy indeed;
the foundations were shaken: Our Corps-du-guard was assaulted, death came up
into our windows; when our Parliament and City, the whole cause and party,
have been said down at every stake, and have had so many, near, and
dangerous casts thrown at them. Give me leave to describe those palpitations
of Englands heart in a few borrowed words, 2 Cor. 7. ver. 5, 6.
We were troubled on every side; without were fightings, with in were fears,
nevertheless the Lord, who comfort those that are cast down, comforted us.
Remember and forget not, how death did knock at your very door: what, Alarms
and fightings, even at both ends of London, East and West? what, dangers, and
talkings of surprising the Parliament where they were sitting, of seizing upon
Lambeth-house, and planting guns upon it, to batter and annoy you in your very
house whilst you were sitting? was the Powder Treason nearer or more
fundamental than this? Take your pens (Honorable Senators) take your pens and
write it down, first in your own Table books, and then in the Journall of your
House, and over the Chair of your Speaker; Psalm. 124. v. 1.
If it had not bin the Lord who was on our side, now may England say; if it had
not bin the Lord, then they had swallowed us up quick when their wrath was
kindled against us, etc.

new, fresh, and progressive. This last war has been doubly new: new in
respect of time, and new in respect of the Scene and places in which it has
broken forth. For time, it is now come on, when the Land had began to rest
again; and when we thought we had been near the shore, behold, an Euroclydon
drives us back into the Ocean. But for its place and Scene, there is much to
be observed. Those parts of the Kingdom which had hitherto been untoucht, the
Maiden Counties, as they call them, have been now most of all defloured.
Unconquered Kent, which had so long been famous for her almost vestall
virginity, has had a principal share of these troubles. And her sister Essex,
is now in the furnace. Besides Surrey, Middlesex, Hertford, Huntington,
Suffolk, and Norfolk; if they have not been scorched by the flame, yet have
they had some of the smoke in their eyes, whilst their neighbors houses have
been on fire. For mine own part, I dare not to determine, the causes of their
fresh and new visitation. I will not say, that the war marched into those
fresh-quarters (1.) because God will have his Jer. 25. v. 15. 16. etc.
cup to go round, when once he begins to send it forth, though I read that
has been his usual method. Or (2.) because the fire of war and tumult had
not so good fuel of plunder to feed it in other exhausted Counties, as in
these; nor so ready Fuellers to intertaine it; other people, like the burnt
child, dreading the Coals. Neither (3.) will I say that it was, because these
people, like dandled children, did need a rod to teach them experimental
sympathy and compassion. In sum, I will not dare, (as in Gods stead) to give
the principal reason or cause of this their new scourge. But yet it would
become the suffering and warned people themselves, to consider of all possible
conjectures; and to examine themselves by all interrogatories that can be
suggested, what may be the provoking cause of this new storm upon them. What,
did I call it a storm? Nay, rather it is yet but a little mist, or as some few
drops before a shower, as that 1 King. 18. v. 44.
cloud like a man's hand. The Lord make the inhabitants of these yet unplundered
Counties, Cities, Towns, Parishes, to be wise for themselves, that they may
not cry for a rod, or grow sick of their own peace. But let them know and
believe, that those that drink last of the Cup, are nearest the bottom, and
the nearer the bottom, the more sour and deadly; for there lie the Lees and
dregs, Psalm. 75. v. 7, 8.
The dregs thereof all the wicked of the earth shall wring them and drink them
out. O pray this cup from you.

But there was much mercy even in the midst of this new, progressive misery, in
that the sword went forward into fresh Quarters, and yet was staid, whereby our
deliverance appears the more wonderful, in that the Lord did so soon quench
the fire even amidst a multitude of fresh fuel; yea amidst so much ripe corn
and dry straw as was about it on every side. Surely, God did but only fire
their Beacons hitherto rather than their houses: they were Sentinels rather
than Armies that were sent amongst them; even enough, I hope, to alarm,
awaken, and instruct them, but not so many as to destroy and devour them.
Psalm. 107. v. 43.
Who so is wise and will observe these things, even they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord.

unsprosperousnes and visible disappointments of the Enemy, in all these
dangers and deliveratices. The whole conflict does look as if it had been a
pitched battle, a challenged Duel, or solemn prize played between Michael and
the Dragon, God and his enemies. Like as when the Romans and the Albanes did
Misso in compendium bello, ter gemenis hinc atque inde fratribus utriusque
populi fata commissa sunt. Flor.
Epitomize their war, and tried it in a combat between three Brethren, (the
Curiatii) on the one side; and other three Brethren (the Horatii) on the other
side: For never did the Enemy, on his part, act more numerously, subtly,
valiantly, by so many, so treacherous, so daring, attempts, as in this bout.
Never did the Lord appear more plentifully, more profoundly, more
peremptorily, for his poor people. And seeing it is both the duty and delight
of a Saint, to tell others what the Lord has done for his soul. Give me leave
to reckon up some of the most visible and mighty passes or thrusts, that have
been made between the Lord and his enemies, in these late eminent encounters.
We will reduce them to three or four heads, which are as so many weapons, at
which Michael and the Dragon have played this Prize.

1. Revolts.
1. How has the Enemy put to it against us, by revolts? This is a mischievous
weapon indeed, it cost 2 Samuel 3. and 4.
Ishbosheth his Cause, Crown, and life, when Abner in discontent went over to
David. And it has seemed more succesfull to the Enemy then all the rest of his
endeavors. But have their revolts always prospered? Ask Pembroke castle, that
great Center and nest of the Revolters; Besides Tenbigh castle in Wales. Ask
those Forces of the Bishopric and thereabouts, that were apostatizing to
Langdale, but come short at Cocquet water, where 'twixt five and six hundred
horse were taken. And believe it, Our God is a righteous Lord (Tam in salo,
quam in solo) as well upon the Seas as on the dry Land. Psalm. 65.5.
By terrible things in righteousness will thou answer us, O God of our
salvation, who art the confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of them
that are afar off upon the sea. Therefore fear not Sea enemies.

2. Surprises.
2. The Enemy has tried it at surprises too; This is also a very dangerous
weapon, as appears by the counsel of Achitophel the Oracle, 2 Samuel 17. v. 1,
2, 3.
I will come upon him when he is weary and weak handed, and will make him
afraid, and all the people that are with him shall flee, and I will smite the
King only. But has not the Lord worsted them at this weapon also? Ask
Denbigh castle in Wales, where the treacherous Enemy combined with a party of
prisoners and soldiers within, had entered, was in part possessed, and yet
wonderfully discovered, repulsed, vanquished. Ask the City of York, where
the day was come, the Enemy hovering and ready to enter, but disappointed; of
Chester, where the neck was near the block, yet escaped the blow: of Norwich
(formerly) where they struck, but the blow fell short, nay fell back upon
themselves: of Nottingham castle, in which some of the surprisers were
surprised and imprisoned. Ask that conspiracy in the Counties of Worcester,
Hereford and others adjacents there was a whole nest full of eggs of treason,
which were blown upon and dashed so early, that one could hardly tell what
birds were in them, whether Owls or Eagles. Surely that discovery and
disappointment deserves to have its Pillar of remembrance erected upon the
banks of Severne, with the names of the active instruments engraven upon it.
Nay ask finally, that their must succesfull surprise of Pomfrect, has it
grown gray in successes? did not their foot also slide in due time at
Willoughby field, where their spoiling Band was broken, taken, scattered? This
must be closed up with that of David, Psalm. 21. v. 11.
They imagined a mischievous device, which they were not able to perform.

3. Insurrections
3. They have sought with the desperate weapon of manifold Insurrections and
Commotions. But were they Conquerours at this? I might here appeal to that
Pair of Clergy, near Stamford (but that one of them falling headlong, is burst
asunder in the midst) I mean that Jolly pair, that imitated Pope Julius the
second, that cast Peter's Keys into Tiber, and betook himself to Paul's sword.
I might ask, concerning them, how many hours that young Commotion did smoke,
and prosper? O most vigilant Commanders and Colonels, that scarcely slept in
all the time of their command! Another Insurrection I must instance in. It was
in the uttermost part of the utmost part of England westward, near the Mount,
in Cornwall, 'twas Dangerous I assure you, though suddenly and gallantly
suppressed and quenched in the Sea, forsome of the principal firebrands
themselves, were so desperate, that scorning mercy, they joined hand in hand
and violently ran themselves into the Ocean, where they perished in the waters.

4. Battles.
4. There was yet one terrible weapon more, at which our Enemies would needs
fight it out with our God, and that was open, pitched battles, and fixed
Garrisons (to that strength were they grown in some places) was not Willoughby
field a set battle? were not Pembroke and Maydstone, Garrisons? Besides that
Scene of the Barons wars, near Kingstone, and its catastrophe at St Neots.
Here the hot and hardy taking in of Maydstone would not be left out, because it
was the vertical and Axeltree (in probability) of all those after victories,
and was one of the many lives which God had given to this Parliament. Thus
every where, and in every attempt, may you write these new, second, Enemies,
Ier. 22.30.
Conijah-like, childlesse, men that do not prosper in their days and ways.
But there are two branches out of this last root: I will gather the fruit of
them, and I have done with it.

1. To Enemies.
1. A word to the Adverse party. Sirs, will you not yet see the hand of God
stretched out against you from heaven, in all this second war? Will you not
see a sword, like that in Balaams way, meeting you at every turn? what? Crossed,
disappointed, broken, in every plot, battle, attempt? Neither Revolts, nor
Surprises, nor Insurrections, nor Commotions succeed with any of you, in any
place, at any time? What? will you neither hear the Lords word, nor feel his
work? How often shall that text be beaten into pour flesh, Isa. 54.17.
No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper, and every tongue that
rises up in judgment, thou shall condemn; This is the heritage of the
servants of the Lord? O remember, how Pharaohs servants did give him good
counsel in time, if he would have hearkened, Exodus 10.7.
Know thou not yet that Egypt is destroyed? So I, to you; know ye not yet
that Poor England, the common Mother of us all, is almost ruined? Nay, that
many of your own companions, are already cut off? But you will despise that
counsel? so did Pharaoh, till at last, himself, and all his Militia, were
forced to believe, confess, and yet perish in the bottom of the Sea. Exodus
14. v. 25.
And it came to pass that in the morning watch, the Lord looked unto the host
of the Egyptians, through the pillar of fire and of the cloud, and troubled the
host of the Egyptians. Has not the Lord appeared for his servants, and against
you, with open face, in the morning of this your second war? Has he not
troubled all your hosts, and taken off their Charret wheels that they drove
them heavily? Surely, you must all subscribe to this, that the Lord has
unwheeled all your late projects and attempts. The Egyptians said, Let us flee
from the face of Israel, for the Lord fights for them against the Egyptians.
But then it was too late; they might confess, to the honor of the Lords
justice, but could not thereby help themselves. The Lord give you all to see in
the evening, in the Eleventh hour, of this your day, the things that concern
your peace.

2 To friends.
2. Howsoever, be encouraged by this fresh and clear experience, O all ye
friends of God and his cause, and learn from these last and greatest
appearings of God for you, to see, and say, that Deuteronomy. 32. v. 31.
their rock is not as our rock, our enemies themselves being Judges. I dare
callenge them all, to name that one attempt, in which they have been
succesfull, in this their second offensive war: Or if they have seemed at first
to prosper in any thing, has it not been only so far as might lift them up for
the greater fall? But as for you, O friends, I charge all your hearts, to
answer me seriously, did you ever see so much of God at once? Such a visible
hand from heaven, with his Banner, and Motto in it, like that of the first
Christian Eusebius in vita Constant. Magn.
Emperors (in hoc vinces:) what should the Lord do more? How would you have
him to express himself more plainly, unless by some audible voice from
heaven? Nay, but that is also vouchsafed you, hearken to it; 2 Chronicles. 15. ver.
2.
The Lord is with you, whilst ye are with him. It was one of Gods first solemn
Messages to you in the beginning of your Fastings, and has been often
inculcated upon those days. What God will do with us at last, in this great
cause, I know not: perhaps he may make us as great monuments of his Justice in
the end, as he has made us wonders of his Mercy in the beginning: (yet let me
interline this comfort, he does not use to cast off a coming-people;) but if we
should perish in the conclusion, yet we must say and confess, that hitherto he
has been, and yet he is, Isa. 28. v. 29.
wonderful in counsel, excellent in working for us.

Ob. But how can that be, seeing we were never so unworthy, unwilling, unfit
for mercy, as at this time? never so profane, divided, bitter, against God and
one another?

Ans. All this is confessed, and a great deal more, if any will ad it: but
therefore know, that we must not thank our selves, but our enemies, for these
successes; not our own goodness, but their wickedness is the cause of all
our late victories. Though we are not ripe for Mercy, yet they are ripe for
judgment, though God be not more engaged for us then formerly, yet (sure I am,)
he is more engaged against them. He was before engaged against them as he was
Jer. 10. v. 7.
King of Nations, and they fought for tyranny against our just and lawful
liberties. But now as Rev. 15. v. 3.
the King of Saints, he will fight against them for treachery, hypocrisy, and
forsworn Covenant Breaking. In short, the Lord is now many ways engaged
against them. (1.) As enemies against Reformation and civil liberties. (2.) As
ungrateful to those that have spared them. (3.) As deceitful and treacherous
against Oaths, Articles, and Covenants. (4.) As bitter Formalists against the
power of godliness. There is a comfortable Text, in this particular, in the
book of Job; Job 17. ver. 18, 19.
The innocent shall stir up himself against the hypocrite, the righteous
also shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands shall be stronger
and stronger. Mark the words, Does the Lord command or promise, that the
innocent shall stir up himself against the hypocrite? And will not God stir
up himself against them? Yea, believe it, he is more engaged against an
hypocrite, then against the open profane person. (1.) Because such an one is
profane, and somewhat more, he is as wicked within as the other, and yet
pretends to godliness without. (2.) Because he does cause the way of God to be
evil spoken of, which is a pitch of wickedness, of which the open profane
person is incapable: therefore the Lord does, will, must stir up himself
against him above all others. He adds, And the righteous shall hold on his
way, that is, both his way of piety, and of prosperity, but the hypocrite must
needs hobble, lame, and tire, both in his holiness and happiness; for both
are as a Hos. 6 ver. 4.
morning cloud and an early dew that passes away. Once more, he that has
clean hands shall be stronger and stronger; then what shall become of him
that has foul hands, whether by flesh, earth, or blood? Surely, he must needs
grow weaker and weaker. Fear not therefore the faces of such men (Honorable
Senators) fear them not. He has said it, and you may adventure your lives
upon it. Were I to choose mine own enemy, I would, above all other, choose to
fight against an ungrateful hypocrite, because both God, and all reasonable
men, must needs abhor him. It is a famous example and sentence that we find
recorded in Ezekiell. Zedekiah the King of Judah had his condition, changed,
from a private man to a Prince, and with it, his name changed from Mattaniah to
Zedekiah. Hereupon he swears fidelity to that King of Babylon which so
advanced him; but upon advantage, basely brake his Oath and faith with him,
betaking himself to the King of Egypt for assistance. For this, God falls upon
him, takes the Babylonians part against him, and puts these interrogatories.
Ezekiel. 17. v. 15, 16, 17, 18.
[Shall be prosper? shall he escape that does such things? Or shall he break
the Covenant and be delivered? As I live, says the Lord God, in the place
where the King dwells that made him King, whose Oath he despised, and whose
Covenant he brake, even with him, in the midst of Babylon, he shall die,
neither shall Pharaoh with his mighty Army, and great company, make for him in
the war, by casting up mounts and building forts, to cut off many persons,
since he despised the Oath, by breaking the Covenant (when lo, he had given his
hand) and has done all these things; he shall not escape. Read through the
following verses, to the end of that Chapter, we do all know, how truly and
sadly this was fulfilled upon him, for it is at least twice thus recorded in
Scripture. Jerusalem, 2 Kings 25. v. 4.5, 6, 7. Jer. 52. v. 6, 7.
that whole Kingdom was lost; Zedekiah taken, his sons slain before his eyes,
then his eyes put out, himself bound with fetters of brass, and carried to
Babylon, where he dyed. Nay, one example more. The Lord will take the part,
even of a Turk, against a perfidious Christian. To this purpose, remember and
forget not, so long as you have to do with this kind of enemy, (the
treacherous and perfideous Covenant-breaker) forget not the famous battle of
Varna. The battle of Varna: See Turkish Hist. in Amurath sixth King of the
Turks. page 287.
It was fought between Amurath sixth King of the Turks, and Vladislaus King of
Poland and Hungary. These two after much war between them, at last concluded a
peace for ten years, confirmed it solemnly, by taking their mutual Oaths:
the Christian upon the Evangelists, the Turk upon his Alcharon. This done,
Amurath securely withdrawes his Forces out of Europe, and leaves his Countries
there ungarded. Upon this advantage, and some others, King Vladislaus, by the
persuasions of Julian the Cardinal, diverse Christian Princes, and many
Prelates (pretending that it would be for the good of Religion and the
Christian cause) is induced to break the peace and his Oath (of which Julian
absolveth him) he takes up arms and invadeth the Turks dominions: where at
first he seems to prosper, and carry all before him; till at last his Army
meets the Turks (who by this, had made head against him) in the pitched
battle of Varna: where the victory, almost all the day, inclines to the
Christians, insomuch as Amurath himself was about to flee, till a common
Soldier laid hand upon his bridle, and stayed him. The fight is again renewed,
and the Christians again have the better; till Amurath now almost despairing,
espied the picture of the Crucifix in the displayed Ensigns of the Christians,
and then, plucking out the writing that contained their last League and peace,
out of his bosom, and holding it up in his hand, with his eyes cast up to
heaven, he said; Behold, thou crucified Christ, unto thy Name and me, and show
thy power upon thy perjurious people, who in their deeds deny thee their God.
Immediately the battle began to turn for the Turks against the Christians,
and that, first of all, in that part where Julian the Cardinal did command:
And without delay the Turks break all the Christians forces in pieces; King
Vladislaus is slain upon the place, Julian, mortally wounded, dies in his
flight; besides diverse great Prelates and Commanders, with many thousands of
common men. Remember it again; God will take part with an Amurath, with an
appealing Turk; against a perfidious Vladislaus, though a Christian. Let us
keep our Covenant in our bosom, and remember to show and plead it in like
time and case. This was the sixth Observation.

half dozen of observable mercies, Behold, the Lord has given you in a kind
of cast-over; a seventh observable, which I must call, a meeting-mercy: For I
believe you shall find, that the Articles of Pembrooke Castle, and your Order
for this Thanksgiving, do both bear the same date and day, even the twelfth
of this instant. The Psalmist says of his prayers, Psalm. 32. v. 5.
I said I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin. So was it in your praises, you said that you would give
thanks unto the Lord for his mercies received, and he gave you another great
favor the same day. Let it be called a meeting-mercy, for that reason: As also
because the Spirit of God seems to give it that very name in the Scripture;
Isa. 64. ver. 5.
Thou [meetest] him that rejoices and works righteousness, those that
remember thee in thy ways. You were about to rejoice in the Lord, and to
remember his way of mercy, and, behold, he met you in your rejoicing. One such
a meeting-mercy, such an after-cast of mere favor, is to be esteemed as much
as a whole bargain. It is like fruit upon a graffe, the first year of its
ingraffing: For your Thanksgiving did bear the same day that it was set. Let
it therefore be your care and endeavor to meet the Lord often in this way,
that you may as often be met by him.

3 Encouragement
The last lesson must be a short, but strong encouragement. Now will you? can
you? dare you to distrust the Lord another time? will you warpe and waver from,
or in, his way again hereafter? I give you leave to do it, if you can find a
better Master, if you can meet with any other God that Dan. 3.29.
can deliver you after this sort. But if there be none such to be found, then
Heb. 3.12.
take heed, lest there be in any of you hereafter, an evil heart of unbelief,
in departing from this living God. Let the heads of these Leviathans be as
Psalm. 74.14.
meat to you in the wilderness; For I believe we have a long way of
wilderness yet to go; but feed upon these past experiences, in all your new
and future Marches. Let this double breakfast strengthen and enable you ( 1
King. 19.6, 7, 8.
Elijah-like) for the great journeys which you have yet to go. Perhaps they are
not of forty days only, (as was his) but for many more weeks or months;
when you are to travel through briers and thorns, before your work, or your
selves, may arrive at the mount of God: Wherefore 1 Pet. 1.13.
gird up the loins of your [mind:] All saints have or should have but one
mind, or heart. Be sober and hope unto the end, or trust perfectly: It is a
(...).
word that I cannot mention without a note upon it; Trust God to the end; to
the end of means, as 1 Kings 17.12.15.
she that at Gods command gave a Cake out of her last handful and little
oil: and was she a loser by it? As those three worthies at Babylon, when they
said, Dan. 3.16, 17, 18.
Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace:
but the hard question was, whether he would do it? Yes, he will deliver them
from the evil, or from the extremity of the evil, they believe; He will
deliver us out of [thy hand] O King, i. e. He will so preserve us, that thou
shall not have thy will upon us. But how were they sure of that? What if he
should not have vouchsafed that unto them neither? But if not be it known unto
thee O KING, that we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship the golden Image
which thou have set up. As he Nil nisi peccatum metuo.
replied to that Messenger I fear nothing but sin.

So much for the former half of the text, concerning the praise of
thanksgiving.

2 Part of the text.
I want time and spirits to speak to the latter part as I would, concerning
[Ordering the way aright.] This clause stands here in the midst, between
the God-glorifying duty of praise, and the men-blessing mercy of salvation;
because it is the top-stone of praises, and the cornerstone of deliverance; To
him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God.
Whence we might fetch a double Lesson.

1. That a right ordering of the way, is the perfection of Thanksgiving. And,

2. That it is the best step to a complete salvation. But to put both into one,
Thus.

Right Ordering of the way is the top-stone of all duty, and the cornerstone
of all deliverance. We have heard, that Thanksgiving is the crown of duty; now
Right ordering the way, or conversation, is the pearl of that crown, and the
very glory of that honor. It is somewhat to praise with the Psalm. 63.34.
mouth, by speaking praises; It is more to praise with the Psalm. 77.11 12.
heart by meditating Thanksgivings: but it is most of all to praise in the Ephesians.
1.12, (...). Application.
life, by ordering the conversation aright, that we should [bee] to the praise
of his glory.

Applica. Would you then praise the Lord indeed? Would you certainly and fully
see the salvation of God? Then for the Lords sake, Si enim male vivis, and bona
dicis, nondum laudas. Non ergo laudat, qui male viuendo offendit Dominum. Aust.
ad Psalm. 49.
as you would honor him; for your own sake, as you would save your selves and
the kingdom; do but order the way aright, and then I dare promise you that he
shall be glorified by you, and ye shall be saved by him.

Quest. Order the way aright? What is that?

Answ. Let it be what it will, what it can, though never so costly, never so
painful, never so hazardous, it is worth all the charge, labor and peril,
that you can undergo. Therefore resolve upon it it at all adventures.

Quest. But what is it then?

Answ. Take it in short; [Right ordering] does contain these two things, as I
find in Scripture.

1. A right setting, methodizing, framing, or casting of things into their
proper order, shape and platform. A putting of things into due place, and so
it is applied to the ordering of battles. 1 King. 20.14.
Who shall order [Heb. bind, or tie,] the battle? He answered, Thou. It is
applied to the ordering of a cause. Job. 23 4. Job 34.18.
I would order my cause before him, and fill my mouth with arguments. It is
applied to the ordering of the things of God. Thus Aaron and his sons are
appointed to order the Exo. 27.21.
lamp, and to order the Levit. 24.3.
burnt offering. Thus Lev. 1.6, 7, 8.
Moses, the Magistrate, is commanded to set in order the Tabernacle with his
appurtenances, and does it. Thus David, 1. Chron. 24.19.
Hezekiah, Ezra, Nehemiah, ordered several affairs abut the house of the
Lord; it is a Heb. 9.10. (...), directio, correctio; Reformation Angl.
right-setting.

2. It does contain an establishing, fixing, or settling of things in that
right frame and order. As, Pro. 4 26.
Ponder the paths of thy feet, and let all thy ways be established, or, all
thy ways shall be ordered aright. And elsewhere, these two are put together,
Col. 2.5.
Beholding your order and steadfastness. And thus, a right ordering, is not
only a putting of things into a right frame, but a fixing of them there: a
right setting and a sure settling. Would you but do this, or do your
uttermost toward this, and then you might be said to order the way aright.

Quest. The way? What way?

Answ. There are many necessary Cause ways now to be set and settled, for want
of which we wander and plunge our selves every where. Take some short hints.
The ways that you are to order, are of two sorts.

1. Particular and personal ways to be ordered aright.
I. More particularly, respecting your selves. And here again are two branches.

1. Labor to order the ways of your persons and families aright: else you are
like to do little good or service toward the public. The Heathen could say,
none but a Nemo civis bonus, nisi vir bonus. Cicer.
good man could make a good Citizen. Remember Jacobs method, when he was whipped
home to pay his vow, in building the Lord an House at Bethel: he first falls
to purging his own house. Genesis 34. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
And God said unto Jacob, Arise, and go up to Bethel, and dwell there, and
make there an Altar unto God, that appeared unto thee, when thou fleddest from
the face of Esau thy brother. Mark how he begins; Then Jacob said unto his
household, and all that were with him, Put away the strange gods that are
amongst you, and be clean, and change your garments, and let us arise and go
up to Bethel, etc. And they gave unto Jacob all the strange gods which were in
their hand, and all their earrings which were in their ears, and Jacob hid
them under the Oak which was by Sichem. Remember Moses his danger, for
neglecting this method; when he was to bring Israel out of the house of
bondage, he must have no uncircumcised thing remain in his own house: Exodus
4. v. 24, 25, 26.
And it came to pass by the way in the Inn, the Lord met him, and sought to
kill him; then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her
son, and cast it at his feet, so he let him go. I know the words are read by
some in another sense, but you may safely and profitably gather that lesson
from them, To begin Reformation at home.

2. Order your own way aright in reference to the public. I mean, labor to
walk and act, not by An passim sequeris corvos, test aque lutoque securus quo
pes ferat? atque ex tempore vivis? Pers.
successes and parties, but by rules and principles. How many public
instruments among us are like vessels upon the Thames, that do rise and fall,
go out and in, according to the ebbings and flowings of the River? O this has
been our great sin and misery! Men have been generally like a herd of cattle
in a ship at Sea, when the storm does roll the ship to this side, the brutish
herd run all over to the other side, thinking thereby to avoyde the toss; but
their weight soon brings back the Vessel, and then they flee over to the old
side again, and so the ship is overset, and all are drowned at last. Let us
maintain our ground: keep close to our stations; and stand upright in our
places. A man in a skirmish, gets a bullet as soon by stooping, as by standing
upright: yea, and perhaps by his crouching, that bullet takes him in the head,
which else would have hit him but in the arm or shoulder. Pro. 10. v. 9. and
28. v. 18.
He that walks uprightly, walks surely, and the Lord will be his Pro. 2.
v. 7.
buckler.

2. Public and general ways.
II. Concerning right ordering the public ways; they are diverse. But let me
tell you, ye have cast your way, and your work generally, very well, and
rightly already, ye have your frames and Platforms well drawn forth, (1.) In
our solemn League and Covenant; an holy, just, and good Covenant it is in it
self, and so we took it; how ever wicked men do turn every stone to abase
it. Believe it, that Covenant shall break those that design to break it; and
if any shall endeavor to make it as an old Almanacke, they will find it full
of red letters to them. Let us therefore show our selves real Covenanters
without racking or lopping. (2.) The constant tenor of your Declarations. Oh,
would you but frequently read them over! you know to whom it was said; I
beseech Your Majesty to read over your book. May it please you, to get all
those your solemn promises and Declarations, to God and man, at least the
principal of them, such as that of both Kingdoms, etc. to be bound up together
in one book, and make that book, your Vade mecum, your pocket companion, where
ever you go. Surely, this might be one effectual means to order the way
aright.

4. Necessary Highways, viz. of
To bind up all. There are four public highways that should be ordered
aright.

1. Religion.
1. The way of Religion. Till you set, and settle that, neither God, nor good
men, will be your through friends. Let that Arc no longer dwell in Tents,
without doors; neither let it be lodged within doors, in the bed of Procrustes.
The Service Book it self was first intended for Crutches: they ruined
themselves, and it, that at last, made it a pair of Stoopes.

2. Justice.
2. The way of justice to Delinquents. Set and settle that, so far at least, as
to stop the mouths of that party, which say, ye cannot try them, because ye
do not. There is also a way of justice to your friends, that are sunk for the
cause of God, upon your command, and promise of support.

3. Militia.
3. The way of Defense. Set and settle that, for the for the safeguard of the
throats of all the godly and well affected through the Land, lest the Enemy
regaine all his lost battles by one nights massacre, as Caesar lost all his
victories in one hour, in the Senate house, and our At, or near Stonehenge in
Wiltz.
British Ancestors lost all by the Saxons skeynes or knives, which they had
long kept and gotten from them by their swords.

4. Mercy.
4. The way of Mercy. Set and settle that, for your poor, helpless, undone
friends, whether undone in estates, bodies or friends. Be merciful to the
poor broken families, and owners of families, of which there are so very many
now in the Land, that have spent the last handful of meal in the barrel, and
oil in the Cruse, at Gods command and yours, in that public cause. We
Ministers were isntrumental in putting them onwards upon those disbursements,
I pray give us now leave, to speak a word, though not for their present
repayment, yet for present subsistence. Be merciful to poor broken bones:
There are many such pieces of maimed men, men walking like trees abroad in the
Land, that want necessary food to sustain those remainders of their bodies
that are left, though here about the City, blessed be God, and blessed be your
care, they are generally provided for. Be merciful to poor broken, beheaded,
and (as I may say) unbowelled families; Oh, how many, many, Widows and Orphans
are there, which know not whose to call themselves, but Gods and yours? The
husband is dead, the father is slain in the Kingdoms service, and the poor
uncovered family has Psalm. 72. v. 12.
no helper. Yea, and many of these, which have most need, are the most silent:
For the Lords sake, let your bowels within you roll toward them. Think of some
way to 2 Timothy 16, 17, 18.
seek them out very diligently, till you find them. And the Lord grant unto
you, that you may find mercy of the Lord in that day.

I have but a few words more to add. Make it your business (Honorable
Senators) to follow God fully in this great Cause, at this needful time, and
remember that the vessel which you do steer, does carry in her more then the
estates, liberties, lives of three Kingdoms. For the eyes and expectations of
all the Christian world are toward you, the Protestants hoping, the Papists
fearing your success; all the precious godly honest party in this and the
other two Nations have adventured their whole estates, lives, posterities upon
you; yea, their Religion and Reformation with you. With you must we and ours
swim or sink. It Is not now in your power to leave us where you found us, or to
land us where we did imbarque; No, no, we must through, or sink in the midst;
be better or worse then ever. Ye are set up for the final fall, or total
rising of godliness, property, liberties in England; and according to your
closure, so shall we say, welcome, or farewell, for ever, to happy or unhappy
Parliaments in this Land. If you by Gods blessing shall faithfully and
courageously carry us thorough this storm and voyage, (which I doubt not if ye
stand fast to God and your friends) how shall all the Saints on earth, all the
Angels in Heaven, and all the children unborne bless your persons and
memories? but if thorough wickedness or weakness, you, or any amongst you
shall betray or destroy this glorious cause, (which God forbid) surely it had
been better for you and us, that we had never been borne: the sin, the
scandal, the ruin, would be unpardonable, unanswerable, intolerable. The
name of Religion would be abhord in England; and the name of English hissedat
over all the world. There are many grounds of hopes and encouragement for you;
remember the good old fervent prayers and martyrdomes which our godly Ancestors
have laid in for this time, ever since the dawning of our Reformation: Consider
the volleys of cries, the bottles, rivers, of tears that have been powered out
for you and your cause by all the Saints on earth since your sitting, remember
the wonders from heaven that your eyes have seen. You may, you may, you shall,
save your selves, and us, and all, if you will. Oh, why will ye dye? Then stand
fast in the name of the Lord, to the great interest of godliness, and to that
holy and honest party, that have cast their lives, estates, posterities upon
you; they are a precious though despised people, if you save them, you save
your selves, if any of you should forsake them, (especially now that the ship
is near to a wrack, or an Anchor) such apostats may thereby ruin themselves,
but yet that poor dear faithful remnant have a God, who has promised by a
president that Psalm. 27. v. 10.
When Father and Mother (King and Parliament) do forsake; himself will take
them up. And therefore let all complementall formal Orpahs kiss, weep, and
part, with that good old Cause and party, as they will, when it shall from a
Naomi (pleasant) be turned by misery, to a Marah (bitter:) yet must every one
of us still do, and say, unto it, as Ruth to Naomi, Ruth 1. v. 16, 17.
Entreat me not to leave thee or to return from following thee, after thee;
for whither thou go, I will go, and where thou lodgest I will lodge, thy
people shall be my people, and thy God: my God and 1 King. 13. v. 31.
when I am dead bury me (O my friends) in the Sepulcher wherein it is buried.

Cum mihi supremos Lachesis perneverit annos,
Non aliter cineres mando jacere meos.

FINIS.
(...) Col 50 of 100. for a Cap: the Life guard is kept whole. The new Swedish
Generalissimo Charles Gustave Palsgrave, is arived in Germany with 8000 men, he
is to meet Mayor Genesis Erlach, they have a design against Collin, because
Lamboy has always his recruit from thence who has an Army again together,
and endeavors to be revenged upon the Heshish. Out of Westphalia is come
unto him Count Hennigo, with 8 pieces of Ordnance, and 1400 foot: The Heshish
are entrenched near Neuse, expecting Lamboys coming, who has about 3000
horse, and as many foot. The Heshish expect Landgrave Fredrick with his horse,
which if he does not come timely, the other may be the hard for them. The
Prince of Orange was to go to Cleve to the christning of his brother Prince
Elector of Brandenburgs child, but the day being put off to the 2 of August,
is returned to the Hague, where the Spanish Ambassador Pegneranda is expected.

The Englishships are said to be riggd, but by whose leave, or by whom, is not
known: not by any authority. At Osnabrugk, the Ambassador of Bavaria, having
propounded that in case a peace should not be suddenly concluded on, that his
Master would take a course to preserve Him and his Dominions; which being
exploded by the Catholic Imperial States, Bavaria thereupon resolved to stand
to the Emperor to the last. The Portugal Ambassador at the Hague has desired
the States (that seeing they had made an end of their great affairs with Spain)
to begin to treat with him about the affairs of Fernambuck, that that Treaty
being brought to a period, each party might enjoy their own to the great
benefit of both. Prince Charles of Wales has been as Calice, and is by this
time in Holland, where he was expected.

In Poland they have in nomination for King, the late Kings son by his former
wife, Prince Cassimire, and the Prince of Conde: the revolted Parliament ships
intend suddenly to be in the Downs, and to put in for a personal Treaty.

July 6. The Commons permitted Major Gen: Brown to be Shrieve of London,
approved of several Counties geting into arms for defense before authority
came to them, Letters from their Commissioners out of Scotland, of there
proceeding being approved were ordered to be printed, as for their coming back
to England they did not think it fit as yet, they being public Ministers, and
while peace is between the Nations, it was thought fit they continue to be
ready to give and receive what was given or received.

The 7. Letter came from the Noble Army inviting the City to a concurrence with
them. The Com. Vote the Lords that subscribed it, and those with them traitors.
The Committee of Commons recomme^ded the desire of their house to the Common
Council, as to satisfaction about his Majesty's coming to London to treat,
another meeting was appointed to resolve upon some what.

The 8. Came news that Col: Rossiter had so dispersed the Pomfret party, that
450 were become his prisoners, all their plunder, and what else there is. This
day came also the news of routing the Noble Army by the forces of Sir Miles
Livesy and of the Army, and that they were disappointed of their sport in
Windsor Forest, many of them wounded, others taken, some slain, among whom was
the Lord Francis Villers Brother to the Duke of Buckingham refusing quarter,
they that escaped got over at Kingston Bridge, some passing in boats, for the
Commander in chief cried Gent: shift for your selves, 10 lib for a boat: this
routed party flies to Harrovv Hill, thence to Watford, but that proved to hot
for them, and so to Redburn, and thence to Shefford, between Bedford and
Hitchin where they were, Saturday night, after whom, with 5 Troops went Major
Gibbons, lately come from Kent. And to meet them with 6 Troops under Command of
Col: Scroop from the Leagure before Colchester, who Sunday night was not far
from them: the joint forces that defeated them of Pomfret stand ready to
receive them come they North: and to this royal party go from London and
other parts, very many horse and foot with colors that distingushes them from
the Parliaments forces, and openly enquire the way to them.

The 10. The Lords at a Conference did give reason for a Treaty with his
Majesty, he being at libert berty before any acts be agreed upon. First, its
the desire of the Kingdom or Parliament of Scotland. Secondly, the agreement
will be the more Authentic. Thirdly, its probable having no Army in being, he
will condescend to that which at Vxbridge and Oxford he refused. Fourthly, its
not the way of Treaties to confirm any before all is agreed, especially those
of most concernment, and that which chiefly will be insisted upon, or to this
effect, the Commons concurrence was desired.

Dublin, June 28. We are here happy (if the least of happiness be to be in
this unhappy Kingdom) in that we are so many minds as parties, and all by that
means at present in an incapacity to hurt cach other. Preston and Owen Roe near
Athlone, striving who may get the Castle from Mr. Audley the newter Governor,
but he has not, nor it is conceived will deliver it to either: Own and the
Nuntio are in the Town on this side the water; no fighting has been between
them only straglers, yet they plunder each other daily, their miseries great,
roots are their chief food, bread being wanting: and yet it is to be feared
they may at last agree, and outlive their wants, we being not i^^capacity to
increase them and fall upon us. The Scots have so much inveigled diverse of our
horse, that many are gone to them (there is a fourth party) they give 20 sh.
advance, and 8d. per diem to a man, during their stay in the Kingdom, for it is
pretended they must go for Scotland: On the other side diverse come to Col:
Monk, from Munroe with their cows and cattle: Col: Monk is possessed of
Dandalke, Col: Moors Regiment, being not great, is brought to this City, and is
to be reduced into 2 Companies, My Lord Inchequins Forces in wants enough as
well as we, and thus stands the State of the five parties at present, when any
action will be is uncertain.

Leagure before Colchester, July 8, 1648. Yesterday the enemy had planted a
small Drake on the Bells frame in St. Mary's steeple, and from it made some
shot, Col. Rainsborow waiting upon my Lord, to the battery made a shot in at
the window, which we are credibly informed shot the Gunner through the belly.
This we are certain, that they never made shot from that place since, and it is
said, he was their best Cannoneer. Upon some volleys of shot yesterday toward
the evening at the burial of Lie vtenaut Col. Shamb ook, the enemy made their
Soldiers believe relief was come, and the walls and Steeples was full of people
to see it come. Eighteen of our soldiers which were prisoners, and this day
released, complain, that from Wednesday to Saturday, they had but three penny
loaves of bread, and each man an ounce of flesh, and a pale of water allowed.
We hear the enemy has drawn all their horse and foot together, causes all
their fire locks to be brought into a Church, and all manner o^ horses, with
such furniture as the Town can make to be ready, whereby, we conceive, they
will attempt to escape with as many of their foot as they can mount their horse
being so straited that they have nothing left for them but green corn. Near 20
deserted them this day, and came into us, they tell that provision is very
scarce, and what there is they cannot eat but for mere hunger. We sent them in
a List of the prisoners taken in Northumberland, by Major Genesis Lambe^t.

Colchester Legu^e, July 11. Our Line goes so fast on, that we are in far
better case to offend the enemy, and correspond with Suffolk men, many of their
soldiers come to us, the people of the Town in great want; all their bread is
made of R^e, and but half grownd; and that (not without a Ticket) their hay
gone, the green Corn they get for their horse, they fetch with hazard of the
lives of their men: yesterday having placed a guard to secure those who came to
get horsneat, the guard was bear by us, diverse of them killed, some taken,
great shooting with cannon from both sides; they have spent very much powder:
more yesterday then in ten days before. We raised this night a new battery, to
beat them our of St. Mary's steeple, where they have planted a Demi culvering,
which annoys us in our new Quarters. We have two whole Culverings play hard
against the Lord Lucas house; the women would come by hundreds out of the Town,
but that is not permitted. Captain Ves^y, upon the petition of his wise is
pardoned, and has a protection from violence, some of both sides being last
night near each other, fell to parley and proved old acquaintance, it seems
they were some of ours disbanded, in which act we have seen our error, but no
more.

Newcastle, ^uly 6. You have had the deseat of Langdales horse by an express
from our Governor, to add a little, the prisoners of quality were most taken
in their beds, being assured by Col: Gray, their Cheifrain, that there was no
danger, they were near 1200, ours 900. Col: Rich. Tempest escaped from Morpeth,
by feeling the hand of the sentinel, 60 common Soldiers also escaped in the
dark, diverse of the com^^n Soldiers serve willingly in this Town: The Scots
Army he on the borders not yet come in Gen: Langdale undertook to clear the
Counties of Cumberland, Westmerland, Northumberland, and Bishopric, to make
way for the Scots Army, and so bring them into contribution to the Scots.
Cumberland is much exhausted. Major Gen: Lambert ^emains before Carlisle, and
keeps those up within: The Forces here are resolved to go toward their Major
Gen: being now 33 Troops of horse, Col: Harison being joined, and to attend the
motion of the Scots, or further the gaining the City: It Is resolved by the
English Forces to fight, if there come but 20000 horse and scor. On the other
side, the Scots now upon the bo^ders must come in, for otherwise their
S^uldiers will spoil their count^ey, and grow discont^n^, having their
expectations upon England, many common Soldiers who made it appear, they were
forced, are set at liberty, diverse that come in as common Soldiers, are found
since to be Gentlemen of quality, as it is probable were some of those that
escaped, they were so full of gold, which they parted with at under value,
though bought over, that common Troopers got 15, 16, 18, and 20 lib. a man,
good clothes, horses, pistols, swords, etc. a subsidy will hardly recrute them
as they were: 15 of the chief are sent into Tinmouth, viz. Col: Gray Col:
Ogle, Sir Iervis Lucas, 2 Collinvvoods, and others, the rest serured in this
Town, where they are as merry and frollick as if they had had the victory, and
spend as if they had as good mines of money a we of coals. Some are of opinion
the Scots will not come in, but be assured they will, and therefore hasten a
reserre for Major Gen: Lambert as fast as you can, in regard the number of
Officers are more then before mentioned, they are inserted.

A List of prisoners taken July 1. 1648. Col: Edward Gray Commander in chief.
Sir Francis Ratcliffe. Sir Iervis Lucas. Col: Iobn Tempest. Col: James Ogle. L.
Col: John Salkeild. L. Col: Ralph Millet: L. Col: John Thornton. M. Roger
Ratcliffe. M. Galeyn Ratcliffe. Col: Ratcliffe. L. Col. Anthony Trellop. Major
Trollop. Cap George Rellasis. Mr. George Collingvvood. Mr. John Collingvvood.
Cap. Hugh James. Cap. Francis Carlton. Cap. Francis Brandling. Cap.
Fetherstonhaugh. Cap: Ascue. Cap. Cholmley wright. Mr. Tho. Salkeild Co^net.
Mr. Will. Hodgshon. Mr. Charles Selby. Mr. John Thirlvvell. Mr. Will. Lampton.
Mr. Lanclot Selby Mr. Rich. Woodhouse. Mr. Ralph Claxton. Licurenant Lance
Procter. Mr. Cuthbert Kennet. Mr. Peter Forcer. Mr. Ambrose Carlton. Mr. John
Fitzvvilliams. Mr. John Hardy. Mr. Thomas Cope. M. John Wright. Mr. James
Shastoe. Mr. Ingram Stellinge. Mr. Tho. Tempest. Cap. Smith. Mr. John Farneley.
Mr. Per. Warden, Corner. Mr. John Goodman. Ensign Tho. Burrell. Mr. Lodovvick
Burnell. Mr. John Sison. Mr. In. Watson. Mr. Rich. Holmes. Mr. Hen. Brahant. Mr
Ralph Bovves. Mr. Cartvvridge. Bilton. Shavv. Thampsan. Rigmadan. Sergeants.
Besides 309 common-Souldiers, and between 5 or 600 horse, with their pistols
and swords.

Pembrook Leagure, July 3. Friday morning last; about break of day, the enemy
made a very stout sally on the North side, upon Col: Reads Quarters with near
300, there being of them only 80 horse, they were upon our men, through a
sally port, ere they were aware, but after ours got handsomely together, they so
banged them, that there went into the Town 40 and upward wounded, 11 killed
under our works, 9 taken prisoners, their Commander in chief one Major
Williams slain, we lost one Lieutenant Potts, a Sergeant, 2 soldiers, and 2 or
3 more were wounded, they are well nigh starved, run daily forth to us, we
believe a few days will give us the Town, but our guns are not yet come up to
us, which is a great inconvenience and much troubles us, had they come, we had
done our work before this, and been ready for the North to receive the forward
if they come out of Scotland, and encourage the suffering party.

Seneeds, July 11. five in the morning. The party of horse commanded by Col.
Scroop, sent from the Leagure before Colchester, to meet with the Noble Army,
came to Hartford, Saturday, where they got knowledge of their enemies posture
and place of quarter, they got from Hartford some skillful guides who brought
them the nearest and best way to Seneeds, Monday morning, before the Nobles
could shift away, yet not before they were got into three bodies in the Town.
The Parliaments Forlorn being entered, charged, routed them before the body came
up, but when come up, there was speedy work made with them, that in an instant
they fled several ways; yet many fell, and of the chief, the Duke of
Buckingham fled with about 60 horses to Lincolnshire, who must either disperse
or fall into the hands of that party of Leicester, Lincoln, etc. which lately
defeated the Pomfret party; for our march was so long, and our horse so tired,
that we could not pursue: we have prisoners the Earl of Holland, Sir Gilbert
Gerard, Col. Skeimisher, Major Holland, Major Slepkin, Lieutenant Col. Goodwin,
and Col. Dolbeere mortally wounded, one Col. Leg in the same condition, 100
common men, and yet no ordinary men, Sir Kenelme Digbyes son said to be slain,
a Col. and diverse other Officers slain, whose names we cannot yet learn, we had
more then 100 gallant horse, for gold and silver, good clothes and weapons,
good and good store.

It Is believed the Duke of Buckingham and those with him will desist and seek
mercy. Lord Andover going to the Prince, is taken, and put into Dover Castle.

We had two men slain, Col. Scroops, Captain Lieutenant wounded, and three more.

July 12. There came an express from the Major Genesis Lambert, which certifies
the houses that he had received a Letter and Declaration from Duke Hambleton,
which tells him that the Parl. of England had not given satisfaction to the
Parl. of Scotland in their desires sent unto them, for effecting whereof he was
to come with an Army into the Kingdom of England, in which enterprise, he
expected no opposition from him. The Major Gen: returned him answer, that as to
non satisfaction from the Parl. of England, he had not to say; but as to his
coming in an hostile way into England, he had authority from Parl. to resift
to his utmost any power not raised by them, and he [that] must expect if he
came upon English ground. The Commons vote, they approve what Major Gen:
Lambert had sent, desire the Lords concurrence, which the Lords do, and both
agree the Committee of Derby house draw up against morning an answer to the
Declaration of the Duke, to be presented to the House. A Petition of many
thousand householders of quality, in London, and parts about, was this day
presented, praying the Lords and Commons, that in a Treaty for peace or
agreement, they will keep up close to their many Declarations and protestation
formerly made, for which, both Houses give them thanks.

Walmer Castle in Kent yielded, they march out with swords.

Printed for R. Leybourn. in Monk-well-street.

Imprimatur

G. Mabbor.

This is the true Moderate Intelligencer.

