THE LABYRINTH the KINGDOM's in: With a golden thread to bring it forth into
Light, Liberty, and Peace again.

BEING A brief but impartial History OF THE Good and Evil of the former, later,
and present Power of the Nation, as it relates to GOD and the PEOPLE.

The Result is a Plea for the Restoration of all in Christ (the Kingdoms
Rest,) who is expected to appear more in the present, then in any former Power
of the Nation.

By R. BACON, a Lover of Mankind.

Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit. Terent.

1 Pet. 4.6. For this cause the Gospel is preached to them that are dead, that
they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but saved according to God
in the spirit.

Gal. 2. If I build again the things I have destroyed, I make my self a
transgressor.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, M.DC.XLIX.

TO THE High Court of Justice, so called, Light and Truth, Mercy and Peace.
Right honorable,
YOu are in your present proceedings a shadow, and but a shadow of good things
to come, not the very things themselves; not he that should come, we are yet to
look for another, even Christ himself the true anointing, that shall not, as
you, judge according to the seeing of the Eye, and hearing of the Ear, but he
shall do righteous Judgment upon you, as well as others; I mean, not upon King
Charles for All, but King Lucifer in All, King, Parliament, Army, All. This is
and has been the King of the bottomless pit, who has let in all manner of
devils into the Nation to be the torment and trouble of it; his name is
therefore in the Hebrew tongue, ABADDON but in the Greek tongue has his name
APOLLYON, and is indeed the great Destroyer of all Good in You, and the whole
Kingdom: I give my vote to the slaughter of this King.

I have but two things more to say to You (and say it I may (I hope) without
offense, for I intend none, neither do I say it after, or to serve, or please,
men, but God,) as they said to Christ, By whose Authority do you do these
things? or who gave you this Authority? or as Christ said to them of John, Is
it from heaven, or of men? If You say, it is of men, then you your selves are
witnesses against your selves, that you tread in the steps ( i. e. are living
in the same principle) of those that went before you, and do as they did, judge
that evil in others, which you have not yet overcome (in the principle of it)
in your selves: Let therefore he that is among you, without this fault, throw
the first stone. But if you say, it is from Heaven, let it appear by your doing
the works of your father which is in heaven: This we will believe, when we
shall see you do that which none others did before you, that is to say, when
you shall do good for evil; not only love those that love you, but those too
(not their evil) that hate you, and despitefully use you: Let your rain of
goodness descend, and your Sun of righteousness shine, upon the Just, for their
Justification, and the unjust, for their Clarification, and Restoration: Then
shall we set to our seal, that you are that you expect to be, As Cyrus was said
to be.
The Christ of God, the anointed of the Lord, for the saving, healing, and
restoring of the Land; to which God and all good men say, Amen.

The aberrations from, and the walking after, the light of this star, this
anointing, by King, Parliament, Army, is the subject of this Discourse, with
all Christian submission, put into your hands,

By R. BACON, Who, in his sphere, seeks the good of all.

The Labyrinth the Kingdom is in; With a golden Thread to bring it forth into
LIGHT, LIBERTY, and PEACE again: Being an impartial History, of the Good and
Evil of the former, later, and present Power of the Nation, as it relates to
God, and the People.
CHAP. I.
Of the height, and fall of the King, and his Party, together with the cause,
and manner how.

THe King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, so is his title, at least
so it was in times past, being through Flattery, Oppression, Superstition,
Ignorance, and the like, lifted up in himself and over the Nation, and all
orders and estates of men, and consciences therein; yea, above all that was, or
is, truly called God among men; so that he said in his heart, and all that were
heightened by, and took up their rest in, this great and tall Cedar, as some^ime
the King of Assyria did, I will ascend above the heights of the cloud; I will
be like the most high: that is, as wise, as strong, as great as he: Or as did
that other great and mighty Poter^ate, we read of in Daniel* reflecting upon
his own glory, and the works of his own hands, boasted himself before God and
men, saying interpretatively, and in the account of both, Is not this great
Babel, which I have built, for the honor of my Majesty? for the spreading of my
glory, and for a lasting rest, and tabernacle to me, and mine to all future
ages?

. 2. No sooner was this, thus in his ignorance of God, gone forth of the mouth
of him, and his, but there apeared written upon the wall of this his, and their
so great, but carnal Confidence, by the invisible and irresistible hand of God,
(which only then, and now, the Daniels of the Kingdom were able to read and
interpret,) MEAN, MEAN, TEKEL UPHARSIN. This is now not only Prophetically, but
that which is come to pass, easily to be interpreted by every one that passes
by, or goes in and out, this Kingdom; so that every man may see, and
understand this to be the interpretation of the thing, or hand writing. Mean,
God has numbered thy Kingdom (taken a note of all the particular vanities,
follies, cruelties therein,) and finished it, in respect of the glory, pride,
and vanity, it now is, and has been in. Tekel, Thou art weigh^d in the
balances (of God and man) and art found too light. Peers, divisit, God has
divided it from thee, and thee from it; or divided it into several pieces, and
smaller parts and parcels: so that one has one part, and another has another:
First, the Irish take one piece; then the Scots take another; and the English
take the last, or rather the first and best, and they too, divide it among
themselves, and strive who, shall have the better part, or the whole of it.

Sect. 3. Thus the King, in this way and confidence of his, and those that had
stretched themselves with him, upon this bed of rest, which they have now
found, by woeful experience, is too short for them; I say he and they have found
that come upon them (at the Call and Command of God) which sometime the Land of
Judah did, yea, that very voice of God has thundered in their ears, houses,
and among their friends and estates, as sometime did among that people, and
that in these very words, or to this very purpose, He, the Lord has, lifted up
an Ensign (for God set up his Standard first against the King, before the King
(in a way of open War) set up his Standard against the Parliament, or People;
the Ensign is lifted up of God, and given for a sign to the Nations; first,
to the Irish; then, to the Scots; and lastly (though not first in a way of open
War) to the English: all of them standing still in times past, and so seeming
(as to the shaking of the Kings rest and glory) afar off, (though some keen and
quick-sighted men had a view in God, of all this before it came:) they all obey
his Call, and come forth against him and his with exceeding speed, God saying
of them, none of them shall be weary, nor stumble among them; none shall
slumber, or sleep; neither shall the girdle of their loins be loosed, till they
have brought to pass his Act, his strange Act, nay, not so much as the latchet
of their shoes be broken, to show that all lets and hindrances should be taken
out of the way, that the Council of God might take place, whose arrows are
sharp, every one piercing to the heart of King, Queen, Bishops, etc. and all
their bows bent, men still in readiness to second and supply one affrightment
with another: their horses hoofs shall be, says God, counted like a flint,
that every march and preparation of calamity against him might succeed; the
wheels of their Carriages and Ammunition like whirle-winde, all being always in
a readiness to annoy him. Their roarings shall be like a Lion, (as the King
has found,) they shall roar like young Lions; yea, they shall roar, and lay
hold of the prey, and shall carry it away safe, and none shall deliver it; as
it has come to pass in all those great Engagements that have been against the
King; and therefore says the Text, Isaiah 5. Verse. 30. In that day they shall
roar against them like the roaring of the sea, (against the prevailing, mighty,
proud waves thereof there is no standing out;) And if one of that way, or that
engagement, look unto the Land, or any part of it, behold darkness and sorrow,
or disappointment, and the light of this Kingly glory, or glorious Kingdom,
opposed now to the Coming, and Kingdom of God (which yet they themselves, in
blindness, and in a way of tradition, prayed for,) I say all that light and
glory is darkened, and eternally ecclipsed in the heavens thereof, that is to
say, in the firmament of it, which was the persons of the King, Queen, Nobles,
and all those either birds or beasts, that had taken up their shelter under the
shadow of this great tree, which by the Commandment of the Watcher, or strict
Observer of all things and Kingdoms, even the holy One of Israel, that for
Isreal's sake, never slumbreth or sleeps, is now felled down.

Sect. 4. The King, to prevent, or rather to occur, and make resistance against
this inundation, or flood of Fears, and troubles, flowing in upon him,
threatening the overshadowing, yea the total ruin of this Babel, that was so
glorious in his, and others eyes, endeavors first the upholding it with the
wit and policy of his Friends and Favorites, and his own personal affronts, and
discountenancing, yea, openly, as in the Parliament House, menacing, especially
the heads of that party, or sort of men, from whence his expectation of fear
did come; but though this was effectual, to the casting down many Stars, that
seemed to be more fixed in the Firmament of the Peoples expected Rights, and
Freedoms; yet the opposition, made against the other, was so far from blunting
the edg of their affections, then, to the Public, and proceedings against the
corrupt interest of the King and Bishops, etc. that they by opposition
multiplied, and were so much the more fortified, and united against him; so
that these bricks of policy, and swordless, or bloodless opposition, made
against the Power prevailing against, and feared by the King, being fallen
down: He speeds into the North, and there is resolved to build with hewn
stones, and though the Sycamores had failed him, and his hope in them, yet now
minds to make further trial, and change them into Cedars; sets up his
Standard, and makes Proclamation among the Gentiles, men of looser and more
apparent, corrupt, and evil lives, and so appearing more remote then others
from the knowleg and fear of God, and thus calls upon these Mountains to cover
him from the wrath of the Lamb, who now appeared to sit on the throne of God
against him; to these in all Countries he says, Prepare ye War, wake up the
mighty men in all parts; Let all the men of War draw near, to the King, and
come up to his defense: Beat your plow-shares into swords, your pruning hooks
into spears: Let the weak say, I am strong: Let none deny his assistance of
Money, Plate, Horse, Arm^.

. 5. Thus the King, and all the fading, worldly glory, and cream of the
Nation, being embodied into a potent, and resolute Army, marches up and down
like a swift Dromedary, traversing her ways, or as the same Prophet speaks,
like a wild Ass Colt used to the Wilderness, which no hand had yet meddled
with, and therefore snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure, or according to the
desire of her heart, as though none could turn her out of the way, so that all
they that go to seek her for the use of man, do even make weary themselves, as
though it were bootlesse to pursue after her any more; as was indeed the case
of the King, and those with him, who had led at sundry times after so many
fights, and frights, his and their pursuers (as they say,) such a dance, that
they were weary and wasted, and even ready and upon the matter willing to give
over; they said once and again as David, We shall one day perish by the hands of
this Saul, the fierce and first King of that, but (as some say) the last of
this our Israel: but as the wild Ass is taken and made tame in her month, so
that a child may lead her, so after a while this Army, and mighty gathering
together of men of War, become bedrid, and are taken as a wild bull in a net;
so that to every child is now given to play on the hole of this Aspe, and the
weaned child, to put his hand on this Cockatrice den.

. 6. A digression, by way of lamentation for the many slain.
Which though I so express in the language of the Scriptures, they being such
to some upon a true account, yet I acknowledge them upon another, to be men of
might, and great renown, and therefore am so far from writing this as rejoicing
at their fall, that I hardly do it but with weeping eyes, and a heavy heart,
and am ready to lament with David over them as he did over Saul and Jonathan
his son, The beauty of Israel is slain upon the high places, how are the
mighty feign, tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askhelon,
lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice. Ye Mountains of Gilboah (ye the
several places, Cities, Hills, Plains, and Valleys) let there be on you no
deaw, neither let there be rain any more upon you, that there spring not up
from you, by virtue of any moisture, or blessedness upon you from above, as it
were from the seeds of the many slain upon you, to beget a resurrection of
another War; and the like dreadful slaughter of men, and inhabitants, the
flower of this Nation, For how were the mighty slain there in the midst of
Battle. O Jonathan, thou noble Brooks, thou noble, but misguided Faulkland,
how wast thou slain! and many others, famous in their Generation, both on the
one side and on the other, how were and are the mighty fallen, and the Weapons
of War perished!

. 7. But to return; after some few years, and in this manner, this Mountain
of pride, oppression, vainglory, superstition, and cruelty, is melted with
the blood of those many thousand slain, for it is the day of the Lords
vengeance, and the year of recompenses for the controversies of Sion; And
therefore it is as to them and the Kingdom they sought to uphold, that the
streams thereof, that is to say, all the means of their refreshing, is turned
into pitch, and matter, and fuel only fit and prepared for the fire, and this
fire shall not be quenched night nor day, but it shall burn continually, yea
the smoke thereof shall go up for ever and ever, from Generation to Generation,
it shall be wast; it shall never again be called from the dead, none shall
pass thorough it any more, it shall only be for the Cormorant and the
Bitter^e, the Owl also and the Raven shall dwell there; for God bath stretched
out upon it the line of confusion, and the stones of emptiness; they shall
call for the Nobles thereof to come to the support of this Kingdom, but none
shall be there, and all her Princes shall be and are become nothing. Thorns
shall come in their Palaces: they shall afford them nothing but vexation, yea
there shall be found in them, and in their Land of delight, only such of the
creatures Ziim and Jiim, the Satyrs, the Vultures and the Owl, whose place is
the Wilderness and deserts not inhabited: those Puritans and Roundheads, of
whom before there was little or no appearance in the Land, for their abiding
was as it were in the Wilderness, and their presence was as strange as ghastly,
and as much affrighting in times past to the multitude, especially to the
rulers of the Nation, as are those birds and beasts that dwell in such solitary
places, to such as are unacquainted with them: so that the Wilderness and the
solitary place, such was the state of those rejected by the King and Bishops,
shall be glad for them, and that desert shall rejoice and begin to blossom as
a rose.

CHAP. II.
How the corrupt principles of the King and Bishops begin to fructify, and
spring up again in the Parliaments and Synods of both Kingdoms.

. 1. BUt to take up all (I intend) as I go. This rose began first to be nipt in
the bud, even before the forenamed desolation of the forementioned State of men
came to that height, both intended of God (though not then purposed of men) and
since accomplished, and brought to pass through the overruling power of God,
by men: And that after this manner and on this wise: that old Serpent the
Devil and Satan, the head even of the King and his Bishops, or followers,
respecting the whole, though not all the particulars or wholly, being now by
the mighty hand of God, wonderfully bruised and broken, and laid even half
dead, as a hopeless, useless, hurtlesse thing, which thing came to pass
about the time of the Kings escape from Oxford to the Army in the North, and
this came to pass thus, the old Serpent, of which I made mention even now (not
intending the Kings person, which I did reverence and love, but the evil
reigning in him, and others of his side and way, which I make mention of by the
way, that I may not provoke any man, professing my self one that seeks
unfainedly the good of all) broods as I may so speak, upon the seeds of it,
both in the Scots, and English Parliaments and Armies, so that it might be said
to the better part of both, that sought after freedom and rest in God in the
Land, in truth, and thought that that had been the time of their joy, and rest,
yet there was said to them, as to the Palestine of the West, as in the Prophet
Esa. chapter 14. 29. Rejoice not thou whole Palestine (though some of them did)
because the rod of them that smote thee is brok^n, for out of the Serpents
root, shall come forth a Cockatrice (or Adder, or the serpent renewed) and his
fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent, more subtle, swift, fierce, or as the
Scr^pture speaks, the peircing Serpent, even Leviathan that crooked, and ^very
ways turning serpent, lifting up his head, and living again even in our
bosom, the Parliament; For being even to death nipt with the frost, and cold,
the Winter of adversity, and disappointment of the King and Bishops, is now
taken by these merciless, merciful men into their bosom, where receiving
warmth and strength, he begins to grow strong and vigorous, not only in them,
but to live and rise again in them, the Kings own party in whom he seemed as
to outward hurt, and appearing to be wholly exhaust of life and being, so that
this last deceit or Serpent became more deceiving and pernicious then the
former, yea the Serpent is now turned Dragon; every Dragon is a Serpent, but
every Serpent is not presently a Dragon, the Dragon then is Serpens annosus,
the old Serpent, though in a new skin, a new and another better, though a more
deceiving appearance, as having eaten up other Serpents, a deceit that has
(to make it the more deceiving) swallowed up into it self all other more
gross, and now discovered deceipts, and therefore the more likely to deceive,
even as an Angel of Light in the Parliament, and those of their side, though
in those of the other party, like a Lion, or a Bear robbed of her whelps, or
kept long in hunger, as those were, that were made ready to devour Daniel,
that they might with greater ravening and appetite, fall again to, and upon
their desired prey.

. 2. To all which they were prepared, and made ready, by the Scots complying,
and committing whoredom with the corrupt principles of the King and Cavaliers,
contrary to their Oath, Covenant, and first Engagement; yea, the whole
Presbyterian Order, Scotch and English (that I speak nothing of the Independent
for the present) like Ahola and Aholibah, she so discovered her whoredoms, and
her nakedness, that the mind of God himself is wonderfully, and apparently
alienated from her, like as it was from the Episcopal, her elder and first
rejected sister, I say first rejected, out of the bed of God; for they like a
woman prone to Adultery, have multiplied their whoredoms, in calling to
remembrance the days of their youth, wherein they all knew themselves, and
others know it of them, that they had played the harlot in the Land of Egypt,
in the state of Egyptian darkness, in the Bishops days, wherein they bowed
the knee to the same Idols they did; so that they have doted, every one upon
their paramore of Egypt, whose flesh, as the Prophet speaks, is as the flesh
of Asses, and whose issue is as the issue of horses, that is, that which to the
full gives content to the unsatiable appetite of carnal and corrupt principled
professors; i. e. such who notwithstanding their great pretense of Religion,
and Reformation, intend nothing but the washing of the outside of the cup and
platter, and under a pretense of long prayer, and strict government, devour
widows houses, loving one part of them to be called Rabbi, another domination
or tyranny of another kind: building, and setting up (like Jeroboam that made
Israel to sin) two Calves, gilded indeed with gold, having for it a glorious
pretense of holiness, and conformity to the Scripture, that every thing might
come forth from them in the name of jus Divinum; these they set up in Dan and
Bethel, Dan being in signification, the place of judgment. Bethel the house of
God.
one in the place of common justice, corrupting the very principles, and glory
of a true and right Magistracy, the other in Bethel, called the Church or house
of God, being nothing else but a dead, wooden, weak, worthless Idol, yet
done over all with gold, entitled in all the pieces and parcells of it (
Directory for Worship, Confession of Faith, Form of Church Government,
Catechism, the mother, and the daughter, the greater and the less) to a
justification from the Scripture, Scripture being made now adays to speak to
every man's fancy: and thus whiles it was boasted we had arrived in a Land of
promise far remote from Romish, Popish, and Episcopal tyranny, and
superstition, we were, as now we see, now our eyes are open, led back again as
that Army of men was that came to besiege Elisha, brought as it were blindfold,
and set down in the midst of Samaria; we find our selves in the midst of Rome,
Egypt, and Babylon; but as it now falls out, in the power and hands too, of
those Prophets, these Reformed Romanists had shut up, and besieged, who are now
(as many as are such in truth) preparing food and necessaries for those that
would have been the slaughter of them.

. 4. Thus Aholah was no worse then Aholibah, and Aholibah no better, but of the
same complexion and adulterous disposition with Aholah, Judah as Israel, and
Israel as Judah, the Presbyters as the Bishops, and the Bishops as the
Presbyters, and both as the Papists, for what was said of the one, mutato
nomine, might be said of the other; hence it was they loved exceedingly, and
longed to be together in one, as appeared by the Scots complying with the King,
and that party as yet corrupt: first at Oxford secretly, after at Newcastle,
Holmby, London, Hampton Court, Isle of Wight openly; in all which they had the
concurrence of the English Presbyter, who together like an imperious whorish
woman, open their feet to their Lovers (whom they had courted before in
private) upon every mountain and hill, to the apparent view, and discerning of
all; so that there is now a marriage made, or a reunion at least, in heart and
will betwixt the King and Parliament, Bishops and Presbyters, (which the King
observed well enough, and therefore being at the Treaty asked by one of his
friends, what he thought of M. Seaman and others, he answered him in the ear,
yet so as others heard, why they would be Bishops man) this union was not in
God or in Christ, but in the common enemy of both Satan the Accuser, and
destroyer of all good in all, so that the Bishops now lived in the Presbyters,
and the Council Table, and other the high Commission, and the Courts
Ecclesiastic, Monopoly-men in the Parliament and Synod, and their first borne,
their several Committees, so that by this means, a bridge is made for one, to
pass over to the other, plain and easy.

CHAP. III.
How this present Army appeared first in the light of God, and after that, in
the darkness of this world.

. 1. BUt Captain, Army, or rather Mr. Agitator, otherwise and since called
Leveller steps in (as one late jeeringly writ) and forbids their actual,
outward and open coming together, seeing it so illegitimate, and tending so to
the prejudise of all, even of the very parties themselves; and to that end
whiles the King longs, or rather lusts after the Parliament, and the Parliament
after him; This bold, young, manly, and yet fair, and as yet untoucht Virgin,
at least so in her own account, and in a good measure so in truth, and
certainly so in comparison of others (those adulterous women or people I have
spoken of hitherto) I mean that honest principle and people in and out of the
Army, these (I say) are so bold to demand the King as though they meant a
marriage with him, which they did not out of pure love, but to prevent his
union with either of the two former, which they judged, as unfit for him, as he
for them, and to that end possess themselves of his person, and so in him, or
because of him they take the greater boldness, to seize upon the Parliament,
whom the King liked better, as being more like him, in disposition, and
complexion; and this they did, having the sword, the better end of the staff
of power in their own hands, not first at least appearingly, by the
approvement, and some think scarce really at all, or at least not till
afterward, and that rather out of necessity, then good will concurred with, and
assented unto, by many, if not almost all the heads of the Army; but for one
end or another they are now all united as one man, having an evident, and
manifest presence of God upon them, they resolve to be his Subjects and
servants for the Kingdoms good and peace, and to withstand all without
difference opposing it, seeking without respect of persons, the profit and
honest interest of all, the King, Queen and Cavaliers not excepted, as appears
in their Proposalls, and therefore they make addresses to him sometime more
open, and sometime more private, that upon his concurring with them, they would
prosecute his just and lawful interest, as well as their own, and upon this
account they march to London to chastise the follies of the Parliament, and
check and put a stop to her unreasonable lustings after the King, and other
the onions and garlic of Aegipt, as apt to breed evil diseases in them, so
that in this they were a reviving to the King and those of his side, who
thought but perhaps to attain only to the forbidden tree by them, i. e. to
satisfy their own lusts, which yet I will not altogether affirm, but this I
do openly profess, and declare, that this overture with the King, was the most
hopeful, promising, innocent, candid, and Christian, that ever was made since
these troubles began, and the most like to bring forth the wished for peace
truth and righteousness, to and for the rest of all the inhabitants of the
Nation, without respect of persons; into which, unless the door stand equally
open unto all, it is like, nay it will certainly be shut against all, it being
the nature of all good men and governments, to give down like the Sun in the
firmament, light and warmth as well to the benefit and refreshing of the unjust
and unrighteous, (though not for their encouragement, as such, but for their
conviction) as the just and righteous, according to the pattern given us in
the Mount, which is Christ himself, to whom the Publicans and Harlots, which
were outwardly unclean, as that party of people are, which we in our self
justifying language, have and do call Malignants, had as easy and open access
as the Scribes and Pharisees, which were only outwardly holy and clean, but
within were full of rottenness and filth, as the most of those are, on the
other side, amongst us that boast of their Saintship and reformation. This sun
of righteousness, mercy, and peace, was dawning in that day, I say an
appearing of righteousness and peace: of Justice and mercy: for the one
without the other is not in God, or Christ, or good men, and therefore where
they are divided as for the most part they are brought forth among men, they
are not in truth, but in pretense.

. 2. And therefore I do utterly dislike the late unreasonable Jewish,
Heathenish, unchristian outcry, or clamor for justice to be done upon the
person of the King and those of his party; and no mention made of mercy, love,
grace, goodness, reconciliation, nor reaching forth the arms, and turning of
the bowels of compassion toward him and them; it being certain, the former is
not of God without the later; yea, the former without the later, does but
irritate, provoke, and stir up anger, wrath, war and tumults, to the confusion
of the Nation. And therefore I affirm again, That that overture with the King,
as it was more Christian, so it was infinitely more probable to bring in truth
and peace, then is the present course taken, though by the same party and
persons.

SECT. 3. But an eclipse came suddenly upon this Sun, that it set even at
noonday upon the whole kingdom, and all the Heads of it, King, Parliament,
Army, English and Scots: The common Mother of the good and peace of all being
forcibly made to withhold her breasts; her Son, the man-child of all our hope,
being taken up to God, and to his throne, ruling yet among men, though in a
hidden and secret way: the woman her self (those weak and feeble people) being
fain to fly into the wilderness to hide her self, not appearing scarce with
any comeliness or beauty at all among men: she has a place prepared of God,
where she is nourished for a time, times, and half a time, from the face of
the Serpent: that is, (as Paraeus on the Revelation observes well, a time
seeming lon, but proving short.

SECT. 4. And now, Behold, the Devil is come down again amongst men, having
great wrath, reigning, raging working, confounding, darkning the Councels, of
King, Lords, Commons, Bishops, Presbyters, Independents, Anabaptists, Levellers
and all; In all whose counsels and projects appeared manifest weakness,
error, ignorance; yea, open wickedness and Apostasy in some: The retiring
himself for rest, and recovery out of his lost estate, into his old principles,
and compliances with his Bishops, and now again beginning to be revived party,
who are prepared every one in secret to engage again, and to revive their old
and almost crucified Cause; which immediately after broke forth into a more
fierce and cruel War, almost in all parts. That which nourished and gave life
again to this dying Cause, was apparently, and to the view of all, the treble
Apostasy of the Army it self, England's glory, that I say not, England's pride.
And I pray God that spirit that is too potent in them, which was both the life
and ruin of both King and Parliament, prove not in conclusion both their own
and the kingdoms ruin. 1. This Army, this so Saint-like Army fell, first from
making good those honest Proposals they had made in the behalf of the King;
which gave too much cause to the King and his party to desist from their
expectation of salvation, and hope from them, which they had too, beforehand
given them just cause to look for from them. 2. They fell from any further
concurrence with the honest Agitators, which now they begin violently to
oppose; that I say not, exasperate, yea pursue and persecute: witness the
strife at Putney, the unrighteous and untrue suggestion that was made of them
to the King, as though they intended to lay hands on him in secret, or indeed,
at all: which opposition grew to that height and heat, that either side
appeared in a way of open war against the other; folly in the one, begetting
frenzy and fury in the other: so that the Heads of the Army imprisoned their
own persons and errors, in the persons and errors of others; so that they
themselves were not free, till they had repented, and set the other as free as
themselves. This awakened the Spirit of God in Sedgwick, Saltmarsh, Pinnell,
Ingrave, like the Angel of God that met Balaam riding beyond his Commission,
openly and professedly to oppose and stand in their way: so that even as the
dumb Ass reproved the madness of the Prophet; so at the light of God
appearing in these men, the very natural strength and sinews of the Army stood
senseless, as a brute amazed animal, not able to go either backward or forward;
either back to a compliance with the honest principles of the Agitators, or
forward in their acquiescing in the Parliaments Votes and Counsels. Which leads
(3) to a discovery of the third degree of their deparure from their faith,
hope, and first good purpose: to wit, their hiding and burying that good
principle of seeking without partiality the good and freedom of all, like the
earth, our common parent, especially the new Earth, Jerusalem, which is above,
the true parent of all the Children that are truly and eternally free, in the
freedom of God and Christ himself: I say, in stead of this, they bury this good
and useful talent, or rather bottle it up in one sort of Vessels, whence arose
that great strife at Windsor about Ordinances, having this only, for the most
part, like the Jews to distinguish themselves from the Gentiles; and for this
cause manifestly opposing, that I say not brow-beating, and persecuting those
that professed to live in no other Ordinance, but that which is the same in all
ages, Jesus Christ our Lord, following the Lamb whithersoever he goes; whose
words and lives are a continual witnessing to Christ, by whom is pulled down
in all ages the partition wall betwixt Jews and Gentiles, the stricter and
looser sort of men, that equal access may be for both to God, by him, they
being all alike good, or alike bad before him.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Confusion or trouble that came upon the Army, and the whole Kingdom,
upon the Eclipse of this Sun.

SECT. 1.
THus Christ in his light, truth and glory, is again crucified, that I say not
dead and buried, even in the Army it self; whence it follows that in this
dark and gloomy day, such is the state of all things in the denial of Christ,
who is the only life and light of man; I say in this dark day, or night rather,
for in the absence of the Sun the day is as the night, the wild beasts break
forth again, and come abroad; first in Wales, having this Spirit formed and
molded in them, by the like appearing in a great though not so great a degree,
first in the Parliament, notwithstanding the great shaking of it, like the
fig tree, by the march of the Army to their door, by which some of those many
unripe and useless Figgs and fruit fell to the earth; and not only in them, but
even in the Army it self, professing a better spirit, dealing with too much
roughness, and occasion of provocation, with those quondam-Parliament Colonels,
Laughorue, Poyer, and Powell, who not being led with good words, or good
dealing, which they call good payment, out of their command, as they might have
been, scorned; which yet was their pride and error, to be commanded out of all,
and therefore put all upon the adventure, and have since for their folly lost
all, and are now prisoners, expecting the sentence of Death upon some of them.
Now though the Army, (the honest faithful and victorious Army, for
comparatively I have always accounted it so,) were a scourge not only to them
in Wales, but them too in Kent, Colchester, the great Army of Scots, that
bubble of of an Army, (though they consisted, they say, of above two millions
of men) headed there by Duke Hamilton, and the like comparatively nearer at
home, by the Duke of Buckingham and the Earl of Holland; I say, though it be
apparent that the Army was a scourge, and a sharp one too, to these last and
dying fainting re-onsets of those, that would, but were not appointed of God to
live and rise again; and therefore stronger was he that fought against them,
then he that engaged in them.

SECT. 2.
Yet it cannot be denied by any good Christian, or any true principles of
Christianity, but that they also were a scourge, yea, a bitter and sharp one
too, discovering the evil of the Army to themselves, awakening the good
principles that lay buried in them; so that I may boldly say, They were the rod
of God chastising them, there being I believe (to speak the least) many
hundreds of them lost their lives, and of them many an honest and good man. So
that though the Army see many and grievous offenses in those given into their
hands this Summer; yet certainly they have cause, if they look into themselves,
to complain of their own giving too much occasion, though unvoluntarily; their
own errors having too great an influence, like some malignant Stars, to
engender the like errors in others, so that upon the matter, which I mention,
that they might not boast either before God or men; and while they complain of
others faults, they would remember their own, and be more faultless themselves,
before they be overhasty and violent against the faults of Others;) I say,
what have they done, but punished their own errors upon the backs of others,
though according to State-rules, they were greater offenders then themselves.

CHAP. V.
The diverse kinds of fruit brought forth this summer, like Jeremiah's figgs,
some very bad, some very good:

SECT. 1.
THe fruit brought forth in this Summers engagement (which use to be either
good, and so for the health of men; or bad, tending to the nourishment of evil
humors and deseases in the bodies and minds of men) was indeed like Jeremiah's
figgs, some very good, even like the figgs that are first ripe, but the other
very bad, that they cannot be eaten they were so naught; the bad were so
naught, that there was little or no discerning of the good; the bad were of
three sorts, whereof the first was very pleasant and desirable in the eye of
sense, but very pestilent to the heart and stomach: and this I call either
first the underhand dealing of the Scots with the English, and the English with
them, they both with the King, and the King with both, by which his person was
wronged, and the evil principle too much nourished in him, by its like in the
Parliaments of both Kingdoms, who must needs be access^ry and so guilty of the
evil, is so violently and without mixture of mercy charged also on him; the
appearance of this fruit, being very pleasant in the eyes of most, was desired
by most, and therefore the most and best were deceived into the liking of it,
and have since found it to be of an evil nature, so that this was another door
opened to the corrupt principle of the King to come out at, and manifest it
self to his prejudice; for had he not been thus complied with, first by the
Army, since by the Parliament, and Scots, it might (through the manifold
afflictions that have been upon him, with the blessing, grace and mercy of God,
which is always open to him) have been more apparently mortified in him, so
that here it again appears the King's fault may be devolved on those that
strenthned it in him, as well as charged on him alone, they being no more
righteous then he.

SECT. 2.
The second sort of bad and evil fruit, I call all those perishing hopes of
all those appeared again in A^mes this summer, They having been both Scots and
English, like the multitude the Prophet speaks of, Isa. 29.7 8. that fought
against Ariell that is the Lion of God, which is as much to say as the Israel
or Church of God, for the remnant of Jacob shall be among the Nations in the
midst of many people, a as Lion among the beasts of the forest, as a young
Lion among the flocks of sheep, who if he go through, both treads down and
teareth in pieces, and none can deliver. I say, all the Army and engagements
this summer that have come up against the Lion of the tribe of Judah, this
Ariell the Church in Christ, Christ in the Church, they all has been as a
dream of a night vision, that they have seen, as when an hungry man dreameth
and behold he eats, but he awaketh and his soul is empty, or when a thirsty
man dreameth, and behold he drinks, but he awaketh as they have done at their
scattering, routing, slaying, killing, imprisoning, and his soul has appetite,
so shall the multitude of all the Nations be that fight against Mount-Sion.

SECT. 3.
The other part of the bitter fruit of which I speak, The Army and Kingdom have
been fain though sore against their will and desire to taste, and that has
been their many fears, troubles, affrights, plunders, ruins, wounds, death,
and loss which they have been fain to partake of, as the fruits of their own,
as well as others errors; but God who is able and sometimes wont of these and
such stones to make bread, gave many of them bread to eat, which others as
they would not, so they knew not of; and this I call the good fruit, which the
Army themselves, and the Nation by them, have given them to feed upon.

SECT. 4.
And this does appear thus, in that they have not only with Samson been
delivered together with the whole Nation, out of the paw and power of the
ramping and roaring Lion, the Army in the field, and the young Lion, the Lion
in the Lambs skin, appearing in policy, and undermining at home: nor only in
that they have had power over both these Lions, rending them as he did, even as
they would have rent a kid; but that also in the carcass of both is found a
swarm of Bees, a sort of men gathering, feeding on, and yet yielding honey to
others: which though a riddle, has appeared true in part; but that there be
two sorts of Bees among them; which, for distinction sake, I will for the
present call, after the language of those that converse with those kind of
cattle, the one is profitable, the ^ther unprofitable; the last is the humming
Be, the drone, or lazy Be.

CHAP. VI.
A description of the corrupt and excrementitious, together with the good and
useful part of the Army.

SECT. 1.
IN the first sort I find these three properties: The first is, they make as
great a buzzing and noise about and for Justice, Peace, Righteousness,
Religion, Liberty, Equity, Saintship; and on the other side, against Tyranny,
Oppression, Superstition, etc. nay, a far greater then any of the rest; because
having far less then others, he is necessitated to make the greater show of
zeal for the one, and against the other; when in mean time he is totally
ignorant of, yea altogether an enemy to, and in secret, yea in his life
opposing of the first wherever it does appear; and on the other side, one
that has no other principle but that which feeds, and gives life and being to
all the evil in the Land.

SECT. 2.
Another property of this kind of cattle, is, the pursuit of that which is
alone as honey to them; that is, their own profit, honor, ease, wealth: and
they may easily be discerned from others, as excelling all others in pride,
vanity, folly, superciliousnesse, overlooking, ov rtopping the honest, quiet,
meek, and silent spirited men among them. As for these, if they would have
justice, it is for themselves; if liberty, it is for their lusts: These are
like those flies, that infest those sores of the already galled, grieved spirit
of the Land; that are so far from healing, that they keep the wounds of it raw
and open, and are indeed to the good spirit of God in the Army, as Peter was in
his pride and ignorance to Christ, even as Satan himself.

SECT. 3.
I will name but one property more of these unprofitable men, and that is this,
They detain and keep others from the hive, and the taste of the honeycomb;
being indeed a veil, or a hedge of briers and thorns, imprisoning, concealing,
clouding the Son of righteousnese, which is behind this wall, within this
hedge, on the other side this cloud; indeed the very Man of sin and son of
perdition, which must be taken out of the way before the Son of God will in his
full light, sweetn^sse and glory appear, to the healing of the Land, and they
in it.

SECT. 4.
This is the first and worst sort of Bees, the excrementitious and unprofitable
part of the Army, and those that adhere to them. The other, which I only prize
as the good and useful sort of Bees, such as are more silent, more painful,
more profitable, of a lesser size, in appearance, then the former, not so
sightly: At fessae multa referunt se nocte minores
Crura thymo plena.
The less and tired Bees return at night,
Get much, but yield the fruits of all their might.
These are the light, life, rest, peace, joy, hope, and healing of the Land;
trees of righteousness (in the Lord) that bring forth fruit in season, the
very tree of life (in Christ) is appointed of God, and expected of men for the
healing of the Nation, plant^ of Gods own planting, Aaron's rod, that at the
same time buds, blossoms, and bears and yields Almonds; the rod of Moses, by
which he did all those wonders in Egypt, devoured the rods of the Egyptians,
gave them no rest till they were made free: In one word, the very rod of God,
the scepter of his right hand, by which he divided the red sea, and by which he
overturned the Nations that stand in his way of love to them, that he who
bless^th himself in the earth, may bless himself in the God of truth. If any
rest or recovering be brought to King, Parliament, and all others in the Land,
it must be by them, for the annoynting of God is upon them, and them alone to
that end.

CHAP. VII.
A comparing the Armies former pretenses, with their present actings together.

Sect. 1.
THis Sun has not appeared, no not in this last engagement, in that beauty,
brightness and splendour it did the first time they assayed the same thing: In
this they are more severe, rigid, fierce, unmercifull toward the King, and
those in the same condition with him, then they were before; and therefore
appear more Jewish, heathenish, fearful, disobedient to God, and unbelieving,
all which tend to the hardening of their hearts against God and them. First
against God; for I may say it boldly, the name of God, called upon by the Army,
is blasphemed among these Gentiles (for so they are in account by most) because
of the Army, in that the fruits of that Spirit, the true annoynting they
pretend to, appears not, except in word, to all. Secondly, As their heart is
hardened against God, so against them; for they can find no place of rest,
love, or mercy in them, that they might be called and provoked to lie down in
their bosoms as on their bed of rest: but contrariwise, when they think of them
or see them, they are fraught with fear, trouble, wrath, and emnity against
them, because they look for the like measure from them. Whereas, if love,
mercy, forgiveness and compassion did appear in the Army, and others toward
such, it would transform them into the same image, and melt them into the love
and knowledge of God: after this manner God persuades Jophet to dwell in the
tents of Shem.

SECT. 2.
The evil then of the King and Parliament is opposed either by the good or
evil of the Army. The evil of the Army, though it does and may oppose the
evil of both, though not as evil: the lusts leading and reigning in the Army
may be brought forth in a way of zeal for justice, and under a pretense of
righteousness, peace, truth, liberty, to oppose lusts of another name and
cognizance in the King and Parliament; this contest is but like Satan's going
about to cast out Satan, whereby his kingdom is no ways weakened, but
confirmed, evil in the Army nourishes and promotes evil in the King; wrath,
malice, revenge in the one, maintains and upholds it in the other.

SECT. 3.
This then is the iron gate and door of brass and steel that shuts
righteousness, truth, peace and love out from the view, peace and rest of men
in them: by this the King and Bishops ruled, and by this they were ruined too:
The same course took the Parliament, and were brought into the same Labyrinth
as was the King. And so far as the Army walks by this rule, they run the same
hazard, will split themselves upon the same rock yea, are for the present, in
respect of that principle, in the same M^ander, in the same pit, where is no
water but that which moistens, fastens, fattens that evil root and bitter in
them, whence comes forth nothing but weeds, briers and brambles, the fruit of
the first earth, which is under the curse, and is eternally to pass away,
whereby they are a vexation and torment, yea, devils to themselves and all
sorts of men in the Land.

SECT. 4.
That then that is worthy of applause in the Army in their present
undertakings, is their good, or rather the goodness of God in them, opposing
the evil, or rather, the evil One in King and Parliament: This alone is to be
reckoned among the Saint^ (as we hope they are) as the common enemy of the
Land; this is only worthy of all opposition: let this be withstood to death
and bonds. It Is a great mistake, and by all means to be removed out of the
hearts and minds of men, that the sword of steel, or the instruments of war
have gotten them success and victory over the other side; nay, it has been
the word of the Lord, the counsel and presence of God, helping the one, and
opposing the other. Thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity: (says
the Psalmist of Christ, or the Anointing in the Church) therefore God, even
thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows; that
is, thou getst the better upon this account, and art too hard for all other
Companies, and Armies of men whatsoever, because of this.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the door of hope was opened to the King, and is to his party in the valley
of Achor, or forlorn state of trouble they are in.

old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, which like an
ignis fatuus, led him and all of the same spirit with him, huc and illuc, after
several objects of rest and delight, all which yet perished in the use; it
being, in respect of his way of enjoying of it, but as the grass of the field,
or corn upon the house top, which withers before it be grown up: nothing is
in it but that which is earthly, sensual and divelish; all appearances are of
a like nature; but not of one and the same form, all from beneath, some black,
and some white Devils: his fearing one, and following the other, has not
suffered him to enjoy any lasting rest.

the valley of Achor, that is to say, the valley of trouble: but in respect of
his Person, and Gods intendment, yea, and the longing prayer and endeavor of
all good men, in whom is the sure and lasting mercies of God, and the bowels of
Jesus Christ, it was to him, and it is to all his friends, and those that took
part with him, for a door of hope. In this wilderness of trouble in respect of
the outward man, God returns (which thing I will not deny) and gives in again
into the heart of the King, together with himself, For the fullness of all
things is in God in Christ.
all things, his Crown, his Queen, his Kingdom, etc. but washed and made white,
that he might enjoy them eternally and without interruption in him.

Capernaum, lifted up in a glorious fig-leave profession as high as heaven;
their turn will be next to be hurled down to hell, the hell in which the King
was, whiles many of that side (the byword, especially of the professing
people) shall be lifted up to heaven, and made to sit with God in Christ in
heavenly places; for there shall come from East and West, and places and
conditions most remote, and shall sit with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the
Kingdom of God, and the supposed children of the kingdom cast out: For God will
not (though it may be, man would) contend for ever; neither will I (says he)
be always wroth, for the spirit should fail before me, and the souls which I
have made. For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and smote him; I
hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart: I have
seen his ways, and will heal him, I will lead him also, and restore comforts
to him and his mourners. For the language of Christ is to this day in the
Church, speaking as it is written, The spirit of the Lord God is upon me,
because the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings to the meek; he has
sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives and
the opening of the prison doors to them that are bound. This I profess my self
to be daily in expectation of, according as it is written, The first shall be
last and the last first: the Jews, and those that profess the knowledge of God
after the letter, shall be provoked, and made ashamed by a foolish and despised
people: the Gentiles, which make no such profession, shall be beforehand with
them in the knowledge of God and Christ, in spirit, power and truth: To which I
say and pray, Deus faxit, This thing, O God, bring to pass.

CHAP. IX.
Of the glory of the Parliament at their first assembling together, with the
cause of their ruin; viz. their dividing themselves into a threefold Schism,
Royalists, Presbyters, Independent; with the hurtful principles and practices
of each.

(.i.) their morning, noon, and evening-tide. Whiles 'twas yet morning, or
young days with them, they began (according to the Country Proverb) as a new
broom, to sweep all clean: and therefore made themselves, after the similitude
of Christ, (the true pattern of all good and wholesome undertakements) a new
threshing inst^ument having teeth, that with it they might thresh the mountains
of Pride, Superstition, Oppression; they made them a scourge of small cords,
and minded indeed to cleanse the Temple, and to cast out the buyers and sellers
of doves, those more innocent and harmless ones in the Land, of whom these
money changers made merchandise, (as it is said) They shall make Merchandise of
you: For they did, as Christ, (...).
cast out the gain gotten by doves. In one word, their going forth was like the
morning Sun, rejoicing as a Giant (newly awoke out of sleep, and silence in the
Land) to run his course of light and truth: so that by them, as by the Woman's
seed, (Christ born in spirit and power among them) the Serpents head (that is
to say) the wit, power, policy, enmity that prevailed in the aforegoing
Hierarchy, Monarchy (for the last was above the first) was wonderfully
discovered, bruised, spoiled and disappointed.

these husbandmen sl^pt, though beforehand the Lord of the harvest had sowed
good seed among them, the enemy came in by night, the night of their ignorance,
and sowed tares; that this garden of God, that at first seemed an earthly
Paradise, was full fraught with weeds, I mean, pride, ignorance of God,
self-seeking, faction, not going oc together in bearing the burden of the
Kingdom (as at first) with one shoulder; but as untamed heifers, according to
the Scripture phrase, unaccustomed to the yoke of Christ, (that is to say, his
presence and government in truth, peace, mercy, justice, his seat and throne)
they all hung back, or drew contrary ways one to another: so that while every
party and faction minded their own particular safety, honor, greatness, the
whole Kingdom was neglected, and that stool of rest intended and expected by
them, and from them, being removed out of the way by their own party-making;
the whole wearied body of the Kingdom did begin again to fall quite to the
ground. This was the forbidden fruit that the whole Parliament in their
several parties were overtaken with: for if the Paradise of God were not
secure, but that the Serpent got in there to deceive the woman, no marvel he
had admission here, where there was so much of the woman (weakness and
inability to overcome temptation, and discern the hour of it) that they all
sought their own things, and few or none the things of Jesus Christ. which
might make for the rest and profit of the whole.

bed of rest to the Nation, they all proved too narrow, or too short; so that
there was not room in it for all: for that which would first serve the turn of
the Royal party, was too noisome and offensive, as a defiled and polluted bed,
a bed of whoredom and lust; and therefore these were as a smoke to the nose of
the pre-ingaged, or fore-resolved men of the Presbyterian or Scottish way, who
proclaim with open mouth the jus Divinum of their own new invention; and
therefore preach, and print, and hold out to the world at at home and abroad,
as though Christ had said to them and that order of men, what he did, and
always does to his true and only Spouse (which is always hid with him in the
wilderness, and not at all exposed to common view; for as Christ, so is the
Church (as in union with him, or as his Spouse) hid to the world) Behold, thou
art fair, my Love, behold, thou art fair, (yea, our bed (say they) is green)
and the only flourishing, fruitful, hopeful woman or Church in the world.
Yet this also takes after her sister, and justifies them that had gone before,
in all their abominations, and all her children prove the sons of the
Sorceresse, and the whore, neither had any of them a heart to plead (in the
behalf of God and Christ) against their Mother, making it appear, she was not
his Wife.

prevailing party in Parliament and Kingdom, usurps all power, and takes all
authority into their own hand, and boasts, she is Lady and Queen of Great
Britain, at least; therefore makes use of it to the establishing of her self,
and depressing of all others, that would not, or could not sing her song, drink
of her cup, or dance after her pipe; and therefore makes a decree, that none
should either buy or sell, that receive not her mark in their hand or forehead.
But whiles she is thus drunk, but not with wine, and thinks she is, and none
besides her, even in that very hour, it is said to her, as to her mother
before, out of whose womb she sprang, Babylon the great, How much she has
glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her.
Therefore her plagues come in one day, (while it was yet noontide with this
new invented Idol) death, mourning, and famine (of all that power, wisdom,
policy, and great riches that did sustain her) and she shall, as her elder
sister Sodom and Samariah the Popish and Episcopal Church, be utterly burnt
with fire; for strong is the Lord God in the Church, that has undertaken to
judge her.

her Princes, and those that reigned as Kings by means of her; yea, all the
Merchants of this seeming new, but indeed the first earth that was to pass
away, that had enriched themselves by her sorceries and whoredoms, that were as
so many bawds and Panders to this Adulterous woman, are now standing afar off,
weeping, and making great lamentation, forasmuch as no man buyeth of their
merchandise any more, for behold her smoke goes up for ever and ever. Thus now
the pit these dug for other, they are fallen into themselves; so that it may be
said to them, by those that were in the pit before them, as it was by those
that were in the like case to Babylon and the King thereof, Isa. 14.10. when he
came into the like condition with them Art thou also become weak as we are? art
thou become like unto us? thy pomp is brought down to the grave, and the noise
of thy viols is ceased: the worm Jacob is spread under thee, and the worms
(such as thou have despised) cover thee, that thou have no glory left. Thus
this party (and being but a party, and for themselves) seeking the possession
of all, lost all, the bed of rest intended by them proving too short, not only
for others, but themselves; so that they are now as well as others, cast out,
to the loathing of their person, and shaking of the head of all against them,
the very byword of the people, and so cast into the furnace, out of which many
of them may come forth, pure and refined gold; which I beseech God to grant and
bring to pass.

New England (though it was not policy for the present to profess it) to make
themselves the only Sarah or Mistress, and to cast out al others as Agar, and
not at all as the Wife and Spouse of God; yea, in effect, they openly declare
it, though afterward they saw a necessity of being of another mind; for they
looked upon the Presbyterian Church as an adulterous woman, and were loath to
have any society with her, or almost any of her Assemblies, as accounting them
not in a capacity to be communicated with. Yet in many, their opposition
against them was but to break open a way whereby the Serpents head in them
might have more certain hope of rest then in the former, being now much more
transformed into an Angel of light then before. And therefore, lest the tail of
Anabaptists and Sectaries (so in their own account) should prejudice their
acceptance with their elder sister, they, to please and sooth the one, openly
and before the Sun disavowed the other in their Apologeticall Narration. These
neither being but a party, and mostly for themselves, were rather the vexation
of the former, then the expectation of the meek and quiet in the Land, to
receive rest and freedom by them.

Joshuah, to lead her into the land of expected rest and freedom; they all
(though English men) going into remote parts (as sometimes King Ahaz did) to
take the pattern of the Altar they intended to worship God by. The Royallists
seek for, as being enamoured with, the old and new Hierarchy of Rome and
England. The Presbyterians were no less taken with that of Scotland. And the
Jndependents, as much as either, with that of Holland and New England: So that
no side having seen the pattern in the Mount (which is Christ in the spirit) as
Moses did, they all not knowing what was become of him (since ascended) make
together a murmuring in the camp, or chief Assembly in our English Israel, the
Parliament, crying out to their several Aaronical Priests among them, Come,
mak^ us gods to go before us; for as for this Moses (Christ since ascended upon
high) we know not what is become of him. But he is now come upon them as a
thief in the night of their blind zeal and ignorance, and there shall not a
man of them escape the sword of his justice. So that there is none of the old
Parliament, as such, whether Episcopal, Presbyterian, or Independent, but as
they have all drank of, and been drunk, with Babylons golden cup; so they have,
and do, and will yet more taste of her plagues; yea, their torment shall be to
be tormented day and night in the presence of the holy Angels, that are sent in
truth from God, and in the presence of the Lamb, the meek King, of the holy,
meek, and quiet in the Land. The light that shines now in the evening of the
late Parliamentary glory; so that in this darkness there shines forth this
light unto them, to lead them forth of the wilderness they are in, to the Land
flowing with milk and honey: that is to say, the true Mount Sion, where is the
Lamb, and all those with his Fathers name on their foreheads, harping with
their harps, and singing that new song which none but those that are redeemed
from among men could learn; even those, and only those in whose mouth there is
found no guile; for they are without fault before the throne of God: To this
rest show them O Lord the way.

CHAP. X.
Where, of the Army 's hopeful, but difficult rise: their successful
victorious progress, the cloud of reproach they lay and acted under, their
breaking forth in open light and glory, their sinking again into the Earth,
their rising again, with cautions, reprehensions, directions given them.



The Parliament, in all their former power, policy, Armies, grew weak, and
withered as a dry tree, and were indeed, in respect of good, like the dry
parched ground: yet because God had not forgotten to be gracious, or left off
his merci^^ which were of old: he causes the earth to bring forth truth,
whiles righteousness looks down from heaven: both which meeting and kissing
each other in a company of honest and plain-hearted Christian men, many of them
having much of the true annoynting upon them, they are modelled, by a divine
hand, into another new and distinct Army from all the rest, and are indeed (as
it is said of the Branch of righteousness) men wondered at by all; yea, feared
and suspected as well of friends as foes; not only their enemies abroad, but
even their very friends and fautors at home; insomuch, that this Hercules was
very like to have been strangled in the womb or cradle, at their very first
setting forth and contriving; but that there was of the seed and strength of
God among them, that there could be no divination against them, nor enchantment
against this new supplanter, for J^cob is their name. These (come forth into an
Army) pass through the Land from one end to the other, like Leviathan in the
sea, in the might of God, ^aking (as it were) in the great waters their
pastime^: so that all engagements against them prove as succesless as does man's
endeavors to draw out that great Leviathan out of the great deep. Can thou
fill his skin with barbed irons, or his head with fish-spears: lay thy hand
upon him, remember the battle, and do so no more, behold, the hope of him is
in vain. Shall not one be cast down at his sight of him: None is so fierce that
dare stir him.

lighting down of his Arm upon the Royal party appeared hid or veiled under
the present and yet remaining Parliament power, which like the interposition of
the earth betwixt the body of the Sun and us, darkened or kept in continual
eclipse, either through neglect or reproach, the newborn hope of the Nation,
the Army; for so they were, both in respect of crushing that power of which all
stood in fear, as also that they were the only Asylum, or City of refuge to
all the afflicted and oppressed people of the Nation. Here they centered, as in
the presence of God among them.

alone above them: and that first in their first, but ineffectuall March up to
London: wherein it did befall them as it did Tamar, Genesis 38.27. for they had,
as she, twins in one womb; for behold, while they traveled and labored to
bring forth, one put forth his hand; that is to say, there was a weak
appearance of those principles and purposes of peace, truth, and righteousness
(since brought forth to greater perfection:) but they that undertook the
midwifery of this so hopeful newborn babe, took immediately a scarlet, bloody,
persecuting thread and tied about the finger of it at its first putting forth,
concerning which only this might be said, This came forth first. When also it
came to pass, that as this appearance drew back again into the womb (where it
has for a while been hid) that his brother or next neighbor (for evil is
always nigh to good, but never one with it) got then the upper hand, and came
forth first; for which cause it was and might be called Perruptor. Pa^aeus.
Pharez, that is to say, A breach, or a Maker of a breach. Therefore it was
said by all that undertook the Midwifery of their first born to this later
unexpected and undesired brat, How have thou broken forth? this breach be upon
thee; bear thou the burden of this affront done to thine elder brother, Truth
and Peace.

Dinah) they were not content to keep at home with God in the house of their
Father Jacob, (who was and is a supplanter of none but his elder and worser
brother Esau, a man that lives upon the spoil of other) but [they] would be
going abroad to see the daughters of the Land, and the fashions of other
people, which proved a snare unto them, and was indeed a reproach to their
fathers house, making his name to stink among the people.

sore, and this great infirmity upon them, of their conformity to, and (as it
were) prostituting of themselves to Sechem and Hamor, promising to acquiesce
the one in the other, all (King, Parliament, Army) being (as it were)
circumcised, and of one Religion, there comes upon them Simeon and Levi in the
anger of God, the English and Scottish Forces (yet brethren in their agreed upon
Covenant:) Instruments of cruelty are in their habitations. O my soul, come not
thou into their secret, unto their Assembly mine honor be not thou united; for
in their anger they slew a man, and in their self-will they dug down a wall*
they both together first made, and then avenged the seeming holy, but corrupt
league was made up between them: Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce, and
their wrath, for it was cruel. After this great slaughter and captivity of men,
God will (I hope) say of them as Jacob did of Simeon and Levi, I will divide
them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel, restore and sanctify them among
their brethren that abode in the Covenant and light of God. For though both
sides excuse the matter (as they did) and say, Should our Sister be dealt with
as with an harlot? For the Royal party being now one with the Presbyterian,
and the Presbyterian one with them, they said, Shall this holy Cause we have
undertaken to defend by Covenant, be prostitute to these uncircumcised
Independents and Sectaries? Therefore they both openly and secretly prepare war
against them, even whilst they pretended to lean upon them. On the other side,
the Army, (who indeed had the better end of the staff, and most cause of
complaint: for though weakly, yet it may be for the most part honestly, run
into their forenamed error) also have their mouths opened, and their hearts
awakened, to see the dishonor would come by dealing with Dinah as with an
harlot, suffer that honest cause they had engaged in, and taken up their swords
for, to be prostituded to the lusts and wills of evil men (though themselves had
too too much betrayed it a little before) promised to acquiesce in that Power
which they knew in heart did not adhere unto them (for though they had their
hands, yet they had not the hearts of most of them); yet in effect, and
interpretatively in this last Summers War they made null their promise to
acquiesce in the Parliament: but since they have done it openly and declaredly,
as it appears in their remonstrance and proceedings.

of those, either at home or abroad, that by reason of use have their senses
exercised to discern betwixt good and evil; and therefore the true Jacob in
the midst of them is making his complaints of both, though not of both in the
like degree. This being the time of Jacob's trouble, and Tamar's travel, there
comes forth now in the late transactions Oriens, vel Ortum.
Zarah, that is to say, that which should have come forth first, but was
strangled in the womb and crucified in the birth, but recovers life again, and
appears now to be of right the firstborn, to whom the inheritance does belong;
he that should come, and we are not to look for another: the good and holy One
in the Army, and so in the Nation, seems for the present to be predominant, and
Lord of all.

Rebeccah Jacob's mother (the good people of the Land, whether the Remainder of
the Parliament, or those bearing office in the Army, and the honest men of the
City and Country, that have an influence into this engagement) making more
haste then good speed, out of a good mind notwithstanding, remembering the word
and promise of God concerning Jacob, That the elder should serve the younger,
that Jacob, a plain-dealing, smooth and honest man or men, should have the
blessing, the upper hand of Esau, she makes use rather of her policy then the
promise of God, she puts Jacob into the clothing or goodly raiment of this
elder brother Esau; which will no more fit or become him, then Saul's Armor did
David, who was fain to put it of again when he had done, and betake himself
alone to his sling and stone to throw down the great Goliath, the contemptible
means of the word and power of God, against which there neither is nor can be
any prevailing. Whiles Jacob, this new and hopeful Supplanter of evil stands
thus ready to administer savoury meat to the dying kingdom, as he did to his
father Isaac which now in his old age could scarce discern one thing from
another; yet coming near and feeling whether this be his very son Esau (which
is best beloved of his father, and most desired of the Nation) or no: finds
and concludes as he did, The voice is Jacobs voice, but the hands are the hands
of Esau: this deceit of this good woman, and this good man's complying with her
therein, cost her much sorrow and grief, being fain after a while to send this
her beloved son out of the way from the fury of his brother Esau; and Jacob for
his own part to serve another Aprentiship, enjoying not the blessing, at least
in his own Land, till after much struggling with God and man to obtain it; yea,
he had it not at all indeed, till God himself touched him in the hollow of his
thigh, (that is to say) till he had lost all strength and confidence in carnal
and worldly courses, counsels and policies, and had nothing left him to rest in
but the naked will and presence of God. For this cause he was made to halt,
that it might be a sign to him of his former halting, and a caution to others
to take heed of the like. This thing I desire the present power of the Nation
to take heed of, and lay to heart: they have indeed Jacob's voice, talking much
of God, Christ, the Spirit, Revelation, prayer, prophecy, the power and
presence of the Almighty, the highest form of knowledge, and talk of things
divine is amongst them: which if it be not in power and truth; that is to say,
if it proceed not from the presence of the true annoynting, and holy one among
them, it is the most deceiving Antichrist that has ever yet appeared in the
world: and yet this I dare be bold to aver, that this knowledge and talk of
many of them (that I say not, the knowledge and talk of most) is but
traditionall, and by imitation of others, having Christ in their mouth, but
Satan in their very hearts and lives, being, as the rest of the world, holy by
fits, holy now and then, holy upon Sundays, holy at a Sacrament, or a Sermon,
holy in their several churches of which many are members, holy upon their
days of fast and prayer; but not holy as every true Christian is holy, in all
manner of conversation, holy as God himself is holy; holy through their union
with him, and enjoying of him. These, these in the Army, God says, They are a
smoke in my nose, a fire that burns all the day: who being as ignorant in
respect of pure and divine knowledge of God, and as full of enmity in their
spirits against him as others, they condemn and say yet to others (in respect
of themselves) we are more holy then ye.

and his presence in the Army, should I deny that there is the shout of a King,
even of the King of Kings amongst them; should I deny that he has given to
many of them, yea some of the chief and top of them, to sit together with him
on his thron^, as the Father has given him to sit with him on his throne:
these are they, to whom is given a pure language, not the language of Egypt, or
Ashdod, no not of Samaria a mixed language, a language that is near, or very
like, but not the very language of heaven, or true Canaan: such as is the
language of the Jew, not such a one that is so only in the letter, and in
respect of the outward man, but he that is so in the inward man, such a one
that speaks such a language that shall confound all other languages; for thus
says the Lord of Hosts (the Lord of Armies) In those days it shall come to
pass, that ten men shall take hold (of all languages, such as are the
languages of the several Sects and sorts of men among us) of the skirt of one,
(such a one that does not only say, but) that is a Jew, and of the seed of
Jacob indeed, they shall take hold of the skirt of such a one, saying, We will
go with you, for we have heard that God is with you. This is indeed the voice
of Jacob, which I and all good men delight to hear among them, the joyful
sound, the roaring of the Almighty like a Lion among you, whose presence is
terrible to the world: For because of truth, meekness (for the meek shall
inherit the earth) and righteousness (not that which is narrow and humane, but
that which is divine and superlative) he shall bring mighty things to pass.
But as the Kingdom hears among you Jacob^ voice (either pretended or in truth)
so by feeling they find your hands are too too much like Esau's hands, your
little finger (in some regard) heavier then your fathers loins to the sense of
City and Country; the afflictions that have been and yet are upon them by the
Parliament and their Proceedings and Armies, are much more heavy and
intolerable, and that upon both their friends and foes, then ever were the
oppressions of the King and Prelates, respecting the outward man, upon that
sort of men that have now by a divine power got the upper hand of him. This is
certain, the burdens of the people are many, and their fears are more, that
one oppressing power will still succeed another; so that the Land shall never
enjoy her Sabbath, this I say, not to upbraid you, but to re-minde you that you
fall not into the same condition and censure others did that went before you;
for as their inward thought was, that their houses should continue for ever;
and their dwelling places to generation and generation, that they call their
lands and their ways after their names. Nevertheless, we see (one year after
another) man, in true Christian honor and integrity abides not, but is like
the beasts that perish being earthly, they sink again into it: This their way
is their folly, which too is made manifest sooner or later: yet their
posterity, they that come after them in power and place, approve their sayings,
see a delight in their mouth, as it is in the margin; they have, as it were,
one mouth, and are in effect the same in a new, and another seeming better
disguise, the same Spirit appearing in another form; one evil generation and
power of men opposing another.

The Lord therefore rebuke the evil Spirit that seeks to undo, deceive and
misguide the Army into those courses that may any way tend to shut up the way
of men to Christ their Savior, who is pretended to be among them more then
among other people, and those that went before them, that it may be said of
this King, (I mean not either King Charles, whose person yet I loved and prayed
for) (or as the Country people speak) King Fairfax or Cromwell, but King Jesus;
a King that is a Savior, and in that he is a Savior, a King; for every one
worthy of the name, honor and title of a King, is a Savior, a Savior not only
of his friends, but his very Enemies; King Charles would indeed have saved his
friends (so, but corruptly called) but he being corrupt and ignorant of the
true pattern [Christ] would fain have destroyed his (indeed but supposed)
Enemies: let not the present Kingly power of the Nation in the Army, for there
it is, interpretatively, and by way of Execution, let not them dance after his
pipe, and do the thing he did, and have since condemned him for; that is to
say, Let not them be the Saviors of their friends only, or men of one side,
this is not the true Spirit of Christ, or of Government; but let them even be
Saviors to, and of those, yea, even of those that would in their ignorance and
unbelief have destroyed them. This is truly noble, Christian, and worthy of men
of high place and power; let them be a Sanctuary of rest to all, even the
persons of all Roundheads and Cavaliers, yet withal standing as a Cherubin of
light, right, truth, life, peace and glory, to keep the way of that tree of
Life, (a true Christian Magistracy, formed according to the pattern in the
Mount, whereby may be opened unto men that long expected and looked for
paradise of Truth and Peace meeting together, and giving rest to the Nation;)
and that no thing or person may be admitted, that may bring any evil into it,
for the defilement and disturbance of it.

secret of God to such a time and purpose as this, that they might evidence to
all, both friends and foes, that there is indeed such a presence of Christ, and
the true anointing among them they have all this while held the world in hand
with, that it may be said of this Presence, even of this Anointing among you,
this King in the Army, to the whole Nation, on the one side and on the other,
none excluded from the grace and benediction of it; behold a King (God himself
in Spirit) shall reign in righteousness; and Princes (for such are the
children of the true Church in all lands) shall rule in Judgment; that is to
say, not ignorantly and in the dark, not knowing what they do, as the manner
of the Rulers of the earth is, (being drunk with Error they stumble in
Judgment;) then shall a man, (that is to say, every one that lives in the
heavenly MAN) be for an hiding place, (what to one sort of men only? that is
Jewish, a course that has undone us all this while, but to every man, though
to the evil or lust of no man) a hiding place, I say, from the wind, and a
covert from the Tempest; as the rivers of water in a dry place: such is for
certain the state of the Royal party, and in the next place the Presbyters and
many others that are bitter and grieved in Spirit; in one word, as the shadow
of a great rock in a weary Land, which how welcome it is in a Land of drought,
as this Nation is, in respect of peace and rest, they know, that have been by
experience sensible of the one and other. By this it would appear to all the
world, that you have skill not only to kill, and to destroy, which has been
your work for the most part hitherto; but that you have heard and learned of
the Father of mercies how to save: which is that one and only thing the whole
Kingdom is in expectation of from you: that it may be said of you, Saviors
(not destroyers) are come up upon Moun Sion, the true seat and place of
Government, to judge the Mount of Esau, that is to say, the evil of all men,
by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning. Let the Kingdom and
all in it first taste of your good, that is to say, your mercy, meekness,
forbearance, seeking not your own, but others profit, even the profit of your
very opposers, whereby you wli lindeed appear to be of the only true Royal
blood, even of the seed Royal of God and Christ himself: say, yea, you have
much more cause to say of your selves then Saul had to say of himself, in the
first day of his power, when the people came and clamoured in the ears of
Samuel, as the people of England, so called, have of late in the ears of the
Army, immoderately and to excess, to have justice, not divine justice (for
they know not, most of them, what that means) upon the person of the King,
saying, Who is he of the King or Parliament's side, that said, or shall say,
Shall Saul reign over us? Shall the Army power prevail over all sorts of men
in the Land (as you know, there is much murmuring)? Bring the men, that we may
put them to death. Let Readiness Answer be yours, (I confess, you pretend to a
conformity to a better pattern, David, who though he were anointed to succeed
Saul against whom there is no question but David might have had as much to say,
as you have had against Charles Stuart, late in title King of England; yet
David your pattern abhorred the thought of taking away his life, as you also,
according to the grounds of true Christian Religion ought the forenamed and
late King) And Saul said, There shall not a man be put to death this day, for
to day the Lord has wrought salvation in Israel. Let not your morning glory,
the glory you seek, be stained with the blood of any; especially, the blood of
war in the time of peace: be not so hasty, hot and violent in condemning the
Powers went before you, before your right^ousnesse, integrity, innocence,
honesty, ability, impart^^l^^y, and bowels of mercy, pity, and compassion
toward the p^^ and f^the^^ss be justified on all hands to be of a nature
exceeding the pretense of others. Let the Kingly and Parliamentary Powers see,
and the whole Kingdom with them, that you know as well how to mend faults, as
to find them out and punish them in o hers. In one word, Set up a high Court
of grace, mercy, and ^vour (in opposition to, or union with this new high Court
of Justice) to which all the afflicted and grieved in spirit may repair, and be
relieved.

This I humbly suggest, and lay it at the feet of Jesus Christ among you, with
whom I know it finds acceptance, for as much as it is his mind, and the fruit
of his anointing in me, by whom alone I have been able thus to speak. He speak
it in you, even in the whole Army and Kingdom, that did endite and write it in
my heart; which the everlasting Spirit of grace work and grant, Amen, Amen.

A Postscript To the READER.
IT is apparent, the late Proceedings of the Army have awakened all sorts of
men to a more deep consideration of the things past, present, and to come,
relating to the Kingdom: At least, I am sure they have had this operation and
effect on me, as may appear by the bringing forth of this -- call it what you
will, scarce the travel of two days: It may be thought of many, it had been
better (as was desired) to have had it strangled in the birth; and the truth on
't is, had I consulted mine own outward peace and acceptance among men, I
should have been first in laying hands on it. I believe there is so much truth
in it, that it will almost offend all, though (if 'twere possible) I would not
displease any. I confess, I perceive in the ARMY much more of the Soldier
yet, then of the Christian, as there did appear in the Powers before, more of
the Man, or Man of Sin, then of Christ or the new Creature. I have therefore,
as Moses coming down from the Mount (though I would not attribute any thing to
my self) who brake in pieces the two Tables, of which the people in his
absence, or rather, in the absence of GOD, made an Idol, made a Calf (I
believe the Nation has done little else these many years;) I say, I have not
(as he) spared mine own flesh, mine own People, mine own Interests on the one
hand, or the other. I acknowledge in it many Erratas; some happening through
the neglect (though voluntary, not mine) of the season intended to bring it
forth to censure; which was indeed before the fall of the late Great KING; yea,
purposed, according to its strength, (which was (and you see is) but as the
strength of a little child) to stand in the way of that spirit that consented
to the putting him to death; hence mention is made confusedly of him, sometimes
as living, and sometimes as dead and gone. Secondly, others, not a few,
occasioned through my absence from the Press.

I have but two things more to take out of the way, that I offend none.

1. My sugesting mine own apprehension touching God's favor and presence with
the King in the day of his affliction; which I judge was much with Him for his
support: What others attribute to the power of Nature, and a Roman-like Spirit
(as they speak) that I give to the immediate mighty power of God.

The second is, My offending the present Power: To this I answer, 1. I have
said nothing to offend it; but (as much as in me is) to rectify it. 2. They
are but even now come forth; and it will be for their further clearing, to
scour off what is dross and filth among them. Lastly, they themselves, even
some of the top men among them, profess they act much in the dark in these
things.

FINIS.

