January 20. 1644.
Imprimatur

Ja. Cranford.

Occasus Occidentalis: OR, JOB IN THE WEST.

As it was laid forth in two several SERMONS, at two Public FASTS, for the
Five Associated Western Counties.

BY John Bond B. L. late Lecturer in the City of Exon, now Minister at the
Savoy, London.

A Member of the Assembly of Divines.

Job 19.23, 24. Oh that my words were now written, oh that they were printed in
a book:

That they were graven with an iron pen, and lead, in the rock for ever!

Lament. 1.12. Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? behold and see, if
there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the
Lord has afflicted me, in the day of his fierce anger.

London, Printed by J.D. for Fran. Eglesfield, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the sign of the Marigold in Paul's Churchyard. 1645.

To the Right Honorable the Committees for the Five Western Counties, of
Wilts, Dorset, Somerset, Devon, and Cornwall, Associated by the Ordinances of
Parliament, of July 1. and August 20. 1644.
Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and Beloved, Men, Fathers, and Brethren,
HAd I but beheld as a Traveller, the stripped, wounded, halfe-dead condition of
the West, and so had passed by on the other side, I might for that fault have
been reckoned with the merciless Priest and Levite in the Gospel, Luke 10.30,
etc.
even worse than a Samaritan: but, besides the common tie of humanity, there
are many special bonds of Nature, Justice, Religion, which do constrain me
to poure-in the utmost of my little oil and wine to the wounds of those
Countries; yea, and to lay out these my two pence (mites rather) in this pair
of Sermons, toward their relief. First, the lot of my Nativity did fall unto
me Chard.
near the center of those five Western Counties, betwixt sea and sea, betwixt
East and West: and the two largest of them I may call, my Somerset.
Mother and my Devon.
Nurse; so that the whole is (according to the Municipibus duas esse censeo
patrias, unam Natura, alteram Civitatis. Cicer. de Leg lib. 2.
Orator) doubly my native Country. This consideration did move me to Isai.
51.1.
look unto the rock whence I am hewn, and the hole of the pit whence I was
dug. I have observed, that even a clod of earth has so much of nature in
it, as will carry it strongly toward its own native element and center. Next,
Justice and Equity did call upon me; for mine own ears and eyes have been
present witnesses to diverse Scenes of this Western Tragedy: so that concerning
the Substantials of this Treatise, I may generally say in truth, Ioh. 3 11.
We speak that we do know, and testify that we have seen; and yet the same
cares and eyes of mine have heard and seen too many aspersions that have been
unjustly cast upon the people of those Counties, as most unworthy of all pity;

-- Juven.
Et quis iniqui Tam patiens orbis? -- I may add, lastly, a tie of Religion,
even that Charge of a Watch-mans office, unto which (though most unworthy) I
was called in those parts: And this office has not only given me the
advantage of prospect above some others in this business; but has laid upon
me the duty of pleading for my Country with God and man: as also, of giving
the Alarm both to it, and to other places. All these relations (besides the
calling which I had from some of your selves, and many others: have enforced me
to the preaching and publication of this work; though, I must confess, that
in respect of the meannesse of mine own abilities, it may be reckoned amongst
the Western miseries, that they are set forth by so weak an Orator: But,
better a mean friend, than none at all. Besides, I thought with my self, that
the In causa sacili cuivis li^^^, -- etc.
Copia of the Subject might supply the narrowness of the Speaker. And the
occasion is so just and necessary, that if every man should hold his peace, the
very stones might cry out.

There is an history of a son, who, though he was dumb from his birth, yet when
he saw one about to kill his father, cried out, Villain, will thou kill my
Father? And you know what beast it was that did speak with man's voice, when
the drawn sword was before him. The common mother of all the children of the
West is now a massacring, therefore good warrant, yea, great need, I conceive,
there was for some man, and (in case of none other) for my self to speak,
write, and Print the Map of her miseries. Next, as for the inscription of your
noble Names upon it, I must confess, I durst not think upon any other
Patrons; for, are not ye the finest of the wheat flour, which the Western
enemy, like a Sieve or Range, has bolted and driven out of your Country,
whilst generally the bran and husks are by them preserved and left behind?
Are not ye the crop of that very small remnant, Isai. 1.9.
which except the Lord of Hosts had left unto us (in the West) we should have
been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah? Ye know (right
Honorable and beloved) that those Cities of the plain might have been spared
for ten righteous persons: yea, Genesis 18.32.
they were once rescued by the Militia of one righteous Abraham and his family;
and, after that, Genesis 14.16.
one of the five (Zoar) was saved by one righteous Lot: so we that are the
inferior exiles and Pilgrims of the West do look upon you, (next unto God and
this Parliament,) as our Abraham's, which must rescue our Country by arms; as
our Lots, which must authoritatively reform and preserve it; in which there
are so many precious Saints under the enemy, so many poor souls under
darkness: and according to this your double work of Rescue and Reformation, and
our double hopes of them both, is this following Treatise proportioned; for it
does partly spread before you the sins, partly the sufferings of the West: the
former (our sins) you may read over as ye are the Representatives, and do bear
the iniquities of your Country, that so they may continually mind and quicken
you in the work of Reformation: the latter (our sufferings) you may be pleased
to peruse, as an help to continue your great activity in sending down succors;
for which, all the well-affected of those parts have already abundant cause to
bless the Lord, and to honor your Names. There are also in this Treatise, a
true (though too narrow) Vindication of the West from some unjust aspersions,
and a Directory for an effectual way of commiserating those most afflicted
Counties. If your leisure will permit you to read thorough the Book, you may
in it travel Westward with safety, and, I hope, with profit. All the rest that
I have to say, is, but as one that has been sometimes a Chaplain to the
Western Forces, to pray for your Militia, that the God of Abraham would be a
sun and a shield to all your Catechized Soldiery, (for such was Abraham's)
that you have, or shall send down; but, especially, as a Public, and somewhat
Representative Minister, I shall continually cry to heaven for your good
success in the all-in-all of Reformation; Zech. 8.7, 8
and that the Lord of hosts will save his people from the East Country, and
from the West Country; and will bring them that they may dwell in the midst of
[our] Jerusalem, that they may be his people, and he their God, in truth and
in righteousness: And let the Lord, Heb. 6.^0.
which is not unrighteous, never forget your work and labor of love, which
ye have showed toward his Name, in that ye have minstred to the Saints, and
do minister: And we desire, that every one of you do show the same diligence,
Verse 11.
to the full assurance of our hope unto the end. This is the prayer of

Your Honors humble and real Servant, John Bond.
Savoy, Jan. 20. 1644.
To all well-affected, tenderhearted Christians, inhabiting the famous City of
London and within the Line of Communication.
Duly Honored, and Beloved,
I Have read, that there grows a Caussin. Hieroglyph. lib. 10. Parab. 4.
tree not far from Malaca, whose roots do spread diversely abroad; those of
them which do run toward the East, are wholesome and medicinal, yea they are an
antidote against poisons; but such as do spread themselves toward the West,
are venomous and deadly: such a tree as this it has pleased the Lord now to
plant in this land; and (me thinks) it grows upon the border betwixt the old
kingdoms of the East and West- Saxons; that is, in the most Easterly edge of
Hampshire, for all the Counties beyond that place Westward, are overspread
with sad roots of bitterness, bringing forth nothing but gall and worm wood;
whereas the other Counties of the land, on this side Eastward, are safe and
medicinal; and these contrary dispensations of providence, as they do call
upon you, Amos 4.7.
the children of the East to bless that Lord which causes it to rain (mercy
or judgments) upon one Country and not upon another; so do they enforce and
encourage us Western exiles to implore some healing for our Country from those
wings of yours, under whose feathers many of our pilgrims have already found a
covering. In hope and pursuance of that healing, was I emboldned to offer unto
you a mid-wifes place in the birth of this Treatise; and, that you may
adventure to read it over, I shall promise you, that this Western history is
not like your creatures of a day at Westminster, it is not like your every days
Mercurian dew of News, which is daily exhaled and evaporated (that is, grown
stale and doubtful) by that time the sun arises in 'its strength; but, in
many of these sad passages, I do but testify what I have seen, in others. I
have considered, that Fame in these days has lost her credit, and therefore
(accordingly) I have not trusted her without sufficient sureties: So that the
sad history of this book is but too true, though, I confess, not full enough.
Once I had thought to have added marginall instances, but did forbear, partly
because I conceived them not the most fit company for a sermon; and partly
because I found them too many and copious for a margin. Pauper is est numerare
pecus. As for the divine matter of these sermons, they do Apologize, Confess,
Petition, Direct, for the good of your most afflicted brethren. By the first, I
hope, they will undeceive such as shall read impartially; and as for others,
which will Non amo te Sabidi, nee possum dicere quare, etc.
not believe any good reports of the West, because they will not; I shall only
answer them that they will mis-judge, because they will. By the second, third,
and fourth, (which are the discoveries of the great evils, of those most
lamentable Counties, etc.) we do call for pity from all brethren and friends,
but especially from this great City, which the Lord has hitherto made a
public fountain of help, and the very poole of Bethesda to all impotent parts,
and (almost) people of the land: John 5.7.
but the West has layen longest in the porch, wanting a hand to put it into
the waters. Surely there was a time when those five Counties did by their Devon.
Kersies, Wilts.
Corn, Somerset.
Cattle, Dorset.
Sheep, and Cornwall.
Tin, afford in good measure, both b clothing, c bread, and d flesh, yea e
dishes, and all to this great City; and such a time again may return: but, at
present, those Shires (and the well-affected of them) would feign borrow a
bucket or two of help from your ocean, to set their pumps a going; I mean, to
put them into an able posture for the defense of themselves. I remember, it is
recorded, that the Keker. in praesat. ad Geegraph.
Queen of Castillia did sell her jewels to furnish Columbus for his discovering
voyage to the West Indies, when he had showed his Maps, (though the English
Courtiers, says mine Author, did deride his profers) and thereby the new world
of America was found and gained to the Spanish Crown.

Surely, there is great adventure now to be made for reducing of the little
Kingdom of West-England, and the Londoners hitherto have been the greatest
adventurers for this cause. Oh read over my Maps, and do like your selves.
But, besides that great occasion, there is also another petty adventure for the
West at this time required; it is, that you would Eccles. 11.1.
cast your bread upon the waters, for the present support of many Western
exiled Pilgrims, which have not only long since laid out, and left the bulk
of their estates for the testimony of Jesus, but have lately spent the last
meal of their barrel, and the utmost oil of their Cruse, in these parts: and
now so it is, that dig they cannot, and to beg they are ashamed, yea, and
almost to receive: Ye shall therefore do well if, like the 2 Timothy 1.16, 17.
house of Onesiphorus, Ye seek them out very diligently, and find them.
Brethren, though my self and some others, have our Prove. 30 8.
Agurs commons, our Exodus 16.16.
Omer-full for our day; yet give me leave (and the more freely) to tell you
that the Lord has set this great City to be his Steward and Almoner for the
distressed brethren; and I must add, he has given you three for one for all
your free disbursements for his sake: First, he has given you that ability and
substance which you have laid out; for it is Pro. 10.4.22
the blessing of God, with the hand of the diligent, that makes rich. 1 Samuel
25.11
My bread, and my water, and my flesh, was the language of Naball. Next, he
has given you (which is greater) the opportunity or occasion of laying out
your abilities. A good commodity and a good pennyworth are as great a benefit,
as a good purse. Lastly, he has given you (which is greatest of all) an heart
to give. 1 Chronicles. 29.12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
David praises him for all these three; for riches to build, for an house to
be built for God, and for an heart to lay out those means in that work: all
these three for one ye have freely received, Math 10.8.
and therefore freely give. I shall add but a word more, it is to mind you,
that the exiled Saints which sojourne amongst you, are the chief auxiliaries
of this City. Flying Lot did preserve that City which preserved him, and was a
Zoar unto his own Zoar: so these men do line your works, and double the
files of all your Regiments, and that partly by their presence, but chiefly by
their prayers for the continual safety, honor, and happiness, of this great
City, which has been the fountain of Liberality, and the Atlas of
Parliaments; and in this prayer he heartily joyneth, who does subscribe
himself,

Your Servant in the Lord Jesus, Jo. Bond.
Savoy Ian. 20. 1644.
Occasus Occidentalis, OR JOB IN THE WEST.
JOB 19.21. Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends; for the
hand of God has touched me.


WE are met together this day, Introduction from the
to weep over the bleeding country of our nativity: and in our weeping are
forced to imitate banished Hagar in the holy History. Let us look a little
upon her example, Genesis 21.15, 16.
and borrow thence a bucket or two to set our pumpes a going. It is said of
her, And the water was spent in the bottle, and she cast the Child under one
of the shrubs, and she went and sat her down over against him a good way off,
as it were a bow-shoot: for she said, Let me not see the death of the Child;
and she sat over against him, and wept. Lo there, a tender mother, weeping
over her gasping child: here, forlorn Children, enforced to mourn over the
dying mother: the bottle of all our helps and hopes being quite exhausted.
There Hagar had the sad privilege to be near her departing Ishmael if she
pleased, and she went and sat her down over against him: But wretched we are
driven off at the distance of some scores of miles, beyond the sight and cries
of our dearest brethren. However, let us not suffer our selves to be deprived
of that last privilege, namely to lift up our voices and weep.

To help us in this seasonable and necessary duty, I confess it cost me some
time and labor to find out a sufficient Text: for I thought with my self that
a single verse, nay some one particular Chapter of lamentation, would be too
narrow a field and circuit, for a full discourse of our ample miseries; but it
must needs be a whole volume, some book of sorrow, to make up a Text broad
enough to take in all our notes, and so at last the choice was easy, namely,
either out of the Lamentations of Jeremy, or out of this book of Job: This
latter I have chosen the rather, because it does not only hold forth the sore,
but also the salve; it shows us both the misery of Job, and the issues
thereof.

How aptly this Eastern history, does parallel our Western subject will
easily appear, if we consider either the Occasion, or Division of this Book.

First, ^ccasion and
as for the occasion; some do conceive that it was written by Moses, while he
led the people of Israel in the wilderness, to teach them selfe-submission, and
holy contentation, by setting before them the patience of Job, and the end of
the Lord. And so St. ^^m 5.11.
James does apply this pattern, Behold we account them happy which endure. You
have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord: that the
Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy. Thus Jobs patience may be our
pattern, and that end of the Lord our encouragement. Others are of opinion
that Moses did pen this holy poem (for such it is generally) in Midian, to
cheer up his countrymen, the Israelites, under the yoke of their Egyptian
bondage. And thus also the whole book is a proper lesson for our selves, and
Counties.

Or, Parts of this Book, viz.
if you consider the parts of this volume, its fitness for our use, will yet
more evidently appear, in that the whole book does hold forth unto us the
threefold condition of Job, which is parallel to the three spiritual estates
of every saint.

Jobs status constitutus, or institutus, (if I may so call it) his primitive
condition, and that is very holy, very happy; It is expressed in the first five
verses of the first Chapter. This is Jobs full-sea; and it may be compared to
mankinds state of innocence in paradise, which was in perfect holiness, and
perfect happiness.

status destitutus, his declining middle estate of calamity. This is set forth
from the fifth verse of the first Chapter to the last Chapter. Now was his
ebbing-water; and it may be compared to the lapsed or fallen condition of man
in Adam.

status restitutus, his condition of reparation, more prosperous, and happy,
then his beginning: throughout Chap. the last. Now it was spring-tyde, or the
highest-water with him. And this is like to the sanctified and glorified estate
of the Saints in heaven. Our native West has long enjoyed the first of these,
and is now suffering the second; why may it not like Job arrive in the
conclusion to the last, and best of all? O let us cry mightily for that Third
condition this day.

The lot of my Text, and of our Country, at present are fallen a like, upon
the second and saddest of those Three generals: Coherence
even upon Jobs destitute, afflicted, tormented estate, which is set down very
pathetically in this whole Chapter, from the beginning to my text. In the
Chapter immediately foregoing, Bildad the Shuite, and his fellow- physicians,
do draw a false conclusion against Job, from true premises: for (according to
the common Logic of the vulgar) they do therefore conclude him wicked,
because he was wretched.

In this Chapter the holy man does labor to confute their inference, Analysis
of the Chapter.
as also to move his friends to a more charitable construction, and a more
serious consideration of his extreme suffering, and to that end he does spread
before them, in this Chapter, an exact map of his present miseries and
afflictions: As ship-wrackt men of old were wont to describe the whole figure
of their wrack in a painted table, which they daily showed up and down, to
move compassion in the beholders. In this table of Jobs sufferings,

First he complains that he is destitute of succors, 1. Complaint.
and comforts from God above, in that the Lord himself is against him, and
does overthrow, compass, refuse, cross, strip, Job 19. v. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
and oppose him; and at last lets loose (a proper word for our case and
time) his troops, to encampe round about his tabernacle.

Secondly, he complains, Second.
that Civil and external helpers do forsake him; All relations did shrink
at once, brethren are removed, Verse. 13 14.
and friends estranged, Kins-folk fail, and familiar friends have forsaken
him. His own family do alienate, and account him as a stranger; Verse
15.16.17.18. Prove. 18.24.
more particularly, his servants, his wife, his children, are deaf, dumb, and
disdainful.

Yet you will say, there is a bosom friend that sticks closer then a brother?

But his inward friends (or the men of his secrets) they abhorred him: yet the
spirit of a man will support his infirmities? Yea but, Verse. 19 Third.
Thirdly, his very natural and corporal abilities do fail him too, his
bones clave to the skin, and to his flesh, and he is escaped only with the
skin of his teeth; Verse. 20.
That is, he has nothing left but his lips to moan and complain withal:
and therefore suffer him to make use of these in this doubled out-crie, and
lamentation.

Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends: for the hand of God
has touched me. The Text in 'its Eastern consideration, with particular
respect to Job himself, Division.
may fitly be called, The plundered man's out-crie: But in 'its Western reading,
with reference to us and our Country, let it be entitled, The petition of the
West. In which observe,

First, the Petitioner, that is in the letter, Job: once the richest, now the
poorest; still the holiest man in the East. But in the antitype our desolate
Country, Me.

Secondly, the Petitioned, they are Jobs three friends, of whom mention was
made before, Now when Jobs three friends heard of all this evil which was come
upon him, Job ^^.
they came every one from his own place: Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the
Shuite, and Zophar the Naamathite, for they had made an appointment together to
come to mourn with him, and to comfort him. Ye my friends.

Thirdly, the Prayer of the Petition: and through it I must lead you a little
further, into two particulars therein contained, which are,

First, the matter prayed for, that is, Compassion, sympathy: Have pity.

Secondly, the form of the prayer; it is sharpened and quickened, both with an
Interjection, which shows that his tongue was too narrow for his heart, [O;]
and with a double repetition, of the act, and of the object: Of the act, Pity,
Pity; Of the object, Me, Me. The act is doubled, to show that he had need of
double pity; The object, to show that he had double need of that compassion.

Fourthly and finally, the ground of the whole Petition, in the last clause:
for the hand of God has touched me: where note

The author, or inflicter, God: which shows his sorrow to be divine; and from
above: and not so much a punishment for sin, as an affliction, and trial, but
withal unavoydable.

Then the instrument, (if I may so call it) his hand, which signifies the
weight; one of his fingers being more heavy then the whole loins of the
greatest of men, especially, when that hand does touch him, that is, touch him
home, and to the quick: for so you may here understand that expression. The
more full explanation of all these terms may be given anon, when I shall
again fetch them about in my application. For present only thus much. As I was
loath to set a whole loaf before you, and therefore have thus divided the Text:
so I am as unwilling to crumble out all these particulars into several
Doctrines, which were the way Non plura faciunt, sed minutiora Quintil.
not to make more matter of this verse, but less. I shall therefore take this
one Observation from the whole; That

The deep aflictions of friends do call for double compassion.

This Observation is the express image of the Text. Only there may lie one
objection against the latitude of my inference, which is this.

Jobs case, and cry in the Text, were but particular, and personal: this
conclusion in the Doctrine seems to be general, and indefinite: and it is
against the laws of Logic to draw so broad an inference from so narrow
premises?

enthimem, yet it shall be proved, and granted by an induction. Let us
therefore look abroad into other scriptures after two other kinds of proofs;
viz:

First, divine precepts from God.

Demonstrations, by
Secondly, humane presidents from the Saints: both these do strengthen my
assertion.

First, Divine precepts.
Divine precepts; This book of Job seems to have recorded this same text more
then once. To him that is afflicted, (or to him that melts) pity should be
showed from his friends. The former part of the verse seems to be the ground
of the latter, Job 6.14.
namely, because he is afflicted, therefore his friends should pity him. And
the neglecter of this duty is charged with no less then want of the fear of
God, in the close of the verse; but he forsakes the fear of the Lord. He,
i.e. the man which omitteth this friendly office.

Next, to show how received, and common a truth this is: the spirit of God
speaking by the wisest of Kings does turn it into a common proverb, setting
it down among the rest, A friend (that is, as a friend) loves (or ought to
love) at all times, and a brother (whether natural, Pro. 17.17.
civil, or spiritual,) is borne for adversity; So then, compassion in
distress is a principal both act, and duty of friendship. Nay the wise man
has a second proverb to the same purpose, A man that has friends (especially
if distressed) must show himself friendly, Prove. 18.24.
(chiefly in compassion) and there is a friend that sticks closer then a
brother.

But this is specially a Gospell-precept; hear the Doctor of the Gentiles,
Romans 12.10.
be kindly affectioned one to another, with brotherly love; (or in the love of
brethren.) But this inward impression, must have its outward expression too,
distributing to the necessities of the Saints, Verse. 13.
that is, making things common, both good and evil, wants and fulness: Verse. 15.
Then it follows, rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them that
weep; that is, hold a Christian sympathy with your brethren on both hands; in
prosperity, with them that rejoice; and in adversity, with them that weep.

Also see in the Epistle to the Hebrews: Let brotherly love continue. Heb.
13.1, 2, 3
Be not forgetful to entertain strangers. Remember them that are in bonds as
bound with them; and them that suffer adversity, as being your selves also in
the body. It seems this duty of sympathizing, is to man's nature like that of
sanctifying the Sabbath; there is a special enmity against it, and oblivion of
it, in the heart and mind of man, out of sight, out of mind: and therefore
there was need of a Memento to be prefixed to both; Remember that thou keep
holy the Sabbath day: And Remember them that are in bonds. 1 Pet. 3.8.
For a close of this head, take in St. Peter's finally; Finally, be all of one
mind, having compassion one of another: Love as brethren, (or, loving to the
brethren) be pitiful, be courteous. All these are divine precepts from the
Lord.

Secondly, Humane Presidents of the Saints; and here, in the mouths of two or
three witnesses, 2. Humane Presidents. viz.
every word of this truth will be enough established; Let Vriah a noble Worthy,
and a valiant Commander in Israel, (though by nation an Hittite) be the first:
In David's reign the people of Israel were engaged in a just offensive war
against Ammon, 1. Uriah. 2 Samuel 11.
and General Joab with his army was now beleaguering Rabbath, the City of
waters. In the time of this leaguer, noble Vriah upon occasion is sent to
Jerusalem, the place where his wife and family resided; and having dispatched
his message to David, the King does presently command and invite him to visit
his own house, Go down to thy house, Verse. 18.
and wash thy feet, There is a command; And there followed him a mess of
meat from the King, there is an invitation: Verse. 9.
But he would not go, but stepped at the door of the Kings house with all the
servants of his Lord: He preferred a board, or bench, before a married bed for
his lodging; and chooses (suppose) the Kings guard for his bed-fellows, rather
then his own dear beautiful Bathsheba; And being demanded the reason of so
strange and unsouldier-like an act of mortification, Verse 11.
hear his answer, and consider it, And Uriah said unto David, The Arc, and
Israel, and Judah, abide in Tents, and my lord Ioab, and the servants of my
lord are encamped in the open fields, shall I then go into my house to eat,
and to drink, and to lie with my wife? As thou live, and as thy soul
lives, I will not do this thing. Verse ^3.^.
The next day David inticeth him again, making him to eat and to drink in
his presence; but he is still the same: O that the mortification of this
stranger, this Hittite, in a time of a foreign offensive war, might be our
pattern; nay, might not rise up in judgment against us natives in these days
of our civil and defensive combustions!

Next, turn to the practice of honest Mephibosheth, being nphew in a direct
line to King Saul; The Civil troubles of David, 2. Mephibosheth.
by Absoloms insurrection, did seem to open a way for this Prince toward the
Crown; yet see his carriage during the time that David and the loyal party
were in a state of banishment: you may read in his outward garb, his inward
compassion to the persecuted party, 2 Samuel 19.24
and Mephibosheth the Son (or Nephew) of Saul had neither dressed his feet,
nor trimmed his beard, nor washed his clothes, from the day that the King
departed, till the day that he came again in peace. From toe to head you might
have read (and almost have smelt) in his unwashen feet, untrimmed beard, and
nastie clothing, the present squallid condition of the public.

But lastly and chiefly, among all Court examples, holding forth this truth to
the life, Nehemiah chap 1.2.
consider high, and holy Nehemiah; This man, of a Jewish Captive, was made a
Babylonish Courtier, a meniall servant, yea a Cup Bearer, to the then greatest
of Emperors Artaxerxes Longimanus; Sufficient preferment, one would think, to
have taken off his affections from the rubbish and ruins of desolate Judah,
and to have planted them in the Caldean soil; But yet his heart does hang
home-ward, and still stands Westward, notwithstanding all this; He is ever and
anon hearkening out what news from the West, the distressed land of his
nativity; Hanani one of my brethren came, Nehem. 1.2.
he and certain men of Judah, and I asked them concerning the Jews that had
escaped, which were left of the captivity, Verse. 3.
and concerning Jerusalem. And they said unto me, The remnant that are left of
the Captivity there in the provinces, are in great affliction, and reproach:
the wall of Jerusalem also is broken down, and the gates thereof are burnt with
fire. Hereupon his ear affects his heart, and the sadness of his heart does
break out into his sorrowful face: he wears in his sad countenance the
mourning liverie of his slaughtered Country, and that so legibly, that
heathenish Artaxerxes could not choose but read it there. Nehem 2.2.
Wherefore the King said unto me, Why is thy countenance sad, seeing thou art
not sick. This is nothing else but sorrow of heart. The time would fail me to
speak of mournful Jeremiah, Ier. 9.1.
who wished that his head were waters, and his eyes fountains of tears, that
he might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of his people. And
afterward he poured out his sorrow into a whole treatise of Lamentations,
which is but as a cisterne from that fountain. Also of beloved Daniel, who
though he were Viceroy to the then greatest of Emperors, yet did still seek
the welfare of his Western Country, by extraordinary prayer and
supplication, Dan. 9.3
with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes, until he obtained it. And at another
time he does hazard his life to pray thrice a day toward his Country. Though
he could not get home into those parts, yet he is ever and anon opening his
window, or casement, to look as far Westward as he can, and to send his
prayers (as that Roman did his book) Westward: for so lay Jerusalem from
Chaldea, as our Country does now from London. But of these things we may
speak more in the closure of this whole discourse. So much at present for
demonstration.

Reproof to Western.
rebuke to all such as are wanting in tender compassions to their afflicted
brethren. These are the days in which the whole kingdom of England, but
especially the Western parts thereof, are in the same condition with that
poor traveller in the Gospel; Luke 10.30.
A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves,
which stripped him of his raiment, and wounded him, leaving him half dead. All
the cruelty mentioned in this verse, has befallen our native West, namely,
stripping of raiment, wounding deeply, and half killing; only those following
words which do savor of some mercy, cannot be applied unto us; the thieves
are not yet departed, they have not left our Country, though it be more then
half dead. But now, to follow the parable, how many unmercifull Priests,
Levits, and others, Verse. 31, 32.
are there to be found, both at home and abroad, which when they have looked
upon us, do passe-by on the other side? yea and (some distressed persons have
tried it, that) there is more compassion to be found from some Samaritans
(strangers and non-professors) then from many of those.

Believe it, brethren, those heathenish sins which St. Rom 1.31. (...). Mat.
24.12.
Paul calls want of natural affection, and unmercifulness; and those worst
of times, in which (our Savior says) the love of many shall wax cold, are
fallen upon our present generation: Yea so it is, that by how-much the more the
objects of pity and compassion are increased and do abound, by so-much the
less is pity exercised, by so-much the more does it decrease.

But because generalities do neither convince the mind, nor pierce the heart,
I shall therefore endeavor to divide this reproof, and level it more
particularly at several sorts of offenders.

First, I shall but mention all cursing and cursed Edomits, who, instead of
pitying, 1. Edomitish Enemies.
do rejoice over the afflictions of their brethren; Such Edom^ts I mean, who
in the day of Jerusalem, cried, Psalm. 17.7. Ob^d v. 11.
R^^^e it, raze it, even to the foundation thereof. Who stood on the other
side, in the day that the strangers carried away captive his brothers forces,
Ver. 11.
and forreiners entered into his gates. But thou should not have looked on
the day of thy brother (says Obadia^) on the day that he became a stranger,
neither should thou have rejoiced over the Children of Judah in the day of
their destruction: neither should thou have spoken proudly in the day of
distress.

As often as I read over that shortest Prophet me thinks, I see again, before
mine eyes, the sad march of Gods people out of the Cities of Bristoll and Exon:
and the march of our late army of Martyrs out of Lestithell in Cornwall about
August or September last: but many of those Edomitish enemies which then looked
on, rejoiced, and spoke proudly, (being since out off) have already answered
for that fact before the great tribunal: and as for others which did it
through ignorance, I shall pray the Father of mercies to give them repentance,
and to forgive them: only let me tell them for present, (...).
that this sin is more base then envy it self; and does argue that men have
put off both christianity and humanity; I shall therefore exhort them to read
over both the threatening prayer, and the thundering prophecy of the Psalm and
Chapter forementioned; beseeching the Father of spirits to set them home upon
their consciences.

But there are other two sorts of offenders remaining, to whom I did especially
intend this reproof, and those are such friends, and children, of the West, as
do want the bowels of brotherly compassion.

Secondly then to such friends; when I say friends, I take the word in as great
a latitude, 2. Jobs- like Friends.
as it has in the Text, even for all such as ought to be friends to the West,
that is, all true English protestant hearts, though borne or living Northward,
Southward, Eastward: sure I am that we are all members of the same British
body; 1 Cor 12.21, 12.
neither can the Eastern head, or the Northern, or Southern arms, say to
the Western feet, (call us so) we have no need of you. Then give me leave, O
ye fellow members, to reason with you a little, concerning the sufferings of
the West: I doubt not but you do all know, that England has a West; but have
you ever seriously considred the vast extent, and the deep extremities of those
Counties, which we call Western?

Have you ever been hitherto convinced, that there is now no sorrow in the
whole land like unto their sorrow, Lamen^. 1.1^.
wherewith the Lord has afflicted them in the day of his fierce anger? And do
you withal believe, that those people have been some of the first and deepest
in suffering, but are some of the last and least in all revivings?

I have read of a people which every morning do worship the rising sun toward
the East, but at evening they do daily curse the setting sun toward the West.
There is an allusion to that custom too generally practiced in this land; some
men's hearts and hopes, are touched from the North as a Needle with a loadstone,
and they will stand and expect redemption no way but Northward, toward our
justly honored and succesfull brethren. (Oh but take heed of leaning with a
full weight upon a walking staff, though never so handsome and useful.) Mr.
Marshal at Mr. Pines Funeral
Others do lift up their eyes wholly to this City of refuge, this great
Eastern mountain, from whence alone they conceive comes their help:

But, alas, all this while the backs of all these are generally turned upon the
deserted South-west: yea and too many are apt almost to curse that Country of
the setting of the sun, as the most unhappy and unworthy part of the kingdom;
Zech 8.^.
and for the truth of this, I do appeal to the memories, and consciences of
many present. Let us come nearer; Brethren, have not the straights of other
lesser parties, petty Towns, and mere Parishes of the Kingdom, affected the
hearts, and filled the mouths of many in this place, with much sympathy, and
loud complaints in their behalf; when at the same time potent armies, spacious
Countries, and very considerable places in the West, have fought, and cried,
and sunck, without any great pity, noise, or notice, in these parts? Nay have
not some of your selves observed, that the distresses of some garrisoned houses
(in the name of Castles) beleagured. have been strongly ecchoed by many, both
to the Lord in prayers, and to the high Court of Parliament in petitions;
whilst some Western Cities, and City-like Towns, have for a long time
together stretched out their hands, and lifted up their voices for help, but
all in vain? Here thou, poor Exon, laboring under a well-nigh four months
tedious siege, might seasonably ask, how many notes or bills were that
while publicly put up for thee in the congregations in this place? I have
heard of one young man that put up some two or three. And thou faithful
Plymouth, together with thy cordial, and considerable Sisters, and Neighbors,
Dartmouth, Barnstable, Lyme, Taunton, etc. might second this complaint with
an outcry.

Alas, poor helpless, and almost hopeless West! And art thou alone, as one
borne out of due time? Art thou the only speckled bird, the mountains of
Gilboa, when other parts have the seasonable, comfortable dewes of help and
pity?

Brethren, pardon my just filial affections? I shall endeavor to walk evenly
in my complaint, betwixt impiety to my Country, and partiality toward the
truth: The sins of young Cham, and old Ely, are both alike abominable in my
account; and in this temper let us argue the matter yet a little further, in
answering the charges laid against us.

Western folk (will some say) are an unworthie people.

sinful inferences from sorrowful premises, by concluding that such a man,
or people are wicked, because they are wretched, sinners because sufferers:
This was the false sophistry of Jobs three friends, for which the Lord does as
it were enjoyne them penance, Job. 42.7, 8.
and amerceth them, in the end of that book. Nay this was the barbarous
Malta-logick of those Islanders, amongst whom St. Paul was cast ashoare at
M^lita. And when the Barbarians saw the venomous beast hang on his hand, Acts
28.4.
they said among themselves, No doubt this man is a murderer, whom (though he
has escaped the Sea, yet) vengance suffers not to live.

But when he shook off the beast into the fire, Verse 5.
they did as easily change their opinions to the other extreme: and indeed,
none are more light and lavish in applauding, then those which are most rash
and severe in censuring: But this fault (I find) may overtake the disciples
themselves, ^^h. 9.^, 2.
When they saw a man that was blind from his birth, they asked Jesus, Master,
who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind? Christ's answer
tells us, that the Lord has many other principal ends and causes for
afflicting his people, besides their sins: as there, his end was that the works
of the Lord should be made manifest; Verse 3.
so in Jobs case, he meant to set up a pattern of patience, and of the reward
thereof. And in that of Paul, he intended to honor the person and ministry of
his servant, in the eyes and hearts of the Barbarians.

Objector charge again; telling us that Cowardice, and Covetousness, lost
the West.

generally, in the words of an Iraset q^an dona^e vilius conslat. Mart.
acute Heathen, that it is more cheap and easy to fall out with the
distressed, then to relieve their distresses: But I will speak particularly to
the several charges of Cowardice, and Covetousnes.

First, to that of Cowardice, I could return many answers, viz. 1. To the
Charge of Cowardice.


1. Who is he (I pray you) that is the God of the spirits of all flesh, whose
prerogative it is (especially in warlike actions) both to heighten the spirits
of the faint, and to flatten the courage of the mighty? And when did the Lord
so evidently and ordinarily exercise this his spiritual prerogative, as in the
present wars of his people in this Land? Doubtless, brethren, it is not all
Cowardice and treachery, which we do commonly call so in these times, though
(I confess) there has been too much of both sorts, almost continually amongst
us; and I could wish that the extraordinary finger of God, in this spiritual
particular, might be more observed, and acknowledged.

2.
Secondly, remember that those Western combustions did begin with the present
general and public wars: So that it was then the very Tyrocinium of all our
Soldiery; the first and sudden shooting of Guns in earnest; at which it is
common, even for valiant men, a while to wink at the firing, and to startle at
the report of an Ordnance: these and suchlike allayes might be given. But

3.
Thirdly, I do answer by denying that charge of Cowardice, upon that At
Minedip Hills in Sommerset about 30000. Commons appeared at once for the
Parliament, in the beginning against the Generallny of their Gentry. In Devon
at 2. several times at least 10000. each time, all completely armed, and paid
by the same County: And great forwardnes in the rest of the Counties, Cornwall
it self not excepted.
Country, as unjust: and for proof of that denial, could easily bring forth a
whole cloud of public and real witnesses, as the numerous frequent free
appearances of great armies of common people upon slender summons, or rather
upon bare leave to appear; their willing tedious attendances at their own
charges, and begging permission to fall on, etc. And all this amidst often and
heavy discouragements; Some Counties going on against the stream of those
which should have been their Leaders; but did destroy the way of their Paths:
Others had such Leaders, as as would have caused them to err, Isai. 9.16.
yea, as would have guided them, as that Prophet led the blindfold Syrians
into Samaria instead of Dotham: yet still the poor willing Commons, leaving
both the Kings highway, and their Malignant Gentry, continued appearing,
waiting, marching, and fighting, though in many places like sheep without a
shepherd, until it has pleased the Lord, out of his secret Counsel, and for
our sins to give us up as a prey to the will of our enemies.

2. To the Charge of Covetousness.
Secondly, for answer to the charge of Covetousness; ask of others, and they
shall tell you: Ask the public and private Treasurers for
Ireland-subscriptions, (both gifts and adventures) for the Parliament
Propositions, and for our own particular Western wars and fortifications;
all these will abundantly certify you.

But, as that proportionist did draw the whole stature of Hercules by the print
of his foot; so I could give you out of one of those five Shires (best known
to my self) a guess of the cordial munificence of the whole: 150000^. out of
Devon. and Exon. Beside their sufferings.
If many scores of thousands have been laid out by one single County, then
admire the vast expenses of all the five.

But it is still objected, enemies were few and contemptible at the first.

Alas, enemies of the whole Kingdom at the beginning, perchance fewer then
ours: remember the little cloud at Nottingham; and by that you may see.
Secondly, that the race is not to the swift, Eccles. 9.11.
nor the battle to the strong, but time and change happens to them all,
(says the wise Preacher) especially, (thirdly,) when the Lord of Hosts
creates trouble to a sinful people, and gives commission to his revenging
sword to pass through a Land; believe it, then they are not all your strength,
and counsel, power, and policy, that can sheath up, or keep off, such an enemy?

But why did you lose so vast, so easily?

1.
doubtless the meritorious causes were our sins; and the safest construction,
and best application that we Western exiles can make of our sufferings, will
be to take up that of lamenting Jeremiah, Lament. 3.39.
Wherefore does a living man complain? (It is a mercy that we are men, and not
beasts, that we are alive this day, and not fallen among the slain) a man for
the punishment of his sins? that is, the Lord has done us no wrong; we do
suffer justly, yea mercifully for our trespasses. -- Let us search and try our
ways, and turn again to the Lord: That is, self examination, and
selfe-reformation, Verse 40.
are our most proper and profitable Lessons. But secondly, if you do ask us
[why we lost our Country?] with reference unto you of these parts, then I must
further add something negatively, 2. Negatively.
something affirmatively to stop censures, and to give you instruction:
Negatively thus, Think not ye that our dwellings have therefore cast us out,
because we were greater sinners then you; But as Christ said to those
Inquisitous persons in the Gospel, -- I tell you nay, Luke 13.12, 3, 5. Verse 6.
but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. And you know what
immediately follows in the same chapter. It is the Parable of the Figtree,
that had bin long time suffered in the vineyard, etc. So negatively: But next I
apply Affirmatively, Affirmatively.
Perhaps we are driven hither from our Native Country for your sakes, that we
might give an Alarm to some Thomases in these parts, which would not believe
until they could thrust their hands into the sides, and their fingers into the
hands and feet, of their wounded brethren. Perhaps we are driven hither, that
the Lord might give you a princely correction upon our skin, and might make us,
(Ministers and people,) as it were your Ionases; that is, men, women, and
children, sent, as out of the belly of hell, where the waters (of ungodlines
and affliction) compassed us about, even to the soul, Jonah 1.5.
the depth closed us round about, the weeds were wrapped about our heads -- and
all this that we might (still Jonah-like) -- arise and go to this great City,
and preach unto it, Jonah 3.2.
the preaching that be shall bidus: if so, then our Text shall be that of St.
Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, with an easy mutation, -- well: because of
our sins we were broken off, and thou London stand by mercy; Rom 12.20.
Be not high minded, but fear; And let our short application of it be this, to
the several sorts of people amongst you:

First, oh ye blinded Malignants! believe in time, that the adverse party
(called Cavaliers) are, Advice to Malignants.
beyond all that you have heard, blasphemous, treacherous, and cruel, against
God and man, enemies and friends, promiscuously; and do not refuse that
instruction, which has been dearly purchased for you, by the blood and estates
of others.

Next, oh ye Neuters, and carnall-compounders! believe in time, that God and
men, both good and evil men, Neuters.
yea very Satan himself does abhor a Neuter; and that this kind of sin, if
it be found in a place, that place may expect the reward of Succoth and Penuel,
Judges 8.6, 7, 8, 9, 16, 17.
even to be demolished, torn in pieces, and taught with briars and thorns; If
in a person, that person may look for the wages of Balaam, which had no
recompense from Balak, and was slame by the sword of Israel. Finally, oh ye
secure and wanton Professors, Professors.
which do despise your old mannah, as light bread, and are grown dizzy by
extraordinary light; roll your selves in ashes, cry mightily, because of your
new vanities, and reform without delay; or else be ye assured (by your
neighbors experience) that God can bring upon you such a spiritual famine, as
shall cause you to leap for a crust, for a bit of your old bread, and yet go
without it.

Brethren all at once, All. Luke 16 30.
be ye not more deaf or stubborn, then the brethren of that rich man in the
Gospel, for whom he did undertake, that if one went unto them from the dead,
they would repent. Behold, we Western exiles are as so many Monitors,
broken-loose from the grave: Let therefore our temporal losses and undoings,
be your spiritual gain and commodities. So much to the friends of the West,
to all Iobs-like friends.

3. Forgetful children. Such are,
Thirdly, the reproof of unmercifulness must be directed to the Children of
the West, even to such as were hewn out of the Western hills and rocks, and
were dug out of those pits and valleys. Some of you, I know, have been long
since transplanted into this City, and other soyles, and thereby (perhaps) have
lost somewhat of your Western sap and nature: others were more larely plucked
up violently by the roots, and are at present but covered with earth enough to
keep life in them, until their replantation; I shall speak freely to both
together, but especially to the latter sort, the exiled, scattered sons and
daughters of the West.

How many are there amongst us, Amos 6.1.
which do justly fall under the reproof and woe threatened by Amos? Woe to
them, that are at ease (or secure) in Zion, etc. He goes on through diverse
verses, describing the unseasonable sins of that people; but the burden and
sting of all to them and us, lies in the latter end; but they are not grieved
for the affliction, Verse. 6.
or breach of Joseph. That expression [ the breach of Ioseph] may have a double
reference: First, it may refer to the Patriarch Joseph, who being in Egypt
imprisoned by Potiphar, did engage Pharaohs butler, Genesis 41.14, 15, 1^.
his fellow prisoner, by a courtesy, but was soon after forgotten of him; for
when the man was set at liberty, and readvanced, he remembered not the
kindness, and durance of Joseph: so I fear, lest too many of our late
Western sufferers, upon new preferment, may forget the old kindnesses of some
that are now (perhaps) imprisoned. Next, Amos his expression [ the affliction
of Ioseph] may refer to the tribes of Joseph, which were Ephraim, and
Manasses: these were miserably broken by the enemy, about the time of this
prophecy; but were little pitied by the rest of the tribes their brethren. The
application of that text is easy: our Country, and Countrie-men have lately
been broken with a sore breach; yea they are continually broken with breach
upon breach: One man's back is broken with taxes, another heart is broken with
taunts, and a third sort have their necks broken by the Gibbet, at the pleasure
of the enemy: and yet how unapt are we to grieve constantly for all these
breaches of Joseph?

But these forgetful ones, are of diverse sorts: As,

1. Delicate Exiles, in general both sexes.
First, all your delicate exiles, a strange contradiction to a serious, and
sober ear! but such there are, and such there have been; as in the time of
Amos 6.1.
Amos (forementioned) Let us look back upon that place once again. Their
general charge was Security, they were secure or at ease, and did trust in
the Mountain of Samaria; that is, themselves were in a strong hold, in a
fortified City, and therefore thought all well enough: hereupon the Lord
sends them to other strong holds that were already demolished. Verse 2.
Pass ye unto Calnch and see, and from thence go ye to Hemath the great;
then go down to Gath of the Philistines. That is, remember York that was lost
in the North, (though it be since re-taken) consider Bristell and Exon, yea all
Ireland, in the West. So in general. Next, he reproves more particularly
their delicacie; Verse 4.
first in Lodgings, that lie upon beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon
their Couches. 2 Samuel 11.9.
How far does this differ from the Lodging of mortified Vriah? But Vriah
slept at the door of the Kings house, with all the servants of his lord, Verse.
11.
and went not down to his house, because the Arc, and Israel, and Judah, abide
in Tents. Next, Amos reproves their delicacie in Diet, both for meats and
drinks: -- and eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the
midst of the stall. It seems the muttons and beeves were too course and gross
for them; Amos 6.6. Dan. 10.3.
and they drink wine in bowls, How far is this also from the diet of Daniel,
I eat no pleasant bread (or bread of desires) neither came flesh, nor wine in
my mouth etc? Lastly, for their clothing, and manner of living; they chaunt (or
quaver) to the sound of the viol, Amos 6.5.
and invent to themselves instruments of music, like David. How far was this
from the temper of Syons exiles, in the Psalmist, who being called to sing,
Psalm. 137.3, 4.
hanged their harps upon the willows, with this answer, How shall we sing the
Lords song in a strange land?

But now, to parallel this text of Amos, have we not too many, even amongst our
exiles, who, in respect of apparel, rather wear upon their backs the foolish
livery of delicate Agag; 1 Samuel 15.
then the mortified mourning weed of their dying Country? And as for the other
particulars of diet, lodging, and other accommodations, they do come up fully
to the sin of Israel, described, and threatened by the Prophet Isaiah: Isa.
23.7, 2.
in the day (says he) of flight and tumults, of fortifications and preparing
for war, even in that day, did the Lord God of hosts call to weeping, and to
mourning, and to baldness, Verse 12, 13.
and to girding with sackcloth. And behold, joy and gladness, slaying oxen,
and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine: But what is the issue? The
Lord whispereth this sentence in the ear of his Prophet, Verse 14.
Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die, says the
Lord God of hosts: And in the next verses Shebna (a sumptuous Treasurer) is
made an examplary proof of the truth of that sentence, Behold, the Lord (says
Isaiah) will carry thee away with a mighty captivity, Verse. 15, 16, 17, 18.
and will surely cover thee. He will surely violently turn and toss thee like
a ball into a large Country: there shall thou die, etc. oh read and tremble,
ye delicate exiles!

But let me speak this reproof yet more particularly to all our delicate
female exiles, More particularly to women. 1 Pet. 1.1.
because I find the scripture especially lessoning them against this sin: Thus
St. Peter, directing his Epistle to the elect strangers scattered thoroughout
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, particularly charge the
women that were amongst them, 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4.
that their adorning be not that outward adorning, of plaiting the hair, and
of wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel: but let it be (says he) the
hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible. There is first a
negative; they must avoid the curious vanities in apparel, that were most
fashionable in those times, and places.

And next the affirmative; they must look to the gracious habits of their
minds, of which no enemy could strip and plunder them: and in both these the
pattern proposed to them, by name, is Sarah (if I may so call her) the
Patriarchesse, 1 Pet 36.
who willingly followed her so-journing husband up and down in strange
Countries: and the benefit proposed to such women, is preservation from
womanish affrightments and amazements, unto which that sex is too prone,
especially in cases of exile and banishment, and are not (shall not be) afraid
with any amazement. This was a proper lesson (you see) for such strangers, 1
Pet. 2.11.
and Pilgrims as they were.

Now as for you, beloved, see then that ye take heed, and beware of that great
sin of many of your sex in these times, who do expend so much in discovering
their own nakedness, as would suffice to cover the nakedness of many. And,
that you may take heed of this great offense, remember the heavy threatening of
Esaias, against the delicacy of women in such sad and breaking times: Isai. 3.1,
2.
-- When the Lord of Hosts does take away the stay, and the staff; The mighty
man, and the man of war, the Judge, the Prophet, Verse 24.
prudent and ancient, etc. then the delicate women may expect -- in stead of
sweet smell, a stink; and in stead of a girdle, a rent; and in stead of well
set hair, baldness; and in stead of a stomacher, a girding of sackcloth; and
burning, in stead of beauty. So much for the delicate exiles and children of
the West, both Sons and Daughters.

2. Covetous exiles, and
Secondly, let me speak to all such Covetous and ambitious exiles, as do also
forget the breach of their Brother Joseph. The first of these, namely, the
Covetous ones, are sharply and largely reproved by St. James; James 1.1.
who, writing to the twelve Tribes scattered abroad, rebukes them, especially
for this sin of worldliness, James 4.1, 2.
when he says, -- From whence come wars and sightings (or brawlings) among
you? come they not hence, even of your Lusts, that war in your members? What
Lusts? Surely, the Lust of the eyes, (for so it follows) -- Ye lust, and
have not: Ye kill, and desire to have, Verse 4.
and cannot obtain: And again, Know you not, that the friendship of the world
is enmity with God? And anon he reproves them which say (to day,) To day, or
to morrow, Verse 13.
we will go into such a City, and continue there a year, and buy, and sell,
and get gain. Such confident Exchange-language as this, does not become the
mouths of the Tribes which are scattered abroad, though it be the common sin
of the dispersed Jews in all places to this day. So much for an Item to the
Covetous.

But next, Ambitious Exiles.
let me speak more particularly and fully to all incompassionate Ambitious
exiles, which do seek great things for themselves in evil times. I will
propound Baruch to be their warning-piece, and his chapter to be their Lesson:
It Is recorded in the prophecy of Jerem. Ier. 15. per totum.
45. throughout. That little chapter, consisting but of five verses, was penned
purposely (it seems) for little Baruch, the son of Neriah; and prophetically
for all others of his spirit, to the end of the world. Let us therefore view it
a little. Ier. 45.1. Ier. 36 1, 2, 4, 5, etc. compared with let. 25.1, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12.
The whole is chiefly Reprehensory, an in it we may observe, First, the Time:
this word was spoken when Baruch had written these words in a book at the
mouth of Jeremiah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah King of
Judah; that is, so soon as Baruch had done his work of transcribing the Roll,
and reading it to the people; for which (like enough) he expected some good
piece of preferment: even in that same year, (being the fourth year of
Jehoiakim) in stead of preferment, he meets with a Prophecy of utter
desolation, and seventy years captivity by Nebuchad-rezzar; as you may find by
comparing those two places: There it is said, This whole land shall be a
desolation, and an astonishment, and these nations shall serve the King of
Babylon seventy years, etc. This is the Time of that Chapter. Next, observe
the Faults reproved in Baruch; which were these: ^er. 45.3.
First, a dastardly sinking and despondency of mind; because (it seems) his
rising expectation was frustrate: Thou did say, Woe is me now, for the
Lordhath added grief to my sorrow; I fainted in my sighing, and I find no
rest. Next, a vain ambitious selfe-seeking: Verse 5.
And seek thou great things for thy self? These faults of his are evinced
to be doubly sinful, in these words, Verse 4.
Thus says the Lord, Behold, that which I have built, will I break down; and
that which I have planted, I will pluck up, even this whole land. And
therefore, (as if he had said) Thy sin, O weak Baruch, the Amanuensis, or
Scribe of Jeremiah, is both unreasonable and unseasonable at this time. What is
more unreasonable, than for a man to imagine that his own Cabine can be safe,
when the whole Ship is a sinking? that which I have built, will I break down.
Or, what is more unseasonable, than, when the axe is laid to the root of the
tree, for a silly bird to begin then to build her nest upon the top branches,
Verse 5.
or to sit hatching therein? and that which I have planted will I pluck up,
even this whole land. Nay, behold, (further says the Lord) I will bring evil
upon all flesh: and therefore it will be well and fair for thee, to have
thine own life for a prey, Ier 39.16, 17, 18. Ier. 40.1, 2, etc.
in all places whither thou go; yea, that is as much as I have given to thy
Master Jeremiah, and to his friend my servant Ebed-melech already.

And now, to apply this most seasonable Chapter: Alas, alas! How many such
Baruchs (little men of great expectations) are there to be found, even amongst
Exiles, in these days of breaking down and plucking up? Yea, this sin is
too near (I fear) unto some of the sons and servants of the Prophets: There
are too many Baruchs about the Ministry, as there are too many Gehazies in the
Commonwealth. By Baruchs, I mean such who having been lately destitute
Levites, like Micha's Jonathan in the book of Judges, Judge. 17 7, 8, 9.
so that they might have said every one of them as he, I am a Levite, of
Bethlehem Judah, and I go to sojourne where I may find a place; yet after a
little shelter and succor received, they are not content with a subsistence;
but are shifting and clambring for more shekels, and higher preferment; like
the same Jonathan: to whom when the Danites suggested, Judge. 18.19, 20.
Is it better for thee to be a Priest unto the house of one man, or that thou
be a Priest unto a Tribe, and a Family in Israel? It Is said thereupon, The
Priests heart was glad, -- and he went in the midst of the people.

These are our Baruchs, our Jonathans, in the Ministry: But (as I said) there
are also too many Gehazies to be found in the Commonwealth. Gehazi the
servant of Elisha would needs make a hard shift, in an unseasonable time, ^
Kin. 5.20, 21.
to gain two talents of silver, and two changes of garments; but they cost him
dear in the issue, when his Master reckoned with him: The conclusion is this;
Is it a time (says Elisha to him) to receive money, and to receive garments,
and olive-yards, and vine-yards, and sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and
maidservants? Verse. 26, 17.
The Leprosy therefore of Naaman shall cleave unto thee, and unto thy seed for
ever. And he went out from his presence a Leper as white as snow. Look upon
this Text, all ye that have been servants, or of low degree, but are now
risen, by these wars, to gainful, eminent places, and offices. What! and are
you now running after nothing but treasure and bravery? Do you make it your
plot and joy to multiply shekels, and change of raiment? to wear variety of
State-gold upon your backs, when so many precious Saints do want a little of
it for their bellies? If so, I would but put Elisha's question unto you, Is
this a time thus to receive money, and to receive garments? Do ye mourn in
gold and scarlet for our common Mother, great Britain, that lies a dying? Oh
beware of entayling Gehazi's leprosy from your selves to posterity.

Finally, there are too many, even of the scattered Saints, that are infected,
in these times, with this unseasonable sin: too many there are of them that
do too well like of the places of their banishment, Math. 17.4.
saying, as Peter in the Mount, It is good for us to be here: Yea, they are
apt to talk of buidling tabernacles in a strange place, both for themselves
and for their friends; not considering how soon a Cloud may over-shadow them,
Verse. 5 8.
and put an end to their imaginary Paradise.

But as for you, Brethren, who are the scattered Children of the West, Jer.
35.2. etc.
remember your selves to be Christian Rechabites; and therefore see that ye
do Christianly imitate that mortified Family, who, in expectation of troublous
times, did propare beforehand, by accustoming themselves to drink no wine all
their days, they, their wives, their sons, nor their daughters: Nor to build
houses to dwell in, Ver. 8, 9, 10.
neither had they vineyard, nor field, nor seed; 1 Pet. 2.11.
but dwelt in tents. So, my dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and
pilgrims, abstain from fleshly (and from ambitious) lusts, which war against
the soul: and remember that we have here no continuing City. Let it therefore
be our care not to build houses, nor to plant vineyards in this place; but
still to retain (our animum revertendi,) our purpose to return: yea, though
we are enforced for our present necessary subsistence to make some little
plantation here a while; yet let it be but like that plantation of the
Gardener, when he does set his Flowers in a Pot of earth, so that they may be
easily removed from place to place, in change of weathers: in like manner let
us so plant our selves and families in these Eastern parts, that we may be
in a fit posture to be carried Westward, Pots and all, so soon as the Lord
shall be pleased to shine again upon those Countries. So much concerning
reproof.

exhortation: Exhortation to pity the West.
In the beginning whereof I must tell you, though the Text and history are
altogether Eastern, yet this branch of application must be wholly Western;
and therefore I would have you now to take the words, as the common cry of all
the distressed Counties, Cities, Market Towns, Parishes, houses, and persons,
of the Iob-like West this day. Suppose, brethren, that you heard all the
well-affected of those Counties (and such I dare generally to call them still)
on the one part, roaring to his Majesty, as sometimes that mother did cry to
the King of Israel, when she had eaten her son for hunger, Help, my Lord O
King: 2 Kings 6.26.
And then imagine his Majesty answering them in the words of David, upon
another occasion, I am this day weak, 2 Samuel 3.39.
though anointed King; and these men, the sons of Zeruiah, are too hard for me
(they were his sisters two sons, Ioab, and Abishai) Make that supposition upon
the one side: But then, suppose them on the other part, crying, and yelling to
us, and to all their scattered brethren, in the words of the Text, with
addition, Oh ye Protestant, Christian, English hearts; Men, brethren, and
friends, Have pity upon us, have pity upon us, for the hand of God has
touched us.

But, I suppose, you are ready to meet this exhortation with an objection.

end, to pity the West; it is the great desire of our bowels, and the only
business of this day, to pity them: But tell us now, how can we, how may we
do this work effectually and to purpose?

chief intention, Helps to this duty; which are,
in appearing this day in this place; and has been my principal endeavor in
my preparations, (such as they are) to help you in this great duty at present:
I shall therefore desire your serious, and affectionate attention. My method,
in the whole work, shall consist of two general branches: I shall endeavor to
spread before you, First, 1.
the causes for which we ought really to pity the West; and this General will
afford us some excitations, and incentives to the duty.

2.
Secondly, the means by which we may pity them indeed; and this general
shall yield us some instructions and directions, for that friendly service.

First, First, excitations to quicken us, to consider Viz.
for our excitation and quickening, we must consider what are the evils of
those parts, because the object of pity is (Malum) Evil: Now their evils (and
indeed all evils) are of two sorts:

1.
Culpall evils, or the evils of sin; these are both the first and worst of all
evils, and therefore are in the first and chief place to be lamented, Ier.
2.19.
as says Jeremiah, who was a man well skilled in lamentations: Know therefore
and see, that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord
thy God.

2.
Penal evils, or the evils of suffering; these are the fruits and effects of
the former, 1 Cor. 15.56
as St. Paul says; the sting of death is sin; that is, misery without sin may
buzze, hiss, and scratch a little, like a Hornet, or Adder, that has lost his
sting; but it cannot pierce, and poison; as we see in every mere affliction of
the Saints: Sin alone puts the venom, the deadliness into death it self.

1.
First, then let us weep, and lament over the Countries of our nativitie:
Western sins, search for these,
because of their sins, and ours in them: Let us bewail, principally, the
greatest provocations that are, and nave been committed in those parts. When
Jobs three friends are said to come every one from his own place, for to
mourn with him, and to comfort him: Job 2.11.
there is a word used for [to comfort] which signifies likewise to mourn with
the mournings of repentance; to show, that if we would pity, and comfort our
Countries, and our selves to purpose, this is the right end to begin at;
namely, in the first place, to bewail both their sins, and our own. Lam. 3.39.
Man suffers for his sin: And it is that alone which puts all the mortal
bitterness into our cup of trembling. So Jeremiah once again: Ier. 4.18.
This is thy wickedness, because it is bitter, because it reaches unto thine
heart. Or thus, this is from thy wickedness, that he (meaning the enemy the
Chaldean) is bitter, that he reaches unto thine heart. And immediately there
follows an alarm, because of wars; my bowels, my bowels; because thou have
heard, Verse 19.
O my Soul, the sound of the trumpet, the alarm of war. Whence we learn,
by the Lords method in punishing, what must be our order in lamenting: First
the sins, then the sorrows of a Country are to be mourned over. The want of
this due order is charged against the false Prophets of Judah, as one cause (I
conceive) of her ruin. Thy Prophets have seen vain and foolish things for
thee. Why? Lam. 1.14.
they have not discovered thine iniquity. Why? What good could that discovery
do her? To turn away thy captivity. Labor we therefore to turn away the
Western Captivity, by discovering, and bewailing our Western iniquities.

impiety of Cham, who discovered his fathers nakedness; and the Partiality
of Ely, who was too indulgent to his own family?

both of these extremes, and yet to give you some special matter of
humiliation; and to that end take these two hints, helps, or directories, for
our more effectual inquiry after the sins of our Country: 1. Search after them
by their effects, and 2. By their proportions.


1. By their Effects, which are Banishing sins?
First, you may be guided to find them out by their effects; Do but ask the
word of God, What provocations especially have an ejecting, exiling, banishing
effect, that is, do cause men's houses and Countries to cast them out? For I
find that there is such a special sort of sins in Scripture, Jerem. 9.19.
Because we have forsaken the land, because our dwellings have cast us out.
Yea, I find in the word that diverse sorts of sins have this effect. Let us put
two or three Quaeres to the children of the West concerning these; every one
shall be taken out of the word of God. I will only put the questions, leaving
to your selves the pressing of them upon your selves.

1. Quaere, luke warmness, both Revel. 3.15.6. Brightman
First Quaere concerning Luke-warmenesse: I find that sin notoriously branded
as an Ejector, as an Exiler, not only of Persons, but of whole Churches at
once; I know thy works, says God to Laodicea, (and England is by Expositors
compared to that Church) that thou art neither cold nor hot; so then, because
thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth.
There, Ejection is the punishment of Luke-warmenesse. But now we are to know
further, that Luke-warmenesse has two branches; Formalitie, and 2 T^^ 3 5.
First, there is Luke-warmness in service to God, that is, Demi-coldnesse in
his worship; this is commonly called Formality, condemned by St Paul, Having a
form of godliness, but denying the power thereof. Secondly, there is a
Luke-warmeness in service for God, that is, Neutralitie. 1 Kings. 18.21.
Demi-fervour in his cause; this is ordinarily termed Neutrality, and it is
censured by Eliah, How long halt ye between two opinions? Both these texts I
have largely handled heretofore in those Countries, perhaps in the audience of
some now present; and I fear that many which then heard me, are now feeling in
those parts, the truth and weight of that word of God. Let us lie low before
the Lord for this sin.

2. Quaere, Earthlymindedness.
Next Quaere, Concerning Coveteousnesse and Earthly-mindednesse; Oh, that
basest of sins! the abomination of Clay-worshiping! It did twice eject
righteous Lot out of his beloved plains of Sodom: His sin (as Divines
conceive) was covetousness; in that he could find in his heart, to live
amongst the prodigious wicked Sodomites, for the love of their fruitful
country: And the History it self seems to hold forth as much; Genesis 13.10.
for it is said, And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plain of
Jordan, that it was well watered every where -- then Lot chose him all the
plain of Jordan: Verse 11.11, 13.
and Lot journeyed East, and dwelt in the city of the plain: then immediately
it follows; But the men of Sodom were wicked, and sinners before the Lord
exceedingly. Si^ Iunius and aln ad loc.
That is, worldly Lot was so baited with the commodity of the place, that, for
love thereof, he swallows the hook of Sodomitical neighborhood and company.
For this the Lord does first suffer the Kings of the nations to plunder and
captivate him; Gen 14.12. Verse 16.
And it was well for him that his uncle Abraham (which had made a safer choice)
did then rescue, and set him at liberty: But shortly after he does relapse, and
return to the same Sodom again, there planting himself as before; but now the
Lord takes a more through course with him, he does smoke and fire him out of
his beloved hole and nest, with brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven;
and it was Gods great mercy that he escaped with his life, leaving all his
estate behind, and losing his wife by the way; and all this was done to warn
all posterity, both persons and sexes, to take heed and beware of the ejecting
sin of Coveteousnesse.

3. Quaere, Selfishnes.
Third Quaere, Concerning Selfishnesse, or Self-love; I mean when men do
altogether seek their own things before the things that are of (that is, from,
and for,) Jesus Christ. The very Heathen Historian has left it upon record
long since, that this sin of private selfishnes, did heretofore eject our
forefathers, the ancient Britans, out of this good land, making way for the
Romans into it -- Olim regibus parebant, nunc per principes factionthus and
sludiis trahuntur: nec altud adversus validissimas gentes pro nobis vt^sius,
quam quod in commune non consulunt. Rorus duabus tribusque civitatibus, ad
propulsandum commune periculum, conventus: (vel corsersas:) ita dum siaguli
pugnant, v^versi vincuntur. Cornel. Tacit in v^t Agr. c. and Tust. Lips. ad loc
Graeciae Civiltates dum imperare sirgulae cupiunt, imp^rtu^ ^^nes perdiderunt.
Ex Justin. lib. 8.
of Old (faith he) the Britans were under one Government, but now they are
drawn in pieces by Factions and Parties; neither was there any one thing more
advantageous for us now against those most valiant natious, then that they do
not consult together in common. Seldom should you find two or three Towns
agree together for repelling the public danger; And so whilst every one did
fight, all were overcome: that is, our British forefathers were Shire-bound,
City-bound, Town-bound, Parish-bound, House-bound; and thus, whilst every man
stood with a Bucket at his own door, to save his house, the whole Town was
burned to ashes: whilst every man did look to his own Chest, the common
vessel was wrackt and sunk. Oh, it is a sad symptom, and a wild infatuation,
when men are so over-round for their own private places, that they are flat
for the public. Nay, doubtless, a man may be a Malignant to the public, by
being too selfishly zealous for his own particular Parish, Town, or Country.
But now, we are to know further, that this sin (which I call selfishnesse) does
contain diverse branches: 4. sorts of Self, viz.
They may be divided according to the several sorts of self, which are these:

1. Religious Self.
First, there is a kind of Religious self, (to begin at top) that is, a self
in matters of Religion. There may be a self in Duties, and a self in
Opinions, although both should pass under the name and show of piety,
conscience, liberty, light; for if a man does practice, or hold either of
these out of self-love, or selfe-seeking, with an eye to self, as his end and
Idol, that man must be called selfish: And his way of selfishnesse, oh how many
Countries and places, has this kind of Religious self, (the self of
opinions) utterly undone? How many people and persons has it ejected? Thus
whilst John of Leyden, and his Anabaptists at Munster, pretending Christ, and
Christian light and liberty, did undermine and eject the Orthodox Protestant
party there, at last, themselves being also cut off, way was made to bring in
the old Bishop of Munster, and his rabble again. So much for a touch
concerning Religious self; let us search diligently after this.

2. Civil Self.
Secondly, there is a Civil, or Morall-selfe; this comprehends Virtues,
Honors, Relations, etc. The love of which has been the destruction and
overthrow of many a flourishing City, Country, County. To instance but in
relations; You know how disadvantagious it was to Nehemiahs building, that so
many of his Nobles were of kin to Tobiah. Nehe. 6.17, 18, 19.
It is said, It is said, There were many in Judah sworn unto Tobiah, because he
was the son-in-law to Shechaniah, the son of Arah, and his son Iohanan had
taken the daughter of Meshullam, the son of Berechiah: The mischievous fruits
and effects of this affinity of Nehemiahs friends with Tobiahs party, are said
to be two; First continual secret intelligence with the enemy, Verse 17.
Moreover, the Nobles of Judah sent many letters unto Tobiah, (or multiplied
letters passing to Tebiah) and the letters of Tobiah came unto them. Secondly,
interceding, or speaking a good word for the enemy: Also they reported his
good deeds before me, and uttered my words (or matters) to him; and Tobiah sent
letters to put me in fear. Oh these entangling names and relations of
son-in-law, and father-in-law, of brother-in-law, and daughter-in-law! It was
son Tobiah, and Father Shechaniah; Son Iohanan, and Father Meshullam: So that
searce a Malignant in all Tobiahs party, but had some one or other to speak for
him unto Nehemiah. Remember therefore that this Civil self also has been a
great ejecting sin.

3. Natural self.
But, Thirdly, there is a Natural self too, the self of parts, of mind, and
body: every man loves the brats and issues of his own brain, as of his own
loins; his own way, projects, and inventions, in the carriage of the public
business. Hushai and Achitophel had their several projections, and the
clashing of those lost the cause of Absalom. How many enterprises since the
beginning of this war would have been more succesfull, if men had not loved
their own counsels too well? Or if men of piety, wisdom, and valor, amongst
us, had but learned that lesson of St. Phil. 2.3.
Paul, Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory; but, in lowliness of
mind, let each esteem others better then themselves? Or that resolution of
Luther, Let the work be done by others, yea by any, so as it be done?

But I will contract: 4. Sinful self. 1 John 2.16.
Fourthly and finally, there is a mere Sinful, or Lustfull-selfe, that is, the
self of sin and lust; and this is threefold, according to the three Cardinal
lusts, as they are reckoned up by St. John: The lust of the flesh; this is
pleasure: The lust of the eyes; that is profit: and the pride of life; this is
pride it self. Every of these has caused the dwellings of many Nations and
Persons to cast them out. Take a short instance or two in each. First, in the
Lusts of the flesh: Thus, that one foul act of uncleanness, committed and
defended by the Gibeathites, did almost utterly root out the tribe of Benjamin.
Justin. H^st. Homer. Iliad.
And the effeminacie of one Sardanapalus, and adultery of one Paris, did put an
end to the famous Assyrian Monarchy, and to the Trojan kingdom. Next, in the
Lusts of the eyes: Thus, the sacrilegious Covetousnes of one Achan did endanger
the whole camp of Israel; and the niggardliness of the besieged Citizens of
Constantinople lost that Eastern City and Empire to that barbarous Turkish
Sultan. 2 Chronicles. 25.17, 18, etc
Lastly, in the Pride of life: Thus (finally) King Amaziab, by his pride, lost
both Jerusalem, and himself, and all the treasures of the Lords house, and of
his own: And arrogant Senacherib, by his proud blasphemy, lost one hundred
eighty five thousand of his men in one night.

4. Quaere. Emulations etc.
Fourthly and finally, Quaere, Concerning an evil spirit of Emulation,
Distance, and Jealousy; I do add these in the last place, as the immediate
fruits of the former evil of Self-love. Emulations sometimes there are
betwixt Commander and Commander, as that betwixt Ioab and Abner, which in fine
lost the house of Saul, and did cost the lives of them both. The method was
this, First, Abner takes distaste against Ishbosbeth, 2 Samuel 3.7, 8, 9. Verse
26, 27.
because he reproved him for his uncleanness; and, soldier like, he swears
to be revenged upon him: which he does, by revolting to David. Hereupon Ioab
(David's General) grows jealous of Abners preferment, and therefore stabs
him: 2 Samuel 20 4, 9, 10. 1 Kings 2.31, 32, 33, 34.
For this (and another like act of Emulation against Amasa) Ioab himself is at
last cut off by the sword of Justice. Sometimes evil Emulations are betwixt
Commanders, or Governors, and the Common people: Such was that evil spirit
that was raised betwixt Abimelech and the men of Shechem: Judge 9.22, 23.
so that the men of Shechem dealt treacherously with Abimelech, and he cruelly
with them: And thus there came out a fire from each other, which devoured them
both; for, Verse 44, 45, 48, 49, 53.
in conclusion, the City was beaten down, and sowed with salt; the Castle or
Tower burnt with fire, and a thousand in it, men and women; and afterward, The
brains of Abimelech himself were beaten out with a millstone, from the hands of
a woman. Thus Abimelech lost his military Idol, the Idol of honor; and they
their townish Idol, the Idol of privileges. All this, to show us the
mischiefs of Emulations, and sinful jealousies. Nay, let me add this one
word more: I have some-where observed, that even the Emulations of the wives of
eminent and active persons, have proved pernicious to the public; especially
in the critical, and crasie times of reformation. Cambden in Apparat. ad
Hister. Elizabeth.
Thus, in the Reign of King Edward the sixth, the womanish Emulation, betwixt
the Queen Dowager, wife to the lord Admiral; and the Duchess of Somerset,
wife to the lord Protector his brother (they falling out about place, and
precedencie) did occasion, and cause the ruin of both their lords and
husbands: first the Admiral lost his head, and then the Duke, to the
unspeakable detriment of the common Protestant cause then in England. Beware
therefore of party-makings in Armies, in Committies, in Counties, for the
carrying on of private interests and designs.

Thus I have hitherto endeavored Theologically, by way of Quaeries, to direct
and help you, and my self, in searching out our own sins, and the sins of the
Country, for which we do mourn this day.

There is another way that may help us in this work, Other helps for the
finding out of the sins of the
which I may call Geographicall, that is, by traveling mentally over, and
thorough those several Shires, and Counties, and the principal parts, and
places of them: there observing and surveying what things and places have had
or given the greatest occasions of sin and provocation. You know, Brethren,
that every one of the five Western Counties have their especial fruits and
commodities, which they send forth unto other parts: as, the Tin of Cornwall;
the Clothing of Devon; the Lead, Coal, and Cattle of Somerset; the flocks of
Dorset; and the Corn of Wilts, are known, and famous.

So, several Counties have their special sins, and occasions of sinning, T^t.
1.1^.
that are Epidemicall amongst them, and peculiar to them: as the Cretians had
their special vices. And thus the sins of the Mines, and the sins of the
Moors, are very considerable, and did run through diverse Counties in the
West. Alas! those poor Creatures that labored in the pits of Tin, Lead, and
Coal; how were their souls made more black, and rude with Ignorance and
profaneness, then their bodies, with soot and oar? And yet who did pity
their condition? How few did look after their salvation? And therefore now you
see, those pits and places have been mines of men, and storehouses of fuel,
bullets, fire, and soldiers, for the black and profane cause of the enemy:
All this is matter of Lamentation.

1. Danmonii
Or if you will have it more particularly, let the exiled Danmonii (the people
of Devon and Cornwall) cry out, and mourn for the contentious lawsuits of
Cornwall, and for that cruel goodlucke, (I think they call it) in which there
was so much cruelty exercised upon poor ship-wrackt strangers; such as our
selves are now become, in a strange City. But chiefly let us weep blood (if it
were possible) for the veil of blindness, error, and excaecation, that lies
at present upon multitudes in that Country.

2. Belgae of Somerset.
Next, let us, the exiled Belgae of Somerset, sit down, and mourn
particularly for the sins of the Bath, and of the Bishopric of that County.
First I say of the Bath, for there the Lusts of those strangers that bathed,
did often times out-boyle (with fire of Lust) the scalding waters of the Bath:
And the Air had in it a greater scum of oaths, then was that other scum which
was found upon the waters. Oh the blasphemies, and uncleanness, of thought,
word, and action, that were committed against God and man, in that place at
every spring and fall! A Patient could hardly go thither for a cure of his
Body, but he came off with some disease or ulcer in his Soul and conscience.
Let us mourn therefore for the sins of the Bath, and weep we also for the sins
of that Bishopric above many others; for, I do not only impute the total
demolishing of Lectures in that County to that present man of sin, which is
said to have given God thanks, that he had now never a Lecture left in his
Diocese; but even to that Chire it self do I especially impute all those
Wakes, Revells, May-poles etc. that so much abounded in those parts.

Wilts.
As for the other Belgae, those of Wilts, that are rich in Corn, let them
search the Records of their hearts and memories, whether that crying and
cursing sin of Corn-hoarding has not been found amongst them; seeing the
great commodity of their Country did especially tempt them thereunto. And where
they find that great act of oppression, let them lay to heart that terrible
Proverb of the Wiseman, He, that is, Every one, Prove. 11.26.
that withholdeth Corn, that is, to raise the Market, the people shall curse
him: and that curse must needs fall heavy which comes from a multitude, by
authority from the Lord. And so much for a hint to them.

3. Durotriges.
Finally, as for (the Durotriges) the people of Dorset that abound with Flocks,
they may sit down and make diligent search after the Sheep-Masters sins. I
have not art enough to particularize; only, if any thing out of that Quaere
that is put to pastoral Reuben or Issachar may do them good, let them hear
and consider it; Judge. 5.16.
that is, let them beware of abiding amongst the sheepfolds, to hear the
bleatings of the flocks, now that there is so much blessing promised to such as
do offer themselves willingly, and that such bitter curses are flying against
those that come not up to the Lords help. Thus have I shot mine arrows
every-way: (much at an adventure, I confess) that by all means I might hit
some. These are Geographicall hints and helps to search after our ejecting
sins. And so much concerning such directions for humiliation, as are taken
from the Effect of sin.

2. By the Proportions betwixt sin and punishment; in Mich. 6.9. Kind.
Secondly, We may be directed in our sin-searching, by observing the
Proportions betwixt our sins and punishments. Punishment is the fruit and
issue of sin: and they are sometimes so well alike, that you may know the
mother by the daughter; we may see written upon the Rod, both by whom, and for
what it is appointed. Now this Proportion 'twixt sins and punishments is
manifold: There is sometimes a Proportion of Kind betwixt them; the wages are
paid in the very same metal that the work is made of. This Adonibezek, though
an Heathen, could discern, when he said, Judge. 1.7.
Threescore and ten Kings, having their thumbs and their great toes cut off,
gathered their meat under my table: as I have done, so God has requited me;
for the Israelites had cut off both his thumbs and his great toes. Lo, there
was a double proportion betwixt his sin and punishment: First, of Kind;
Cutting for Cutting; according to that other Scripture, All they that take the
sword shall perish with the sword: Mat. 26.52.
And next, of Parts; Thumb for Thumb, and Toe for Toe. Thus also King David's
sins were punished with the same Kind, though in higher degrees; his Adultery
with Bathsheba, by the Incest of Amon; his Murder of Vriah, with the
Fratricide of Absalom.

2. Time. Number. 14 34
Sometimes there is a Proportion of Time betwixt the sin and punishment: Thus
murmuring Isreal's forty days search of the land of Cunaan, was paid home with
forty years wandering in the wilderness from that time.

Place.
3. Sometimes there is a Proportion of Place: Thus King Jorams Carcass must be
cast into the portion of Naboth the Jezreelite; 2 Kin. 9.35, 36.
and Jezabels blood must be licked by the dogs in the same field where they
had licked Naboths before.

4. Finally, 1 Kin. 21.23. Measure. Rev. 18.6, 7.
there is sometimes a Proportion of Measure and Degrees: So in the punishment
of Romish Babylon; Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her
double according to her works: in the cup which she has filled, fill to her
double. How much she has glorified herself, and lived deliciously, so much
torment and sorrow give her. All these Proportions are so many hints to direct
us in our search after the special provoking causes of our Countries miseries.

Shall I adventure upon an Application? Application of those Proportions.
Suppose that the people of one City, Corporation, or Parish, were too selfish
and covetous; and that it was their great work and sin to endeavor to build
their nests so high, that no hand should reach them; or so closely, that no eye
should find their wealth; and there they sat brooding (suppose) upon their
bags, till first their neighbors were lost, and then themselves, for want of
money: And now the Lord, it may be, has proportionably set a needy, greedy
Horse-leach to reign over them, which cries nothing but, Give, give; and
having met with the Booty, vaunteth himself in the language of that Assyrian
Rod, Isai. 10.14.
My hand has found as a nest the riches of the people: and as one gathers
eggs that are left, have I gathered all the earth, and there was none that
moved the wing, or opened the mouth, or peeped. That is, he had climbed the
tree, he had opened the thick bushes, and so did search and find out the
hidden nest of wealth and treasure; plucking thence the beloved eggs, and
feathered young ones, as his prey and game, whilst the quondam owner (like the
damme) was feign to fly away; or if he stayed, yet durst not so much as to
flutter, or to peep openly; but is forced to sit down in silence, 2 Samuel 3 15,
16.
as Phaltiel the son of Laish was hushed, when Abner the Commander carried
away his wife before his eyes. Another Place, Person, or Town-ship,
(peradventure) have stood too Townishly upon their Privileges and Liberties;
bearing themselves too high, because of Friends, Charters, and Worship; and
therefore, it may be, the Lord has proportionably set a Leopard to watch over
them, (...) 5, 6.
and their Cities; so that every one that goes out thence is in danger to be
torn in pieces: that is, their Patron is a Miscreant, one that delights in
blood and rapine. Or, to make but one Supposition more: You know, Brethren,
that sinful strangeness, and neglect of Christian communion, has been too
great a fault amongst Western Professors. And now, behold, how proportionably
does the Lord punish us for this sin, by forcing us thus together, as a
Shepherd does fetch in his straggling sheep with his dog? he causes him to
bite one, and to lugge another, until he has brought them into a close and
compact body together. Some of us heretofore were scarcely well acquainted with
our nextneighbour-professors; and therefore we are now made nextneighbours to
our Brethren of other Shires. And behold, this one Church does contain at once
the Exiled fragments of five spacious Counties, which are forced by one common
calamity, to be weeping Pew-neighbours this day. But now, if after all this
constrained acquaintance, and forced communion, we shall still retain and
cherish our old sin of unchristian distance; then, believe it, Brethren,
believe it, the Lord will make us friends and familiars at dearer rates, and by
some sharper means: Perhaps be will imprison us next in the same Jail; yea,
fetter and manacle us together with the same Irons; (remember my words) and so
try whether or no one Dungeon, one Chain, or one Fire, (as it was in Queen
Mary's days) will make us to associate, and grow acquainted: ^^is and
Mo^u^ie^^s.
for so I have read, Doctor Ridley (a Conformist) and Master Hooper (a
Nonconformist) both Bishops, were reconciled by Martyrdom.

Thus you see, that this help of finding sins by their Proportions with their
punishments, is a quick and searching receipt. I should be very loath to give
gall and wormwood to any place or person that is upon the Cross; but I should
be as loath, on the other side, to neglect the giving of a wholesome (though
bitter) potion of cleansing physic, now that our souls are prepared and
opened by afflictions: And this is the reason why I have gone so deep with
these Probes. And now, to close up, let me beseech and charge you, and my
self, to make use of all these helps and hints in secret, betwixt God and our
consciences. The Lord has given us leisure more than enough to study our
Country, and to read over our bypast days and actions: he has also added
the provocatives of banishment and distress. Afflictions must be Instructions.
Times of afflictions are times of instructions: let it be our care to make
them such unto our selves. And to help us therein, let us know, that Affliction
does further Instruction two ways: First, a remembrancer of sin that was
before forgotten: Genesis 41 1^.
This we see in Joseph's brethren, when he had put them all together into ward
three days in Egypt, They said one to another, Verse 21.
We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of
his soul when he besought us, and we would not hear: therefore is this
distress come upon us. Observe there, how the proportion of their punishment
did bring their sin to remembrance: Their fault was unbrotherly cruel
dealing with Joseph, in selling him into Egypt; and this they do now call to
mind, by that harsh usage and imprisonment which themselves have met withal in
the same Egypt. Thus Affliction is a tell-troth, a remembrancer of sin. Next,
it is also an humbler for sin that had not been duly felt before: This we
see in Manasseh's case, who in the day of his prosperity puffed at God and his
Prophets, 2 Ch^on. 33.11.
Wherefore the Lord brought upon them the Captains of the host of the King of
Assyria, which took Manasseh among the thorns, and bound him with fetters,
and carried him to Babylon. This was the way to take and tame such a wild Ass
of the wilderness. First, the Lord drives him to the hedge, and makes him hide
his head in a bush, among the thorns: next, he does fetter, and (as it were)
crosse-fetter him, and so carries him to the Pound; he bound him with chains,
and carried him to Babylon. This round usage breaks his spirit, and makes him
fall to begging of mercy; And when he was in affliction, he besought the Lord
his God, Verse 12.
and humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers. Let us in like
manner accept of, and apply the punishment of our iniquities; and with Daniel,
in his exilement, Dan. 9.20.
thus confess our own sin, and the sin of our people, presenting our
supplication before the Lord our God, for the holy Mountain of our God. So
much be spoken concerning the cause or matter of our Lamentation for our
Country; namely, the evils of sin which are found there. And in this general
I have been the more large, because the mourning for sin is the most
spiritual and ingenuous of all sorrows; and because this is that only right
way that our selves and our little ones must tread, if we mean to return and
see our native Country again.

Secondly, 2. Mourn for the sufferings of the West.
Let us also lament and mourn over the Countries of our Nativity, because of
their Penal evils; that is, the evils of suffering, which are the effects
and punishments of those sins. The former consideration ought to move every
Christian to pity the West, because of their sins; but this argument should
prevail with every one, that has the bowels of humanity, to weep over them,
even because of their sufferings. If there be any quarter of this Land, that
may at present be properly called, The Joblike part of great Britain; then
certainly the West has great right to that Epithet: How great a right, I
shall show and prove in an ensuing Parallel. In which we will endeavor to set
the afflicted man Job of the East, and the afflicted Job-like Country of the
West over against each other; 1 Samuel 20.41.
that so, like David and Jonathan, they may strive together in weeping, until
we shall see which exceeds.

The miseries of both those Jobs (that Man and this Country) have been
somewhat Methodicall: A Parallel betwixt the miseries of Job and the West. viz.
The same Satan, and his like Instruments, have kept well-nigh the same order
in laying on torments upon them both. The general parts of their miseries may
be these two: First, the [Vnde] the top, station, or pinnacle from which Satan
and his Instruments have cast them down both; that is, the very Zenith, or
height of their happiness.

Secondly, the [Quo] that is, the bottom, depth, and gulf of calamity into
which he did degrade and thrust them: this is the very Nadar of their
distress and misery. 1. From whence they are cast down; Non Quo, sed Unde.


First, let us speak a little of the [Vnde] or whence, that is the height of
happiness; from whence first Job, and now our Country, have been cast down:
because, Miserrimum est faisse selicem. Jobs Holiness. Job. 1.1, 2, 2, 4, 5.
to an ingenuous spirit, this has been the greatest aggravation of a fall: Job
was thrown down from his primitive prosperous estate, as we called it: it is
shadowed in his first Chapter, at the beginning; there he is described by his
holiness, and happiness: First by his holiness; he was inwardly sincere
toward God, and that man was perfect; and outwardly honest toward men, and
upright: yea, he had a sound principle of both, one that feared God; and this
principle was strong and general, he eschewed evil. Before I give a parallel
to this branch, let me Apologize a little in the words of that mourning Non sum
ambiti^sus in malis etc. Quintil. Job. 13.7.
Orator, when he praised his deceased son. Brethren, I am not (I hope)
ambitious in and of our misery; and I should be loath to tell a lie for God:
but, on the other part, I would, in the worst of times, be just and pious
toward my dying Country; and therefore must now speak something to the praise
of the piety of the West: and that both Negatively, The West.
and Positively.

For the first, let me say, Orthodox.
Those parts were as free (I conceive) from Antichristian Papists on the
left hand extreme, and from uncatechised Sectaries on the right, as any
proportionable tract of land in the Kingdom. The God of truth make all our now
dispersed Professors in those parts, and our few garrisons at home, Revel.
16.15.
still wise and watchful to keep their garments in these pilfering times,
lest they walk naked, and they see their shame. Next, Positively, I might
mention the wonderful breaking forth of light in those parts of late, the
Gospel going like the sun from East to West; the springing of Lectures, and the
stout endeavors to hold them up; together with a great multiplication of
believers in diverse places of those Counties, all proving the great daybreak
of godliness in the West. Besides, in the last times, since these troubles
began, the extraordinary cries to heaven, and seekings to God, publicly,
privately, with prayer, fasting, and tears, in many places were such, as would
(I think) have forced the most adverse Anti-westerne spirit to confess, that
there was much of the fear of God in those places. But all this I shall pass,
and would add but one only consideration; and that is, Multitudes banished.
About 500 exiles from Devon and Exon alone are in these parts.
the numerous army of Martyrs, (exiles I mean) which are now come off from
those quarters, for that cause of God, and for the testimony of Jesus. Such an
army and number they are, of men, women, and children, as I dare say cannot be
paralleled from any proportionable part of the land: And (which is yet more)
these poor souls, generally, did not stay and linger until the palpable
Popery, and intolerable Tyranny of the enemy did thrust them out, as Lot and
his wife came out of Sodom; but they came off in the beginning of the storm,
before the paint of Iezebels face was wiped off, when few but through Christians
could discern the cause, or would adventure the whole for it: which proves,
(even to the face of Calumny it self) that in the West there was many a man
that was perfect and upright, that feared God, and eschewed evil. So much
concerning the Parallel to Jobs holiness. But

Secondly, Jobs, Happiness. Job 1, 2, 3.
Job was rich and happy, both in his children and goods; Of children, And there
were borne unto him seven sons, and three daughters. His substance also was
seven thousand sheep, and three thousand camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen,
and five hundred shee-asses, and a very great household; so that this man was
the greatest of all the men of the East. And surely the West for populousness,
The West.
might well have borrowed that old title of the North; as it was called
[officina hominum] the shop of men: It was the populous No of the kingdom,
whose streets and fields were sown with the seed of man, and the seed of
beasts; as has appeared too well since the beginning of these wars. And as
for riches, those parts were justly called the West Indies of great Britain.
This is the [Vnde] the height and happiness, whence both Job and our Country
are cast down: that is, the privative part of their calamity. So much
concerning that first.

Secondly, but the greatest bulk and burden of the miseries both of the
Eastern and Western Job, does ly in that second part, 2. Whither they are
cast down. here,
which I call the [Quo] the [whither] of their sufferings, containing all those
positive afflictions and cruelties that were laid upon them: And this I shall
still go on to show by a parallel betwixt their afflictions, as (I promised.)
The enemies of holy Job were very Methodicall in their cruelties: They did not
kill and crush him at one blow; No, that had been a Occidere, est
vetarecuptentom mori, Sen.
kind of mercy to him: but they dealt with him, as the American Canibals are
wont to handle their Prisoners: It is said of them, that when they take a
prisoner, they do feed upon him alive, and by degrees; for they cut off one
piece of flesh from his arm (suppose) or thigh, or other brawny part to day,
which they do roast, and eat before his eyes, searing up the wounded place
with a firebrand, to stanch the blood; perhaps anon, or to morrow, they cut
off another meal from him: thus carrying the poor wretch up and down with
them dying daily, whilst he sees himself eaten up by degrees; The several
steps or degrees of (...) mise(...) which (...).
to the unutterable aggravation of his horror and torment. So dealt Satan and
his instruments with Job: They did not devour him at once, but did bite, and
eat him up by parts and pieces.

1. For first, he is undone in his estate by rapine and plundring; and so robbed
of his temporal riches.

2. He is smitten in his body with sores and ulcers; and so stripped of natural
comforts.

3. He is afflicted in his soul by false accusations, and by desertions; and
so deprived of his spiritual treasures. So that in the whole, he is made
miserable all over; in soul, body, and goods. This method of cruelty is well
like unto that which the Prophet Micah does charge upon the Tyrants in his
time: Hear, M^cah 3.5, 2, 3,
I pray you, O heads of Jacob, who hate the good, and love the evil, who
pluck off the skin from off them, and their flesh from off their bones. Who
also eat the flesh of my people, and flay the skin from off them, and they
break^ their bones, and chop them in pieces, as for the pot, and as flesh
within the cauldron. Mark the accurate method of those Tyrants: First, they
did not only pluck off the fleece, but flayed off the skin, of their sheep
which they should have fed: Who pluck off their skin from off them. This may be
compared to the undoing of Job in his estate by rapine, and plunder. When they
had thus skinned them, then, Secondly, they fall upon their flesh, and do feed
upon that; and their flesh from off their bones. As the fleece and skin of the
poor flock did serve to cloth them, so their flesh and blood are made meat
and drink to feed them. This does answer to the smiting of Job with sores and
ulcers in his body. Lastly, there being nothing now left but the bare bones,
yet those worse then Ravens have not done with him, but will fetch something
more out of those; and therefore it is added, they break their bones, and chop
them in pieces, as for the pot: That is, they do first heat and beat them, to
fetch out the marrow; and when they have gotten as much as will run out, at
last they chop and boil them again, to force out the utmost drops of fatness
and moisture. And this last act of cruelty may run parallel with Satan's
afflicting of the soul of Job by false accusations, and spiritual calumnies.
So much in general.

But we will now trace the steps of this cruelty toward Job in 'its
particulars, giving our Western parallels as we go.

The first step was the undoing of Job in his outward estate, 1. He is undone
in his estate;
by rapines and plundrings; the fleecing and flaying of his wool and skin of
temporalls. This is expressed in seven verses together, in which there is a
second method, or subdivision of cruelty, Job. 1.13. and^. 10. 20.
expressed with great varieties, both of Tyranny and Miseries: for, if we look
1. upon the instruments of that Scene, there we find Satan himself Commander
in chief; and his forces are of two sorts: Some, natural, and more ordinary
instruments; as the Sabeans and Caldeans: Others, supernatural, and
extraordinary; as the fire of God falling from heaven, and a great wind from
the wilderness. The Sabeans were (as most conclude) a people inhabiting
Arabia-felix, near the Country where Job dwelt; famous for nothing but theft
and robberies: They were, in two words, his plundering neighbors. The Caldeans
were a people inhabiting Caldea; and are described by the Prophet Habakkuk,
^^b. 1.6, 7, 8.
to be a bitter and hasty nation, terrible and dreadful; their horses are
swifter then the Leopards, and are more fierce then the evening wolves: These
lived farther off from Job; and were, in two words, more unmercifull strangers.
As for the fire of God from heaven, and the great wind from the wilderness,
Satan's design in using those, was, to shake the foundations of Jobs confidence
in his God, and to persuade him that the Lord himself was now become his
Enemy, and did punish him as an hypocrite in his wrath: As if Satan should have
said, Now Job, thou see clearly that these evils do not come out of the
dust, but immediately from God; they are not trials, but judgments: thou see
the very Judgment of Sodom is come upon thee, (for the Judgment of Sodom was
not so long before his time, nor so far from this place, Genesis 19.14.
but that Satan might now urge it,) even a fire from the Lord out of heaven;
nay, and this fire is fallen upon thy sheep too, thy chief beasts for
sacrifice; to show, that thy very oblations are abominable: and therefore,
Curse God, and dye; or, at least, let go thine integrity, and acknowledge thy
self to be a wretched dissembler. For thus these hints were afterward taken
up by Jobs Wife, Job 2.9.
and his three Friends. So much concerning the Instruments.

2. If we consider the Objects of this cruelty, upon which it was exercised,
we find them to be many; yea, all the substance of Job that was capable of
plundering. Let us take a short Inventory of his temporal estate, and so
cross out every particular as it was lost. Job 1.3. with 14.15.
Imprimis, Beasts for tillage and breeding; He had five hundred yoke of
plowing oxen, and five hundred shee-affes, and a competent number of Hines
attending them. Upon all these the Sabeans fell, Verse 16.
and took them away; slaying all the servants (but one) with the edge of the
sword. Next, for food and clothing; He had seven thousand sheep, with a
competent number of Shepherds watching over them. Upon these the fire of God
fell from heaven, and burnt up both sheep and Shepherds, one only servant
escaping to tell it. Thirdly, for carriage and labor; Verse 17.
He had three thousand camels, and a competent number of Servants to keep them.
Against these the Caldeans made out three bands, and rushed upon them, and
carried them away; slaying all the Servants but one only Messenger. Lastly,
He had for his comfort, yet remaining, seven sons, and three daughters,
Verse. 18, 19
which were this day eating and drinking wine in their eldest brothers house;
and behold, a great wind from the wilderness over-turneth the house upon them
all, and so both slew and buried them at once. So that of all his eleven
thousand and five hundred Cattle, of all his very great household of Servants,
of all his ten Children, not a Hoof, not a Lad, not a Child is left, to feed,
clothe, serve, or comfort him; but only four miserable Messengers; besides,
three censorious Friends, and a despairing Wife. So much concerning the Objects.

3. If we observe together the order, the measure, and the managing or
marshalling of this cruelty, we find it thus: First, for Time; Satan does
choose the Feasting day of Jobs Children, Job 1.13.
both for his own greater advantage, that he might take them together; and
for the greater aggravation of the stroke upon Job and them, by turning
suddenly their great mirth into so great mourning. Nay, perhaps, he had a plot
upon their souls too; hoping to take them in their sins, or unprepared: for
we read, that when the days of their feasting were gone about, Verse 5.
Job was wont to send and sanctify them, and to rise up early in the morning
and offer burnt-offerings, according to the number of them all; as fearing lest
they had sinned. Therefore Satan chose this time; 2 Samuel 13.28, 29.
dealing with them as Absalom did with his brother Amnon, He commanded his
servants, saying, Mark ye now when Amnons heart is merry with wine, and when I
say unto you, Smite Amnon, then kill him, fear not. Thus dealt Satan with Jobs
Children, that he might kill soul and body together. Therefore the Time is
remarkable: so also is the Manner, and Ordering of this stroke very observable.
The business is so contrived, that there are several Armies of Enemies
levied; as Sabeans and Caldeans: and those Armies do afflict Job by several
parties too: the Caldeans do divide themselves into three Bands: besides,
there was fire from heaven, and a wind from the wilderness: And all this
variety was thus marshalled by Satan, for the greater aggravation of Jobs
afflictions.

Oh! Western Parallel.
how easily might all these Instruments, Objects, Order, and Measure of holy
Jobs Calamities, be amply paralleled by our Western sufferings? With what
facility could I here expatiate? Take but some few hints and sips.

1. Plundering by Neighbors. Psalm. 55.12, 13, 14.
1. Was Job stripped by Sabeans, who were his Plundering Neighbors? Alas! this
is the common lot of all Gods people, in these wars; but especially in the
poor West: There almost every Saint may cry out in the words of the oppressed
Psalmist; For it was not mine enemy that reproached me, then I could have
borne it: neither was it he that hated me, that did magnify himself against
me, then I would have hid my self from him. But it was thou, a man, mine
equal, my guide and mine acquaintance. We took sweet counsel together, and
walked to the house of God in company. Surely, many thousands of titular
Christians in this Land, were, in times of peace, but as Wolves in a Cage, but
as Lions tamed by art; they wanted nothing but liberty and opportunity to show
their wolvish and worrying natures; which now these present commotions have
discovered. Who could have imagined four years ago, when the people of this
Kingdom walked, talked, visited, and dwelt peaceably and merrily together, as
neighbors and friends; nay, as brethren and sisters; that they had carried
such tongues in their heads, or such hearts in their breasts, as do now
appear? Such tongues, I say, as could have cried, Roundheads, Rebels, Dogs,
Devils, to their own Protestant neighbors, friends, familiars, brethren? Such
hearts as could close and join with armed Papists, and proclaimed Irish Rebels,
against their own chosen Protestant Parliament, established by Act of
Parliament? Surely, if a man could have prophesied these things, but for four
or five years since, none would have believed his report; but men would rather
have questioned the crazinesse of his brains. Nay, if a Prophetical Minister
should have settled his countenance steadfastly, seven years since, upon such or
such a Gentleman, his neighbor, or (perhaps) Parishioner, 2 Kin. 8.11, 12.
and should have wept over him, as Elisha did sometime over Hazael; and being
asked (as he) Why weepest thou? should have answered, Because I know the evil
that thou will do to the children of England: their strong holds will thou set
on fire, and their young men will thou slay with the sword, and wilt dash their
children, and rip up their women with child: that is, thou shall join with
Papists, and Irish Rebels, after they have massacred above an hundred thousand
Protestants in Ireland; and shall with them take up Arms against the English
Protestant Parliament: Nay, thou shall plunder and imprison thine own
neighbors and friends; besiege their towns, fire their houses; starve, slay,
and hang up their sons; abuse their daughters: and all this with sport and
rejoicing: Would not such a man have replied in Hazaels words, But what! Is thy
servant a dog, Verse 13.
that he should do this great thing? What? would you make me no Protestant,
no Christian, no Man; but a Papist, a Heathen, a Monster; nay, worse than a
Saevis inter se convenit ursis.
Bear or a Tiger, that loves and preserves his own kindred? Thus,
doubtless, men would then have answered to such a Prophetical Elisha: Nay,
they would have added that loud voice of Festus unto Paul, Acts 26.24.
Thou art beside thy self, Preacher, much learning has made thee mad: the man
has lost his charity and his wits together; away with him to the Prison, to
the Bedlam, for his sedition and distraction. Nay, did not some men charge Gods
Ministers almost so high, when they did but foretell us of this very sword
which now we feel? Let this be the first Parallel.

2. Again, was Job plundered by Caldeans, which were merciless Strangers?
Alas! 2. By Strangers. Hab. 1.6, 7, 8.
what a valley of Jehoshaphat is England now made; to which, all the strange
fowls of the air are come together to devour? Yea, do not (in Habakkuks
words) the bitter and hasty nations march through the breadth of the Land, to
possess the dwelling places that are not theirs? Are they not terrible and
dreadful, and their horses swifter than the Leopards, and more fierce than the
evening Wolves? Are not their horsemen come from far? do they not fly as the
Eagle that hastes to eat? Do they not come all for violence? Yea, Verse. 9,10
they will (I fear) scoff at the Kings (in the end,) and the Princes shall be
a scorn unto them, etc. But these fierce Strangers have especially abounded in
the West, whose shores do day and night lie open upon both sides, South and
North, to receive both French and Irish: who, together with High and
Low-Germans, are let-in at those Posterne doors, to the funerals of Great
Britain, by her own sons. Nay, and the Enemy tells us, that Moors and Turks
shall be called in too, rather than the Roundheads shall prevail. Ah,
miserable England, the common Mother of us all! and are thy Children now come
to that Principle of professed selfe-destruction?

It is recorded in our Bakers Chroni^le, and al. i.
Chronicles, as an inexpiable horrid impiety in King John, that he is said to
have sent to Mirammumalim, King of Africa and Morocco, with offer of his
Kingdom to him, upon condition that he would come and aid him with his
Barbarians against his own people. And is it now grown lawful, yea
warrantable and necessary, not only to arm our own Papists, but to call in
proscribed Irish Rebels, yea, Turks and Infidels, to kill and slay Christians,
Protestants, Parliaments? The good Lord shake up the British Nation out of
their spiritual sleeping sickness, Hos. 7.8, 9.
and cause our England to see how she has mixed her self among the people,
and is a Cake not turned: How strangers have devoured her strength, and she
knows it not: yea, gray hairs are here and there upon her, yet she knows
it not. 3. Firings.
I am persuaded that the Histories of these times will be so strange to after
Ages, that though Truth herself be the Compiler, yet there will need the
Sanction of some public Act or Statute, to command incredulous posterity to
believe them. That Is a second Parallel.

3. Again, did the Enemy consume Jobs substance with fire? Alas poor West!
thou may compare heaps of ashes with most parts of the Land: Thou have been
made the Land of fire and smoke in diverse places: as the The Subu^bs of Exon,
at every gate.
City, the Bemmister, Axminster, Market Towns, etc.
Towns, the Ilford-Combe, Stoke, etc.
Parishes, and diverse stately and ancient Eight or nine stately Mansions burnt
and pulled down within five or six miles together, near Lyme.
Mansions do testify: some of them being cruelly turned to ashes by the
Enemy; others necessarily fired by our Friends, to burn out the Hornets that
were gotten into them: and, by this means, hundreds of families have been
turned out, like herds of cattle, into the open fields and woods; leaving
dung-hils and heaps of ashes, in the places where their goods and dwellings did
lately stand.

4. But did Satan labor also by those extraordinary plagues (the fire of God
from Heaven, and a great Wind from the Wilderness,) 4. False charges.
to shake Jobs holy confidence, and to make him question his own integrity?
Did Satan entitle the Lord to those judgments, as if God had been on his side
against Job? Oh this! this has been the great Engine and impudent design of
the Enemy, and it has been very closely followed by them in the West; they
have cunningly endeavored by the (sometimes) prosperous outward success of
the wicked, and the extraordinary heavy afflictions and defeats of the godly
party in those Countries, to entitle the Lord to their side and cause, against
his own people and party. But this stratagem is old, as old as Rabshakeh's
himself, who (it seems) was their copy in like case: For when S^nnacherib,
coming up against reforming Hez kiah, sent Rabshakeh, 2 Kin. 18.
in a reviling message, to Jerusalem; we find that he does especially insist
upon two common places, which are the great engines of the Enemy now a days;
and therefore they are well worthy our perusal, viz. First, he does asperse and
charge Hezekiahs reformation with Sacrilege and Innovation: But if he say unto
me, We trust in the Lord our God: Verse 22.
Is not that he whose high places, and whose altars Hezekiah has taken away,
and has said to Judah and Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this altar in
Jerusalem? As if he had said, Good people, look about you, I am come purposely
to undecerve you: This Hezekiah and his faction, under the name of Reformation,
do take away all the antiquity, glory, and beauty of your Religion. You see
how he has removed the high places of Gods good service, and divine worship;
those places that were so venerable for their antiquity, that they have been
continued through the reigns of twelve noble Kings before this time: So
honorable for their institution, that they were erected by Solomon himself of
most happy memory; the wisest and most glorious King that ever swayed the
Scepter of David; and is Hezekiah now become wiser then Solomon? Or can ye
hope for more blessed days then his Who made silver to be in Jerusalem as
stones, 1 Kin. 10.27.
and Cedars made he to be as Sycamore trees, that are in the vale for
abundance? Or what, had this young King, at twenty five years old, more
understanding and devotion then all his grave and pious ancestors? What, then
Solomon, Rehoboam, Abijah, Asa, Iehoshaphat, Ioash, (and his Iehoiada) Vzziah,
Jotham, and Ahaz his own Father, that he makes such strange work in the
service of God? Nay further yet, good people, besides your high places,
consider, your high Altars are also taken away, and ye are all confined, to
your unspeakeable charge, trouble, and travel, to worship before this one
Altar in Jerusalem. Secondly, he does entitle the Lord unto his side against
Hezekiah and the reformers, Am I now come up without the Lord against this
place, 2 Kin. 18.25.
to destroy it? The Lord said to me, Verse 20.
Go up against this place, and destroy it: As if he had said, O ye Rebels!
(for so he had called them before) How durst ye to fight against your King,
the great King of Assyria, and yet pretend that ye stand for God and for his
Reformation? Behold and see, we have an express command, a positive commission
to fight against you; and here Rabshakeh might have cited some Text out of the
Prophets, which do seem to license and call in the Assyrians, as the Lords
rod, against Israel for their sins; as Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezechiel, Hosea, and
others. You see then that it is no new thing for the most cruel enemies against
reformation, yea for Rabshakeh himself, to pretend and plead loudly, that the
Lord is on their side, against his own holy people. It Is no new thing for the
thieves themselves to cry, Stop the thief, upon those that are their lawful
pursuers. That is a fourth Parallel.

5. Successions of Enemies.
5. But farther yet, Did Satan send enemies upon enemies, and armies by
several parties, upon Jobs goods?

Alas, poor West! in this thing also can thou compare too well: Have not the
armies of thine enemies taken their successive turns at thee? When a
well-affected Town or Parish had first been plowed by their own Malignant
Gentry and neighbors, (as by the Sabeans) with heavy fines and amercements;
then come other forces, that were raised in Counties farther off, and they do
harrow them by weekly taxes, and free quarter: when these are called away,
then, thirdly, the French, Irish, and other Foreiners, a people of a strange
Language, (like the Caldeans) are sent upon them; and these by their cruel
plundrings do, as it were, break the clods by parties and degrees, as those
Caldeans made out three bands: The first drives away the husband-mans cattle,
which he may redeem again for a sum of money: that is no sooner done, but a
second band comes, and drives them again, requiring another ransom; which
the poor owner has no sooner made up by borrowing, pawning, and begging, but
anon comes the third band, and they do finally sweep away all this thrice
purchased stock and stuff, there being no more ability left to buy them again
a fourth time. And these several bands of the enemy, are like those three
swords of Hazael, Jehu, and Elisha, of which it is said, And it shall come to
pass, 1 King 19.17.
that him that escapes the sword of Hazael (a stranger) shall Iehu slay: and
him that escapes the sword of Iehu (their King) shall Elisha (their Prophet)
slay. Thus the first parallels do run too evenly, which I called (the undoing
of Job in his temporals, by rapine and plundring.) I shall be shorter in the
two following generals. Remember all this was but the fleecing of Job, but the
plundring of his estate; and skin for skin, (as Satan truly urged) all that a
man has will he give for his life; that is, temporal afflictions are lighter
then corporal. Let us therefore consider

Secondly, the Smiting of Job in his body with sores and ulcers, 2. The smiting
of Job in his body.
the stripping him of all Natural comforts, which was called the plucking and
eating the flesh from the bones; not only his children (which were flesh of
his flesh) even seven sons and three daughters, were smitten dead in one place
at a blow amidst their feasting, and his wife is turned against him; but his
own body, skin and flesh, are lamentably afflicted and mangled. Satan
obtains a second commission; by which he has power to lay any torment upon
him on this side death, and he follows it to the purpose: So went Satan forth
from the presence of the Lord. Job 2.7.
The time is not long, you see, betwixt his commission, and the execution
thereof; and smote Job, that is, both suddenly and vehemently with sore
boyles, from the sole of his foot unto his crown. Note there, (in the kind)
they were boyles; Intensively, they were sore (or the worst sort of tormenting)
boyles; and extensively, they were from the sole of his foot unto his crown;
that is, he was all overrun with the worst kind of boyles: Verse 8.
It is added, And he took him a potsheard to scrape himself withal, and he
sat down among the ashes. Mr. Caryl ad loc.
There are (says one) diverse aggravations of his affliction in that verse; as
first, if we consider the Surgeon; he could get, it seems, none to dress
him; nor wife, nor servants, nor friends would meddle with him, but himself is
feign to be his own Surgeon: he took [him.] Secondly, observe the tool, or
dressing instrument which he does use, it was a sheard, (as we call it) either
because he was loath to touch his loathsome flesh with his hand, or because his
boyles did so overspread his hands to the very nails, that it was a pain to
him to touch himself: he took a [potsheard.] Thirdly, the lodging or pallet
he had to rest upon in this noisome grievous condition, he makes his bed in
the dust: And that either (Elective) by choice, in token of his abasement; or
(necessario) out of mere necessity, being enforced thus to do by his poverty
or loathsomeness. Thus every circumstance and interpretation does proclaim his
extreme affliction. Parallels in
For a Western parallel to all this map, or rather Anatomy of miseries, I
will gather but some particulars of the corporal and natural sufferings and
torments of our Country and Countrymen, in those things which do afflict
their Liberties, Livelihood, Lives.

The West is now generally become a kind of Turkey (to speak vulgarly) to all
that are Christians indeed; 1. Slaveries.
the Ports that are in the enemies hand are as so many Algiers and Sallies, to
all true protestant English Passengers; for not only their goods, but their
persons are there taken captives, and set at ransom. The Inland places, are
like the maine of Barbary; for the poor Countrymen, Yeomandry, and
Artificers, are taken prisoners from their fields and shops, at the pleasure of
the nefarious and necessitous soldiers, and are driven by them as their
Captives into the next garrison: Whence they are sold out again at such prices
and ransoms, as their Patrons are pleased to set upon them: Others, at the
Tyrants pleasure, are pressed for their service; and of these, some are again
ransomed at the will of the petty Officers; others, not able to buy their
lives, are forced along to the assault or battle, being coupled, and bound
together with cords or match, like dogs for the game, or rather like oxen for
the plough, or (which is worse, but more proper) like sheep for the slaughter:
if they do attempt an escape from this death, and are taken, they are sure of
another at the next tree by hanging; their cords being removed from their arms
to their necks: If they go forward to the battle or assault, they are forced
on upon the Cannon, like the Turkish Asapi, in the front, the horsemen like
their Ianisaries following them closely in the rear, with drawn swords, and
pistols cock't, to prick them forward, or to shoot them through; so that all the
liberty that is now left them, is only to choose from which party, and in
which part they will receive their death; whether from the adverse party in
their breasts, or from their own side in their backs: Mean while the poor
creatures, as amazed betwixt this choice of deaths, may well take up that
Lamentation of the Ancient Britains (our Ancestors) in the downfall of
Britain, when thus they write, Aetio 111 Cos. Gemitus Britanorum, Repellunt
Barbar: ad mare, repellit mare ad Barbaros: Inter haec duo genera funerum aut
jugulam^^, aut mergimur. Camden. (...) Gild^.
To Aetius the Roman Consul, the gr^anes of Britains, The Barbarians drive us
back to the sea, the sea again puts us back upon the Barbarians: Thus
between two kinds of death, either our throats be cut, or we are drowned. So
much concerning slavery.

As for the cruel imprisonments that are exercised in the West, it does strike
a kind of horror into mine heart to recount them. If you look to the
loathsomeness of prisons, I must tell you, there are such in the West as may
compare with Ieremiahs dungeon, into which they let him down with cords, and
in the dungeon there was no water, but mire: so that Jeremiah sunk in the
mire. If you look to straightness and severity, there is not only the common
prison, but the prison of Peter, (as I may call it) where he stepped between two
soldiers, bound with two chains, 2. Imprisonments. Iere. 33.6. Acts. 5.18.
Acts. 12.6. Acts. 16.2^. Verse 23, 24.
and the keepers before the door keept the prison. Nay farther yet, there is
the usage of Paul and Silas, even the renting of their clothes, and command to
beat them. And when many stripes have been laid upon them, a charge is given
to the Iaylours to keep them safely, and thereupon they are thrust into the
inner prison, and their feet made fast in the stocks. Where, sometimes they
do receive death at their nostrils, by noisome stenches, and pestilent
infections: sometimes at their eyes, which do affect their hearts at the sight
of their languishing fellow members round about them: sometimes at their cares,
by the blasphemous taunts, and direful threatenings, and censures from the
enemy: but chiefly at their mouths, by cleanness of teeth, by want of
physic, food, and moisture; for the supply of which, when money has been
openly sent unto them, it was seized; when secretly, yet it is soon exhausted
by the great and high prices that small and low refreshments are set at: and
not only some visiters have been denied to speak with their languishing,
dying, fettered husbands, Nonpanis, non baustus aqua, non ultimus ignis:
Hi^sola haec duo sunt, exul, and exilium Vide Senecdib de consol. ad Helv. in
principio.
children, brethren; but others have been imprisoned for relieving of
prisoners. Let me present you but with one model of the Western Prisons; it
shall be that of Lidford, which is a little straight stony tower, situate in
a barren desolate moore or wilderness; the place is as far from all
fertility, as commerce; no harvest, no trading are there to be found, but the
prison it self seems to be banished and imprisoned. In short, the whole soil
of that moor is like the banished * stoics Corsica, yielding nor bread, nor
water, no nor fire enough (says he) for a funeral. In this prison, diverse
debtors ^^ve been starved, and some were said to eat their own flesh, even in
those times of peace and plenty: Guess ye then, what cries and yells for
bread and water there are now to be heard amongst the many scores which at
present are shut up in that straight prison? Yea the passengers do hear the
cries, ere they see the prison. For a close to this point of Imprisonments,
take but this one word: It is a like difficult thing to find amongst our
enemies in the West, a wicked man in their prisons, or a godly man out of them.

3. Deaths.
Lastly, if we look to varieties of Deaths and Banishments, there is stabbing,
shooting, hanging, both by order, and at pleasure; besides, other multitudes of
Saints do die daily, by wandering up and down in dons, and caves, and holes of
the earth; yea some with their families have inhabited the woods, and clefts of
the rocks, nay the tops of the ragged rocks; Sometimes leading their hungry
little ones in their hands, and anon carrying them along in their arms, to go
and make their bed in the dust, and to seek their bread out of desolate places,
Math. 2.18.
all destitute, afflicted, tormented. There you might see in the streets a
Rachel, a mother weeping for her slain children, Genesis 21.15, 16.
and will not be comforted, because they are not: Here, in a wood, sits another
Hagar-like, with a dry bottle, and a fainting son, and she lifts up her voice
and weeps. Not far off in an house, you may discover a third, like her of
Zarephath, ^ Kin. 17.12.
dressing and baking up the last meal of the Barrel, with the utmost oil of
the Cruse, that she and her family may eat it and die. Yea, it has been a
lot which Ladies of honorable Families have not escaped, viz. after they have
bin deprived of their houses by fire, of their goods by plundring, of their
lands by Sequestration, of their Sons (under years) by imprisonment, at last
to escape to the next Garrison on foot (almost barefooted) in borrowed shoes,
leaving their wearing Garments in the hands of the Enemy. But what do I
multiply instances, seeing the bare History of Western sufferings of this
kind, would seem but mere Poetry to the multitude? 3. The Afflicting of Job
in his Soul.


The third and highest degree, or common place of the enemies cruelty upon Job,
was afflicting of him in his soul with spiritual scourges and scorpions, by
temptations, false accusations, and desertions: This was indeed like the
breaking of the bones, and chopping of them in pieces as for the pot, and as
flesh within the Cauldron; Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give
for his life, so said Satan when he compared Jobs goods with his body; but
Christianity will tell us, life for life, and all that a man is, will he give
for his soul: And again, Prove 18.14.
the spirit of man will support his infirmities, but a wounded spirit who can
bear? In the last place therefore, the enemy does set upon his soul by a
strong temptation, from the wife of his bosom: Then said his wife unto him, Job
2.9.
Will thou still retain thine integrity? Curse God and die. In which words
there is a scornful exprobration, and a wicked direction, the exprobration in
these words, Do thou still retain thine integrity? As if she had said,
what! art thou so senseless, so sottish, as still to go on in this course?
What have all thy prayers, fastings, and sacrifices, profited thee? Where are
the ^arnings, what is the advantage of thine holiness and singularity? And yet
do thou still retain thine integrity? Away with these empty shows, and
fruitless devotions; delude thy self no longer with dreaming of help and
happiness from thy Jehovah; but, seeing there is no hope of thy deliverance by
his blessing, dispatch thy self with a curse; Curse God and die.

These bolts came from his wife; next what sharp and keen charges does he
receive from his mistaking friends? Who, by their false accusations and
conclusions against him, did endeavor to dispute him out of his innocence?
Thus Eliphaz begins to charge him, Remember, I pray thee, who ever perished,
Job 4.7.
being innocent? or where were the righteous cut off? Then Bildad does second
him: Does God pervert judgment? Job 8.3.
or does the Almighty pervert justice? And lastly, Job 11.2, 3.
Zophar the Naamathite is in the same strain: Should a man full of talk be
justified? should thy lips make men hold their peace? These are the darts of
his friends. But finally, the Lord himself does strike him through with
spiritual agonies and desertions; of which he complains in these words, The
arrows of the Almighty are within me, Job 6.4.
the poison whereof drinks up my spirit: the terrors of God do set
themselves in array against me. The Caldeans and Sabeans, the losses of his
goods and children, together with the ulcers of his body, the cruel mistakes
of his friends, and the malignancy of his wife, were all as nothing to this
spiritual battell-array.

Parallels.
In my Western parallel to this affliction, I must double my Lamentations:
Alas, alas, poor native Country! This last degree of Jobs misery is the
highest and heaviest of all, so is it that wherein thou can most aptly, and
fully compare with this thy pattern: For,

Did Satan turn the mouth of Jobs own Ordnance upon himself, 1. Friends and
kinsfolks treacherous. Gen 10.25.
making his friends to become miserable comforters? Did also the wife of his
bosom turn Malignant? Surely, these our days are as the days of Peleg, in
whose time the earth was divided; they are the very times of division which
were foretold by our Savior, when he says, There shall be five in one house
divided, three against two, Luke 12.51, 52.53. compared with Matthew. 10.34, 35,
36.
and two against three, (it is like that the three were Malignants,) the father
shall be divided against the son, and the son against the father; the mother
against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother; the mother in law
against her daughter in law, and the daughter in law against her mother in law.
Lo, there are the five, Stella ad loc.
if you take the same woman to be both the mother, (to her son) and the mother
in law (to his wife:) But though a shower of stormy divisions has overspread
the whole Land in general, Luke 12.54
yet you see this cloud arising especially in the West; there is the father
divided against the son, that is, many an old, wicked, ambitious, Machivillian
Saul, is there to be found hating his sweet and faithful son Jonathan, for
cleaving to the just and holy cause of (David,) 1 Samuel 20.30, 31.
the men after Gods own heart; yea, he is enkindled against him, railing at
him, and calling him perverse Rebel, (a remarkable Title) and telling him
that he will confound himself, and the whole family by taking this side, etc.
This is the father against the son. 2 Samuel 15, 16, 17 Chapters
Next, there is also the son against the father, that is, many a bushie,
bloody, ambitious Absalom is there to be found, which does not stick to murder
his own brethren, to plunder and defile his fathers house, and to drive him
(if he be a man after Gods own heart) weeping and barefoot, both from his own
habitations, Filius ante diem, etc.
and from the public ordinances; and all this to get the inheritance unto
himself before the time: this is the son against the father. As for mothers
and daughters, etc. There you might see in every County many an unnatural
massacring Athaliah, 2 King 11.1.
that does not stick to swim to her own ends through a stream of guiltless
blood. 2 Chronicles. 22.10.
And many an hollow complementall Orpah, which does kiss, and weep over the
cause of God, and those which do travail for it, Ruth 1.14.
but takes leave of them both at last. But what do I straighten my self with
instances? There are and have been revolts, treacheries, and false charges,
practiced, discovered, and laid on in those parts, by all sorts of friends and
relations: In Families there are Nabal-like husbands, 1 Samuel 25.17
that do hold under their wise and holy Abigails, so that they cannot speak
unto them for this Cause: And contrariwise, 2 Samuel 6.16, 20.
there are some Michal-like Wives too, that scoff at their David's for their
zeal in this Service. Amongst Brethren, Genesis 4.8.
there is many a Cain rising up against his righteous brother, and slaying him,
because his own works are evil, and his brothers good: Yea, amongst Twinns
there are Esaus, Genesis 32.6.
that do arm themselves against their brethren and their families, because
God is with them. Amongst Professors, and professed friends, there is many an
Edomitish Doeg, 1 Samuel 22.9, 10. 1 Samuel 23.12
that ensnareth the Lords Ministers; yea, some Keilites, whole Parishes, that
have betrayed their Protectors. Amongst Servants and Clients, many a Ziba,
delating his absent innocent Master, 2 Samuel 16.2, 3
to get his lands: Many a Sir Curson, (as I remember) Speeds Chron. H 7.
Popilius, Fabricius in Histor. Cicer. Mat. 26.14. 2 Samuel 4.7, 8.
that begs a Commission to cut off the head of that Cicero which defended him:
yea, many a Judas, that sells his Lord for silver pieces. Amongst Commanders
and Counselors, there has been many a Baanah and Rechab, that sold their
Lords head for preferment: Many a subtle Renegado, that did not stick to wound
himself, (like Synon) that he might thereby betray others; or to be a
proscribed and proclaimed Rebel amongst other men, (like that Knight in King
Henry the seventh's time) that so he might be admitted freely to their
Council, and thereby give intelligence to the Enemy.

Brethren, I remember that the Hor. Apol. Niliac. in Hieroglyph. lib. 1. numb.
66 Nichol. Caussino Interpret.
Egyptians, in their Hieroglyphics, did signify the West by a Crocodile,
which is a beast that does ensnare (and so kill) Passengers by his tears: And
I am persuaded, that our West has been the greatest Country of adventitious
and (some) homebred Crocodiles in the whole Kingdom. So much concerning the
mischiefs that did come from pretended friends, who were parallel to Jobs
Wife, and his three miserable Comforters. But,

Did that Wife and those Friends of Job taunt and upbraid him with
heart-piercing language? 2. Enemies Blasphemous.
Did they tempt and cut him with blasphemies? Herein the poor Western
suffering Saints can also compare. For I am persuaded (upon too good grounds)
that the blasphemous insolences, even of Pharaoh, Sennacherib, Rabshakeh, and
that Apostate Julian himself, have been matched and equalled by the Enemies in
those parts. Pharaoh (you know) did say, I know not the Lord, neither will I
obey his voice, to let Israel go. Sennacherib and Rabshakeh said, Let not
Hezekiah deceive you. -- Let not thy God in whom thou trustest deceive thee,
etc. and Julian was wont, when he buffeted and tormented the Christians,
scoffingly to apply some Text of Scripture unto them, as, bidding them to turn
the other cheek also, etc.

Surely, many of our ears, eyes, and skins, have heard, seen, and felt,
(horresco referrens) even as horrid things as these. We have heard (as a godly
Mr. H. P.
Minister, now with God, said with tears, as he marched out of Exon) both all
the Attributes, and all the Ordinances of God blasphemed over and over in one
day; and that not by two or three, but by their whole Armies: Insomuch that my
self have wondered to hear so much Scripture and Divinity from the mouths of
diverse of the illiterate, ignorant, and fottish common Soldiers, as they have
belched out in taunting blasphemies; as, Where are now your long sanctified
prayers by the Spirit? What is become of your holy Humiliations and
Supplications? etc. But especially (me thought) they did still fly in the face
of our God, scoffing abundantly more at him than at any; yea, all his servants
besides: as, Where is your God now, O ye Hypocrites? Where is your holy Cause,
your Cause, and all your hopes? Now you shall see God will come down from
heaven! yes, by-and-by you shall see it! No, no, farewell heaven, heaven is
gone, your God is asleep, etc. Oh, I am loath to believe mine own ears; or,
though I must do it, yet I am afraid to repeat with my mouth the studied
blasphemies of that one day. Brethren, Mat. 27.26, 27, 28, 30, etc.
you may look over the harmony of the Evangelists, and especially Saint
Matthew, and when you do there read, how the Soldiers did take Jesus (when
he was to be crucified) into the common Hall, gathered unto him the whole
Band, stripped him, put on him a scarlet robe, and a crown of thorns upon his
head, and a reed in his hand, then bowed the knee before him, and mocked him,
saying, Hail, King of the Jews; then spit upon him, blind-folded him, and
smote him on the head, Mat. 26.67, 68.
saying, Prophecy unto us, thou Christ, who smote thee? and when he was upon
the Cross, how they gave him vinegar to drink, mingled with gall, and parted
his garments; also, how they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads,
saying, Thou savedst others, thy self thou can not save; Thou that
destroyest the Temple, if thou be the Son of God, come down; See if Elias
will come and take him down, etc. I say it sadly, when you do read over this
Chain of amazing blasphemies, then consider, remember, and believe, that this
whole Series may be paralleld by the taunts and blasphemies of the Western
Enemies. But, besides these, there is another kind of blasphemies, by horrid
Oaths, and execrable Curses: And in these also the Enemy is (like himself) out
of measure blasphemous; for I dare challenge the Records of all Nations and
Generations, to show me such affecting, studying, and buying of abominable,
direful, damning Oaths and Blasphemies, as is daily practiced among them. Oh,
the anatomizing of Jesus Christ limb by limb, by their horrid Swearing! Oh, the
daring and mis-calling of the whole Trinity, by their Rhetorical new-sought,
new-bought Blasphemies! Oh, the dammings, rammings, and shooting into hell,
that is used in their Execrations! Nay, this is one test or touchstone, by
which some of them are wont to try a suspected Roundhead, Swear, Dammee (say
they,) and we shall believe thee that thou art a friend to the King. Oh, my
friends! and is blasphemy now become the true character of loyalty? then let us
not be troubled if these men do call us Rebels. But this kind of hellishnesse
is come to that height, that (the truth is) I hold it not fit to speak the
whole truth in this Point: for there are such blasphemies amongst them, as are
not so much as to be named among Christians. 1 Cor. 5.1.
And now guess ye, Brethren, in what condition are the poor Saints, which
are forced to entertain those Miscreants into their houses, and to be
continually within view and hearing of their Diabolical lives and language?
what Mesechs (think ye,) what Kedars are their own houses unto them? Is not
all this a hell upon earth to a gracious soul?

But I must go yet higher, to other kinds of spiritual Scorpions, 3.
Ordinances lost.
to other Irons that do enter into the souls of Gods people in those parts:
What think ye, Brethren, of the loss of the Arc and Ordinances? It Is a sad
death to dye for want of bodily food; but what think you of Amos his Famine?
not a famine of bread, Amos 8.11.
nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord. This
soule-dearth is come upon them (I believe) above all parts of the Land besides;
for they do, in a most literal sense, Verse 12.
wander from sea to sea, and from the North even to the East; they do run to
and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and cannot find it; but are forced to
gather stubble in stead of straw: the multitude of their Teachers were long
since driven into corners, Isai. 30.20.
where their eyes could not behold them: and of the gleanings that stayed
behind, some are imprisoned and dead, others condemned to dye, (two in Exon) by
their Council of War: so that there is scarce a conscientious preaching
Pastor to be found in a whole County; only, perhaps, here and there is left
an old complying Prophet of Bethel; 1 K^n. 13. 11, 12, etc.
who if he has some embers of grace in the nether-most corner of his heart,
yet they do lie hid under so much cold earth and policy, that his Ministry is
not like to warm a soul in many years. But, the multitude of their Priests,
in those parts, are of the vilest of the people, in all respects, and do send
out profaneness over all that Country; and to the servants of God they are
Wolves and Butchers, rather than Shepherds. But now, oh how beautiful would be
the face, yea, the feet of one of the least of their old Ministers? how sweet
would be the weakest of those godly Sermons, which (perhaps) wanton hearers
have sometimes despised? Have you ever observed, Brethren, an halfe-starved
beggar, or prisoner, that picketh up a cast crust of bread in the street, how
hastily, how heartily he does eat it down in a corner, without wiping it? Just
so precious is the bread of life, amongst the halfe-starved souls in those
Counties; if they can get but a stale fragment of some old Sermon-notes, a
piece, a bit of a Doctrine or of an Use, oh! how sweetly does it go down upon
the heart? there is honey come into it; for the Enemy does martyr all the old
Sermon-notes that he can meet withal: and as for new Sermons there are very
few; the Sanctuary is desolate, the Church-doores have been shut up in diverse
places, for many months together.

Churches still open, and doubtless there is some food to be picked out of
those Ordinances, such as they are.

poison in stead of nourishment; not only a stone, that is, a stroke is given
them in stead of bread, but for fish they have a Scorpion, death it self is in
the Pot; I mean, Doctrines of Libertinisme and Superstition. (2.) They are fed
with snares; like that snare upon Mispeh, Hos. 5.1.
and like that net which was spread upon Tabor: Not only the Lords Table is
made a Snare unto them, by Altaring and Worshipping of the elements, there used
and enjoined; but almost every other Ordinance is poisoned, and made a bait
unto the Receivers. Shall I instance? First then, The solemn and extraordinary
holy exercise of Prayer and Fasting is not only denied to the godly in
private, Public Fasting,
in their own families, upon perist of intolerable scoffs, riots,
imprisonments; but even public Humiliation also, though it be the Lords
marking Ordinance, whereby he does mark out his mourners for preservation in
evil times, Go through the midst of the City, Ezekiel 9.4
and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and cry for all the
abominations that are done in the midst thereof. Even this cho^ce Ordinance is
denied unto the Saints, and is now utterly put down, though it were formerly
set up by his Majesty himself, with the consent of his Parliament: The Enemy
will not give Gods people leave to weep and mourn for his sins, and for the
sins of the Land. Neither are those adversaries of Re^entance content to
over-turne that settled course of humiliation; ^ut, which is yet worse, they do
imitate Jeroboam, who, when ^ee had withdrawn the ten Tribes from the true
God, and his ^ight Ordinances, did set up two Calves in stead of the
Temple-^orship, and new holy days in stead of the Lords own Feasts: ^eroboam
ordained a Feast in the eight month, 1 Ki^. 12.28, 29, 31, 32, etc.
on the fifteenth lay of the month, like unto the Feast that is in Judah: So
these ^en, in his Majesty's name, have set up an Anti-fast, (as well as an
Anti-Parliament, and an Anti-Covenant) and, consequently, an Anti-God against
the God of the Roundheads: And all this is made as a Shibo^ch, for the
discovery and entanglement of the upright in the Land. Thus the very Fastings
of Gods people are turned into a Snare unto them. This cruel Decree is most
severely executed in the West, Secondly. Hearing of the word preached.
As for that only ordinary soule-saving Ordinance of Preaching, and other
public Exercises of the Congregations, those in the West are made to be as a
bait and a train to conshiracy and perjury; for the common practice of the
Enemy in those parts is this: Upon the Lords day, when there is a full
Congregation met together, to seek the public food of their souls, (they
being stripped and plundered of all their outward and bodily comforts) then the
Civil, and Military Magistrates and Commanders do usually send their severe
Warrants and Orders, requiring that first the Church-doores be shut up, 4.
Horrid Oaths enforced.
and strictly guarded by armed Soldiers, (only the women and children are
first let go) then the cruel Officers are sent in to the people with a new
Oath, which is exactly, in all points, contrary to our Covenant, and to that
solemn Protestation which all those poor souls have taken already in that
place: And here the trembling wretched creatures are put to this miserable
dilemma, or choice, either to take that perjurious Oath, and so to swear that
they will fight against their Religion, Parliament, Laws and Liberties, to
their utmost; or else, to receive a brace of bullets from that Carbine, or
Pistol, which is there presented to their breasts. Brethren, what think you of
such a choice as this? Do not those men make the place of Gods public worship
(which themselves do seem so much to reverence) to become such another
Shambles as Jehu made in the house of Baal? you know the History: King Jehu, by
a stratagem, 2 Kin. 10.25.
(pretending a great sacrifice) did draw the Priests of Baal into Baals house,
and having gotten them together, did cause them to be there sacrificed to their
god; so turning the place of their worship into a slaughterhouse. Such another
butchering place of souls do these men make of their Churches. Or, is not
this act of theirs like that of a bloody Italian, of which I have heard? An
Italian, studying an high degree of revenge against one that had offended him,
did resolve upon this cruel stratagem; himself being armed, waylaid his
unarmed enemy in a solitary place where he was to pass, and rising against
him at an advantage, does put him to this choice, Either (says he) do thou
presently curse God, and abjure and blaspheme Jesus Christ, in these and these
words, (high enough you may be sure) or else thou shall dye immediately by this
sword; withal offering the point thereof unto his breast: The poor defendant
thus helpless, and fearing the face of sudden death, does choose (wretched
creature) the far worset part, namely, to blaspheme his God, and forswear
his Savior; which he had no sooner done, but the witty bloody assaylant does
immediately thrust him through, with these words, Now will I kill soul and body
together. Does not the forementioned act, of the cruel Enemy in the West,
come up full to this barbarism? Is it not a killing of soul and body
together, when they do first enforce men, for fear of present death, to
forswear themselves, and to abjure their God and Gospel, and then by virtue of
that perjurious Oath do immediately require, and carry them away to the wars,
where they are cut off in the midst of that perjury, whilst they are fighting
against God and their own consciences? And yet such is the terror of present
imminent death, (the King of fears) that diverse godly persons, through
infirmity, have entangled themselves, verbally, with that bloody combination:
but, after the taking thereof, some of them have been distracted with the
terrors of their clamorous consciences; others have lost their comfort and
activity, the very wheels of their souls, and do lock up themselves in
darkness. Brethren, there are diverse Hospitals in this City, for such
soldiers as have been wounded and maimed in these wars, where there is
provision of food, physic, and Surgeons, made for their bodies; and
doubtless that work is an act of much equity, prudence, and mercy: But alas,
alas! how many Savoys and Bartholomews, I mean, Hospitals and Spittles, shall
we need for wounded consciences, and maimed souls in the West? Surely, I am
persuaded, that if ever the Lord does turn our captivity, and brings us back
into those parts, we shall meet with spiritual wounds, ulcers, and broken
bones, of all sorts and degrees: there we shall have one crying out, (like
hopeless Spiia) I have denied God before men, and now am I sure to be denied
of him before his Angels in heaven; the wound of mine Apostasy is incurable.
Another roaring out because of his perjury, and saying, Which side soever is in
the right, I am certainly a forsworn man; because I have taken Oaths that were
directly contrary: and therefore, I am marked out, like Cain, with a trembling
conscience: I have sold Christ and his Cause, like Judas, for gain and safety;
and this my sin was committed both with knowledge and against it: yea, I have
sinned presumptuously; and then the Scripture is clear in my sentence, For, if
we sin wilfully, Heb. 10.26, 27.
after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no
more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and
fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. And, perhaps, a third
man, that was once a Professor, Acts and Monuments.
but last an eminent Actor for the Enemy, will, like that Judge Hales, (if I
mistake not) lay violent hands upon his own body, and become Executioner to
himself, by drowning, burning, or hanging: Yea, some cries and carriages of
this kind, have been uttered and acted in those parts already. And they are but
according to the desires of some of the Enemies, who are said to have wished,
Oh that they could but kill the soul of a Roundhead! This was the last and
highest of Jobs three kinds of Affliction, namely, the plundering of him in
Spirituals. And thus have I done with my Parallels.

And now, if all these considerations both of Western sins and sufferings do
not lie heavy enough upon our hearts, to break them before the Lord this day;
then I have yet one talent of Lead more which I would cast in; and it may also
be dug out of my Text, Some especial unhappinesses of the West; as in
even out of this last clause, and close thereof: For the hand of God has
touched me; That is, the Lords special, peculiar, immediate afflicting hand
was upon him, and against him; my meaning is (Brethren) to commend unto you,
with reference to those words, this consideration, namely, that the especial,
immediate, and (me thinks) extraordinary hand of God is against the poor West
above other parts and quarters of the kingdom. I know that every Country and
person is apt by nature to think 'its own burden to be the heaviest, but
therefore I shall spread my reasons and arguments before you, that so your
selves may consider of it, Judge. 19.30.
take advice, and speak your minds. Mine arguments to prove the singularity,
and transcendency of the Western forrows and sufferings; and to evince, that
the hand of God is especially against those Countries, above other parts, shall
lie in these three following Considerations:

First, 1. The Rise of their destruction.
consider the rise and original of our desolations. The West is in great part
a kind of great promontory, or somewhat like a Peninsula; it is a Country partly
hugged in the arms of the Ocean, upon the North; partly sleeved up by the
narrow sea, upon the South; so that for people and situation, it was like unto
that Egyptian Alexandria, Nahum. 3.8.
which is thus described by Nahum: Art thou better then populous (or
nourishnig) No, that was situate among the rivers, that had the waters round
about it, whose rampart was the sea, and her wall was from the sea? Our ships
and Ocean were heretofore accounted (and too much gloried in) as the strength
of great Britain; and we were wont to say, that this Island had a wall of
wood, and a moate of seas about her; but the West above other parts might have
boasted of her greatest share in this defense; for it was a Country by
situation (as it were) cut out for safety and security; so that I have heard
some wise Eastern men saying, that they did even envy our Geographicall
happiness, in the beginning of these troubles; and indeed we had little cause
to fear either any commotion from within, all the five Counties standing
generally right at first; or any invader from without, Devon and Cornwall.
two of these five Counties, and a part of the third Somerset
being almost cut off from the whole kingdom, and only a neck of land, little
more then from Lime to Bridge. water.
twenty miles over, does unite them as a Peninsula to the maine. Hence it was,
that many of our people did stand studying which way 'twas possible for an
enemy to come in, and overrun us; yea, and generally we of the West may now
take up that of the lamenting Prophet in this point: Lamen. 2.12.
All the inhabitants of the world would not have believed, that the adversary
and the enemy should have entered into the gates of [our] Jerusalem. And, to
give glory to God, we must all confess, that this sea-confidence has been
one great sin of this kingdom: and as the whole land is now scourged for it,
by a sword coming out of 'its own bowels; so especially the Western parts,
where a little cloud like a man's hand, arising out of that unhappy Sherborn.
castle, and meeting with many vaporing exhalations in Cornwall, did in a short
time darken our heaven, and anon was poured down upon all those Counties in a
shower of blood; in which, the garments of our miserable Countrymen are
lamentably rouled to this day; yea, and although we did continually endeavor
with our prayers, persons, purses, as with so many buckets, to draine and
stanch our distressed Counties; yet did the waves still flow in and arise from
the ancles to the knees, from the knees to the loins, Ezekiel. 47.
until they became such a river as could not be passed. And thus has our
affliction arisen as it were out of the dust, our destruction (as the
kingdoms) was (strangely) of our selves, Isai. 45.6, 7.
and our casting down from the midst of us: and all this is happened unto us,
That men may know (says God by his Prophet) from the rising of the Sun, and
from the West, that there is none besides me: I am the Lord, and there is none
else. I form the light, and create darkness: I make peace, and create evil:
I the Lord do all these things,

Secondly, 2. The progress of it; Lost labors in
consider the growth and progress of our ruin: Oh the great labors, both in
doings and sufferings, that were laid out by the people of the West! Oh the
vast treasures that were by them expended, for the defense of this cause and
themselves! and yet, alas, all these labors (me thinks) have been (as the
Prophet speaks) but as laboring in the very fire: Hagga^ 1.6.
all those treasures have been put into a bag with holes, or a pierced bag; for
we have scarcely purchased, by all this, so much as a general thorough
persuasion in the hearts of the well-affected of the East, that the West has
abundantly done, suffered, expended. Let us therefore now look into this
matter more fully; partly for the farther satisfaction of such as do desire
true information; but chiefly for our own farther humiliation under that
heavy hand of God, which has extraordinarily touched us. 1. Fortifications.
First then, shall we look to our strong and labourious fortifications, and
the succeslesnesse and loss of those, that therein we may read (as our own
activitie, so) the Lords displeasure against us? Then give me leave shortly to
view some of the works of the five Western Counties: Cornwall.
And 1. as for lamentable Cornwall; I must say of that, at present, as
sometimes Jacob of his lost Joseph: Cornwall is not, though even that County
was not lost without some hearty struglings of the honest party; and therefore
I hope to see 'its rising again, as life from the dead. Devon.
2. As for the greatest of all these five Counties, in it one large City, and
four great Towns, all accounted as maritime, were strongly fortified and well
defended; but that labor has proved but a laboring in the fire, all those
places being now lost, except one poor Plymouth only. 3. In the third County,
Somerset. Bristoll. Taunton and Bridgwater.
(which is the second in extent) there, that greatest City of the West, with
other her two daughters, which are p^tty Cities also, were with great sums of
money made garrisons; but every of them since that time, (as well mother as
daughters) have been taken, sacked, undone; though the Lord has given us back
the shell, the nest, I mean the dwelling houses or buildings of Taunton.
Dorset. Poole. Wareham. Dorchester Weymouth, Lyme.
one of those Towns again; but alas the kernel, the birds, the substance are
gone and flowen. 4. In the fourth County, (to proceed Geographically) five
Towns near the seacoasts were made defensible and garrisoned; I might call
them the Parliamentary Cinque ports of Dorset: but of these the greater number
and the stronger have also been taken by the enemy, though God has given them
to us again. 5. And finally, Marleberough.
as for the last of those Counties, 'its best defended, and the most fighting
town, is now made a principal quarter of the Enemy: So much concerning
fortifications. Or secondly, shall we speak of faithful and valiant
endeavors of self-defence, for the Parliamentary cause, 2. Valiant
selfe-defence, in sustaining of sieges. Exon.
by sustaining of long sieges? even herein the West may compare (if comparisons
be not odious) with most Cities, Towns, Castles, or houses in the land. Take
an instance in every of those three: 1. Amongst City-sieges, remember that of
Exon, which for the space of about fifteen weeks together, did faithfully
conflict and struggle with a double disease: partly with a strong, crafty,
pestilentiall enemy, encompassing her without; and partly with a Malignant
putrid fever in her own blood within; and all this in the lowest and most
hopeless juncture of time, that ever this Parliament did see, or I hope shall
see, until our perfect deliverance: Deuteronomy. 22.26, 27.
and therefore that City, though it be now ravished by strangers, may truly be
said to have kept her virgin-honour and Fidelis in aternum.
motto still, because she cried out for help, though no man came to her
rescue. Amongst Towne-sieges, I might say much concerning the stoutnesse and
longanimity, of Poole and Dartmouth, and perhaps of some other places; but
because I have promised but one instance in this particular, let our Chronicle
of these times bid posterity to give the Crown of perseverance to constant
Plymouth; Plymouth.
whose siege may bear almost the same (that is as long a) date as the present
wars. It is now about two years since (as I remember) that the habitual
Leaguer, or, rather, Plantation of the enemy before that town did begin: and
although there have been some intermissions, yet I do question, whether those
(as the Lord disposed them) have made more for the greater relief or distress
of that place: And in all this time, both flatteries, treacheries, and violence
of all kinds were used; yea, and the presence of abused Majesty it self, was
brought to prove and crown the wisdom, sincerity, courage of that Garrison.
Finally, amongst Castle-Sieges, Warder Castle.
that of Warder in Wilts will be famous to posterity, both for passive and
active valor, to the utmost. So much concerning length of Sieges.

But once more, Marleborough.
if you look to hot service and fiery stormings (as they call them) then take
but two instances: First, in the tempest at Marleborough, that was admirably
sustained, until the defendants were overpowered with lead, fire, and
numbers. But chiefly in that great wonder of little Lyme in Dorset, Lime.
which having in it but eleven hundred Soldiers, did not only sustain, but
shamefully repulsed a Leaguer of no less then (by their own confession) six
thousand Enemies; whose Demi-cannon, and other Ordnance played unceflantly upon
their weak and thin line, for full 8. weeks together; whilst the Soldiery in
the Town, having dug pits, (or graves rather) for themselves, under their
line, in the earth, to shelter themselves from the Ordnance, did there eat,
and drink, and lodge, and dwell in mire and clay to the end of that siege; So
that not only their own judicious, The Lord Admiral. Maurice.
and noble friend, (beholding that line of theirs after the siege) is said to
have professed, that he never saw such paper-works defen^ed by men; but even
the repulsed Prince their enemy is said to have acknowledged, that, had not
the defendants been rebelis (as he miscalled them) every man of them did
deserve to have Command. Many more particulars, with their instances, might be
added, to show the extraordinary endeavors of the West to preserve it self
for King and Parliament. But that which ought to break our hearts in all that
has been said, is to consider, that, notwithstanding all this labor, charge,
courage, heartines, we have spent our strength in vain and for naught. Our
fore did still run, and ceased not, until we were become (as at this day) the
most miserable parts of the Kingdom; so that the West must necessarily and
specially cry out, The hand of God has touched me. This was the second
Consideration.

3. The continuance of the Western desolations.
Lastly, let us consider the continuance and settlement of our miseries to this
day, 2 Samuel 1.
and that, for all this, the Lords wrath is not turned away, but his hand is
str^tched out still. Is not the West at present, nay, has it not been for a
long season, as the Mountains of Gilboa, in comparison to other places? that
is, the Country upon which especially neither dew of comforts, not rain of
succor does descend? Are not we alone as a people born out of due time? the
utmost Eastern parts of the Kingdom have not at all seen and felt the present
war: the No^th has felt it indeed, but is in a manner now quite delivered: and
as for the middle parts of the Land, though the shower be not as yet wholly
blown over; yet there is many a strong wind that is driving away the clouds,
many a bucket that is laving off the waters from them; I mean, there are many
potent armies fighting valiantly in those Counties for their relief, only the
poor West that was the [primu^ moriens,] one of the first in this death, is
like to be the [ultimum vivens] the very last in the resurrection, whenever
these troubles shall have an end, it being to this day farthest from the
fountains of help, viz. London, and the North; and nearest to the fountains of
harm, viz. Ireland and France. I do not quarrel with instruments, but shall
leave them all to the Father of Spirits, and the Searcher of hearts; only my
desire is to affect mine own heart and yours with the consideration of that
hand of God that does especially touch us; and in that sense I shall go on to
show you this branch of Western unhappiness in these three cases: The last
Branch of of the Western unhappinesses, farther aggravated is 3. Cases. 1.
Case. Judge. 18.28.
First, in case of petitioning and begging help and relief for our Country. Me
thinks, the Lords providence has still waylaid us, and as it were hedged up
our ways with thorns; God has so ordered the frame of public affairs, that
little water (as they say) has bin spared to our mill: some cause of this
unhappiness may (perchance) be the distant situation of our Country from
these parts, and so it is like unto that Laish, of which it is said, And there
was no deliverer, because it was far from Sidon, and they had no business
with any man. So the West perhaps has seen the fewer deliverers, because it
is far from London, and has now little business with the children of the
East: It is necessary (I confess) that the parts nearest the heart be first
preserved, and it is ordinary (I find) for those poor people to be served last,
which are farthest off from the door. Another cause of this our unhappiness
may be the more importunate interposition of other suitors, that, like Jacob,
do get away the blessing from us, whilst we are hunting for venison to procure
it by; and so we and our Country are like that lame man in the Gospel, that lay
near the pool of Bethesda, expecting a good time for healing, who thus
complains to our Savior, Sir, John 5.7.
I have no man when the water is troubled to put me into the pool: but while I
am coming, another steppeth down before me. The text needs no application;
this is the first Case. But secondly, in case of obtaining, 2. Case.
and procuring the help which was petitioned for, I mean when armies and
treasures, have been procured, and sent for our relief; yet, even then, the
Lord has especially blown upon them and us; sometimes by turning, and
over-turning our Counsels, sometimes by frustrating our active endeavors: I
will instance but in one most remarkable disappointment. You have not forgotten
the time when his Excellencies army was sent for relief of the West: we might
have said of that army until that time, as much as David in his Funeral Elegy
says of valiant Saul and Jonathan, 1 Samuel 1.22.
From the blood of the slains, from the fat of the mighty, the bow of Jonathan
turned not back, and the sword of Saul returned not empty: To this both
Keinton and Newbury, the first and second time, and all other Eastern,
Northern, and Southern fields can witness: but when once this ever
before-victorious army marched into the West, then behold (as if the fate of
that unprosperous Country had wrought upon them) the Scene is changed, and we
might also change our note, Ve^se ^7.
as David does afterward in that same Song, How are the mighty fallen, and the
weapons of war perished? That Virgin Army (as it was well called) had never
its nakedness uncovered, in any other Field or County, but only in the most
Western Cornwall. 3. Case.
This is the second Case. But thirdly, once more, in case of accepting and (for
a time) enjoying the help obtained and procured, yet the West has been the
more unhappy: My meaning, in plain English, is this; When some Armies,
Brigades, and Parties have been sent down for our relief and restoration,
they have rather proved (by accident, and in event) an occasion of our
Countries greater miseries and bondage; for, upon their coming into those parts
with help, and promises of continuance, the well-affected have the more freely
engaged themselves; that is, some men that had before walked so prudently (yet
honestly) that the Enemy had no great advantage upon them, did actively
discover themselves: others, that had lain hid in woods and pits, or were fled
to the next Garrisons, came forth, and brought out with them all their treasure
and provision, which they had hidden from the Midianites; and all these (you
may suppose) do now take the Covenant, do draw in their friends to their
Party, and, in a word, do imbarque both their persons and whole remainder in
the present Bottom: But lo, upon a sudden, (to follow the Metaphor) either
the Vessel is split, and so they are wrackt; or the wind is turned, and so the
Barque drives away; leaving them (as that wandering Aeneas left his Dido) to
despair, cry out, and perish. Even thus have many of our intended helpers
proved unto the well-affected of the West but as an Egyptian reed, but as a
piece of new cloth set upon an old garment, whereby the rent has been made
worse; or, (to speak but this once, though I can hardly speak sufficiently in
this point) but as Gaal the son of Ebed proved unto the men of Shechem: Let
us look sadly upon that Example; It is said, Judge. 9.26, 27.
And the men of Shechem put their confidence in him: And they went out into the
fields, and gathered their vineyards, and trod the grapes, and made merry, --
and cursed Abimelech. Why? what might be the cause of this great confidence and
merriment? Surely, Gaals boasting, and his promise of protection to them. Verse.
28, 29, 40, 41, 44, 45.
And Gaal the son of Ebed said, Who is Abimelech, and who is Shechem, that
we should serve him? -- And would to God this people were under my hand; then
would I remove Abimelech. But what is the event both of his big words and their
great hopes? It is this in short: first, Gaal is worsted, and so leaves them;
then comes Abimelech with his Army, and fights against the City, and takes it,
and flayeth the people that were therein, and beats down the City, and sows
it with salt, etc. We have diverse such Shechems in the West; as thou forward
Barnestaple art one witness: And though Taunton be lately relieved, (blessed
be God, and all that had a hand in that work;) yet, even since that
relieving, my native Chard is another sad witness of this truth.



hand does touch the West: And suffer me to say with sorrow, that few other
parts of the land have had so great a share in this kind of unhappy accidents,
a^ those five Counties toward the setting of the Sun. The last additionall
aggravation of especial Western unhappinesses, Loss of Pillars. Isat. 3.1, 2,
3.


Before I conclude this sad Point, concerning the singular unhappiness of the
Western parts, give me leave to mind you but of one aggravation more; namely,
That the hand of God has been very heavy upon many of our excellent Western
Leaders: He has plucked away diverse of our Supporters from us, and has
smitten some of our Shepherds. Brethren, you know that dreadful commination
against the Jews, wherein the Lord threatened to take away from Jerusalem the
mighty man, and the man of war; the Judge, and the Prophet, and the prudent,
and the ancient; the Captain of fifty, and the honorable man, and the
Counselor, and the cunning Artificer, and the eloquent Orator. I know not the
losses of other parts of the Land; sure I am that the West has been a deep
loser in all these kinds. What City, what Town, nay, what Parish (almost) of
eminency is there in those parts, in which there is not some one or more use
full man dead? Some such persons have been shine by the sword; others have died
of the diseases of the Armies; and a third sort have had their hearts broken by
the Oppressors. Many other men are better acquainted with diverse of the
Western Towns than my self; and yet, even out of my little knowledge, I
could reckon up some very eminent ones, which the Lord has taken away from
every of the five Western Counties but Dorset, -- C^neri gloria sera venu.
one, since this Parliament did begin. Why should we deny honor to the dead?
Why should we neglect a powerful means of humbling our own hearts? First,
give me leave to remember you of our losses of Parliamentary State-pillars: 1.
In Parliament,
What a precious pair (to begin at home) of excellent instruments has Devon
lost? Surely, the Jo. Upton Esquire.
one of them was no less than [the stay and the staffe] of that County: and
the Tho. Wise Esquire.
other might justly be called, The prudent man; though in years he was not
the ancient: and both were taken away, by a kind of The small Pox.
imperillous disease, in our times of greatest need. Next, what think you of
the loss of that Sir Fran. Popham, Knight.
greatest, and most cordial Knight of Somerset? was not he by an eminency
[the ancient and the honorable?] And to him add Sir Peter Wroth, Knight.
another honest worthy Knight that served for the same County, who was likewise
called away in the midst of the work: These two were (I take it) the only
pair of right Parliamentary Knights of that County. Also in Wilts we may
reckon Sir Henry Ludlow, Knight.
another precious and worthy Knight, which the Lord has snatched away from his
Country. Nay, lastly, even Cornwall it self may complain, that of her little
handful of good members, which do hold fast to this Cause, she has lost a
principal Sir Rich. Buller, Knt.
finger: All these were Parliamentary Supporters of the West. And we do all
know, that when the owner of an house does pull away the posts and pillars
thereof, it is a sign that he does intend either to build it better, or to
demolish it.

2. In the Assembly.
But this is not all; we have had a deplorable loss in Prophets too: Three of
the five Western Counties had but five of their Ministers sitting in the
Assembly of Divines; and (...), Mr Henry Painter, of Exon. Mr Peal, of Dorset.
two of those five has the Lord taken away from us in these parts: even a
pair of workmen that were some of the charets and horsemen of the West; both
of them were eminent for piety and abilities: But give me leave to mourn
especially over that Mr Painter, B.D.
eldest pillar of fire, which did for so many years support and enlighten the
true Religion in the West: give me leave to call him [the mighty man and the
Counselor;] that is, the Champion, and the Oracle, of persecuted Ministers,
and people in those parts; yea, the hammer of Schismatics, and the salt of the
most Western City; which did not only preserve it (in great part) from the
putrefaction of Profaneness, but from the rawnesse of Novelties. In a word, he
was so public a good, that for him that whole City has cause to wear blacks.
Thus the Lord has taken away from us the Prophets. And now (to fill up our
sorrows) I could tell you, finally, of the loss of [the man of war, and the
Captain of fifty;] that is, of some considerable Martial pillars: 3. In the
Armies, Col. Will. Gould. Lievt. Col. Martin.
I could instance, upon knowledge, in that precious piece of activity, upon
whose good name biting Envy may break her teeth, but she shall never be able
to devour it. And in that other pious Commander in the same Town, who having
defended his Charge to the utmost, yet afterward died with grief, because he
could do no more. But I forbear to draw forth this thread any farther,
because the clue is grown so big already. Thus have I done with the Causes for
which we ought really to pity our Western Brethren, with all those excitations
and incentives to compassion, which that General did afford us. Secondly,
Means and instructions to direct us in the duty of pity, viz. 1. In general,
from the example of Jobs 3. friends. In their visit, note,


Secondly, we come now to the means, by which we may pity the West to
purpose: And this General (as I promised) must yield us some instructions and
directions in that brotherly, Christian duty. These instructions may be of two
sorts: 1. Some more general, and borrowed from the example of the friends of
Job, mentioned in this history. 2. Others more particular, and as it were
independent, taken only from the subjects, or instruments of our compassion.

First in general: as we have already found in this book of Job, a pattern,
and parallel of misery; so may we fetch out from thence a Copy of
compassion, even from the pity of Jobs three friends; it is described Chap. 2.
in three Verses, viz. Verse 11, 12, 13. They do contain the visit of Jobs
friends: in which we may observe, 1. The occasion. 2. The ground 3. The end,
and intendment of their coming.

The occasion of their visit, 1. The occasion. Verse 11.
was the report of all the evil that was come upon Job: Now when Jobs three
friends heard of all the evil that was come upon him, then they came: This may
hint unto us the duty of enquiring, and listening after our distressed friends
and Country, which shall be the first branch of real pity.

The ground of this visit was a mutual agreement, 2. The ground.
or a voluntary compact made between them; for they had made an appointment
together to come, etc. This does intimate unto us, the duty of assembling, and
consulting together, for the good of our afflicted brethren, which will be the
second branch of friendly pity.

The end, 3. The end, hence.
and intendment of their visit, is expressed to be twofold:

1. To communicate with him in his sorrows; to mourn with him.

2. To communicate to him their comforts; and to comfort him. Then their
solemn mourning is expressed through the next verse, v. 12. and the cause
thereof. ult. But these last two verses, I shall not touch upon: only let us
run through the former three branches of real compassion.

The first branch of real pity, 1. Duty, Enquiry, etc. Job. 2.11.
is to hearken out, and make enquiry after our distressed brethren. Thus
Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar, were induced to pity Job, by the hearing of their
ears: When they heard of all this evil that was come upon him, then they came
every one from his own place, etc. Mark, the very hearsay, or report of the
afflictions of friends ought both to take our ears, and to move our hearts.
But, alas for the Adder-like deafness of multitudes now amongst us, that will
not hear in that ear (as we say) for fear lest their hearts, and then their
purses should be picked open; for they do interpret every sad relation, to be
the preface to a petition: Yea, many men are (like the people near the falls of
Nylus) grown deaf by the continual noise of doleful reports: Surely the
Lord will boar such ears at last. Others there are, which do account it a
cheaper and a wiser way, not to believe any sad reports at all but generally to
cry them down, as false and uncertain pamphlets, rather then to be at the
pain of letting them into their hearts; and these are like churlish Nabal,
which did choose rather to call David a runaway, and to suspect the truth of
his messengers, then to be at the charge of rewarding and relieving them. The
sword may one day find out these men also.

But chiefly we must observe from this duty of enquiry, that we ought to have
our ears open to receive, yea, our mouths open to enquire after all the evil
that does come upon our friends. Good Nehemiah did not only hearken what
tidings from Jerusalem, but (so great a Courtier as he was) he made enquiry
after news: Nehem. 1.1, 2.
And I asked them concerning the Jews that had escaped, which were left of the
captivity, etc. It seems he was both earnest and busy, in his
interrogatories; for so you may read the words; I asked concerning the Jews,
concerning the remnant, concerning Jerusalem: Here is question upon question,
and another upon that again, concerning, concerning, concerning; just as your
vehement inquisitors use to do; yea, he does enquire after every particular
too, as the Jews, the remnant, Jerusalem: Let this example shame the faces of
all such Epicures, as cannot listen after the condition of their suffering
fellow members: Surely themselves are but as the belly in the public body,
Venture auribus caret.
of which we say, that it has no ears; and I shall leave with them that just
proverb of the holy Ghost: Prove. 21.13.
Who so stops his ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry himself,
but shall not be heard. But as for us, (my brethren) let us be like unto pious
old Ely, who, although he had lost his eyes, yet does use his ears to the
utmost, in listening after the condition of the Arc, and Israel in the field:
Ely sat upon a seat by the way side, watching: 1 Samuel 4.14, 15.
Yet it is added; his eyes were dim, that he could not see. A strange
watchman that had no eyes; but it seems that he did watch with his ears, to
hear what news from the armies; so let us even pant with trembling hearts
after the public occurrences: And here I cannot but complain, and grieve, to
consider how much the stream of perfect and true intelligence (that should be
to our daily prayers, as water to the mill) is continually obstructed, defiled,
and broken in this great City, by manifold printed malignities, falsities, and
mistakes. This was the first branch of the real pity, from the example of
Jobs three friends. 2. Duty, assembling, etc.


The Second, was to assemble and consult together, for the good of our
afflicted brethren: Thus Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar, did make a mutual
appointment together to come, etc. Learn we hence, the necessary lesson of
voluntary meetings, for the benefit of our distressed absent brethren and
Country.

Jobs friends were neither constrained nor called together, but their act was
both free and unanimous. Let all our unsociable, untuneable Western exiles,
consider this pattern; even all those that are backward to friendly
consultations and deliberations for the good of their native Country; but too
forward to censure and prejudicate all such as do promote them: Surely, there
were not more excuses made by those ungrateful guests, Luke 14.18, 19, 20.
which were invited to that Gospel marriage feast, then may be heard from some
of us, when we are invited to meet together for the public good: the purchase,
the oxen, the wife, pride, profit, and pleasure, do all bring in their
several put-offs; One man will tell you beforehand, that the meeting will be
to no purpose: Who made him a Prophet? but if thou art sure of that (O
diviner,) then thou ought the rather to come thither, or at least to appoint
some other place, thereby to make up an effectual meeting. Another man takes
exception, because such a one did appoint the consultation: But why had not
thou prevented him? Besides, I think it is lawful for any man to bestow his
pains freely toward the dressing of a common field. A third man objecteth
(pettishly) that he never heard of the meeting before, neither has he as yet
been told the business. Why, who was bound to be the beadle to give you notice?
who is paid for that service? Me thinks thou might rather account it a mercy
from God, and a courtesy from man, that thou do by any means hear of any
opportunity of doing good at any time; nay, (as I conceive) thy self art bound
to ask and inquire, after such occasions of serving thy Country; and me thinks
there is Scripture for it, Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, Eccles. 9.10.
do it with thy might. Does not [finding] imply and suppose a [seeking?] nay,
is not the promise of finding made to seeking; Mat. 7.7.
Seek and ye shall find? A fourth person will not come together with others
by appointment, because (forsooth) such a man will be there whom he hates
(perhaps as Ahab hated Micaiah,) for his round dealing. A rod, a rod; have we
not yet done with this old peevish Western humor? cannot all our Countries
miseries, and our own hitherto, nip this rankenesse of spirit? Will we needs
have another whipping with scorpions for this sin? Well, mark the issue, the
Lord has not as yet spent all his plagues upon us, but we shall find that if
he loves us, he will not leave us, before he has bowed or broken our pettish
stomachs. Finally, the last sort of men, they cannot come, because of other
private gainful businesses of their own, or perchance some hollow visit for
pleasure: To this I answer, Jonah 4.6, 7, 8.
Have we yet some Jonah's gourds left us, to shelter and delight our selves
under them after our former wrack for those self same sins? Take heed, lest
the Lord does provide a worm in the heat of the day, to smite those gourds
also until they are withered, and, after the worm, some vehement blast to
beat upon our heads till we faint again. In a word, let me speak to all such
Exiles in general, in the language of Mordecai to his kinswoman Queen Hester,
Hest. 4.14.
If ye altogether neglect this duty at this time, -- then shall there
enlargement and deliverance arise to the West from some other means, but ye
and your fathers houses may be destroyed; and who knows whether we are come to
this City for such a time as this?

But as for you, my dearly beloved, who are willing to do, to suffer, or to
be, any thing, or any where, so as the West may live again; to you I would
recommend, as a Legacy, that golden portion of the author to the Hebrews: Let
us consider, Heb. 10.24.
that is, with much prudence: One another, that is, the dispositions, gifts,
experience, virtues, and faults of one another: To provoke unto love, and to
good works; that is, striving who shall be first, and most in doing, and
receiving of good: Verse 25.
Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together; that is, both by
Church Assemblies, and Christian meetings, for the spiritual and civil good
of our Country, our selves, others, souls, bodies: As the manner of some is:
that is, of Schismatics, Apostats, Cynicks: But exhorting one another, (by
word and example) and so much the more, as ye see the day approaching: that
is, the day of general and particular judgment, the day of public and
special trial; and these days we ought to look unto, as at the door, at all
times, but especially then, when the plague is begun, 3. Duty, Communication of
good and evil.
when one foot of it is over the threshold. This was the second branch of the
real pity of Jobs friends: viz. their appointed meeting together to visit him.

The third branch of their friendly visit, is contained in the End thereof, and
that is expressed in the Text (as I said) to be twofold: 1. To communicate
with him in his sorrows, To mourn with him. 2. To communicate to him their
comforts, And to comfort him.


But these two, for brevities sake, we will twist together: they are indeed the
both hands of real friendship; the one is the giving hand, with which we do
freely strip our selves of any of our comforts, reaching them forth to our
distressed friends; this is commanded by the Apostle when he says,
Distributing to the necessity of the Saints: Romans 12.13.
The other is the receiving hand, with which we do take off their burdens,
laying them upon our own shoulders; and this also is enjoined by the same
Apostle, when he commands, Bear ye one another burdens, Gal. 6.2.
and so fulfill ye the law of Christ. It is one great commandment, or law of
Christ, that we love one another: It is another, that we do to others, as
we would they should do to us. John 1^.34. Luke 6.31.
Both these laws do bind us to both those duties of communicating: And
indeed, as the laws, so the example of Christ does enforce the same thing; for
with one hand he does reach forth unto his Saints both his merit, and Spirit;
and with the other hand he does bear our iniquities, and takes upon him our
infirmities. Let us therefore make him our Lord and pattern, in laboring to
do the offices of Christian friends to our distressed Countrymen with both
hands; not contenting our selves only with stripping our selves of our own
comfort, and to give it unto them, 1 Samuel 18.4
as Jonathan (in token of friendship) stripped himself of the robe that was upon
him, and gave it unto David, and his garments, even to his sword, and to his
bow, and to his girdle; but let us also make the sorrows, and sufferings of
our afflicted brethren, to be our own. But of this kind of compassion, I have
spoken somewhat already in my excitations: The rest that remains I shall bind
up together and thresh out in the

2. ^^ particular,
Second General which I promised, was called the more particular means of
real pity; and it may be amplified by the special members and weapons, by
which our compassions are acted and expressed. In few words then, would we
perform the duty of friendly pity in deed and in truth? Then we must do it,
Cord, Ore, Opere; with our hearts, with our mouths, with our hands or actions.

First, First, Cord.
with our hearts: The heart is the fountain of all reasonable living motions;
and if any actions have not their rise from thence, they are artificial, or
but brutishly natural: labor we therefore to engrave a map of our miserable
Country upon our hearts. Queen Mary is reported to have said after the loss of
Callice to the French, that whosoever should rip up her dead body, might find
Callice in her heart; Her reason was, because that last footing of England in
France was lost under her reign and government. Brethren, our native Counties
have been lost in our time, and partly also by our sins: Oh let us therefore
carry the West continually in our hearts. Answ. I mean, Cards of the five
Western Counties, which I have drawn before your eyes already: but, because
that draught is somewhat imperfect, I would only add unto it two or three
terms of art in this place; they may be borrowed from Paul, in a verse of his
to the Ephesians: where, laboring to express the great love of God in Christ,
Ephesians. 3.18.
he gives it several dimensions, that ye may be able to comprehend with all
Saints, what is the breadth, depth, and height of that love. There is the whole
trina dimensio, (as they call it) all the three dimensions of misery to be
observed in the present maps of the West: As namely, the [latitude] the
[longitude] yea [the profundity] of their sufferings.

First, would you know [the breadth] of our Western miseries? Surely, 1.
Latitude of the miseries of the West. Camden. Speed.
they are as broad as a tract of land containing from East to West (as our
Geographers do measure the five Counties) above two hundred miles; and from
North to South generally the whole continent betwixt the Northern and
Southern seas: In which tract there are commonly accounted five Cities,
Market-Tomnes one hundred thirty and one; diverse of which may compare with
some of your Eastern, and Northern Cities: Of Parishes, one thousand four
hundred nintey, and those also not (as in some other Counties) narrow and thin,
but generally very spacious, very populous. In short, the Western tract that
is now so miserable, does contain that whole kingdom of the West Saxons, (
Berks. Hamps.
two Counties only excepted) which of old (like Moses his rod) did devour all
the other six kingdoms of that Heptarchy; and I have cause to think, that at
this day, could there be but a competent number of helpful forces afforded
unto that Country, (like a bucket of water that is poured into a dry pump to
set it going) it would not only be able to defend it self, but might send
forth many comfortable streams toward the refreshment of other parts of the
kingdom. Sure I am by experience, that when the ill-affected of but one of
those five Counties had over-flowne the Western banks, which for a long time
did beat back their streams, they did in a short space turn the tide thorrow
the whole kingdom. This is a touch concerning the latitude, or breadth of the
Western miseries.

2. The Longitude.
Secondly, would you know what is the longitude, or length of this map of
misery? that is, how long time those parts have bin over-flowne? Surely, I
must answer, that the calamities of the kingdom, and of the West, do bear
the same date; even from August in the year 1642. unto this present, has the
fire of war been blown up and down in those Counties; and ever since about
July in the year 1643. when the West received her deaths wound at the Devizes,
has the enemy been master of the field in that little kingdom: only I
confess some blood did run to the heart in Exon after that blow, and it was
cherished to the utmost by that poor beleagured City; there being (I believe)
scarcely an hired soldier behind of his pay so much as for one week, to the
last day. Also there was a short seeming reviving in the field, but it proved
but as a draught of cold water to a man in a fever, which did increase the
after-fit: So that generally ever since that last blow, and at this present,
the state of the West has been, and is, after this manner: Note this present
state of the West.
First in Cornwall, which is a tract of land in length 60. miles, in breadth
40. containing 23. market-townes, and parishes 161. there is not left us one
yard of ground, whereon a known parliamentary friend can set his foot. In Devon,
which is a tract of land in length 54. miles, in breadth 55. containing 40.
markettownes, and parishes 394. only one poor single Plymouh is left us, which
stands like a kid amidst a wilderness full of wolves; for the whole Country
beyond it Westward to the lands-end, being above 50. miles, and the Country
upon this side of it Eastward, being full as many, is wholly possessed by the
enemy; the constant Town standing alone, Hosea 4.16.
amidst them all, as a lamb in a large place. In Somerset, which is a tract of
land in length 55. miles, in breadth 40. miles, containing 29. Market-Townes,
and Parishes 385. there is left but one poor single Taunton, that stands
like the burning bush amidst a Country full of fiery flaming swords. In Wilts,
a tract of land in length 39. miles, in breadth 29. containing 21. Market
Towns, and Parishes 304. there remains, escaped out of the common wrack, one
only Malmesbury (as I conceive.) Finally, Dorset, which is a tract of land in
length 44. miles, in breadth 24. containing 18. Market-Townes, and Parishes
248. has in it the most remainders of all the five Counties, and in it there
are four Maritime Towns under the power and obedience of King and Parliament.
The total in short is this, that seven Towns are yet left us in five
Counties, of which, four are situate in one County, and the other three in
four Counties more. This is the longitude, or the length of Western miseries.

3. The profundity.
Would we know the profundity or depth of our afflictions? Do but remember what
has been said already; do but seriously call to mind all the forementioned
methods of misery, as plundring of temporalls by cruel strangers, and
unnatural neighbors, both Caldeans and Sabeans by sword and fire; then the
corporal smitings, in liberties, livelihoods, lives, by slavery, enforcements,
or pressings, imprisonments, deaths; and lastly, spiritual tortures, by the
loss, the corrupting and poisoning of ordinances, as fasting and the Ministry
of the word, by enforcing of perjury, and so murdering both soul and body
together, etc. And this very recapitulation will sufficiently show the depth
and profundity of our afflictions, and this Map ought we to carry in our hearts.

We must pity our Countrymen with our mouths too; that is, 2. Ore.
in short, by speaking for them, by speaking to them, by speaking of them, as
often and as opportunely as we may, speak [for them] especially to the Lord in
prayer: Open thy window daily toward the West, as Daniel did; yea, plead with
the Lord for those parts, as Abraham did plead for the Cities of the plain,
because he had a Cousin Lot and his family there inhabiting; Genesis 18.
tell the Lord that there is many a thousand righteous to be found there,
besides those that are banished thence, and ask him with tears, Whether he
will destroy the righteous with the wicked; yea, give him no rest, until thou
bring down his pardoning mercies from fifty to ten, as Abraham did. Besides,
speak to men also, as Nehemiah did to his King and Master, plead for the place
of thy fathers Sepulcher that lies waste, but especially for the Sanctuary of
the Lord which is desolate: speak as Hester did to her Sovereign and husband,
though with the hazard of her life, and say, Hest. 7.3, 4.
Let my life be given me at my petition, and my people at my request; for we
are sold to be destroyed, to be slain, and to perish. This is to speak for
them. Next, speak we [to them,] if possibly we may by mouth, at least by
letters and messages: You know how sweet, how comfortable a messenger is, that
comes with glad tidings from far: As cold water to a thirsty soul, Irov.
25.25.
so is good news from a far Country. We read (to our great benefit) what
large letters some of the Apostles by inspiration did write to the absent
scattered Churches and Saints in their days: Thus Paul did send forth no less
then thirteen Epistles (besides that to the Hebrews) some to several Churches
both in Europe and Asia; Others to several persons, as to Timothy, Titus,
Philemon. Thus James indicted an Epistle, consisting of diverse seasonable
instructions and consolations, to the twelve tribes which are scattered abroad;
and Peter writes a first and second Epistle general, to the strangers that
were scattered through five distinct Kingdoms and Provinces, somewhat
answerable to our five Western Shires or Counties. Thus briefly John the
beloved disciple has by the spirit left upon record, both his general and
particular Letters, which are inscribed to persons of several ranks and sexes,
even as high as the Elect Lady and her children, and as low as his host Gaius.
By all which Epistles, and written messages, they being dead, do yet speak
unto us this duty of preaching unto our absent brethren, as often as
conveniently we may, by Epistles and Letters. Lastly, and at least, let us
speak [of them] wheresoever we come; let us perform that cheap duty for them,
which those captives in Babylon do promise to their desolate Sion in the
Psalmist, Psalm. 137.^.
If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if
I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy. When the City of Gloucester was in
distress, it is said, that some of her friends here in London did usually
stand at the doors of both Houses of Parliament, crying modestly to the Members
as they passed in and out, Remember Gloucester, oh remember poor Gloucester! and
it pleased God that at that time poor Gloucester was remembered and relieved. Oh
how many Gloucester Cities, and Glocester-Shires are there now perishing, yea,
half perished in the Western Counties? Let us therefore uncessantly scatter
our cries up and down in all places, to all persons, where there is any
possibility of succor, and say, Remember the West, Oh remember the unparalleld
sufferings of the West! So much concerning verbal or vocal compassion, which
is to pity them with our mouths.

Let us pity our Western Countrymen in deed and action; 3. Opere.
this is the best proof and perfection of both the former branches of
compassion, as Saint James appositely tells us; If a brother or a sister
(says he) be naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto
them, Depart in peace, be you warmed and filled, James 2.15, 16.
notwithstanding ye give them not those things that are needful to the body,
what does it profit? Surely, nothing at all, either to the mere verbal giver,
or to the seeming receiver. Let us therefore show our pity by our works; that
is, let us cast in, if necessary occasions do require, even a part of the
remaining dusts and drops of our meal in the Barrel, and of our oil in the
Cruse; 1 King 17.13, 14, 15, 16.
and doubt we not but the Lord will take care so to bless the remainder, that
there shall be a sufficiency for us and our family: yea, let us cast in the two
last mites, even all that we have, into that public treasury, if need
requires it, and so engage the Lord to maintain us. There is, to this purpose,
a famous Example of the Carthaginians, recorded in History, which has come
often into my mind, and it is this; Flor. lib. 2 c. 15. de Bell. Punic. tert.
Spe pa^is injecta traditam ^ volentibus classem, etc.
When that people had sustained their first and second war with the Romans,
with honor and some good success, at last the third and fatal war begins;
in which, when the Romans, pretending articles of peace, had treated away the
Carthaginian Navy, which they speedily fired in the very face of the City,
then offering them this only condition, [Th at they must all depart their own
Country, leaving it and their estates wholly to the Enemies:] It Is said, that
this proffer, for the horridness of it, so enraged them, that they would
rather choose to adventure upon the utmost of extremities. Hereupon all the
City do generally call to Arms, not so much out of hope to defend themselves,
as because they had rather that their Country should be destroyed by the hands
of the Enemy, than by their own. And now the great work to be done by them is
to build a new Navy: For the making whereof, for want of timber, they do pull
down their own houses; for want of iron to make bolts and nails, they do
work up their gold and silver; and for want of cordage, the Matrons do cut off
their hair to make ropes and cables. Ah poor souls, yet gallant spirits,
that could so freely cast in their last all to the honorable funerals of their
deceased Country! Brethren, this is the third, and (I hope) the last and best
conflict of the English (yea, British) Protestants with the Antichristian
Romans: First, they did attempt against us by force, in 88. Next, by fraud, in
their Gunpowder Treason: But, behold, now (and let us beware the third) in
this last attempt, force and fraud are knit together; their Armies (in stead of
their Armado) are combined, with their second Gunpowder Treason, to blow up
this Parliament: I say, with their second Gunpowder Treason; which, for
impudence, cruelty, and universality, does exceed the first. Nay, (and to
carry-on the application of my Punick Story) they have already treated-away
some of our most considerable pieces, as Ireland, and the West of England. Let
us now play the Carthaginians in hope, and to purpose: Let us not spare the
relics of our estates, treasures, persons; our houses, gold and silver,
hair, heads and all, to redeem all our temporal, natural, spiritual goods
again. As for the issues, let them be wholly left to the good pleasure of our
God; perchance it may please him to make good unto us, Western Exiles, that
promise by Zephaniah, namely, Zeph. 3.12.
To leave in the midst of the West an afflicted and poor people, and they
shall trust in the Name of the Lord. Surely, such a mercy as this would be
great, and precious to broken hearts: Or, perhaps (which seems sharper) he
has in his secret purpose justly decreed, that unworthy we, of this present
generation, shall not return to conquer or see again our native Country;
though, perchance, our children after us may obtain that favor: But, though
it be thus, yet let us labor to conquer our selves, and our own inordinate
desires; ('it is as great a mercy to want drought, as to have drink;) let us
prepare to see the pleased face of Christ at last: And for present, strive we
to attain to hearts like that of David, who, when he was flying from his
Jerusalem, from his Kingdom, yea, from Ordinances and all, yet could say unto
Zadok, ^ Sam. 15.25, 26.
Carry back the Ark of God into the City: if I shall find favor in the eyes
of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both it and his habitation:
But if he say thus, I have no delight in thee; behold, here am I, let him do
to me as it seems good unto him. Such a depth of selfe-submission as this,
is the highest step of selfe-advancement. However, so long as our remaining
inch of Candle shall be burning, (whatsoever place may be our Candlestick) let
us mightily, uncessantly, especially, pray, study, act, FOR THE WEST, FOR THE
WEST, FOR THE WEST.

FINIS.

