A SERMON Preached before the Reverend Committee of Divines, the 20th of May
1646. At their usual place of meeting in Westminster. Upon a Text given the
day before, by that Godly and learned Member of the Assembly Mr John Ley
Chairman.

By SAMPSON BOND Minister of Gods Word, at Mayden-head in Berks.

2 COR. 10.1. Now I my self beseech you by the meekness and gentleness of
Christ, which when I am present among you, am base, but am bold toward you
being absent.

Chrysostom. in Act. Hom. 5. (...). ibid.

(...), etc.

Printed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, and are to be sold at the sign of the three
legs in the Poultry. 1646.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir FRANCIS PILE Baronet, Sampson Bond wishes
plentiful increase of spiritual gifts, health confirmed, and life prolonged,
etc.
IF that (much honored Sir) I should here prefix any long narration in
commendation of your Worth, I should of some be suspected of flattery; of all
it would seem a thing superfluous, seeing it sufficiently commends it self?
such is your Worth, that who so reads you throughout, cannot but entertain
honorable and pious thoughts of you: your deserts of Gods Church, your
singular zeal, your unfeigned faith, your sincere profession, your especial
care to advance Gods glory, and to root out Papistry, your constant
faithfulness to your King and Parliament, has been such, that this Kingdom
generally, but the County of Berks especially (your native soil) have and
shall have great cause to bless God for you; hoping yet better and greater
things; and that their hopes may meet with fruition, they have jointly with one
heart and tongue chosen you, (being worthy double honor) Knight of the shiere;
and which justly speaks observation, no negative voice heard; which clearly
proclaims to the world, your sensible goodness and deserts for the time past;
Their great and glorious hope, that the Lord will make You an isntrumental
Blessing, not only to the whole Realm, but especially to them ana their
County, for the future. Now, that this expectation may come into their hands,
you have the tongues and hearts of all; of all, except some few of Nadabs and
Abihu's sect, such as offer often times strange fire upon Gods Altar; they
indeed breath out flames endeavoring to singe and search you, your visible
goodness, and apparent virtues: oh, what will not Ignorance and Malice,
(especially if infected with our Kingdoms new disease) dare attempt? what
speech of wisdom can be so discreetly uttered, but it may by Ignorance be
depraved? what action of virtue can be so exactly performed, but it may through
Malice be mis-construed? It is not more proper to God to bring light one of
darkness, than it is natural for the Devil and his turbulent Imps out of
the light of truth to endeavor to draw darkness of error, and out of the
best speeches and actions to strain and force out somewhat, to maintain and
nourish their corrupt humors and bosom sins. And what marvel? since even in
Paradise amidst the sweetest flowers and herbs a Serpent could live* and find
there something to feed upon, turning the (...) of those sovereign and meddle
shall simples into poison; but expelling these, I hasten unto that whereof I am
chiefly to speak.

I am, honored Sir, as full of hope as desire, that your countenance will
help into the light, this bashful piece of my composure? your Affection, and
more then common kindness unto me has emboldened me to beseech that you will
Patroni^e this first fruit of my endeavors; as I shall not here remember all
the favors wherewith I have been honored, so can I not forget to mention
some, especially those reflections and glissonings (which in due respect to
you) shone on me, from that great star lately fallen (the able and reverend
Doctor, the faithful and worthy Prolocutor Master William Twisse) as, his last
judicious and elaborate Book, which he so willingly gave me with his own hand;
his thinking me Worthy (though unworthy) to succeed him as Pastor of Newbury,
signed with his own hand; his giving me the free use of his rich and learned
Library; under the Sunshine of these beams (darted on me (right Worshipful)
for your sake) have I lately lived; so that, it may be expected somewhat of
mine should be colored with them. indeed the Argument being an Assembly act,
might therefore claim a peculiar interest in a Prolocutours religious
Protection; but the former causes have invited, nay enforced me, humbly to
desire yours: Whose protection should I rather beg then his that has made me
happy both in affection and action? such is your known goodness, as that it is
not only extended to me, but fastened on all those that sincerely fear God
(which makes the public Good) with affections (like the beams of the Sun)
immutable, unchangeable; mark the rays of the visible Sun, how constant
they are, being not moved at all by the motion of the object, but immoveably
flowing from the Body of the Sun, though blustering winds tyrannize in the
air, and remove it a thousand times out of his place in an hour, yet the
Sun beams keep their object which they enlighten, and stir not at all; in
like manner, your affections (honored Sir) like thc beams of the Sun
remain unmovable where they are once fixed, though blustering winds have
tyrannized, and tossed You, your Person, your good-name, your most godly, most
humble, and devout Lady, your well-governed Family, your great estate, etc. yet
your pious heart and religious affections have remained unmovable; witness
your cheerful constancy to your Christ and his cause from the first to the
last; this is that which (more especially) adds unto my hopes; nay, its that
that makes me confident, that these few labors will find a gracious acceptance
being humbly presented to your Indulgency and Gentleness. I conclude, fearing
prolixity; the Lord of Heaven bless you, and grant as you have been
heretofore faithful, just, and wise; so you may continue to the glory of God,
the increasing of his Church, and the profit of his People.

Your Worships most humble and faithful, and in Christ at command, SAMPSON
BOND.

To the Christian and Judicious READER.
THose strains of Rhetoric most take the wise, and affect the judicious
ear, which express more by expressing less: wherefore, that I might affect
thee, I will not (though I might) say much (unless it be in a little) of the
cause of my writing; the truth is, I intend not to plead excuses; I hope, I
shall not need it in this particular. If importunity of friends (yea, of some
Reverend Ministers) might have prevailed, it had ere now seen the light: if
abundance of Tracts (upon this subject) might have hindered it, it had now and
ever been in the dark; in the former, I saw an encouragement inducing a
publication; and as the former was an inducement: so the latter can be (to me)
no impediment; for, if so many have gone before me, should not I follow? why,
should I sit still and do nothing, when others have done so much? I resolve
not to regard the carping Mate, or curious Reader, either of secret Heretic,
proud schismatic, dissembling Hypocrite, or blind Atheist, who never with
godly reverence regard the truth of Christ, or the dividing the Word of God
aright. But if my sober friend shall urge, that the overplus of printing, and
excess of Writers patronized by the greatest men, is enough to silence any
mean and ordinary pens. It Is true; in this scribbling age it is too common, under
pretense (not practice) of piety, to send worthless and empty Pamphlets abroad
in great men's liveries, they know, their slimy Comets, although they make a
great blaze, cannot move themselves without the help of the Moon, or some
greater star to whirle them about the world; yet this, all this, is but vanity
in Pamphlets; no tincture of good so much as intended. But for my part; as I
dare not put my self into the rank of the best deservers, so can I boast
nothing (though I have since completed some points, which the shortness of my
time then denied) of my present performance: howbeit, this much I will take
upon me to affirm, that, as the subject I here present, is far from all
extremes, so mine aim is nothing but public service, and common good. Books
that press this way (the godly Reader will say) the more the better: no
excess of Writers, no overplus of printing in such a case; it is impossible
to surfeit, where it is lawful to covet; as in these things we may, nay we
must. I much lament their sick and diseased estate, who are cloyed with
spiritual food; in this case, no man is more woeful, then he that feels
himself most full. I say no more (lest I say much, and not little) only this.
Pray for me in that I shall not cease to do for thee, that thou may be
enriched and made more wise to know, and willing to do what is good, and what
the Lord requires of thee, wishing thy best happiness in Christ Jesus, in
whom I am

Thine, so far as I may further thee to him, SAMPSON BOND.

A Sermon Preached before the Reverend the COMMITTEE of Divines the 20. of May,
1646. at their usual place of meeting in Westminster.
ROMANS 12. VERSE. 1. I beseech you therefore Brethren, by the mercy of God, that
ye present your bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is
your reasonable service.


MENTION is made by Aristotle of two Brothers ( Archilocus and Lycambes) of
different constitutions; Arist. Rhet. c. 2.
Archilocus having sharpened his tongue, and dipped it in gall against his
Brother, finds that it became not his condition (being a Brother) to upbraid;
yet that his satyricall invectives might relish better, puts his tongue
into his Fathers mouth, and by an elegant Prosopoeia makes him check Lycambes
with those errors and sores, which was not fit that any but his Father should
in such sort rub up; so, your Text, your Audience, and my limited time had
been fitter for a Reverend Father, then a son. We read of an invention laid
on Tully, how, that he was to read a grave and sober Lecture to Clodia, Orat.
pro M. Coelio.
a Matron of much gravity and modesty; understanding, how that the exercise
became not his years, rayseth up her old Grandfather Appius Coecus, and out of
his mouth delivers a sage and fatherly admonition to her. In like manner
(Reverend Fathers) receiving a command from you, and an entreaty, from your
Text, I have willingly (though unworthy) been obedient to both, especially unto
the entreaty, the subject of your command, in these words, I beseech you
Brethren, etc.

In the Chapter immediately before, Saint Paul had spoken of faith; in this
Chapter he writes of obedience, that the former might be fastened in their
hearts, the latter manifested in their actions; such was the care and love the
good Apostle had of their spiritual estate; true love has a longing desire to
enjoy the outward sight of what it most inwardly affects; this made Moses so
importunate with God to show him his face; this made our blessed Savior so
desirous to see Jerusalem; and this was that that made Saint Paul so earnestly
to press obedience, because it was a grace which he did inwardly affect;
therefore he desires to behold the practice of it outwardly in the life, and
Christian conversation of the people. Now, as true love is not only in
affection, but in action, so Paul does show the truth of his love; for he does
not only inwardly desire it, but uses all good means to bring the same to
pass, setting down precepts of a godly life to be united in faith, and to the
intent they may be effectual, the great Apostle comes humbly, praying and
begging them; I beseech you Brethren for the mercy of God, etc.

These words are a general exhortation to a godly life, figuratively
expressed, delivered in borrowed speeches.

Wherein we will observe two general parts.

1. The manner, I beseech you therefore Brethren by the mercy of God. 2. The
matter, That ye present your bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, and,
First the manner or form of speech presents to our spiritual view.

1. An Introduction, Therefore. 2. A courteous compellation, Brethren. 3. A
holy and sweet insinuation, I beseech you for the mercy of God etc.
First, the Introduction in this word Therefore; which makes clear way for
the exhortation, not only looking back upon the last verse of the chapter
going before, Romans 11. verse 36. For of him, and through him, and to him, are
all things, to whom be glory for ever, Amen. But also it has respect unto
Election, Vocation, Justification, with the great comforts coming from them;
all which are powerfully applied unto the conscience, by this word Therefore;
which brings us to our second particular part, the courteous compellation in
this word.

Brethren. If it be demanded, who are meant by Brethren; Object.
Jew only, Gentile only, or both jointly.

The Jew for Nation and Countrey-sake; Answ.
but Jews and Gentiles as Christians for the Gospel-sake.

No name so frequently occurreth in Scripture as this of Brethren, no love more
often enforced then brotherly love; Nature her self kindles the fire of
brotherly love in our hearts, and God by the blasts of his spirit, and the
breath of his Ministers, blows it continually; yet in many it waxes cold,
and in some it seems to be quite extinguished. If we would but remember, what
our Apostle desired of the Philippians, and to what he exhorted the Hebrews,
Phil. 19. Heb. 13.1
we could not but cry out, oh, how long have we forgotten our selves? of the
Philippians he desires, that love might abound more and more; the Hebrews he
exhorts, Let brotherly love continue; but if Saint Paul were now upon earth
in his mortal body, and should behold this Kingdom, and take a survey of all
the evils some do, and what others suffer, Paul would cast his exhortation
into a new mold, and say, 1 Cor. 3.3
Let brotherly love begin in you; for were it begun, so many quarrels, so many
factions, so many sects, so many broils would not be so far from an end; oh,
that the saying of our Apostle to the Corinthians did not so nearly concern us,
Jo. 13.35. By this all men shall know ye are my Disciples if ye love one
another.
Ye are yet carnal; for whereas there is among you envying, and strife and
divisions, are ye not carnal and walk as men? did we contemplate the badge,
by which we ought to be known, brotherly and mutual love, we would blush, we
then would know it were a work of the great Deceiver, that they should lift
their hands up one against another for whom Christ spread his hands upon the
Cross; let us consider what Abraham said to Lot, Genesis 13. Let there be no
falling out between me and thee, Genesis 13.8
Plut. lib. de fratorno amore.
for we are brethren. What Plutarch observes is very true (i) that the nearer
the tie is, the fouler the breach; bodies that are but glewed together, if they
be rent asunder, experience tells us, they may be made as fast as ever they
were. But bodies of flesh and blood, if any cut, or rent be made in them, they
cannot be so fast glewed, but a scarre will remain; how much more in bodies
tied together by nerves and sinews, not only of natural, but also of
spiritual Obligation, as all Christians in general? the Brethren of England
and Scotland in particular, if there fall any rent or breach between them, it
cannot be so fairly made up, but it will prove like the putting of New Wine
into old Bottles, both will be spilt, Virg. Aen. ^.
-- -- ruit Ilium et ingens
Gloria Dardanidum.
And then after our many grievous strokes, and wounds received, we shall bleed
at the heart, and breath out our last gasp; wherefore, let there be no tinder
of malice in our hearts ready to take fire, upon the flying of the least spark
into it; oh, let us endeavor by all friendly offices so to endeare our selves
to our Brethren, being Members one of another; nay, which is more, being
Members of Christ Jesus, and so fasten all natural and civil ties by
religious obligation, that we always keep the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace; remember, oh, remember, how that our Father is the God of peace,
our Blessed Savior is the Prince of peace, our Comforter is the spirit of
peace and love; God who is love, and of his love has begot us, loves nothing
more in his children of love, then the mutual and brotherly love of his
children one unto the other; oh, let us hearken to the counsel of our wise and
blessed Savior, Matthew. 23. Mat. 23.8.
Ye are all Brethren, love therefore as Brethren, be pitiful, be courteous,
not rendering evil for evil, nor railing for railing, but contrariwise
Blessing, knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye should inherit a
blessing; here, we see what our Redeemer would have us to be; beams of the
same Sun, meeting in the same center of brotherly love. But where is our
obedience? we turn the Adders ear to our Christ and his counsel, and in the
Serpent we contend how we may poison and sting one the other most. If
Forrainers can put on the bowels of pity, and sigh to see Brethren struggle in
the same womb; then Natives may weep, when all the true Family of Love shall
seem to be extinct. In Saint Lukes Gospel, Christ demands this Question, Luke
18.^.
When the Son of Man comes, shall he find faith upon the earth? may he not
rather demand shall he find love on the earth? for the greatest part of men as
if they had been baptized in the waters of strife, are in continual
frettings, vexings, quarrels, schism and faction. Martial writes of two
Brothers, between whom there was never any contention but this who should dye
(not who should kill) one for the other.

Mart. Epig lib. 1.
Nobilis haec esset pietatis rixa duobus,
Quod pro fratre mori vellet uterque prior.
Let these Salamanders, which live perpetually in the fire of contention, take
heed lest these Heathen rise up in judgment, and condemn them to that
eternal Lake, which admits not of one drop to cool either tongue or hand;
mark the contrary of our Saviors words, Matt. 5.9.
Mat. 5. If Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the children
of God; then, Cursed are all Make-bates, for they shall be called the children
of the Devil; Prove. 6.26
the like may be applied from the words of Gods spirit by Solomon, Prove. 6.
they that sow discord amongst Brethren, are an abomination to the Lord; if so,
then, let the contentious man tremble; for God has him in abomination; on the
other side let the Peacemaker rejoice; for if they That sow discord among
Brethren, are an abomination to the Lord, then they that plant love, and set
concord among Brethren are his chief delight: which constitutes our second
part, viz. the courteous Compellation. Brethren, leading us to our third part,
the sweet insinuation. I beseech you by the mercy of God.

In this last, of the first general part, we will examine two things in
particular.

1. The manner of the insinuation. I beseech you. 2. The Matter. By the mercy
of God.
First, the Manner, in these words.

I beseech you. What can be more powerful, more forcible to allure and winn
the hearts of men to obedience, which is merely the Apostles end, then such a
sweet expression? Object.
I beseech you. If any object, and say, What necessity was there, that Paul
should be thus humbly earnest, they being Christian Romans, people full of
excellent knowledge, and to every good thing most willing?

Answ.
True, S. Paul does write to them, who are endowed with spiritual gifts, to
them, who by grace are willing; notwithstanding Paul knowing that even the best
men are sluggish, and slack to good things, and that they need forcible
exhortations to move and stir them up; the Apostle therefore comes (like
himself) meekly. I beseech you; and the Romans gladly and willingly receive
his godly desire; they say not (with profane Laodicea) we are rich, and know
enough of these things; no, that had been the way to have been beggars for
ever: yet we know what has been; it was the exploded Argument; and it is
assumed still by some: (i) nihil est dictum, quod non sit dictum primus: where,
or what, shall we hear, that we have not heard or known? This Objection,
whether framed by the heart only (which is deceitful) or by heart and tongue
jointly; bewrays ignorance, and want of knowledge in spiritual things. All men
should know, that the Scripture is like a plentiful Mine, in which the deeper
we dig, the vein of heavenly truths proves still the richer; hence is it, that
the Saints of God in all ages have complained of, and confessed their
ignorance, and continually prayed with the man after Gods own heart, O teach
me the way of thy statutes, and open mine eyes, that I may see the wonderful
things of thy Law: the Romans (to whom our Apostle directs himself) knew that
it was their duty to improve their talent of wisdom, and spiritual
understanding; so, it is the duty of every good man to improve his talent of
knowledge, and spiritual gifts, according to that saying, 1 Timothy 4.15

2 Pet. 3:18


1 Timothy 4. to meditate on those things he reads, and hears, that his
profiting may appear to all: and to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; admit that the Christian Romans should have
learned no new thing by diverse of Saint Paul's Sermons, yet this would not have
excused their gross carelessness; in case they had neglected their duty of
hearing; for, instruction of ignorance is not the only end of hearing; there
are many others; as, to glorify God, to countenance the Ministry of his Word
by their presence, to encourage others to the diligent and constant hearing of
the Word, by their example, who happily may more need instruction then
themselves; again, that men may be put in mind of those things which indeed
they knew before, but either forgot, or made as little use of them, as if they
had never known them: Lastly, to perform all religious duties in a better
manner, that they may for the future receive more comfort in their private
devotions, and more benefit by the public Ministry of the Ordinances of our
blessed Lord and Master; these or the like considerations made the true
believing Romans, as joyful in obeying, as their Apostle was humble in
desiring; and although by grace they were both knowing and willing, yet the
deadness and dullness of their natures; to the best things, made way for this
powerful and sweet exhortation to rouse and stir them up. I beseech you; this
Phrase denotes two good qualities in Saint Paul, gentleness, and earnestness,
both to persuade the willing soul; this was his constant course. I will
instance but in one, 2 Cor. 10.1.
2 Cor. 10. Now I Paul my self beseech you, by the meekness and gentleness of
Christ; in these and the like passages Saint Paul is an example for the
Reverend Assembly themselves, and all other faithful Dispensers of the sacred
mysteries of the Covenant of grace; gentleness and meekness are such
Load-stones that they draw, nay, pierce the hardest heart: so powerful that
they make a Rock drop tears; it is not the storm of hail and rain that
ratleth upon the tyles, and makes such a noise, but the still kind shower that
sinketh deep into the earth. (...) We find by experience, that he that makes
an incision in the body of a Patient, that has tough and hard flesh, puts
him to little or no pain at all; but if he mollify the flesh first, and then
apply his sharp instrument, the party begins to be sensible, and shrinketh at
it. It seeems Paul was well acquainted with this truth; therefore that he might
do good upon his hearers; he first makes their hearts tender ( I beseech you)
and then pricks it. Now that which makes the heart tender, is not heat of
passion, Gal. 6.1.
is not rage, is not the spirit of fury, but the spirit of meekness. Do not
we see, that the soft drops of rain pierce the hardest stones, and the warm
blood of a Goat, dissolveth the Adamant, which the strongest Axe cannot break:
this fair and gentle means is laid down by our Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. What will
ye, shall I come unto you with a rod, or in love, 1 Cor. 4.21.
and the spirit of meekness? as if he had said, for my part consider me in my
self; I had rather come in love, and meekness. Nature seems to prescribe
this method; Et afflatur omne priusquam percutitur. Seneca, l. 1 de ira:
which always sends a flash of Lightning, before we hear a clap of thunder;
and nothing is struck, which is not blasted before; Art does the like, Si
frustra molliora cesserint, ferit venam: for Physicians first minister weak
and gentle potions, and as the disease grows; apply stronger medicines. Good
Surgeons, Homer l. i:
like Machaon in Homer (...), first, lay plasters and poultesses to wounds and
swellings, and never lance or burn the part, till the sore fester, and other
parts be in danger: thus, S. Paul showed himself a skillful Surgeon of souls:
he knew desperate remedies are never good, but when no other can be had; he
knew, that if the Romans were of a great spirit, and well given, they will not
entertain violent and compulsive remedies: if they be ill, cannot be amended
by such means, Plin. not: Hist. lib. 3i c. 7. uno digito mobilis, idemsi toto
corpore impellitur resistens.
viz. extreme courses; wherefore, that he might gently and comfortably move
them with his finger, whom peradventure he could not wag, if he should put his
whole body and strength; wisely applies himself, after this manner. I beseech
you: which brings us to our second particular, of our last general, the Matter.

By the mercy of God. This is the matter, by which he so humbly beseeches
them; though we find by daily experience; that in God there are miserationes
multae, yet there is but one mercy, which is his essence, from whence issue
motus miserecordiae, diverse motions and acts of that infinite mercy; as there is
but one spirit, yet diverse gifts and graces of that spirit, so there is but one
mercy, yet from that one mercy flow diverse motions and acts: this mercy in God
is infinite; and happy is it for us, that it is so; misery is infinite in us,
we therefore stand in need of an infinite mercy; with this mercy Paul does
reason, that his earnest desire may be effectual; as if a another should
entreat her children by her womb that bare them, and her paps that gave them
suck: in like manner, Paul does supplicate, I beseech you by the mercy of God:
Oh, my Christian Brethren, then consider, is God merciful, and shall man be
cruel; is the Master meek and mild, and shall the servant Be fierce and
furious; shall God give the Lamb in his Scurchion, and man the Lion; if he who
rules the Nations with a rod of iron, and breaks them in pieces like a
Potters vessel, will not break the bruised reed, shall reeds break reeds: the
sensible mercy which we daily receive from our Creator should teach the
creature (of what degree soever, whether in the Mount or in the Plain) mercy
and compassion; these are virtues which our Lord Jesus himself richly sets
forth with a title of Blessedness over them, and a large promise of great
possessions by them, Mat. 5.5.
as Mat. 5. Blessed are the meek for they shall inherit the earth: Blessed are
the merciful, Mat. 5.7.
for they shall obtain mercy: these graces of meekness and mercy, are not
more acceptable in the sight of God, than agreeable to the nature of man:
witness our moist eyes ready to shed tears upon any sad accident, witness
our tender and relentings heart, apt to receive the least impression of grief.
Why, has God given us soft hearts, but to melt into compassion? why moist
eyes, but to shed tears, as well for the grievous affliction of others, as our
own sins: what; shall not grace imprint that virtue in our selves, which
nature has expressed in the chief members of our bodies, and exemplified in
the best creatures almost in every kind? if we examine, Number, 12.3.
we shall find, the meekest to be the best. Shall we behold Moses among the
Israelites: we read of God sending this gracious testimony after him, that he
was the best of men, because the meekest in all the earth: Shall we behold
Christ among the people, we hear him, Matthew. 11. saying, Mat. 11.2.9.
Learn of me that I am meek and lowly in heart, and you shall find rest to
your souls. Shall we behold Paul among the Corinthians, the Galatians, and all
others; we find him, desiring all to put on the bowels of Compassion,
Meekness, Mercy, and natural Affection, etc. so mercy and meekness were
Peter's (I mean the Apostle) way, which he went, to restore his country men the
Jews: for though they had murdered his and our Lord and Master, and much
injured his fellow servants the Apostles, yet he speaks to them as a Father,
or a careful Master, he tells them indeed of their fault, but with much
meekness and mercy, for, he aggravateth it not, that he might not drive them
to desperate courses, but excusing it by their ignorance, he offers them
grace and pardon upon very easy terms, that grieving for their sins of a
deeper dye, they would look upon him by faith whom they had pierced, and with
wicked hands nailed to a tree: thus far we see, that in respect of men, the
meekest are the best: Act. 2.23.
so of other creatures; I will instance but in a few, the Prophet does make way
for me in the eight Psalm, Psalm. 8.7.
All sheep and oxen; yea, and the beasts of the field, etc. David speaking of
the Beasts of the field, he instanceth in sheep, and oxen, which all know to
be, not only the meekest and mildest of all the rest; but most profitable to
man; therefore the best. The grand Philosopher testifies, that the Master Be
either has no sting at all, or never uses it: thus (...) also in respect of
Beasts, the tamest and gentlest are the best, inferior a fulminant, they are
Lions and Bears, that rore, yell, and tear. In the next place, shall we search
the Heavens; the upper Region of the air is always calm and quiet, they are
the lower Regions that are stormy; men of baser and inferior natures are
boisterous, tempestuous and abusive. The superior Spheres and those stars fixed
in them, Planet. pro loco.
move regularly and uniformly; they are the erratick and vagabond stars that
wander from one Planet to another, and are without order; nay, there is an
Antipathy between them, and Regularitie or Uniformity: Lastly, let us look
above the Heavens; upon him qui regit sidera, that distributes to the stars
their several influence; and is the first mover of them all; He, even he
himself is slow in his proceedings against rebellious sinners: for example,
see Jericho; behold Adam and Eve, God was longer in destroying Jericho, then in
creating the whole world. And when Adam and Eve had sinned with a heigh hand,
reaching the forbidden fruit, and eating it, it was the cool of the evening
before the voice the Lord was heard in the Garden, and the voice that was
heard, was of God Walking, not running. So true is that of Moses, Exodus 34. God
is merciful, gracious, Exodus 34 67
abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, and transgression, and sin. Are all these Attributes in God, and
can man be content to be without them, nay, to have the contrary dwell within
him; to be merciless, ungracious, abundant in ungodliness and falsehood,
keeping malice for thousands, forgiving no man, etc. nay, which yet cries
lowdest in the ears of God and man; thinking himself innocent, righteous,
just and good? Oh, let no man (much less such) stand too much upon his own
innocence and integrity, August. Confess. l. i3.
Vae laudabili vitae hominum, si remota misericordia discutias eam, woe be to
the commendable life of men, if it be searched into without mercy, and scand
exactly: the Cherubins themselves continually look toward the Mercy-seat; and
if we expect mercy at the hands of the God of meekness, we must meekly show
mercy: wherefore you (especially you) whom God has exalted above your
fellows; remember that, no virtues are so generally commended as meekness,
and mercy; true wisdom consists herein, witness the spirit of God, Jam. 3.
the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and
easy to be entreated, Jam. 3.17, 18.
full of mercy and good fruits, and the fruit of righteousness is sown in
peace of them that make peace: no fruit of the spirit, so sweet and pleasant as
this: on the contrary, no fruit of the flesh, so tart and bitter as jealousy
and wrath, which God curses by the mouth of Jacob, Genesis 49. Cursed be their
anger, for it was fierce, and their rage for it was cruel; but on the other
side, blesses meekness by the mouth of our Savior, Genesis 49.7
Mat. 5. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth: Mat. 5, 5
when the earth was cursed, it brought forth thorns, and thistles, and briars,
which are good for nothing, but to be burned: wherefore, as we desire the
blessing of God, let us take heed of thorns, and thistles, and briars, they
are fruits of a cursed earth: hear the counsel of Saint James. Iam: 1.21
Let no root of bitterness remain in you, that ye may receive with meekness
the ingrafted word, which is able to save your souls; our roots of bitterness
are like so many Serpents, full of poison: and of all, wrath is the most fiery,
which will set all in a combustion, if it be not quenched by the infusion of
divine graces, especially the graces of meekness and mercy. Aristotle briefly
defines it (...), the bridle of wrath; which because it is a passion of all
other most headstrong, it requires both a strong curb, and a skillful Rider,
how to prevent the occasion of quarrels, and stop the passages of wrongs, to
nip the seeds of discords; this is a work for grace and wisdom both, because
if anger take root, like an inveterate disease, it will hardly be cured: Seneca
strikes the same note, though on a different string, in premis finibus host is
arcendus est; nam cum portis se intulit, modum ae captivis non capit, above all
things, says he, keep the enemy from entering the City, for if he once thrust
his head into the gate, he will give thee the Law, and not take it from thee.
Certainly, the bone was never well set, that easily slips out of joint; a man
full of juice and sap of grace is like green wood, which is long before it be
kindled; mercy is not hasty, is not violent; it breaks no bones: yet there are
some, who like best a resolute Surgeon, who be the patient never so
impatient, will do his duty, and quickly put him out of his pain; though in
the mean time, he puts the party to most intolerable torture: but, give me
a tender hearted Surgeon, who being to set an arm or a leg that is out of
joint, handles it so gently, that the patient scant feels when the bone
falls in. Thus Nathan the Prophet handled King David, 2 Samuel 12 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
and by telling him first a Parable of a poorman that had but one lamb, etc.
afterward applying it unexpectedly to the King himself ere he was aware, set
not his body, but his soul in joint. Consider a little the rule laid down by
the Prophet Micah 6. He shows thee O man, what is good, and what the Lord
requires of thee, Eccl. 7, 16
to do justice, and to love mercy. Solomon has a saying appliable hereunto.
Be not just overmuch, cut not too deep, nor lance too far? Ne excedat
medicina modum. It is better to leave some flesh a little tainted, then to cut
away any that is found. It is more agreeable to Gods proceedings to save a
whole City for ten righteous men's sake, then after the manner of Romans, when
there was a mutiny in the Camp to pay the tithe of Justice, by executing every
tenth man through the whole Army. I am not against the cutting off a rotten
Member to preserve the whole Body: when the only means to save the pure blood
about the heart, is to let out some of the corrupt blood in other parts, he is
a cruel Physician that will not prick a vein. I am not, for an equality
between the Conqueror, and conquered; yet, I am for mercy. Cass. ex Jun. Great.
not. in Tac:
Principi non minus turpia multa supplicia, quam medico funera. It is as great
shame for a Magistrate, as for a Physician, to have many dye under his hand.
Let the clap fright all, and the thunderbolt strike but a few, viz. the
fattest of the Beasts for sacrifice? make the chief Authors and Ringleaders a
sinne-offering for the rest, and an example to all. Salust. in conjur: Cati^.
Quintus Curtius degest: Sir Thomas Fairfax. Some that have accurately observed
his demeanor, attribute his miraculous victories to nothing more then his
extraordinary and admirable devotion. Senec. lib. 1 de Clem. Romans 12.15.
This moderation Tully used in the repressing of Catalines Conspiracy; this
moderation victorious Alexander used in punishing the rebellion of Articinae:
this moderation Scipio used in disciplinating his Army: so, the religious and
fortunate Commander of our Parliament Army, (who like Lightning in a moment
has appeared from one part of our Kingdom to the other, and nothing was able
to withstand him) has used this holy and sweet moderation, not only with his
own, but with the adverse party: the very enemy call him friend; as if they
had all read that divine sentence of Seneca, Divina potentia est gregatim, ac
public servare, multos occidere, et indiscretos, incendij and ruinae potentia
est, to kill men pell mell, and murder multitudes together; is like rather a
ruin of a House, or the devouring of a common fire, then a moderate execution
of Justice: But on the contrary, to save whole multitudes of men, and that
together from death and destruction, is an eminent work of divine power:
hereunto accords that saying of Saint Paul, Romans 12. Weep with them that
weep, put on the bowels of mercy, kindness and meekness. The sound Christian
is not like the iron instruments of Chirurgions, that have no sense at all of
the intolerable pain which they cause in the part pricked or launced; But like
Zeleuchus, who put out one eye of his own, when he sentenced his son
according to the Law to lose both his eyes: see this compassion in God
himself; if God, who is void of all passion, is yet full of compassion, so
full, that he does never pronounce the dreadful sentence of destruction
against any Person, or Persons, without great regret, and seeming reluctation,
as Hos. 11. Hos. 11:8:
How shall I give thee up O Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee O Israel? how
shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? my heart is turned
within me, my repentings are kindled together? I will not execute the
fierceness of my anger; -- For I am God, and not man, etc. Now this God of
all, that is so full of regret and reluctation, so full of compassion and mercy
unto all; should teach us all to be compassionate, and merciful; Let us never
look, that God will have mercy on us in Heaven, if we have not compassion on
him here, calling for food, in his almost starved; sighing for house and home,
in his banished; groaning for ease in his burdened; mourning for liberty, in
his imprisoned; crying for pity, in his grievously afflicted and tortured
Members. So we pass from the first general part of the Apostles meek and
earnest exhortation (I beseech you therefore, Brethren, by the mercy of God)
unto the second general part. That ye present your bodies a living sacrifice,
holy, acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service.

In this last part of the verse, Saint Paul does deliver the matter of his
earnest exhortation; which is to this effect: that the Romans to whom he
writes should consecrate themselves wholly to the worship and service of God;
that they would show themselves obedient unto his commandments, resign up all
unto his will, though never so adverse to their own wills. In these words, we
will handle diverse parts in particular.

1. Act. Present. 2. Persons presenting. Ye. 3. Object. Bodies. Your bodies.
4. Manner of the Presentation, as a sacrifice, 5. Properties of the sacrifice:
1 living; 2 holy. 3 acceptable; 4 reasonable service.
First, the Act, present. Some render the word Officer; Heb. 5. ^^
there is a twofold Offering, the one of gifts, the other of sacrifices: if
the word Offer, which is rendered by some, may stand; we are not in this place
to understand gifts, but sacrifices. But (in my judgment) present is a most
proper and convenient word, if taken aright; that is, so present, as to be
offered in sacrifice; for, the sacrifices were first presented at the door of
the Tabernacle; and then offered up: so, we must first present a knock at the
door of the Tabernacle, ere that our hearts can be offered up; indeed, in what
place soever we seek God, we shall be sure to find him to our comfort and
protection; for God is Omni-present in all places to be found of them that
seek him faithfully, as in the Psalm. 139. Thou art about my bed, Psalm. 13^:1.
and about my paths, and spiest out all my ways: yet there is a particular
place appointed, more especially for Christians to present and offer themselves
before the Lord; and that is his Sanctuary or house of prayer, the Church of
God; Deuteronomy. 12.^
as we read Deuteronomy. 12. in that place which the Lord your God shall choose to
put his name in, in that his habitation shall ye seek him: all sides grant,
that, this is an express Law, requiring Christians to seek the Lord; and that
there is a proper and peculiar place intimated by the words: but the difference
is only concerning the Law; some would have it merely judicial and
ceremonial; and so, bound the Jew only for a time to seek the Lord in his
Sanctuary, sed quia non legimus non credimus: because we find no such thing in
the Scripture we believe it not: we are so far from finding it there, that
before, in, and since the Primitive Church, it has by all sound and faithful
Christians been embraced as an express Law, moral and perpetual, binding the
Christian for ever, to present and offer himself before his God in the house
of prayer, being the place of his more especial dwelling: in a word, they that
refuse to come thither, may as justly be termed profane persons, as ever Esau
was; who because he was procul a fano, far from the Sanctuary, Prove. 8.33
therefore, far from Gods protection, Prove. 8. If blessed is the man that
hears him, watching daily at his gates and giving attendance at the posts of
his doors: then cursed is the man that hears him not, daily watching at his
gates, and giving attendance at the posts of his doors: but those that will
not watch his gates, Prove. 9.5.
nor attend his doors; Solomon gives them this counsel, Prove. 9. forsake your
way, ye foolish, and ye shall live, and walk in the way of understanding: So
I Act present, unto the Persons presenting, Ye.

Ye. The persons presenting, are not only the Romans, but all true believers
in all places, and ages; for though the Epistle be entitled to the Romans, it
will not therefore follow, that it concerns us not: for whatsoever things were
written before time, Jam. 2.12.
were written for our instruction: hence it is that Saint James says, so
speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the Law of Liberty:
that is, he will proceed according to his Word written.

Wherefore, let us be circumspect, and labor that our speeches and actions may
be such, Romans 2.16
that they may be agreeable to the Gospel. God (says the Apostle) shall judge
the secrets of all men in that, according to my Gospel: there is not a word
that Christ speaks, but it shall judge* Let us therefore pray, that the Lord
would set a watch before our tongue, and before our Actions; forasmuch as he
speaks not in vain, that is judge that speaks, says Solomon, Prove. 13:13*
Prove. 13. He that despises the commandment shall perish: that is when God
has revealed his will in matter of duty, for the direction of life (for that
he calls the commandment there) now if a man come to despise this, he shall
certainly perish, says Solomon.

If any demand, when does a man despise the commandment. Object.


When a man accounts a thing as nothing, Answ.
we say he does despise it; as (...) despise not prophesying: the word is
account it not a thing of nothing; account it not a slight matter; therefore
when in spiritual things a man accounts the Law of God below it self, that
is, when he makes it not the chief direction of his life, then he accounts
it as a thing of nothing, and despises the Law, which is praeludium
perditionis, the presage of perishing. But these things I am compelled to leave
to your meditations, having sundry other points to handle. I fall upon the
next, the Object.

Your Bodies. In time of the Law, it was not your own Body is not meant the
body only, Synecdoche. Ezekiel. 18.4.
but the whole man, body and soul; so that a part is only put for the whole.
We read the like of the soul, Ezeck. 18. The soul that sins shall dye: that is,
body and soul; so then, in one word, by Bodies, is meant our selves bodies and
souls, and all the parts and faculties thereof, especially of the soul and her
faculties. Esaias 36.8, 9.
First of the soul, according to that of the Prophet, With my soul have I
desired thee in the night: yea, With my spirit within me will I seek thee
early. God is that which should be printed in the heart of a Christian man: God
and the name of God, should be that upon which the affections of the whole
soul ought to be fixed: our place and seat in this world is (as it were)
between earth and heaven; heaven above us, earth beneath us; now the question
is, which way our heart looks; it may be downe-wards to Jericho, to the
earth, and the vanities thereof; and so we shall run a course of ruin and
destruction: it may be toward Jerusalem, to Heaven, and heavenly solidities;
and so we shall run the course of peace and salvation. Wherefore it is God (we
see) that our souls should breath after; nay, our God has made us for
himself, and our souls, of themselves, are restless till they return to
their God. The soul is then in its perfection, when it may truly be compared
to a Circle: A Circle is said to be a most perfect figure; for this reason,
because the Line that begins in one point, goes round, till it return into
the same: so, the soul of man, is then in its greatest perfection, when it
returns to his beginning, to his God? reflecting it self altogether back
again upon his Maker; till then the soul is in no quiet at all. This the good
man knows, that there is no more rest for the soul out of God, then there is
for a stone in the Air: hang but a stone in the air, and do but remove that
that holds it there, and it will never rest, till it come to the earth: so it
is with the soul of man, try it all fortunes, and states, and conditions in
the world, and it will rest in nothing, till it come to its center, his God: to
this purpose, the father and the son are fit examples: Psalm. 144 12, 13, 14:
first David, Psalm. 144. having prayed for many temporal blessings in the
behalf of his people; that their sons might be tall and valiant; their
daughters amiable and fair; their oxen strong and laborious; their sheep
fruitful; that there might be no invasion by foreign enemies, nor any
lamentation in their streets; (...)
at length windeth up all with this conclusion: Blessed are the people in such
a case, no more, but blessed are the people in such a case; when his soul
enjoyed all that it could desire, it was still restless; therefore in the last
part of the 15. verse, he comes upon the neck of his conclusion, with words
of correction, correcting his former speech, and revoking his words, as if he
had spoken otherwise then well. Yea rather (says he) Blessed are the people
that have the Lord for their God: Now, not till now, his spirit is at rest, his
soul being fixed upon the Lord his God. So Solomon, when he beheld all the
works of his hands, and the delights of his life, passed this censure upon
them; Eccles. 1.6
Eccles. 1. Vanity of vanity, all is vanity, and worse too, vexation of
spirit: in the end, the good spirit sums up all, Fear God, and keep his
commandments. Now, when his soul is settled upon his God and his
Commandments, it is at peace and rest. So then, as we said before, let the
soul be tried in all the fortunes and conditions in the world, and it will
rest in nothing, till it come to its God. God then, is the object, upon which
our souls should be set; we should always have an eye to God; laboring to
approve our selves to him, that our souls may rest with him; that we may
enjoy the light of his countenance here, and the fullness, and brightness of
his glory hereafter: thus, by bodies is meant, bodies and souls; especially,
as we have heard, the soul. Now, not only the soul in general is meant; but
also, all the parts and faculties thereof in particular.

Wherefore, if any demand here also, what are the parts, Object.
and faculties of the soul; that they may know how to present them to God.

Though there are many, I can mention but a few: Answ.
time would fail me, to speak of many.

First, there is the Act of the understanding, the intellectual part, viz. the
Remembrance, our remembrance is a Esaias, as I showed before, Esaias 26. Our
remembrance is toward thy name: Verse 8.
This Chapter is a sweet song of the Prophet concerning the restoration of the
Jews, and in this verse Esaiah makes a good use of the act of his
understanding, of his remembrance, that noble faculty of his gracious soul;
saying, our remembrance is toward thy name. Esaias ought to be looked on by us,
as an example of our imitation: and though we can never over-take him, yet we
ought to follow after him; this should be one thing, which a Christian should
take special care of, that our memories should not be like sives, to let out
the clear water, and to return the grains and the dregs; we should not have
that treasury to preserve rubbish, but to keep and preserve our Jewels:
Remember Mary, she treasured up those things she heard in her heart:
wherefore? doubtless for these reasons, that she might lay up the remembrance
of God there, that she might be always thinking upon God, that she might be
breathing out prayers to him, and praises of him, in return of his mercy: take
notice of Solomon's advise, Remember thy Creator (says he) in the days of
youth: that is, begin betimes, hold on, and never be weary of this; therefore
this should be a thing, that we should often inure our selves unto, not to put
the thoughts of God from us, or to think they are too sad and serious, and so
to account them as unwelcome guests; but we should rather often bathe our
selves in these sweet thoughts; in meditation and remembrance of God: this is
one part, and faculty of the soul.

viz. Desire, which is an other part and faculty of the soul. A true desire,
is one of the sweetest acts of the affection; we heard before of Esaias, and the
Jews; the desire of our soul (say they) is toward thee: this was in one part
their Christian Badge, by which their God knew them, and loved them, and past
by doubtless many faylings, and infirmities which were incident to them. The
life of Esaias, and these Jews is a perfect samplar of many virtues, which the
spirit of God has pricked out for us to imitate and follow; that our desires
might be always breathing out, and flaming up toward heaven, that in case we
cannot obtain a full perfection in grace, and heavenly virtues; yet, whatsoever
we come short in otherwise, to make it up in abundant desires, longing desires,
ardent desires; in any case, not to come short of that; which will make an
excellent and comfortable supyly, for much want, defect, and imperfection; this
faculty of the soul, Desire, is an Argument of a gracious heart; desire is
that (if there be truth in it, be it in the lowest degree of it) which is an
evidence of spiritual life: we must know, there cannot be truth of grace,
where there are not unfaigned and hearty desires toward God: desires to
approve our selves to him, desires to walk with him in our whole course,
desires to be defective in nothing: again, the desire of God is that, that
makes some union with God. It is impossible for the heart to love God, or to
love grace, except it desire God, and desire grace: for desire is nothing but a
configuration of love: it must needs be therefore that where there are desires
toward God, and desires of grace, there is somewhat of God formed in that
person, there is somewhat of grace begun: this is a second part and faculty of
the soul, which Christians should take special care to cherish, and willingly
practice.

There is endeavor, constant endeavor, which is another Esaias, cry out, Our
soul has desired thee in the night, and our spirit also shall seek thee
early: the soul of a good man, of every good man, desires God in the Evening,
and his spirit will seek him early in the morning. Solomon gives the reason,
Pro. 27. Who can tell what a day will bring forth? it may be albus, maybe at er
dies, it may be a white, a happy, a comfortable day: may be a black, a
dismal, a doleful day: so, who can tell, what a night may bring forth,
whether judgment, or mercy; whether good, or bad events; therefore to prevent
the worse, it is good to make sure work for our own safety, namely that our
soul desire him in evening, and that our spirit seek him early, and then come
what will come, all shall be for the best, God will turn it all to good, Romans
8.28
Omnia cooperantur, etc. Romans 8. all things work together for good to them
that love God. Now, when the Jews say, our soul shall seek thee in the
Evening, and our spirit shall desire thee early: these words Evening and Early
do express not only Desire, but Endeavor: which shows, that the one is
not to go without the other, our desires must be joined with enquiries and
endeavors, searching after God, to see if we may by any means find him out,
that we may know what is the way of his good will, and pleasure: whether we
are in the way of life, whether we are effectually called, whether we are in
the state of grace, whether we have any part in the promises of salvation:
except there are continual endeavors, the suspicion is too palpable, that the
desires are ineffectuall desires, and empty desires, and not those that argue
any life and truth of grace; but when our desires are joined with these
bestirrings of the soul, to seek after Gods to search him out in his Word,
and his Ordinances, to find his steps and his goings, and so to walk with God,
maintaining a holy communion with him, that is a sweet act of grace, and an
evident ratification of the truth of it: so then, those that desire to present
their bodies to the God of Mercy, know not only what to do, but what is meant
by Bodies, viz. bodies and souls, together with all the parts and faculties
thereof, especially of the soul, and her faculties: as yet, we cannot take
our leave of this particular part. Because it may be justly demanded, Why did
Saint Paul exhort the Romans to present their Bodies, and not their souls, the
nobler part.

Answ. Because the Body is an instrument of the Soul, in the outward worship
and service of God, and because the affections of the heart, are manifested by
the body.

2. Because Christian People should know, that, that God which has made both (
i.) body and soul; does require the faculties of both to serve and worship
him. Yet, with what penuriousnesse, penuriousnesse of devotion, penuriousnesse
of reverence do many Bodies meet him, in his Sanctuary, the place of Gods
worship and public service; Deus stetit, says David, Psalm. 82. God stands
in the Congregation; does God stand there, and will thou sit, sit, Psalm. 82.1.
and never kneel? I would speak so, as the World should not know, whom I
mean; yet so, as that they whom it concerns, might know I mean them; I would
speak; for I must say, that there come some Persons to the House of prayer,
and Persons of example to many that come with them, of whom, no man ever saw
master or servant kneel at any part of divine Service. David had such a zeal
to Gods service, as that, he was content to be thought a fool, for his
humility toward the Arc. St. Paul was content to be thought mad, for his
humility to the Gospel. Act. 26.24. Io. 10.30. Mar. 3.21.
So was our blessed Savior himself, not only by his enemies, but by his own
friends and kinsfolk. Indeed Tehillim, which is the name of the Psalms, and
of all cheerful and hearty service of God, is Halal, and Halal is insanire, to
fall mad; And, if humility in the service of God here, be madness, I would
more of us were more out of our wits, then we are; St. Hieroms rule is not
only frequenter or andum, to come often to prayers, but flexo corpore crandum,
to declare an inward humiliation by an outward: mistake me not (I beseech you)
I speak not this, as if I stood for bowing at Altars, stocks, and stones, or
for complementing with the name of Jesus, etc. the relics of Baal; as, I am
not for these; so, neither am I, for the proud and unmanerly postures of
ignorance, fraud, and weakness, etc. the fragments of Beli-iagnal. As our
coming to Church is a testification, a profession of our Religion, to testify
our fall in Adam; so, this part of our Text now in hand, does appoint us to
fall upon our knees, present your bodies, worship God with them, genuflexio est
peccatorum, kneeling is the sinners posture; if thou come hither in the quality
of a sinner, (and if thou do not so, what do thou here, the whole need not
the Physician,) put thy self into the posture of a sinner, kneel; the man
after Gods own heart, did delight in it; and therefore, the more, because it
was a note of humility. Let us come hither (says the Kingly Prophet) Let us be
here; what to do; Let us come and worship; how, will not the heart serve? No,
Let us fall down and kneel before the Lord our Maker. The inward affection of
humility, was rooted in the heart of this good and godly man, yet, that is not
enough, he is not content, nor quiet in soul, till his inward humiliation be
declared by an outward, the like we read, of our Savior, touching repentance;
Mat. 3.8. Mat. 3.8.
Repent, and do works meet for repentance, as if he should say, Let
repentance, which is an inward affection of the heart be declared outwardly,
manifested, and made appear by some work ( i.) by some outward testimony meet
for such an affection in the heart. In like manner, though humility be a
blessed affection of the soul; yet, is it to be declared by the body.
Humilia^ion is the beginning of sanctification; and as without sanctification
(which is holiness) no man shall see God; though (like the most diligent
Christian) he pore whole nights upon the Bible; so without humility, no man
shall hear God speak to his Soul; though (with the best of men) he hear
many Sermons every day. As many therefore as desire, that God should improve,
and advance their sanctification, to the best perfection; Let them pray for
humility in their souls, practice it with their bodies, that their God that
has made both, may be glorified by both, which constitues our third part, the
Object, Your bodies: the fourth is the manner of the presentation.

A Sacrifice. Sacrifices are either legal, or evangelicall, a Paul does not
intend any legal sacrifice, but only that sacrifice which is evangelicall;
and that, is always of grace; either universally, or particularly; first,
universally, so is only the sacrifice of Christ, Who is the Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the World. Secondly, the sacrifice evangelicall of
grace particularly; is a framing, and fashioning to good works, which are
called sacrifices, Heb. 13. And so, Sacrificium, is sacrum factum, an holy act
done by faith, whereby we mortify sin, and walk in newness of Life; for
the sacrifices of the old Law, were shadows, not only of the body, which was
Christ's sacrifice on the Cross; but also types of our spiritual sacrifices;
as thus, there were meat-offrings, which were a type, of our Almsdeeds: there
were drinke-offerings; which were a type, of our penitent tears: there were
peace offerings; which were a type of our praise and thankesgivings: there were
heave-Offerings; which were a type of our heavenly desires and affections: and
there was the whole burnt-Offering; which was a type, of Martyrdom for the
testimony of the Gospel of Jesus Christ: thus then, we see, that the
sacrifices of the old Law were shadows not only of the body, which was
Christ's sacrifice on the cross; but also types of our spiritual sacrifices,
which we are to present to God; Ask me how they are to be presented. Some are
to be presented with salt, and some with salt and fire, according as the
sacrifice shall be, in some sacrifices of the old Law, we find that there was
flesh in some wine, in some oil, in some meal; but in all, and with all salt
was offered, so all spiritual sacrifices (if we will they shall be sacrifices
of righteousness) must have in them salt, 1. Exam. gener.
( i.) discretion: among many examples, we can but examine (the time failing)
but one or two. First, if a man be called to suffer; he is in the first place
to consider, for what he suffers; for all are not Blessed as Martyrs, that
suffer; only those that suffer according to our Saviors direction, for
righteousness. Blessed, indeed most blessed are they that are persecuted for
righteousnesse-sake, not those that are executed as Malefactors; for Murder,
Felony, Blasphemy, Schism, Obstinacy or Fancy; none dies a Martyr, but he
who dies for the faith, by which the just lives. If a Jew be scourged to
death, for the abrogated rites of the ceremonial Law: or a Jesuited Papist
hanged, drawn and quartered, according to the penal statutes of this
Kingdom, for treason against the State, in the Popes quarrel: or if an
Anabaptist be burnt to ashes, for his fanaticall and fantastical revelations;
he is the Popes or his own sacrifice, he dies the Popes, or his own
Martyr, not Christ's: because, it was without salt, being so, it must be
unsavory ( i.) lame and maimed, such as God does utterly reject, and finally
despise.

2. Exam. There is a sacrifice of the inward man, of the heart; this sacrifice
is to be seasoned, not only with salt, but with fire ( i.) uncorruption: Now,
this sacrifice of the heart, is twofold; either contrite, or divided; the
divided heart, is a sacrifice most abominable; cor divisum a heart parted, and
divided within it self God cannot abide, I will give you an instance; it is
said of Saul in the 1. Sam. 28.6. that he tried ail ways to seek the Lord,
and the Lord would not be found of him, nor answer him, neither by dreams, nor
by urim, nor by Prophets: how comes this to pass? the Answer is easy, Saul
presented a sacrifice without fire, he had a cloven heart, and then, non
videtur fieri quod non legitime fit, that which is not done rightly and
sincerely as it ought to be done, is counted as not done in the sight of God;
Saul's seeking of God is counted as no seeking, because it was not in sincerity,
but in hypocrisy, his sacrifice was full of corruption; like that of Agag, and
the Amalakites cattle; pretending devotion, when he did it for gain;
wherefore the Lord despised the sacrifice, and hewed the sacrificer in pieces;
a most just reward, for all those, that serve the Lord for their own ends, (to
be carnally minded in spiritual affairs, is (...) (as the Apostle speaks) an
affection of dishonor, and does discover a kind of baseness in Gods servants,
to seek him only for their own ends.) We may see the like in another kind,
2. Reg 17.32.33.
2. Kin. 17. it is said of the Samaritan Assyrians that mongrell brood, That
they feared the Lord, and served their own Gods also, and the next verse
says; they feared not the Lord at all. How, can these things hold, viz. fear,
and not fear? Answ. they presented a sacrifice without fire, their hearts were
parted within them, and therefore their fear of God is counted as no fear of
God, because it is no sincere fear of the Lord, had they truly feared God,
they should never have need to fear their own Idols; for he that truly
fears God, has this Blessing, that he shall need fear nothing else but God
in this service of God; as contrarily, he that fears not God has this Curse,
that God will give him such a trembling heart, that he shall fear every thing,
but God; as those people did: wherefore, God (as with Saul) hated their
sacrifice, and the sacrificers he made a subject of his wrath, fuel of his
fiery indignation, till that they were consumed to ashes; hence, we find, that
God cannot abide cor divisum, a cloven heart, a heart parted and divided within
it self. But, The other sacrifice, viz. the contrite heart, this is as
amiable, as the other was abominable. God dearly loves cor contritum, a broken
heart, a heart rent and torn with grief, and sorrow for sin, he who is
displeased with himself, because he has displeased his gracious God; he
whose spirit grieveth, because he has grieved Gods holy spirit; he who
because he has done that which God abhors, abhors himself in dust and
ashes; he who when God has chastned him for his sins, kisseth his heavenly
Fathers rod, and acknowledges that he deserves far smarter blows then
those which he yet feels; he who goes mourning all the day long, and will
never be at peace with himself, till he has made his peace with his maker;
he who always feeling the weight of his sins, sigheth and groaneth under
them, and never cease to offer up prayers and supplications (...), with
strong cries and tears unto God, Heb. 5.
till he be cased of them. Are we such sacrifices seasoned with this fire of
uncorruption and contrition, are we such contrite sinners? Alas, Alas: we,
often instead of denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, have with Peter,
denied our Master; oh, but do we weep bitterly with him, and (as he)
whenever he heard the Cock crow after the denial of his Master, fell on
weeping afresh; so, do the Wounds of our Consciences bleed afresh at the sight
of every object, and hearing of every sound, which puts us in mind of our
crimson sins? Oh remember, how that we have polluted our beds with David; but
do we cleanse them as he did? do we make our couches to swim with tears of
repentance? we halve entertained with Mary-Magdalen many foul sins, like so
many unclean spirits; but have we broken a box of precious ointment upon
Christ's head, or kneeled down and washed his feet with our tears? if we have
done so, then, we are sacrifices rightly seasoned, then, we are contrite
sinners indeed; when our hearts are rent and torn with grief for sin, with
remorse for iniquity; God then beholds us with his pure eyes; this, is comfort,
great comfort: because, God never casts his eye upon any, but he sets his
affection upon him: and he never fetteth affection upon any without an
intention of blessing him, so then the Christian man, whose heart is broken,
whose heart is rent and torn for transgression, is the only happy, the only
Blessed man; true, he is so, if his sacrifice of uncorruption and contrition,
be also seasoned with discretion; for a broken spirit and contrite heart, is a
sacrifice necessarily wanting the salt of discretion: for, even godly sorrow
must not exceed; the Rivers of Paradise must be kept within their banks; A man
may prick his heart for his sin, nay wound it, but he must not kill it; he
may dive deep into the waters of Mara, but not stay so long under water till
he be drowned: he that has grievously wronged Gods justice by presumption,
let him take heed that he do not more wrong his mercy by desperation; his
finnes be but finite, but Gods mercy, and Christ's merits are infinite, which
brings us to our last part, the Properties of the sacrifice.

Living. A Sacrifice may be said to be living two-wayes; 1. proper.
First, in regard of a natural life, and so our bodies may be called living
sacrifices in opposition to the sacrifices of the Law, where the Beasts were to
be killed. Secondly, in regard of a spiritual life, and the grace of
regeneration, in opposition to the sinful estate of wicked men, Ephesians. 2.1.
which is an estate of death, Ephe. 2, 1. in the last sense our Bodies must be
a sacrifice Living. So then, the spirit of God by St. Paul does require all
believers to present their Bodies a Living sacrifice.

Object. If it be demanded, what is meant by a Living sacrifice, or how shall
we know when the sacrifice is Living.

Answ. By the special effects and fruits hereof, the motions and workings of
the soul, will be, 1, inward, 2. sincere, 3. Universal.

1. Effect. Inward. That Body that is a living sacrifice; his soul will be
carried most inwardly: the inward motions and actions of the spirit will be
toward God; it is the inward working that testifies the truth of this
Property. All outward actions of seeking toward God, they are all such as may
be counterfeited, a Hypocrite may act them all; there is no outward action in
the world that belongs to God, or to Christianity, but it is possible for a
base Hypocrite to represent them all, but he can do no more, an outward
representation is all; as there is no shape of any external thing in the
world, but a skillful Painter can draw the form of it, give a resemblance of
the thing; yet, this Painter cannot draw it so, as that it should have life and
motion, spirits and blood running into the veins; so, there is no outward
action belonging to Religion, but it is possible for a Painter, a cunning
Hypocrite, a lame-sacrificer to imitate; but the inward actions of life, truth,
and grace he cannot: but that which is intended in this place, is, that all our
outward actions, be animated actions: not dead actions, actions that have no
further bottom, then a word or two growing upon the tip of the tongue, which
is all the Religion too many have; Adrian Iun. Embl.
For the Religion which is (I will not say professed) but practiced by most
men, is aptly set forth in the words of a godly, and wise man, quae aure
concipit, 1. Io. 3.18.

My little Children let us not love in word, not tongue only: but indeed and
in truth.


parturitore, which conceives at the ear, by frequent hearing; a good
exercise: but brings forth only at the mouth, by frequent discoursing (a bad
practice) of religion, some pious counsels, some good words, some liberal
prayers, such as these, God help thee, God relieve thee, God comfort thee,
Alas poor soul (alas poor comfort.) Words be they never so adorned, clothe
not the naked: be they never so delicate, feed not the hungry, be they never so
zealous, Iam. 1. ult. True religion and undefiled before God even the rather is
this, to to (...) the Fatherless and Widdovves in their affliction, and to
^^epe himself unspotted of the World. Martial Epigr.
warm not him that is almost starved with cold, be they never so free, set not
free them that are bound, visit not the sick or imprisoned: in a word,
perform not any of those duties which shall be vouchsaved the naming at the
general day of retribution unto all men, which shall be according to their
works, not according to their words. The Epigramatist deservedly casts a
blur upon Candidus his fair name, and debonaire carriage, because all the
fruits of his devotion toward God, or friendship to men grew upon his tongue.

Candide (...) haec sunt tua candide (...),
quae tu magniloquus nocte dicq^e sonas.
Ex opibus iantis veteri fidoque sodali
das nihil, and dicis cand, de (...).
Thou say, my friend Cand^dus, that to be charitable and to do good, is a
most glorious (because Christian-like) cognizance, and that all things are
common among friends, Mat. 3.1^. Every t^ee which b^ingeth no^ ^^th good fruit
is hevvne down and cast into the sire.
but it seems these words of thine are thy all things, for thou give nothing
at all, and yet art most prodigal in thy Language, and wearest out that
Proverb threadbare (...) all things are common amongst friends, but Candidus,
and all such as are like him, are but living sacrifices in name, being dead,
having no inward principle to quicken them; but, to apply it the right way, all
our outward actions must be animated actions, they must have their root in the
very heart and soul; that must inwardly move toward God; otherwise, they are
not living; no, though they move, and move a-pace in many, nay, in all outward
things; for we see it is so, in experience: that there be many things that
move, yet their motion is no Argument of life; I will give you only one
instance: A Windmill, when the wind serves, moves and moves very nimbly too:
yet we do not say presently that that is living creature; No, it is moved only
by an external cause, by an artificial contrivance, and so having but an
external motor, and no inward principle, no soul within, to move it, it is an
Argument it is no living creature; so, it is here: If a man see another move,
and move very fast, in those things which of themselves are the ways of God;
as, to move to a Sermon, or to the Lords Table; the question is what principle
set him a work; if it be an inward principle of Life, out of a pious affection
and love to God, and his Ordinances that carried him to these; it is an
Argument of spiritual Life, and of a Living sacrifice: but if it be some wind
that blows him on, the wind of danger, of penalty, of vainglory, of fashion
or custom to do as other do; and does not make it the aim and drift of his
soul; then it is palpable, that some sinister thing (no true intent) carried
him on toward God; that though he be a sacrifice living it is but in name
only, in respect of the truth of grace, he is indeed dead.

2. Effect. Sincere. The Living sacrifice has motions and workings carrying
the soul not only inwardly, but most sincerely toward God; sincerity has no
by, nor base respects; hence is it, that the sincere Christian is in all things
in heart to God, as he seems to be in Life to the world; sincerity makes the
Christian man to be like the Curtains of the Tabernacle, which (as they say)
were so wrought, that they were on both sides alike: sincerity tells the
Christian man, nil fictum est diuturnum, nothing counterfeit will last long,
counterfeit Diamonds may sparkle, and glister, and make a great show for a
time, but their Luster will not last. Experience shows, that, an Apple if it
be rotten at the coare, though it have a fair and shining outside, yet,
rottenness will not stay long, but it will possess the outside also; it is
the nature of things unsound, that the corruption stays not where it begun,
but putrifieth and corrupts more and more, till all be a like: so, that man
that has a rotten heart toward God, his want of sincerity will in time be
discovered, and his outside be made as rotten as his inside, fraud and guile
cannot go long but it will be espied, dissembling will not always be
dissembled; and when it is once detected, it disableth the dissembler for ever
after, the using his cousening trade. Faithfulness and sincerity are like
natural beauty and strength of body, which preserve themselves; but all
fraudulent and deceitful dealing, and cunning fetches, are like Complexion,
where nature is much decayed, must be daily laid on: All devices, plots, and
fabrickes in the mind for advancing our estate spiritual, or temporal, which
are not built upon the foundation of faithfulness and sincerity, continually
need repairing, and upon a strong assault are easily cast down, and fall upon
the builders themselves: but it is not so with sincerity, that, is a grace,
which (like a Ship with full sail) carry to the soul toward heaven: storms
will not beat her off, but she will persevere.

3. Effect. Universal. The motions and affections of a Living sacrifice must
be universal, as well as inward, and sincere; the workings of the soul must
be universal; not only advancing God to this height, to be carried toward
God above all other things (which is an infallible character of the truth of
grace and life of piety) but the love of the soul, the obedience of the spirit
must universally move toward God: for, this is that, which does justify the
truth of our affections to God, and sets the heart in a right frame and temper:
wherefore, except a man love God, and all the ways of God, and yield himself
in subjection, and resign himself in obedience to them all, he cannot be
said to be a Living sacrifice; if he do but reserve any one sin, to wallow
and tumble in, he does by virtue of that one sin, lie in that which God does
abhor, he stands chargeable with that which will separate and divide
perpetually between God and his soul; nay, he throws down all his other
good (how many, or great soever) with that one evil, as Ezekiel does testify.
All his righteousness that he has done, Ezekiel. 18.24.
shall not be mentioned: but in his transgression that he has committed, and
in his sin that he has sinned, in that shall he dye. We say a vessel is no
vessel, if it have but one hole in it, it will hold nothing, and therefore
cannot perform the use of a vessel, though it have but one hole in it; so, if
the heart have but one hole in it; ( i.) if it retain the Devil but in one
thing, that heart cannot yield a full and absolute subjection to Christ
universally; and where there is not a full and absolute subjection to Christ
universally; Christ has no part, nor portion in that man, nor he in him; for,
he that lives in any one sin, so, as to allow of it, never grieving for it,
not striving against it, not making conscience to reform it; that man did
never forbear the committing of any sinne-whatsoever, out of any love and
affection to Christ in his heart. So, I pass from our first property, to the
second; which is,

2. Prop. Holy. By this term holy we are to understand unpolluted and pure;
now, there is a twofold purity; a partial purity and a universal purity:
the partial purity, is that pureness, that holiness, to which David so often
referres himself, in his religious and humble expostulations with God. Judge
me, and deal with me, according to my righteousness, and mine innocence, and
cleanness of heart and hands. That is, as I am innocent, and guiltless in
that particular, which Saul imputes to me, and persecutes me for: but this is
not the holiness, the purity intended by our Apostle, for the holiness or
purity, which is the mark of the Saints of God, is not partial, but
universal; it is not a fig-leafe that covers one spot of nakedness, but an
entire garment, a holiness in all our actions; this is the holiness which St.
Paul intends, a holiness, a cleanness in all our actions, both of soul, and
body, as St. Paul says of the Virgin, 1. Cor. 7. That a Virgin cares for the
things of God, 1. Cor. 7.34.
that she may be holy hoth in Body and Spirit. (i.) That as she is chaste in
body, so she may be in mind and heart also, it will be little or no comfort to
the soul in the day of account, to say, I have not polluted my Body, the
outward man; but my inward man has boiled with lust: he that does no more but
welcome Lust in the heart, is not a sacrifice Holy, because, he is not in all
things unpolluted and pure: we say sometimes, and not altogether improperly,
that a man walks clean, if in a foul way, he contract but a few spots of dirt,
yet if he have but one spot of dirt, we cannot say he is absolutely clean; in
like manner, if a man have but one spot (one choice sin) in his soul; he
cannot be said to be absolutely Holy; what lesser sin then lust, or a desire
in the mind? yet, this (as St. James affirms) has strength enough to
conceive sin, and sin when it is finished brings forth death. ^am. 1.15.
The whole man is not a sacrifice Holy, except the sleightest and lightest
occasions of provoking God be removed; it is the speech of the greatest to the
greatest, of Christ to his Church, Can. 2. Can. 2.15.
Take us the little Foxes for they devour the Vine, it is not a cropping, a
pilling, a retarding of the growth of the vine that is threatened, but a
devouring, though but from little Foxes. It is not so desperate a stare, to
have thy soul attempted by that Lion, that seeks whom he may devour, (for
then, in great and apparent sins, thou will be occasioned to call upon the Lion
of the tribe of Judah, to thine assistance) as it is to have thy soul eaten up
by vermin, by the custom and habit of small sins. God punished the Egyptians
with little things, with Hailestones, and Frogs, and Grasshoppers; and Pharaohs
conjurers, that counterfeited all Moses greater works, failed in the least, in
the making of lice. A man may stand out a great tentation, and satisfy
himself in that, and think he has done enough in the way of spiritual
valor, and then fall as irrecoverably under the custom of small tentations. I
were as good lie under a Mil-stone, as under a hill of sand; for howsoever I
might have blown away every grain of sand, if I had watched it, as it fell,
yet when it is a hill, I cannot blow it, nor shove it away; and when I shall
think to say to God, I have committed no great sins, God shall not proceed
with me by weight, but by measure, nor ask how much, but how long I have
sinned.

And though I may have done thus much toward this holiness, as that, for a
good time, I have discontinued my sin, yet if my heart be still set upon the
delight, and enjoying of that which was got by my former sins, though I be
not that dog that returns to his vomit, yet I am still that Sow, that wallowes
in her mire* though I do not thrust my hands into new dirt yet the old dirt is
still baked upon my hands; though mine own clothes do not defile me again,
as Job speaks, (though I do not relapse to the practice of mine old sin)
yet I have none of Jeremies niter and soap, Job. 2.22.
none of Jobs snow-water; to wash me clean, except I come to restitution. As
long as the heart is set upon things sinfully got, thou sinnest over those
years sins, every day: thou art not come to the holiness of this Text, for it
is a holiness in all our actions.

Object. If any object, can a man come to that holiness? to have a heart so
holy, as to be pure from all foulness? says Solomon, Prove. 20. Who can say,
I have made clean my heart.

Answ. Indeed Salamon could not make his heart clean of himself, or by any
absolute power of his own; yet he had a faculty within him* which he did
employ, so, as to be appliable and supple, easy and ductile in those ways, to
which God called him: so, when we say, that by this term holy, we are to
understand such a holiness, as is a purity and cleanness in all our actions;
that is, an earnest endeavor after perfection, and cleanness in all our
actions: to be simply and absolutely holy, totally holy; is an impossible
labor for corrupted man; a service that none (all having lost those abilities
that God gave man at the first) can ever reach to: wherefore the Lord is
graciously pleased to accept our endeavor after perfection and holiness
instead of perfection and holiness: indeed, the Law tied us to the obedience
of all that was required, in all fullness, perfectly, completely, without any
defect, and then promising acceptance, but the obedience the Gospel requires,
is striving to this perfection and holiness in truth and sincerity, desiring
and laboring after it, in putting out our selves toward it, and then
promising acceptance through the perfection of Christ, in and by which, out
imperfections are done away? appliable to this purpose, is that of St. Paul, 1.
Cor. 7. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness; that is, let us employ
that faculty, that is in our selves, let us be appliable, and ductile to those
ways, to which God has called us, and then we shall find a power to assist
our own salvation, dwelling within us: I will give you an instance, Mul^er
drachma^ invent, non extrinsecus, sed in domo, the woman who had lost her piece
of silver, found it not without doors, but within; it was in domo mundata,
when her house was made clean, so long as her house was foul and filthy, it
was lost, it could not be found; but when her house was clean she found it,
and it was within the house, and within her own house: make clean thy house,
by the assistances which Christ affords thee in his Church, and thou shall
never fail finding of that within thee, which shall save thee, not that it
grows in thee naturally or that thou can produce it of thy self, but that
God has bo^ ^ himself by his holy Covenant, to perfect his work, every man,
that works with him, so then repenting of former sins, in breaking off the
practice of those sins, in restoring whatsoever was gotten by those sins,
in precluding all relapses, by a diligent survay and examination of particular
actions, this is this holiness, which constitutes our second property. And the
third is,

3. Prop. Acceptable. This is a consequence of holiness, that which is holy,
will be acceptable, and nothing is acceptable, except it be holy: the Apostle
gives us a caveat, 2. Joh. 8. to take heed that we lose not the things we have
wrought; that is, if a man in his serving of God either publicly, or privately
be careless and negligent, his sacrrfice will be lost, ( i.) not accepted,
because, not zealous, not holy; where holiness is wanting, there a corrupt
heart is present: Now, nothing proceeding from a corrupt heart, can be
acceptable or pleasing to God; even our prayers are unsavory, unwelcome
sacrifices if proceeding from an unholy mouth, no words sound well in his
ears, but such as are consonant to his word, and Minister grace to the
bearers. Let my prayer, Ps. 141.3.
says the Psalmist, be directed to thee as incense; prayer must be directed,
not suddenly thrown up, without faith or understanding; wisdom and intention
must direct it, not to Saints and Angels, but to God, as it must be directed,
and that to God; so in the third place it must be directed as incense from a
burning ^enser, that is a zealous heart: is this to pray and praise God
acceptably, to draw near to him with our lips, when our hearts are far from
him? to lift up our eyes and hands to heaven when our minds are on earthly
things? is thus to pray unto, or praise God, to vent our unhallowed desires and
indigested thoughts we know not how? Hos. 14.2
no surely, this is not to offer to God, (according to the direction of the
Prophet Hos. 14.) vitulos labiorum, the calves of our lips, but labia
vitulorum, the lips of Calves: no unsavory prayers proceeding from a corrupt
heart are pleasing to God; because, whatsoever is acceptable, must be Holy, it
being a consequence of holiness: But I suppose the word acceptable, is not to
be applied to Holy, but to sacrifice. Now our sacrifice, viz. our obedience and
good works, are not acceptable in themselves, because of much defect and
imperfection in them, Object.
which have the nature of sin; I do not say, they are sins, but that they
have the nature of sin, sin cleaves to them; but if any object; how can the
sacrifice of obedience and good works have the nature of sin, when they proceed
from the spirit of God? Ans.
As they proceed from the spirit of God, they have no tincture of sin, but the
next causes are corrupt, which are an understanding but in part enlightened? and
a will but in part sanctified: indeed, as far as these are spiritual, the works
that proceed from them are holy and good; but as far as they are flesh, they
are corrupted and stained; the works of the regenerate are good per se; but sin
per accidens does alter the matter: but in my opinion, this one thing is
necessary to be understood; as God judges, not according to the Law, but
according to the Gospel; for, our best sacrifice cannot endure the strict
rigor of the Law; if the Lord judge thereby, we must all perish; but there is
hope in the Gospel by Jesus Christ, in whom God is well pleased with the
faithful, and with their works; this should oblige us unto Christ by whom we
are accepted, and without whom we are vessels of wrath, even as the very dung
of the earth: well then, is it so, that God does accept us, our persons and
sacrifices in Christ? how happy are they, that have an interest in Christ by
faith? faith takes that from Christ, which is wanting in us and our works,
that so, both, become a sacrifice acceptable; faith takes that from Christ,
which removes the evil from our best actions, that they are pardoned, and
then accepted; here is comfort for the Christian heart. If thou be united to
Christ, Christ by his divine power will free thee, not only from the power and
dominion of sin, from the bondage of sin; but when thy hope shall come into
thy hand, when thy Faith shall meet with fruition, Christ will make thee so
acceptable in the sight of God, that thou shall see thy Christ so as to be
like him: here is such a sight of Christ, as never the eye of flesh saw, nor
can see; to see Christ, and to be like him, to see him as he is; here is such a
sight, as would ravish the soul, did we but know the comforts that are
reserved for us in Christ; eye has not seen that which we shall see in
Christ, heart cannot conceive, what degrees of happiness and glory we shall
find in Christ, but this we know, that when our expectation shall enjoy a
fruition, we shall see him as he is, and see him so as to be like him; in the
mean season, let our hearts humbly rest with Christ, I say humbly, because we
put no hand to this work: no more then the dead body of Lazarus could help
the raising of him; no more then a creature being nothing, can help to its
own creation; no more can a Sinner help forward this work of his
acceptance; therefore thou have (in these thy days of hope) cause to be
humbled for not putting the least helping hand to this work; it is wholly
supernatural; therefore let not any one arrogate any thing to the power of his
Free Will, but remember the work is wholly supernatural, which brings us to
our last part.

4 Prop.
Which is your reasonable service: in this last property two things might be
handled; first, the thing it self, service; then the manner of it reasonable.
I shall only name the first; time will hardly grant me that.

1. Service, is that worship which we perform to God, proceeding from a
believing, and sanctified mind, etc.

2. Reasonable, this word Reasonable, is to be taken for that of which a reason
may be given; and so the worship and service of God, may be called reasonable;
because, the Believer can render a reason for all, and every part thereof; and
indeed, that worship and service is far from faith, which is not reasonable;
hence is that of the Prophet, Psa. 32.9.
Psalm. 32.9. Be not as the Horse, or the Mule, which have no understanding,
whose mouth must be held in with bit and bridle, lest they come near unto
thee; that is, first, the worship and service, void of understanding, is so
far from Faith, that it is brutish, next, those that worship and serve being
empty of understanding, (in the sense of the Prophet) are like Beasts, rather
than men; for says David, Be not like Horse or Mule, which have no
understanding, etc. Here David forbids men a descent, into certain particular
depravations of our nature, in those qualities which are intimated and
specified in the nature and disposition of those two Beasts, the Horse and the
Mule. Be not as the Horse, or the Mule; ask wherefore? quia non intellectus;
not because they have no Faith, but because they have no Understanding; for
then, it is impossible that ever they should have Faith; and so it is a reason
proportioned to our reason; do not so, for it will vitiate, it will annihilate
your understanding, your reason, and then what are you for supernatural or for
natural knowledge? that I may come a little closer, you must know that the
Prophets purpose in this Psalm, is instruction; the substance, is peace with
God, in the merits of Christ, declared in a holy life; which being the sum of
all our Christian profession, is far beyond this understanding, mentioned by
David here (they have no understanding) but yet upon this understanding God
rayses that great building, and therefore we take this understanding, this
faculty, into a more particular consideration. Here is the danger, he that at
ripe years has no understanding, has no grace; a little understanding may
have much grace: but he that has none of the former, can have none of this;
therefore as David here makes understanding the foundation of al
superdifications ( i) of all virtues and graces; so Paul in our Text makes
Reason the touchstone to try our spiritual estate; if the service be not
reasonable, the sacrifice is not living, holy, acceptable,: wherefore, you may
as well call him an Anatomist, that knows how to pare a nail, or cut a corn:
or him a Surgeon, that knows how to cut and curle hair: as allow him the name
of a Preacher which has not the Prophets understanding, nor the Apostles
reason: for though Animalis homo, the natural man perceives not the things of
God, yet let him be what man he will, 1 Cor. 2.14.
natural or supernatural, he must be a man that must prove and discern the
spirit: let him have as much more as you will, it is requisite he have so much
reason, and understanding, as to perceive the maine points of religion; not
that he must necessarily have a natural explicit reason for every Article of
Faith, but it were fit he had reason to prove, that those Articles need not
reason to prove them. If I believe upon the authority of my Teacher, or of the
Church, or of the Scripture, very expedient it were to have reason to prove to
my self that these authorities are certain, and irrefragable. And therefore,
caeteris animalibus, se ignorare, natura est; homini vitium. If a Horse or a
Mule understand not it self, it is never the worse horse or mule, for it is
borne with that ignorance: But if man, having opportunities, both in respect of
his parts and calling, to be better instructed, yet will not: but either by a
negligent and lazy and implicit relying upon the opinion of others, do but
lay himself down as a leaf upon the water, to be carried along with the tide,
or by a wilful drowsines and security in his error of wickedness (it is the
Apostles expression, 2 Pet. 3.17.
2 Pet.) have given over the debatement, the discussing, the understanding of
the maine of his belief, and of his life, if either he keep not his
understanding awake, or over-watch it, if he do nothing with it, or employ it
too busy, too fervently, too eagerly, so as with Nadab and Abihu to offer up
strange fire; I would it were true of them, facti sicut, you are like the
Horse, and the Mule; but utinam essetis, I would you were so well, as the
Horse, and the Mule, who though they have no understanding, have no forfeiture,
no loss, no abuse of Scripture (as in Pet. 3. among the which, some things are
hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable, wrest, Pet.
3.16.
as they do all other Scriptures unto their own destruction, not only the hard
places, but all other Scriptures they take in hand) no abuse of understanding
to answer for: that so, in this respect, the condition of the horse and mule is
more acceptable, then the worship and service of those that are without
understanding or reason; if so, Object.
how is it that David then makes the comparison thus?

Not because they differ in some few (as in that particular among others) but,
Answ.
because they accord in so many things; for example; The Horse and the Mule,
are creatures admitting any rider, any burden, without discretion habitually,
and erroneously wicked; they admit of any Person, or Place, without discretion,
or difference. They never debate whether the Person be noble or base, nor
whether the place be the Treasury, or the Market; whether the sanctuary and
house of prayer, or the private habitation of scattered sheep without a
shepherd.

Here we may contract it better, if we understand pride lust by the Mule; pride
is proper to the Horse, that is granted by all; and lust is as proper to the
Mule, both because the Mule is carne virgo, and mente impudicus, which is one
high degree of lust, to have a lustful desire in an impotent body: and then he
is engendered by unnatural mixture, which is another high degree of the same
filthiness: and these two vices we take to be presented by the Prophet David, as
the two principal enemies, the two chief corrupters of mankind: pride to be
the principal spiritual sin, and lust the principal that works upon the
body. Both these are within them that worship and serve without reason and
understanding; it is just with God to leave them, that want all care and grace
(the greatest want of all) to worship him, and serve him aright. The Jew hopes
to find God, but without a Christ: God therefore in justice has left them, and
their hopes to their God the Prince of the air (which rules in the children of
disobedience) that like the Horse and Mule they are not not only slaves (under
the tyranny of the Turk) but are as full of pride and lust, as blindness. It
is just with God to restrain his preserving love and care from them, that
wilfully take wrong ways to find him: those that will seek Christ and his
spirit without a Church, and Sacraments, do pursue the truth it self by another
way then Christ has laid open to us; and to pursue the truth any other way
then he has discovered unto us, is madness, as to pursue thou know not
what. If thou should see a man pull at an oar til his eye-strings, and
sinews, and muscels break, and thou should ask him, whether he rowed. If
thou should see a man run him self out of breath, and should ask him
whither he ran; if thou should see him dig til his back broke, and should
ask him what he sought; Now if any of these should answer thee they could not
tell, would not thou think them mad? so are all Disciplines, all
Mortifications, all runnings, now here, now there: al works of Piety and of
Charity, madness, if they have any other way then that Christ has chalked
out. Multi Pagani, There are many infidels, infidels, heretics, and
scismaticks that refuse to be made Christians, because they are so good
already; sibi sufficient de sua bona vita; they are the worse for being so
good, and they think they need no faith, but are rich enough in their civil
honesty having a worship without understanding, and a service not reasonable;
this is pride, and a bestiall pride. Job 39.21.25.27. Zech. 12. ver. 4
And these proud People are elegantly expressed in the Horse; The Horse
rejoices in his strength, he goes forth to meet the Armed man, he mocks at
fear, he turns upon the sword, and he swallows the ground. The Horse stands
upon his outward pomp; but well; what will the Lord do? But when time is, God
mounteth on high, and he mocks the horse and the rider. In that day, I will
smite every horse with astonishment, and his rider with madness. The Horse
believes not that it is the sound of the Trumpet; when the Trumpet sounds to
us in our last bell, the erroneously wicked shall not believe that it is the
sound of the Trumpet, he shall not know it, nor take knowledge of it, but pass
away, unsensible of his own condition. This is not all, to be like the Horse;
it is most just with God that they be like the Mule too. Those that have
Separated their love in regard of truth from him, it is just that he should
unite his hatred and anger both on theme; God does so as we read Prove. 22.14.
Prove. 22.14.
The mouth of a strange woman, is as a deep pit; he with whom the Lord is
angry, shall fall therein. And therefore he that pursues that sin, is called
to a double sad consideration, both that he angers the Lord in committing that
sin then; and that the Lord was angry with him before for some other sin,
and for a punishment of that former sin, God suffers him to fall into this.
Oh, it is a most fearful condition when God punishes sin by sin; other
corrections bring us to a peace with God, he will not be angry for ever, he
will not punish twice; when he has punished a sin, he has done: but when he
punishes sin by sin, we are not thereby the nearer to a peace or
reconciliation by that punishment; for still there is a a new sin that
continues us in his displeasure. Punish me O Lord with all thy scourges, with
poverty, with sickness, with dishonor, with loss of Parents, and Children;
but with that rod of wyre, with that scorpion to punish sin with sin, Lord,
scourge me not; for then how shall I enter into thy refst?

And this is the condition of this sin; for, The mouth of a strange Woman is
(like the Mule) as a deep pit, he with whom the Lord is angry, shall fall into
it. And when he is fallen he shall not understand his state, but think himself
very well: 2. Sam. 12.
for instance Nathan presents David's sin to him in a parable of a feast of an
entertainment of a stranger: David tastes no sowrenesse, no bitterness in it;
Not because there is none, but because a carcass, a Man already slain cannot
feel a new wound; A Man dead in the habit of a sin, of the error of
wickedness, has no sense of it. And when this erroneous soul shall have a
desire to knock, he shall not be able to find the door; Like those licentious
persons, who pursued Lots guests, their blindness brought them to an
impossibility of finding the door, Genesis 19
( they were weary in seeking the door) and if they had found it, they had
found it shut. A Man when he has wallowed long in a worship without
understanding, in a service without reason, when he seeks a door to
repentance, he will quickly be weary, for there lie hard conditions upon him;
and he is danger of finding the door so shut, as his understanding (in case he
had that key) cannot open: wherefore, my National brethren, I exhort you, to
entertain Saint Paul's counsel; Let your worship and service toward God, be
not only living and holy, but reasonable, that you and your service, that you
and your worship may be accepted; and by the way remember David, that man after
Gods owns heart, Nolite fieri sicut, be not made like the Horse or the Mule, in
Pride or Wantonness especially, quia non intellectus, because then you lose
your understanding, and so become absolutely irrecoverable, and leave God
nothing to work upon: for the understanding, of man is the field which God
sows, and the tree in which he engrafts faith it self; and therefore take heed
of such a descent, as enduces the loss of the understanding, the field of that
blessed seed, the tree of that fruitful graft, the materials for that
glorious building, faith; for the understanding is the receptacle of faith; But
do it not the rather, because if ye do it, God will be brought to a necessity
in chamo and fraeno maxillas constringere, to hold in your mouths with Bit and
Bridle, to come to hard usage when as he would fain have you reduced by fair;
and gentle means.

But to this way God is often brought; and by this way of affliction, the cure
is sometimes wrought upon us; see it in Joab; we find that Absalom sent for
Ioab: The Kings Son for the Kings servant: there was some coldness, some
dryness between Absalom, and his Father; 2 Samuel 14.
Absalom was under a cloud at Court, and so Joab neglected him, he would not
come: Absalom sent again, and again Joab refused: But then Absalom sent his
servants to burn Joabs Corn fields, and then Ioab came apace. Affliction and
Calamity are the bit, and bridle, that God puts into our mouth sometimes to
turn us to him. Behold, we put bits into the Horses mouths, Sam. 3.3
that they should obey us, and we turn all the body about: and to this belongs
that of Solomon: A whip for the Horse, Prove. 26 3.
a bridle for the Ass, and a rod for the fools back: when we are become
fools, made like the Horse and Mule, that we have no understanding, then God
bits and bridles us, he whips and scourges us, sometimes lest our desires
should put us further out of the way; sometimes to turn us into the right way.
I seal up this whole Discourse with the words of the blessed Apostle: Finally,
Phil. 4.8.
Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are just, whatsoever things are pure, what soever things are lovely,
whatsoever things are of good report: if there be any virtue, if there be any
praise, think on these things, and the God of Mercy shall be with you: to
whom, etc.

FINIS.

