THE BOOK OF PRETTY CONCEITS. OR, The green Forest OF Youthful Delights. BEING
Merry and Pleasant to all such as delight in SLIGHTS, TRICKS, STRATAGEMS,
DEVISES, And FANCIES.
Natural and Artificial Inventions and Conclusions. Experimented as well to
profit as delight.

LONDON: Printed for P. Brooksby at the Golden Ball in Py-corner. 1685.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
KNowing that Art imitating Nature, glories always in the variety of things
which she produces, to satisfy the minds of the curious Inquisiters of
Natural and Artificial Conclusions. I have for that reason thus enlarged my
self; not being ignorant, that amongst serious and useful Experiments that I
have inserted, there are pleasant Conceits, such as some call, the Juggling
Tricks of the Art of Legerdemain which have been ascribed to the Egyptian.
What I have writ, was only for Divertion and harmless Recreation, to be used at
Festival seasons, when Youth meet to be civily merry, and instead of access of
drinking, and other vanities to purchase only to themselves an handsome
Emulation, to outvy one another in subtle and pleasant Sports, such being only
to be allowed of, as are civil and honest, not to the loss of their more
precious time, or of any their more serious employments.

THE BOOK OF Pretty Conceits, etc.
To make an Herb grow that shall have many savours and many tastes.
TAke one Seed of Lettice, one of Endive, one of Smallage, one of Basil, one of
Leek, one of Parsley, putting them all together in an hole, that they may touch
one another; but remember that you plant them together in the dung of an Ox or
Horse, without any earth at all with them, amd afterward these seeds shall
grow up in one proper Herb, which will have so many savours and tastes as there
are seeds sown.

To make Beans grow in the space of an hour.
Take the Beans and put them in hot Oil and let them there remain for the space
of eleven days, and after dry them, and when you will make proof of them set
the Beans, and go to dinner, and by that space of the usual dinner time, that
you rise from the Table, go to look on them, you shall find them grown well
nigh a span.

How to make yellow Roses grow, and to make trees and other things grow green
all the year.
I have been informed, that if you graft a white Rose upon a broom-stalk, or a
Furzen bush, that the same will bear yellow Roses, but they will have no sweet
scent. Also if you graft a Rose or any other thing upon a Holly-stalk, the
leaves of the same will grow green all the Year.

How to make Apples, Pears, and other fruit of several colors, and to give
them a dainty taste of Spices.
If you would give a pleasant color to your Fruit, do thus: for a red, boil
Brasil, Turnfoil, or Sanders; and for a yellow, use Saffron, or Turimerick: now
to give them a dainty taste or smell, you must beat Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon and
Nutmegs to powder, and mix them with the water of your colors with some honey,
then with an Augur bore a hole in the biggest part of the tree, unto the
middle, something slopeing downwards, and then pour your water and spices into
the hole then with a pin made of the same wood or tree, beat it hard into the
hole, and saw off the end and wax it about: This must be done in the winter,
before the Spring, because when the Sap arises, the color, scent and last
also ascends with the same.

To keep a Tapster from frothing his pots.
Hrovide in readiness the skin of a red herrior, and when the Tapster is
absent, do but rub a little on the inside of his pots, and he wist not be able
to froth let him do what he can for a good while after.

To break a new big Rope with your hands only.
Take and fasten to one end of the Cord or Rope with a nail driven fast into
it, or about strong hook of Iron, and afterw ind the same three or four times
or oftener about your hands and the other end of the Rope wind about by the top
of the palm, between the forefinger and the thumb, that one part of the cord
may reach into the nail, and the other unto the bottom of the palm, which must
be again winded about, and after that winded again once or twice about, this so
done, then with a vehement thick or force assay in the same part by which it is
so over-winded with the cord, for that the substance of the cord or rope which
is under, does defend that the hand can take no harm of the hasty and strong
pull, and take heed that ye overmost with of the Rope fly not in your and. And
to conclude, you may conceive this, that in the strong and hasty plucking
together, the one fold of the cord does so cut the other asunder, and then more
chiefly, when that part shall be let loose which is between the hand and the
Nail, especially if both the hands be strong, and the pluck outright and quick.

To make a Bladder skip from place to place.
Put Quicksilver into a Bladder, and lay the Bladder in an hot place, and it
will skip up and down without handling.

How to make people seem headless.
Break Arsenick very fine, and boil it with Sulpher in a covered pot, and
kindle it with a new candle, and the standers by will seem to be headless.

How to make a glorious Light with a candle in imitation of the Sunshine.
This conceit is fit for those Artists, or others that perform curious or fine
works by Candlelight: as Iewellers, Engravers, or the like, or those which are
weak-sighted to read by, never dazzling of their eyes. Go to a Glass-house, or
Glass-shop, and let them blow you a thin round Globe-glass, bigger than a penny
Loaf, (the bigger the better) with a short neck like a bottle, they know how to
make them, when you have this glass, with glue or wax bind a tape or
pack-thread about the neck or top, and making a little Loop thereabout to hang
by: then fill yoru Glass with the purest Conduit or Spring Water you can get,
(putting some Aqua vitae therein to keep it from freezing) stopping it close to
keep out the dust; having thus done, if you will use it at a table or bench,
knock a Tenter or Nail into the Seiling, or a Shelf, and with your tape or
pack-thread fasten it and hang it up, (but a round stick is better to hang it
upon, putting it into a post or hole in the wall, that you may let it higher or
lower at your pleasure in turning the stick) then behind your glass set a
Candle lighted, and you shall have a glorious light through the glass and water
for your purpose. Some use to place a sheet of Oyled Paper between them and a
Candle, which will cause a good light.

How to lay one end of a staff or stick upon a stool or table, and to hang a
Pail full of Water at the other end, having nothing to hold on the stick, nor
nothing under the Pail.
To perform this conceit, do thus: lay one end of the staff or stick a pretty
way upon the table or stool, so that it roll not off, letting the other end
hang over the Table likewise, then take a Pail full of Water, and hang the
handle upon the same; but you must have another short stick that will deach
just from the inside of the borrom of the Pail, to the long stick on the rabble,
plating the short stick under the table very stiff, and then shall the pail of
water hang from the ground upon the long staffs end on the table without
falling, which will seem very strange, but this is very difficult at first,
till you hit just in the center of gravity, but it is by those tha are knowing,
familiarly practiced.

How to know the hour of the day or night by a Ring and a Glass.
Take a small thread and put it through a gold Ring, or some other like ring,
and doubling the thread, tie a pretty big knot at the end, and cut it off, let
the double thread be seven or eight inches long, then take a boulglass, and set
it on a Table, and hold the knot of the thread something hard betwixt the ends
of your fore-fingers and your thumb, which will cause the Pulses of your wrist
to beat, let the ring hang in the middle of your glass, a little within the
rim, then the working of your Pulse will make the Ring to move, striking upon
the side of the glass the hour of the day or night, and then the Ring will
stand still again.

To know if a sick person shall dye or not.
Take gray Nettles while they be green, and put them in the Patients Urine, and
it they remain green, he shall live, and if they wither, not.

How to make salt water fresh.
Take Clay and put it into a bag, and strain it through till it be clear, and
it will be fresh.

How to make two knives (with a short stick) to hang upon the brim of a glass
without falling.
Take a little stick some four inches long, and make it warp at one end like a
Butchers scure, and then get two Knives, somewhat of an equal poise, and prick
the points of them toward the bigger end of the stick, on each side stope
wise, then put the small end of the stick upon the brim of the glass of Wine or
Beer, and you may take up the glass and drink and they will not fall off.

To kindle a Candle at the sun.
Take a bright Basin, and put a new Looking-glass therein, and set the basin in
the hottest of the Sun, and lay about it very dry Two chopped small, and the
Two will take fire with the heat of the Sun.

How one may put his finger, or wash his hands in melted Lead, without danger,
or burning.
Take an ounce of Quicksilver, two ounces of good Bole-Armoniack, half an
ounce of Camphire, and two ounces of Aqua vitae, then mingle them together, and
put them into a brazen Mortar, and beat them with a Pestil, having thus done,
anoint your hands all over thoroughly with this Ointment, and then you may
safely put your finger into melted Lead, or you may wash your hands therewith,
if one pour the Lead upon them, it will neither scald nor burn them.

How to make a Candle that it cannot be blown out.
Take a quill of Hempstalk, and fill it full of Brimstone, and make it warm,
and fire it, and it will never go forth with blowing.

How to keep Sword-blades, Halberts, Pistols, Knives, Edge-tools, and other
things free from Rusting, for seven years or more, in a dry house.
Take fish-glew, or Iu^ng-glass, and cut it in pieces, then with a hammer beat
it or bruisae it upon an Anvil or stone, then put it into a little Skillet, or
such like, with water, and let it dissolve over a gentle fire, still stirring
it as you do your common glue, then when it is well boiled take it off, and
with a Pensil or small Hair-brush lay the same while it is hot all over your
sword-blade as thin as may be, then ray it to dry and it is done. This thin
coat keeping the moistriess of the air from the metal that it cannot rust, but
when you are to wear it, or use it, take a blunt Knife, and you may easily
scale off the thick substance, and then it will be as bright as any silver. I
do believe that our common glue will do the like, if it be kept in a dry Room.

How to heal the biting of a mad Dog.
Take white Nettles, and the innermost thin skin of a great and angry Onion,
with a little running Water and honey, and bath it.

How to know if a woman be with Child, whether it be Male or Female.
Take fair Well-water, and put it into a clean Basin, and let the woman with
Child milk a drop or two of her milk into the water and if the milk sink to the
bottom, it is a man child, and if it float on the top above the water, it is a
woman-child.

To make a flame pass suddenly out of a pot of Water.
Take an Egg and make a hole in the head of it, and draw out all the substance
of the same, fill it with powder of Brimstone and unslacked Lime mixed together;
then shut the mouth with wax, and let it fall to the bottom of a quart pot full
of water, taking your hand suddenly away, and presently a flame will issue out
of the pot.

How to harden the white of Eggs into an artificial Gum, fit for many uses.
Separate the whites of Eggs clean from the yolks, and beat the whites very
well into a clear Oil of water, and when it is settled, skim off the Froth, then
put the same into Bladders, and hang them in a chimney to dry, where fire is
usually kept, and in a few days the sum will become as hard as Gum Arabic; in
hot weather you may hang your bladders in the Sun to dry: This Gum may be used
instead of other Gums, and with it you may varnish Prints, or other things that
are washed in Colors.

To make one see fearful sights in his sleep.
To do this, take blood of a Lapwing, and anoint therewith the Pulses and the
forehead going to rest: And if in the Evening before his going to bed, a man
eat a small quantity of Nightshade, or Mandrake, he shall see pleasant sights
in his dreams.

To make a Sword, Dagger or Knife, cut Iron as easy as Lead.
If a sword, dagger, or knife, being only Iron, and it is fashioned, being red
hot, being quenched in the juice of Radish, mixed with the water of fresh
worms, distilled according to Art, being before somewhat bruised; such a sword,
dagger, or Knife, will have such a strange edge if it be quenched four or five
times in this water, so that you may cut things easily in two with it.

How to cleave a Groat in sunder like two Groats.
Take three small pins, and prick them down upon a board or table, triangular
wise, and then take a thin whole Groat, and lay it level on the heads of the
three pins: having thus done, take a piece of Brimstone and beat it to powder,
covering the groat therewith all over in a pretty thiokness, and then with a
lighted piece of paper set the brimstone on fire till it be consumed, when this
is done and the fire out, you shall see the edges to open like a dry Oyster,
then take a knife and put into it, and it will cleave asunder, having the
impression on both sides very perfect.

A ready way to take Pigeons or any other Wild Foul.
Take a sheet of brown Paper and cut it into four quarters, then roll it up
like a Sugar Loaf and take a small quantity of bird-lime, and lime the inside
of it, and strew some Corn therein; then lay them about the place where they
usually haunt, in some place where they may hardly be perceived: and when they
come and see the Corn, they put their heads in to reach it, by that means they
so imprison themselves by the Feathers of their necks, that they fly upright
into the Air until they are spent, and then they tumble down as if they were
dead: I have known two or three dozen taken in a morning with these things.
Probatum est.

A present Remedy for all inward pains.
Take the seed of Carduus Benedictus, stamp them and drink them in Ale, and it
helps pains, pinchings, and stitches of the side, gripings in the guts, or the
lower part of the Belly, etc.

A present Remedy for an Ague.
Pare the Nails of any one that is troubled with an Ague, which being, put into
a Linen Cloth, and tied about the neck of a live Eel, and the same Eel put
into the water, then the Ague will leave them.

How to make Hens lay Eggs apace.
To mix Hemp Seed amongst their meat, is an approved way to lay Eggs apace.

An approved way to make the face and hands clear from spots and freckles.
Anoint your Face or hands with the Oil of Tartar, and it will clear them from
all Spots, Freckles, Pimples, etc. probatum est.

A present Remedy for the Cramp.
Taste the little bane in the Knee-joint of the hinder leg of an Hare, and
touch the place grieved therewith, and it will immediately take away the pain.

How to stanch bleeding at the Nose.
Take the three-corner'd stone of a Carp, which lies in the hinder part of the
head, beat it small, and blow it into the Nose, and it will stay bleeding.

To take Warts from he hands or face.
Take Hens feet, and put them into hot Embers until the scales or skin thereof
be separated or shrunk from the leg, then with the same skin while it is warm,
rub the Warts four or five times, and it will drive them away.

To take Crows, Magpyes, or other Birds.
Take a piece of Carrion or Bullocks liver and slice it both ways with your
knife, that the Crows or Pyes may swallow it with ease then take the powder of
Nux Vomica, andrub it well in, and lay it in a place where they haunt, and
stand a looff off; and so soon as they have eat a little, they will fly to a
Tree, but it will make them so drunk, that they will tumble down, and then you
may take them with your hands, but you must be quick, for they will recover
again presently.

To make a hollow Ring dance by it self.
Take a Ring which is hollow round about into which put quicksilver, and stop
the same that it run not forth, afterward hear the Ring somewhat in the fire,
and being hot, lay the same on the Table or Stool, which by and by after will
begin to dance of it self till it be cool again.

How to make a Light, that things shall appear black or green.
Take the black juice of a Fish called a Cuttle, and the like quantity of
Verdigrease, mix them well together, putting the same into a Lamp, and dipping
the Wick into the liquor then light the same, putting out all the lights in the
Room, and all the things, though never so white, will appear black and green.

How to draw many Candles one after another being laid at a foot distance.
Take Brimstone, Orpiment, and Oil labor these together, and make thereof an
Ointment; after take so many Candles as may well serve for your Table, laying
them a large foot asunder, and all a row, the one behind the other, as many as
you please, lay them straight, then take a long thread and anoint it in this
Ointment, which afterward you must lay along on the Candles, and drawing the
foremost all the rest will follow in order.

A Remedy for the Jaundies in sheep.
The stale Urine of a man taken inwardly is accounted the best Remedy.

How to keep Goats from straying.
Cut off the beards of your Goats, and the will not go far from home.

To take Fish by night.
Take a Lanthorn of Glass, and put a burning Candle in it, and set the Lanthorn
on the water, and the Fish will come to the light. Or else take Nettles and
Housleek, and make juice thereof, and put it into a pond, and all the Fishes
will gather thither, and if your hands be anointed therewith, you may at your
pleasure take them.

To prove if a Maiden be clear.
Burn Mother-wort, and let her take the smoke at her Nose, and if she be
corrupt, she shall piss, or else not. Otherwise take gray Nettles whilst that
they be green, and then let her piss on them, and if she be no Maiden they will
wither forthwith, or else not.

To write a Letter with such Ink as cannot be perceived unless you hold it
before the Fire.
Take a sheet of fair white Paper, and write thereon with the juice of a red
Onion well mixed or tempered with the white of an egg and then dry it well: and
then it cannot be perceived to be any other than plain white Paper, without any
writing on it: but if you hold it betwixt you and the fire, you may the more
easily read it, and perfectly see the Letters or contents thereof.

Another way to write Letters that cannot be read, but in this sort.
Take Alum, and beat it into fine powder, and then put, it into fair water,
and whatsoever you write therewith, neither that writing nor Letters will
appear, except you put the said paper in water, and then you may read it
perfectly.

An easy way to take Eeles.
Take new Hay that is sweet, and make a Bottle thereof, and as you make it up,
shake upon it some new Calves blood, with the Liver shred therein; and for want
of Calves blood take the blood of a Bull, Ox, or Cow, with the Liver, as
aforesaid; and then bind up your bottle as hard as you can with some Ropes of
the same. Hay, and cast it into a River or Pond where Eeles are, so tie it to a
cord to pull it up at your own pleasure again. Note, the chiefest time for the
taking of Eels and other running fish, is at the dark of the Moon, in the
beginning of May, at the shooting of Oats, and in the Months of September and
October, when all waters turn white after a flood. And for want of hay take
Osiers, and sees them in blood, as aforesaid, and make your purpose therewith.

How to make flesh cleave to the pot.
Take Dwell or Nightshade, and stamp it well, and put it in the por with meat,
and the Meat will cleave together.

To take Birds alive.
Take Pease, and steep them in Wine-lees, and in the juice of the Herb Benner
and Hemlock, and then cast them to the Birds; and as many as do ear thereof
will be so amazed that they cannot fly away.

To see by night as by day.
Anoint your eyes with the blood of a bat.

A ready and easy way to try if a Maid be a pure Virgin or not.
Take Roots of red Nettles, and stamp them small, and mix the juice thereof
with Ale, and let her drink thereof, and if it do remain with her, then she is
a Maid, otherwise she is not.

To throw a piece of money into a deep Pond, and to fetch it again when you
please.
In this you must work by private confederacy, by making something like to a
shilling, or any other thing that is of seeming worth, having another about you
like it, then throw it into a pond, and having hid a shilling before in some
secret place, bid one go presently and fetch it our of the Pond, you having
thrown it close by the shore, making them believe that it is the same that you
threw into the Pond; which upon such an account none will be so foolish as to
trouble themselves to look for it.

How to make Eggs dance upon a staff.
Provide you a good thick Staff about two yards long, three parts whereof ought
to be made Scoop wise, or half hollow like a basting Ladle, at the end of the
Scoop must be made a hole, and therein put a broad pin about the length of an
Egg, this being done, rest the handle of this staff against your thigh, and
hold it with your right hand near to the beginning of the Scoop, lay an Egg then
into the scoop of the staff now up, so the Egg will tumble from one end of the
scoop to the other, and not fall out. After the same fashion you may make two
or three Eggs tumble one after another.

To cut a Lace asunder in the midst, and to make it whole again.
Provide a piece of Lace, which you mean to cut, or at least a pattern like the
same one inch and a half long, and keeping it double privily in your left hand
between some of your fingers rent to the top thereof, and putting your own
piece a little before the other, (the end or rather the middle whereof you must
hide betwixt your forefinger and thumb) making that which shall be seen of
your pattern; let some stander-by cut the same asunder, and it will be surely
thought that the other Lace is cut asunder, which with words and rubbing and
chasing it, shall seem to be made whole again; which if it be well handled,
will seem wondrous strange.

To make men seem dead.
Take Aqua Compostra, and mingle it with Salt, and fire it in the night,
putting all other lights out, and the standers-by will seem as dead.

A pleasant Conceit, being a ready and sure way to catch a Pick-pocket.
A Gentleman being in a Throng in the Fair, had his purse picked out of his
Pocket; he missing it, (as you could not blame him) was somewhat vexed, but for
the present could not help himself, but was not without handsome resolution to
be revenged: To which purpose he bought two pennyworth of Fishhooks, and
caused a tailor to sew them round about toward the upper part of his pockets,
with the pooints of them downwards, and so the next day away he goes to the
Fair again amongst the Throng, throwing his Cloak on one shoulder, seeming
careless of his pockets wherein he had store of money: presently there was a
Diver nibling at his Pockets: The Gentleman being wary, (perceived that the
Fish had swallowed the hook) gave a jeck aside, which caused the Hooks to catch
hold of the Diverse hand, and when he had him sure, he said, Fellow, what makes
thy hand in my Pocket? O good Sir, (replied the Pickpocket) pardon me, I cannot
pull it out: Come (says the Gentleman softly to him, because no body should
take notice) go along with me: so together they marched with his hand fast in
the Pocket, (but covered with his Cloak) and to a Tavern lovingly they went
together, where the Gentleman told him of the loss he had sustained the day
before, and making of him to restore back his Money: He cut out his Pocket and
gave him his paw again. Surely this Pick-pocket had good store of picking work
to get out those hooks before he could angle again.

How to make a Cup of Glass not to burn being set in a fire.
Take any Vessel of Glass and boil it for the space of five hours in common
Oil, and after take it forth, and it will be then made so strong, that the said
Glass shall endure the hjeat of the fire.

How a Man shall not be weary of going.
Drink the juice of Mugwort, and bear the Herb it self about you, with the
Herbs Pedelion and Crowfoot.

To cause a Dog to cease banking.
Take a Dogs tongue, and lay it under your great Toe, within your shoe, and
the Dog will cease barking as long as you wear the same.

How to put one tester in the one hand and the other in the other, and by words
to bring them together.
He that has once attained to the facility of holding a piece of money in his
right hand, may show a hundred conceits by that means. Thus you may seem to put
one plece in your left hand, and retaining it still in your right hand, you may
together therewithal take up another like piece, and so with words seem to
bring both pieces together.

How to put an Egg into a Vial: Or to draw it through a Ring.
Steep the Egg two days and two nights in Vinegar, and then roll it on a table
softly, and it will stretch as you please, and then you may put it into a Vial,
or through a Ring.

How to make a glass of water seem to boil.
Take a glass near full of Water, and setting one hand upon the foot of it,
hold it fast; then turn slightly one of your fingers of your other hand upon
the brim or edge of the glass having before privately wet your finger, and so
passing on softly with your finger in pressing a little; so the water will seem
to boil, and leap over the Glass by drops.

How to thrust a Bodkin through your tongue, or a Knife through your arm.
Make a Bodkin, the blade whereof being parted in the middle so as the one part
be not near to the other by three quarters of an inch each part being kept
asunder-with a crooked piece of Iron, then thrust your tongue betwixt the
aforesaid space, thrusting the crooked piece of Iron behind your Teeth, biting
the same, and it will seem to stick so fast in and through your tongue, that it
will be hard to pull it out.

FINIS.

