CHVRCHES GLORY: OR, THE Becoming Ornament: BEING A seasonable Word, tending to
the Provoking, Encouraging, and Perfecting of Holiness in Believers.

Wherein is discovered the Nature, Necessity, and Excellency thereof:

Also, many grand Obstructions or Impediments removed, which hinder the Saints
growth and increase therein.

Whereunto is added, A Glass for the Unconverted; showing the woeful state of
Fallen Man, and the only way of his Recovery.

As also, several Articles of Faith briefly laid down for the further
establishment and confirming of the Faithful.

By Josias Bonham, sen. of Byfield in Northamptonshire.

Follow peace with all men, and Holiness, without which no man shall see the
Lord, Heb. 12.14. London, Printed for the Author, 1674.

To the Church of JESUS CHRIST, Congregated In the order of the Gospel, by
Confession of Faith and Baptism; meeting at Priers Marson in the County of
Warwick; wishing the abounding of all Grace, Mercy, Peace, and Unity in, and
through Our Lord Jesus Christ; and one with another, as the Truth is in Jesus.
Beloved in the Lord,
HAving for some Years been a Companion with you in the fel^owship of the
Gospel; and by the hand of God upon me, and your requirement, have been
^nstrumental among you as ^pportunities have been offered, to impart unto your
Edification what I through grace received: Now, considering that Mortality is
approaching near toward me and having those words of the Apostle Peter upon my
spirit which says: Moreover, I will endeavor, that after my Decease, you may
be able to have these things always in Remembrance, 2 Pet. 1.15. And likewise
considering the abounding of Iniquity and Errors, bot^ in Opinion and Practice
in these latter days; all which do witness the truth of that in a great part,
which our Savior Christ and his Apostles in holy w^^ have foretold; the which
^^ much manifested in Papis^ Rantisme, Quakerisme, and superstitious
Ceremonalism: as also the abounding of self-love, self-endedness, and profane
and vicious Atheism. I thought it my care and duty to present unto you this
small Treatise; wherein is comprised most of the chief heads, and principle
grounds of doctrine, that by me has been delivered unto you; hoping that you
will make these lines herein contained, your Companions; sometimes when you sit
at your Table, or Window, or by the Fireside, that they may be your
Remembrancers, how you have heard and received; and that you may hold fast unto
all stability and perseverance in judgment, and practice, the truths therein
contained tha^ are agreeable to the revealed will of God; that when I have put
off this Tabernacle, and am Deceased, these few gleanings out of Gods Vintage
may be of some use unto you, the better to enable you to stand fast in the
Truth, in unity of the Spirit, striving together for the faith of the Gospel.
So with my Prayers to God for you, hoping to see your faces in Heavenly Mansion
places, I remain your Servant in what I may, for Jesus sake both Night and Day.

John Bonham.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Christian Reader,
CAsting mine eye, and considerations upon the holy and pure Word of God, and
exercising my mind and meditations therein, I beheld through Grace, the habit
of Holiness to be of high acceptance with God, and of great concernment to the
Christian Soul: Also I harkned, and heard, as it were the Lord in his word
calling unto, and commanding the Sons and Daughters of men to put on the said
habit in the use of the means thereunto appointed, and many argumental grounds
and reasons he produces to move and draw the Creatures love thereto, and to
cause him to delight therein: But casting mine eye, and considerations on the
other hand, I beheld the present state of the Sons and Daughters of men in this
Generation, to see what acceptance this habit of Holiness found among them:
And lo its interest seemed very small and mean as to true holiness in its
proper nature; scarce here and there a man that affectionately seeks after it
in comparison of the contrary.

Wherefore I receiving some glimpse of the excellent properties of Holiness,
and the necessity and benefit thereof, did think it my duty to promote its
interest in the best manner I could, according to what I have received; and to
that end, I here present unto thee these ensuing considerations; humbly
requesting thee, that in thy perusal of the same, thou will view them with an
impartial eye: And seriously consider the doctrine therein affirmed, and weigh
it in the Balance of the Sanctuary; and what thou find to hold weight,
therewith, for the God of truths sake, accept the same as the work of God that
works all in all, according to the operations and manifestations of his holy
Spirit.

Let not the meanness of the Instrument, nor any Imperfection in the method
cause thee to despise the work, but rather with Aquilla and Priscilla expound
to me the way of God more perfectly, Act. 18.26.

I have not penned these ensuing considerations as any new light or
administration that has not been of old; but rather as a witness to that
ancient Apostolical Doctrine of Faith and Holiness, which was once delivered to
the Saints; the which, through grace in the operative power of the spirit, has
wrought in me to bear this Testimony according as I have received.

That Servant that improved his two Talents into four, was aceepted as well as
he that had improved his five into ten; whiles he that had made no improvement
was rejected with the fruitless Fig Tree: If the Heavens declare the glory of
God, and the Firmament shows his handy work: If day unto day utters speech,
and night unto night shows knowledge, Psalm. 19.1, 2. how much more should
man, whom God has endowed with the faculties of Reason and Understanding above
other Creatures, that so he might be apprehensive of divine demonstrations; and
especially that soul, whose understanding God has in a good measure
enlightened, to understand his mind, and will, contained in his Word, and has
given him a state of grace here, and an assurance in Christ of glory hereafter.

Our Savior having held forth some Divine Truths to his Desciples, asks this
question; Have ye understood these things? they say unto him, Yea Lord; then
says he unto them; Therefore, every Scribe that is instructed unto the Kingdom
of God, is like unto a man that is an Householder which brings forth out of
his Treasury things New and Old.

The term therefore is a relative to the enlightened understanding, and stands
as a Reason why the understanding soul should be as this Householder, bringing
forth; as if he should have said, Because ye understood these things, therefore
ye ought to bring them forth, like this Householder; and the good man mentioned,
Mat. 12.35. Which out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth good
things.

Whence I Note, what Divine Truths being received into the understanding, ought
not to be there concealed, but to be brought forth to the glory of God, who
has discovered them, and to the edification and comfort of Gods people,
according to the measure of the gift given.

And to this Saint Peter witnesses, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. As every man has
received the gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good Stewards
of the manifold graces of God. If any man speak, let him speak, as the Oracles
of God; if any man minister, let him do it, as of the ability that God gives,
that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ; to whom be praise
and cominion for ever and ever. Amen.

The like mind also was in Paul, who exhorts the Corinthians to covet
earnestly the best gifts; follow after Charity, says he, and desire spiritual
gifts; but rather that ye may Prophecy, Because he that Prophesies, speaks
unto men to Edification, and Exhortation, and Comfort, 1 Cor. 14.3. So likewise
Moses, when his Servant would have had him forbid Eldad and Medad of
Prophesying in the Camp, he answered him thus; Envyest thou for my sake, would
to God all the Lords people were Prophets, and the Lord would put his Spirit
upon them.

And although there be now no Prophesying by extraordinary Revelation, but only
that which is ordinarily wrought in the soul, through the operative power of
the spirit in the exercise of the mind, and meditations in the word of God: yet
the day of small things is not to be despised; for God will accomplish his
work, not by might, nor by power, but by his own spirit; and although these
ensuing considerations be not adorned with variety of tongues, nor such
eloquence as humane Wisdom teatheth; yet now in love they are tendered to thy
consideration: If they bear an harmonious sound to the wisdom of God, and thou
receive any Edification or Comfort thereby, let God have the glory, and me thy
prayers for my further growth and increase in the grace of God, and of Jesus
Christ our Lord, to whom I desire to be an obedient Subject and faithful
Servant, although unworthy of so high a calling, and remain thine in all
Christian Office.

Josias Bonham.

And now my Friend, art thou for Heaven designed,
And to the way of Holiness inclined:
Lend me thine eye, thine ear, thy heart, and hand,
These lines with me to read, and understand.
Would we an holy state and glory win,
Lets search our hearts, and there the work begin,
By application of Gods word thereto;
Preventing evils that from thence ensue.
The heart is naturally Corruptions seat,
Whence flows great sins that do us often cheat.
Obstructions great from thence does often rise,
Like filthy Rubbish in our way it lies.
The which in wisdom must removed be,
If we an holy state, and Heaven would see:
Therefore with diligence, let us fall to work,
To search what Vermin in our hearts do lurk:
Unanimous let us be, go hand in hand,
Corruptions, Laws, and Power to withstand;
That we from slavery may be set free,
To serve the Lord in holy Sanctity.
Thine in the Lord, J. B.

AN EPISTLE TO THE READER Of this Ensuing Treatise.
IT is man's misery since the Fall (having lost his God, and therewith his
Happiness) that he knows not the way to return to Happiness again: Indeed every
man in the world aims to make himself happy, but is at a loss, where, or in
what to place his happiness, not considering the first make of man's noble Soul,
which was like God; which can never be happy, or content without something
Infinite and Eternal. Hence it is that man places happiness in Goods, not in
Goodness, crying, Who will show us any Good; any good serves turn, though but a
show of good; in the mean time the one thing needful is neglected; they see no
need of this one thing needful; he is concerned with trifles, and trifles with
his great concernment. And as he is to seek where, or in what to place his
happiness to the way by which happiness is to be obtained, forgetting that
irrevokable decree of the Almighty, viz. That without Holiness no man shall see
the Lord. This way of Holiness thou have here discovered in this Book, now this
tho^ may assure thy self, that of all those things disputable, this is
without al^ dispute on all hands, that holiness is the great thing designed by
God; hi^ threatenings are, that we should be Holy his promises are, that we
should efect Holiness; all his Afflictions, ^^^t we should be partakers of his
Holi^^ss, Christ prays that we should be Holy, ^^d pleads that we should be
Holy; the ^^d of all Preaching, and of all the Or^^^ances, is, that we should
be Holy: ^ver did any perish, but for want of ^^liness; God glorys in this,
that he is Holy God, He is glorious in Holi^^ss: Christ is the Holy Child,
Jesus, ^s a Holy Savior; he had his Name ^^sus, that he might save us from our
(...): Would thou go in that way to^^rds Heaven, as not to miss, as many
^ost Christians and foolish Virgins ^^ve done; why Holiness is this way; ^^e
wayfaring man, though a Fool, ^ll not err therein, Esa. 35.8.

Let me therefore entreat thee, who^^er thou art that may be the Reader of ^t
Book, to consider the great thing ^^igned herein, viz. which is to show ^^t
what is the only becomeing Orna^^et, viz, Holiness; as for all other ^^raments,
they may perish, but this becomes thee for ever: Possibly ^ may say, if I be
Holy, I must ^^ with many frowns from an unw^^ world; matter it not, there is ^
in Gods love than the worlds ha^^ frowns and smiles from the world not long;
one smile from Christ ^ dying Bed, will make amends for. Therefore fear not
what will becom^ thee; study what becomes thee, as Wise man once said, Yet I
kno^ shall be well with them that fear G^^ but it shall not be well with the
Wic^^^ Therefore I beseech you consider near you walk on the brink of Eter^^^
what provision is made for the world; Vessels of glory are before pared for
glory; and be sure of that though you may own your se^ and others may own you,
yet God never own you, if you be not (...) Now, art thou one that say, as the
^^^ciple once to Christ, Rabbi, w^^ dwell thou, and he answ^^^ Come and see;
So say I, wo^^^ thou know the Excellency, the Ne^^^ Beauty, the Glory of
Holiness, come ^^d see; read this Treatise, pray that (...) eyes may be
anointed with eye-^^ve, and that he which is Truth, may ^^d thee into all
Truth, who is sancti^^tion, that he would sanctify thee; ^o shed his precious
blood to wash us, ^t we might be Holy; who before the ^^^ndation of the world
has chosen us ^^t we should be Holy, and that he ^^ld bless all means leading
thereto; ^^t his blessing may go along with the ^^ours of that his Servant, the
Au^^ur of this Eook, is the unfeigned de^^^ of him who is an unworthy Servant
Jesus Christ, and thy Friend,

Jo. Norcott.

TO THE READER IN Commendation of this Book.
Reader,
TWo things are chiefly treated of in this ensuing Treatise, the Filthiness of
Sin, and the Excellency of Holiness; the Covering of a Sinner, and the Ornament
of a Saint: Nothing makes a Wicked man so much like the Devil, as Sin; nor
nothing makes a Saint so much resemble Christ, as does Grace and Holiness.

Grace makes man more man, yea, more than a man; but Sin un-mans man, yea makes
him worse than a Beast: Sin is the Brat and Spawn of the Devil, but Grace is
the Seed and Off spring of Christ; God loathes nothing so much as Sin; yet
wicked men love nothing better. Gods great design and labor is to destroy Sin;
but man resolves to keep and cherish it. O what a Rebel is man to God! Sin is
the greatest Thief and Deceiver in the World (for every one has more or less
been cheated thereby) yet the most of men are greedy to entertain the Cheater.
Nothing is such an Enemy to man as Sin, yet but few men will make War against
it. Sin seeks to destroy the soul, yet some men will rather dye then leave
their Sin.

O what blindness and madness is in the heart of man! Sin separates man from
God, and hides his face from him, yet man resolves to hug and hide his Sin.
That must needs be the greatest evil, that deprives man of the ^reatest good,
and exposes man to the ^reatest misery. He that makes a ^^ock at Sin now, will
change his Note, when the Sentence shall be pro^ounced, Go ye Cursed. If Sin be
^o odious, and Grace so excellent, what ^ause have we to take up a lamentation,
that their should be so much of the one, and so little of the other in the
world; that sin should be so countenanced and ^ncouraged, and Grace and
Holiness so ^uch slighted and contemned.

Never was there greater need to ^tand up against Sin, and contend ^or
Holiness, then in such days as these ^^ Looseness and Licensciousness. This
^orthy Author has cast in his Mite in seasonable time; there, are abun^ance of
Professors, but too too few that strive after the power of Godliness. Many
strive to Preach well, and Dis^ute well, but few to Live well. I ^are not say a
man, who is of a false Re^igion, cannot be saved; yet, I will ^ay, he that
walks not holily and uprightly with God, cannot, though externally does profess
the truth.

This Book, Reader, whosoever the art, may (with-Gods blessing) pro^^ of great
advantage to thee; for here seasonable Council for Saints and S^^ners, both for
the Professor and P^^phane.

First: Art thou a Sinner (I me^^ one not truly converted, one that h^^ not (as
yet) put on the Ornament Holiness, then read the latter pa^^ wherein thou may
clearly percei^^ what a Cursed and Miserable state the art in, whilst thou do
remain unc^^verted. May-be thou art one the makes a mock at Religion and
Conv^^sion (for alas, there are some miser^ble Wretches that stick not to
cont^^dict and revile the very Word of Go^ so ripe are they grown in Sin a^
Wickedness: What Sinner soever t^ art, let me mind thee with these two three
things.

1. Consider thou have an immor^^ soul that is of a precious worth and v^lue,
and that this soul thou art in danger to loose to all Eternity.

2. Consider the shortness and uncertainty of thy days, how soon thou may be
cut off; and remember, if thou dyest in thy Sins, having no interest in Christ,
thou art undone and damned for evermore; there is no Repentance after death;
let not the Devil tell thee that thou shall dye like a Beast, and have no
Resurrection.

3. Consider what Gods Word says; Unless ye Repent, ye shall all likewise
Perish, Luke 13.5. And a man must be born again, or else cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.3. and without Holiness no man shall see the Lord.

4. Consider with thy self to what end God has given a Law or Light in thy
Conscience; and know assuredly, that if thou do go on in Sin, minding not
these inward reprovings of Conscience, that it will rise up against thee, and
Condemn thee in the dreadful day. Conscience truly enlightened, does judge for
God; I may say before hand, and pass judgment too, and men may in part know how
it is like to go with them hereafter, if they did but mind the Testimony of
their Consciences; for if Conscience judges and condemns thee by the light of
Gods Word, you have cause to tremble at those Reprovings, and to fly to the
Lord Jesus Christ, for he is, I may say, Gods Viceroy; and does, whilst
rightly informed, judge for his Sovereign in Truth and Righteousness: The Lord
help thee to consider these things before Repentance be hid from thy eyes.

5. Consider, if thou would put on the comely or becoming Ornament of Christ
and Holiness, then thou must put off thy filthy garments of Sin and Corruption;
before thou can put on the New man, thou must put off the Old.

And as to you that are called Saints, one word further let me say since I have
this opportunity in my hand; take heed you rest not contented with the name of
Saints, the form of Godliness, without the power, will do you no good in the
day of Christ.

2. Remember the foolish Virgins were shut out; it is not enough to be Virgins,
unless you and I have Oil in our Vessels. O labor for Grace, you know not
what times of need are at hand; he that has the most, will have none to spare,
and some will seek it too late.

3. Remember, and think upon the man that had not on the Wedding Garment: Know
assuredly; that none will be made welcome, and lovingly entertained by the
Bridegroom, but those only that have that excellent Garment on of Christ's
Righteousness, Holiness, and Humility; and how many will the day of Christ find
unprovided, notwithstanding the time and space which God does afford us to make
ready.

O look upon it as your chief work and business to dress, trim, and make your
selves ready; for at a time you think not of, the Son of man comes; and that
the labors of our Brother in the ensuing Treatise may be blessed to your
advantage upon this very account, shall be the Prayers of him who is willing to
serve you in the Gospel of Jesus Christ, as strength shall be Communicated.

Benja. Keach.

THE CHVRCHES GLORY: OR THE Becoming Ornament.
Being a Seasonable Word, tending to the Provoking of Holiness in Believers,
raised from
Psalm. 93.5. Holiness becomes thine House, O Lord, for ever.
CHAP. I. Wherein the words are Opened and Explicated.
SEveral things are in these words very considerable for our Christian
Edification: First, by way of Division. Secondly, by way of Explication.
Thirdly, by way of Doctrine. Fourthly, by way of Application.

First, By way of Division.

First, we have in the words a subject bearing the Denomination of an House:
Secondly, the person to whom the right of Propriety does belong. And that is
the Lord: Thine House O Lord. Thirdly, we have the Ornaments of the house,
which do most Adorn the same to make it comely and delightful unto the Lord.
And that is Holiness: Holiness becomes thine House, O Lord. Fourthly, we have
here set forth unto us the duration of this Ornament Holiness, how long its
comeliness is acceptable in the sight of God; and that is here said to be for
Ever; Holines^ becomes Thine House O Lord for Ever.

Secondly, By way of Explication.

We have several particulars very considerable. First, who this Lord is tha^
claims propriety in this house; Secondly, what the House is and how
considered Thirdly, what Holiness is: And Fourthly how far the term Ever does
Extend.

Of these particulars Briefly. And First who this Lord is that claims
proprie^^ in this House.

Now among the multitude of Scripture Testimonies which do unfold this
Quest^on, that of Jeremiah is very full and clear; where the Lord, by the
Prophet, does discover himself in these words; But the Lord is the true God; He
is the living God, and an everlasting King, at whose wrath the Earth shall
tremble, and the Nations shall not be able to abide his Indignation, Jer. 10.10.

To this may be added, Hebrews 3.4. the Words whereof are these; For every
House is builded by some Man, but he that built all things is God, who is a
Spirit J h. 4.24.
, or spiritual Essence, pure Hebr. 1.13.
, perfect Psalm. 18.30
, eternal Deuteronomy. 32.4.
, incomprehensible Deuteronomy. 33.27.
, having his Being of and from himself, and giving Being to all Creatures, of
which he is the supreme Governor, Orderer, and Disposer, by his Omnipotency,
Providentiality, Omnipresency, and Omnisciency, according to his Infinite
Wisdom and Divine Will, Jer. 13.23, 24. Heb. 4 13 See Psalm. 22.28. Rev. 19.6.
Ps. 65.9. To. 13.1.
Ephesians. 1.11. Thus much to the first particular; Who it is that claims
Propriety in the House.

The Second Question concerns the House it self, under what Consideration it
may be taken.

The term House does signify a Dewlling Place, a place of Abode, Habitation,
or of Rest.

Now it is not to be conceived, that any one particular place can comprehend an
Incomprehensible and Infinite God.

Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the Lord, Jerem. 23.24. If I ascend up
into Heaven, thou art there, says the Psalmist: If I make my Bed in Hell,
behold thou art there: If I take the wings of the Morning, and dwell in the
uttermost parts of the Sea, even there shall thy Hand lead me, and thy right
hand shall hold me, Psalm. 139.7, 8, 9, 10, 11; 12.

So that God dwells in Heaven by his glorious essential Presence, in Hell by
his Wrath and just Judgments, in the World by his common Mercies, and in his
Saints by his Spirit, whereby they are regenerated, sanctified, assisted, and
assured o^ his Favor, in the use of all his Ordinances. And under this last
Consideration, i^ my ensuing Discourse, I shall consider the House of God: That
a Believing people in whom the Covenant of Grace is confirmed by the
in-dwellings of the Spirit o^ Grace in its Operations and powerful Influences,
whereby they are drawn forth to walk with the Lord Christ, in the Faith and
Practice of his Truth, according to his Revealed Will contained in his Word;
such a People upon a Scripture-account may be called the Lords-House.

The Apostle Peter writing to the Saints scattered abroad, considering them as
People in Covenant with Christ, and Partakers of the Spirit unto Sanctification
and Obedience, puts them under this Denomination; Ye also as lively Stones,
says he, 1 Pet. 2.5
are built up a spiritual House, an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual
Sacrifice acceptable to God by Jesus Christ: So Hebr. 3.6. Christ as a Son over
his own House, whose House are we, if we hold fast the confidence and the
rejoicing of the Hope firm into the end. The Believing Ephesians likewise being
in Christ by Faith, and Christ in them by his Spirit operating and working them
up to Sanctification and Obedience, and sealing the Promises unto them. The
Apostle considering their near Relation unto God, which they were hereby
brought unto, has these Expressions concerning them:

Now therefore, says he, Ephesians 2 1 20, 21, 22
ye are no more Strangers and Foreigners, but Fellow-Citizens with the Saints,
and of the Household ^f God; and are built upon the Foundation ^f the Apostles
and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner Stone; in whom all
the Building fitly framed together ^roweth unto an holy Temple in the Lord, ^n
whom ye also are builded together for an Habitation of God through the Spirit.
Thus Gods People are his Habitation: as God has said, I will dwell in them,
and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my People, 2 Cor.
6.16. The Prophet Isaiah does bear testimony to this truth, Isai. 66.1, 2. Thus
says the Lord, The Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my Footstool: where
is the House that ye build unto me? says the Lord: and where is the place of
my Rest? for all those things has my hand made, and all those things have been
says the Lord: but to this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a
contrite Spirit, and trembles at my Word. Two things briefly we may note in
these words: First, the Question propounded; Where is the House that ye build
unto me? says the Lord: and where is the place of m^ Rest. Secondly, the Lords
Answer to hi^ own Question: But to this man will I look even to him that is
poor and of a contrit^ Spirit and trembles at my Word. Now how will the Lord
look to this man? surely to make his abode with him, to tak^ up his residence
and dwelling with him and in him by his Spirit of Grace, quickening, reviving,
comforting and replenishing the Soul with assurances of his Favou^ in Christ;
endowing them with suc^ Gifts and Qualifications of Grace, whereby they are
enabled to offer up spiritual Sacrifices of Prayers and Praises acceptable to
God by Jesus Christ.

I dwell in the high and holy place, Is 57.15.
says the Lord, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to
revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones.
Judas, one of Christ's Disciples (but not Iscariot) putting forth this Question
to his Lord: Lord, faith he, how is it that thou will manifest thy self unto us
and not unto the World? Jesus answered and said unto him: If any man love me he
will keep my words, Joh. ^4.23.
and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode
with him. Gods Work in the S^ul by his in ^^ dwelling there.
Now how will the Father and the Son come to such a Soul to take up their
abode? surely. by that illuminating and quickening spirit of Truth proceeding
from the Father and the Son, enlightening the Understanding, informing the
Judgment, rectifying the Will, subduing Corruption, and quickening to act in
holy Duties, assuring and confirming the Soul in the Favor of the Father and
the Son unto eternal Life, according to that Promise of God held forth by
Ezekiel 11.19, 20. I will give them one heart, and I will put a new Spirit
within them, and I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give
them a heart of flesh: whence note by the way, that the Spirit is here said to
be a new Spirit, not because it is any new erected thing in it self, for it was
of old from eternity: but first, because by its powerful influences and
operations it does take up its residence in that Creature that was formerly
destitute thereof; and so it is new to the Creature. And secondly, because it
does erect a new Work in the Creature; so as to alter and change the
Inclinations and Dispositions of the Heart, by destroying the Carnality,
Earthliness and Rebelliousness thereof toward the things of God: which is
signified by the stony Heart, and making it tender and pliable to yield a
cheerful conformity to the Will of God, which is signified by the Heart of
Flesh. This great Promise, as to the end of it, is further expressed in these
words: That they may walk in my Statutes, and keep mine Ordinances, and do
them; and they shall be my People and I will be their God.

To the same effect are the Words of the Apostle Paul, Romans 8.11, 12, 13. If
the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the Dead, dwell in you; He that
raised up Christ from the Dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his
Spirit that dwells in you: Therefore Brethren, we are Debtors not to the
Flesh, to live after the Flesh; for if ye live after the Flesh, ye shall dye:
But if ye, through the Spirit, do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall
live: Hereby says John, We know that we dwell in him, 1 John 4.13.
and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit. The Apostle Paul giving
Instructions to Timothy, concerning the qualifications of Church Officers,
makes this application to Timothy; These things Write I unto thee, that thou
may know how to behave thy self in the house of God, which is the Church of
the living God, the Pillar and ground of the Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. So that,
first, Gods people are called the house of God, as they have the in-dwelings of
God by his Spirit, in its Influences, Operations, and Laws, residing in their
hearts: Secondly, They are called the Church of God, as they are a company, or
Congregation of people imbodied together by the Ligaments and Nerves of Gods
word, and walk together in the observation of all his Laws and Ordinances,
according to his Will. Thirdly, such a people or Congregation are called the
Pillar and ground of the truth, as they perform the office of a Pillar in
upholding and propagating truths interest before the men of the world, by
doctrine and practice answerable thereunto, as the Apostle to the Ephesians
teaches; To the intent, says he, that now unto the Principalities and Powers
in Heavenly places might be known by the Church the manifold Wisdom of God,
Ephesians. 3.10. So that Gods people within the Evangelical Covenant of Grace,
believing on Christ, and conforming to Christ in his holy Laws, Orders, and
Ordinances, according to the Gospel Dispensation and improving the same to the
obtaining Victory, or overcoming of their own, Corruptions, and inordinate
affections to self and the World in its Vanities, and live to God in holy
Sanctity by the indwellings of God by his Spirit in the heart: Such a people
are by the Spirits demonstration, called the House of God, the Church of God,
and the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. And such as overcome, Christ makes
Pillars in the same, Rev. 3.12. In which Temple God does dwell by his Spirit;
as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. What? know you not that your Body is the
Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you, which ye have of God; and ye are not
your own, for ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your Body,
and in your Spirit, which is Gods, chap. 3. ver. 16, 17. Know you not, says
the Apostle, that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells
in you; if any man defile the Temple of God, him will God destroy; for, the
Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are. The Temple which Solomon built, was
called the Lords house, upon four Considerations:

First, He made choice of that house above all other, for an house of
Sacrifice. 2 Chronicles. 7.12. verse 16.


Secondly, He Sanctifies that house to himself for that purpose.

Thirdly, He placed there his name, that his eyes, verse 16.
and his heart might be there perpetually.

Fourthly, He promised such acceptance of the Worship there performed
according to that dispensation, that his eyes should be open, and his ears
attentive to the Prayers there made, ver. 15. and for a clear Testimony
thereof, he filled the house with his glory, ver. 2. In all these
Considerations, Gods faithful people may be accounted his house:

For first, God has chosen them, and builds them up a Spiritual House, 1 Pet.
2.5. A habitation for God, through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.22. to the use of
spiritual Service, and the offering up the Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving
to his name.

Secondly, He sanctifies them, and fitteth them thereunto, 1 Cor. 6.11. Ephesians.
5.26.

Thirdly, His eyes and his heart are upon them, beholding with delight their
Sacrifices and Services performed in Faith and Love.

Fourthly, He so accepts of their worship performed in Spirit and Truth, that
his ears are open to their Prayers; and for their consolation and assurance, he
fills them with Joy unspeakable, and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. Whence note by
the way, that when a peoples Sacrifice of Prayer, and Praise, and other
obedience, does arise from an in-dwelling of the Spirit of Faith and
Sanctifying grace, and is offered upon the Altar, Jesus Christ, in the golden
Censer of his merits; this doubtless is highly accepted of God, in what place
soever it be performed according to the words of Christ; Where two or three are
gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them, Math. 18.20.
The Conclusion drawn from these considerations is this, That although God does
dwell in Heaven by his divine Essence and all-glorious presence, and so Heaven
may properly be called his house and dewlling place; yet God dwells also
spiritually in, and among his people, who may be called his house or
dewlling place, where he does Record his Name, and where he does give his
Blessings of Grace, and Mercy, as the Apostles in their Epistles to the
Churches do declare, and the Author to the Hebrews does testify in these
words; But Christ, as a Son over his own House, whose House are we, if we hold
fast the Confidence and the Rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end. Thus much
in Answer to the second Question.

The third particular we have to consider by way of Explication, is, the
Furniture or comely Ornaments of this House, and these are here comprehended
under the term Holiness; Holiness becomes thine House O Lord: Holiness is an
Ornament which does adorn and beautify both the inside and outside of a
Christian, or Christian Society; it is curiously wrought in the inward man by
the In-dwellings of Gods holy Word and Spirit in the influences and operations
thereof; and it branches forth it self in those visible actions and practices
that are agreeable to Gods Will.

This Ornament comprehends within its circumference, the great work of
Transformation, sometimes called Renovation, or new Creation, according to the
Apostles exhortation. And be not conformed to this World, but be ye Transformed
by the Renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good, that
acceptable and perfect Will of God, Romans 12.2. And says the same Apostle, Ephesians.
4.23, 24. Be ye Renewed in the Spirit of your mind; and that ye put on the New
Man, which after God, is Created in Righteousness and true Holiness: When the
mind is transformed from Carnality to stand in the things of God, it may then
be said to be Holy: The will also may be said to be Holy when it is transformed
from that stubbornness and Rebelliousness, which by corrupted Nature it
stands in against the will of God, and is become submissive and obedient to
the will of God, so as freely to observe it in all his Commands, and freely to
submit unto his Will in all his dispensations; saying, The Will of the Lord be
done.

So likewise the affections, when they are transformed from Earthly objects to
Heavenly objects; when the Meditations, Desires, Love, and Delights, are all
seated in God, and in the things of God; this may be accounted holiness in the
inward man; holiness in the outward man does arise from this inward work as
from the root, and brancheth forth it self in word and action; as that holy man
David says of himself, That his mouth should show forth the praise of God,
Psalm. 34.1. and his tongue should talk of his Righteousness all the day, Psalm.
71.24. It was the Prayer of Paul, that holy Servant of God, in the behalf of
the believing Romans, That with one mind, and one mouth they might glorify
God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 15.6. The mind and the
mouth should go together in those things where the glory of God, and the
edification of the Church is concerned; yea, all the members of the body, as
David says, I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy Testimony; I
made have, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments, Psalm. 119.59.

It is not enough for a man only to withdraw his affections from Carnal
objects, but he must have also his eye fixed upon the Lord, and his Truth, with
the Professors thereof; as David says, Psalm. 101.6. Mine eyes shall be upon
the Faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with me; Neither is it enough for
a man to have his hand shut from doing any action of violence or oppression,
but he must have it open also in doing works of Mercy and Charity, to undo the
heavy burdens, and to let the Oppressed go free, Esa. 58.6. to be ready to
Distribute, and willing to Communicate to such as are in Want, Tim. 6.18. So
that when all the faculties of the inward man, and members of the outward man
act in their places according to the will of God, by virtue of his sanctifying
and quickening Spirit that gives motion thereunto: When a man is set free from
sin, and become the Servant of God, he has his fruit unto holiness, and the
end will be Everlasting Life, Romans 6.22. So that holiness is the perfection of
purity in Nature, Word, and Works; the which perfection is only found in God;
but in reference to man, holiness consists in pardon of sin, and in
transformation of Nature, by the renewing of the mind, from corrupted Nature to
a renewed or new-begotten Nature which is wrought by the operations of the
holy-Spirit, in such thoughts, words, and actions as arise from that original:
And thus much by way of Explication concerning the term Holiness.

The fourth particular concerns the duration of this Ornament which is
expressed in the Text by the term Ever: Holiness becomes thine House O Lord
for Ever. The term Ever, does here signify Time without limitation or end, and
so it is taken sometimes in Scripture: We have the Lords Kingly Office in
respect of the duration of it, set forth by this term Ever; The Lord sits
King for Ever, Psalm. 29.10. So the Apostle Paul, setting forth to the
Thessalonians the second coming of Christ, and the happy Estate of the Faithful
at that day, when the dead in Christ shall rise first; Then we, says he, which
are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together with them, to meet the Lord
in the air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord; wherefore comfort one
another with these words, These. 4. whence I apprehend the the term Ever to
signify Time, without limitation or end, which is also called Eternity, or
Life Eternal, Math. 25.46. And so having considered the words by way of
Explication, I shall proceed to the Doctrine and Application.

CHAP. II. The Doctrine Propounded and Confirmed.
THe point of Doctrine, or Observation, which does offer it self to our
Christian consideration from the words thus explicated, is briefly this:

The Doctrine.
Holiness is an Ornament ever becoming the people of God:
Or thus, It ever becomes Gods people to be an Holy people.


This Doctrine is confirmed by such Scriptures as do show the Grounds and
Reasons why it ever becomes Gods people to be an holy people: And the first
ground I shall present to consideration, is this; The first Reason grounded on
Col. 3.9, 10.
because they do therein most resemble God their Heavenly Father, and Jesus
Christ their Elder Brother.

Paul to the Colossians gives this Exhortation; Lie not one to another, seeing
that ye have put off the Old man with his deeds, and have put on the New man,
which is renewed in knowledge after the Image of Him that Created him. The same
Apostle in his Epistle to the Ephesians, gives the like Exhortation; Put off
says he, Ephe. 4.22, 23, 24.
concerning the former Conversation the Old man, which is corrupt, according to
the deceitful Lusts, and be renewed in the Spirit of your mind; and that ye
put on the New man, which after God, is Created in Righteousness and true
Holiness. In which words we may note:

First, That the Lord calls for a renewed mind, and not only the mind, but also
the whole man.

Secondly: The way in which this work of Renovation is wrought; and that is
through a true and sanctified knowledge of God: Put on the New man which is
renewed in Knowledge.

Thirdly: Here is the likeness or Image into which the New man is renewed, and
that is after the Image of Him that Created him after God, or the likeness of
God.

Fourthly: Here is the particulars wherein this Image or Resemblance of the New
Creature unto the Creator, does consist; and that is in Righteousness and true
Holiness.

Agreeable hereunto are the words of the Apostle to the Corinthians: 2 Cor.
3.18.
But we all with open face, beholding as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the
Lord; So that Holiness does most resemble the Image of God, and of our Lord
Jesus Christ; therefore it ever becomes the Lords people to be an holy people.

The second Reason grounded on Ephe. 1.4.
A second Ground and Reason why it ever becomes Gods people to be an holy
people, is, because God has chosen them thereunto in Christ, before the
foundation of the world, as the Apostle teaches the Ephesians; According
(says he) as he has chosen us, in Him, before the foundation of the world,
that we should be holy, and without blame before him in Love. In this Scripture
we may note these three particulars.

First: God's choice of his people.

Secondly: Upon what account this choice is made; and that is, not our works
foreseen, but Christ's merits, he has chosen us in him.

Thirdly: To what end this choice is made; and that is, that we should be holy,
and without blame before him in Love. But if it be asked how has God chosen
his people in his Son unto holiness before the foundation of the world? I
Answer, God did from Eternity see the lost condition of his people, through
their transgression of his Law; and their defaceing his Image of holiness, in
which he did at first Create them: He also did foresee, and in himself purpose
and decree a satisfaction to his Justice, in and by Jesus Christ, his obedience
to his just Law, which man had transgressed; and by his suffering death for sin
in the same humane nature that had sinned, that thereby a perfect Righteousness
and Justification might be wrought for mankind, that all those who through
grace, and the operations of the holy Spirit are in time brought over to
believe in Jesus Christ, should be justified from all things, from which they
could not be justified by the Law, Act. 13.
and sanctified to the obedience of Christ, and to acceptance with the Father
through him. And so God beholding his people from Eternity, in that
Righteousness that Christ by his perfect obedience to the Law, should in time
obtain; and in that satisfaction which he should make to divine Justice by his
sufferings on the Cross: God also beholding his people in that work of
Regeneration and Sanctification, which in time Christ by his Spirit should work
and effect in them, did accept and choose them in this means, to be a people to
the praise and glory of his grace; in relation whereunto are these words of the
Apostle to the Ephesians; For we are his Workmanship, says he, Created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained that we should
walk in them, Ephesians. 2.10. So that Gods people ought ever to be an holy people,
because they are chosen thereunto from Eternity. And this is the second Reason.

The third Reas n grounded on 1 These. 4 7. 2 Timothy, 1.9.
A third Ground and Reason why it ever becomes God's people to be an holy
people, is, because they are called thereunto with an holy calling, as the
Apostle to the Thessalonians says; God has not called us unto Uncleanness,
but unto Holiness. The Apostle also writing to Timothy, speaking in the words
before of God, Who (says he) has saved us, and called us with an holy
Calling, not according to our Works, but according to his own purpose and
grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began. In these
words we have the Lords act of saving his people, set forth unto us in two
particulars: First, he Saved us. Secondly, he Called us; whereby the term
Saved, I do apprehend that free and full Redemption from Sin and the Wrath of
God, due to man for sin, which Jesus Christ, the unspotted Lamb of God, has by
his perfect and unsinning obedience, wrought for Mankind; Romans 3.24, 25.
Ephesians. 1.5, 6, 7, 8.
for which obedience sake, the Father does give to his people a free and full
Remission of their sins, with everlasting Salvation.

And by the term Called, I understand the operating power of Christ's Spirit,
bringing persons into the way of Salvation, and investing them with the holy
Calling, whereby they may receive the privileges of the Gospel; that is,
Adoption, Sanctification, and Justification, as John 1.12. 1 Cor. 6.11. which
the Spirit of Christ does work either immediately, as in the Apostles, or more
ordinarily in the Ministry of the Word, plainly and purely set forth to the
understanding, to the producing Faith, Regeneration, and Sanctification,
whereby the Creature is called forth to walk with God in that way whereunto it
has pleased the Father to annex the promise of salvation, according to those
words of the Apostle to the Thessalonians; 2 These. 2.13.
But we are bound to give thanks always to God for you Brethren, beloved of the
Lord; because God has from the Beginning, chosen you to Salvation, through
sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth. Believers therefore are
the persons that are saved and called, not according to their works, but
according to the purpose and grace of God, given in Christ Jesus before the
world began; so that man's works are no ways meritorious of Salvation, nor any
original ground of Gods love to man; but Justification, Sanctification, and
Glorification, together with all the means appertaining thereunto, are God's
free gift to man upon the account of Jesus Christ; to the end, that man in a
diligent improvement of the same, might bring forth the fruit of holiness to
the praise and glory of his name; God has called his people unto holiness,
with an holy calling, therefore it becomes them always to be an holy people,
suitable to their Call. And this is the third Reason.

The forth Reason grounded on Levit. 20.7, 8.
A fourth Ground and Reason, why it ever becomes God's people to be an holy
people, is, because God has enjoined holiness upon his people by special
command: The Lord said to the Children of Israel, to whom he had given his
Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances: Sanctify your selves therefore, and be ye
holy, for I am the Lord your God, and ye shall keep my Statutes, and do them, I
am the Lord which sanctified you. As if he should have said, I am the Lord your
God which have chosen you unto my self, to be an holy people; and to that end,
I have sanctified unto you the means of holiness, therefore sanctify your
selves through a careful and diligent improvement of the means that you may be
holy.

So the Apostle Peter gives the like exhortation by virtue of the same command:
But as he which has called you, is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
Conversation, because it is written, be ye holy, for, I am holy, 1 Pet. 1.15,
16. So that God's people are to be an holy people, because they are enjoined
thereunto by special command. And this is the fourth Reason.

A fifth Ground and Reason why it ever becomes God's people to be an holy
people, The fifth Reason is grounded on Psalm. 29.1, 2.
may be taken from the consideration of the beautifulness of holiness: It does
beautify and adorn the Christian, and the Christian-profession; or the
profession of Christianity. It is of great excellency to the advancement of
God's glory, to the promoting of the Gospel, and to make Christian performances
in the way thereof delightful in the sight of God; and therefore the spirit of
God by the Psalmist has this exhortation unto the Sons and Daughters of men:
Give unto the Lord, O ye mighty; give unto the Lord the glory and strength;
give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name, worship the Lord in the beauty
of holiness, Psalm. 96.

The sixth Reason is grounded on 2 Cor. 7.1.
A sixth Ground and Reason why it ever becomes God's people to be an holy
people, is, because they are a people unto whom God has made exceeding great
and precious promises, 2 Pet. 1.4.

The Apostle Paul to the Corinthians, making a recital of many excellent
promises which God has made to his people, as to dwell in them, and walk in
them, to be a God unto them, and to accept them as a people unto himself,
repeats an exhortation laid down by the Prophet Isaiah, Esa. 52.12. 2 Cor.
6.17, 18.
to come out, to be separate, and not to touch the unclean thing, and I will
receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and
Daughters, says the Lord Almighty: As if the Lord should say, my Divine power
and providence shall be over them for their protection; my Spirit of Wisdom and
Counsel shall be in them by its influences and operations, to instruct them in
the way of Life; My mercy shall be exercised in remission of their sins: The
experiences of my Love shall replenish their hearts with consolation and
support in time of trouble; My Righteousness shall plead their cause, and right
their wrongs against all their Oppressors: As a Father will I take care of them
in this their present Pilgrimage, and interest them in an Heavenly and
Everlasting Inheritance, that it may be well with them for ever. Upon these and
the like considerations the Apostle groundeth this Exhortation. Having these
promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of
Flesh and Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1.

So that God's people are a people unto whom God has freely given exceeding
great and precious Promises; therefore it becomes them to be an Holy people:
And so I shall proceed to some Considerations by way of Application; only make
a brief recital of the six particulars laid down for the proof of the point;
namely, It ever becomes God's people to be an Holy people; and to be found
therein, is matter of great concernment.

First, Because they do therein most resemble God their Heavenly Father.

Secondly: Because they are thereunto Elected in Christ from Eternity.

3dly: Because they are thereunto called with an Holy means or calling.

Fourthly: Because God has enjoined holiness upon his people by special
Command.

Fifthly: Because holiness is a beautifying Ornament unto a Christian and
Christianity.

Sixthly: Because they are a people unto whom God has made exceeding grea^^
and precious promises.

CHAP. III. Containing some Considerations, by way of Application.
The first Use of Information.
THe foregoing Considerations may be of use unto us in several particulars by
way of information.

First: To inform our Judgments wherein the beauty and comeliness of a Christian
does consist; that is to say, not in fleshly beauty, nor the adornings of gay
Apparel; but in Holiness. God delights in the likeness of himself, where he
sees his own Image in a person or people, that is the soul he delights to
honor with the Communications of his choycest favors: The Lord has set apart
him that is godly, for himself, Psalm. 4.3.

Secondly: We are hereby informed into the original or first moving cause of
holiness in a people, with the means and promises thereunto appertaining; and
that is God's electing Love in Christ Jesus, as the Apostle teaches: But God
who is Rich in Mercy for his great Love wherewith he loved us, even when we
were dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ; by Grace ye are
saved, Ephesians. 2.4. and herein is Love, not that we loved God, but that He loved
us; and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins, 1 John 4.10. So that
Jesus Christ, with all the means of holiness, and promises thereunto
appertaining, are the effects of the Fathers Love; see Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, 8.

Thirdly: The third Use of Information.
We are hereby informed into the knowledge of the will of God concerning
holiness in his people: It is certainly the will of God that his people should
be an holy people, seeing he has chosen and called them thereunto, as the
effects of his Love toward them: For this is the will of God, even your
Sanctifica^ion, that ye should abstain from Fornicati^n; that every one of you
should know how to possess his Vessel in Sanctification and Honor; 1 These.
4.3, 4, 7.
for God has not called us to Uncleanness, but unto Holiness. So that it is
the will of God that his people should be a^ holy people.

Fourthly: It may inform us of our Duty in answer to God's command: God's
command implies his peoples duty in obedience to the command, by a careful
improvement of the means which he has ordained to accomplish that end: The
Lord said to the Israelites of old, Sanctify your selves, and be ye holy, for
I am the Lord which sanctify you, Levit. 20.7, 8. As if he should say, I am
the Lord which se^ you apart for my self, and sanctify the means whereby you
may be an holy people; therefore sanctify your selves by a careful and
diligent walking in the use of that means, that you may be an holy people unto
me: So likewise the Apostle to the Romans says, If ye through the Spirit do
mortify the Deeds of the body, ye shall live, Romans 8.13. Also to the
Philipians he gives this Exhortation; Work out your own salvation with fear and
trembling; for it is God that works in you both to will and to do of his good
pleasure, Phil. 2.12, 13. All which Scriptures do show that God is the chief
Author of the means, and the mover to the means; yet there is something
enjoined on the Creatures part in obedience to the command, wherein the
Creature by the direction and assistance of the means, ought to be active in
the things of God which concern its own salvation, and the Edification,
Comfort, 1 These 5.9, 10, 11.
and Assurance of others; and that not upon the account of merit or desert on
the Creatures part, but to glorify God that has freely given forth both means
and merit in his Son, whom God the Father has ordained supreme Head, King, and
Governor to his Church and People; that men might honor the Son by obedience
to his Laws, as they honor the Father; Joh. 5.22, 23.
unto which obedience, through Faith in the merits of Christ, God the Father
has annexed the promise of Salvation of his own free Love and rich Mercy: Heb.
5 9.
so that Salvation is on God's part an act of Mercy; on Christ's part an act of
Merit; on man's part it is undeserved in his best obedience: for, It is not of
him that wills, nor of him that runs; but of God that shows Mercy, Romans
9.16.

A second Use which the aforementioned considerations may direct us unto, The
second Use is of Admiration.
is a use of Admiration: It may raise up our Souls to behold with Admiration
God's great Love, All the Works of God are to be Admired of his Saints;
Especially his grace in Christ to effect holiness in his people, and happiness
thereupon.
and rich Mercy manifested in all his proceedings, in, and by Jesus Christ
toward man, (a sinful and undeserving Creature) who by sin had dishonored
God, defaced his Image of Righteousness and true Holiness, wherein he was at
first Created, and deprived himself of the Paradise of God, and made himself an
object of his displeasure, according to due desert.

Now that God should look upon the Creature in its lost condition and corrupted
state (from which he was no way able to recover himself) with such an eye of
pity, and bowels of compassion, as to lay help upon one that is mighty, even
Jesus Christ his only Son, both God and Man, to take satisfaction in him that
sinned not, for the world of Sinners: And by his grace to accept those unto the
adoption of Sons, that by Faith receive Jesus Christ, as in the Gospel he is
tendered, Joh. 1.12. and to repair the decays of Nature, and to restore that
Image of holiness which by sin was defaced; to pardon the sin of Sinners, and
to impute Righteousness unto them without the deeds of the Law; to behold the
Creature in the Righteousness of his Son, and to bestow upon him Heavenly
felicity and eternal life, is admirable Mercy, and he is to be admired in all
them that believe it, 2 These. 1.10. They may say with the Psalmist, What is
man, that thou art mindful of him, or the Son of man, that thou visitest him,
Psalm. 8.4. And with the Apostle; O the depth of the Riches, both of the Wisdom
and Knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past
finding out! For who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his
Counselor? or who has first given to him, and it shall be recompensed unto
him again? for of him, and through him, and to him are all things; to whom be
glory for ever Amen, Romans 11.33, 34, 35, 36.

Thirdly: Is it so, The third Use is of Examination. Self Examination of our
hearts and ways is a Christians duty, and of great concernment.
that holiness ever becomes the people of God; and to be found adorned
therewith, is matter of great concernment? it may then put us upon a third Use
by way of Examination, to move us to examine our own hearts and ways, how far
we have attained to the Ornament of holiness, which so becomes the people of
God: And in the prosecution of this Duty, two things are to be considered.

First: Our hearts, or inward man.

Secondly: Our ways, or outward walkings: We may know our holiness by our
Heavenliness: Has the Lord through the illuminations of his Spirit, and the
operations thereof manifested to thy Soul the great sufferings of Christ, to
procure the pardon of thy sins, together with the privileges of Adoption,
Justification, and Salvation? has he showed thee the dignity of Christ, in
respect of his Offices, King, Priest, and Prophet? has he sealed the benefits
and privileges thereof to thy Soul, with the signet of his Love, through the
demonstrations of his holy Spirit to thy great Consolation in the enjoyments
thereof? so that thy mind and affections are thereby raised up from Earthly and
Carnal objects, and seated on God with so earnest a desire and delight in him,
that thou can truly say with the Psalmest, Whom have I in Heaven but thee,
and there is none opon Earth that I desire besides thee, Psalm. 73.25. Thy
Testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever, for they are the rejoicing of
my heart, Psalm. 119.111. When thou can experience by a supernatural work of
grace, that thy affections are so fixed on the Lord, that thou can sincerely
love him for his own sake; and in love to him, bear an affectionate esteem to,
and delight in his Testimonies, Statutes, Ordinances, and Commands, so as to
make them thy choice, Psalm. 119.30. or chosen Subjects of thy meditations, and
rule of observations, when thou can experience thy will by grace, made free
to stand in the will of God, so as in love to him, submit and wait upon him in
all his dispensations; serve, worship, and obey him in all his institutions:
When thou can experience thy desires drawn forth toward him, with holy
longings, thirstings, and pantings after more enjoyments of him, and
supplications to him for further strength and power of grace to assist thee,
support and uphold thee against those corruptions and temptations that attend
thee, lest thou should thereby be overcome to sin against God to the
dishonor of his Name, the grief of his Spirits, and stain the profession of
his Truth.

When thou can experience this end in thy desires and supplications for his
assisting grace, as aforesaid; The Saints end in their desires and
supplications to God for grace. A right end Crowns the action.
not only that thou might not dishonor God by sin, but also that thou
might honor him by such motions and actions as may answer his will in his
commands, to the experiencing of self ends, self-righteousness, self-merits,
and carnal delights, and the vain pleasures of this world, in a dying or dead
condition in thee, and thee dead to them, so as not to have any motion or
action thereunto approved by thee, when thou can experience such a Love to
the Lord, as that for his sake thou can perform Offices of Love toward all
men, as opportunity serves thee; Gal. 6.10.
and that as they are his Workmanship by Creation; but especially to his
Saints, as they bare his Image by Regeneration; for every one that loves him
that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him, 1 John 5.1. So when thou
can experience such a supernatural work of grace in thee, every experience
will be an evidence that thou have attained unto a good degree in the ornament
of holiness, and have an interest in the promises thereunto belonging.

But on the contrary; if thy mind, will, affection, desire, delight and
meditation is chiefly exercised on carnal and wordly objects, with expectation
of content therein; but as to the things of of God, which concern his glory,
and the eternal welfare of thy Soul, thou have but little affection thereto,
thy mind and meditation but little exercised therein, thy love, desire and
delights but cold to the exercise thereof; it is an evident sign thou art but
in the Old Man, and in thy corrupt Estate, in the carnal mind, earthly
affections, obstinate will, worldly desires, and vain delights thou have not
yet put on the New Man, which after God is Created in Righteousness and true
Holiness; for, look how far a man has proceeded in the work of Mortification
of the Old Man with his deeds, and in putting on the New Man, with the ftuits
and effects thereof: so far has he attained toward the Ornament of Holiness.

Wherefore first: Let us examine our selves, and consider what sins we have
cast off, what Lusts we have subdued, what Corruptions we have conquered,
through the holy means and Heavenly calling, and divine assistance which we
have Received,

They that are Christ's, have Crucified the Flesh with the affections and Lusts,
Gal. 5.24.

Secondly: Let us examine our selves, and consider how far we have proceeded in
putting on the New Man; what Works of Faith? what Labor of Love? 1 These. 1.3.
what Patience of Hope we have been exercised into the glory of his name, that
gives the means, and commands obedience.

It may be some Soul may say within it self, I have spent much time in hearing
God's Word Preached, I have been often in Prayer and Fasting, and in receiving
the Sacraments; yea, and have preached in Christ's Name to others: and many Alms
have I given, and many good deeds to my Neighbors and Brethren have I done, as
need required: also, many Sins and Vices, which formerly I delighted in, I have
now cast off: therefore I hope I have attained to a good degree in the Ornament
of Holiness.

These Exercises of Preaching and Hearing Gods Word, Prayer and Fasting, Alms
and good Deeds done to Neighbors and Brethren, are all Duties belonging to a
Christian, which he ought to do according to the measure of the Gift given: But
let us examine our End, in the performance of such Undertakings; it is the End
that crowns the Action: if we perform these or the like Christian Duties to by
and base Ends, as to be seen of men, to obtain the favor and applause of some
persons with whom such Duties are in estimation; or because it is the Fashion
or Custom of the Country wherein we live, at least, of the better sort: or for
lucre of some temporal Benefit; or that thereby we might deserve Gods Love, or
purchase Heaven. These and the like Ends will be unto our performances, but
like unto the dead Flies in the Apothecaries Ointment; it will destroy the
sweet Savor thereof in the Nostrils of God, and we shall be forced, at last,
to lie down in sorrow with that doleful Sentence, I never knew you, depart from
me ye that work iniquity, Matthew. 7.22, 23.

But when Christian Performances do flow from an inward work of Grace received,
from a renewed Mind and sincere Love to God; to the end we may thereby glorify
him in faithful Obedience to his Commands; and obtain strength against
corruptions and temptations that do so frequently assault us; and that we may
be instrumental to edify and build up others also in the Knowledge of God, and
in obedience to his Will; that they may set their hope in God, and glorify his
Name by becoming obedient to his Commandments: then the more active we are in
those Christian Duties, the more is our Comeliness in the fruits of Holiness;
the more is our power and strength against our Corruptions; the more increase
of Grace; the more communion with God; the more we glorify his Name, the more
peace of Conscience, the more comfortable enjoyments of Gods Favor, and the
more rejoicing in his Promise of our eternal Happiness through Jesus Christ.

Wherefore let us examine our selves, first, whether we are moved or acted by a
right Principle, viz. an inward work of the Spirit of Grace, quickening,
sanctifying and renewing the inward man. Secondly, whether we perform our
Christian Duties in a right manner according to the Direction of Christ in his
Word. Thirdly, whether we perform them to a right end; viz. that God may have
the Glory in all our Obedience, through Jesus Christ: and if we can experience
these particulars, we may have the comfortable assurance of Gods favorable
acceptance of us upon the account of Christ as an holy people comely in his
sight.

Objection arising through doubts and fears.
But happily some Soul may say, I have a long time pressed after the attainment
of Holiness; and I have thought it has been from a right Principle, in a right
manner, and to a right end; and yet me thinks I cannot attain to the perfection
of Holiness, so as to be without many spots and stains of Sin; by reason of
which, I am afraid, my best and holiest Duties will not find acceptance with
God.

Answer to the Objejecting or doubting Soul.
In answer whereunto, we may consider that spots and stains of Sin may be and
are in the best of Gods Servants, by reason of our present state composed of
Flesh and Spirit, two contraries, the Flesh lusting against the Spirit, and the
Spirit against the Flesh, which occasioneth much weakness and frailty in the
best of Gods Servants; by reason of which weakness, and the strong temptations
many times that do assault them, for want of a careful watchfulness, the poor
Servant of God is overtaken with Sin; although he approves not of it, nor
delights in it, but beholds it with sorrow and grief of heart: And in this
condition God sometimes suffers his dearest Servants, for good Reasons; as,
first, because they should not be exalted above measure with high thoughts and
conceits of themselves; but beholding their own Imperfections, they might be
the more humbled in the sense of their own weaknesses.

Secondly, that they may be provoked to depend upon God: and to seek unto him
for his Grace and holy Spirit, to comfort, support and strengthen them upon all
occasions.

Thirdly, that seeing their own imperfect state, they might be moved to prize
Jesus Christ and that atonement made by him with the higher estimation: The
whole have no need of a Physician, Mar. 2.17
but they that are sick: Christ came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance. This is not spoken to encourage any to continue in sin; that Grace
may abound, Romans 6.1. but by way of support to that Soul that sees it his duty
to be holy in all manner of conversation; and therefore presses after it; but
lying under the sense of his own weakness is cast down with doubts and fears of
his not being accepted with God, because he cannot attain to Holiness in the
perfection thereof. But although the full perfection of Holiness will not be
attained till this vile Body be changed, and this Mortal has put on
Immortality: yet notwithstanding when the Creatures Endeavors after Holiness
do arise from the work of Grace, and renewed Mind, and are performed in
obedience to the Lord Jesus Christ; the spots and stains of Sin being beheld
with grief of heart, and the Blood of Christ thereunto applied by Faith, both
Person and Performance shall assuredly be accepted, and through the sanctifying
Grace of Christ shall appear in the comely Ornament of Holiness, without spot
before the Throne of God, who did from eternity behold and accept his people in
his Son, and not in themselves; as has been before considered.

CHAP. IV. Of the Use of Exhortation.
A Fourth Use that presents it self unto us from the aforementioned
Considerations, is, an Use of Exhortation. Has God chosen his people in
Christ, that they should be holy, has he called them thereunto with an holy
Calling; has he commanded them to be holy in all manner of Conversation. Then
let us be exhorted to strive to answer Gods end in electing, calling and
commanding us to be holy, by pressing after Holiness in the use of that means
that God has ordained to accomplish that End: let us put on that noble Spirit
of Blessed Paul, that Servant of God; I press toward the Mark, says he, for
the price of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.14. Holiness is
an high Calling; yea, it is an high Calling of God in Jesus Christ, well
becoming the people of God. Men are most earnest after a Comodity when they
consider these two particulars in it: first, the Necessity of it: secondly, the
Excellency of it: wherefore to press on the Exhortation on our Spirits, let us
consider Holiness in these two particulars.

First, Holiness is of great necessity: for, says the Scripture, without
Holiness no man shall see the Lord. Hebr. 12.14. Want of Holiness deprives a
Soul of the comfortable enjoyment of God.

Adam when he had defiled himself with Sin was thrust out of Paradise from the
comfortable enjoyments and paradicical privileges he was there invested with.

It is true, that wicked men may, and many times do, enjoy a great measure of
this worlds felicity, in respect of the Riches, Honors and Pleasures thereof;
while Gods faithful Servants suffer hard things: which made David at a stand
till he went into the Sanctuary of God, and gained understanding in the
Promises of true Felicity in eternal life made to the sanctified ones: and then
he understood the End of those wicked and unholy men. That as to true peace
with God, and assurance of his favor, as to enjoyment of Communion with him in
Grace here, or in Glory hereafter, there is no Promise made to them in that
their unsanctified estate: and therefore he puts on this resolution: But as for
me, I will behold thy Face in righteousness: I shall be satisfied when I awake
with thy likeness, Psalm. 17.15. There is no beholding God without Holiness,
with true satisfaction to thy Soul. Wherefore let that Exhortation of the
Apostle be an Exhortation to us; Follow Peace with all men, and Holiness,
without which no man shall see the Lord. O let the consideration of the
necessity of Holiness strengthen the Exhortation upon our Spirits, so as to
quicken us in our motion after the seize thereof.

Secondly, let us be exhorted to put on this Ornament of Holiness upon the
consideration of the Excellency of it: the which is very great in several
respects: first it is very beautiful in the sight of God; it bears his Image,
and adorns the Soul with the likeness of himself; it beautifieth the Profession
of Truth, and fills the Soul with Love both toward God and toward all men:
yea those excellent fruits of the Spirit, as Love, Joy, Pe^ce, Long-suffering,
Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, against which there is no Law: What are
they but effects of Sanctification? 1 Cor. 6.11. 1 Pet. 1.2. therefore let all
persons that make profession of Christ be exhorted to worship the Lord in the
Beauties of Holiness. Ps. 110.3. Ps. 96.9.


Secondly, Holiness is of great Excellency in respect of its Descent: it is of
an heavenly Birth: those only are the persons invested with it, that are born
not of Blood, nor of the Will of the Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but of God,
Joh. 1.13. Joh. 3.3, 5. It is the Church that is sanctified in Christ Jesus,
and called to be Saints, Romans 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.2. and for the Church he gave
himself, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of Water
through the Word, that he might present it to himself a Glorious Church, not
having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and
without blemish, Ephesians. 5.26, 27. Holiness is therefore of great Excellency: as
also the Excellency of Holiness does demonstrate it self by its Valuation;
nothing below the precious Blood of Jesus Christ could be a valuable price to
purchase it, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. yea those excellent Virtues that are in Charity
must needs accompany (...) viz. it suffers long and is kind, (...) not, it
vaunteth not it self, is not p^^^e^ up, does not behave it self unseemly,
seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in
iniquity, but rejoices in the truth; it may be said, though I speak with the
tongues of Men and Angels, though I understand all Mysteries, though I bestow
all my Goods to feed the Poor, and give my Body to be burned, and have not
Holiness, it profits me nothing: O! therefore follow Peace with all men, and
Holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.

Thirdly, Holiness is of great Excellency, in regard of the privileges it
brings to the Soul; it gives peace of Conscience, and Comfort in a dying hour;
it gives Boldness to appear before the great tribunal Seat of Justice, to
behold the Face of the Judge with assurance of his Favor: when the great Men of
the Earth, and the rich Men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty Men, and
every Bondman, and every Freeman, that is not adorned with Holiness, shall
call to the Rocks and Mountains, to hide them from the Face of him that sits
on the Throne, and from the Wrath of the Lamb, Revel. 6.15, 16. O! what would
many a poor Soul give to be found in this Ornament of Holiness, when Death
shall summons him to the Grave, and this Consideration is upon his Spirit, that
the next thing he has to do after Death, is, to arise and come too Judgment,
when all his Riches, Honors, Pleasures and delightful Vanities, carnal Friends
and Companions in Iniquity, with all those goodly things his Soul has lusted
after shall be turned into Gall and Bitterness to his Soul, and become his
miserable Comforters, to the greater horror of his Conscience, and the
furtherance of his condemnation? See Romans 2.9. When tribulation and anguish
shall be upon the Soul, then will the poor Soul bewail his former Folly, and
careless Negligence, in slighting the Means of Grace, and the precious Price
put into his hand, and he had not a heart to improve it, Prove. 17.16. and all
those things whereon his heart was fixed shall be dissolved according as it is
written: But the Day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the night, in the
which the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall
melt with fervent heat; and the Earth also, and the works that are therein
shall be burnt up: Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what
manner of persons ought we to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness? 2 Pet.
3.10, 11.

Fourthly, let us consider this Ornament of Holiness in respect of the Duration
of it: Holiness is an everlasting Ornament unto the people of God: it becomes
Gods House for ever: It is the Wisdom of the Children of this world, That when
they want any Commodity, as Apparel, or otherwise, they will endeavor to
obtain it with these three considerations in their eye: first, where they may
buy at the best hand, or cheapest rate: secondly, which Commodities are likely
to be of longest continuance: thirdly, which are most beautiful and fashionable.

Now let us cast our eye upon this Ornament of Holiness, of which there is so
much necessity, that without it no man shall see the Lord: and we may behold it
tendered unto us at a very cheap rate, as on our part; for although Gold and
Silver will not purchase it, yet God does freely give it in the use of the
means that he has ordained to effect it. Let us then improve the means, and
God has promised a Blessing. It will indeed cost us the parting with our
rotten rags of the Old man: but what are they in comparison to the Ornaments of
the New man, which after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness: it
may be it will cost us the parting with our former Companions in worldly
vanities: and not only our gross sins, but our own Righteousness, which is of
the Law, Phil. 3. It may be it will cost us the parting with a good Name among
men, and with our Goods, Liberty and Life, which are things near and dear unto
us: but if we part with all these for Holiness, we shall be abundantly gainers
by the hand: for what are corrupt Lusts and carnal Vanities in comparison of
the Gifts and Graces, and spiritual enjoyments of Christ? and what is the
Fellowship of carnal Friends and vain Companions unto the Communion of God in
Jesus Christ, and the Fellowship of the Saints? and what are the Sufferings of
Gods people, though in Name, Person and Estate, in comparison of that exceeding
and eternal weight of Glory promised unto a holy life? Holiness does far
surpass all valuations that can be laid in opposition to it: wherefore let us
lay out for Holiness; it is a rich bargain at the highest Rate.

Secondly; Holiness is an Ornament exceeding durable in respect of its Use and
Service: the more it is made use of, the more excellent it is: Holiness is
every way serviceable to the Creature: it helps the Creature to glorify God in
obedience to his Commands, as to find acceptance with him: it helps toward
peace of Conscience and Comfort in a dying hour: it helps toward a sanctified
use of all the Creatures with comfort in the enjoyments of them: it helps a
Soul to the sight of God, and that blessed enjoyment of Communion with him in
Glory: Yea it is serviceable upon all accounts, at all times, in in all places,
in all companies, and in all conditions: provided the Creature cast it not off
as a Garment out of fashion and esteem; but put it on, and gird it to him, and
be always found in it, and it will be so serviceable to him, that as abovesaid,
the more it is made use of, the more excellent it is. For,

Thirdly, Holiness is never out of fashion and esteem with God and good men: it
is that which God in Christ designed from Eternity, to accomplish in his
people; and Holiness shall be the Ornament of the people of God unto Eternity:
when all these outward things shall be dissolved, holiness shall remain in its
primitive beauty: Holiness accompanies and beautifies a Soul not only in this
life, but also in the life to come, as says the Text; Holiness becomes thine
House, O Lord, for ever.

O let us be exhorted and moved therefore by all these forementioned
considerations, to run the Race set before us; to press after the Mark for the
Price of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.14. to follow Peace
with all men, and Holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14.

CHAP. V. Containing some Directions how to pu^ on the Ornament of Holiness.
I Shall now apply my self to the enquiring Soul, which happily may propound
this question: You exhort us to Holiness, and to press after it, because i^ is
excellent, and of great necessity: bu^ what course may we take, that we may so
press after Holiness, as to obtain it?

In answer hereunto, I shall lay before you these ensuing Considerations by way
of Direction.

First, I shall propound to your consideration the center where Holiness,
togethe^ with the means for the obtaining thereof is placed.

Secondly, the way in which a man must walk, and the manner how he must press
on to the Center where Holiness is centered, so as to obtain the same.

First, as Holiness in its perfection resideth in God the Father: so Holiness,
together with the means for the effecting the same, in the Children of Men, is,
of the Father centered in God the Son, Jesus Christ both God and man, and by
the holy Spirit proceeding from the Father and the Son, in its powerful
influences and operations upon the inward man, is wrought and effected in them
that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, and called to be Saints through the
exercise of Faith in Christ.

Now for the clearing up of these things to our understanding, let us consider
some Scripture-Testimonies. The Apostle Paul, speaking of Jesus Christ, has
these Expressions: For it pleased the Father, that in him should all Fullness
dwell, Coll. 1.19. And in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily,
Col. 2.9. Saint John says, And the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us,
and we beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full
of Grace and Truth, Joh. 1.14. in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and
Knowledge, Col. 2.3. and of his Fullness have all we received, and Grace for
Grace, Joh. 1.16. So that in Christ is centered both Holiness and the means to
produce Holiness in the Sons and Daughters of men, unto whom he tenders
Holiness in the Gospel, as John the Evangelist teaches, He came unto his own,
and his own received him not; but as many as received him, to them gave he
power to become the Sons of God; even to them that believe on his Name, Joh:
1.11, 12. And hence it is, that God has chosen his people in Christ, that they
should be holy, even because the perfection of Holiness is inherently in
Christ, with sufficiency of the Spirit of Grace to effect Holiness in his
people through believing.

If then thou would press after Holiness, so as to attain such a degree
thereof that thou may have the comfortable sight of God, and be enabled to
stand before him with joy, then observe these ensuing particulars.

The Eye fixed on Christ by Faith, is a great help toward the attainment of
Holiness.
1. In all thy undertakings, look unto Jesus, have an eye of faith fixed on him;
he is the Center where Holiness is centered: if we look short of the Center, we
are like to fall-short of our purpose: let us therefore take the counsel of the
Apostle; Let us run with patience the Race set before us, looking unto Jesus,
the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who, for the Joy that was set before
him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand
of the Throne of God, Heb. 2.1, 2. Yea, whether we read the Word; pray, or
perform any other Christian Duty whatsoever, let us still look to Jesus, with
desire that we may have more Knowledge of him, more Faith in him, and more Love
and Obedience to him: let us look unto Jesus with an Eye of Faith fixed on him,
and behold his performances on our behalf: let us behold his humility, who was
very God, and yet, assuming the human Nature, became also Man; and taking upon
him the form of a Servant, became obedient not only to the divine Precepts of
his Fathers Law, but also unto Death, even the most shameful Death of the
Cross. O let us look unto Jesus, and behold him in his Sufferings, and in the
Cause and End of his Sufferings. The Cause of his Sufferings was our Sins, the
End of his Sufferings was to free us from Divine Wrath due to us for Sin, and
to obtain Eternal Salvation for us.

To look unto Jesus, and with an Eye of Faith, to behold him as aforesaid, Gods
way is a sure and a safe way.
is to take Gods way to hearken to his Call and to observe his counsel, for our
better seize unto Holiness and Heavens Happiness, as says the Lord by
the Prophet Isaiah, Behold my Servant whom I uphold, mine Elect in whom my Soul
delights, I have put my Spirit upon him, he shall bring forth Judgment to the
Gentiles, Isai. 42. I said, behold me, behold me unto a Nation that was not
called by my Name, Isai. 65.1.

Secondly, let us not only look unto Jesus and behold him, but also consider
him; this is a piece of Divine Counsel: A due Consideration of Christ's
sufferings a great help toward the attainment of Holiness.
also consider the Apostle, and High Priest of our Profession, Christ Jesus,
Heb. 3.1. O let us consider the Greatness of his Burden in his Sufferings of
Death; wherein he did not only suffer a natural Death, but also did bear the
burden and weight of Divine Wrath due to Mankind for Transgression: the which
being set home upon his precious Soul by the hand of Divine Justice, forced him
into that Agony, that his Sweat was as if it were great Drops of Blood falling
down to the ground; and to cry out, Luke 22.41. Matt. 27.46.
O my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? as if the sense of Divine Wrath
had so overwhelmed his precious Soul, that all the appehensions of his Fathers
Love had been ecclipsed from him.

One sin set home to the Soul by the hand of Divine Justice is a heavy burden:
how great then is the weight which Christ underwent for us. Surely, says the
Prophet, he has born our Griefs, and carried our Sorrows, yet we did esteem
him stricken, smitten of God and afflicted: but he was wounded for our
Transgressions; he was bruised for our Iniquities: the Chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his Stripes we are healed: All we like Sheep have
gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid on
him the Iniquities of us all, Isa. 53.4, 5, 6.

Certainly, if the Sons and Daughters of Men did but look through all their
outward, transitory and fading Felicities unto Jesus Christ, with a serious
consideration of those hard things he has undergone, to procure Redemption for
their poor sinful Souls, it would more draw up and endear their Affections to
the Lord, and produce in them a delightful endeavor to honor him in the way
of Holiness.

Thirdly, as we should look unto Jesus, and consider him in his great
Undertakings for us: so ought we to consider his Faithfulness toward his
Father, in respect of the Trust he reposed in him; and toward Man also in the
prosecution of poor fallen Man's Redemption: Had he shrunk back in those great
and hard Undertakings, how had the Father lost his Glory, and Man his true
Felicity? but he, like a faithful and valiant Soldier, set his Face like a
Flint Isai. 50.6, 7.
against all the oppositions the World and Devils could raise against him,
until he had faithfully completed his Undertakings to the Glory of his Father:
so that he could boldly make up his accounts, saying, Father I have glorified
thee on Earth, I have finished the Work which thou gave me to do. And now, O
Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the Glory which I had with
thee before the World was, Joh. 17.4, 5. O let us look unto Jesus with a
serious consideration of his Faithfulness to our Cause, and it will both
quicken and direct in the way to Holiness: and we being faithful after his
example shall have boldness in the day of account.

Consider Christ's Love, which is strong and of great power.
Fourthly, let us look unto Jesus, and consider with a due consideration, his
tender; affectionate Love and yerning bowels of Compassion toward Mankind,
manifested in his great Undertakings for us. Surely, if ever that Saying of
Solomon in his Song of Songs be made good in any, it was abundantly manifested
in Christ's Love to Man: his Love indeed was strong as Death; Cant. 8.6. the
many Waters of Affliction, nor Floods of the Ungodly, nor Death (the King of
Terrors) could not be able to quench the Flames thereof: greater Love has no
man than this, that a man lay down his Life for his Friend: but so great was
the Love of Christ to poor worthless Creatures, that while we were ungodly, and
enemies to him, he died for us, Romans 5.6, 8, 10. so that Redemption,
Justification, Sanctification and Glorification are the effects of Divine Love;
the which, if we could behold with a believing Eye, and seriously consider, it
would be an excellent means to raise up our affections to Love and Delight in
the Lord, and to quicken us in our motions toward the Attainment of Holiness:
for every Performance of Christ in the days of his Humiliation was so perfumed
with Love toward us, that did we truly apprehend it, and really consider it,
it would be of force to draw our feet out of those crooked paths of carnal
vanities, and to place them in those pleasant paths where Peace with Holiness
does dwell.

Fifthly, A due consideration of Christ's Exaltation, is a great help toward
the Attainment of Holiness.
let us look upon and consider Jesus Christ in his Exaltation: The Scripture
says, that Christ is entered into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence
of God for us, Heb. 9.24 to carry on the Execution of his Office as
High Priest, to be Interceder and Advocate with the Father on the behalf of his
People, to perfume their Prayers and Praises, which are offered up in his Name,
with the sweet Perfumes of his own Merits, wherein the Father does accept them:
and therefore, as the Apostle says, he is able to save them to the uttermost
that come unto God by him; seeing he has an unchangeable Priesthood, and ever
lives to make Intercession for the Saints, according to the Will of God, Heb.
7.24, 25. Romans 8.27. Should I transgress the Kings Law in some high nature,
whereby his Displeasure is so provoked against me, that all that I can do
cannot appease his Wrath, nor stop the proceedings of Justice against me unto
Death: in this sad condition should a Friend arise on my behalf, who is of near
Relyance to the King, and in tender Love and Pity to me should take my Case
upon himself, and make an atonement for me, not only to the appeasing of the
Kings Wrath, but also to the procuring of his Favor so far, as not only to
save my Life and Possessions forfeited, but also to endow me with such Benefits
and Privileges in his Kingdom, as far surpass all my former Enjoyments; yea
farther, this Friend in Court, does so engage himself by Promise unto me, that
if I should again transgress the Kings Commandment, (provided it be not
wilfully, but only through weakness, infirmity, and inability to resist the
Strength of the Tempter) that then he will become my Advocate and Interceder
with his Majesty, to make an Atonement on my behalf: O how great is the Love
and tender Affection of this my Friend! how may these his Actions prevail upon
my Heart, to rejoice in him, and engage my dearest Affections to him, to love
him, and so delight in him, as to desire more communion with him, to hearken to
his Counsel, and to obey his Will in whatsoever he commands me? And indeed,
while I exercise mine Eye upon this happy Object with a serious consideration
of the excellent Benefits I received by him, there is nothing more dear unto my
Soul: but if I cast mine eye and considerations upon lower Objects, of less
concernment, and short of my Friend, I may soon forget his loving Kindness, and
suffer my Love and Delight to grow dead toward him.

Surely, herein is our Condition represented; for we, unworthy Creatures, have
transgessed not only a Law of an Earthly King, but even of an Eternal God, the
King of Kings and Lord of Lords, at whose Wrath the Earth shall tremble, and
the Nations shall not be able to abide his Indignation, the which is due unto
every Transgressor of the Law of God. And such is our weak and frail estate now
since the Fall: yea such is our wilful Stubbornness, that in many things we
offend all, and become guilty before God, whose Law condemns us, and whose
Justice calls for Satisfaction: so that every Soul is liable to his Indignation
and Wrath, which we are no ways able, of our selves, to appease, nor stop the
Proceedings of Justice from inflicting upon us the heavy Horrors and Terrors of
Divine Wrath, and the Indignation of the Almighty; no, not so much as for one
day, much less for time without end, or for Eternity.

Now in this our sad condition, which we are fallen into by reason of our
Transgression, a Friend is risen up on our behalf, even Jesus Christ the Son of
Righteousness with Healing in his Wings, Mal. 4.2. who has not only performed
the Office of an High Priest in the days of his Humiliation, in offering his
own Body upon the Cross, to make an Atonement for us, and to free us from the
Wrath to come, Heb. 10.10. To. 5.11. but also is entered into heaven it self,
now to appear in the presence of God for us, Heb. 9.24. to enrich us with such
Benefits and Privileges as Grace and Glory does afford.

If now a poor Soul lie under the apprehensions of Gods Displeasure for some
sin committed, if he want an increase of Faith in Gods Promises, if he want
inward peace and assurance of Gods Favor, if he want Power against Corruption
and Temptation, if he be oppressed by the violence of men, and want Patience to
bear it, if he want Wisdom or Knowledge in the things of God, or any Grace or
good thing whatsoever, would this poor Soul make its humble address unto God,
the Father of all Mercies and Fountain of all Supply to all our Wants, from
whom every good and perfect Gift proceeds, that he would grant a continual
Supply of all good things, according as the conditions of his poor Creature
does require Then behold, O thou poor Soul, behold thy Friend at Court, Jesus
Christ in his unchangeable Priesthood, and ever glorious Exaltation on the
right hand of the Majesty on high, there to appear in the presence of God for
us in all the approachings of thy Soul unto God, take this Friend with thee; he
is able to save them to the utter most, that come unto God through him, seeing
he ever lives to make Intercession for us, Heb. 7.24. There is no approaching
to the Father without the assistance of the Son, our faithful High Priest,
Mediator and Advocate, as he himself has said, I am the way, (says Christ)
the Truth and the a Life, no man comes to the Father but by me, Joh. 14.6. I
am the Door, says Christ, by me if any man enter, he shall be saved, and shall
go in and out, and find Pasture, Joh. 10.9. as if he should have said, I am the
way, or place of entrance to the Father; by me, if any man enter, he shall go
in and out, that is, he shall have free access unto the Father, Ephesians 2.18.
and he shall find Pasture, even such spiritual enioyments, as shall abundantly
refresh, replenish and content the Soul even to its full satisfaction.

When Christ foretold to his Disciples his Exaltations to the Father, and the
great concernment he should be unto them therein, as their High Priest, to
intercede for them, he leaves these Expressions, with other, upon their
Spirits, for Comfort and Encouragement in times of Sorrow and Affliction, and
as a piece of Divine Counsel useful upon all occasions: Verily, verily, I say
unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you:
hitherto ye have asked nothing in my Name: ask and you shall receive, that your
joy may be full: these things have I spoke unto you in proverbs, the time
comes when I shall no more speak unto you in proverbs: but I shall show you
plainly, of the Father: at that day ye shall ask in my Name, and I say not unto
you, that I will pray the Father for you; for the Father himself loves you;
because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out from God, Joh.
16.23, 24, 25, 26, 27.

If Christ enjoin, his People must obey:
But their Priv'ledg is, he helps' em in their way.
I cannot well pass these Words, without observing some of the particulars
therein contained, first the thing enjoined, and that is Prayer: secondly, the
Person enjoining, that is Jesus Christ: thirdly, the Persons enjoined, which
are Disciples, or persons learned and taught by Christ: fourthly, the Person to
whom the Disciples are directed to present their Petitions, and that is God the
Father: fifthly, the means or way of Acceptance, and that is, they are to pray
unto the Father in Christ's Name; Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my Name (says
Christ) he will give it you.

There are three Specialties included in word, Three Specialties in Christ's
Name, the which being observed in our approaches to the Father, are very
prevailing for our Acceptance with him.
Name, which we are to observe in order to the right performance of the Duty of
Prayer: The first is Christ's Authority or Command; as when a poor Soul in the
sense of its Wants and Weakness shall approach unto God upon this or the like
account, The first is Christ's authority.
saying, Father, I thy poor unworthy creature being made in some measure
sensible of my own Wants and Imperfections, and of thy Fullness and
All Sufficiency, do humbly appear in thy presence, being directed to Thee, the
Fountain of all Supplies, by the special Command of thine only Son, in whom
thou art well pleased, in whom thou have made many gracious Promises to thy
People, have respect, I pray thee, as thou have to thy Son, so also to thy poor
Creature, that exercises Faith in the Promises and in the Commands of thy Son,
True Faith applies both Promise and Command.
whom thou have ordained to be King of Saints, and by whose Authority I now
approach thy presence, and for whose sake, I pray thee, grant fupplies of Grace
and spiritual Assistance according to thy Divine Wisdom and good Pleasure, to
the further enabling thy poor Creature to glorify thy Name in this my present
Pilgrimage, that my Soul may be supported in the many straights and troubles
that this World affords; and so confirmed in the assurance of everlasting Peace
and Consolation with thy Son, and with thy Saints, in eternal Bliss and
Happiness. Thus when a poor Soul, through the Exercise of Faith in the Commands
of Christ, is drawn forth conscientiously, to act in obedience thereunto, ^t
is, doubtless, an argument greatly pre^ailing with the Father; for Obedience ^o
the Son is agreeable to the Fathers Will, and has many precious Promises
^nnexed thereunto.

A second Specialty, or prevailing Argu^ent, included in Christ's Name, does
arise ^om the Influence and Operations of the Word and Spirit of Christ upon
the Crea^^res Affections, whereby the Love and ^esire of the Soul is bent
toward the en^yment of Spiritual things, with holy ^^ngings, thirstings and
pantings after ^od; and for further participations of ^s Grace, making its
address unto God these or the like words, saying, Fa^^er, I thy poor unworthy
Creature, unto ^^om thy Son Jesus Christ has appeared, (...) the Divine
Illuminations and Operati^^s of his Spirit, in and through thy Word, ^ereby I
am, in some measure, made sensible of my own Wants, and of tha^ Fullness and
All Sufficiency that is in thee (...) supply the same, do humbly approa^^ thy
presence upon the account of the Son Jesus Christ, being directed to the for
Supplies by him whom thou have ordained not only King of Saints, but also the
Prophet of thy People, to teach them Obedience to thy Will.

Behold, O Lord, the chief Cause as Ground of my coming to thee, even t^^ Son,
thine only Son, he it is that quicke^^ me, and raises up my Affections towar^
thee, by the powerful Influences and Operations of his holy Spirit, whereby the
Riches of thy Grace is, in a measure, (...) my Soul discovered, my hope of
acceptatio^ with thee much revived, my love unto the somewhat enflamed, and the
desires of (...) Soul after more enjoyments of thy speci^^ Grace and Favor
much enlarged: therefore, O Righteous Father, I pray the^ behold me in thy Son,
as being enlightne^ moved and quickened to come unto the by him: it is his work
upon my heart, s^pernatural and divine, even the Effect his Prophetical Office,
whereby I t^^ poor Creature am made sensible of (...) own Wants and
Necessities, and where^ I behold a Fullness for Supply in thy bl^ed Self, and
whereby my Soul is drawn forth toward thee, with earnest desires after more
Communications of thy Grace and Favor.

And now, Dear Father, I pray thee, behold the Work of thy Son upon my Soul,
yea thine own Work in and through him, and satisfy those longing Desires
wrought in me by virtue thereof, with assurance of Acceptance with thee, and of
the Communication of the Gifts and Graces of thy holy Spirit, to the
replenishing of my Soul with spiritual enjoyments, and to the further enabling
me to walk before thee in the ways of Holiness, to the Glory of thy Name, and
to the everlasting Consolation of my Soul through Jesus Christ: to whom with
thee and thy holy Spirit be ascribed all the Honor, Praise and Glory both now
and for ever. Amen.

Thus when the poor Soul can make its approach to the Father of Mercies,
experiencing the Work of Divine Grace by Jesus Christ, enlightening and
quickening to holy Duties; so that the Creature can truly plead, that Jesus
Christ, executing his Prophetical Office upon the inward Man, is the Ground and
Cause of its approaches to the Father. This, doubtless, is an Argument greatly
prevailing with him for Acceptance, and for an Answer of Peace from him,
seeing the original Ground and moving Principle is his own work of free Grace
upon the Creature, wrought by his own Son, through the operative Power of his
holy Word and Spirit, to the Praise and Glory of his Name.

It was the main Argument of the Prophet Isaiah, When the Lord does work the
Love and Desire of a Soul unto himself, it is a sign that be intends to that
Soul a farther Benefit.
wherewith he moved God, and strengthened his own Confidence in him: Lord,
says he, thou will ordain Peace for us, (and why so?) for thou have wrought
all our Works in us: other Lords besides thee have had Dominion over us; but by
thee only will we make mention of thy Name, Isai. 26.12, 13.

It may be said of a Souls coming to God in the Name of Christ, as aforesaid,
as David said of his and the peoples Willingness to offer Provision for the
building of the Temple: But who am I, and what is my People, that we should be
able to offer so willingly after this sort? for all things come of thee, and of
thine own have we given thee, 2 Chronicles. 29.14. For such a frame of Spirit does
flow from a supernatural Work, wherein the Creature is taught of God; the
Duties which he performs, do flow as Fruits and Effects of what he has
received from the Lord, to the Glory of his Name.

Thirdly, a Christian comes to the Father in the Name of Christ, not only upon
the account of the Commands, nor only because Christ, by Divine Discoveries,
has wrought an earnest Desire in him after further Enjoyments; but also when
he comes unto the Father upon the account of the Merits of Christ, making his
Address to this or the like effect, saying,

Most glorious God and merciful Father, in Jesus Christ, although my Sins of
Omission and Commission (by which I have transgressed thy holy and just Law,
and offended thy Majesty) do render me not only unworthy of the least of thy
Mercies, but also worthy of thy just Condemnation to proceed against me; yet
forasmuch as thy only Son Jesus Christ, in the prosecution of his Prophetic
Office, has revealed unto my Soul, that the exceeding Riches of thy Grace and
free Mercy to thy unworthy Creatures, is so abounding, that thou have given thy
Son, who has fulfilled thy Law by his actual Obedience thereunto, to the end
that I, thy poor Creature, which stand condemned thereby, by reason of my
manifold Sins whereby I have transgressed the same, might receive a free, full
and absolute Remission, Pardon, and Deliverance from the Guilt, Dominion and
Punishment of Sin, having an interest in the Righteousness which thy Son by his
Obedience has obtained, through the Exercise of that supernatural Grace of
Faith, wrought in my Soul by the Influence of the Word and Spirit of thy Son: I
therefore, thy poor unworthy Creature, am emboldened and somewhat enabled to
appear before thee in hope of Acceptance; forasmuch as the Riches of thy Grace
and free Mercy to thy unworthy Creature is so abounding, that thou have not
only given thy Son to fulfill thy Law by his actual Obedience, but also
passively to suffer the Ignominy and Reproach of the World, and patiently to
yield and offer up himself in obedience to thy Will and determinate Counsel
unto Death, even the most shameful Death of the Cross, shedding his most
precious Blood, and undergoing the Terrors of Divine Wrath due unto us for our
Transgressions, upon which account thou have declared thy self to be a God well
pleased in thy Son, and reconciled unto such as through a true and lively Faith
are united to unto Him, whom thou have raised again from the dead, and set at
thine own right hand in Glory, now to appear in thy glorious presence for us,
as an Interceder and Advocate.

Now therefore, most righteous Father, as thou have given unto thy poor
Creature this new and living way unto the Throne of Grace, to approach thy
presence with free access, I come unto thee utterly renouncing all my own
Righteousness, as being not any ways meritorious or deserving the least of the
Mercies which thy poor Creature does enjoy, and casting my whole dependency
upon the Merits of Jesus Christ my only High Priest, Mediator and Advocate for
my acceptance with thee: I beseech thee therefore, even upon the account of
thine only Son, to grant me a free and full pardon of all my Sins, and to seal
the assurance thereof unto my Soul, by that illuminating, quickening, sealing
and sanctifying Spirit of Truth which proceeds from thy blessed self, and
from thy Son, my blessed Savior. Therewith do thou enlighten my Understanding,
that I may understand thy Mind and Will contained in thy Word: therewith
confirm my Judgment in thy Truth, and let me experience the Demonstrations of
thy Love in Christ: therewith transform and rectify my rebellious Will, and
bring it to a conformity to thy Will in all things: thereby enable me to
mortify my Corruptions, and let not Sin have dominion over me: thereby do thou
draw my Affection unto thy self, and let not worldly Vanity be my delight.

O do thou replenish and satisfy my thirsting Soul [In want of Grace we sadly
may
Our sad Estate condole:
Nothing but Grace can satisfy
The thirsting Christian Soul.
Grace is attained by that Soul
That unto God does cry,
By Prayer in the Name of Christ,
That asks believingly.]
with the rich treasures of thy Grace in Christ, through the operating power of
thy Spirt of Truth, that my heart may abundantly rejoice in thy saving
Benefits, and be thoroughly furnished to praise thy Name.

O Lord hear, accept and answer thy poor Creature in these and all other
particulars, which thou in thy infinite Wisdom judge most expedient for thy
poor Creatures temporal and eternal well-being, to the Glory of thy Name, even
for the meritorious Name sake of thy Son, my only Redeemer and Advocate, by
whom I have received Command, Direction and Encouragements to appear before
thee, for whom thy poor Creatures have always cause to bless and praise thy
holy Name: unto whom, with thee and thy holy Spirit, be ascribed (as is most
due) all Glory, Power, Praise and Obedience, by us thy Creatures everlastingly.
Amen.

Thus have I briefly delivered my Apprehensions concerning the Creatures going
to God the Father by Prayer in the Name of his Son Jesus Christ: wherein we may
take notice of some particulars: as,

First, what great Concernment Christ is to the Believing Soul now in the days
of his Exaltation, whose Name is a prevailing Principle with the Father, in the
behalf of all those that come unto God therein.

Secondly, how highly it does concern every Soul to have an Eye of Faith fixed
on him, and consider him with a due consideration in all his Benefits.

Thirdly, consider that, as I am upon a use of Direction toward the Attainment
of that excellent Ornament, Prayer in Christ's Name is an excel nt means for
the attaining to an estate in the Ornament Holiness: because it has precious
Promises thereunto annexed.
Holiness: so Prayer in the Name Christ is not one of the least of the means
whereby it is attained, inasmuch as Jesus Christ (who is Truth, and cannot lie)
has crowned the Duty with a Promise of the Fathers Gift; as he has said,
Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you, Joh. 16.23.
And, lest any should reply, Lord, we know not the Father, and how shall we come
unto him? he annexeth this Promise also to the other, The time comes (meaning
the time of his Exaltation) that I shall show you plainly of the Father. That
Soul that would obtain a true and saving knowledge of God the Father, must take
Jesus Christ for his Counselor


And, lest there should be any scruple or doubt arise, that they should not
perform the Duty aright, or not so perfect without Imperfections as to be heard
of the Father, and answered by him: he annexeth this Promise also unto the
rest, for their Encouragement in the Duty; in that day (says he, meaning his
Exaltation) ye shall ask the Father in my Name, and I say to you, that I will
pray the Father for you, Joh. 16.25, 26.

O excellent Privilege, Christ the Saints advocate, an excellent privilege:
would thou partake of the privilege, be active in the duty.
to that Soul for whom the perfection of Wisdom, Knowledge and Fidelity is
exercised to plead its cause! Christ the Wisdom of God and the Power of God is
become an Highpriest for ever, to intercede with the Father in the behalf of
those Souls that come unto the Father with a dependency by Faith upon his
Intercession, for their Acceptance with the Father: wherefore, as says the
Holy Ghost, having an Highpriest over the House of God, let us draw near in
full assurance of Faith, having our Hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience,
and our Bodies washed with pure Water, let us hold fast the Profession of our
Faith without wavering: for he is faithful that promised, Heb. 10.21, 22, 23.

O! did we really consider this Highpriest Jesus Christ, as in his Humiliation,
so also in his Exaltation, executing his Priestly Office upon our account, that
we might experimentally partake of the benefits and Privileges thereof: how
would it engage our Love to him, our Delight in the enjoyments of him, and our
utmost Endeavors to answer his End in all his undertakings for us: which is,
that we should be holy and without blame before him in love, Ephesians.

CHAP. VI.
Containing a Word of Advice, to consider Christ in his Kingly Office, and by
Faith to embrace him in the same, in order to our better Attainment unto
Holiness.
SIxthly, would we attain unto Holiness, and be found in the Ornaments thereof:
then we are concerned to exercise our eyes of Understanding and Faith upon the
Dignity and Authority of the Lord Jesus Christ, beholding and considering of
him, and submitting to him in his Kingly Office, wherein the Father has
exalted him unto his own right hand of Power, and Throne of Majesty on high, to
sway the Scepter of Rule and Government in Righteousness, by his righteous
Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, Heb. 1.8. and to execute Justice and Judgment
accordingly against all opposers. The Prophet Isaiah, speaking of Jesus Christ,
says of him, he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove
after the hearing of his ears; but with Righteousness shall he judge the Poor,
and reprove with Equity, for the meek of the Earth, Isa 11.3, 4, 5.

The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hand, or into
his Power and Jurisdiction, Joh. 3.35. Paul to the Ephesians says, that He,
meaning the Father, has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head
over all things to the Church, which is his Body, Ephesians. 1.22. Christ a King by
the Fathers Ordination, whose Laws and Subjects are his Kingdom.


By Headship is signified Supremacy, Sovereignty, or his Kingly Office and
Authority, to give forth Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, with Order of Rule and
Government, with Power to command Obedience thereunto, with Power to defend his
Subjects in the proper Rights and Privileges of his Kingdom, to plead their
Cause, to revenge their Wrongs, and to crown them, his Subjects, with an
immortal recompense of heavenly Glory, all the oppositions of the Devil and
wicked men notwithstanding; as the Lord by his Spirit in his Word has of old
declared, saying, Yet have I set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion, Psalm. 2.
The word Yet is a Relative to what is in the foregoing Verses related; as if
the Lord should say, Although the Kings of the Earth and Rulers, yea, though
Herod and Pontius Pilate, the chief Priests and Elders, the Scribes and
Pharisees, yea all the rude multitude of the people consult together, and set
themselves against the Lord, and against his anointed, saying, Let us break
their Bands, and cast their Cords from us: yet for all whatever they can do, I
have exalted him, and set him at my right Hand of Power and Majesty, Act. 5.31.
far above all Principalities, and Powers, and Might, and Dominion, and every
Name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come:
and has put all things under his Feet, Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22. that is to say, all
persons of what Rank and Quality soever, by what Names, Titles or Dignities
soever distinguished; together with all earthly Dominions, Rules and
Governments whatsoever to be at his disposing, or deposing, according to his
own Will and Pleasure: all shall be brought in subjection unto him, either by
active Obedience to his Laws and righteous Government, or passively to submit
unto the Execution of his Justice; as it is written, At the Name of Jesus every
Knee shall bow, Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. the which bowing of every Knee, does intend
Subjection to his Laws, as aforesaid, or Submission to his Justice; unto one of
which all the whole Creation of Men and Angels shall be forced to submit unto:
Such a Construction the Apostle Paul seems to put upon the words, Romans 14.11.
But why do thou judge thy Brother, or why do thou set at naught thy Brother?
we shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ: his ground and reason
is, because it is written, As I live, says the Lord, every Knee shall bow to
me, and every Tongue shall confess to God: the which Expressions the Apo^^le
asserteth, to prove the certainty of Christ's sitting on the Seat of Judgment,
and that all persons in particular, none excepted, shall be forced to app ar
before him, to give an account how they in this life have acted in order to the
Supremacy of Christ, and to receive the Sentence of Absolution into Glory, or
the just and righteous, but dreadful Sentence of Condemnation into everlasting
Perdition: as the Apostle Paul by the Spirit of God does testify, that will
render to every Soul of Man, that does evil, Indignation and W^ath; But Glory,
Honor and Peace, Immortality and eternal Life to every Soul of Man that
works good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile; for God is no
respecter of persons, Romans 2.9, 10, 11. every man shall give an account of
himself unto God, Romans 14.12.

Surely, it will then be in vain for ungodly and wicked men: be they of what
Degree, Rank or Quality soever, to call to the Rocks and Mountains to fall upon
them, and hide them from the Face of him that sits on the Throne, and from
the Wrath of the Lamb; Romans 6.15, 16. for nothing in that day shall be found to
be a shelter, verse. 17. but an Interest in Christ by Faith, which in this day
of Grace brings forth the fruits of Obedience to the Supremacy of Christ.

We usually say, a man forewarned of a danger, is fore-arm'd; he will seek to
secure himself in time, and take him for a Friend that gives him the warning.

O! how many friendly warnings has the Lord by his Spirit in his Word given
unto poor sinful mortal man, of the great and eminent dangers approaching, as
the fruits and effects of Sin? O what friendly Counsel and advice has he laid
before us for security, did we improve the same accordingly; as if his very
bowels yerned toward us for our eternal preservation? O how are his Warnings
and Counsels made out in his Word to all sorts of men, of what Degree, Rank or
Quality soever, high and low, rich and poor, free and bond, as if he was no
Respecter of persons in his Warnings, Advice and Counsels, as he is no
Respecter of persons in Judgment.

The Lord having made known, by his Spirit in his Servants, the certainty of
his accomplishing his Decree, and fore-Determinations in exalting his Son Jesus
Christ into the Throne of Kingship and Seat of Justice, The Lords Advice to
Majest a es.
gives this Counsel and Advice unto Kings, and other inferior Magistrates,
saying, Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the
Earth, serve the Lord with Fear and Trembling, kiss the Son, lest he be angry,
and ye perish from the way, while his Wrath is kindled but a little: Blessed
are are all they that put their trust in him, Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12.

As if he should have said, O ye Kings and Judges of the Earth; in whose hands
the Sword or Power of Magistracy is entrusted: herein does the principle part
of your Wisdom consist: let the Salutations of your Love and chief Respects be
manifested toward Christ Jesus the Son of God, whom the Father has exalted
into the Throne of Government and Seat of Justice, King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords; Let the Salutations of your Love and chiefest Respects be manifested
toward him, The Wisdom of the majestrate chiefly consists in making Christ
chief in his Counsel, in his Laws and Government; for thereunto is the Blessing
promised.
by embracing his Counsel for your Counsel, his Laws for your Laws, his
Government for your Government, his Subjects that desire to obey him in his
Laws and righteous Government, the people of your chiefest protection and
objects of your Praise, that you may be as nursing Fathers unto them, but a
terror to those that do evil; as it is written, Isai. 49.23. Romans 13.3. The
Lord has signed this with the Promise of his Blessing, as before expressed.

The Spirit of God by the Apostle Paul asserting the Sovereignty of Christ,
into which God the Father has exalted him, Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. does lay down
this Exhortation, verse. 12. as drawn from the aforesaid consideration of his
Sovereignty? Phil. 1.12.
Wherefore, my Beloved, as ye have always obeyed not only in my presence, but
much more in my absence, work out you own Salvation with fear and trembling. As
if he had said; wherefore, as ye have hitherto subjected your selves to the
Sovereignty o^ Jesus Christ, by Obedience to his Laws and Form of Government:
so that no^ only in my presence, but also in my absence, you have been growing
and increasing in the same: so let your careful endeavors be in a holy, awful,
reverential fear and spirit of Humility, to be still growing and increasing
with all perseverance in the Faith and Practice of all the Will of God: in as
much as true Faith in Christ does demonstrate, and show forth it self by the
fruits of sincere Obedience to Christ, and perseverence therein, has the
promise of Salvation thereunto annexed; as Christ himself did intimate unto
those Jews that believed on him, Joh. 8.31. If ye continue in my Word, then are
ye my Disciples indeed; and ye shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make
you free. O did we with David set the Lord Jesus Christ always before us, Psalm.
16.8. having an Eye of Faith fixed on him, as in his Priestly Office, so also
in his Kingly Office, executed in his giving forth Laws, Statutes, Ordinances
and Order of Government, with Rules of Observation and Commands, and Examples
for our better Obedience thereunto: see Genes. 49.10. Isai. 9.6. did we behold
him, and seriously consider him the anointed and appointed King and Lawgiver,
by the Father ordained Head over all things, to his Church in the great
concerns of Gods Worship and our Salvation, the alone exalted King of Sion, and
Judge of the World, with a due consideration, Isai. 33.22. Psalm. 2.2. Act. 5.31,
32. Jam. 4.12. doubtless we might thereby the more be induced, and the better
behold the great concernment that lies upon us, to quicken our motion in the
use of the means appointed by God the Father for our better attainment unto
Holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord to his eternal Consolation:
The Man Christ Jesus Judge of the World by the Fathers Ordination, whereof his
Resurrection is a sure testimony; the which inviteth all persons to live to
Christ in his way of Holiness that their Account may be comfortable in that day.
for God has appointed a day in which he will judge the World in Righteousness,
by that Man whom he has ordained; whereof he has given assurance unto all
men, in that he has raised him from the dead, Act. 17.31.

CHAP. VII.
Wherein is contained some considerations concerning the Prophetical Office of
Christ, necessary to our better attainment of a Degree in the Ornament of
Holiness.
OF all Wisdom demonstrated in or among the Sons and Daughters of Men, the
Divine Wisdom of God in Christ is the most excellent and wonderful, most to be
admired and desired.

Christ the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. in whom are hid
all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, Col. 2.3. in comparison whereof all
the Wisdom of this world is but Foolishness in Gods esteem, 1 Cor. 1.20. Of all
cases that we are concerned to seek for Counsel in, the Case of our Souls for
the Salvation thereof is our great concernment; and of all Counselors for
Advice in this case, we are most concerned to advise with Christ, and seek to
him for Counsel herein: Lord (says Peter) to whom else should we go? thou have
the Words of Eternal Life, Joh. 6.68. neither is there Salvation in any other,
Act. 4.12. It was commendable Prudence in Mary, that she was careful in this
case of great concernment: she sits at Jesus's Feet to hear his Words, and
makes all other Concernments for to give place hereto, Luke 10.39, 40, 41, 42.
And what was the reason, think ye, that Mary was taken up in so high esteem
with the Words of Christ? Doubtless this was one among the rest, the Virtue and
Tendency of his Words was unto the A^tainments of Holiness, and Heavens
Happiness to her Soul, the words of Eternal Life.

This is that Lion of the Tribe of Juda, and Root of David, that has prevailed
to open the Sealed Book, Revel. 5.5. even the Mysteries of the Kingdom, and way
of Holiness, which from the beginning was hid in God: but now made manifest for
the Obedience of Faith. This is that great Prophet of whom Moses spoke, saying,
A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you like unto me, him shall ye
hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you: and it shall come to pass,
that every Soul that will not hear that Prophet, shall be cut off from his
people, or I (says the Lord) will require it of him, Deuter. 18.18. Act. 3.22,
23.

Whence note by the way.

First, That God the Father, according to his fore-determination and ancient
Promise, has raised up Jesus Christ, and or^ained him chief Prophet to his
People.

Secondly, Christ the Mediator between God and Man.
Jesus Christ is here said to be a Prophet like unto Mos^s, that is, as Moses
in that day did stand as a Mediator between God and his People, to receive the
holy and lively Oracles of the Mind and Will of God from the Mouth of God, and
dispense the same unto the People in that Dispensation; so Christ is the
Mediator between God and Man now under the New Covenant, to receive of the
Father the lively Oracles of the Mind and will of the Father, and to
communicate them unto the Sons and Daughters of Men in this Dispensation of the
New Covenant.

Thirdly, An Advertisement to all persons to observe the Voice of Christ in the
Ministry of his Word.
a third thing to be noted here, is, the Injunction or Command of the Father:
Him shall you hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you.

Fourthly, the Danger that will ensue to that Soul that does not hearken to
this Prophet: I will require it of him, says the Lord, Deuteronomy. 18.19.

Fifthly, One thing more is considerable, in verse. An Advertisement to all
Preachers, to take heel they preach not any thing that the Voice of Christ in
his Word does not own.
20. that if any Prophet shall presume to speak a Word in my Name, says the
Lord, that I have not commanded him, or that shall speak in the Name of other
Gods, that Prophet shall die.

Would a poor Soul attain to Holiness, so as to have an Interest in that comely
Ornament, then consider Jesus Christ in the Execution of his Prophetical
Office, which stands in a revealing, or discovering the Mind and Will of God
the Father unto the Sons and Daughters of men, with Advertisements and
Persuasions to a Reception of the same, and a walking answerable thereunto.

The Prosecution of which Office he did perform doctrinally in his own person
in the days of his Humiliation, and in the days of his Exaltation, by his
Spirit in his Apostles, by immediate Inspiration, whose Doctrine and Practice
for Church-Constitution, Order of Worship and Discipline, he confirmed to all
succeeding Generations with Signs and Wonders, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost,
Heb. 2.4. and since more ordinarily by the Ministry of the word confirmed, as
aforesaid: I say, more ordinarily by the Offices and Officers; as Pastors and
Teachers gifted for the work of the Ministry, to teach those confirmed Truths
of Jesus Christ, contained in his Gospel, unto the Sons and Daughters of Men,
for their Conversion, Edification, Comfort and Confirmation of them in the
Faith and Practice of all his holy Laws, Ordinances and Order of Government and
Discipline, according to his own Institution, Pattern and Appointment, together
with all those Promises and Privileges in his Word of Truth, given out to them
that in Love and Loyalty unto him and his Sovereignty subject unto him, and
walk with him in the same.

Hereunto does the Holy Ghost, by the Apostle Paul, witness, Ephesians. 4.8. When he
ascended up on high, he led Captivity captive, and gave Gifts unto men: and,
verse. 11. he gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors
and Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the Body of Christ; till we all come in the unity of the
Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto the
measure of the stature of the Fullness of Christ: that we henceforth be no more
Children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine by
the sleight of men, and cunning Craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to
deceive: but speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things,
which is the Head, even Christ, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

Some few things I would here note by the way: The Gospel Verities are Gods
Oracles, by him confirmed to us for standing truths to be highly prized, and
faithfully embraced, the Fountain from whence they flow being considered.


First, that the Gospel Dispensation is the lively and holy Oracles or Word of
God the Father, which Christ by his Prophetical Office has received of the
Father, and made known to us the Sons and Daughters of Men, and confirmed to us
by the witness of the Father, not only by the Resurrection of his Son, but also
by signs and wonders, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, for the Glory of his Name,
and the Salvation of those that so embrace it as the Oracles of God so
confirmed.

Secondly those Pastors and Teachers that, in Love and Obedience to the Lord,
do make the Apostolical confirmed-Doctrine and Practice their Rule and Ground
of Doctrine and Practice for Conversion of Souls to Christ, An Adv^rtisement to
Gods people, both Preachers and Hearers, to keep close to the Gospel-Rule.
Constitution of Churches, Admittance of Members, Order of Government and
Discipline accordingly are such as Christ has given and gifted as Ministers in
his hand, Revel. 1.20. whereby he does prosecute perseveringly from age to age
his Prophetical Office, in order to Man's Salvation.

Thirdly, the natural Use, The Gospel is of great excellency and concernment to
poor sinners, the use and tendency of is being considered.
Virtue and proper Tendency of the Gospel Apostolically taught, observed and
confirmed, as aforesaid, is the ordinary means, by the Father put into the
Heart and Hand of Christ, for Man's Edification in the Knowledge of Christ, Unity
in the Faith of Christ, a Participation of the Fullness of Christ unto an
attainment of Perfection in Christ, together with Stability in Christ unto
Salvation by Christ, through believing in Christ, and conforming to Christ in
the Teachings and Administrations thereof wherefore, as I am upon an Use of
Direction to the enquiring Soul after the way to Holiness Seize, or the
Attainment to Holiness; so I have set before thee Jesus Christ in his Offices,
as an Object, whom thou art concerned to behold by an eye of Faith, and
seriously to consider him with due consideration, as in his Humiliation, so
also in his Exaltation in the Execution of his Offices; as in his Priestly and
Kingly Offices, so also in his Prophetical Office; consider his Wisdom, his
Love, and Faithfulness, made out to poor Sinners in the Execution of his
Offices; consider his Ability and Sincerity herein: his Wisdom is infinite,
it is the Wisdom of God; his Counsel is holy Counsel, it is heavenly Counsel, the
Words of eternal Life: his Love is great Love, pure Love; it is such a Love
that drew him forth to deny himself unto Death for Sinners: consider him in his
Ability: he is Almighty, All-sufficient, full of Grace and Truth, able to save
(to the uttermost) them that come unto God by him: consider him in his
Sincerity; he is sincere and real-hearted in his words and actions, in all his
Undertakings, and Dispensations unto poor Sinners, that look unto him, and
advise with him for Counsel in their concerns for Holiness, and Heavens
Seize. Man's Rejection of his Counsel is his Sorrow; he wept over
Jerusalem: Man's Embracing of him is his Joy; there is Joy in Heaven over one
Sinner that repents, that turns to the Lord, to walk with him in his holy
ways; he is real-hearted and sincere in his Word and Actions: therefore would
attain to Holiness, that comely Ornament, look unto Jesus, behold him in his
Offices, as thy Prophet to teach thee by his Counsels, the King to govern thee
by his Laws, and thy Priest to make an Atonement for thee by his Sacrifice: His
Sacrifice is holy, his Laws are holy Laws; every Ordinance of Christ is holy;
his Word and Counsel therein is holy: yea, all his ways are ways of Holiness;
and all persons walking in the same with a due observation, are by the Holy
Ghost owned for a holy People, holy and beloved.

O, would thou look unto Jesus, so as to make him the Object in thine Eye,
and the Subject of thy Meditations! doubtless it would be a means to direct
thee in the way to holy Seize, and quicken thy motion thereunto.

The Prophet David has laid us down an example of his own Practice of this
nature, I (says David) have set the Lord always before me, Psalm 16.8. as if he
had said, I have beheld the Lord through Grace, an Object of great Excellency
to my Soul: therefore have I chosen him to be the only Object, upon whom I
desire always to exercise the Eyes of my Understanding and Faith, with
Considerations and Meditations of his Word, his Laws, Statutes, Testimonies,
his Counsels, loving Kindness and Faithfulness in the same; as he further
expresses, Psalm. 119. I have chosen the way of truth, thy Judgments have I
laid before me: I have stuck unto thy Testimonies, O Lord, put me not to shame,
verse. 30, 31. I have rejoiced in the way of thy Testimonies as much as in all
Riches: I will meditate on thy precepts, and have respect unto thy ways: I will
delight my self in thy Statutes, I will not forget thy Word, verse. 14, 15, 16.
thy Testimonies also are my delight and my Counselors, verse. 24.

Thus did David set the Lord always before him: and behold the Privileges
David reaped hereby unto himself: He is at my right Hand, (says David) I shall
not be moved, Psalm. 16.8. Two general Privileges is here noted, in which is
comprehended many particulars:

First, here is the Lords presence with David in his aforesaid Exercise.

Secondly, here is David's Stability of Faith, Hope, Assurance and Confidence of
attaining to the full enjoyment of the Lord in the state of Glory, through the
presence of the Lord with him: Thou will show me the path of Life: in thy
presence is fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. the sense
and sight hereof fills David's heart with joy: Therefore my heart is glad (says
David) and my Glory rejoices, my Flesh also shall rest in hope: verse. 9.

So Psalm. 34.5. They looked to him, and were enlightened: and their Faces were
not ashamed: that is, they were not failed of their Expectations.

Wherefore, would thou attain to Holiness, and Heavens Happiness, look unto
Jesus, advise with his Counsel in his Teachings, in his Word: exercise thine
eyes of thy Understanding and Faith thereupon; it is thy great concernment in
order to thy Seize in the Ornament, Holiness: yea, so look unto him, as
to consider him as aforesaid.

Consideration and Meditation are of great use in the way of Holiness: Samuel
speaking a word of Exhortation unto Israel, to fear the Lord, and serve him
with all their heart; the more to engage them, and make his Exhortation
prevailing with them, he puts them upon the act of Consideration upon the great
things that God had done for them: For, consider (says he) what great things
God has done for you, 1 Samuel 12.24: as if a due consideration of Gods Mercies
were of great concernment, to produce an awful Reverence of God in the heart of
a people, and of great use to beget motion in his Service.

And, doubtless, did we exercise our considerations seriously upon the Lord
Jesus Christ in his Offices; and consider how great things the Lord has done
and does do for us thereby: did we consider Gods End therein, with the use and
Benefits thereof unto poor, fallen, enslaved, sinful man through believing; it
would, through the Blessing of God, prove to be of an engaging nature, to
engage us to press after the Attainment of Holiness; and of a directing nature,
to direct us in the way; also of an encouraging nature, to encourage against
all difficulties lying in the way; and of a quickening nature, to quicken our
motion toward the perfecting of Holiness in the Fear of God. Isreal's
Ingratitude in not exercising their Considerations upon the gracious Dealings
of God toward them, but upon their carnal Vanities.


It was the great complaint of the Lord against Israel, even their want of
Consideration, Isa. 1.3. The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters
Crib: but Israel does not know, my people does not consider. So in chapt. 5.12.
the Lord by the Prophet complains, saying, The Harp and the Viol, the Tabret
and the Pipe, and Wine are in their Feasts: but they regard not the work of the
Lord, neither consider the Operation of his hands.

And may it not be the great complaint of the Lord against the men of this
Generation, as to the generality of them? that although the Lord is the owner
of them, not only by Creation, but also by Purchase and Price paid; and
although the Lord has created Man with that noble Faculty of Rationality,
above others of his Creatures, to the end they might be considerate of his Word
and works of Divine concernment, to the glory of his Name; and although he has
furnished the Masters Crib, even Jesus Christ and his Word, with the excellent
Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, Gifts and Graces, for Soul-nourishment in
holy and heav nly Seize, for the Glory of his Name, and the eternal
Consolation of the Soul: yea although the Lord does many times work and operate
by his Word in the Ministry thereof, upon the Mind, Affections, and
understanding Faculties, both to will and to do according to his good pleasure;
and that by his loving Invitations and persuading Arguments, Exhortations and
Promises: yet notwithstanding what Ignorance of God, and Fruitlesness in the
things of God, what little strength of Grace remains in the greatest part of
the men of this Generarion.

And what is the reason thereof? Su^ely (says the Lord) Wine and Music is in
their Feasts (i. e.) they give themselves up to the Vanities of this world, in
the Profits and Pleasures thereof, to fulfill the fleshly lustings of a carnal
Heart; but they regard not the Works of the Lord, neither consider the
Operation of his Hands. Surely, would we seriously consider the great Work of
God in Jesus Christ, and the Operation of his Word and Works manifested in this
our day; how useful would it be unto us for Direction unto Holiness, and to
quicken our motion thereunto?

CHAP. VIII.
Containing some Directions tending to our better Attainment of that comely
Ornament Holiness, by putting on of Jesus Christ; and abiding in him.
GReat Care and Cost is exercised by many for the putting on upon the Body, not
only such Raiment necessary for the Preservation of its Health and Modesty, but
also for such Attire that they think may most beautify and adorn it to an
esteem in the Eyes of Men; mean while that Attire that is of greatest
concernment for the adorning of both Body and Soul, to make them comely and
delightful in the sight of God, is laid by, disregarded, as Ornaments out of
fashion.

Holiness is the comely Ornament, well becoming Gods House, Gods People.

As I am upon a Use of Direction to the inquiring Soul for its Attainment to
Holiness, and in the foregoing Chapters have laid some Directions before you,
in order to that Attainment, by an Act or Exercise of the Eyes of the
understanding Faculties upon Jesus Christ in his Offices, as King, Priest and
Prophet, anointed and appointed thereunto by the Father.

Also an Act of Consideration; to consider him in the prosecution of the said
Offices, with the Use, End and Tendency thereof toward the Sons of Men; as the
Eye Salve for the clearing the Eyes of the Understanding, to behold the way of
Holiness, and the Excellency of its Seize.

Now in further prosecution of this Use of Direction, I shall propose a further
Action, in order to our perfecting Holiness in the fear and way of God.

The which is, to put on the Lord Jesus Christ.

Would we attain to an Estate in the Ornament of Holiness: then our great
concernment is, to put on the Lord Jesus Christ. It is a piece of Divine
Counsel, not mine, but the Lords, given by his Spirit, whose Office it is to
lead Souls into all truth.

But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 13.14.

Three things are here liable to be proposed in way of Inquisition, by the
enquiring Soul: as first, wherein persons are concerned to put on the Lord
Jesus Christ.

Secondly, how persons are concerned to put on the Lord Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, why persons are concerned to put on the Lord Jesus Christ, in order
to that Attainment of Holiness.

To the first Proposal, wherein Christ is to be put on: and that is in a
threefold respect, in order to that Attainment:

First, in respect to his Offices.

Secondly, in respect to his Qualifications.

Thirdly, in respect to his VValkings.

To the second Proposal, how Christ is to be put on in respect to his Offices,
Qualifications and VValkings: And,

First, to his Offices.

And that is, by an Act of Faith adheringly and dependingly; as when a Soul
beholding God the Father tendering his Son in all his Offices, as King Priest
and Prophet, to the Soul: the Soul is hereby moved to accept and take (by
Faith) Jesus Christ with all his Offices, so as wholly to confide in him, and
depend on him, and on him alone, for a free pardon and a full Remission of its
sins, and for its acceptance with the Father, through his Atonement and
Satisfaction made, by Virtue of his Priestly Office.

Secondly, to confide in him, and depend upon him, in order to his Kingly
Office, as the only Lawgiver, unto whose Laws the Subjection and Obedience of
the Creature is due, and ought to be performed, and as its great Protector to
eternal Bliss.

Thirdly, adheringly, by applying and relying, by confiding in him, and
depending upon him in his Doctrine, teaching Advice and Counsel contained in
his Word, as the only Rule and Guidance of a Soul into the paths of Holiness
and way of Salvation, by Virtue of his Office Prophetical.

Thus to put on Christ, does put a Soul into possession of most excellent
Privileges: as,

First, Christ's Merits, obtained by virtue of his Priestly Office, does become
the Souls Righteousness and Justification unto the Fathers Acceptance.

Secondly. Obedience to the Laws of Christ, as King, is attended with many
Blessings from the Father, who accepts it as Honor done, as unto his Son, so
also unto himself.

Thirdly, by a Souls putting on of Christ as its Prophet: the Soul is put into
possession of a sure word of Prophecy, an infallible Counsel for Direction how
to stear its Course both in Word and Action, so as to please God, and to
possess his favor, in whose favor is Life, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 30.5.

Secondly, the second thing proposed, wherein persons are concerned to put on
Jesus Christ, is in his Qualifications of Grace: It is not enough for persons
to hear the Word of Christ, nor to act in the visible Ordinances of Christ; but
also to endeavor so to improve the Word and Ordinances of Christ, by an
Application of Christ in the same to the Heart through believing, that by the
Power of the Word of Christ in our Hearts we may attain to the Qualifications
of Christ, in their proper nature; ruling in our Hearts by the Dominion and
Power thereof, to the enabling of us to subdue the Qualifications of
Corruption, and to bring our Thoughts, Words and Actions, our Minds, our Wills
and our Affections into a conformity unto Christ.

And for Testimony hereunto, that persons are concerned to put on Christ in his
Qualifications, and wherein these Qualifications do consist, I shall call in
two or three Scripture Evidences among many, which that infallible Spirit of
Truth, proceeding from the Father and the Son, has recorded, Phil. 2.1. If
there be therefore any Consolation in Christ, if any Comfort of Love, if any
Fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels and Mercies, fulfill ye my Joy, that ye
be like minded, having the same Love, being of one accord, of one Mind: let
nothing be done through Strife, or Vainglory; but in lowliness of Mind: let
each esteem others better than themselves: let this Mind be in you, which was
in Christ Jesus, etc.

See here is a Unity of Qualifications required between Christ and his People;
the same Mind, the same affectionate Love, the same bowels of Compassion and
Mercies, the same Humility, the same Patience in the Quality, though we cannot
reach the Quantity.

To this purpose is that Divine Exhortation, Coloss. 3.12. Put on therefore, as
the Elect of God, holy and beloved bowels of Mercies, Kindness, humbleness of
Mind, long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, even
as Christ forgave you, so also do ye; and above all things put on Charity,
which is the Bond of Perfectness: as if he had said, And above all things put
on a real Love unto the Lord, and unto one another for the Lords sake; and let
all your Actions flow from that Original, and be therewith compounded.

This is my Commandment (says Christ to his Disciples) that ye love one
another, as I have loved you, Joh. 15.12.

O see Christ and Christians Oneness in the matter of Qualifications, according
to what Christians do or ought to press after, in order to the Attainment of
Holiness.

Those Souls that would attain to Holiness must put on Christ in his Offices,
also in his Qualifications.

Thirdly, as it is the great concernment of Souls, to put on Christ in his
Qualifications and Offices, in order to Holiness, so also in example of walking
suitable to those Qualifications. It is not enough to receive Grace, and to have
the Qualifications of Grace wrought in us; but there must be a bringing forth
the Fruits thereof, by a visible motion and action in all those ways wherein
the Glory of God and the Benefit of his People is concerned, after the example
of Christ, according to our measure received.

Jesus Christ in the days of his Humiliation was active to administer Grace
unto poor Sinners, for their Conversion, Edification and Salvation, according
to what he had received of the Father: so Divine Counsel does require every
man, as he has received the Gift, so to administer the same one to another, as
good Stewards of the manifold Graces of God, 1 Pet. 4.10. Edify one another,
as also ye do, 1 Thessalonians. 5.11. building up your selves on your most holy Faith,
Jude 20. exhort one another, Heb. 3.13. admonish one another, Col. 3.16.
forewarn and reprove in the case of Sin: These are some of the footsteps of
Christ, that he had his motion and walking in; these are some of the footsteps
of the Flock of Christ, wherein they are by Divine appointment to follow Christ
in: and he that says, he abides in Christ, ought so to walk even as he
walked, 1 John 2.6. It was commendable in the believing Romans, that they so
improved the Word of Christ to an increase of Grace and Knowledge to an ability
to admonish one another, Romans 15.14. The Thessalonians were under Commendations
for their edifying and comforting one another in things of God, while the
Hebrews lay under Reproof, in that they, for the time that they had received
the Gospel, ought to have been Teachers of others, they were become such as had
need to be taught again the first Principles of the Oracles of God, Heb. 5.12.

The Corinthians were commended for keeping the Ordinances to them delivered;
but at the same time reproved for not observing of them in manner and form,
according to the order of the first Institution or Delivery: therefore he that
says, he abides in Christ, ought so to walk even as he walked: To this
agrees those words of Paul to the Corinthians, Be ye Followers of me, even as
I also am of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. even so, not otherwise, Christ must be the
Pattern for Matter, Manner and Form; Christ walked in the observation of all
the Laws and Ordinances in Matter, Manner and Form, wherein his Fathers Will,
his Worship and Service was concerned; he that says he abides in him ought so
to walk even as he walked. Should I by the way give one instance of Christ's
Observation in that holy Ordinance of Divine Institution unto a holy Use and
End, that in these days is by most people laid aside, and by many violently
opposed and abused, calling it a low, carnal, empty thing, a Shadow without a
Substance, and a Shell without a Kernel, and the like, or worse, and the
Observers of it had in gteat reproach; the which Ordinance is that Baptism
where a Gospel-Minister is the Administrator, and the Subject a Believer
demonstrating Faith in Christ, and much Water the Matter, and both going down
into the Water, the Administrator dipping or overwhelming the Subject in the
Water, in the Name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost, the Manner and Form. This
Baptism, as low as some would lay it, is from Heaven, appointed by God the
Father as a Branch of his Mind and Will. To this Ordinance of Baptism in
Water did Christ the Son of God, and Head of his Church, submit unto, in
obedience to his Fathers Will, as an act of Righteousness, thereby confirming
it as the Will of God, and an act of Righteousness unto his People, for to
observe and do in obedience to the will of God; the which Ordinance Christ has
ratified and confirmed unto his Church, and every Soul exercising Faith in him,
by his Authority and Command, as a standing Ordinance, to be observed in its
place, and to its Ends and Uses, for and during the time of the
Gospel-Administration; the which is like to be until time shall be no longer,
Revel. 10.6. or the great and terrible day of the Lord come, in which the Lord
will judge all men, and those living under the Dispensation of the Gospel,
according to their embracing or rejecting of his Counsel contained in the
Gospel: as it is written, The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his
mighty Angels in flaming Fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and
that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with
everlasting Destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of
his Power, 2 Thessalon. 1.7, 8.

Therefore seeing the afore-recited Baptism was by God the Father instituted as
a Branch of his Will and an Act of Righteousness for Believers to observe and
do; and Christ his Son has confirmed it unto us by his personal Act therein,
and also by his word of Command and Counsel thereunto: He that says, he
abides in Christ, ought so to walk, so to observe the same, it being by Divine
Authority made one of the footsteps of the Flock of God.

But here is one thing liable to the Inquisition of the enquiring Soul, unto
which I would say something before I pass this particular.

Quest. What is the End and Use of Baptism.

Ans. Baptism is an Appointment of God, to stand as a visible sign or token of
his Covenant of Grace made in Christ for the Remission of Sins, and Acceptance
of Persons, that through a supernatural Illumination do see themselves siinners
and loft by sin, and their Redemption from the gift of Sin, and their
Justification unto Life, to consist in Christ, by virtue of his Death, Burial
and Resurrection, as a Propititation and Atonement by him made, unto his
Fathers satisfaction, and acceptance, upon the conditions of Faith and
Repentance; that is to say, upon their embracing of him believingly unto a
dependency upon his Merits alone for their Justification from Sin unto Life,
and Repentance unto a purpose of Heart to live to Christ in his Laws and
Counsel contained in his Word: and hence it is, that Baptism is sometimes
called the Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of Sins: Luke 3.3.

First, because by Gods Requirement it is to be attended with Repentance in the
Subject unto a purpose of heart, to live to God, as contained in the Covenant.

Secondly, because by Baptism God does visibly signify both unto the Believer
acting in Baptism, and also his Church, that he accepts that person unto a free
Remission of its Sins, and also to all his Church Priviledges contained in his
Covenant.

Thirdly, because a Believer in Baptism does signify both to God and Man its
Acceptance of Christ, and Repentance unto a purpose of Heart to live to Christ,
by whom he receives the Atonement contained in the Covenant.

Fourthly, because a Believer does in Baptism resemble Christ in his Death,
Burial and Resurrection, by which our Atonement was obtained: Therefore (says
the Apostle) we are buried with him in Baptism into Death, that like as Christ
was raised up by the Glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in
newness of Life: for if we have been planted together in the likeness of his
Death, we shall be also in the likeness of his Resurrection; knowing this, that
our Old Man is crucified with him, that the Body of Sin might be destroyed,
that henceforth we should not serve Sin, Romans 6.4, 5, 6.

Whence note, that the Gospel-Baptism is a Resemblance of the Death, Burial and
Resurrection of Jesus Christ unto Believers: Christ descended down into Death
and the Grave, taking upon him the weight and burden of the Sins of sinful Men
that went astray: a Believer descends (in Baptism) down into the Water, an
Eliment of Death, where it gains power, and and is therein by the
Administrator buried or overwhelmed, taking upon the Command and the Example of
Christ for its Rule thereunto; his Will for to obey, and taking upon him the
Merits of Christ, whereby his Sins are done away.

Christ arises out of the Grave by the Glory of God the Father, purposely to
live unto the Glory of God the Father: but one thing here, among the rest, I
mind: He leaves his heavy burden of Sin behind.

The Believer arises up out of the Water, as out of a Grave, by the Glory of
God the Father's Grace, with purpose of heart to live unto the Glory of God the
Father, through the power of Grace: and here one thing, as before, I mind: He
leaves all his former Sins behind, all done away by virtue of Christ's Blood,
by Faith applied in this similitude.

And now (says Ananias to Saul) why tarriest thou? arise, and be baptized: and
wash away thy Sins, calling on the Name of the Lord; Act. 22.16. not that the
Water in it self washes away Sin; but the particular application of Christ's
Death, Burial and Resurrection, with the Ends, Use and Efficacy thereof by
Faith, as they are to the Eye of Faith represented by the Act of Baptism, with
three Motions in the Water; as going down into the Water, buried in the Water,
and arising up out of the Water, as aforesaid: the which Baptism, with the form
of Words thereto, is the Gospel-Baptism, approved by the Divine Counsel of God,
to be the visible sign and token of his Covenant made in Christ unto Believers,
wherein God signs to them his Acceptance of them unto the Privileges of his
Covenant: they sign to God their Acceptance of the Covenant, and Christ the
Mediator thereof, to live to him according to his Mind and Will contained in
the Covenant.

The Apostle Peter, speaking of Noah's Ark, and eight Souls therein, saved by
water, says, Like Figure whereunto even Baptism does now save us, not the
putting away the filth of the Flesh, but the Answer of a good Conscience
toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

Two things are here laid down as Instruments of Noah's Safety, the Ark and the
Water: They get into the Ark, and the Water carries up the Ark above the
deluge, to their preservation: But we are principally concerned to look unto
the original Ground of their Preservation, which was,

First, Gods Command and Counsel to Noah discovered.

Secondly, Noah's Faith in embracing, and acting accordingly. Noah believes God
makes Preparation, and gets into the Ark: and therefore Hebrews 11. attributes
their Safety unto Gods Command and Counsel, and to Noah's Faith: By Faith Noah
being warned of God, etc.

Noah herein had the Answer of a good Conscience toward God, he acted suitable
to his Will revealed, and was preserved: Like Figure whereunto Baptism now
saves us, says Peter, not the washing away the filth of the Flesh, but the
Answer of a good Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

Three things are here considerable in these words of Peter.

First, Baptism is here said to be of a saving nature.

Secondly, wherein it comes so to be of a saving nature: and that is said, to
consist in the Answer of a good Conscience toward God.

Thirdly, how it comes to be of a saving nature: and that is, by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

But why by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ?

First, because that the Resurrection of Jesus Christ is a sure confirmation to
us, that Jesus Christ has suffered Death, shed his Blood, for the obtaining a
free and full Remission of Sins unto a Justification from the Guilt thereof,
and from the Condem- thereunto belonging, even to as many as believe on his
Name.

Secondly, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ we have a sure Confirmation,

1. That he ever lives to be a Mediator between God the Father and Man, as the
chief Prophet to his People.

2. That he ever lives to make Intercession for his People, as their
High Priest.

3. That he ever lives to be the sole Head, King and Lawgiver, for Rule and
Government unto his People, for their Direction, Protection and Preservation
into a full possession of Salvation, according to the Covenant.

Thirdly, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ we have sure Confirmation, that
he ever lives to raise us up out of the Grave, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. 2 Cor. 4.14. by
his power unto an estate of Immortality and eternal Life; we being on him, and
conforming to him, according to the conditions of the Covenant: Herein God
commended his Love unto us (says the Apostle) in that while we were yet
Sinners Christ died for us, much more than being now justified by his Blood we
shall be saved from Wrath through him: for if when we were Enemies we were
reconciled by the Death of his Son, much more being reconciled we shall be
saved by his Life: that is to say, by his Life, whereunto he is risen again,
will he much more carry on the Management of every Branch of the Covenant,
which on his part is to be performed to the crowning of all his reconciled ones
with eternal Salvation, even as the Resurrection of Jesus Christ is an evidence
of assurance unto all men, that God will by the Man Christ Jesus judge the
World, Act. 17.31. so is the Resurrection of Jesus Christ a sure evidence of
Confirmation, that Jesus Christ ever lives to perform every Branch of the
Covenant unto Believers, as aforesaid, by virtue of his Offices.

Now, as it is the Counsel and Requirement of God, that persons should through
the Gospel-Ministration, believe on Christ, and conform to Christ, as
aforesaid; so also is it the Counsel and Requirement of God, that persons so
embracing of Christ by Faith, with purpose of heart to conform to him, should
visibly confess their Faith in Christ, and visibly put on the Profession of
Jesus Christ by Baptism, in the way of Christ, confirmed unto us in the Gospel,
Gal. 3.27. the which Baptism, although with Water administered, does unto the
Eye of Faith comprehend figuratively the Ark of Safety, with the Mercy Seat
also (i. e.) Christ Jesus, with the Covenant of Grace in him, which carries
the Soul (through Faith) above the deluge of Sin and Condemnation for the same,
wherein the ungodly world do sink and perish, while the Believer remaining in
the Ark does dwell in safety. Would you know the Reason why the Eunuch, when
baptized, went away rejoicing? Act. 8.39.16.34. Surely he was by Faith gotten
into the Ark, wherein he did behold his security from the aforesaid deluge of
Sin and Condemnation; and set into a state of peace with God unto his
consolation: we joy in God (says the Apostle) through our Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom we have received the Atonement, Romans 5.11.

Noah in believing Gods Word, and improving the Means by God appointed
according to his Advice and Counsel, does therein answer a good Conscience
toward God; and answered his Conscience with peace and security, to his great
joy and consolation: so a Believer in embracing Gods Word, and improving it
according to his Advice and Counsel, does therein answer a good Conscience
toward God, and God does in the said Improvement answer the Conscience with
peace, and the Soul with preservation, to its great joy and consolation.

A Believer by being baptized does thereby visibly justify God in the truth of
his Word, and God does by Baptism visibly signify his justifying of the
Believer unto a participation of all his Church Priviledges, according to his
Covenant.

The Publicans (says Christ) justified God being baptized with the Baptism of
John: but the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the Counsel of God against
themselves, being not baptized of him: Luk, 7.29, 30.

The Publicans, it seems, did apply the Word of God believingly: the
Pharisees and Lawyers gave not so much credit thereunto.

Where the Word of a King is (says Solomon) there is Power: But the
Administration of the Gospel of Christ is not only the Word of a King, but it
is the Word of the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, in whose Word Baptism
stands both by Command and Promise, Matthew. 28.19. to Believers by Command,
for their Observation, and by Promise to their Consolation and Salvation.

He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, Mark. 16.16, the Word of
this King is a Word of Power: it is the Power of God unto Salvation, to every
one that believes, Romans 1.16. yea it is a Word of Power also to the
Unbeliever, for to judge him unto Condemnation for rejecting the same: as, says
Jesus Christ, He that rejects me, and receives not my Words, has one that
judges him: the Word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him at the last
day: (his Reason is) for I have not spoken of my self; but my Father which sent
me, he gave me a Commandment what I should say, and what I should speak, And I
know that his Commandment is Life everlasting: whatsoever I speak therefore,
even as the Father said unto me, so I speak, Joh. 12, 48, 49, 50.

Here behold a faithful Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus; he
brings nothing to the Sons of Men, but what is the Mind and Will of God the
Father, for them to believe, observe and do accordingly: and as Baptism is
equally confirmed to us, with the rest of Gospel-Doctrine, for to be believed,
and observed in its place: so it does greatly concern all persons exercising
Faith in Christ, to observe it so as to answer the Will of God, and a good
Conscience in the Administration and improvement of the same, in order to its
End and Uses: and withal consider, that if it does become a Shell without a
Kernel to any persons, it is for want of Faith in the Subject upon whom it is
administered: to behold the Kernel, and to feed thereon: and indeed it is the
Wisdom and good Pleasure of Almighty God to order the preaching of the Word
unto all people, for to beget Faith in them, and those converted to the Faith
unto a visible Demonstration of the same, to be meet Subjects for Baptism and
visible Church Membership by the same.

And whereas some persons do pretend they are baptized with the Spirit, and
therefore slight Baptism with Water, as too low an Ordinance for them to
observe in the administration of it, and rather plead the cessation of it than
the observation of it.

In answer whereunto, consider that if any persons might have been exempted
from Baptism upon that Plea, of being baptized with the Spirit: then doubtless,
Christ, and also those persons spoken of Act. 10. might have been exempted,
inasmuch as they were extraordinarily inspired with the Spirit and Gifts
thereof: yet these must put on the Administration thereof, as an act of
Righteousness in submission to the Will of God.

Whence note, that the highest Seize of the Spirit and spiritual Gifts of
Grace, we can attain unto in this Life, does not exempt or free any person
from, but rather obliges the more unto, and makes them the more meet for
action in those Ordinances of Baptism and Bread and Wine in their several
places, ends and uses.

And indeed it is a question, whether those persons pretending the abovesaid
Plea, for their Omission and Opposition of the afore-recited Ordinances, are at
all pertakers of that Spirit whereunto they do pretend: forasmuch as it is the
Office of the Spirit of Truth to lead Souls into the Observation of all Truth,
and not into the Omission or Opposition of the same.

In the next place consider, that although I have proceeded so far upon this
point of Baptism, in order to the Vindication of it, and Believers in the
Observation of the same: yet have I not digressed from the Matter of Direction
to the enquiring Soul, in order to its Attainment to Holiness: forasmuch as
Baptism, as before considered, is a holy Ordinance, instituted by the holy God
unto holy ends and uses; neither is it of the Matter of putting on of Christ,
as before asserted, in order to the Attainment of Holiness, but is comprehended
in the same; that is to say, his Offices, Qualifications and Example of
Walkings:

In order whereunto, consider those Words asserted by the Apostle Paul, Gal.
3.27. As many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ: and
so I shall proceed to the next particular; which is, to abide in him.

Fourthly, as we are concerned to put on the Lord Jesus Christ, as aforesaid,
in order to our Attainment unto Holiness, so also we are concerned to abide in
him.

It is a piece of Divine Counsel delivered by our Lord and blessed Savior
Jesus Christ unto his Disciples, Joh. 15.4, 5. Christians must abide in Christ
in order to their perfecting Holiness.
Abide in me and I in you, as the Branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except
it abide in the Vine: no more can ye, except ye abide in me; I am the Vine, ye
are the Branches: he that abides in me and I in him, the same brings forth
much fruit; for without me ye can do nothing. Sometimes in Scripture we have
this abiding in him set forth by the terms continuing and persevering: The
Apostle Paul, Col. 1.21, 22.23.
putting the Colossians in mind of the End of Christ's Death for them, which was,

First, to reconcile them unto himself, and unto the Father in him.

Secondly, to present them unto the Father holy, unblameable and unreproveable
in his sight, he adds this proviso, If ye continue in the Faith, grounded and
settled, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel, which ye have heard.

Whence note by the way, that a well-grounded Faith in Christ, attended with
stability therein, according to the Apostolical Ministration, is the principal
way to attain to Holiness, to the Fathers acceptance: such will Christ adorn
with the holy Robes of his own Righteousness; and therein justify them to the
Fathers acceptance unto Life eternal.

Therefore, as ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him,
rooted and built up in him, as ye have been taught, abounding therein with
Thanksgiving, Col. 2.6. I may not omit Saint John's Exhortation and Advice in
his first Epistle, chap. 3.24, 25, 28. Let that therefore abide in you which ye
have heard from the beginning: if that which ye have heard from the beginning
shall remain in you: ye also shall continue in the Son, and in the Father: and
this is the Promise that he has promised us, even eternal Life. And now little
Children abide in him, that when he shall appear, we may have confidence, and
not be ashamed before him at his coming.

Whence note by the way,

First, that as persons are concerned to put on Christ in order to Holiness and
Heavens Seize: so it is their stability or abiding in it that crowns them
with the same: Hold that fast which thou have, that no man take thy Crown,
Revel. 3.11.

Secondly, note that a person near conformity to and abiding in the Apostolical
Doctrine, in all things wherein the Faith and Practice of a Christian is
concerned, is the best visible Demonstration of a Souls being and abiding in
the Father and the Son: see 2 John v. 9.

Thirdly, note that a people abiding in the Gospel-Doctrine, and so in the
Father and the Son by Faith: they do thereby much augment the joy, comfort and
confidence of the true Gospel-Minister (in the day of Christ's second appearing)
under whose Ministry they have been conducted into that estate.

And now, little Children, abide in him, that when he shall appear, we may have
confidence, and not be ashamed before him, at his coming. 1 John 2.28. For what
is our Hope or Joy, or Crown of rejoicing? are not even ye in the presence of
our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? for ye are our Glory and Joy: for now we
live, if ye stand fast in the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 2.19, 20. chap. 3.8.

Thus having briefly laid down these four Rules for the enquiring Soul, to
observe in its progress toward the Attainment of Holiness: as,

1. That he look to Jesus with an eye of Faith, as he is held forth in the
Gospel-Administration.

2. To consider him in his Undertakings for us, and in his Benefits to us.

3. To put him on in the particulars afore-premised.

And 4. To abide in him.

Now whereas there was three particulars proposed, in order to the putting on
of Christ: as,

1. Wherein he is to be put on.

2. How he is to be put on: and

3. Why he must be put on in order to that Attainment.

Having laid down something to the first and second, it remains that something
be said to the third, Why Christ must be put on by those that would attain to
Holiness? And,

First, because he is the Center in whom all the means appertaining to Holiness
is by the Father centered: In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily, and ye are complete in him, Coloss. 2.9, 10. Christ's Person is holy,
his Word is holy, his Works are Holy, his Name is holy, his Nature is holy, his
Laws, Ordinances, Government, Council; yea all in himself, and proceeding from
himself is holy; he is the Fountain of Holiness, full of the Springs of God.

Secondly, Persons must put on Christ in that Attainment; because it is the
Will of God, and his fore-determination and appointment from Eternity, that in
Christ should that Attainment of Holiness be unto all persons, through
believing or putting on him as aforesaid. There is no other way standing in the
Election or Counsel of God to attain unto Holiness, but only in Jesus Christ,
as says the Apostle, According as he has chosen us in him, before the
Foundation of the World, that we should be Holy and without blame before him in
love, Ephesians. 1.4. Wherefore would we attain unto an Estate in the Ornament of
Holiness; would we have Christ formed in us, and we transformed into his
likeness, so as to bare his Image, his Name and Nature? Would we answer God the
Fathers Predestination, Election, and Calling? Would we have the assurance
thereof sealed unto our Souls, and have an entrance into his Kingdom? Then put
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and abide in him as before considered; in his Offices,
Qualifications, and Example of walking; its the great design of God in Christ
from Eternity; its the joy of every faithful Gospel-Minister to behold such
effects wrought in a people; fulfill ye my joy (says the Apostle) that ye be
like minded, having the same love. Its the Beauty of a Christian; the very
quintescence of Christianity; the honor of Religion, to the glory of God.

O put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and abide in him, and make not provission for
the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof.

CHAP. IX.
Containing a use of Reprehension and Admonition unto several sorts of men in
this Generation; who notwithstanding the Excellency of Holiness, and the great
concernment thereof, to the advancing of Gods Glory, and the Creatures Comfort,
and Eternal Consolation, do wilfully neglect, or carelessly improve the way and
means for the attainment thereof, as if it was an Ornament altogether out of
fashion, and of no use, nor comlinest to be found in it.
Of these Persons, are first

THe Ignorant Soul that sits down contentedly in an Estate of Ignonorance,
making the Custom of their Country, and the Traditions of their Ancestors, the
only rule and ground for their chiefest actions; but as for the matter of
Holiness, with the way and means of its attainment, the poor Creatures are
merely strangers: The Estate and Condition of such Souls is much to be
lamented, in that so much means of knowledge is afforded, and so much ignorance
remaining under the same, by reason of a careless negligence of applying the
rational faculties of the Soul in the diligent use of the means afforded by a
serious search into the revealed will of God, with due consideration and
meditation of the same, thereby to gain the knowledge of him, acquaintance with
him; to glorify his name, and to the establishing of the Soul in the knowledge
of its Salvation.

The Spirit of God in Scripture reckons the said carelessness and negligence
in this matter, under the notion of folly, and indeed it is a point of the
greatest folly in the world, and to be admired, that God having given forth
such excellent means of Knowledge and Salvation in the same, and the Creature
not esteem it worth the improving.

Solomon was a man endued with great Wisdom, and yet he seems not to reach
the depth of the Creatures negligence herein; or at least, Gods great mercy in
affording such excellent means unto the Creature, and waiting upon him in the
same: Wherefore (says he) is there a price in the hand of a Fool to get
Wisdom, seeing he has no heart to it, Pro. 17.16. yet Solomon lays the
cause of a persons not attaining to Wisdom, in his not improving the means; and
his not improving the means, to be his folly, as we may understand him in his
expressions, Prove. 24.7.
Prove. 24.7.

Wisdom is too high for a Fool (says Solomon): and why? He opens not his
mouth in the gate; as if he had said, The way and means in which Wisdom is
attainable, is by him neglected.

As without Knowledge the Mind cannot be good, so doubtless it is generally
possessed with Carnality; the which, as says the Apostle, is Enmity with God,
Romans 8.7. and, through Ignorance is alienated from the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18.
It were much to be desired that every Soul in this Estate, would take Counsel
of the Spirit of God, given out by Solomon, to cry after Knowledge, and lift up
the Voice for Understanding; to seek for her as for hid Treasures; implying a
diligent search into God's Word, with earnest supplications to the Throne of
Grace for the attainment thereof; Then (says the Text) shall thou understand
the fear of the Lord, and find the Knowledge of God; for the Lord gives Wisdom,
out of his mouth comes Knowledge and Understanding, Pro. 2.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

I shall only present two or three Scriptures more to the consideration of
those persons that sit down as satisfied and contented under this Estate of
Ignorance, and so leave them to the good pleasure of the Almighty; the first
Scripture is recorded in Pro. 24. ver. 3, 4. Through Wisdom is an House
builded, and by Understanding it is Established, and by Knowledge shall the
Chambers be filled with all precious and pleasant Riches. These words admit of
a spiritual sense and meaning, as it may be thus: The House builded, to signify
a Person or People built up in the Faith of Christ, and observation of his
Truth, as Saint Peter teaches in his first Epistle, chap. 2. verse. 5. Ye also,
as lively stones, are built up a spiritual House, etc. to this sense are those
words of Jude; But ye beloved, building up your selves on your most holy Faith,
praying in the Holy Ghost, etc. Jud. 20.

Secondly: You have the means by which the building is reared up, and that is
here said to be through Wisdom, intimating the divine Wisdom and Counsel of God
contained in his Word.

Thirdly: The way of Establishment, and that is said by Understanding. As if a
right understanding of the Mind and Will of God, or the Truth, as it is in
Jesus, were the only way to a Souls Establishment therein; Psalm. 119.34.
Give me Understanding (says David) and I shall keep thy Law, yea, I shall
observe it with my whole heart, when Wisdom enters into thy heart (says
Solomon) and Knowledge is pleasant unto thy Soul, Prove. 2.10, 11, 12.
Discretion shall preserve thee, Understanding shall keep thee, to deliver thee
from the way of the evil man, etc.

Fourthly: It is said, by Knowledge, shall the Chambers be filled with all
pleasant and precious Riches, intimating the inward and uppermost Rooms of the
Soul, as the Mind, the Will, Affections; yea, all the rational faculties of the
Soul, shall through the true knowledge of God in Christ, be filled and
furnished with the precious qualifications of divine grace, according to Christ
Jesus, in a measure, and with the pleasant and comfortable manifestations of
God's love in Christ, wherein is satisfying Joy and Pleasures for ever-more.

This is Eternal Life, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent, Joh. 17.3.

Hereunto agrees those words of Peter in his second Epistle, recorded in the
first Chapter, ver. 3. whose words are these; Grace and Peace be multiplied
unto you, through the knowledge of God, and Jesus Christ our Lord, according as
his Divine Power has given unto us all things that pertain unto Life and
Godliness, through the knowledge of him that has called us to Glory and
Virtue; whence we may note these particulars by the way.

First: The gift given unto us of God, and that is, all things that pertain to
Life and Godliness.

Secondly: The way of conveyance of these things unto the Soul; and that is
said to be through the knowledge of God and Jesus Christ our Lord.

Thirdly: The effects wrought in the Soul by the means received in knowledge,
and that is an Estate of Godliness and assurance of Eternal Life, and also
preservation in this Estate: Whence we may observe, that an Estate of Holiness,
or Godliness, and Eternal Life, with all things appertaining thereunto, is the
free and proper gift of God, and is highly to be prized, Observe.
and carefully improved to the Glory of God, by every Soul that desires his own
well-being in the knowledge and enjoyments of God, wherein the true felicity
and comfort of the Soul does consist; the which seize is enjoyed through
a true knowledge of God in Christ. To this agrees those words of St. Paul,
Col. 3.10. The new Man is renewed in Knowledge, after the Image of him that
Created him, in Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. Whence note also by
the way, that in, and through a true Knowledge of God in Christ, are the
Mortifications of the Old Man of Sin, and the qualifications of Grace wrought
in a Soul.

O what is the Reason that there is so little Renewedness in the qualifications
and Conversations of many people in our days, and so much abusing of the Sacred
Name of God, by Swearing and Cursing, and many profane speeches! as also the
abuse of the Creatures by Drunkenness, and the like excess: Also the many vain
carnal, loose, licentious practices, acted and observed with delight therein.
Is it not the want of this Knowledge of God in Christ? Is not Ignorance the
Mother of such Profaneness and Impieties? and what is the Reason that God's
dear Children are many times hated and reproached, reviled and villified? Yea,
says Christ, the time comes, that whosoever kills you, will think they do
God Service. Christ gives us this Reason; All these things will they do unto
you, because they have not known the Father, nor me, Joh. 16.3.

O consider, all ye that content your selves in an Estate of Ignorance, and
solace your selves in Carnal and Worldly Vanities, and are careless and
negligent in applying and improving the means of Knowledge; to the end you
might glorify God, and thereby be enabled to answer the end of God in your
Creation; his end in giving his Son to die for your Redemption; and his
spiritual Word, Counsel, and Advice therein for your Sanctification; that
thereby in a good improvement of the same, you might be made meet to glorify
his Name, and to enjoy his glory! O consider the loss and damage that you
hereby sustain, by slighting or carelessly neglecting such precious means,
granted forth unto such gracious ends for a little Carnal Vanity!

Consider how you will answer it in the day of account, when for all these
things God shall bring thee to Judgment.

O! how do many Parents in this case not only prejudice their own Souls, but
also the Souls of their Children, and those within their jurisdiction; whereas
it is the requirement of God, that Parents should lay up the words of God in
their hearts, and teach them to their Children, that they might know the Lord,
and set their hope in God; they not only neglect this great concernment, but
also by their own viscious lives and evil example, rather teach them the Vices
of Swearing, Cursing, Drunkenness, and much Profaneness, to God's dishonor,
and their own ruin both of Body and Soul; not considering that God will
require it of them, and bring them to Judgment for the same.

O how many Parents, although not so vicious and profane, yet are so earnest
in their pursuit after this worldly interest, to gain for themselves, and
enrich their Children with great Portions of this earthly Treasure, as wholly
to give up themselves thereunto, not minding those Treasures that are Divine,
and of a more greater concernment to the gaining an interest in Christ, either
for their selves or Children, by instructing of them thereunto, until death
seize upon them, and summon them to the Grave; and then perhaps send for a
Minister to pray for them: the which I do not condemn, because I know God is
merciful; yet I know that God is also just, and will bring Souls to Judgment,
and then whither God will accept this last Sacrifice for the whole, I shall
leave to the only wise God to determine.

But know and consider that it is the undoubted Will and Requirement of God,
that Parents should Treasure up the word of God in their hearts by
Consideration, Meditation, and Application, believingly and diligently
endeavor to plant the same word of God in the hearts of their Children, as
they come to be capable of the teachings of it, to the end, that they might
know the Lord, and reverence his Holy Name, observe his Will, and place their
hope in him. To this purpose see and consider Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8. Deuteronomy. 11.18, 19,
20. Deuteronomy. 4.9, 10. Psalm. 78.5, 6, 7. to these Testimonies of the Will of God do
those words of the Apostle Paul bear witness, Ephesians. 6.4. Solomon says, by
Humility, and the Fear of the Lord, are Riches and Honor, and Life.

Would we have our Children truly Rich and Honorable, and live Everlastingly,
so then lay up the Word of Grace in our own hearts, treasure it up there; Let
the Word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all Wisdom, Col. 3.16. Secondly: Let
your diligent endeavors be to answer God's Will in making forth the same unto
your Children, to their Edification, to the planting of that Immortal Seed of
the Word in their hearts, that they may set their hope in God, and fear before
him, and humbly walk with him in the way of his Commandments: Train up a Child
in the way that he should go, and when he is Old, he will not depart from it.
Pro. 22.6.



Ephesians. 1.4. and that persons do partake of, and witness this Election in
themselves, as they embrace Christ, believingly, and conform to him in holy
Sanctity, is also true: See 1 These. 1.3, 4. 2 These. 2.13.

And therefore so much the rather should you give diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure, by a growth and increase of Grace unto an attainment
of the qualifications of grace wrought in you, according to the qualifications
of Jesus Christ, and as the Apostle teaches, Giving all diligence (says he)
add to your Faith, Virtue; and to Virtue, Knowledge; and to Knowledge,
Temperance; and to Temperance, Patience; and to Patience, Godliness; and to
Godliness, Brotherly-kindness; and to Brotherly-kindness, Charity. 2 Pet. 1.5,
6, 7.

And, as there is an Election in Christ unto Salvation, through believing in
Christ, and conforming to him in the way of Holiness, attainable through a
careful applying and improving the means thereunto appointed; so also is there
a Reprobation determined and decreed of God from Eternity, unto those persons
that in love to their Lusts, and carnal, and worldly Vanities, do obstinately
persist in opposing, or carlesly neglecting, do slight the means afforded, so
as not to embrace it in the love thereof, and carefully improve it to the glory
of the Lord; that like as they reject God's Counsel, and his Love and Mercy in
the same, to satisfy their Lusts in worldly and sinful Vanities; so the Lord
has determined that in their Unrighteousness, he will reject them, and leave
them to Satan's delusions, that divine Justice may be satisfied in their
Condemnation.

To this purpose consider well some Testimonies (among many) given out by God's
Spirit in his Servants of old; as in 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. the Epistle of Jud.
4. Here observe, they are persons turning the grace of God into Laciviousness,
denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ; and withal observe, that
this denial is not to be confined only to such Atheists that say there is not
any God; but also those persons are herein comprehended, that in words do
acknowledge there is a God and Christ, but yet although they live under the
dispensation of Gods gracious word, and word of grace, yet refuse to live in
God's Counsel therein contained, to live in those ways and works that their own
ungodly Lusts do lead them to; and such are those persons that Paul to Titus
speaks of, that confess they know God, but in works they deny him, being
abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work, Reprobate, Tit. 1.16.
and with these Scriptures consider Wisdoms Voice, Prove. 1. ver. 20. to the end
of the Chapter: Wherefore all ye that lie down securely upon the bed of
Ignorance and Profaneness, solacing your selves in Carnal Vanities, and the
Mammon of this world: O look unto the Lord, who desires the Knowledge of God
rather than burnt Offerings, Hos. 6.6. and obedience to his Will, rather than
Sacrifice. Look up and behold, it is not Ignorance and Profaneness, but
Holiness that leads to Happiness; It is not the qualifications of the Old Man,
as Hatred, Malice, Envy, Evil-speaking, Backbiting, and Devouring, nor any
Profane and Carnal Vanities; but the qualifications of love to Christ, his
Truth and Members, yea love to Enemies, to all men as they are the Creatures of
God, the workmanship of his hands; with Peace toward all men, Mercy, Pity,
and Compassion toward the Oppressed and Distressed; Meekness, Patience,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, and Temperance; with joy and
delight in the exercises of Piety and Charity, that leads to Holiness, without
which no man shall see the Lord; against such (says the Apostle) there is no
Law: And they that are Christ's, have Crucified the Old Man or the Flesh, with
the Affections and Lusts. Neither is it Ignorance, but a true Knowledge of
Christ, through which the Old Man is Crucified, and these divine graces or
qualifications of Christ are begotten, conceived, nourished, and preserved in
the Soul, and brought forth into action, to the perfecting Holiness in the fear
of God. Neither is it, a Mind, and Meditations exercised chiefly in temporal
things; but a diligent and careful exercising the mind and meditations in the
divine Precepts, and Counsel of God, contained in his word; with a wrestleing
at the Throne of Grace, for a sanctified use thereof unto the Soul, whereby the
true Knowledge of Christ, and the truth in him is obtained. Wherefore, would
thou have Heaven for thy Inheritance? press after Holiness. Would thou be
Holy? suffer not the Old Man to lie Uncrucified in thee; but press hard after
the seize of the divine qualifications of Christ, so as to have them
ruling in thee; and from that principle, let all thy actions flow both toward
God and men. And would thou attain to this degree? press after a right
knowledge of Jesus Christ and God in him. And would thou attain to a right
knowledge of God in Christ? Take the Testimonies of the Mind and Will of God
contained in his Word for thy Counselors: Advise therewith, by a diligent
exercise of thy mind, and meditations therein; waiting upon God with
supplications, for a blessing thereupon. Wherewith (says David) shall a young
man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto, according to thy Word, Psalm. 119.9.

As if he had said, by making the Word of God his chief Counsel, and regulating
his thoughts, words, Psalm. 119 93, 104.
and actions by that rule. Through thy precepts I get understanding; therefore
I hate every false way; I will never forget thy precepts, for with them thou
have quickened me.

O that every Soul in an Estate of Ignorance and Profaneness, would in time
consider David's footsteps, and the footsteps of all the flock of God; and
consider the experienced Benefit they did attain unto, by walking in the
Counsel of the Lord contained in his word; and by way of imitation, turn their
feet, their affections, unto the Testimonies of the Lord, and up and be doing,
while it is called to day, before the night comes, when no man can work. He
that gathers in Summer, is a wise Son (says Solomon), but he that sleeps
in Harvest, is a Son that causes shame, Prove. 10.5.

These words in the spiritual sense of them, gives us this note, or
observation by the way; That it is a point of excellent wisdom in a person, or
people, diligently to improve opportunities and means for Heavens Seize,
while the season serves; but shame and contempt are the attendants of a person
or people careless and negligent in improving opportunities and means for
Heavenly seize in their season, or while they are afforded to them.

If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy self, Prove. 9.12. Thy diligence
in season shall redound to thy own advantage and eternal benefit. But if thou
scornest, thou alone shall bear it; for God has not called us to Uncleanness,
but unto Holiness, 1 These. 3.7, 8. He therefore that despises, despises not
man, but God, at whose Wrath the Earth shall tremble, and the Nations shall not
be able to abide his Indignation, Jer. 10.10. A prudent man foreseeth the evil,
and hides himself; but the simple pass on, and are punished, Prove. 22.3. In
the fear of the Lord is strong Confidence, and his Children shall have a place
of refuge, Prove. 14.26. Surely he scorneth the scorners; but he gives grace
unto the lowly; The Wise shall inherit glory, but shame shall be the promotion
of Fools, Prove. 3.34, 35. The heart of the Prudent gets Knowledge, and the
ear of the Wise seeks Knowledge, Prove. 18.15. The words of the Lord are pure
words, Psalm. 12.6. They are the words of Wisdom, Knowledge, and Understanding;
they proceed from the Fountain of Wisdom, Knowledge, and Understanding; and God
does give Wisdom, Knowledge, and Understanding thereby, unto such as embrace
his Counsel in the same, and improve it accordingly, waiting upon him therein
in love thereunto, as says David; Thy Word is pure, therefore thy Servant
loves it, Psalm. 119.140. Thou, through thy Commandments, have made me wiser
then mine Enemies, Psalm. 119.98. for they are ever with me; the entrance of thy
words gives light, it gives understanding to the simple, Psalm. 119.130. David
experiencing the truth of the words of God, and the virtue, use, and efficacy
of the same unto his Soul, does here set forth the excellency thereof to the
praises of God, and to the encouragement of others, to prove the excellency
thereof by an imbracement adhearingly; Every word of God is pure (says Agur)
He is a Shield unto them that put their trust in him, Prove. 30.5.

Every word of God is pure, his Testimonies, his Commands, his Promises, his
Invitations, Exhortations, Admonitions and Reproofs; yea, all his whole Counsel
is pure, flowing from a pure God, given out to pure ends, to bring defiled
Sinners to a state of purity; every word of God is pure in it self, and pure in
the esteem of every true Child of God; the sanctified heart: I esteem all thy
precepts in all things to be right, says David, Psalm. 119.128. Wisdom is
justified by her Children, says Christ, Math. 11.19. Poor Publicans justify
God, Luke 7.29. by esteeming and embraceing of his Counsel: but have any of the
Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him? Joh. 7.48. The Pharisees and Lawyers
rejected the Counsel of God against themselves, See Luke 14.16, to the 24.
Luke 7.30. They would not justify God by esteeming and embraceing of his
Counsel, as held forth by his Authority, although God witnessed to the same by
his mighty hand: The Poor, the Lame, and Maimed, come in at the invitation, and
partake of the benefits, while the worldly interested persons slight the
invitation, and the loving kindness of the Inviter for their worldly interest
sake, to the procuring to themselves the displeasure of the Inviter, the Lord,
and to their loss of a participation of the benefits.

And so by observing lying Vanities, Jonah 2.8.
they forsake their own mercy, that they happily might have had upon their
imbraceing and improving what they were invited to.

Wherefore, A Word to the inordinate and open Profane.
consider all ye that act the Prodigals part in Ryoting and Drunkenness, and
other profane and vicious Vanities, to the wasting of your precious time and
opportunities, your temporal Estates and Wits, and all in the service of sin,
to the impoverishing of your poor souls, and the souls of your Children, for
want of Education in the knowledge of God; unto the Condemnation of your own
souls, and the souls of your Children by your evil Example, as much as in you
lies. O consider, that by reason hereof, not only your Children, but also your
Wives and other Relations; yea, the whole land of your Nativity is forced into
mourning; and especially, when God shall visit for these things; as says the
Lord by his Servants the Prophets: see one Testimony among many, Hos. 4. where
it is said, that the Lord had a controversy with the Inhabitants of the Land:
the cause seems twofold first, They lay aside truth, and the knowledge of
God by the same, and acts of mercy (which the knowledge of God and truth
leads to), as things out of request and estimation with them: Secondly, as
effects ensuing, and demonstrations thereof, they fall into those great and
gross abominations of Swearing, Lying, Killing, Stealing, and committing
Adultery, and all excess, even unto blood; and therefore shall the Land mourn,
etc. O that every such Soul would consider and act the Prodigals part in his
return, and that timely, while the Fathers arms of mercy are open to embrace
them: O (says the Lord) that there were such an heart in them, that they would
fear me, and keep my Commandments always, that it might be well with them, and
with their Children for ever, Deuteronomy. 5.29. Thus says the Lord thy Redeemer, the
holy one of Israel, I am the Lord thy God, that teaches thee to profit, that
leads thee by the way that thou should go: O that thou had hearkened to
my Commandments, then had thy peace been as a River, and thy Righteousness as
the Waves of the Sea, Isa. 48.17, 18. Note, Gods desire is that Sinners should
return and live to him: Note, Those that hearken to God's Commands, so as to
walk therein, are those that live to God, and are blessed of him; Blessed are
all they that do his Commandments, that they may have right to the Tree of
life, and may enter in through the Gates into the City, for without are Dogs,
and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever
loves and makes a lie, Rev. 22.14, 15. I, but what Estate shall these without
possess, and where, the same Author tells us, chap. 21.8.

But the Fearful, and Unbelieving, and the Abominable, and Murderers, and
Woremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars, shall have their part
in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second death,
Rev. 21.8. I Jesus have sent mine Angel to testify these things unto the
Churches; I am the root, and the offspring of David, the bright and morning
Star, Rev. 22.16.

Secondly: A word to the industrious Worldling.

O consider ye, in whose hearts the world has full possession, that cannot
spare one corner to give entertainment to the word of God by way of meditation
and contemplation thereupon, although God requires the whole heart unto
himself: Consider ye that are in an immoderate pursuit after this earthly
treasure: Take heed (says our Savior Christ) and beware of Covetousness, for
a man's life consists not in the abundance of the things that he possesses.
Here methinks, I should hear some say, that as to matter of Covetousness, I
think I am clear; for although I am industrious in my pursuit after the things
of this world, yet I have not taken any thing from any man, but what I pay for;
neither do I wrong any man, but pay every man his own; and therefore I think I
am not guilty of Covetousness.

But then the question is, whether we can say as much in the case between our
selves and God; and between us and our Souls; and between us and our Relations?
and first, Let us consider a little as in the matters of God; have we not in
our earnest pursuit after our worldly interest, spent the most part of that
time that God has required for his Service, upon our worldly interest? have
not our minds and affections been exercised upon our worldly and carnal
interests, when they should be exercised by meditations and contemplations,
with love and delight in God, his word and works, and celebrating praises unto
his name? do we not by our earnest pursuit after this worlds interest, make our
bodies and spirits so dull, drowsy, and unfit for God's Service, that if we
appear but one hour in a week therein, we spend the most part thereof in sleep?

Do we not by our earnest pursuit after this worlds interest, deprive our
Children of that Soul-Education that is due unto them from us by God's
requirement?

Do we not by our earnest pursuit after this worlds interest, withold more
then is meet from the Poor and Needy, as in acts of Mercy, Charity, Pity and
Compassion by Gods commanded?

And if so, is it not Coveteousness? yea, is it not Covetousness which is
Idolatry, when that our time, our strength, meditations, considerations; our
wills and affections are so dedicated to the world, whereby God wants that
Honor and Service that is due unto him; and our Souls want that nourishment
that is of its greatest concernment; and our Children want that Soul-Education
that is their right and due from us to be performed to them; and the poor and
needy eyes want that refreshing, that of right by God's requirement, and the
bond of Nature, and the bond of Charity, we ought to communicate unto them?
There is that scatters (says Solomon) and yet increases; and there is that
withholds more then is meet, but it tends to Poverty: The liberal Soul
shall be made fat, and he that waters, shall be watered also himself, Prove.
11.24, 25. The merciful man does good to his own Soul, but he that is cruel
troubles his own flesh, Prove. 11.17. The sense of these words is made out, and
confirmed by the Apostle Paul to Timothy, 1 Epist. 6.17, 18. Charge them that
are rich in this world, that they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain
riches; but in the living God, who gives us richly all things to enjoy; that
they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate; laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the
time to come, that they may lay hold on Eternal life, verse 19.

O consider ye that have the world chief in your hearts, that sins of Omission
are condemning sins, as well as sins of Commission. See Matthew. 25. where you
have a large description of several under the sentence of Condemnation, only
charged with Omissions; as the foolish Virgins, for omitting the time and
season for providing themselves of Oil; and the sloathful Servant, that
improved not his Talent to the advantage of his Lord; and the hard-hearted, and
close-handed, that did not visit, relieve, and show mercy unto the poor,
distressed, and oppressed Members of Jesus Christ. Wherefore consider, and Sow
to your selves in Righteousness, that you may Reap in Mercy, break up the
fallow ground of your hearts, for it is time to seek the Lord, till he come and
rain Righteousness upon you, Hos. 10.12.

Thirdly: A word to the more knowing and seeming Religious; yet acting the
qualifications of the Old Man.

Is Holiness of such concernment, as before considered; and the way of its
Attainment is by putting on of Christ in his offices, qualifications, and
example of walking? It may administer a word of Reprehension and Admonition
unto those of us in particular, and also all persons that have attained a great
measure of knowledge in the Doctrine of Christ; yea, in the
foundation-principles of Christianity, and yet do not persevere to the putting
on of Christ in his qualifications of grace, and example of walking, to the
Crucifying of the qualifications of the Old Man. O how does Pride abound in
many knowing people, whose knowledge should teach them humility? how many
Professors, even men of great knowledge, do suffer their desires to run on in
an immoderate pursuit after the riches and honors of this world, whose
knowledge should lead them to covet earnestly the best gifts? O how is
self-love and self-endedness abounding in this Generation, and that among
knowing persons, whose knowledge should lead them to deny themselves more in
worldly things, to follow Christ in the way of holiness; but as if those words
of Paul were made good in our days, Phil. 2.21. All seek their own, not the
things of Jesus Christ's.

O how does that old deformed qualification of the Old Man, even Envy, Hatred,
and Malice, show it self unmortified among many knowing people, bearing the
denomination of Christians, only upon the account of some differing opinions,
about ceremonial circumstances; or it may be some difference in Judgment in the
manner of Church-constitution, or observation of Ordinances, or order of
Discipline, to the exposing one another unto the devouring jaws of Cruelty; by
Imprisonment, loss of Estate and Life, for not conforming the one to the other
in an outward conformity, although in judgment and conscience there is no
union, as experience does manifest in the dealings of the Papists with the
Protestants, and the Protestants one toward another in the case of
nonconforming outwardly in religious worship, in those things that in judgment
and conscience they cannot act Faith in, as to be agreeable to the will of God;
whereas, if Christians in name would be Christians in nature, and act one
toward another in the qualifications of Christ; if difference in judgment
should cause a dividing in the matter of assembling in religious worship for
conscience sake; yet Ephraim need no more envy Judah, nor Judah vex Ephraim,
but each enjoy his own privileges and liberty of Conscience in Religious
Worship, without any more hailing into Captivity, or complaining in our
streets, by reason of the tender Conscience being oppressed?

Obj. But we are commanded to contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to
the Saints; and the more, because of certain men crept in unawares, who were
before of old ordained to this Condemnation, Ungodly men turning the grace of
God into Laciviousness, and deny the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ,
Jude 1.4.

Ans. First: We are to consider the persons concerned in the duty, of
contending, to be Christians called into a Church Assembly in the faith and
order of the Gospel.

Secondly: For what they should contend, and that is said to be for the Faith
once delivered to the Saints, or the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the
observation thereof accordingly.

Thirdly: With whom they should contend; and those are gainsayers of corrupt
principles, and gainsayers of corrupt practices.

Fourthly: The manner of the mannagement of this contention also is
considerable, and that is twofold, as 1. Respecting persons without the
Church, as not being Church Members: 2ly. Persons within the Church, as
Church Members. As to persons without, there is no way of contending with them,
to bring them into an imbracement of the Gospel and Church Membership thereby,
but the management of the word of God unto them, and the example of a Godly
life; and if they will not be won thereby, there is no other forceable means
upon Gospel-record approved, that the Church of Christ should by temporal
penalties force them into Church Membership, before, through Faith in Christ,
they are made willing thereunto; for temporal penalties may force the body into
a way of worship, but they cannot force the spirit; and God requires no such
worship, for the time is come (says Christ,) that they that worship the
Father, must worship him in spirit and in truth, for the Father seeks such to
worship him, Joh. 4.23, 24. And Paul asserteth his remembrance of the believing
Romans in his Prayers, with this testimony; God is my witness (says he) whom I
serve with my spirit in the Gospel of his Son, that without ceasing, etc. Note
here, Paul's Spirit and Gospel Truth are joined together in the worship of the
Father; such the Father seeks to worship him: Now Club-law cannot beat these
two together, although laid on by human might and power. As says the Lord
concerning Christ, and his building of his Gospel Church under the denomination
of his Zerubabel; not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord,
Zach. 4.6, 7. Hereunto agrees those words of the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 10.4.
The Weapons of our warfare are not Carnal, but mighty through God, to the
casting down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every high thing
that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into Captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ: the which weapons he does further
explain, Ephesians. 6.14. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with Truth
and the breast plate of Righteousness, and your feet shod with the preparation
of the Gospel of peace, taking the shield of Faith, and the helmet of
Salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, praying
always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto
with all perseverance. These, and the like weapons, are the weapons of the holy
Catholic Church, that believes aright, and is universal in the truth, by
which, they manage their contention with those that are without; and those that
withstand that means, are to be left out of the Church in the world, during
the pleasure of the Almighty, and to be judged by that means they have rejected
and condemned with the world, in the day that God shall judge the world by
Jesus Christ.

But secondly: The text says there are certain men crept in unawares, ungodly
men, etc. It seems that there were some in those times, that by pretending
Faith in Christ, were admitted into Church Membership, which afterward
discovered themselves by an ungodly lacivious life: These it seems had no
right unto Church Membership, although a right to the hearing of the Word by
virtue of Christ's Commission, yet not unto Church Membership; they crept in
unawars: that is, their counterfeit Faith was not discerned, until afterward
that it appeared by error in opinion or practice.

But how must the Church contend for the Faith with these persons, and carry on
the management thereof?

First: In a respective love to their persons, tendering the good of their
souls, but with a hatred of their sin; and in love to their souls, to reprove
and admonish them; laying before them that part of Gods Law, against which the
crime is acted; that thereby, they may the better be convinced and reform, and
so by the sword of the spirit, the word of God, to deal with them, if possible,
unto a Reformation. But in case no Reformation does appear, then to proceed in
the severity of Justice against them by Excommunication, according to Christ's
rule and order; and thereby cast them out of the Church into the world again,
as not to have any further privilege in the Church then what the Lord affords
the world, which is admittance to hear the Word for their Conversion. But what
is the end of this severity? There are diverse ends; as first, To signify God's
severity against sin and obstinate sinners, that as they are justly, for sin,
cast out of Communion with his Church, and the gracious privileges thereunto
afforded here on Earth: So assuredly, without timely Repentance unto a
Reformation, such persons are by God's determination, and shall be by the
sentence of the just Judge of all the world, See Math. 18.18.
excluded from Communion with the Church triumphant, and all her glorious
privileges in her glorified state.

Secondly: To the end, that the Sinner may consider and see his sin, be humbled
for it, 1 Timothy 1.20.
and ashamed of it, and repent unto a reformation, that the soul may be saved
in the day of the Lord: see 1 Cor. 5.

Thirdly: To the end, the Church may preserve her own purity and holy-state,
from being defiled with those sins, which if suffered, may get into other
members and corrupt them, and it becomes a sin unto the Church in her neglect
of duty; see the Church of Corinth, chap. 5. the Church of Pergamus, and the
Church of Thyatira, Rev. 2. all under reproof here upon the neglect of this
duty.

Neither is the Church in general, nor the Officers thereof in particular, to
make Edicts of their own devising, and enjoin them as parts of God's worship,
and to be observed, which are not Apostolically confirmed as to be the will of
God, nor to Excommunicate any person for not observing the same, without
defiling their holy state with the guilt of sin; for says Christ unto those
persons that stood steadfast in the Apostolical Observations, and received not
the contrary, I will put upon you (says Christ) none other burden, but that
which ye have already; hold fast till I come, Rev. 2.24, 25.

Whence note by the way; First, That it is the will of Christ that his people
should observe that way of Church-constitution, Doctrine, order of Worship and
discipline, which was Apostolically confirmed without diminishing ought
therefrom, until the second coming of Christ.

Secondly: That it is not the will of Christ that any Innovasions or Additions
to that order of Worship should be brought in, or imposed upon the Consciences
of his people, but that the Innovators, and Observers, shall bear their sin,
and in retaining the Observations of the said Innovations, do thereby cease
from being Catholic, or a people universal in the Truth.

But in case Innovations are brought into the Church, and maintained by the
power of the Church, and imposed upon the Members; and some of the Members
cannot in Conscience bear them, what way may they take to secure themselves
from the guilt of sin, that attends the Church in the Observations of such
Innovations, and not sin against God? Answer, first: By contending against
them, by the rule of truth, that if by any means the Church may be convinced of
their Evil; and if this will not prevail, then to answer the call of God and
his Counsel therein; which is, To come forth from among them, and be separate,
and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, says the Lord, 2 Cor.
6.17. Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing; go
ye out of the midest of her, be ye clean ye that bear the Vessels of the Lord,
Isa. 52.11. Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins,
and that ye receive not of her Plagues, Rev. 18.4.

The which call of God, I do presume was justifiable in Luther and Calvin, and
other Protestants, who for the abominable Innovations of the Roman Church, did
dissent and separate from her; which although she was once a true Church of the
Gospel-Constitution and Order, as the Apostle Paul in his Epistle gives
Testimony of them, calling them Beloved of God, and gives thanks to God that
their Faith was spoken of through-out the whole world, as in chap. 1.7, 8. And
I my self (says Paul) also am persuaded of you my Brethren, that ye also are
full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish one another,
chap. 15. 14.

Yet notwithstanding, in process of time, she has much corrupted her self by
her own Edicts and Innovations, contrary to the rule of Truth, as to become a
Mystery, a Babel of Confusion, rather than the Catholic Church of Jesus
Christ. And whereas she does contend with her dissenters by the temporal Sword,
by Fire and Faggot, and Imprisonment, and the like, she seems to sit on the
scarlet-colored Beast, making her self drunk with the blood of Saints, as it
is written, Rev. 18. The which way of contending, Jesus Christ has not allowed
to his Church in all the dispensation of the Gospel, that Tares (although
Tares) should be plucked up out of the world, lest they pluck up Wheat also.
And if in case the Protestant Churches that have cast off the Supremacy of the
Romish Church, and shall yet retain some of her Innovations and Ceremonial
Circumstances, or bring in and impose other of their own, which are not
warranted by Gospel-testimony, to be agreeable to the will of God, to the
satisfying of tender Consciences, and shall exercise the like power to force
the said Impositions upon the Conscience in the matters of God's Worship; then,
if any persons shall in Love and Loyalty to the Lord, hearken to the call of
God, and come forth and separate, to the end they may set their feet in the
holy ways of God, and worship him in his holy appointments, exposing themselves
to the bearing of the Cross for Jesus sake; then let the said Protestant
Churches blame themselves, and not those that separate from them unto the
aforesaid end; for Christ's Sheep will hearken for the voice of Christ to
warrant their undertakings in the matters of their God; they must worship him
in spirit and in truth, for the Father seeks such to worship him, wherefore
worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness, according to the pattern in the
Mount, or that which is Apostolically set forth unto us: wherefore, according
to the exhortation given by the Apostle Peter, Let us every one lay aside all
Malice, Guile, Hypocrisies, Envyings, and Evil speakings; and as newborn Babes
desire the Milk of the Mothers breast, and feed thereon for its natural
nourishment: So let every one of us desire the sincere Milk of God's Word, so
as to feed thereon for our spiritual nourishment and growth in the knowledge of
Christ, and qualifications of grace, till we have Christ formed in us, as the
Apostle says, Gal. 4.19. And we conformed to his Image in Righteousness and
true Holiness, according to the sore-Predestination or Appointment of God, Romans
8.29. That when he shall come as a Bridegroom, to receive his Spouse unto
himself, and to settle her in his Heavenly Mansions, which he is now preparing
for her, we being found in those Wedding Robes, may be accepted of him, and
received by him into Communion with him to the participation of his choycest
Loves, in that inheritance which sadeth not away; and in the mean time, let us
(as the Holy Ghost says) follow after those things that make for peace, and
things whereby one may Edify another; and as the Apostle says, Let all your
things be done in Charity, 1 Cor. 16.14. For although (says the Apostle) I
speak with the tongues of Men and Angels, and have all the gifts of Prophecy;
understand all Mysteries, and all Knowledge, and all Faith to remove Mountains;
give all my Goods to feed the Poor, and my Body to be burned, and have not
Charity, it profits me nothing, Cor. 13.1, 2, 3.

Knowledge and gifts not sanctified with the qualifications of the graces of
Christ, puffs up (says the Apostle) 1 Cor. 8.1. But Charity edifieth, Love
works no ill to his Neighbor, therefore Love is the fulfilling of the Law,
Romans 13.10. Surely if this grace of Love in Jesus Christ was so rooted and
grounded in our hearts, as to become the qualification in us, and principle
from whence our words and actions both toward God and men did proceed, how
would peace and unity adorn our habitations, and holiness show forth it self to
the praise and glory of God the Father? how would our knowledge, gifts, and all
enjoyments be sanctified to us in the use thereof; and Envy, Strife, and
Contention dissolve and fly away? But I must hasten to another Use that my
Doctrine leads me to, and that is a Use by way of caution unto the Saints, or
those that have attained unto a good degree in the Ornament of Holiness.

CHAP. X.
Containing a Use by way of Caution unto the Saints, or those that have
attained unto a good degree in the Ornament of Holiness.
IT is a common thing among most people, that when they have cast off their old
Garments, and put on new that are comely and fashionable, credible, and
profitable, to be very careful and cautious, and take great heed of them lest
they should be defaced with spots and stains of pollution; and it is Wisdom so
to do, and a point of prudence; and if the Children of this world are so wise
in their Generation, for the preserving of their temporal concerns, how much
more are the Children of God concerned to exercise much wisdom and prudence, in
being very cautious (with great heed and care) that their credible,
fashionable, and comely Ornament of Holiness be preserved from the stains and
pollutions of sin? All sin is of a defiling nature, and does much stain and
pollute the Soul, together with its Ornaments of Holiness and Sanctity,
whereunto it has attained, and especially when they are committed against
Knowledge and Grace received, as the Apostle says to the Galathians, chap.
4.8. How be it then, when ye knew not God, ye did service to them that were no
Gods; but now after ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how turn ye
again? etc. As if he had said, But now after God has so known you, as to
communicate unto you of his free grace in his Son, and the Truth, as it is in
him to the comfort of your Souls, how turn ye again? etc. Signifying, that sins
against Knowledge and Grace are of a deep defilement, and very hard to be
washed out; requiring not only the hot water, or tears of true Penitency, but
also a measure of infinite mercy to clear the stains thereof. O how was poor
David fain to struggle at the Throne of Grace, with tears and fears again and
again, for Infinite Mercy to come into his help, to wash out those crimson
stains; and until mercy came in, all that he could do, would not clear the
stains thereof! still the complaint was, My Sin is ever before me.

When sin does stand before the Actors face,
The cry thereof is Judgment, with disgrace:
If Mercy come not in, the stain to clear,
How greatly is the Soul possessed with fear?
That for its sin, it should condemned be,
And bear the Wrath that is due Eternally.
When Peter's sin was set before his face, how did the sight and sense thereof
cause him bitterly to weep, and wash his stain with the Laver of brinish tears,
and lamenting sorrow; yet had not infinite Mercy come in to his help, how had
he been foiled under the same wherefore admire God's Mercy, but presume not
upon the same for any allowance to sin; for he has said, Romans 9.15. I will
have mercy upon whom I will have mercy. Esau found no place of Repentance,
although he sought it carefully with tears, Heb. 12.

Therefore of Sin, in time beware,
If you would prevent an after care.
But Secondly: All ye that have begun in the spirit, and set your faces
Sion-wards, O be very cautious, and take great heed, and be very watchful
against sin; because as it is of a defiling nature, so is it also of a
depriving nature: Sin in God's people, many times deprives them of many
comfortable enjoyments, which otherwise they might happily enjoy: Sin depriveth
Angels of their Heaven, Man of his Paradise, Israel of his Canaan, and many a
poor soul of the manifestation of God's favor, both in temporal and spiritual
enjoyments, as is evidenced by the word of the Lord in many Testimonies:
whereof let us consider one testimony, Jer. 2.2. Thus says the Lord concerning
Israel, I remember thee, the kindness of thy Youth, the love of thine
Espousals, when thou wentest after me in the Wilderness, in a Land that was not
sown. Israel was Holiness to the Lord, and the first fruits of his increase;
all that devour him shall offend, evil shall come upon them says the Lord. In
which words the Lord puts them in mind of their former kindness and love unto
him, and their walking with him in that their former state, then Israel was
holiness unto the Lord; and yet in the next verses, the Lord is taking up this
complaint against them; What Iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they
are gone far from me, and have walked after Vanity, and become vain; and in
chap. 5. he says, Your sins have withheld good things from you.

From which words we may note four particulars.

First: That God's people are very apt to decline from their first degree of
holiness, obtained in their first Illuminations and Experiences of God. They
were holiness to the Lord in their first Espousals, but now become vain, and
gone from God; the Church of Ephesus was eminent for God, but now fallen from
her first love, Rev. 2.

Secondly: Note, that the people of God are usually most holy, and walk most
close with God, when they have but little of these outward things to depend
upon: When thou wentest after me in the Wilderness, in a Land that was not
sown, then Israel was Holiness to the Lord.

Thirdly: Note, that the more close God's people keep to him in the way of
Holiness, the sooner shall their Adversaries in their enterprises be defeated:
All that devour him shall offend; evil shall come upon them, says the Lord.

Fourthly: Note, that God's people declining the way of Holiness, deprive
themselves of comforts very great, and not their Enemies, but themselves do often
thereby defeat, Hos. 8.3. Israel has cast off the thing that is good, the
Enemy shall pursue him.

But Thirdly, by way of Caution.

As God's people are greatly concerned to take heed, and be very cautious of
meddling with sin, because it is of a defiling nature, and also of a depriving
nature, so is it also of a destroying nature: Sin suffered in the Creature, and
not washed out by true Repentance and rich Mercy as aforesaid, and especially
when entertained with delight: O how will it not only stain our Ornaments of
Grace and Holiness, but also eat up and destroy by degrees, like the Moth in
the Garment, and the Worm in the Nut, the very life, marrow, and quintescence
of Christianity or power of Godliness; even that love, zeal, reality, and
sincerity of heart, with all those gifts and spiritual endowments and
enjoyments formerly attained, until there be nothing left but an outside form
of Godliness, if that; so that the Creature becomes as to spiritual
performances, and acts of grace in the life and power thereof, but like unto a
man whose soul is departing, or departed, little left but an outside Carcass;
and if a little, yet but weak in motion, as the Holy Ghost does seem to
testify, concerning the Estate of the Church of Sardis, Rev. 3.1, 2. I know thy
works (says the Lord) Thou have a name that thou live, but art dead; be
watchful and strengthen the things that remain, and are ready to dye. Whence
observe, here was only a name; that is to say, an outside form, or show of
Godliness; but as for the power of Godliness, the very marrow and quintescence
of Christianity, that was as it were even at the last gasp, in a dead or a
dying condition; and this seems to be the state of most in that Church,
excepting a few names (says the Lord) that have not defiled their Garments;
from whence we are given to understand, that the main ground and reason that
the life and power of Godliness were thus destroyed in them, was their want of
watchfulness against sin; but suffering it to grow and increase in them, either
by omision of duties required, or committing sins forbidden, or both, they
being allowed and continued, without a true Repentance to a Reformation. To
this does the Estate of the Churches of Ephesus and Laodicea witness, as also
many other presidents in holy Scripture; the which, to run over so large a
field, my present time and occasions will not permit; wherefore let us be very
cautious how we meddle with it, but watch against it, take heed and be ware of
it, and the occasions thereof, whether they be sins of Omission or Commission;
all sins are of a destructive nature, and especially sins against Knowledge and
Grace received, being allowed and approved of, or winked and connived at: How
plentifully does the Scripture set forth the destructive nature of sin, and
particularly those Grandees, Infidelity, Hypocrisy, Heresy, Drunkenness, and
Gluttony, profane Swearing, and Blasphemy, Whoredom and Adultery,
Coveteousness and Idolatry, Pride, Presumption, and Oppression, and the like:
The which sins are (with many other) not only destructive to soul and body,
gifts and graces, but also unto Families and Church-fellowships, Cities and
Countries, Kings and Kingdoms, as the Scriptures do plentifully evince, as says
the Lord by Samuel, chap. 12.25. But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be
consumed, both you and your King; in which words are intimated as to Israel, so
to us; that if a people do live in such a wicked vicious life, as highly to
provoke God's Justice against them, that then God would consume them with such
Judgments, as they, nor their King should be able to withstand.

Whence note by the way, that men of a wicked vicious Conversation, thereby
endeavor ruin to their King and Nation; concerned therefore is the Kings
Authority for to suppress such wickedness and grand impiety.

Secondly: Note by the way, that men in whom is civil honesty, and Godly
sincerity, are the best Subjects; for whose sake many times the tranquillity of
a City or Nation is prolonged; wherefore all ye that have any respect unto your
Native Country, King and Kingdom, or unto your own souls, and yet are solacing
your selves in wicked vicious ways, let Daniels Counsel find acceptance with
you, To break off your Sins by Righteousness, and your Iniquities by showing
Mercy to the Poor, if it may be a lengthening of your own tranquillity, and of
your Country, King and Kingdom, Dan. 4.27.

And all ye that are Descipled to Christ, and by confession of Faith and
Baptism, have joined your selves into a Congregational way of
Church Communion, to live to Christ, and to walk with him in all his holy
appointments contained in his word; remember Christ's Counsel by way of caution
to you: Take heed (says he) unto your selves, that your hearts be not
overcharged with Surfeting and Drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that
day come upon you unawares; for as a snare shall it come upon all them that
dwell upon the face of the whole Earth: Watch ye therefore and pray always,
that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things, and to stand before
the Son of man, Luke 21.34, 35, 36. O consider, the Caution is a piece of
Divine Counsel, take heed therefore: And as Surfeiting and Drunkenness is
become a part of the abounding sins of this Age and Nation, and many
temptations and opportunities thereunto are presented, and many evils thereby
does ensue; take heed therefore, watch and pray against the temptations,
occasions, and evils thereof; and consider, that as Drunkenness dismables and
makes a man unmeet for divine Contemplations and Religious Services, so also
the immoderate cares of this life makes persons unfit and unmeet for the same,
and also unmeet for the enjoyments of glory: Therefore take heed, and beware,
watch and pray against the same; also consider what dishonor it is to God,
what reproach to religious profession, what grief to the spirit and spiritual
persons, and wounds to your own Souls attend thereupon: Take heed therefore,
watch and pray always, that ye may escape these things; once again consider,
that unto you that are Christians by profession, these sins are sins against
divine Love, Light, and Knowledge received; sins against rich grace, sins of a
deep defilement, sins against Covenant-mercies and obligations, which if after
we have escaped such corruptions through divine Illuminations and Experiences
of God in Heavenly concernments, and shall again therewith be entangled and
brought in bondage, may not the last state be worse then the first? Therefore
take heed, watch and pray, that ye may be able to withstand all temptations,
and to stand before the Son of man. If our first Parents Adam and Eve, in their
estate of Innocence, did, by yielding unto one temptation against the known Law
of God, so corrupt themselves and Posterity, as to stain and pollute their
Ornaments of Holiness and Righteousness, and thereby disable themselves to
withstand many other temptations without a divine assistance; how do we know,
but we, by yielding unto one temptation, to transgress allowingly the Law of
God known unto us, may thereby disable our selves to withstand Satan in many
other of his wiles? one sin may give advantage to another; and therefore take
heed, watch and pray for divine assistance, that ye fall not in temptation; and
as we are to take heed of viciousness of life, so also of corruptness of
judgment in the points of Faith by false Doctrines, which are likewise some of
Satan's baits and subtle wiles, wherewith he lies in wait to deceive; take heed
therefore, watch and pray against the same, try before ye trust, and prove them
by the word of Christ before ye embrace; If any bring not the Doctrine of
Christ, receive him not into your house, neither bid him Godspeed, for he that
bideth him Godspeed, is partaker of his evil deeds: As says Saint John in his
second Epistle, verse. 9, 10, 11. Take heed (says Christ our Savior) for many
shall come in my name, and shall deceive many: Take heed therefore, watch and
pray, that ye may obtain a firm Faith in Christ, and a well-grounded judgment
in his Counsel, contained in his Word, his Testimonies, Commands and Promises
to the enabling of you to live therein, and according thereunto, to the
perfecting holiness in the fear of God. Plentiful is the Scripture of Cautions
upon this account, whereunto I shall refer you, and proceed unto a further
prosecution of this Use by way of Caution, considering that omission of Duties
required, is sin of dangerous consequence as well as actual transgression. Take
heed, and beware of neglect of duty, and particularly the omission of action in
the Word of God and Prayer: The Word or Doctrine of Christ is sometimes called
the word of Faith, because it is the ordinary means in the ministration of it
to beget Faith, and to nourish Faith, and to complete Faith in a Soul toward
Jesus Christ: It is sometimes said to be the power of God to Salvation unto
every one that believes; because the tendancy, use, and efficacy of it, is to
the directing, leading, and nourishing of Souls up to the seize of
Salvation by Jesus Christ: And as it is the requirement of God, that the Sons
and Daughters of men should harken diligently unto his Word in the
ministrations of it, and to meditate therein, and to apply it, and improve it
to the glory of his Name, and to their seize unto holiness and happiness,
so it becomes a duty incumbent upon us to be active therein; Therefore take
heed and beware of neglect in this great duty, and our omission thereof become
our great sin, and the Word that we have omitted, become a witness against us
to our Condemnation: And let those that through grace have received ministerial
gifts, and employed in the work of the Ministry, take heed of omitting
willingly or carelessly what the Lord requires at their hands in order to their
feeding of the Flock of God; take heed therefore of omitting, but watch and
pray for opportunities to the work, and for divine assistance in the work, that
ye stain not your Ornaments of Holiness by the sin of Omission.

And in the duty of Prayer, take heed of Omission, lest it become sin unto us;
God forbid (says Samuel) that I should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray
for you, 1 Samuel 12.23. God's People are required to pray for an increase of
Laborers in the work of the Ministry, and for an increase of gifts and
qualifications suitable to the work in those that are already employed: And if
Paul did stand in need of, and required the Prayers of God's People, who was
extraordinarily gifted; how much more ordinary gifted-Ministers? Paul required
the Prayers of the Christians, in order to his preservation from the hands of
wicked and unreasonable men: And herein Christians ought to be active at the
Throne of grace in behalf of Gospel Ministers now, and especially when the
storms of Persecution arise against them.

Christians are required to pray for the civil Magistrate, for Kings, and all
that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
Godliness and honesty, for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our
Savior. The Office of Magistracy is an Ordinance of God, appointed to execute
Justice against evil doers; but for the praises and protection of them that do
well; the Office is weighty, and of great concernment, and requires not only
humain Wisdom and Counsel, but divine also, to the well management thereof;
therefore it is of concernment that God be sought unto, both by the Magistrate,
and also by the Subjects on the Magistrates behalf, for divine assistance in
Wisdom, Understanding, and Faithfulness of heart; for the well management of
the civil Laws, according to the Will of God, and the glory of his Name, and
the Subjects privileges: Wherefore, as Gospel-injunction does require the
duty, take heed of omitting the same, lest it become a sin, defiling and
staining the Ornament of Holiness in your seize thereof.

Also, consider that this duty of Prayer is extended as the duty of every
Christian, not only for themselves, but also for one another, and for Enemies
and Persecutors: Therefore take heed, omit not the duty, lest it become sin
unto us of a deep pollution; Continue in Prayer, and watch thereunto with
thanksgiving, Col. 4.2. Note, Here is a further duty to be joined with Prayer,
for Christians to be active in, and that is Thanksgiving: All our enjoyments
are said to be sanctified to us by the Word of God and Prayer, and are to be
received with thanksgiving. He that offers praise, glorifieth me, says the
Lord: Praises and thanksgiving to God, is a Heavenly exercise, a work
requirable here in the Kingdom of grace, and more perfectly performed in the
Kingdom of glory by Saints and Angels in their glorified state. God that has
blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus, is worthy of all
praise and thanksgiving to the glory of his Name; from him we receive all our
spiritual and temporal enjoyments, and unto him belongs praise and
thanksgiving to the glory of his Name: Every mercy enjoyed, calls for a return
of praise to the Lord, from whom it does proceed: Therefore let us be careful
here, take heed of omitting this great duty, lest we be found deep in sin, and
our Ornaments of Holiness be defiled: Ten Leapers were cleansed by Christ, but
where are the nine? only one returned to praise the Lord.

Take heed therefore, watch and pray, that you may be sensible of God's mercies
afforded, and not forgetful of your returns: I cannot here stand to number up
the mercies afforded to us, they are great and large; yet here is one among the
many I would say something to.

It is not long, since a strong, rough, East wind did blow upon us for several
years; it may be the Lord had a good end in it, as to sift us, to prove and try
the reality of our hearts toward him in our undertakings, to blow away the
Chaff, but to preserve the Wheat; so that although tried, yet the Lord in
measure did debate with it; so that although under the left hand of affliction,
yet upholden by a right hand of mercy: So that as the Apostle says, We were
troubled on every side, yet not distressed; Persecuted, but not forsaken; cast
down, but not destroyed. Herein are we to behold God's hand with much
thankfulness, and to take heed that we forget not his Providence, under which
rough dispensation, we may remember that we did set several days apart to seek
the Lord by Fasting and Prayer, laying our condition and cause before him: And
for as much as it has pleased the Lord suddenly to turn back the rough stormy
wind, and to bring a calmy Southern serene refreshing gale upon us, in such a
way as was unexpected by us, although our hope in him was for a deliverance in
his time, and which way should seem good unto himself, for the glory of his
name; and indeed, as the Lord is admirable in all his works and ways, so in
this; that by the same hand he did chastise us, by the same hand he should
deliver us: as if the Lord was minded to seal the truth of those words of
Solomon unto us; that, the Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord; as the
rivers of water he turns it whither soever he will, Prove. 21.1. O who has
known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor; did we think such
a thing, or did our Prosecutors expect it? may not we herein say with the
Psalmist? When the Lord turned again the Captivity of Zion, we were like them
that dream: Rather question whether it was a real thing, or a fained, then
readily to believe it.

But for-as-much as it has pleased God thus admirably to answer our poor
Petitions put up unto him in the name of Jesus Christ, beyond our deservings or
expectations; let us in these ensuing particulars be very cautious, and take
heed, and beware.

First: That we do not omit the attribution of this our deliverances to the
Lord, to the glory of his Name, as the original Author thereof, and to the King
as an instrument in his hand, lest the omission hereof become sin unto us, and
a stain unto our holy Atchievments; but rather with Ezra, say, Blessed be the
Lord, that has put such a thing as this in the Kings heart.

Secondly: That we be very cautious, and take great heed, and beware of
omitting our duty in a return of praises suitable to the benefits we receive by
the Lords answering us in our requests unto him. O let it not be said of us as
once of Hezekiah; But he rendered not again, according to the Benefit done unto
him, 2 Chro. 32.25. And of Israel, that when he slew them, Then they sought
him, and enquired early after God, and they remembered that God was their Rock,
and the high God their Redeemer, Psalm. 78.34, 35. but they soon forgot his
works, they waited not for his Counsel, Psalm. 106.13. But rather so apply and
improve his benefits herein, as to make them the greater obligation to us to
love the Lord, to trust in him, and to wait upon him in his holy appointments
as long as we live, as says the Psalmist; I love the Lord, because he has
heard my voice and my supplication; because he has inclined his ear unto me,
therefore will I call upon him as long as I live, Psalm. 116.1, 2.

Thirdly: Let us be very cautious, and take heed unto our selves, and beware,
that by Carnal security we abuse not our liberty and privilege of prosperity
by acts of vanity, and neglect of our duties in true Christianity, and so make
our privilege of liberty and prosperity to become of greater damage to us than
ten or twelve years of Persecution has ever yet done; for as much as we shall
sin under the greater Mercies, and so must expect the greater Judgments from
the Lord: There is, in a day of Prosperity, more danger of a peoples growing
into Carnal Security, and forgetting of their God, than in a day of affliction,
if we take not heed; as the Lord said to Israel of old, When ye shall come into
the good Land, and have Houses builded, and Vineyards, and Olives planted, and
your Cattle multiplied, and ye have eaten and are full; then beware that thou
forget not the Lord thy God, in not keeping his Commandments, and Judgments,
and Statutes, which I Command thee this day, that then thou forget not the Lord
thy God that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of
Bondage, Deuteronomy. 6.12.

Whence note, that God's People that have had great experiences of God, are in
times of peace and plenty very apt to forget the Lord, and to turn aside from a
due observation of his ways, and thereby defile themselves with the sins of
ingratitude, and great disobedience under eminent mercies, highly provoking the
Lord: would we be a holy people unto the Lord? Let Isreal's and others sins, and
punishments for the same, make us timely to beware lest we stain our chiefest
Ornaments thereby, and watch and pray against such ingratitude; the neglect
whereof, may cause God to neglect us of those supplies of grace necessary to
uphold us; and in all our approaches to the Lord, we are also to take heed, and
be careful that our end be right; that we might glorify God in our act of
Prayer, and our end of asking any thing of God, may be for our better
glorifying of his Name; the end many times crowns the action; as the words of
Saint James does imply; Ye have not, because ye ask not; and ye ask, and have
not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your Lusts, Jam. 4.2, 3.
Wherefore would we have God to supply and support us, let us not omit our duty
in seeking to him; would we have him answer us in our seeking to him? then let
us take heed that we omit not a right end in what we seek unto him for.

The omission of one thing more I would present, to mind, that we take heed of
(lest it should become sin unto us), and that is, of omitting the ministering of
our temporal things unto such as perform the Office of ministering unto us in
spiritual things, especially if it be by the Minister required; for as much as
the Lord has so required and ordained that they that Preach the Gospel, should
live of the Gospel: The Apostle Paul would have the Churches know their duty in
this point, and the Ministers power to require it, although he voluntarily
would rather work with his hands, then to be chargable to the Churches: But as
for me, as I have not been chargable hitherto in that nature, for what has by
me been done upon that account, so do I not desire to make the Gospel chargable
to any, except the greater necessity; yet as Paul would, so would I have
Christians know their concernment in this point, as well as other points of
Christianity, and to take heed, lest Omission here do not become a sin of deep
pollution, since it is doubtless the requirement of God: see 1 Cor. cap. 9.
Gal. 6.6. And let the Minister on the other hand take heed, and beware, that he
make not temporal means and honor the chiefest end and master-wheel of his
motion in the work of the Ministry, and it become a pollution of the Ornaments
of holiness unto him.

Also take heed and beware of omitting actions of charity toward the poor, and
it become our sin; For as much (says Christ) as ye have not done it to one of
the least of these my Brethren, ye have not done it unto me; go ye therefore
into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels; but he that gives
to the Poor, lends to the Lord, and he will repay it: Blessed is the man that
considers the Poor, the Lord will deliver him in the time of trouble.

And so I shall conclude this Use by way of Caution, with those words of Deuteronomy.
4.9. Only take heed to thy self, and keep thy Soul diligently, lest thou forget
the things that thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all
the days of thy life; but teach them thy Sons, and thy Sons Sons.

CHAP. XI.
Containing a Use of Encouragement unto Believers, to Press after the
attainment of Holiness, and to Persevere therein.
THe first consideration I shall propound for Encouragement in the prosecution
of this design, for an Estate of Holiness, is, the warrantableness of the
design; it is highly approved of God, insomuch that God does command the
prosecution of this design: Be ye holy, for I the Lord your God am holy.
Persons prosecuting this design for holiness in God's way, out of which there
is no attainment, they do hereby answer God's Will, and a good Conscience, the
which is a good encouragement in the prosecution of a design; a good issue and
success thereof may be expected: But Secondly,

A second ground of encouragement in the prosecution of this design, may arise
upon the consideration of the promise of assistance in the management of this
design for holiness, made to the prosecutors of the said design.

A man having a design for his advancement in this world, either for the
obtaining some great Estate of Land, or place of Honor and Dignity, and having
the word of a King for his assistance, by his Countenance, his Court and
Counsel, his Laws and Authority for the accomplishment thereof; how does this
raise up, and enlarge the heart of this man with encouragement in the
prosecution of his design, and confirm his hope of attaining his end therein?
How much more may the Christian-Soul be raised up with confidence, and his
heart enlarged with encouragements in his design for holiness, and hope of
attaining unto the perfection thereof? Considering he has not only the
command, but also the promise of him who is the King of Kings, the Omnipotent,
Immortal, and Omni-present Majesty of Heaven and Earth, with all his Heavenly
Court and Counsel, Laws and holy Appointments to protect and assist us in the
management of this great design for our seize unto holiness; without
which no man shall see the Lord.

O what an assistance is this, for a poor Soul to have the whole Court of
Heaven to assist him in his design and management thereof, where God the Father
by his holy appointment does ordain his holy Word and Counsel therein, to
inform us, his holy Spirit to enable us, his holy Angels to encamp about us, to
minister security to us in the said design, and his holy Son, Jesus Christ, to
Crown us with the perfection of Holiness in himself; considering also that he
is faithful that has promised, who also will do it.

O what great encouragement is this that the Lord has laid before us? What
rich grace is this, that God does not only command us to be holy, because he is
holy, but attends upon us with all holy means appertaining to the attainment of
an holy state; that we in a good improvement of the means, according to his
Counsel against Sin and Satan, and our own Corruptions for the attainment of a
holy life; we might both Plow in hope, and Sow in the hope of Reaping a sure
and certain Estate of holiness in its perfection, to the great joy and
consolation of the Soul, in the sweet enjoyments of Communion with the Lord:
But Thirdly,

As we may be encouraged in this design, by the warrantableness of it, God
highly approving of it; and secondly, from the promise of God to assist us in
the management of the design: So thirdly, we may be much encouraged upon the
consideration of the faithfulness of him that has promised assistance to us;
Know therefore (says Moses) that the Lord thy God, is God, the Faithful God
which keeps Covenant and Mercy with them that love him, and keep his
Commandments to a thousand Generations, Deuteronomy. 7.9. This is an excellent
encourageing argument and attribute of God, to strengthen the courage and
confidence of a Christian in his design, for the perfecting holiness in the
fear of God; if a Christian in the management of this design, do meet with
temptations and oppositions by the Lusts of the flesh, the Devil, or Wicked
men, here is a special ground of courage and confidence; God is faithful, who
will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able, but will with the
temptation also, make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it, 1 Cor.
10.13.

Should a Christian in his management of this design be possessed with some
fear or jealousy of its own Imperfections and Weaknesses, that by reason of
the same it shall not attain unto an estate of Holiness, to stand acceptable
without blame in the sight of God: Here in this Case-consider, that God is
faithful who has Called you unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our
Lord, 1 Cor. 1.8, 9.
who will also confirm you unto the End: that ye may be blameless in the Day
of our Lord Jesus Christ: Wherefore thou Christian Soul pressing after the
attainment of Holiness, consider Gods faithfulness as a remedy against any
fears, doubts, or jealousies, that may arise upon the sight or sense of thy own
weakness and imperfections: has God also called thee unto the fellowship of
his Son, to walk with him in his holy Laws and Council contained in his Word,
striving against Sin, for to attain unto an Holy state? God has also called
thee unto the fellowship of his Son, in the participation of his Righteousness
and true Holiness; in which Robes he will accept thee as unblameable in his
sight: Faithful is he that calls you, who also will do it, 1 These. 5.24.
Therefore press after Holiness, but against the defilements of sin, depending
on Christ for perfection therein, who Crowns Saints endeavors, and adds to
their store, his own perfect purity; to acceptance evermore.

Thou have a few names (says the Lord to the Church of Sardis) That have not
defiled their Garments. It seems these few persons did carefully endeavor in
the use of the means, to keep up and nourish the life and power of Godliness in
them, so as not to allow themselves in that deadness and sloathfulness that
others were found in, nor in those false doctrins and opinions that were on
foot among others; neither in those loose and lacivious practices and
abominations of the times; but their hearts being real to the Lord, and their
careful endeavors was to keep themselves undefiled from the sins of the times.

So the Lord Jesus Christ does record them here, according to their careful
endeavors and integrity of their hearts, although they might have failings and
imperfections, without which there is no man on this side the grave; yet they
being not allowed but endeavored against, the Lord seems to take not any
notice thereof, nor lays any thing to their charge on that account; for as
much as such souls, thus conscientious of sin, do in the sense of their own
imperfections, the more humble themselves before the Lord, admiring his mercy,
and judge themselves unworthy of the same. Well, but what of these few; They
(says the Lord) shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy. Note, here
for encouragement in this design for holy seize, two things especially
laid down in promise to such: First, Union with Christ in his white robes of
Innocence, Righteousness, and Holiness in the perfection thereof; Christ will
cover the failings and imperfections of such souls with his own perfections.
Secondly: Here is Communion with Christ, Christ accepts them in Communion with
himself; They shall walk with me in white: Christ puts his perfections upon
them, as aforesaid, and makes them meet-Companions for himself; They shall walk
with me: O what rich grace is this? what an encouragement is here to press
after such seize, when Christ has engaged himself to make up our wants
with his own fullness; our imperfections, with his own perfections, and thereby
make us meet for fellowship with himself; They shall walk with me in white, for
they are worthy. Note, Here Christ seems to attribute a worthiness in them of
these privileges, although in all that they have done, is but their duty, and
not deserving at the hand of Christ so great privileges; but such is the
gracious goodness of the Lord, that he will not let the gift of a cup of cold
water, Math. 10.42. that is given to one of his Disciples, for his sake, go
unrewarded; how much more respects will he freely show toward those that for
his sake in love to him, do improve his Counsel unto a denial of themselves in
all ungodliness and worldly (Tit. 2.11, 12.) Lusts and Vanities, to walk with
Christ in his Counsel, confessing his Name, and professing his truth, in
opposition to Sin, the World, and the Devil, to the management of this design
of perfecting holiness in the fear of God, to the glory of his Name: Yea, so
does Christ respect such souls, that he confirms his former words with a second
Confirmation; He that overcomes the same, shall be Clothed with white
Raiment, and I will not blot his name out of the book of Life, but I will
confess his name before my Father, and before his Angels, Rev. 3.5. O what
great encouragements has the Lord laid before us! if we are upon the
management of this design for holiness in the way of Christ's Counsel, He will
Cloth us with his own Robes, and keep our names clear in the book of Life; and
confess our names, and bear his Testimony for us before his Father, and before
his Angels, as he also testifyeth, Math. 10.32.

O behold the faithfulness of God, that as he has commanded us to be holy, so
has he graciously promised his assistance to us in our endeavors, by his
Divine Counsel in his Word to inform us, by his Spirit to enable us, his Angels
to secure us; and by his Son, to Crown our weak performances with his own
perfections, to his gracious acceptance; He has made us accepted in the
beloved, Ephesians. 1.6.

Thus having briefly presented three general grounds, comprehending many
particulars, for encouragement to the Christian soul, that in love and loyalty
to the Lord, enters a design for holy seize. As first: The
warrantableness of the design, God manifesting his approbation of it by his
command thereunto. Seconddly: God's promise of assistance. Thirdly: His
faithfulness in performing of his Promise. I shall only present a fourth ground
of encouragement, which is as follows.

A fourth ground of encouragement in this design, is, The sure reward that is
annexed by promise unto those souls that in the way of God, do manage a design
for the attainment of a holy state; unto such souls there is a sure reward, as
says the Spirit of God by Solomon: The Wicked works a deceitful work; but to
him that sows Righteousness, is a sure reward, Prove. 11.18.

This Reward, is sometimes in Scripture called the Reward of Inheritance, as in
Col. 3.24. Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not to men;
knowing, that of the Lord ye shall receive the Reward of Inheritance, for ye
serve the Lord Christ; also this Inheritance is said to be an Eternal
Inheritance, Heb. 9.15. and an Inheritance incorruptible, 1 Pet. 1.4. Sometimes
it is called a Kingdom; as in Matthew. 25.34. and in Luke 12.32. Fear not little
Flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom, a Kingdom that
cannot be moved, Heb. 12.28. Sometimes in Scripture, this Inheritance or
Kingdom is called Eternal Life, as in Joh. 10.28. My Sheep hear my Voice, and
they follow me, and I give unto them Eternal life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand: See further Matthew. 25.46. Romans
6.23.

Quest. But where is this Inheritance or Kingdom, says the enquiring soul,
that I may behold it?

Answ. The Apostle Peter tells us, It is reserved in the Heavens, for you that
are kept by the power of God through faith unto Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.4, 5. Note,
its by the power of God, that ye are kept thereunto; the power of God in the
operation of his Word, and efficacy of his Spirit, working in, and by the Word;
therefore love the Word, delight therein, hold it fast, its the power of God
unto Salvation, unto every one that believes, Romans 1.16. Note also, its
through faith; therefore look well to your faith, make not shiprack of faith,
but keep up faith in its due exercise, for ye are kept by the power of God,
through faith, unto salvation. The Servants of God, of old, did behold the
promised Inheritance by faith, to their great comfort and encouragement, as
says the Author to the Hebrews, chap. 11. These all dyed in faith, not having
received the Promises; but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of
them, and embraced them, and confessed that they were Strangers and Pilgrims on
the Earth: Moses by faith, beheld this recompense of reward, and in respect
thereunto, he chose rather to suffer afflictions with the people of God, then
to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; for he had respect to the
Recompense of Reward.

Quest. But when will it be that this promised Inheritance and Reward shall be
possessed by the Believer, pressing after holiness? many have been in the
expectation of such a thing indeed, but since the Fathers fell asleep, all
things continue as they were from the beginning of the Creation, 2 Pet. 3.4.

Answ. The Apostle Peter affirms, That the Lord is not slack, as some men
count slackness, but is long suffering to us^ ward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to Repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9. It may be that God
has some people yet to Convert, and to add unto his Church, that his coming is
prolonged: But the day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the Night, in the
which the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall
melt with fervent heat; the Earth also, and the works that are therein, shall
be burnt up: Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner
of persons ought ye to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness? Nevertheless,
we according to his promise, look for new Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein
dwells Righteousness. It is enough for us that we have the word of promise
made out, and confirmed to us by the Eternal and Infinite God to exercise our
faith and hope upon; and it is our duty to wait upon him in faith and patience,
for the performance of the same unto us in his time: It is his own free gift,
not our deserts, and that he will at last accomplish it to any soul, it is
infinite mercy to be admired. The spirit of God has signified unto us, that it
will be performed at the second coming of Christ personally, as in Col. 3.4.
When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall we also appear with him
in Glory; whereunto agrees the words of Paul to the Thessalonians, chap. 4.16,
17, 18. which words are these; For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven
with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God, and
the dead in Christ shall rise first; then we which are alive, and remain, shall
be caught up together with them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, and
so shall we ever be with the Lord, wherefore comfort one another with these
words; and in chap. 5. Comfort your selves together, and edify one another,
even as also ye do, verse. 11. Whence Note by the way, that it is the duty of
Christians, and the property of souls, espoused to Christ, so to apply and
improve the promise of Christ's second personal coming, as to make it a ground
of comfort and encouragement one to another, of edification in, and the
observation of all his holy appointments perseveringly.

Our Savior Jesus Christ, a little before his sufferings, being conversant
with his Disciples, and foreseeing the sorrow and trouble that would attend
them after his departure; he, for their better support, encouragement, and
comfort under the same, leaves them this Cordial to feed upon; Let not your
hearts be troubled, (says he) ye believe in God, believe also in me; in my
Fathers House are many Mansions; if it were not so, I would have told you; I go
to prepare a place for you, and if I go and prepare a place for you, I will
come again and receive you to my self, that where I am, ye may be also, Joh.
14.1, 2, 3. The Lord has furnished the holy Scriptures with plenty of
provision of this nature, as if his faithful Servants were likely to have great
need of encouragements, support, and comfort after his departure, by reason of
the many troubles and oppositions the world would raise against them in their
faithful obedience unto him; so that, as the reward of Inheritance is sure, and
certain to the faithful; so the more full accomplishment thereof, will at the
second coming and glorious appearing of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, be
performed.

But of the day and hour knows no man, says our Savior, no not the Angels
in Heaven, but the Father only, Matthew. 24.36. But as a Thief in the Night, will
it come suddenly upon all that dwell upon the Earth; the which does invite
every soul to a diligent watchfulness in the way of God, and a patient waiting
in the expectation thereof, Matthew. 24.42.

The Husbandman (says Saint James) waits with long patience for the
precious fruits of the Earth, until he receive the former and latter Rain: Be
ye also Patient, stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh,
Jam. 5.7. Cast not away therefore your cenfidence, which has great recompense
of reward, for ye had need of Patience, that after ye have done the will of
God, ye might receive the promise, for he that shall come, will come, and will
not tarry; now the Just shall live by Faith, etc. Heb. 10.35, 36, 37. Saint
John says, he saw under the Alter the Souls of them that were slain for the
Word of God, and the Testimony that they held; crying, how long Lord, will thou
not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the Earth; and white Robes
were given to every one of them; and it was said unto them, that they should
rest for a little season, until their fellow Servants also, and their Brethren
that should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled, Rev. 6.9, 10. It may
be the Lord has some of his Servants yet to suffer for his sake, that his
comeing is yet prolonged: And white Robes were given them, and it was said,
that they must rest for a little season, etc. whence Note, first, That Innocent
blood cries for the hastening of Christ's coming to judge and revenge its
cause against its Persecutors; and the Lord will assuredly in due time answer
the cries thereof. Secondly, Note, That Christ's Perfection, with the Reward of
Salvation, being sealed and assured to a Soul by the influences and opperations
of the spirit of Christ, as a pledge of the Fathers love and special favor,
should be unto every such soul of an inducing nature, to move and draw forth
the soul to exercise faith and patience, to wait upon the Lord, with a
dependency upon him to plead its cause, and to revenge its wrongs, and to
perform the accomplishment of all his promises in his own time; he that
believes, makes not have, he waits God's time as the best time.

Wherefore, considering that the management of a design for holy seize,
is attended with such encouragements, as God's Approbation and Command, and his
promise of assistance in the way of attainment, and his crowning our endeavors
with perfection in his Son, and with a Reward of an Eternal Inheritance, to be
fully possessed by the holy people, the Saints of the most high God, at the
second coming of Christ, personally bringing his reward with him; therefore
Beloved, Building up your selves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy
Ghost, keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ unto Eternal Life, Jude v. 20.

CHAP. XII.
Containing a Use of Comfort and Consolation unto those persons that are
industrious in the management of a design for holy seize in the way of
God's Counsel.
CHristian Friends, having related something in the former Chapter, concerning
a Reward of Inheritance or Kingdom, to be possessed by the holy people at the
second comeing of Jesus Christ personally, as a matter or ground of
encouragement unto Holiness; so for a ground of Consolation, I would put into
consideration something of the privileges the heirs of this Inheritance shall
possess in the possession thereof: But I must confess that my capacity is too
narrow to comprehend, and tongues of Men and Angels too short to declare the
excellencies of those privileges in the latitude thereof: But when we shall
come to experience the privileges of that Inheritance, by a full possession
thereof in the glorious presence of the Majesty of the Eternal Deity in the
Heavenly Mansions, we may with admiration say as the Queen of Sheba, concerning
Solomon's Wisdom and Magnificence, that the one half had not been declared to us.

And as the Queen of Sheba was, by the report she had heard drawn forth to make
an experiment of Solomon's Magnificence, by putting her self upon a Journey to
his Court: So hoping that some souls may be provoked to put forth it self upon
a journey toward the Heavenly Court in the paths of Holiness, upon the report
of the excellent privileges thereof, to an experiencing of the Magnificence of
the same, although not the one half be declared. Consider with me these few
particulars as privilegdes appertaining to the heirs of the aforesaid
Inheritance or Kingdom, to be experienced by a perfect possession at the second
coming of Christ personally.

The first general privilege including many particulars, we shall consider to
consist in that excellent and glorious change of the body which at that day
shall be effected in the Resurrection thereof, with a uniting of body and
spirit; in which glorious change the body will be Immortal, no more subject
unto death; a spiritual body, no more subject to hunher, thurst, cold,
sickness, nor any putrefaction whatsoever; an Incorruptible body, no more
subject to sin, temptations, sorrow, fears, tears, nor terrors, neither from
the apprehensions of any oppression by man, nor any displeasure of Almighty
God; but a glorious body, altogether capable of beholding the glorious Essence,
and beautifical presence of the glorious Majesty of the Lord, which excels
the beholding with a mortal eye; for evidences hereunto, see 1 Cor. 15. Rev.
7.16. Rev. 21.4. Our Conversation is in Heaven (says the Apostle) from whence
we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile
bodies, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious Body, according to the
working, whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself, Phil. 3.20, 21. We
know (says Saint John) that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we
shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. Now we see through a glass darkly, but then
face to face; now we know in part, but then shall we know as we are known, 1
Cor 13.12.

He that has this hope, purifieth himself even as he is pure: O thou that art
in the management of a design for Holy Seize, here is a ground of
comfort, encouragement and consolation to thy soul, although men may kill this
vile body, and cut thee off in the way, they cannot deprive thee of thy end;
thou shall be raised again, a glorious body like unto him, who is able to
subdue all things unto himself, and be made capable of that glory, that no
mortal eye is able to behold, nor tongue express: But Secondly,

As the body shall at that day admit of a glorious change, as to be like his
glorious body, so the will, the affections, with every faculty of the soul,
shall in this reunity, be transendently glorious with the Image of God: That
soul, that in this life, by some beams and influences of Christ's love, is
drawn and contracted in love to Christ, and holy longings after further
Communion with him, shall then have its desires accomplished in the glorious
presence of her Beloved; then will that glorious Marriage between Christ and
his Spouse, be gloriously, solemnized with the glorious presence of God the
Father, and Christ the Bridegroom, attended with an innumerable company of
Angels; then shall souls Espoused to Christ here in this day of grace, by some
streams of Christ's love, be then filled with the Ocean of divine love from
Eternity; then will Christ beautify and adorn his Beloved with the glorious
beauty of himself, and make her beautiful and comely, and delightful unto
himself; yea, in that day will Christ give his Spouse the right hand of
fellowship, he will set them on his right hand with this sweet salutation; Come
ye Blessed of my Father, Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you before the
foundation of the World.

O consider, if some drams of Divine Love in Christ will in this day of grace
comfort and refresh a soul, and give cause of rejoicing, how much more will the
soul be filled with joy and consolation, when it comes to live in the full
Ocean of Divine Love from Eternity? Surely this is joy unspeakable, and full of
glory; but Thirdly:

A third privilege belonging to this Kingdom, or reward of Inheritance, may be
considered, consisting of most excellent Associates, Companions in fellowship
and communion together: That soul now pressing after holiness in this day of
grace, and now delighting in such Companions, in whom evidences of grace
appears, shall there live in the full enjoyment of Communion with God the
Father of all our mercies, and with God the Son, the Redeemer of all our
comforts, and with the Holy Ghost, God equal with the Father and the Son; See
Heb. 12 22, 33, 24.
the Illuminator of our understandings, the quickner of us in the life of
grace, the sanctifier of us to the subduing of sin, the helper of our
weaknesses and infirmities in our Christian duties, the seal of our Redemption,
and witness of our Adoption; the souls comforter in Tribulation, and director
in all the paths of holiness; together with an innumerable company of Angels
and glorious Saints, whose Communion of persons shall flow from a perfect union
of spirit; solemnizing a perpetual Sabbath to the Lord, in Praises and
Thanksgivings, in perfection of purity, and real-hearted sincerity in fullness
of joy and consolation; while the Ignorant, and Profane, the Carnal Worldling,
and the Voluptuous, with the Time-serving Formalist, that have spent the day of
grace in pursuit of their own carnal interest, little minding the interest of
Jesus Christ in the footsteeps of the New Man, which is Created in
Righteousness and true Holiness, shall have no part in the Resurrection with
them that shall be counted worthy, or made meet for these privileges, but
shall be everlastingly excluded this Heavenly fellowship, with all the
appurtenances thereunto belonging, having not so much much as one dram of God's
love and favor to abate the flames of those horrors and terrors ceasing upon
their souls, through the sense of Sin and Condemnation for the same, in that
Eternal Wrath and fiery Indignation of the Almighty, where the Worm of
Conscience is always gnawing, with Accusations of disobedience to the just and
holy Laws of a Righteous God, the Fire of whose Wrath, and Flames of Divine
Vengeance never goes out, but will be everlastingly burning in the soul, time
without end; where the best Associates, and chiefest Companions will be the
Devils and damned Spirits in Hell, and the best harmonious melody will be
Confusion of howlings for extremity of pain, and gnashing of Teeth in endless
sorrows. But Fourthly:

A fourth privilege in this Reward of Inheritance, or glorious Kingdom, to be
enjoyed by those persons that in this day of grace press after holy seize
perseveringly, may be considered consisting in a due proportion of the
Inheritance and Heavenly Mansions, every one an Heir, joynt-Heir with Christ;
every one a free possession, and every one free in his possession; every one a
full possession, and every one full of true content with his possession; every
one a possession full of true delight, comfort, and satisfaction; and every
soul taking a full delight, comfort, and satisfaction in his possession; every
one a peaceable possession, and every one acting peaceably in his possession;
every one a possession full of divine love, and every one acting in his
possession in that principle of divine love, which works no ill to his
Neighbor; every one a possession full of the glory of the Lord; and every one
rendering glory unto the Lord in his possession. He that overcomes shall
Inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my Son, Rev. 21.4.
And if Sons, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and joynt-Heirs with Christ; if we
suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together, Romans 8.17. And there
shall be no more Curse, but the Throne of God, and of the Lamb shall be in the
City of their Habitations, and his Servants shall serve him, and they shall see
his face, and his Name shall be in their foreheads, Rev. 22.3, 4. But Fifthly:

A fifth privilege considerable in this Inheritance, may be in the perpetuity
thereof: A man, Heir to an Earthly Inheritance, and entering into possession of
the same, in considering the great benefit that it will be unto him, many times
his heart is raised up with joy and delight therein; but considering again on
the other hand, how soon death may take him away from it, or an Enemy by force
and violence take it from him, or considering how soon he may be surprised with
afflictions in body or mind, or in both; whereby the comfortable enjoyment of
this possession may be taken off; he considering the uncertainty thereof, how
does this abate the delight and comfortable satisfaction that the poor Creature
did seem to fancy to himself?

But as for this Heavenly Inheritance, it is perpetually sure to every soul
possessed thereof; and therefore, as it is a possession yielding a fullness of
true delight and comfort unto perfection of satisfaction in the first enjoyment
of possession: So the consolation thereof, is no whit abated or lessened by any
fears, or doubts that may arise concerning a deprivation: There is no place
left for fears nor doubts where the possession is so, surely founded and
confirmed: As for this Inheritance (says Peter) it is incorruptible and
undefiled, and that fades not away, its a Kingdom that cannot be moved; It is
an Eternal Everlasting Inheritance, founded upon the Basis of Eternal love,
even the infinite love of the Eternal God, and confirmed unto the Heirs thereof
by the Eternal decree of the incorruptible and unchangable God; and upholden,
and maintained by the Omnipotency, Omnisciency, Omnipresence, Immortality, and
Incomprehensibility of the same Eternal, Infinite, and Everlasting God;
Everlasting in his love to those Souls in possession of this Inheritance;
Everlasting in his peace which passes all understanding; Everlasting in his
glorious presence, that fills all in all; And there shall be no Night there,
and they need no Candle, neither light of the Sun; for the Lord God gives them
light, and they shall reign for ever and ever, Rev. 22.5. Therefore, we
receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have grace, whereby we may
serve God, acceptably with reverence and Godly fear, Heb. 12.28.

For as much as the Kingdom is Unmovable and Everlasting; so also is the joy
and consolation of the Inhabitants thereof an Everlasting Joy and Consolation
which neither Men nor Devils can deprive the soul of. Death cannot do it, there
shall be no more death, no more sorrow, no more pain, no more hailing into
Captivity, nor complaining in the Streets, by reason of Oppression; but all
Violence shall be done away, and Everlasting Joy, Peace, Comfort, and
Consolation, shall be as a Crown upon the heads and hearts of these
Inhabitants: God shall be all in these souls, and these souls shall be all in
God, by a Union of qualifications Divine, and the sweet enjoyments of his
glorious benefits, the height, the length, breadth, and depth, whereof eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to
conceive. Too narrow is the capacity of mortal man to comprehend, and the
tongue of Men and Angels to express the Latitude thereof: Wherefore gird up the
loins of your minds; be sober, and hope to the end for the Grace that is to be
brought unto you at the Revelation of Jesus Christ, as obedient Children, not
fashioning your selves according to the former lusts in your Ignorance; but as
he that has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of Conversation,
because it is written, be ye holy, for I am holy, 1 Pet. 1.13, 14, 15, 16. But
sixthly:

A sixth privilege appertaining to the Heirs of this Kingdom, to be by them
enjoyed at Christ's personal appearing at his second coming, may be considered
herein, for to consist, that he that is their Head and Husband, with whom there
is a unity of Affection and Covenant-Contract, and is the Recorder for his
Espoused Souls, that puts their tears in his Bottel, and Records their
sufferings in his book of Remembrance, and by whom, and for what, even for
their love to him, and loyalty to his Supremacy in the observation of his Laws,
and for rejecting the contrary. This is a great ground of consolation, that he
that is their Recorder, their Head and Husband, is the only potentate King of
Kings, and Judge of all the World, who will bring his Records with him, and
make his personal appearance in the glory of his Majesty, and seat of Justice,
attended with his glorious Angels, and glorified Saints to Judge the World in
Righteousness, who will not respect persons in Judgment, nor pervert Judgment
for gifts nor reward; but in Righteousness will he Judge the cause of the Poor,
and with Equity will he plead for the Meek of the Earth; who will then plead
the cause of his people with a witness against those that in this time of their
Pilgrimage have oppressed and persecuted them. A poor man being oppressed by
one that is too potent for him, and being not able to relieve himself, he
makes his address unto the King, laying open his cause before him, resolving
to wait with patience for his relief; at length the King arises, and takes
this poor man's cause into his hand, and pleads it with his Adversary, and
rights him in his wrongs, and avengeth him of his Oppressor. O how does this
administer comfort to this poor man! O how does this oblige and endear the
affections of this Poor man unto his Prince, and fill his heart with joy and
gladness, and thanksgiving for such a benefit; and shall not God avenge his own
Elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them, they
having committed their cause unto Him, and cast their burden upon him? yea
(says our Savior) I tell you he will avenge them speedily: O what Consolation
does this bring unto oppressed Souls in the cause of God, and especially when
the Lord shall plead their cause with their Adversaries, what praises will it
bring forth unto his Name: I heard (says Saint John) a great voice of much
people in Heaven, saying Alleluja, Salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and Power
unto the Lord our God, for he has Judged the great Whore which did corrupt the
Earth with her Fornications; True and Righteous are his Judgments, for he has
avenged the blood of his Servants at her hand: and again, they said Alleluja,
and her smoak-rose up for ever and ever; in her was found the blood of Prophets
and of Saints, and all that were slain upon the Earth, Rev. 18.24.19.1, 2, 3.
Note, the Heavenly Host rejoices when God pleads the cause of his people
with their Adversaries: Rev 19.5.
And a Voice came out of the Throne, saying praise our God, all ye his
Servants, and ye that fear him, both small and great: Babylon rejoiced in the
day of Sions troubles, and helped forwards her Afflictions; and Sion must
rejoice in the Lords hand of Justice upon Babylon in the day of her Desolation:
Wherefore all ye that in this day of your Pilgrimage are in God's way, pressing
after holy Seize, in order to the adorning of your souls for further
Communion with your holy God, your Head and Husband, although many troubles may
attend you, and many difficulties, oppositions and temptations compass you
about; Yet cast not away your Confidence which has great Recompense of Reward,
Heb. 10.35. But raise up your hearts, and labor to strengthen your Confidence
in the Lord by a serious Meditation and Application of the Testimonies and
Promises of God contained in his Word unto all long-suffering and patience; For
yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry, Heb.
10.37. For as sure as he was once offered to bear the sins of many, so, surely
to them that look for him, will he appear a second time without Sin unto
Salvation, Heb. 9.28.

And then assuredly will the Lord own a people, that now in this day of Grace
press after Holy Seize in the way of God for his People peculiarly, as
Taught by him, Redeemed by him, Sanctified by him, and Justified by him; the
effects of the Fathers Election in himself, and the fruits of the Travels of
his Soul in the sufferings of himself; his Beloved Espoused to himself, his
Inheritance Purchased with his own blood unto himself; and his Fellow-heirs to
possess Eternal Glory with himself, unto whom, every wrong done, he takes as
done unto himself, ( Act. 9.4, 5.) and Records it, every Tear by them shed,
through their Oppression, he bottleth up for a Witness against the Oppressor in
the day of his Vengeance; Psalm. 56.8.
when he makes Inquisition for blood, he remembers them; then will he not
only take account of actions done against his people, but also of the omission
of that good they might have done unto them, and should have ministered to them
in the day of their distress; In as much as ye have not done it to one of the
least of these, ye have done it unto me, Matthew. 25. See this Omission is
rewarded with go ye Cursed; with what reward then will the Act of Oppression be
rewarded; the Lord has spoken, he will also bring to pass; the Lord will
perform, and none shall hinder his proceedings: Nevertheless, when the Son of
Man comes, shall he find Faith on the Earth? Luke 18.8.

True Faith in Christ, works by Love to Christ, a stability in the way of
Christ; the which, by the words of Christ, is likely to be very rare, and
scarce to be found among the Sons and Daughters of men in the latter days,
immediately before his coming, unto which the Apostles in their holy writings do
bear their Testimonies: Therefore, when ye shall see but little true Faith on
Earth, as it were, but here and there a man, or a few that are steadfast in the
Profession of Christ, as the truth is, in Jesus, according to the primitive
Institution and Law of Love, but great instability in ways of worships, turning
and twisting, soon this way, and soon that way, and but few performing
obedience as to the Lord by the rule of God's Word; and when ye shall see the
Iniquity of profaneness in actions, and erroneous opinions to abound, Mat.
24.11, 12, 23, 24.
and the love of many to wax cold, and actions of Charity to be almost grown
out of use, scarce here and there a man acting in the principle of true love to
Christ, in obedience to him, neither toward God in his worship, nor the
Neighbor in civil Courtesies; but almost all carried on by a self-ended
principle of self-love in their actions, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
all which are evidences of want of true faith; then lift up your heads, for
your Redemption draws nigh; then behold, the Judge standing at the door, as
it were ready to plead your Cause, and to revenge your wrongs, and to give you
a full and free Possession of his glorious Kingdom: He that shall come, will
come; and will not tarry, even so come Lord Jesus: Now the Just shall live by
Faith, but if any man draw back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him, says
the Lord, Heb. ^0.37, 38. 1 Pet. 4.19.


Wherefore (as the Apostle Peter teaches) Let them that suffer according to
the will of God, commit the keeping of their Souls to him in well doing, as
unto a faithful Creator; for we have not an high Priest which cannot be touched
with the feeling of our Infirmities, but was in all points tempted, even as we
are yet without sin, Heb. 4.15. for in that he himself has suffered, being
tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted, Heb. 2.18. Let us
therefore come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and
find grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4.16.

O let every one of us, in this our present Pilgrimage, endeavor to have the
word of Christ dwelling richly in our hearts, and Heavens glory in our eye; and
let us run with patience the holy Race for holy Seize; considering that
holiness is an Ornament ever becoming the people of God; to be found therein,
is a matter of great concernment.

First: Because therein God's people do most resemble the Image of God, their
Heavenly Father, and Christ their Redeemer.

Secondly: Because thereunto they were Elected in Christ from Eternity.

Thirdly: Because thereunto they are called with an holy calling.

Fourthly: Because thereunto they are enjoined by special Command.

Fifthly: Because holiness is a beautiful Ornament well becoming a Christian
and Christianity.

Sixthly: Because God's people are a people to whom precious promises appertain.

Seaventhly: Because holiness is an excellent Ornament is respect of its
duration, the more made use of and improved, the more comely and perfect it is.

Eighthly: Because there is a great necessity of it; for without holiness, no
man shall see the Lord.

Ninethly: Because there is a sure Attainment of a holy state, in pressing
after it in the way of God.

Tenthly: Because thereunto is anexed a sure reward of an Eternal Inheritance.

Eleventhly: Because holiness puts a Soul in a capacity to see the Lord, and to
enjoy Union and Communion with him in a state of glory to its Eternal
Consolation.

Twelfth: Because negligence and carelessness in improving the means appointed
of God for holy Seize, puts a Soul in a capacity of possessing God's
great displeasure under his Eternal wrath.

Wherefore, dearly Beloved, having an holy God that requires holiness in us,
and holy Services to be performed by us, in the way of his own holy
appointments to the glory of his Name; and he having made out unto us such
great and precious Promises in the same, Let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God;
always considering that holiness is an Ornament well becoming the House of God;
his people for ever to be found therein, is a matter of great concernment and
so with that Exhortation, 1 Samuel 12 24. I shall conclude: Only fear the Lord
and serve him in Truth with all your heart for, consider how great things the
Lord has done for you.

A GLASS FOR THE UNREGENERATE TO BEHOLD Their Heart-Conceptions: OR, A brief
discourse, tending to the Discovery and Removal of some grand Obstructions to
Spiritual Health, and Heavens Seize; with some Directions and Motives
necessary thereunto.

By JOSIAS BONHAM, of Byfield in Northamptonshier.

And Judah said, the strength of the Bearers of Burdens is decayed, and there
is much Rubbish, so that we are not able to build the Wall, Neh. 4.10. Printed
in the Year, 1674.

A Glass for the Unregenerate, to behold their Heart-Conceptions.
WHen Honest-hearted Nehemiah had tidings of the decays and breaches made upon
Jerusalem, that the Walls were broken down, and the Gates burnt with fire, and
the Inhabitants Captivated by their Enemy; he so lays it to heart, as to become
sencible of Jerusalems condition; and in the sense thereof, he mourns with
tears, he fasts from food, he humbles himself, and intercedes with God by
Prayer on Jerusalems behalf. Yea, the sadness of his Countenance, did
demonstrate the sorrow of his Heart, to over-weigh all the honors, profits,
and pleasures that he did possess in King Artaxerxes Court: Yea, so did he
prise Jerusalem, and commiserate the condition of the same; that he must leave
his King, and his Office in the Court, with all the honors, profits, and
pleasures thereof, to visit his Brethren, and to repair the decays, and make up
the breaches, with endeavors to set Jerusalem in her former state, or
primitive beauty; unto which work he thought not much to set his hand, his
heart, his all, for to complete the same.

And can not thou, O Unregenerate heart, be wrought upon to a sensibility of
thy own Estate, by all the tidings brought home unto thine ears, by the
infallible word of Truth, and Ministry thereof, informing thee of the sad
decays and breaches made upon thy precious Soul by sin and Satan, the grand
Enemies of mankind: Have thou not heard that thy Walls of Security, and
Ornaments of Beauty are much decayed, and many breaches made therein; (that is
to say) thy beautiful state of Righteousness, and true Holiness, in which man
was at first Created, in which man did God's Image bare, and unto which Estate
God did vouchsafe his Presence for security of thy self, thy Peace, thy
Comfort, and Consolation: And have thou not heard how by the Enemy all the
faculties of thy Soul, and members of thy Body are Captivated under the
dominion of Sin and Satan: A sad servitude unto thy Eternal desolation, except
a supernatural means, timely applied, and carefully improved to effect a
Restoration to thy primitive Estate. And have thou not heard that a
Supernatural King has granted and given forth a supernatural means compounded
with Divine Love and Pity to thy poor distressed Soul and Captivated state,
together with an order sealed with his own Signet, for liberty to improve the
means unto the aforesaid end, with directions in the same, and calls thereto?
And can thou (with those, by the Holy Ghost Recorded, Amos 6.) Chant to the
sound of the Viol, and invent to thy self Instruments of Music; drink Wine in
Bowls, and solace thy self in worldly Vanities, and not lay to heart the sad
condition of Joseph of Jerusalem, of thy poor Soul and Body in their Captivated
state, plundered of all their chiefest good.

O that thou would act Nehemiahs part, which is thy great concernment; to lay
to heart thy Condition, so as to become sensible of thy Estate wherein thou
stand; and in the sense thereof, to go unto God, and humble thy self before
him, with Chastisements by Fasting, and Tears of Mourning, and lay thy Cause
before the Lord, with supplications in the name of Christ, on thy Jerusalems,
thy precious Souls behalf: and in order to thy sensibility hereunto, and the
quickening of thy motion herein, Consider the words of Christ to the
unprofitable Servant; thou ought to have put my money to the Exchangers: As
if he should have said, thou ought to exercise those noble faculties of
Rationality and Memory, that God has bestowed on thee, by a due Consideration,
and serious Meditation in the Word. So now may I say to thee, as God has
bestowed upon thee those noble faculties of Rationality and Memory, would
thou exercise them in the Word of God by a due Consideration, and serious
Meditation, and in those Balances, weigh the Adorning Ornaments of
Righteousness and Holiness, and the benefits and privileges thereunto
appertaining against the deformed habit of Ungodliness, and the sad slavery,
thraldom, and wrath that attends thereon; and weigh well the value of thy
precious Soul, by the price laid down for its Redemption, against the value of
those sinful Vanities that procure thy Souls Condemnation, and Christ's Love and
Faithfulness against Sin and Satan's Deceitfulness; then happily thou might
obtain a sense of thy condition, as thou stand in thy Unregenerate and
Barren state, and see that it is time for thee to seek the Lord, and to break
up thy fallow ground, and to Sow in Righteousness, in hope to Reap in Mercy:
see Hos. 10.12. and to wait upon God in the use of God's appointed means, until
he rain the dews of Grace and Righteousness upon thee.

When Nehemiah came to Jerusalem, Neh. 4.10.
to view the decays and breaches therein made, he found there much Rabbish, the
which must in wisdom, first be removed and cleansed away, otherwise the Rubbish
would obstruct the work, and cause it soon for to decay and fall again.

And although this obstructive Rubbish was so very much, that it required many
hands and heavy burdens with much difficulty and industry to remove and clear
away: yet this Obstruction must first be done away, otherwise it would deceive
their work, and cause their labor to be in vain.

Now would thou, in the sense of thy decayed and fallen state, act Nehemiahs
part in the use of the means appointed thereunto? to be a Renewer or Repairer
of those decays and breaches in thee made by the Enemy of thy Prosperity,
Peace, and Happiness; then thou must with Nehemiah, wisely seek God's
assistance, and set thy self with all diligence to remove the Rubbish, those
corrupt Lusts and Sins that lie as grand obstructions in the way to our
Seize, in the work of our Reparations and Restoration of our first Estate
in Holiness and Righteousness, true Peace and Happiness.

Wherefore in order to our better discovery and sensibility of those grand
obstructions prejudicial to the work, and for our better inducement, to improve
our utmost abilities with all diligence to a removal thereof, that our
achievements may be the more prosperous and effectual: Consider with me the
ensuing discourse, raised upon these following words written, Prove. 30.15.

The Horseleach has two Daughters, crying, Give, Give, Prove. 30.15.
AS all Scripture was given by Inspiration, and is profitable; and whatsoever
was written aforetime, was written for our Learning; so doubtless this small
part or portion of holy Scripture aforementioned, has something in it of
profit and use to the Sons of men in the right Application of it.

Should we consider the words by way of division, we may therein observe three
parts:

First, A subject bearing the denomination of a Horseleach.

Secondly, A second part relating to the Horseleach, as conceived and brought
forth by her, demonstrated by the denomination of her Daughters.

Thirdly, A third particular observable, is, their qualifications, or natural
properties demonstrated in these words, Crying, Give, Give.

Should we consider the words by way of Explication, it will not be
unnecessary, in the first place, to consider that it is oftentimes the method
of the Holy Ghost in Scripture-Record, by way of similitude, or parable, to
illustrate the natural properties of one thing by the name of another thing of
the same nature; as for instance, The Spirit of God, by the Prophet Zephaniah,
illustrateth, or sets forth the natural properties and dispositions of
Jerusalems Rulers, in respect of their Oppressions and Cruelties imposed upon
the people under their jurisdiction by the names of Lions and Wolves; Her
Princes within her (says he) are roaring Lions, her Judges are Evening
Woolves, they gnaw not the bones till the morrow, Zeph. 3.3.

So likewise David sets forth the property and disposition of his Enemies by
the Denomination of Lions; My Soul (says he) is among Lions; I lie even among
them that are set on fire, even the Sons of men, whose teeth are Spears and
Arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword, they prepare a net for my steps, Psalm.
57.1, 6.

So our Savior Christ demonstrates the natural properties and dispositions of
his Desciples or Believers, as they are Regenerate by the denomination of Sheep
and Lambs, as in John 21.15, 16. and John 10. and that in respect of their
harmless nature, and peaceable deportment which they bare, or ought to bare
toward all men, even toward their Persecutors; and in this sense Christ
himself is sometimes called a Lamb, and compared to a Sheep; yea many
Testimonies of like nature may we find in holy Scripture to evidence this; that
it is the method of the holy Ghost many times to illustrate the nature of one
thing by the name of another of the like nature: So now in the explication of
this Text of Scripture I shall observe the same method, according to what I
have received now by this Horseleach, (my judgment is) that the Holy Ghost does
mind to illustrate some other thing of the like nature, yet more mysterious:
Now we know that the Horseleach is a certain Worm, whose appetite does much
delight in blood, and after it, they naturally are very greedy and insatiable;
therefore Physicians make use of the Horseleach to draw blood from their
Patients as they see occasion; yea so insatiable and greedy is her appetite
after blood, that if she once fasten upon a man, she would suck and drain all
the blood out of every Vein and part of the body, to the destruction of the
life, if possible she could contain it, and suffered thereunto; such is her
natural properties. Now that which this Horseleach does in its natural
properties to us resemble and simily forth, is that mysterious
Horseleach-Corruption that ceased upon man's heart, and did take up its
Residence there by the first transgression.

The which Corruption, is Horseleach-like in her natural properties, so
insatiable and greedy, that by her operation and powerful influence, she will
search into every Vein, Member, and faculty of Body and Soul, and suck and draw
out of the same all that spiritual blood, and life of God, and power of
Godliness which man was invested with in his Creation, until she has wholly
made the Creature like a dead man, without life and motion as to the things of
God; but so enslaved under the dominion of her Laws, that in conformity
thereunto, the poor Creature must run and go at every beck, improve all
Opportunities, embrace all Companions, and use all means, tending to the
promoting of Corruptions-Interest, the law of Sin, to the great decay and
detriment of man's holy and happy State.

But Secondly: The Text says, The Horseleach has two Daughters, crying, Give,
Give.

It seems these Daughters of the Horseleach, are for nature and quality like
her self, greedy insatiable Worms; their cry is always Give, Give; they are all
for themselves, but nothing part from.

These two Daughters of the Horseleach, do much resemble the Creatures
affections, as they stand in their Unregenerate state; that is to say,
Unsanctified love, and Carnal desire, sometimes in Scripture called Lust; and
that they are the Daughters of this Horseleach-Corruption, it may appear by
these Reasons: First, They bare her name, they are Corrupt Affections.
Secondly: They bare her nature, they are Inordinate Affections. Col 3 5.


And as they are Inordinate in respect of their being out of that order,
wherein God at first placed them, which was upon himself, to be unto him, and
to him only; so are they Inordinate in their Insatiable Covetousness and greedy
dispositions after other objects, as if they could never have enough; always
their cry is, Give, Give.

Thirdly: That they are the Daughters of that Horseleach Corruption, does
further appear by their subjection to the law of Corruption; they are as
obedient to the Law of Corruption, as a Daughter can be to the Law of her
Mother; insomuch, that they and the whole man steered by their course, are by
the Holy Ghost demonstrated to be the Servants of Corruption.

Yea, as the Law of Corruption, does require these Daughters to Renounce God,
and break Covenant with him, and join themselves in a conjunction of affinity
with self, and the world, they readily submit and yield thereto, and make the
interest of Self and the World, the only object of their delight.

And in order to the promoting of this Interest of Self and the World, they
(unto every faculty of Soul, and member of Body) are always moving, and crying
Give, Give: Give your strength, your abilities, your motion and action, your
time and opportunities in our Service to Self and the World, and to our
satisfaction in the delights and pleasures thereof, whereby the whole man is
brought into Captivity and Slavery to these Horseleach Daughters, these greedy
insatiable Worms, these Lusts, to Self-advancement, to worldly Vanities, until
the poor Soul be left as desolate as ever Nehemiah found Jerusalem; plundered
and ransacked of all its life of God, and power of Godliness, true peace and
happiness, and all its gates and doors of faith and hope, and assurance in God
burnt up and destroyed, and its beautiful Ornaments of Righteousness and
Holiness much defaced, and all its Walls of Fortification broken down, and the
whole man laid open to the mercy of a merciless Enemy; to its eternal ruin,
except a supernatural means be timely applied and improved for a remedy, to the
breaking off the Creatures affections from this affinity, and to the reducing
them to their first Estate.

Now that there is such a conjunction of affinity, as aforesaid, is farther
evinced by the name that the Holy Ghost has put upon those persons in that
contract; as those persons that are joined in a spiritual Conjunction or
Contract with Christ, are called Christians; and as a Woman Espoused to a Man,
is called by his name: So has the holy Spirit of God put the name of the world
upon those persons whose affections are joined to the world; as Christ said to
those in a conjunction of affection with him; Marvel not if the world hate you,
ye know that it hated me before it hated you: Whence note, that by world, he
means persons Espoused in affection to the world.

So the Spirit of God (by Saint John) says the whole world lies in
wickedness, meaning all persons in their Unregenerate state, whom Corruption
has drawn off their affections from God, and situated them upon Self and the
World: So that in this discourse here is briefly and plainly set forth; First,
That by the Horseleach, is implied Corruption that ceazed upon the heart of man
by sin in the first Transgression; so considered from their natural properties;
and the two Daughters to be the Creatures of affections, Unsanctified love, and
Carnal desire, as they stand in their Unregenerate state, demonstrated by these
four Reasons;

First: They bare her Name.

Secondly: They bare her nature.

Thirdly: By their subjection to her Law.

Fourthly: by their Conjunction with the world, and self-renouncing God and his
Covenant; as not having any true love or desire thereunto; and that by the
influence of Corruption, whereby they are brought forth into that Estate.

The Inference drawn from the words thus considered, is briefly thus:

That Corruption has brought forth a separation of the Creatures affections
from God, and joined them in a Conjunction with Self and the World; in which
Estate the Creatures affections are very insatiable and greedy after Self and
the Worlds interest, by which conjunction God is dishonored, and every faculty
and member of soul and body enslaved in such servil motions and actions as may
promote the said interest, in order to the satisfying of these greedy Worms,
until by their continual instigations of Give, Give, they have drained out of
the poor soul all its spiritual blood, or life of God, and power of Godliness
to its eternal ruin, except a supernatural means be timely applied, and
effectually improved for the reducing the said affections unto their first
Estate.

Now for proof of this inference here asserted, I think there needs no
further Testimony then what is contained in the explication of the words,
especially if Doctor Woeful experience his evidence; may be heard and credited
by you; yet for order-sake, and lest I should be thought wanting in the case of
evidence, I would produce some further evidences that will give in their
Testimonies to the separation and conjunction aforesaid; as first, Those many
Testimonies of God in Scripture, whereby God calls to the Sons of men to return
unto him: O Israel, return to the Lord thy God, for thou have fallen by thy
Iniquity, Hos. 14.1.

Secondly: Gods Expostulation with man about his Apostasy; thus says the Lord,
What Iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me,
and have walked after Vanity, Jer. 2.5. See Ezekiel. 18.23, 32.

Thirdly: Those many Exhortations the Lord has laid before us in his word. Set
your affections on things that are above, not on things on Earth, Col. 3.2.
Love not the World; if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in
him, 1 John 2.15. Yea, the Lord calls for self-denial and crucifying of the
world, to mortify every member of the body of sin, and to set our love and
delight in him, and that with all our hearts and soul, and strength; all which
do imply, and hold forth their evidences, in witness of the aforesaid
Conjunction.

Fourthly: I would add one Testimony more among many that might be produced;
and that is the multiplication of that Succession, or natural Generation, that
is conceived and brought forth by virtue of the aforesaid Conjunction of those
Horseleach Daughters, corrupt affections, in affinity with Self and the World,
as the offsprings thereof.

And for brevity sake, I shall only name some few of this offspring, and leave
the rest to Doctor Woful's experience, his evidence to evince one part of the
generation conceived and brought forth by the said Conjunction, is Pride, Envy,
Malice, Hypocrisy, Infidelity, and Sloth in God's Service, and
Voluptuousness: These, as a part of that Brood and Generation of the Horseleach
and her Daughters, in affinity with Self and the World, are by their influence
conceived and nourished up in the heart of Unregenerate man, where the said
conjunction has dominion.

These do evidently demonstrate themselves to be of that race by their natural
qualities and language, insatiable greedy Worms, alaways crying, Give, Give; as
for Pride, that is an insatiable greedy Worm of an aspiring nature; insatiable
and greedy after self-honour and the worlds applause: It looks high and lofty,
as if it was one, by whose influence that generation was steered by, which Agur
speaks of, Prove. 30.13. There is a generation (says Agur) O how lofty are
their Eyes! and their eyelids are lifted up. Agur here seems as not able to
express the Latitude of the aspiring nature of Pride, and those whose course is
steered thereby, but stands in admiration at it; as if by the influence of
Pride, those Creatures, in whose heart it is predominant, were carried up into
that airy Region with that Prince spoken of, Ephesians. 2.2. as Retainers to his
Court.

But into the third Heavens, where Christ sits at the Right Hand of God,
they have no inspection; for, says the Spirit of God by the Prophet David, The
Wicked, through the Pride of his Countenance, will not seek after God; God is
not in all his thoughts, Psalm. 10.4. Whence Note, that Pride by its influence,
does work the thoughts of God, and his ways, out of the minds of those, in
whose hearts it is predominant.

Yea, This Brat, bred and nourished in the heart of Unregenerate man, by those
Horseleach Daughters, Unsanctified love, and Carnal desire, through their
affinity with Self and the World, does not only plunder a soul of its thoughts
of God, but also of the qualifications of Humility, Penitency, Charity, and all
the peaceable habits of true Humanity, as considered in its first estate.

Yea, like a greedy heart-Worm; it devours and eats up the very bowels of
tender Pity and Compassion, and Commiseration; and yet like one of Pharoahs
lean Kine, is never the better: This Brat is still crying, Give, Give; always
moving the Creature to satisfy its greedy Appetite; in order whereunto, the
Creature must improve its Time and Opportunities, Pains, Labors, and
Meditations, Considerations, Moneys, Lands, Livings, Lordships; yea, all must
be improved and dedicated to the satisfying of this Brat, in beautifying the
Face, powdering the Hair, new fashions in Apparel, sumptious Buildings,
delicious Fair, places of Honor, and worldly Preferments, and honorable
Greetings, and to be called Rabbi, Rabbi: Mean while, God, and the power of
Godliness, and the souls happiness, is little considered. Yea, where Pride is
predominant in the heart, and unsanctified love, and carnal desire joining
therewith, produces very sad and dangerous effects to the Creature; for it
makes Angels to become Devils, and Men to become Slaves to their Lusts,
Enemies to God, Persecutors of the Godly, and themselves Subjects of Perdition:
The Wicked in his Pride does Persecute the Poor, Psalm. 10.2. It seems this
greedy heart-Worm of the Horseleach brood, is a great mover to, and stirrer up
of Contention; so says Solomon, Only by Pride comes Contention, Prove. 13.10.

Another greedy heart-Worm of the Horseleach-race, and her Daughters is called
Envy, this is a bloody Brat; as greedy after blood, as the Horseleach and her
Daughters, by whose influence it is in man's heart conceived.

This Envy, seems to be of a nature cruel and blood-thirsty; of Countenance
fierce and grim; yea, this Brat looks, as if it would devour all the interest
of God and Godliness, with the Profession and Professors thereof.

Those persons, whose course is steered by the influence of Envy, through its
predominancy in the heart, may seem to be of that generation that Agur speaks
of, Prove. 30.14.

There is a Generation (says Agur) whose Teeth are as Swords, and their
jaw-Teeth as Knives to devour the Poor from off the Earth, and the Needy from
among men; so says David, My Soul is among Lions; Psalm. 57.4, 6.
I lie even among them that are set on fire; even the Sons of men, whose teeth
are spears, and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword; they prepared a Net for
my steps. Wrath is cruel, and Anger is outrageous, but who can stand before
Envy, says Solomon? Prove. 27.4.

It is a sad thing, and of dangerous consequence to the Creature, for to be
carried on by the influence and instigations of this Blood-worm bred in the
heart, and nourished by corrupt affections, in affinity with Self and the
World; when every member of body, and faculty of the soul must be active in
their places, to contrive and wait for opportunities, and improve all means to
accomplish a satisfaction to this blood-thirsty-worm; although in the blood of
the Innocent, as Cain to Murder his Brother Abel; Jospephs Brethren to sell
him; King Herod, to kill the Children in Bethlehem, to satisfy these greedy
Blood-worms in the death of Christ; and says the Scriptures, the Priests moved
with Envy, cried, Crucify him, Crucify him: They must not spare their Breath,
nor Counsel, nor Pains, nor Money, to move and stir up the people, both
Magistrates, Officers, Soldiers, and all the rude multitude, to satisfy Envy
in the blood of the Innocent.

Another greedy Worm, of the race and offspring of the Horseleach and her
Daughters, bred in the heart of Unregenerate man, is Malice; this Brat, by its
influence and operation, is a great obstructor of Peace, Unity, Charity, and
all good humane Society: Yea, this heart-worm is so insatiable, that its cry is
always, Revenge, Revenge; and by the instigations and movings thereof, together
with unsanctified love, and carnal desire, in affinity with Self and the World,
through their crying, Give, Give, does enslave every faculty of the soul, and
member of the body, to ride and go, contrive and studdy, spare no cost nor
pains to improve all opportunities, ways, and means, and counsels, for an
accomplishment of a design for Revenge to satisfy this Brat; no different
satisfaction, nor composure by Friends in moderation, will serve; Malice cries,
Revenge, Revenge: And what strifes, and variances, contentions, and sad
consequences does ensue, both Scripture-evidences, and the sad experiences of
our times do sadly manifest.

Another of this Horseleach-brood is Hypocrisy; This is of a more smoother
deportment outwardly, than the former; this Brat, by its influences and
opperations, will get into all the performances of that Creature, in whose
heart it is predominant; and like a worm in the Nut, destroys the kernel, the
very marrow and quintessence of the said performances, leaving only a fair
smooth outside shell: Hypocrisy will permit the Creature to do civil
courtesies to a Neighbor, and Religious performances to God; provided always
that the interest of Self and the World, with whom the affections are united,
be not thereby prejudiced; for this Brat Hypocrisy has always a respect to
self-interest. A poor Creature that is overrun with this distemper, if he
Pray, or Preach, or give Alms, all must be dedicated to Self, self-honour,
self-applause, and estimation, profit, and worldly advantage: But this end,
that God may be glorified, his truth promoted, and his people edified and
comforted, and encouraged in the truths of God; this, as the very kernel,
marrow, and quintessence of Religion, is (by this heart-worm Hypocrisy)
devoured, and nothing left, but a mere outside, a form of Godliness, without
the power. Our Savior Christ; like a skilful Physician, could discover this
distemper in the Scribes and Pharisees of old; and their works they do, (says
he) they do to be seen of men; and many of the chief Rulers believed, but did
not confess him; for they loved the praise of men, more than the praise of God;
Christ compares the Scribes and Pharisees unto painted Sepulchers, and such as
make clean the outside of the cup and platter, but leave the inside filthy.
Those persons whose course is steered by the influence of this heart-worm,
seems like unto that Generation that Agur speaks of, Prove. 30.12. There is a
Generation (says Agur) that are pure in their own eyes, but are not washed
from their filthiness. Self and the World is still retained in affinity with
the affections, whereby many evils is produced: Yea, the residence of
Hypocrisy in the heart unsubdued, is of dangerous consequence; for, as it
shuts out the glory of God in the end of our actions of Piety and Charity, so
it shuteth the Creature, with all its performances, out of God's acceptance to
glory. When poor Creatures shall say, Lord, Lord, open unto us, have we not
Prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name done these, and the other works? And
the Lord shall Answer, I know you not, depart from me, ye workers of Iniquity;
go to your Lusts whom ye have served; as ye have dedicated all your works to
the interest of Self and the World, now see if Self and the World can save you;
and herein will these words of Job be found true, What is the hope of the
Hypocrite, though he has gained, when God takes away his soul, Job. 27.8. The
hope of the Hypocrite shall perish, Job. 8.13. Whose hope shall be cut off, and
their trust as a Spiders Web, ver. 14.

Another of this Horseleach race is Infidelity, whose proper nature is to
oppose God in his dispensations: That Creature, in whose heart this greedy worm
is predominate; it will give no rest until by its instigations and continual
crying, Give, Give; it has brought every part, member, and faculty of the
whole man, to a conformity to its self: This Brat hardens the heart, blinds the
mind, darkens the understanding, stops the ears against the voice of God,
clincheth the hands against actions of Mercies and Charity, and makes the will
averse and stubborn against the will of God: Yea, it does by its influences and
operations, work up the Creature into its own proper nature, to oppose God in
his dispensations. If God say, I have given my Son to Redeem thee from thine
Iniquities, and to be unto thee both King, Priest, and Prophet, whose Counsel
thou must observe, whose Righteous Laws thou must obey unto a Conformity unto
him, and upon whose Atonement and Intercession thou must depend for
justification unto life; and for his sake thou must break that bond of affinity
between thy affections and Self, and the World; thou must deny Self, crucify
the world, and set thy affections on things that are above: Infidelity, with
the Creature subjected thereunto, presently replies; its no such thing, we will
not have this man to reign over us; thus Infidelity would make God a Liar, as
Saint John says, He that believes not God, has made him a Liar, because he
believes not the Record that God gave of his Son, Joh. 5.10. O what an
obstruction is here to the Creatures seize unto Holiness and Heavens
Happiness! O what a sad consequence does follow hereupon; He that believes
not, is Condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only
begotten Son of God, Joh. 3.18. O what a heart-worm is here, that eats out
the very life of the Creature, to Gods great dishonor, and the Creatures
ruin, except such obstructions to be timely removed.

Another of this brood, is Sloth in God's Service. This greedy Heart-worm is a
great obstruction to the use and efficasy of God's word, and to the efficacy of
the Creatures performances in God's Service. This greedy Worm, by its influence
and operation in the heart, devours all the Creatures Zeal for God, and
fervency in any performances in order to the worship and service of God. This
worm does much hinder the Creature, and obstruct its improvement of Gods Word
and Ordinances to Gods Glory and its own benefit, by application and
meditation, and action, as it ought to do; and hence, or hereunto are those
words of Solomon: The sloathful man roasteth not that which he took in hunting,
Prove. 12.27. that is, he does not improve the means afforded as aforesaid: What
need (says Sloth) so much strictness and preciseness in spending so much time
in reading, hearing, preaching, prayer, meditation, and assembling so often, it
is time enough for these things hereafter, and the like; the which (...) of sad
consequence, for hereby God wants that honor that is due from the Creature
unto his Name; and the poor soul wants that spiritual nourishment, to refresh,
comfort, strengthen, and support it in the way to its eternal rest, whereby the
poor soul is impoverished, and destitute, or at least much weakened in its
knowledge, faith, hope, love, zeal, and comfortable assurance in the Lord; which
in a good improvement of the means, through Gods blessing hereupon, happily it
might have enjoyed.

Consider the foolish Virgins, and the sloathful Servant that improved not his
Talent.

Another of this Generation is Voluptiousness, whose nature is most delightful
in excessive feasting, and drunkenness, with other carnal delights and
pleasures: This Brat once getting residence in the heart, and suffered, does
much obstruct and destroy those virtues of moderation, temperance, sobriety,
and charity, etc. This is likewise an insatiable greedy Worm, and does much
enslave the Creature; for by its influence and operation, it does strongly work
upon the Creature, to yeald both Person and Purse, Lands, Livings, and
Lordships, Time and Opportunity, though never so precious, all must be
dedicated to the use and service of this greedy-guts; this unsatiable
heart-worm, by whose influence those persons seem to be steered, that Paul to
the Philippians speaks of, chap. 3.19. Whose end is destruction, whose God is
their belly, whose glory is their shame, who mind earthly things; but as
(Solomon says) A word to the Wife is sufficient: So I do but give a hint of
these things, to put you in mind of the sad effects of sin, and of that
conjunction wherein the Creatures affections, and the world, and self, are
united. I have heard an Astrological story, that when two malignant Planets, as
Mars and Saturn, happen in Conjunction together, in one Aspect, House, or Sign,
that that altogether operate to the prejudice of man, by producing the sad
effects of losses, crosses, sicknesses, wars, contentions, death, and the like.

But whether this be so, or not, sure I am, that this is truth; that when there
is a Conjunction between the Creatures affections, and self, and the world,
that the operations and effects thereof is sad indeed, for the mouth of the
Lord has spoken it; for, thereby the understanding is darkened, and the clear
light of the Son of Righteousness eclipsed from the Soul, the apprehensions
be-nummed, the judgment misinformed, the will obstinate and averse to the
things of God; the bowels of compassion shut up, the hand of pity clinched
fast; so that God may call in his word, his spirit may strive, Christ may weep,
and Lazarus may beg, and Christ's Ministers may like a Candle spend themselves
to give light to others, and yet all will do but little; and why?

Corruption has wrought a Conjunction between the Creatures affections, and
self, and the world; and therefore self-denial, and the loss of the worlds
favor, to follow Christ in his ways, is become a hard saying, who can bare it?
Many of the Rulers believed on Christ, says the Scriptures, but they did not
confess him, for they loved the praise of men, more than the praise of God; and
many could follow Christ for the Loaves, for self and worldly interests, but
when it comes to pass, that this conjunction must be broken, and self, and the
world must be denied to follow Christ in all his precepts and examples of
sanctity and true holiness of life, then the young man, and the old also, goes
away sorrowful: Demas must rather forsake Christ and his ways, and all those of
Asia forsake Paul and the true profession of the Gospel, rather than self and
the world must be parted with: Oh says Corruption, that Horseleach! and
unsanctified Love, and carnal desire, her Daughters! favor thy self, let not
these things be: Yea, so prevailing are these Blood-worms, even in many
Gospel-professors, that it was the sad complaint of the Apostle Paul in his
days, that he had no man like-minded to Timothy, whose special care was for the
promoting of Christ's interest in his truth and people; for (says he) all seek
their own, and not the things of Jesus Christ: And therefore it is, that God
does so often give unto his own people, even his chosen ones and dear Children,
the bitter cup of the wormseed of Afflictions, on purpose to break the bed of
these Heart-worms, and subdue them: and the oftener, because his people do often
through carelessness and negligence of improving the means afforded, suffer
these greedy worms to breed and multiply in their hearts, whereby the stomach
grows weak, as to a spiritual digestion of the Heavenly Manna of Gods word,
and the conjunction between the affections, and self, and the world, the more
strengthened.

It is Gods usual way in such cases, ever and anon to give his people a cup of
that wormseed-bitter-afflictions, yet mixed with Divine love, and saving ends,
as to break the aforesaid conjunction, and to cleanse the heart of corruption,
and to bring the affections home unto himself, and to quicken the appetite unto
a good digestion of the administrations of his grace in all his dispensations.

In their affections they will seek me early.

But is it so? that corruption has brought forth such a separation of the
Creatures affections from God, unto a conjunction with self, and the world, to
the conception of many evils which cannot be cured, but by a supernatural
means; it may put us into an admiration upon a twofold account; as first, we
may stand and wonder with admiration, to behold what a mystery of Iniquity,
what a Babel of Confusion is wrought in the heart of man in his unregenerate
and carnal state; what Conceptions Transgression has wrought in the nature and
heart of man; here is a Horseleach-Corruption, and unsanctified Love, and
carnal desire in affinity with Self and the World, whereby is conceived in the
heart, the wicked fruits of Envy, Pride, Malice, sloth in Gods service, Hatred,
S. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.
Hipocrisy, Strife, Contentions, prophan-Swearing, Blasphemies, Drunkenness,
Gluttony, Whoredoms, Adulteries, Idolatries, yea all manner of profaneness and
ungodliness, that bears so much sway in the world: as the Apostle James
says, from whence comes wars and fightings, contentions amongst you, come
they not even of your Lusts, James 4.1.

We are ready to lay all the fault up on the Devil, and so as the first
moveing cause he was; But man was the Effectual cause in yiedling to the
serpentine motion: Our Savior Christ was as strongly tempted as man could be,
yet he, in not yiedling thereto, could triumphingly say: The Prince of this
world comes, and has nothing in me, John 14.30. That is none of his Evil
principles, nor wicked qualifications found in me.

The Devil is here said to be the Prince of this world, as he by policy with
subtle Temptation did prevail with man to transgress the will of God revealed,
by which transgression, man came to contract unto himself the natural
principles, and evil qualifications of the Devil: And by the virtue and
opperation of the said natural principles, and Evil qualifications, the
Creature in its unregenerate corrupted state, is subject naturally unto his
will, in opposition to the will of God, and the true power of Godliness: Hence
our Savior tells the unbelieving Jews, 1 John 8.44. 1. Joh. 5.19.
Ye are of our Father the Devil, and his works ye will do: And hence it is that
John considers the whole world to lie in wickedness, only a small remnant,
that by the power of grace, are wrought up to a conformity to Christ, of whom
Christ says, John 15.19.
Ye are not of the world, as I am not of the world; but I have called you out
of the world, and therefore the world hates you. First, note, So that
Godliness, and the true professors thereof, are the objects of the worlds
hatred. Secondly, note, That those called out of the world, were once of the
world, as says Paul, Ephesians. 2.3, 4, 5. It is only Gods call by grace, that makes
the difference.

Thus man by action, according to the Devils motion, did corrupt himself, and
corruption brought forth a separation of the affections from God, to self, and
the world; and hence arises those many evils, and great abominations that are
committed; the which may lead us to a second use of admiration.

To admire Gods Patience, 4 Reasons why God destroyed not the World long ago,
for the wickedness thereof. First, for his Covenant sake.
long-suffering, and forbearance toward man, in that he did not in Justice,
utterly destroy all his Creation, and bring it to a nothing again; the which he
might in Justice have done. As he showed some sad examples of his Power and
Justice in Noah's time, by Water, and in Lots time, by Fire, but only for some
reasons: As first, For the sake of his covenant of Election made in Christ
before the world was; the which Reason may give us to understand, that all the
enjoyments of honor, riches, pleasures, and treasures, that ungodly men
possess in this life, is for the sake of the Elect, or Believers in Christ,
whom the ungodly so much despise and persecute. To manifest his power and
faithfulness to his.


Secondly: That he might manifest his Power, Wisdom, and Faithfulness, to the
glory of his Name, in making good his Covenant, and fore-determinations against
all oppositions; which may give us to understand the great privilege Believers
have in Christ, as to have God (the faithful God) to be their God.

Thirdly: That he might manifest his mercy and goodness by his long-suffering
and patience, Romans 2.4.
with administrations of means and pledges of his Love by him made forth for
man's recovery, 2 Pet. 3 9.
as evidences of his unwillingness to man's destruction, and as inducements to
lead men to Repentance and conformity unto him: The which may give us to
consider, that those persons that obstinately persist in wickedness, and
conform not to his will revealed, Joh. 3 19.
do sin against the Divine Love, Light, Mercy, Goodness, Long-suffering, and
Patience of Almighty God, to the furthering of their own Condemnation.

Fourthly: That he might honor his Son, according to his fore-determinations,
Joh 5 22, 23. Jude 15. 2 These 1.7, 8, 9.
with the supremacy of government to his Church, and with the seat of Justice
for the Execution of Judgment upon all that turn the grace of God into
Laciviousness, that in love to their Lusts, reject the Lord Christ in his
gracious Reign and righteous Government, to follow their own pernicious ways.

The which may give us to consider, that God has an attribute of Justice, as
well as Mercy; and in his justice, he will surely choose to deal with those that
do his grace abuse.

For information threefold.

First: These considerations forementioned, may inform us of the generality of
this Disease, man's nature being corrupted, Ephesians. 2.3.
and has this Horse-leach-corruption in it; so through corruption, do these
worms, in the heart, naturally breed, and so by nature, a general disease.

Secondly: It may inform us of the dangerousness of the Disease, which eats
and sucketh out of all the vital parts of the Soul, all the life and power of
Godliness, to the impoverishing the poor soul of all its evidences for Heaven,
and to the producing eternal wrath thereunto; except there be a speedy and
effectual means applied for a remedy against the same.

Thirdly: The Use hereof, may inform us of the great concernment that lies
upon us, to look out for an eternal means; and with all carefulness to improve
the same for a remedy, as we tender the life and eternal well-being of our
souls.

And that we may be the more sensible of this disease, and the better gain some
experience of our condition in order thereunto; and lest we should deceive our
selves, and think all is well with us, when it is not so; like unto that
Generation that Agur speaks of, Pro. 30.12. There is a Generation (says
Agur) that are pure in their own eyes, and yet is not washed from their
filthiness; therefore, the better to be acquainted with our own weakness and
inward distempers of the heart, by these insatiable heart-worms: Let us fall
upon a use of trial, every one to examine his own heart, and try what
Conceptions we can therein discover.

Use for Examination.

In order whereunto, let us take the Glass of Gods Word, and therein cast our
Heart-conceptions, for the better finding out, or discovering of the aforesaid
disease.

As for example.

The glass of Gods Word discovers, that a sharp appetite unto the way of
Righteousness, and a good digesture of the truths of God in his word contained,
is an approved sign of a good condition: Blessed are they that hunger and
thirst after Righteousness; theirs is the Promise, They shall be filled, Mat.
5.6. But when the appetite of the soul, or the affections are but weak to
Righteousness, and the stomach slow of digesture, as to things of God; so that
the Heavenly Manna is thereof loathed, and the way of Righteousness is become
as a burden thereunto, it is an evident sign that heart is almost overcome of
the aforesaid disease, and has great need of a portion effectually applied to
it. Again,

Secondly: The glass of Gods word shows, that if the conceptions of the heart
have in them the stamp of Divine Humility, Sincerity, Love, Joy, Peace, and
Unity, and the like qualifications ruling in the heart; there is a discovery of
a healthful condition.

But on the contrary, If the Conceptions are Wrath, Malice, Envy, Pride,
Contentions, Strifes, Variance, Hypocrisy, and the like fruits of corruption;
It is an evident sign, that heart is diseased, and has great need of a potion
effectually applied thereunto.

For, Jam. 3.14, 15, 16.
If ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not
against the Truth; this Wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly,
sensual, and divellish; for where envying and strife is, there is confusion,
and every evil work.

But they that are Christ's, Gal. 5 24. 2 Cor. 5.14.
have Crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts: Therefore, if any man
be in Christ, he is a new Creature, old things are past away, behold all things
are become new: A new mind, new affections, new apprehensions, a new
understanding, a new will, new conversation, new ends, new grounds of hope, new
objects of joy; ye, all things are become new; and Christ is become all to, and
all in the new man, Col. 3.10, 11.

Thirdly: The glass of Gods word discovers, that, except a man deny himself,
and take up his Cross and follow Christ, he cannot be his Disciple; and if any
man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.

So when self, and the world, are the Conceptions in the heart, and the objects
in our eye, as to hinder us in following of Christ in his Righteous Commands,
so as not to give him the pre-eminence of our obedience; it is an evident sign
the heart is diseased with the aforesaid distempers, and has need of a potion
effectually applied thereunto.

But (says the Apostle) Who so looks into the perfect law of Liberty (or
glass of Gods word) and continues therein, he being not a forgetful hearer,
but a doer of the work; this man shall be blessed in his deed, Jam. 1.25.

Thus trying our Heart-conceptions in the glass of Gods word, and by due
examination discovered our distempers, let us accept a word of exhortation to
be active for a cure and direction therein.

A word of Exhortation and Direction.

Let us in the sense of our disease, and our weakness, and distempers thereby,
put on the Ornaments of sincere humility, and real desire of remedy; and go
every day unto the Well-springs of Gods free grace in Christ, flowing from the
fountain of his eternal love, streaming forth unto us in his word of promise;
and drink every day a good hearty draught or two of that holy water in the cup
of serious Meditation, compounded with the ingredience of Faith: Then let us
take the odours of Thanksgiving for such grace, mixed with Supplications, for a
sanctified use thereof to the heart.

And go unto the Throne of Grace, and present the said Odours in the sensor of
of Faith, upon the Altar Christ Jesus, with the Insence of Christ's Merits, and
the fire of fervent Zeal unto the God of all grace, and through Christ's
blessing; this means may prove effectual to the hearts enlargement.

I will run the way of thy Commandments when thou shall enlarge my heart,
Psalm. 119.52.

Secondly: Let us have recourse to the streams of Christ's self-denial for our
sakes, and his meakness and humility in the same, and ever and anon take a good
hearty draught or two thereof in a cup of due Consideration, and serious
Meditation upon the manner, nature, and ends thereof; and this (through Gods
blessing) may prove very effectual against the aforesaid distempers, and much
strengthen, support, and comfort the heart against the same, Faith being one
ingredience in the said Cup.

Consider him that endures such contradictions of sinners, lest ye be weary,
and faint in your minds, Heb. 12.3.

Thirdly: Let us have recourse unto the School of Christ's Supremacy, where
Christ's Commands is the only rule of action, and the testimonies of his will,
the ground of observation; and by Faith, lay to heart the said supremacy; and
by a due consideration, and serious meditation thereof, learn our duty to
Christ, and accordingly observe his Precepts and Testimonies of his will, as
the only rule of our observations; and withal, present thy supplications at the
Throne of grace, as aforesaid, for Divine assistance in the work; and through
Gods blessing, it may prove effectual to purge the heart of the aforesaid
distempers, and produce in us obedience, to the dignity of Christ; and to the
joy and comfort of the Soul.

Through thy Precepts I get understanding, David's Experience.
therefore I hate every false way, Psalm. 119.104.

I will never forget thy Precepts, for with them thou have quickened me, Psalm.
119.93.

But for the better persuading of our selves to a faithful improvement of the
means aforesaid, let us consider some motives to move us to a careful use of
the said means.

Motive the First.
Let us consider God: the Fathers free Invitations to his Son, and to the
springs of his free grace in him, as by the Prophet is made forth, Isa. 55.1. O
every one that thirsts, come to the waters; and ye that have no Money, come;
neither merit nor desert, in which Chapter we have a free tender of Christ, and
free grace in him, with a free invitation thereunto, of every soul that in the
sense of its loss and damage by the Horselease-Corruption, and her Daughters,
desire a remedy; as also a Remonstrance of Christ's Supremacy: Behold, I have
given him for a Witness to the people; a Leader and Commander to the people,
ver. 4.

Motive the Second.
Secondly: Consider Christ's fullness, he is a full Fountain, full of grace and
truth, for in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily; he is the
Fountain set open for Sinners; a Fountain fed with all the springs of God, that
will never fail: A River, whose streams shall make glad the City of God in the
worst of times, and in the greatest Revolutions that can come upon the world.

Motive the Third.
Thirdly: Consider him as in his fullness, so also in his freeness to impart of
his fullness to poor Sinners, that are enslaved by this Horseleach and her
Daughters, and their brood, unto the obedience of Satan's will, to the enslaved
sinners condemnation.

The which freeness of Christ, to impart of his fullness to poor Sinners as
aforesaid; is evidenced six-fold: First, By that order he takes by the
doctrine of his truth, to inform the Creatures of their enslaved state, and of
their remedy to be in him attainable by converting to him.

Secondly: By his invitations given out for Sinners to come unto him; Come unto
Me all ye that Labor and are heavy Laden; all ye, that through the influence
of my Doctrine, are drawn forth to consider and become sensible of your estate
by sin; and in the sense thereof, desire a remedy: Come unto me, submit to my
supremacy, and ye shall find rest for your souls, Mat. 11.28, 29.

Thirdly: By his promise of acceptance to those that come unto him: Those that
come unto me, I will in no wise cast out, says Christ, Joh. 6.37. He will not
turn back the bruised reed with the sense of its own unworthiness; and the
least desires of the soul toward him, he will not quench.

Fourthly: By his complaints of the backwardness of Sinners in comeing to him:
Ye will not come to me, that ye might have life; wherefore do ye lay out your
money for that which is not Bread, and your labor for that which profits not?

Fifthly: Christ's freeness to Sinners, in their coming to him to partake of the
streams of his fullness for a remedy against the aforesaid distempers, is
further signified by his commending the excellent virtue and duration of those
streams, as inducements to draw poor Sinners unto an esteem thereof.

Whosoever shall drink of the water that I shall give him, says Christ, shall
never thirst; but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a Well of
water, springing up into everlasting life. Whence observe, that a full
satisfaction unto an eternal duration, is the natural virtue and effects of
free grace unto every soul that partakes thereof, by a union with Christ.

Sixthly: A sixth evidence of Christ's freeness to Sinners, and of his desire of
their coming to him, to partake of the streams of his fullness, is the
testifications of his great displeasure he takes against such that obstinately
refuse: And those mine Enemies that would not that I should reign over them,
bring them hither and slay them before me, Luke 19.27. Expressions testifying
great displeasure. Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out
my hand, and ye have not regarded; therefore shall they eat of the fruit of
their own doings, and be filled with their own devices, Prove. 1.24, 32.

Thus you have Christ's free desire of sinners coming to him, and to partake of
his fullness of Grace and Truth, demonstrated.

First: By the means he uses to inform sinners of their need of him.

Secondly: By his Invitations to sinners to come unto him.

Thirdly: By his Promise of acceptance of those that come unto him.

Fourthly: By his Complaints or Reproofs upon their not coming.

Fifthly: By his commending the excellency of the virtue and duration of his
streams of free grace, as an inducement to sinners to come.

Sixthly: By his testifying displeasure against those that refuse and withstand
all means thereunto afforded.

Thus much concerning the third Motive, which is Christ's freeness toward poor
sinners for their coming to him, and partaking of his benefits, which is a
strong inducement thereunto.

Motive the Fourth.
As the Father has placed his springs of water of life in his Son, and invites
us to his Son, to participate thereof; and as the Son gives testimony of the
excellent virtue of the water of life in him, with invitations thereunto; so
the Spirit and the Saints Espoused to Christ, that experience the virtue of
these living springs by their union with him through Faith, beholding the
freeness thereof, and the fullness of satisfaction therein, do also give forth
invitations thereunto.

The Spirit and the Bride say, come; and let him that is a thirst, come; and
let him that hears, say come; and whosoever will, let him come and take of
the water of life freely, Rev. 22.17.

Motive the Fifth.
A fifth Motive for encouragement to the said means for the aforesaid cure, may
be the privileges attainable thereby. This water of free grace, which we are
so called and invited to by the Father, Son, and holy Spirit, and sanctified
persons that have tasted thereof, and from their experience commend it to us,
is not only effectual to clarify the heart of the aforesaid Horseleach, and
her brood, but also to qualify the heart with the Divine qualifications of
grace, for nature and quality, like the Fountain whence they flow, to the
evidencing of our Election in Christ, our Adoption by Christ, our Justification
through Christ, and our Glorification with Christ: Yea, hereby the poor soul
comes to be enriched with the Heavenly treasures of divine contentment in all
conditions, whether Prosperity or Adversity, Plenty, or Poverty, Peace, or
Persecution, I have learned (says Paul) In whatsoever state I am in, therewith
to be content. And why so?

Doubtless he had drank of these living springs, these waters of life in Christ
Jesus, whereby he had the evidences of an eternal Inheritance, sealed unto him
to enjoy when this life shall cease and be no more: Therefore Paul valueth not
self, nor the world, nor any of his Birth-priviledges, nor any outward external
knowledge or interest, in comparison to the knowledge of Christ, and the
privileges and dignities attainable in and by Jesus Christ and him Crucified:
I determined (says Paul) not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ
and him Crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2. But what things were gain to me, those I counted
loss for Christ; yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered
the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ, and
be found in him, Phil. 3.7, 8.

And what is the Reason that Paul is thus taken up in estimation of Christ:
Doubtless he had drank of those living springs of free grace in Christ, and
tasted the sweetness and savor thereof; then all his self-righteousness, and
self-justification, and self-wisdom, and self ends, and worldly interests must
all be laid aside as dung; when once he beholds Christ's perfect Righteousness
streaming toward him for the adorning of his soul to the Fathers gracious
acceptance: And Justification in Christ streaming toward him, to free him
from the gift of sin and condemnation; the just desert of sin; and the
sanctifying Spirit of Christ, streaming into his soul, to cleanse the heart of
corruption, and to replenish it with grace: And wisdom in Christ, streaming
into his understanding, to instruct him in the paths of Salvation; and every
stream hereof, compounded and sweetened with Divine love from Eternity, and
with that peace that passes all understanding; and with assurance of that
glory which is unexpressible by the tongue of Men or Angels; whereby Faith is
the more confirmed, and hope revived and patience the more perfected, and the
affections the more enflamed with desires and holy longings after further
communion and fellowship with Christ, whence these streams of living waters
flow: Stay me with Flagons (says the Espoused Soul) For I am sick of Love;
Cant 2.5 chap. 8.6. chap. 2.14 chap. 5.16 chap. 1.2.
Set me as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal upon thine arm: Let me see thy
Countenance; let me hear thy Voice, for sweet is thy Voice, and thy Countenance
is comely; he is altogether lovely: Let him kiss me with the kisses of his
mouth, for his love is better than Wine; Thy Name is as ointment poured forth,
therefore do the Virgins love thee. And hence it is that Paul so highly
esteems the knowledge of Christ as the most excellent of all knowledge, and
his Being in Christ the most excellent Being.

There he might drink his fill of the River of the most excellent pleasures,
even the pleasures of God, and the joy of the Saints: And therefore, if ever we
would overcome our corruptions, and break off our affections from self and the
world; if ever we would have our hearts cleansed of sin, and furnished with the
qualifications of grace, and evidences of assurance of eternal life; then let
us run the race that is set before us, improving the means given out unto us,
looking to Jesus that spiritual Rock, in whom all the the springs of free grace
is centured; and from whom all the streams thereof do flow unto Believers for
their comfort, support, strengthening, refreshing, and confirming of them in
the assurance of a possession in the promised Inheritance, and weight of glory,
far exceeding all the glory of this present world.

If thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that says unto thee, give me
to drink, Thou would have asked of him, and he would have given thee living
water, Joh. 4.10.

Motive the Sixth.
A sixth Motive and encouragement to a careful improvement of the aforesaid
means, against the aforesaid distempers, may arise from the consideration of
our sad estate, whilst we are slaves unto those corrupt Lusts, what heart so
hard, as will not a little commiserate the condition of such as are in
captivity and slavery under the dominion of the Turks? What poverty and want,
what hard service and cruel bondage such under-goe, we have had related to us?
O what would such poor slaves give, if they had it to be freed from such a
bondage, that they might enjoy the liberty and plenty of their Fathers house! O
how welcome would a Ransom be to such! how readily would they accept thereof?

And shall not we consider and commiserate the sad estate of our selves, whilst
we are in bondage and slavery under the dominion of sin, the Horseleach and her
Brood; Corrupt Lusts which war against the soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. and force the
Creature to run and go at every beck; wait all opportunities, and improve all
means to satisfy the greedy appetites of carnal desire, and unsanctified love
to self and the world, whilst the poor soul is faint to feed on Husks, and pine
and starve for want of food, and bread enough in the Fathers house; and a
Ransom given for liberty thereunto, and invitations to partake thereof; and
acceptance promised upon return; and the poor carnal is so blinded with the
God of this world, and so enslaved to its Lusts through that contract between
the affections, and self and the world; That although there be a price put in
the hand to get Wisdom (as Solomon says) yet he has no heart thereunto.

Motive the Seventh.
Seaventhly: We may be moved and encouraged to a careful improvement of the
means aforesaid, in order to a Cure of our aforesaid disease, by the due
consideration of that eternal woeful misery that this slavery to our Lusts will
bring upon us, if the aforesaid conjunction be not timely broken, and the heart
cleansed of the lusts therein conceived through that contract, when God shall
say unto us, Go unto the Gods, your Lusts, whom ye have served, Remember now in
Youth and Age,
Thy sinful Lusts to mortify;
For they sad Evils do presage,
To those that to them live, and in them dye:

and let them deliver you; then shall they call upon me, says the Lord but I
will not answer; they shall seek me early, but shall not find me; for that,
they hated knowledge, and did not chose the fear of the Lord; they would none of
my Counsel, they despised all my reproofs; therefore shall they eat of the
fruit of their own doings, the turning away of the simple shall slay them.

And as the Apostle Paul affirms, 2 These. 8, 9. The Lord Jesus Christ shall
be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking
Vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ; who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of his power.

O sad slavery and servitude that bring-forth such sad effects: To be Slaves to
the Turks, is but a temporal slavery of the body for a short time; but the
slavery to the lusts of Corruption, tends to eternal woe and misery, if not
timely prevented: Wherefore, as ye have yielded your Members servants to your
Lusts, unto Iniquity, so now yield your selves Servants to Righteousness unto
Holiness; For whilst ye are the Servants of sin, ye are free from
Righteousness, and the end thereof is death. Romans 6.19, 20, 21, 22.

Motive the Eighth.
The eighth Motive to the aforesaid work, may be the consideration of the
little time we have in this life to mortify our Corruptions, and subdue our
Lusts, and crucify the world, and to deny self, and so follow Christ in the
way of his Commandments, in holy sanctity to the glory of the Father, and
honor of the Son, and edification, and comfort, and encouragement of his
people; and to get a stock of grace to help us in a time of Need. When our time
is over, our opportunities cease; and therefore, as Solomon faith, Whatsoever
thy hand finds to do (i. e. in answer to the will of God) Do it with all thy
might, for there is no work nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave,
whither thou go, Eccle. 9.10. Therefore says the Holy Ghost, To day, if ye
will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, that is, neglect not the time,
reject not the means while they are afforded, for time and means will not
always attend upon us; as says the Holy Ghost, Now is the acceptable time, now
is the day of Salvation; (i. e.) now Christ with Salvation in him, is freely
tendered; now the voice of Christ in the Gospel is clearly demonstrated, and the
true light now shines with the bright and beautiful beams of the Son of
Righteousness: now Christ waits upon us in the dispensation of his precious
blood to justify us, his precious word to direct us, his precious promises to
comfort us, and many precious calls for to invite us, with precious arguments
to persuade us, and precious cords of love in all to draw poor Sinners to
himself; and now a precious door of hope is opened to us; but so it will not
always be, thy present time is a precious time, the present means of the Gospel
is a precious means, given for precious ends, as to reduce poor Sinners to
their primitive state in Righteousness and true Holiness, in true peace and
happiness with God in glory; in order thereunto, we in time shall find that
time's best spended, that is spent in that kind.

Then let not this thy precious time be spent
In The Horseleach-Daughters, and their Broods content.
But by improvement of the precious means,
Endeavor thou, thy heart of them to cleanse.
By often drinking of those livings springs
That flows from him, who is the King of Kings.
It Is water of life, with love compounded sure,
'Twill heal thy wounds, and thy distempers cure.
But thy work is great; thy time is but small;
Time's best improved, in time of Gods call.
FOR, When our time is over, and opportunities cease,
We may lie in sorrow, hopeless of release.


See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise, redeeming the
time, because the days are evil.

Motive the Nineth.
A nineth Motive to move us to improve the said means against the aforesaid
distempers, may be the consideration of that loss we shall sustain unto our
selves, if our hearts be not cured of the said distempers; as the loss of our
Union and Communion with God the Father, and Christ, and the Spirit, and the
Holy Angels, and Saints in the Kingdom of glory, with all the felicities
thereof to all Eternity.

O what a sad loss will it be unto us, how shall we befool our selves, for
yealding our selves and services unto the supremacy of these Taskmasters,
these insatiable greedy worms, always crying, give, give: When we shall see
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all those that have been faithful to Christ's
supremacy accepted into the Kingdom, and we our selves thrust out, with that
dreadful Sentence, Go ye, Cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil
and his Angels, where the Worm never dies, and the fire is never quenched: O
sad Estate! with sorrows intolerable, and miseries endless.

Motive the Tenth, or a Use of encouragement,
To go often to the aforesaid springs, and by an act of Faith, improve the means
thereof, to the destroying of these lusts of Corruption out of our hearts, is
the consideration that they are not only our Enemies, but they are also Gods
Enemies, as much as in them lies, opposing him in the effecting of his eternal
purpose, and determined Counsel in bringing man to glorify his name, and to
enjoy his glory; and they are Antichristian against Christ and his supremacy,
and against the holy Spirit in its work of Illumination and Sanctification: And
therefore God gives special commands unto us, to improve the Means and Counsel
that he affords us, in order to the destruction of them all: and not to suffer
one of them to live in our hearts unsubdued: Therefore, God in giving to us
both Means and Counsel thereunto, does call upon us for to mortify your
inordinate affections, crucify the world, deny self, put off the old man with
his deeds, cleanse your selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God, circumcising the foreskin of your
hearts; the Lord lays many special injunctions upon us; wherefore we may not
let one live, for they are Gods Enemies.

The Amalakites being Enemies to God, God gives command to King Saul, utterly
to destroy them, old and young, sparing none: But Saul in sparing Agag the
King, lost both Gods favor and his Kingdom for his disobedience therein. God
has given us the Commands and Testimonies of his Mind and Will, that we should
destroy these Amalakitish Lusts, his Enemies, and subdue them out of our
hearts, and not to let one of them to live; and he has given us means
thereunto: And may he not, nay, will he not deal as severely with us, if we
willingly spare any, although never so dear unto us; the dangerous consequence
thereof considered.

David by suffering one Lust to live in his heart to Vriahs Wife, it brought
him to the guilt of Murder and Adultery, to the great dishonor of God, and the
wounding of his soul, with the sense of sin, and Gods displeasure for the same;
to the loss of his strength of assurance, and weakening his evidences of
Salvation; the which caused him to drink many a bitter cup of affliction, with
many a deep sigh, and sob, and sad complaint; with tears and fears of being cut
off in the want of his assurance; which made him cry out in the bitterness of
his soul, in the sense of his loss, O spare me, that I may recover strength
before I go hence, and be no more, Psalm. 39.13.

One Dalilah having gained the heart of strong Sampson, through her continual
crying, Give, Give, did soon surprise him, and bring down his strength so, as
not to be able to resist his Enemies: So one Lust suffered alive in the heart,
through its continual crying, give, give, may soon surprise us, and weaken our
strength of faith and hope, and comfortable evidences, and assurances in Gods
favor; so as we may become weak as another man, as not to be able to resist
the assaults of many other Lusts in the temptations thereof: Every man is
tempted, when he is drawn away of his own Lusts and enticed, Jam. 1.14.

Motive the Eleaventh: Or,
A Use of encouragement, to move us to a diligent use and improvement of the
said means, to the cleansing of our hearts of these greedy worms, may be the
consideration of that choice, and requirement that God has made of the heart,
God requires the heart as a Treasury to himself.
to be for himself as his Treasury, or Storehouse, to lay in the Divine
Treasures of his holy word, his graces and gifts of grace, and divine
qualifications for his own pleasure and delight, and for to enable his Creature
to bring forth fruits to the praise and glory of his name, and to edify and
comfort others, as faith the Lord; These words which I Command thee this day,
shall be in thy heart; and thou shall teach them thy Children, and talk of them
in thy house, Deuteronomy. 6.6. And says the Lord, Therefore shall ye lay up these my
words in your hearts, and in your souls, etc. Deuteronomy. 11.18.

The heart is a Treasury for Gods Love, Romans 5.5. and for the peace of God,
Col. 3.15. and for the spirit of Christ, Gal. 4.6. Yea, all the Laws of God,
and graces, and gifts of grace comprehended in the new Evangelical Covenant in
Christ: God the Father has chosen the heart to wright them in, and as his
Treasury to place them there, Jer. 31.33.

And shall we suffer Gods Treasury to be defiled and polluted with these filthy
worms, seeing God has put a price in our hands for a remedy; seeing he has
opened a fountain of living springs of water of life for sin, and for
uncleanness, Zach. 13.1. And seeing he has commanded us to improve the same
for cleansing; O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may
be saved; how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee, Jer. 4.14. Will thou not be made clean, when shall it once be, Jer. 13.27.

Motive the Twelfth: Or,
A Use of encouragement, to encourage us to a right and serious improvement of
the aforesaid means to the breach of that affinity between our affections and
self, and the world, and the subduing of those Lusts conceived in the heart
thereby, may be the consideration that they are the principal Enemies to true
Reformation in Church and State: The which Reformation has been the subject of
discourse in the mouths of many, and in the prayers and desires of some for
many years: But until the Creatures affections be disunited from self, and the
world, and really united to Christ and his Supremacy, so that the honor of
Christ, and the promoting of his interest in his truth and people, become in us
the principle and only end, and aim in all endeavors, and self, and the
world, denied and cast aside: We are unlikely, to see either the birth or
growth of that truly called Reformation in Church and State; for self and the
world, retained in affinity with love and desire, will assuredly hinder the
work; they are Enemies thereunto: Know ye not that the friendship of the world
is enmity with God; Whosoever will be a Friend of the World, is an Enemy of
God, Jam. 4.4. And as Saint John says, Love not the world, nor the things in
the world; If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2.15.

In Ezras time, when they were upon the work of Reformation in Church and
State; it is said of Ezra, that he had Prepared his heart to seek the Law of
the Lord, and to do it, Ezra. 7.10. And they the better to complete their
Reformation, fell to reforming the strange Marriages as a great evil, and the
more to be lamented, because the Princes and Rulers were chief in that
Trespass: Thence came in Idolatry, and many abominations of the Heathen; and
until this was Reformed, all was but to little purpose; therefore in this work,
they put away both Wives, and all Born of them: So also, except this unlawful
conjunction of affinity between our affections, and self, and the world, be
broken; and self and the world put away, and all born of them; there is like to
be no true Reformation completed, because self ends and worldly interests will
assuredly hinder the work: But if one hearts were but truly reformed; and with
Ezras, Prepared to seek the Law of the Lord, and to do it, the principle part
of the work, in the furtherance of Reformation in Church and State would be
accomplished.

Wherefore, as it is written, Set your affections on things above, and not on
things on the Earth, Col. 3.3. Draw nigh unto God, and he will draw nigh unto
you, cleanse your hands, ye Sinners, and purify your hearts ye double-minded,
Jam. 5.8.

Motive the Thirteenth: Or,
A Use of encouragement, to a careful and diligent Use of the means prescribed,
may be the consideration of that pollution and defilement that this disease
aforesaid will bring upon our most Religious performances. If we will be
Religious, except this affinity be broken (i. e.) self and the world put away,
and all those Lusts by their influence in the heart, conceived, and the heart
prepared and set for God only; all Religious exercises must be dedicated unto
self and the world: If one in this affinity go to hear the Word, yea, if he
Pray or Preach, or perform any Religious exercise, it will bring in
self-Righteousness, self-Justification, or self-Pride in knowledge and gifts, or
for the praise of men; yea, all must be done to be seen of men, and for worldly
applause, profit, honor, and advancement; as our Savior says of the Scribes
and Pharisees; All their works they do to be seen of men, and love the
uppermost seats, and to be called Rabbi, and for a pretense, make long Prayers:
Wherefore our Savior compares them to such as make clean the outside, and
leave the inside filthy; and to painted Supulchres, beautiful outwardly; in
show of Religious observations, yet the heart full of pollution with these
greedy worms, to the devouring the Poor; they devoured Widows Houses, as
Christ seems to charge them. And what is the Reason of this? surely self and
the world were retained in affinity with love and desire, and therefore
self ends and worldly interests becomes the wheel of motion in all the actions
of the unsanctified heart; and is not this the cause and ground of that sad
complaint that the Lord by the Prophet takes up against the Priests, and
Prophets, and Judges of Israel of old? Thus says the Lord concerning the
Prophets that make my people err, that bite with the Teeth, and cry, peace;
and he that puts not into their mouths, they even prepare war against him,
therefore Night shall be unto you, Micah. 3.5. The Heads thereof judge for
reward, and the Priests thereof Teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof Divine
for money; yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, is not the Lord among us,
ver. 11. And what is the reason of all this? surely the Horseleach and her
Daughters corrupt affections in affinity with self and the world, do Monopolise
all persons, all places of dignity, and honor; all gifts, all knowledge, and
all religious offices and performances unto themselves: Where this affinity is
retained, as to have its lively residence in the heart, all must be monopolised
to self and worldly interests.

But I would present to consideration that more excellent way laid down by the
Apostle Paul to the Corinthians, which is the way of Charity, without which,
all is nothing in the Lords esteem, as says the Apostle, Though I speak with
the tongues of Men, and of Angels, and have not Charity, I am but as sounding
Brass, and a tinkling Cymbal; And though I have the gift of Prophecy, and
understand all mysteries, and all knowledge, yea, and all faith, so that I
could remove Mountains, and have no Charity, I am nothing; and though I give
all my goods to feed the Poor, and my body to be burned, and have not Charity,
it profits me nothing.

Whence Note, that our highest actions will not reach to Gods approvance,
except Charity be a compound in the same: Yea, so excellent is the nature and
virtue of Charity, and of esteem with God, that the meanest actions of it, be
but the gift of a cup of cold water, where there is no better, if compounded
with Charity, it has the promise of reward; so highly is Charity in esteem
with the Lord. But happily some soul may question in it self, if not of some
other, saying, what is Charity, that is of such concernment: I Answer briefly,
That Charity is a real affectionate love to the Lord, and all actions by the
Creature, performed in this principle of love to the Lord, may be deemed
actions of Charity, or Charitable actions; as when the Creature is drawn forth
to do that which is the manifest will of the Lord, by the powerful influence of
real affectionate love unto the Lord, then the Creatures end, and aim, and
drift, and scope in all its actions, will be honor, praise, and glory to the
Lord, the object of its love.

Yea, by this principle of love to the Lord, the Creature is drawn forth with
endeavors to vindicate, promote, and with high esteem, prefer the name of the
Lord, the interest of his truth, and people, for the Lords sake, above all
other things.

But why is this love to the Lord called Charity? and those actions arising
from thence, acts of Charity; and not that love in the Creature, that is fixed
upon other objects here below, as self and the world, which you have so much
condemned in this your former discourse.

This love to the Lord, may be called Charity.

First: From the purity of its original, from whence it does arise, which is
the pure, eternal, free, and undeserved love of God in Christ; the which by its
influence and operation upon the heart, does work up the Creatures affections
into its own nature to love the Lord, and all his interest for his sake, and to
demonstrate this love unto the Lord, as occasions do offer themselves, and
ability does afford; and so Saint John lays the original cause of man's love to
God, to be Gods love first made out to man: We love him (says John) because he
loved us first.

Secondly: It may be called Charity upon the consideration of the purity of the
object, upon whom it fixes its respects.

Thirdly: It may be called Charity, to distinguish the excellency of this love
from, and above all love fixed upon other objects.

Fourthly: It may be called Charity, in consideration of the purity and
excellency of the natural properties of it, which it works in those hearts
where it does reside; as says the Apostle, Charity suffers long, and is
kind; Charity envieth not; Charity vaunteth not it self, it is not puffed up;
does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked;
thinks no evil; rejoices not in Iniquity, but rejoices in the Truth;
bears all things; believes all things, hops all things; endures all
things.

Fifthly: There is no love but is failable, except this of Charity; and Charity
never fails; and therefore Charity.

Sixthly: There is no love has a reward like this of Charity, for Charity has
an eternal reward in Glory annexed unto it: So that when the Creatures actions
do flow from this inward principle of real love to the Lord, and therewith
compounded, they become actions of Charity, and of high acceptance with the
Lord: But when this ingredience is wanting, neither person, nor performance is
approved of the Lord, as faith the Lord by the Prophet Zachariah, unto Israel
of old: When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month, even those
seaventy years did ye at all fast unto me, even unto me; and when ye did eat,
and when ye did drink, did not ye eat for your selves, and drink for your
selves? And what is the reason that their meat offerings, drink offerings, their
fastings and mournings, their solemn meetings, and religious services found not
acceptance with the Lord? Surely their hearts were destitute of Charity, there
wanted this compound of a real love to the Lord, and a real desire to promote
the interest of his truth in the power and purity of it, to the glory of his
Name, and to be an example to others thereunto: But contrarily all their
performances were rather dedicated to carnal self and worldly interests, with
whom the Horseleach Daughters, their corrupt affections, were joined in
affinity; and therefore all was nothing in the Lords esteem.

Many shall come to me (says Christ) in that day, saying, Lord, Lord, open
unto us, have we not Prophesied in thy Name? and in thy Name cast out Devils?
and in thy Name done many wondrous works? Then will I profess unto them, I know
them not, Depart from me, ye workers of Iniquity, Mat. 7.22, 23.

Wherefore consider.

When as self ends, and wordly interests become
Our wheel of motion in Religion;
Our reward from God, then is like to be
Rejection from his presence in Eternity.
Motive the Fourteenth; or, a Use of Encouragement.
We may be further moved and encouraged to a careful use and improvement of the
aforesaid means against the Horseleach and her Daughters, and their Brood, for
the destroying of those heart-worms by the recommendation, and experimental
testimonies of the faithful in all ages, commending to us this means, the
streams of free grace in Christ Jesus, flowing from the fountain of the Eternal
Love of the Father, the Lord Jesus Christ, in the days of his Pilgrimage here
upon the Earth, did thereby preserve his heart from Corruption, by drinking of
these waters of this fountain, as it is written of him, Psalm. 110. ver. 7. He
shall drink of the Brook in the way, therefore shall he lift up his Head: The
streams of Gods free grace, flowing from the fountain of his Eternal Love, is
that Aqua-vitae water of Life, that has a powerful virtue in it, to do the
work, if rightly applied.

David having tasted a cup or two thereof, is drawn forth into admiration of
it, with these expressions; How excellent is thy loving kindness to God!
Therefore the Children of men put their trust in the shadow of thy wings. They
shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy House, and thou shall
make them drink of the river of thy pleasures, for with thee is the fountain of
life; in thy light we shall see light, Psalm. 36.7, 8, 9.

The Fathers of old (says the Apostle Paul) did all drink of the same
spiritual drink, for they drank of that Rock that followed them, and that Rock
was Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4.

Sweet are those streams of living waters; sure,
That's sweetened with Love, divine and pure,
That streams to us in Christ; the rock of age;
It Is life eternal, that this love presages.
Hereby Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the faithful cleansed their hearts
of self and the world, and kept up their affections to God, so as to make the
will of God their ground of action, and the glory of God their end in the same,
to the denial of self and the world, in the lusts and vanities thereof;
choosing rather to suffer affliction, then to disobey the will of God, or to
infringe his glory.

It is said of Moses, that he refused to be called the Son of Pharoahs
Daughter, and denied himself of all the Honors, Treasures, and Pleasures of
Pharoahs Court; choosing rather to suffer affliction with the People of God,
than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; for he had respect to the
Recompense of reward; and what is the reason of this; Surely he drank of the
Brook in the way, and therefore he lift up his head, Psalm. 110.7. above all the
treasures and pleasures of this world, Esteeming the reproaches of Christ
greater Riches than the Treasures of Egypt: Yea, Heb. 11.25, 26.
such is the Virtue and Efficacy of these living spings, Gods free grace in
Christ, that it both cures the heart of the reigning power of sin, and
furnishes it with courage and boldness in the ways of God against all
reproaches and persecutions for the sake of Christ: As we read of many that
underwent Mockings and Scourgings; Bonds and Imprisonments; some stoned, some
sawn asunder, and some slain with the sword; some wandering about in
Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, of whom the
world was not worthy; and these not accepting of deliverance, (i. e.) upon
their Adversaries terms: And what was the reason that they thus slighted self
and the world, to follow the Lord in his ways, to the loss of all their outward
enjoyments: Surely, they drank of the brook in the way; the streams of Gods
free grace in the promised Messiah, were the waters of life, whereunto they had
recourse upon all occasions, and by a supernatural hand of faith, applied the
same unto the heart in the cup of serious meditation; and by the virtue of the
said streams, they received such spiritual nourishment, comfort, support and
assurance of better, and more satisfying enjoyments, the which drew up their
affections to the Lord, so as to renounce self and the world, with all the
fading vanities thereof, as says the Apostle Paul, Whether we are besides our
selves, it is to God; or whether we be sober, it is for your cause; for the
love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if Christ died for
all, then were all dead; and he dyed for all, that they which live, should not
henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him that dyed for them, 2 Cor. 5.13,
14, 15.

Thus divine love, with the excellent benefits thereof, has a constraining
opperation in it, to convert a soul from self and the world, unto God, and to
the glorifying of his name, with qualifications of grace wrought in the heart,
through the souls participation of the powerful influences, and refreshing
streams thereof.

For as the true sight and sense of our own Corruptions, and our vileness
thereby, and our just deserts for the same laid to heart, by a divine hand, is
sufficient for the converting of our proud hearts, and haughty spirits into
humiliation; so also the true sight, and sensible experience of the glory of
the Lord in the dispensations of his free grace in Christ, and the glory that
it leads unto, being laid to heart by due consideration, and serious
meditation, through the operation and power of the divine spirit of the Lord,
is a sufficient means for to change the property, and alter the dispositions of
the heart, from what it was by corrupted nature, and to qualify it with the
qualifications of the Divine Nature, into the same Image or likeness unto Jesus
Christ in his natural properties, inclinations and qualifications of grace, as
evidences of future glory.

As says the Apostle: We all beholding as in a Glass, the glory of the Lord
are changed into the same Image, from Glory, to Glory, even as by the spirit of
the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18.

An Exhortation to a Unity with Christ, in qual fication and self-denial after
Christ's example as an emblem of true Christianity.
If there be therefore any Consolation in Christ? if any comfort of Love? if
any fellowship of the spirit? if any bowels, and mercies: Fulfill ye my joy
(says the Apostle) that ye be like-minded, having the same love, being of one
accord, of one mind: Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory, but in
lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better than themselves, Phil. 2.1, 2,
3. so forward.

Thus have we the Counsel and Example of Christ, with the experimental
testimonies of the faithful in former ages, recommending unto us upon Scripture
Record, Gods free grace in Christ, as a sovereign remedy to cure our souls of
this disease of Corruption that Horseleach, and all those greedy worms bred in
the heart by the influence thereof, which lie as obstructive Rubbish in our way
to Holy and Heavenly seize, suitable to our Head, Jesus Christ.

Wherefore we having such excellent means afforded us, and being compassed
about with such a cloud of Witnesses giving testimony to us of the excellent
virtue, and powerful efficacy thereof; let us carefully, and with all diligence
improve the said means, to the laying aside every weight and the sin that does
so easily be set us, and let us run with perseverance unto the divine springs
and streams of the waters of life flowing unto us, in, and through Jesus
Christ, from the Fountain of the Eternal Love of his Father, and manifested by
his Spirit in the word of truth, the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and our Salvation;
looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who for the joy that
was set before him, denied himself, contemned the world, endured the Cross, and
despised the shame to do his Fathers Will in opening the springs of the waters
of life unto us, and is set down at the right hand of the Majesty on high,
there to appear in the presence of God as an Interceder for us, as we by faith
unite to him, and participate of his fullness.

Thus have we before us a discovery of a most sad and dangerous disease of the
Heart-worms, the Horseleach, and her Daughters in conjunction with self and the
world, and a brood of ungodly Lusts conceived in the heart of unregenerate man
by the influence thereof; as insatiable as the Grave, the barren Womb, the
Earth and the Fire which never says it is enough; the which disease is not
only dangerous, but also very general; thousands are sick thereof, and
thousands are dead thereby, whilst they live, as being unsensible of the
disease or danger thereof, and thousands of thousands have perished by the
same; we are also informed of a way how we may try our hearts whether this
disease be prevalent in us, or no; and also what means is like to be most
effectual against the same, with some motives for encouragements to a careful
improvement of the said means.

As First: God the Fathers free invitation of Sinners unto his Son, in whom the
springs of the water of life is placed to be communicated to those that by
faith embrace him.

Secondly: Christ's invitation of Sinners to come unto him and partake of his
fullness, as he is a full Fountain set open for Sinners, a Fountain fed with all
the springs of God.

Thirdly: Christ's freeness to impart of his fullness to poor Sinners enslaved,
the which, freeness is evidenced six fold.

Fourthly: The Spirit and the Brides invitation to, and commendation of the
freeness of these waters of Life in Christ.

Fifthly: The excellent operation of these living springs to the clarifying of
the heart from corruption, and to qualify the heart with grace.

Sixthly: The sad slavery and bondage of souls enslaved to the Horseleach and
her Brood.

Seaventhly: The woeful misery that this slavery to our selves will bring upon
us, if the means be not improved for a remedy.

Eighthly: The little time we have for our improvement, the which once over,
our opportunities cease.

Ninethly: The greatness of our loss, if we obtain not a cure while the time
and season serves.

Tenthly: They are Gods Enemies as much as in them lies, opposing God and
Christ, and the Spirit in their effecting of man's salvation in the way of Gods
determinations, and for appointments from Eternity.

Eleaventhly: The consideration of Gods requirement, and choice that God has
made of the heart, to be as a Treasury for himself, to place his word, his
spirit, his gifts, and graces, his laws and statutes there, according to his
Covenant.

Twelfthly: They are the grand Enemies to true Reformation in Church and State,
and therefore are not to be suffered to live in the heart.

Thirteenth: They will Monopolize all thy Religious actions of Piety and
Charity to themselves, all must be done for self ends and worldly interests.

Fourteenth: The Recommendations and Testimonies of the faithful which from
their own experiences commend unto us the excellent use and efficacy of these
streams of free grace in Christ, as a sovereign remedy to our distempers, as an
encouragement to us.

Fifteenth and lastly: One Use of comfort to the faithful improver of the
aforesaid means to the aforesaid ends and unto that soul that is truly sensible
of its disease its slavery and danger thereby, and world with longing desires
be relieved, released, and delivered from the bondage of sin, and condemnation
due for the same.

Behold; O behold your privileges, your help, your remedy, you have a a God
free of his dispensations of grace to you in Christ a full Fountain set open
with the waters of Life, to cure all your distempers by sin; it is to cleanse
the heart of sin and of uncleanness; a Rock that cannot be drawn dry; a River
with streams, seasoned and sweetened with Divine Love, Christ Jesus, full of
grace and truth, for the refreshing, comforting, and satisfying of every soul,
that in the sense of its own deficiency comes to Christ believingly, in real
desire of remedy, where you may drink and refresh your selves and welcome; you
have Christ ready to entertain you with friendly entertainment; Eat O friends,
drink, yea drink abundantly, O Beloved, Cant. 5.1. The more souls come to
Christ, the more free is Christ unto them, the more joyfully does he entertain
them, the more his delight is in them, and the more he communicates of his
fullness to them; your presence with him, and partaking of his fullness, is his
joy; your absence from him, and refusal of his benefits, is his sorrow: He wept
over Jerusalem upon their refusal of him in the day of his free Communications:
The springs are open, the Fountains full, the streams run clear and pure, and
free for cure for all your wounds, though never so sore; here may you find
support and comfort in the worst of times, and greatest troubles, as says the
Psalmist, Although the Earth be removed, and though the Mountains be carried
into the midst of the Sea, we will not fear, Psalm. 46.2. And why? There is a
River, the streams whereof shall make glad the City of God, verse 4. and
agreeable here unto are those words of the Prophet Isaiah, ver. 23. The
Glorious Lord will be unto us a place of broad Rivers with streams: God will be
yours, and Christ, and Grace, and Glory, and what enjoyments is communicable in
them shall be for your Consolation and Salvation.

Wherefore, as ye tender the glory of God, the honor of Christ, and your
participation of the benefits and privileges in Christ, the life of holiness,
and the health of your souls in Heavens seize, use all diligence at the
said Well-springs, for to complete a cure to your diseased hearts, and to
obtain your freedom from the servitude of carnal Lusts, the Enemies to our
Reformation and Salvation.

Certain Articles included and drawn from the foregogoing Discourse, as the
Judgment of the Author in brief.
First.
THere is one God, Creator of all things, whose being is of himself; Glorious
in Essence, Almighty in Power, Infinite in Wisdom, Wonderful in Providence,
Perfect in Purity, Rich in his Mercies, Great in loving Kindness, Faithful in
his Covenants, Free in his dispensation o^ Grace, Tender of Compassion,
Long-suffering in Patience, Abounding in Goodness and Truth, Righteous in his
Laws, Just in his Judgments, Jealous of his Truths, a Hater of Sin, a Revenger
of Iniquity upon the Impenitent incomprehensible in himself; yet comprehending
all things within his All-seeing Eye, his Understanding, Knowledge, and
Almighty Power, having Dominion over all things, to order all things, and
dispose of all, according to the good pleasure of his divine will, unto whom
all Worship, Service, and Obedience is due, and is to be performed in his own
way by the Sons of men; and what he is in himself, his Being and Attributes, he
is Incorruptible, Immortal, and Eternally so: God blessed for ever, the hope,
the help, the support, the consolation and salvation of all that put their
trust in him, to whom be Glory, Honor, and Praise everlastingly. Amen.

Secondly,
The glorious God has made forth himself unto the Sons of men by three
denominations or distinction of names, as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. The
Father is of himself, not made, created, nor begotten: The Son is of the
Father, Begotten; not made, as he is God; yet made of a Woman, as he is Man,
Gal. 4.4. The perfection of both Natures centred in him, that he was perfect
God, and perfect Man: The holy Spirit is neither made, created, nor begotten;
but is equally one, from Eternity in the Godhead, with the Father and the Son,
proceeding from both, man's heart to invade, to repair the great loss, the power
of sin therein made.

Thirdly,
The Father from Eternity, before the world was, did determine, decree and
purpose in himself, in time, to Create man; to be to the glory of his Name, and
to enjoy him in a glorious state; and thereunto did fore-appoint, or
predestinate him.

Fourthly.
The Father foreseeing the Fall of Man by sin, and Man's Captivity under Satan's
dominion thereby, and Man's corrupt and miserable state under the same; and Man's
inability to recover himself therefrom, that the determined Counsel, decree,
purpose, and predestination or fore-appointment of the Father might stand sure,
and yet he be just: He also determines a free Redemption for Mankind by his
Son, and electeth or chooses his Heirs of Glory in his Son, under justification
of Life and Glory, through believing in his Son, and conforming to him; and
herein God is just, and the justifier of them that believe on Jesus.

Fifthly.
Believing and conforming to Christ is the product of the spirit.
The which power of believing, and act of conforming, was by the Father
fore-appointed from Eternity, to be produced by, or the product of the spirit,
which through its operation upon the heart, or inward man, should enable the
Sons and Daughters of men, at least Some of them, to believe on his Son, and
conform to him, and thereby be made meet to glorify God, and enjoy his glory;
therefore is this believing and conforming in Scripture, called a New Birth,
and the sanctification of the Spirit, because wrought by the spirit, sometimes
extraordinarily by inspiration, or more ordinarily in and by the Word and
Ministry thereof: The works of sanctification or New Birth by the Spirit.
enlightening the understanding, quickening the apprehension, informing the
judgment, rectifying the will, renewing the mind, regulating the affections,
and persuading the heart to take Christ, to trust in Christ, to rely upon
Christ, to obey Christ, and to suffer for Christ: It qualifies the heart with
love to God, and joy in God, and zeal for God; with patience to wait upon God,
with humility in its walking with God, with sincerity in the worship of God;
sobriety in life, temperancy in the use of the Creatures, with kindness to the
Brethren, and a peaceable disposition and charitableness toward all men,
together with an hatred and loathing of sin, but a love to, and delight in all
the ways of Righteousness.

Sixthly.
The Lord Jesus Christ in his working out the Redemption of man, in order to
the decrees and fore-appointments of the Father, did take upon him the humane
Nature, by a Conception in the Womb of a Virgin, through the over-shaddowing of
the Holy Ghost, as says the Scriptures: And in the Womb of the Virgin Mary was
he nourished for the time, and after the manner of Women, and became both God
and Man; that the same nature that had sinned (being assisted with the Divine)
might make restitution unto justification of life, and so God be just, and the
justifier of them that believe on Jesus.

Seaventhly.
He takes upon him the Execution of three offices imposed upon him by the
Father, as King, Priest, and Prophet: And in the Execution thereof, he does
accomplish and complete the Redemption of mankind unto justification of life,
according to the eternal purpose and fore-appointment of the Father.

Eighthly.
He invadeth the Kingdom of darkness, and encountered the Prince thereof, the
Devil that captivated mankind, and brought them under his dominion; and by his
two-edged sword, the word of God, he obtained Victory, and spoiled the
Principalities and Powers of the dominion thereof.

Ninethly.
Effects of Christ's obedience to the Law.
He answered the Law by a perfect obedience thereunto, whereby he brought in
perfect Righteousness unto life, whereby he became the end of the Law for
Righteousness to Believers, as they stand by faith in him, and whereby
believers are wholly freed from the Accusations, Curse, and Condemnation of the
Law.

Tenthly. The effects of Christ's Priestly Office.

He answers divine justice in his sufferings upon the Cross for man's
transgression to a full satisfaction, whereby Believers, through says in
Christ, are wholly acquitted as from the accusations of the Law, so from the
Executions of Divine Justice, and brought into an estate of peace,
reconciliation, and acceptance with the Father.

Eleaventhly.
He obtains a Conquest over Death and the Grave, Christ's Victories are the
Saints Triumph, but the Wickeds Woe.
those great Captivaters of mankind, by the power of his Resurrection, whereby
Death and the Grave are become subject to him, to deliver up their Captives at
his command, which is a Privilege to the Faithful, but a Woe to the Ungodly.

Twelfthly.
He Ascended to the right hand of power into the glory of the Father; Christ
the Saints Prophet in his exaltation.
where he further executes the aforesaid Offices; as a Prophet he opens the
sealed book; the mysteries of the Kingdom, and the great salvation that the
Father from Eternity has placed in him for all that by faith subject to him,
instructing and teaching the knowledge thereof.

Thirteenth.
Christ's Priesthood, a privilege to his Saints for ever.
Christ further executes his Priestly Office, also now in the days of his
exaltation, by presenting the performances of his Subjects unto the Father in
the golden censor of his own Merits, making intercession for them unto the
Fathers gracious acceptance, and to the encouragement, comfort, and
consolation of his Servants walking in his holy order of government contained
in the Gospel.

Fourteenth.
Christ is in execution of his Kingly Office, whose Laws and Subjects are his
Kingdom.
As Christ did invade the Kingdom of darkness, and overcame the Principalities
and Powers thereof, that held fallen man in Captivity thereby: Se he as a King,
is now in the execution of his Kingly Office in these days of his exaltation,
as is demonstrated not only by his ordination, but also first in his giving
forth his Laws, Ordinances, and Righteous order of Government, with commands of
obedience thereunto. Secondly: By defending and upholding his said Laws and
Government against all opposers. Thirdly: By his sending and gifting his
Ambassadors with propositions of Pardon, Peace, Reconciliation, and Protection
unto the Sons and Daughters of men upon their receiving of him, and conforming
to him, his Supremacy, Crown, and Dignity by subjection to his Laws and
Government accordingly, that man might become Servants to him in subjection to
his Laws; and be brought into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, and
Heirs of Glory, according to the Fathers fore-determination from Eternity.

Fifteenth.
It is the order and design of Christ in the dispensation of the Gospel, to
gather Believers into Congregational Assemblies, otherwise called Churches, for
the better accomplishing the fore-determined decrees and purposes of the
Father; that is, that man might the better glorify God, and be edified and
made meet for glory.

Sixteenth.
It is the way and order of Christ that Believers actively constitute, imbody,
or congregate themselves into Church. Assemblies by a personal confession of
Faith and Baptism, answering the institution and order of Christ, their
supreme Head and King.

Seaventeenth.
It is the order of Christ, and the liberty and privilege of Christian
Congregation so gathered, so constituted as aforesaid, to elect their
Church Officers, men approved for gifts and qualifications suitable to the rule
of truth, as near as they can, and to ordain them into Office by a solemn
ordination of fasting, prayer, and laying on of hands of the Eldership, for the
better promoting of the interest of divine worship, and that order of
government that Christ has left unto his Church upon Gospel-record, and for
converting of the unconverted, and perfecting of the Saints in the Knowledge,
Faith, and Obedience of Christ their King.

Eighteenth.
1 Cor. 9.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Gal. 6. 6
It is of divine requirement, and the Christian Churches duty to communicate
unto the maintenance of their Minister in Office of their temporal concernments
that ministereth to them in spirituals; for so has the Lord ordained, that
they that preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel; yet may a Paul's spirit
make his ministry without charge for the Gospel-sake without sin, if he can
subsist without the Churches maintenance.

Nineteenth.
It is the duty of Christians from the example of the primitive Apostolical
Churches, to set apart, Act. 20.7.
observe and solemnize the first day of the week peculiarly, to assemble
together, to worship the Father, to honor the Son, 1 Cor. 16.2
and to edify one another in that holy order and divine rule of truth made
known unto us by the Son, through the demonstrations of his Spirit in the
Gospel, without adding or diminishing.

Humane inventions cast aside,
For Christ in's Word has them denied.
Twentieth.
That prayer with thanksgiving unto the Father, in the name of the Son, by the
assistance of the spirit, and reading, preaching, and hearing with due
attention the doctrine of Gods word, and the due administration of the
Ordinances of Baptism, and of bread and wine in that order; and to those ends
which answer Christ's Institution, Pattern, or Example; as they are the essence
and substantials of divine worship, so are they with actions of mercy and
charity, the proper work of a Sabbath, or a day set apart to the Lord, and are
to be continued in practice by the Church, until the second appearing of Christ
personally.

Twenty-first.
Mat. 28.19. Mark. 16.15, 16.
That the Baptizing of Believers in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
is a Divine Ordinance appointed as a visible token of Gods Covenant made in
Christ unto Believers, apprehended only by an eye of faith, through a
supernatural illumination, and is to be administered unto subjects upon their
confession of Faith in Christ, wherein Christ not only gives a Believer visible
admittance into communion with his Church as a Member; but also engages to the
Believer (walking in faith and obedience to him) a performance of all the
privileges and benefits promised to his Church in him, as he is King, Priest,
and Prophet thereunto.

And also the Believer by Baptism, visibly testifies to God, Gal. 2.27.
the Church, and the World, that he takes Christ as his King, Priest, and
Prophet; and thereby engages with Christ to walk with him through his
assistance in his holy order of government and rule of truth, made known in his
word to be his will, in opposition to Sin, the World, and the Devil.

All persons have a right to the hearing of the Word Preached, and are to be
admitted by virtue of Christ's Commission thereunto, whether Jews or Gentiles,
Heathens, or Pagans, or whatsoever; but only Believers to Baptism upon
confession of Faith, Act. 8.37.

Twenty-second.
The Ordinance of Bread and Wine instituted by Christ, Luke 22.12, 20.
is to be observed by his Church, consisting of Baptized Believers, until his
second coming, as a representation of the body and blood of Christ, broken and
shed for the remission of Sins, and of the Union-Believers in him thereby; 1
Cor. 11.24, 25, 26
as also a representation of that communion and fellowship Believers shall
hereafter enjoy by virtue thereof; the which Ordinance, through a right
application by faith, proves useful for the preservation and confirmation of
the Faith, Hope, Joy, and comfort of Believers acting in the said Ordinance in
obedience to Christ their King.

Twenty-third.
Lev. 19.17.
It is the order of Christ, and the duty of Christians to reprove sin in their
fellow members upon the visible appearance of it; and to give in warnings and
admonitions for reformation, as they tender the glory of God, Romans 15.14.
the honor of Christ, their own duty, and the promotion of truths interest,
the life of holiness, and the present and future good of the said fellow-member
found in transgression. Heb. 3.3


Twenty-fourth.
Psalm. 141.5.
It is the will of Christ, and the duty of Christians, being justly reproved for
sin, that they take it patiently, and apply it penitently, and improve it
reformingly with respect unto the aforesaid ends, the glory of God, the honor
of Christ, their own duty, Prove. 15.10.
truths interest, the life of holiness, and the present and future good of
their own souls.

Twenty-fifth. Mat. 18.16, 17.

It is a divine order, given forth by Christ as a Statute Law unto his Church,
that in cases of difference, arising between Church Members; and the said
difference cannot be composed by the parties in difference, or by one or two
more, that then the judgment and determination of the Church should stand for a
composer of the same; and the parties in difference to be satisfied therewith,
as they respect the glory of God, the dignity of Christ, the credit of the
Church, and their union in the bond of peace.

Twenty-sixth.
It is the order of Christ, and the duty of his Church in obedience to him, as
their supreme Head and King, to put in execution the Ordinance of
Excommunication against such Members that obstinately persist in wicked
practices, 1 Cor. 5.
or destructive erroneous opinions, 1 Cor. 16.22.
after private and public reproofs, admonitions, and exhortations given by the
Church according to the rule of Christ's order; with a respect unto the dignity
of Christ, and their duty to Christ, the purity of the Church, and the
reformation of the person found in transgression.

Twenty-seaventh.
As a Churchmember is by the order of Christ, Mat. 18.18.
and the Authority thereof given to his Church, justly excommunicated from
communion with his Church in the holy Ordinance of divine representations; so
assuredly in the purpose and determinations of God, he shall be excluded from
the communion of Saints in glory, and be numbered among the Transgressors,
except timely Repentance.

Twenty-eighth.
These persons that enter themselves visible Church Members by Baptism, and
walk in Church Communion in the use of all the external parts of divine
worship, Mat. 13.41.
and under the dews of Gods free grace in Christ, in the doctrine of the Gospel;
and have not Gods glory, and the mortificacation of their sins; Rom 8.13.
the subduing of their corrupt Lusts, and the sanctifying of their hearts with
the qualifications of grace to be their principal ends; and in order to those
ends, do not strive carefully to apply, and faithfully to improve the aforesaid
means thereunto; such persons are like to be as the man without the
Wedding Garment, and his portion like to be their lot; for carnal ends, and an
outside profession only establishes in a man but the hope of the Hypocrite:
but right ends often crowns the action with good success, although the action
have many imperfections.

Twenty-nineth.
Those persons that in love to their corrupt Lusts and the world, in the pride,
pleasures and profits thereof, do carelessly slight the means of grace, and live
in the neglect thereof; and those that obstinately oppose the dignity of Christ
in his Laws and Government, and subjects in the same; and those that wilfully
resist the motions and operations of the spirit of grace, and work of
sanctification until death, without Repentance, are doubtless of that number
that God from Eternity, has through their corruptions ordained or
predestined unto eternal Condemnation.

Thirtyeth.
The Office of Magistracy is an Ordinance of God, Romans 13.
wherein God does empower and appoint him to be an Executioner of his civil
Laws of justice, to the terror of all vicious, profane, and wicked persons
that will not be bridled and kept within the bounds of civility, Titus. 3.1.
by the power of Gods word, nor light of nature; and also to countenance,
maintain, and protect all civil persons within his jurisdiction, in their just
rights and privileges: And also, not only to observe Christ's institutions and
order of government and worship, without adding too, or diminishing from the
truth, as it is in Jesus; with respect to the dignity of Christ, as the only
Lawgiver, sole Head and Governor of his Church; but also to promote and
propagate the interest of Christ, and his People in the true worship and order
of Gospel-government, as a nursing Father, to countenance, preserve, and
protect by his power those that endeavor to walk peaceable in the same; And
herein he is the Minister of God to thee for good, Romans 13.4, 5. But if thou do
that which is evil, be afraid, for he bears not the sword in vain; for he is
the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute Wrath upon him that does evil:
Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for Wrath, but also for
Conscience Sake: And hence the Apostle exhorts that prayers and supplications
be made for all men, for Kings, and all that are in Authority, that we may lead
a peaceable life in all Godliness and Honesty, for this is good and acceptable
in the sight of God our Savior: But if the Magistrate contrarily lay
injunctions and impositions upon the Conscience of his Subjects, in the point
of divine worship, which the Voice of Christ in the Gospel does not own, either
in matter, or manner of performance; so that it become inconsistent to the
dignity of Christ, and the peace of a tender Conscience; then may a soul,
lawfully, with the Apostles and Christians of old, choose rather to suffer the
penalty, then to obey actively the command; and say with Peter and John,
whether it be right to obey God or man, judge ye, Act. 4.19.

Thirty-one, Comprehending many.
Christ's visible appearance in his Kingly power.
The said Lord Jesus Christ shall once more appear personally in his Kingly
power and glory, Mat. 16.27. Luke 21.27. Mat. 24.30. 2 Pet. 3.10, 11.
wherein the Father has exalted him; the which power he shall then put in
execution, The general desolution.
to the dissolving of this world, and all the Principalities and Powers
thereof, The Resurrection The Communion of Saints in Immortality attend Christ
on the Throne with the Angels.
unto which power the graves shall be subject, Joh. 5.28, 29. 1 These. 4.16, 17.
Jud. 14. Mat. 24.31. 1 These. 4.14.
to deliver up their dead according to his will; the Saints in the first place
with those his Saints then alive, all of them will he gather into one Assembly
or Body in Communion with himself in their Immortal state; 1 Cor. 15.53. Mat.
19.28. 1 Cor. 6.2, 3. Joh. 5.27. Mat. 25.31, 32, 41, 46. Romans 2.8, 9. Rev.
20.13, 14. Rev. 21.8. 2 Timothy 4.8 1 Pet. 5.4. 1 Cor. 15.24.
who with the Holy Angels, The seat of Justice.
shall accompany him on the Throne of Majesty, and Seat of Justice, beholding,
and giving their assent and consent unto the just proceedings of Christ, the
Righteous Judge, in the execution of his Justice, The Condemnation of the
Ungodly.
against all the ungodly, both Men and Angels, who shall then be cast into
eternal flames of the fiery Indignation and Wrath of the Almighty, as a just
reward of their ungodly deeds.

But his Saints, The Saints Crown of Righteousness.
shall be in the white Robes of his own Innocence, and Crown of Righteousness,
present and deliver up unto the Father, The Kingdom of Saints presented to the
Father and accepted to glory.
as the effects of the Fathers Election in the Son, and as the fruits of the
faithful labors of the Son, unto the Fathers great and gracious acceptance of
them unto his Kingdom in the state of glory from Eternity, The Saints triumph
in glory.
purposed, appointed, and promised unto them through faith and sanctification;
there to dwell as Kings, triumphing in glory over all their Enemies, The Saints
sacrifice in their glorified state.
fears, sufferings, and sorrows; and as Priests, offering up their sacrifices
and songs of deliverance unto him that sits on the Throne, and unto the Lamb
eternally.

A Letter to my Beloved Children, Josias Bonham, Thomas, John, Samuel, and
Elizabeth Bonham.
Beloved Children,
ALthough in the last end of my Book reminded, yet in much respect are you upon
my heart retained in the tender bowels of true Fatherly affection; wishing unto
you, not only the blessing of me your Father, after the flesh, but more
especially the blessing of him who is the Father of spirits unto your
establishment in his grace, mercy, peace, and unity in the truth, as it is in
Jesus, unto all perseverance through the knowledge of God our Father, and Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Where, as the influence of Gods word upon my heart, written Deuteronomy. 6.5, 6, 7.
and chap. 11.18, 19. and Ephesians. 6.4. has heretofore drawn me forth to consult
with the mind of God in his Testimonies, Commands, and Promises contained in
holy Scripture for my better ability to perform my duty in answer to such a
divine requirement; and having in a measure improved my seize thereunto,
in my House and Family among you, for your edification, that you may set your
hope in God.

And having found the Blessing of God in some good measure attending the same,
to your growth in civility and piety, unto my greater comfort; to the praise of
God be it spoken, and to the encouragement of others in such concernments.

Now considering that most of you are gone from me, and that Mortality (...)
approaching near unto me; and considering the danger of these latter days, by
the abounding of Iniquity, both in errors of Opinions, and vicious practices:
Therefore to the end you might be preserved from the evils of the times, and
the principles that have been communicated to you, be preserved in you, to an
increase and growth in holy and Heavenly seize: I would bequeath unto you
as the best Legacy that I can bestow upon you, even this little Book,
containing some few gleanings, which through grace I have gathered out of the
Vintage of God; and for your sakes, in part composed, to the end, that these
lines within contained, may be your Companions to consult with, as you have
opportunities thereunto; and to remind you of your great concernments, and be
some direction to you in the way of Holy and Heavenly seize, when I have
put off this my Tabernacle, and am Deceased from you: Wherefore let me remind
you with the words of David, to Solomon his Son: Know ye the God of your
Father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and a willing mind, for the Lord
searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts:
If you seek him, he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he will cast
you off for ever, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Take this promise also along in your
Considerations, which says, Then shall ye know if ye follow on to know the
Lord; his going forth is prepared as the Morning; he shall come unto us as the
Rain, as the former and latter Rain upon the Earth, Hos. 6.3. As the going
forth of the Morning light expels the darkness of the Night away, and
increases more and more unto the perfect day, so will the Lord with the light
of the Son of Righteousness, the beams of his special favors in Christ, break
forth upon your souls, to refresh, nourish, comfort, and rejoice your souls,
and cause you to grow up unto a state of perfection in Jesus Christ, as the
fruits of the Earth by the former and latter Rain: For the Eyes of the Lord run
too and fro throughout the whole Earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of
them whose hearts are perfect toward him, 2 Chronicles. 16.9.

The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he knows them
that trust in him, Nahum. 1.7. Wherefore eye the Lord in his providence, and
wait upon him in his dispensations, praise him for all his Benefits, trust in
him at all times, in all conditions; and confide in him for the performance of
all his promises in Christ unto you; always remembering that he is faithful that
has promised. One Text more I would mind you of, which says thus:

And the Lord was with Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the first ways of his
Father David, 2 Cor. 17.3.4.
and sought not unto Baalim; but sought to the Lord God of his Father, and
walked in his Commandments, and not after the doings of Israel. And now my
dear Children, my desire is, that you would make my failings your warnings; and
what you have heard and seen in me of good, make that examplary for your
imitation; and the God of peace be with you, and make you perfect in every good
work to do his will; working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight
through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. So I commit you
to the Lord, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and
to give you an Inheritance among them that are sanctified; hoping in Heavenly
glory You to see; enjoying of each other in felicity.

Your loving Father, Josias Bonham.

A word to my Book, and I have done.
BEhold, I send thee forth to th'Church and World,
Not knowing in whose hands thou may be hurld:
As well as Friends, thou may meet with Foes
That will thy Plainness and thy Truth oppose.
Some may perhaps thee friendly entertain,
Whilst other-some behold thee with disdain.
But whether it be so, or whether not,
Thou may expect it as thy adverss Lot:
For this be sure, thou must expect to pass
Through good and bad report; for why? alas,
Who so Gods Errand tells, must bare his Cross;
Deny himself to his external loss.

