Die Mercurii, 27 Martii, 1644.
IT is this day ordered by the Commons, Assembled in Parliament, That Master
BOND, and Master NICOLLS. do from this House give Thanks unto Master BOND, for
his great pains he took in the Sermon he preached this day at MARGRET
WESTMINSTER at the entreaty of this House (it being the day of Public
Humiliation) And they are to desire him to print his Sermon. And it is Ordered
that none presume to print or reprent his Sermon without being authorized under
the hand wrighting of the said Master BOND.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I do appoint Francis Eglesfeild to Print my Sermon.

John Bond.

SALVATION IN A MYSTERY: Or A PROSPECTIVE GLASS for ENGLANDS Case.

As it was laid forth in a Sermon preached at MARGARETS in Westminster, before
the Honorable House of Commons, at their monthly Fast, March 27. 1644.

BY JOHN BOND, B. LL. late Lecturer in the City of Exceter, now Preacher at the
Savoy in London.

A Member of the Assembly of Divines.

Published by Order of the Commons House.

EXODUS 3. v. 2. The Bush burned with fire, and the Bush was not consumed.

JUDGE. 14. v. 14. Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong came
forth sweetness.

LONDON, Printed by L. N. for Francis Eglesfeild, and are to be sold at the
figne of the Marygold in Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS NOW ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT.
HONORABLE WORTHIES:
THAT which by your first command, was in part, presented to your ears from
the Pulpit; is here at your second command, fully represented to your eyes from
the Press. It is a piece, I dare say, as rare and useful for the Plot and
Subject, which are immediately the Lords; as it is plain and homely in my style
and method: In the dress thereof, I thought it a duty to put off Ornaments;
for although it was Preached upon the yearly day of the Kings Inauguration,
March 27.
yet that season was also the Monthly day of the Kingdoms Humiliation; when you
did endeavor to Weep, Pray, and Fast for the Royal Family; whilst others
(perhaps at Oxford) did Drink, Blaspheme, and Debauch themselves, to show
their Loyalty to His Majesty.

The subject of this sermon, is like the two Pillars which guided (our type)
Israel through the Wilderness to Canaan by day, and night: The one was a
Cloud, which might well signify the Lord hiding himself: The other of Fire,
importing him to be the Savior of Israel even whilst he was in that Cloud.

There is much talk now a days of now light, and that new light as it is held
forth by some, is nothing less then old darkness. I may safely promise you in
this Treatise, at least, the dawning of a light that is new Orthodoxe and
certain: By which I have endavoured to begin the discovery of a hidden Mine of
precious Providence; though all my labors, have scarcely opened the uppermost
surface of the ground. I shall leave the accurate searching of the veins to
more able observers.

I confess that I did make an Essay upon his very Text, in my native climate,
before my banishment; but being plundered of those speculative thoughts; and
having, since that time in some measure experimented this text; I conceive my
self bound in conscience to give you some meat out of my Eater. Surely there
is a vast difference between hearing of the Lord by the hearing of the ear
and when our eyes have seen him. Job. 42.5.


May it please you therefore to travel over this unusual discourse once
again; because Mysteries commonly are not understood at the first perusal.
Sure I am that never any Parliament in England, had greater need of Viatica
than your selves: You are made a Spectacle to Angels and Men; And believe it,
you are set up, for the fall and rising again of many in England. The Lord
has cut off all bridges behind you (and blessed be his name that they are cut
off) And now, together with you, all the Treasures of great Britain and
Ireland are imbarqued: And according to your standing or falling in this great
Cause, must the present Generation and their Posterities in the three Kingdoms,
begin the dates of their perpetual weal or woe; for, pure Reformation, or open
Popery; ingenious Liberty, or Norman Slavery must now be made the settled
Master: Nay, to allude to Caesar's speech, you do now carry the whole Protestant
Cause, withal its Fortunes.

For mine own part, there is nothing upon earth, that does more amaze mine
intellectualls, then the prodigious Lethargy that does still rest upon the
heads and hearts of cursed Neuters, and Protestant Malignants in the Land, even
now when both parties do abhor indifferency, and that the excreable Rebels of
Ireland are brought over: But I might silence my self in this Quos perdece
vult Jupiter, cos dementat. Surely the Lord has smitten the generallity of the
Land with madness and blindness and astonishment of heart, as he threatened
the Jews. Deuteronomy. 28.28
Otherwise they could never dream of defending Parliaments by Malefactors,
Property by Desperado's, and Protestanisme by Irish Rebels. May, we not fear
lest the Spanish, or Irish, or other Foreigners, may beg the whole Land of the
King, and obtain it, alleging that the Nation, is not Compos mentis?

But my hope shall be, that after the Lord has deeply humbled us for our old
and new abominations, Dan. 4.14.
and broken us as he did Nebuchadnezzer, when he has hewn us down, cut off
our branches, shaken off our leaves, and scattered our fruits; Verse. 25.
when he has driven us from men, and suffered our hairs to grow like Eagles
feathers, and our nails like Birds claws; Verse. 33.
then at the end of the days, men's reason and understanding shall return to
them again, and perhaps, our glory also. At least, I am confident, Zeph. 3.12.
that God will leave in the midst of us an afflicted and poor people, and
they shall trust in the name of the Lord.

Mean while, it is my Petition to you, and for you (worthy Patriots) that you
may hold-out through all those seas of difficulties which are before you; Heb.
6.10.
And that you may remember that God is not unrighteous to forget your work and
labor of love, which you have showed toward his name: Yea, 2. These. 3.3.
you may take it for a positive promise. The Lord is faithful, who shall
stablish you, and keep you from evil; Verse. 4.
and we have confidence in the Lord, touching you, that you both do, and will
do, the things which he commands you. Verse. 5.
And the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and into the patient
waiting for Christ. This is the fixed hope, and shall ever be the fervent
prayer, of

From my Study at the Savoy April 20. 1644. Your Humble and willing Servant,
JOHN BOND.

A SERMON PREACHED at a late Fast before the Honorable House of COMMONS.
ISAIAH 45.15. Verily, Thou art a God that hidest Thy self, O God of Israel
the Savior.


THe Springhead of this Text (as some conceive) does arise at the sixth verse
of the 44. Analysis.
Chapter. Others do fetch it as high as chap. 43. verse. 14. Thus says the
Lord your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; for your sakes I have sent to
Babylon, etc. And the Streams do run down as far as the end of chap. 48. The
whole divides it self into two branches.

The first is a prophetical promise of the return of the Jews from their
Babylonish captivity: That ends with this chapter of my Text. And,

The second is a Prophetical threatening of the downfall of Babylon shortly
after that deliverance: This extends from the beginning of the next Chapter
[Bel boweth down, Nebo stoopeth] to the end of this Prophecy, chapt. 48.
[There is no peace, says the Lord, unto the wicked.]

In this propheticall-promisory-Chapter of my Text, Coherence.
commonly three parts or heads are observed.

principal Instrument of this strange Jail delivery; It Is Cyrus the Persian,
whom the Lord does call by name to this great service; For instead of [Spacus]
that is in the Median language Canis, (so called because he had been nursed by
a Bitch) he is surnamed [Coresch] by the Persians, Herodotus. Justinius.
which amongst them does signify a Lord. This strange man is anointed, that
is, authorized and fitted to this strange work. The fitting of him lies in
these particulars.

First, in giving Strength unto him: (wisdom and strength are for the war) The
Lord does promise to hold his hand as the Scribe does guide the hand of his
unready scholar; or rather as Elisha did put his hands upon the hands of Joash
King of Israel, when he did shoot the arrow of the Lords deliverance, the arrow
of deliverance from Syria, 2 King. 13.16, 17. So runs the expression of this
Prophet, verse. 1. Thus says the Lord to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden,
etc.

Next, the Lord does as it were provide Pioners for him to further his march,
by opening of gates, levelling of ways, and removing all obstacles and
impediments; verse. 1. I will loose the loins of Kings, to open before him the
two-leaved gates, and the gates shall not be shut, verse. 3. I will go before
thee, and make the crooked places straight, etc.

But there is a third thing yet behind, and that is the sinews of war, a
sufficient treasury for the work. This also shall be supplied, verse. 3. And I
will give thee the treasures of darkness and hidden riches of secret places,
etc. Thus the Lord will be in stead of Auxiliaries, of Pioners, and of
Treasurers, to fit Cyrus and his Armies for this great service.

proclaim all his great Attributes before them to encourage them in their way.
Thus when he was to put Moses upon that great design of bringing the people of
Israel out of Egypt, He proclaims His Name before him, Exodus 3.14. I am that
I am, thus shall thou say unto the children of Israel, [I am] has sent me unto
you. The like in Exodus 6. verse. 3. where he tells him of his great Name
Jehovah, by which says he, I was not known unto Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
This head of the Chapter runs onward from the end of verse. 4. to verse. 14.
It is one continued, loud, large proclamation of the Lords excellencies and
prerogatives royal, thereby to support their spirits against all difficulties.
The sum of the whole encouragement may be thus rendered; I can (says God) and
I will muster and command all things from the rising of the Sun, and from the
West, verse. 5. and 6. both light and darkness, verse. 7. the heavens, the
skies, the earth, verse. 8. All these will I muster and draw forth for this
work, rather than it shall die in the birth: And as for that Potsheard, that
Clay, Babylon, it shall herein know my love unto Israel, verse. 9. and shall
feel what it is for a creature to strive with its Creator, or for a birth to
tax those parents that begat and bare it, verse. 10. This part reaches to verse.
14.

third piece of the Chapter, is a kind of twisted promise, partly respecting
the deliverance from Babylon in the letter; and partly (according to the usual
manner of the Prophets) interweaning some passages concerning Christ and
spiritual redemption, in the mystery.

The words of my Text, Division.,
if you look upon them with reference to the bordering verses, they are an
abrupt Apostrophe. If you view them in themselves without that reference, they
are an Epanorthosis or correction.

First look upon them with reference to the bordering verses; Relatively."
so you shall find that this verse of my text seems not at all to be of kin to
other parts of the chapter. The whole series stands thus; The Church having
heard and considered all the promises, prophecies and passages of this strange
work of salvation and redemption from Babylon, how that it shall be done by
Cyrus, an heathen King, an enemy to the Jews: and observing also that there
were so many crooked places that must be made straight, so many gates of brass
that must be shattered and broken in pieces ver. 2. and having further
considered ver. 8. that this same righteousness must drop down from heaven
above, as it were by a miracle; that it must come up from the earth beneath, as
if it were from low and contemptible means: Nay finally they having also
seriously pondered that this grand redemption shall be done without price and
without reward, as ver. 13. (and who will do a work without wages? who goes
a warfare at his own costs? yet says God) he shall build my City and he shall
let go my captives, not for price, nor reward, says the Lord of hosts Having
considered all these strange curcumstances and rubs in the way, all these
Meanders, these up-hills and down-hills in the passage, and having lain them
together, she cries out like one astonished, and in a kind of abrupt Apostrophe
does interrupt the Prophet in his Sermon with this mixed admiration twixt fear
and faith [verily thou art a God that hidest thy self, O God of Israel the
Saviour] that is, whilst thou hidest thy self, O God, yet thou art the Savior
of Israel. Thus with reference to the bordering verses, the Text is an abrupt
interrupting Apostrophe.

Next, consider the words in themselves, Absolutely.
and they are a kind of EPANORTHOSIS, a correction: For in the former part of
the verse, the Church seems to trip, stumble, and stagger, at the strangenes
of the manner of the prophesied deliverance from Babylon; it is carried on in
such an abstruse, intricate, unusual way and method, that she cries out as one
at a loss, [verily thou art a God that hidest thy selfe] Here is her trip, her
stagger, her stumble at the strange manner in the former part: But then she
recovers her self again in the latterpart to a confident pers^asion of an
undoubted good issue or end at last, concluding certainly that the upshot will
be wonderful salvation unto the Israel of God; though the manner be strange and
various, yet the issue will be, shall be good and certain: Though thou be
(says she) a God that hidest thy self, yet O God, I believe thou will be the
Savior of Israel. Thus she trips in the first, and recovers her self in the
latter, and you know the proverb, he that stumbles and does not fall, makes the
more speed in his way. This is the state of the Text: So that the former part
of it is a kind of musing admiration at the strange manner of Gods proceeding;
the latter part is a confident persuasion of the final good issue.

If I would be curious to mince a text, Sub-division.
both those general parts might admit of a more particular anatomy. As first
in that strange hidden manner of this work, there are three several steps or
degrees: and as many more (answerable to them) are to be found in the certain
believed issue of this salvation.

In the manner is employed, I. An obscurity; it is an [hidden God] 2. The
willingness of that obscurity, a [selfe-hiding] God. 3. The certainty of both,
[verily] thou art such a God.


In the issue, there is an exact opposition to all those three, both in
quantity and quality. For 1. This hidden God was [notwithstanding] the God [of
Israel.] 2. This selfe-hiding God was (even that while) a [Saviour.] And 3. The
certainty, expressed in the asseveration [verily] is answered and overpowered by
an admiration, in the interjection [o] as though the mouth of the speaker had
been too narrow for his heart and observation.
And thus the whole tenor of the text does run somewhat like the beginning
of Psalm. 73. ver. 1. Truly (or yet) God is good to Israel, even to such as are
of a clean heart. Why [truly] or [yet]? See the next verse, ver. 2. but as for
me my feet were almost gone, my steps had well-nigh slipped: Wherefore? ver. 3.
For I was envious at the foolish when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.
Mark, he recovered himself in the issue, though he stumbled at the entrance.
It seems that the Lords dispensations in those days went on like this
deliverance from Babylon; and this deliverance went on just (me thinks) like
the motions of a Clock: Fix your eyes steadfastly upon a Clock while it is
going, you shall only hear and see the balance moving and clacking above, but
you cannot perceive the poises making any motion that while, neither can you
discern the finger of the watch to go forwards; but take off your eye for a
while, leaving a mark upon the place, and then you shall find easily [in
facto esse] that the Clock has gone, though [in fieri] you could not perceive
it in motion. Such was the carriage of this work: While the people of God did
steadfastly and continually fix their eyes upon it, it was advanced in such an
abstruse, intricate, insensible way, that they could see no motion at all. Thus
we read in Ezra 4. ver. 24. Then ceased the work of the house of God which is
at Jerusalem; and yet even then it scarcely ceased, for in the next Chapter,
chapt. 5. the Prophets prophesyed, ver. 1. and the eminent men begun to build
again, ver. 2. and 5. The balance of the Clock did continue their clacke,
and at last the Clock did strike out.

So much ought necessarily to be said for draining, levelling, and trenching
the ground for a foundation. Now (not to detain you any longer from the thing
that I do principally intend) the Observation from the whole Text and Context
thus briefly explained, divided, debated, must run thus: That, Gods great
salvations of his people, Observation.
but especially from Babylon, are commonly carried on in a mystery.

Here is salvation, because a Savior: And so great a salvation, that it
strikes the beholding Church or Prophet into an admiration, they cannot
express it without an interjection, O God of Israel the Savior. And that this
salvation is from Babylon, the whole tenor, grain and strain of the History
does declare.

Salvation is nothing else but the putting of a thing into a safe condition;
Explication. Salvation, what.
and it is sometimes taken actively with respect to the Author; As Exodus 14.13.
Stand still and see the salvation of God; And so I say here, the Lords
salvation: Sometimes salvation is taken passively, with respect to the
receiver; As you may read in the Psalmist, Psalm. 14.7. O that the salvation of
Israel were come out of Zion; And so I say, the Lords salvation of his people:
Therefore both those significations are in the Position; and both those sorts
may be further considered, first, with respect to their subject, whether as
common, public, or general, respecting a whole Nation, Church or people; or
as particular, private or special, of a place, member, or person.

Next, with respect to the object, or [materia circa quam.] So there is a
salvation [in spiritualibus and Ecclesiasticis] a spiritual, a religious
salvation, that is the same with [Reformation.] And there is a salvation [in
Politicis, Civilibus and secularibus] a salvation in politic things, and this
is the same with [Deliverance.] In this place you must take in both,
Reformation and Deliverance, because both are expressed in this Prophecy, as
we may gather out of Esa. 44.28. Saying to Jerusalem, Thou shall be built;
there is the Civil or politic salvation, the State-salvation, the
Deliverance: And to the Temple, Tthy foundation shall be laid; there is the
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical salvation, the Church-salvation, which is the
Reformation.

And accordingly I shall carry on my doctrine, both in the Demonstrative and
applicative parts of it, using the word [salvation] in both these acceptions,
for Reformati-and Deliverance: And thus Gods great salvations of his people,
especially from Babylon, are carryed-on in a mystery.

Babylon in scripture is of two sorts. Babylon, which, Eastern.


First, there is literal, Eastern, Asiatique Babylon. This was the Metropolis
of Chaldea, and sometimes of the world. Of this we read commonly in the Old
Testament, and it is meant immediately in the Text.

Next, Western.
there is Mystical, Western, Europaean Babylon; this is Rome, the Metropolis
of Italy, and it was sometimes the Queen of the Nations: Of it we do read
commonly in the New Testament. This is also included in the Doctrine.

In a Mystery] A mystery (...) and for the smoother sounding (...) does
signify an hidden, Mystery, why.
abstruse, secret matter, a thing shut up under bars and locks from common
sense and carnal reason. It does include these two conditions.

First, [Respectu Dei] in respect of God, it is an act or work not of his
common, general, ordinary providence; but of his particular, special,
extraordinary power, wisdom, justice, mercy; it is not only the work of his
hands, but of his finger; as the Aegyptian-Magitians acknowledged concerning
the plague of Lice (Exodus 8. verse 18, 19.) when they saw that their
enchantments did fail them in that particular, they said unto Pharaoh, This is
the [Finger] of the Lord. Thus in respect of the Lord, a mysterious carriage of
a business it is (as Isaiah says else where, Chap. 28. verse. 21.) His work, his
strange work, his act, his strange act.

Next, [Respectu nostri] in respect of us men, it is hard to be understood,
it is to the common multitude as a thing locked up in a strange language, as 1
Cor. 14.2. (I may allude at least) For he that speaks in an unknown tongue,
speaks not unto men, but unto God, for no man understands (or hears him)
howbeit in the spirit he speaks [Mysteries.] In short, a Mystery, is to the
generality of men, a paradox, a riddle, a secret that does require a
revelation; as Dan. 2.28. There is a God in Heaven that reveals secrets (...)
say the Septuagint.

Thus much I mean by a mysterious carriage in general, viz. when a salvation
is wrought out in a course, besides, beyond, or against, the beaten rode of
common providence and carnal capacities. Let us borrow but one verse. more to
express it allusively: See, Pro. 30. verse 18. There be three things which are
too wonderful for me, yea four which I know not: read verse 19. the way of
an Eagle in the air, the way of a Serpent upon a rock, and the way of a Ship
in the midst of the Sea. Just such is usually the way of the Lord in carrying
on his great salvations, and especially from Babylon. Let us severally consider
those three comparisons.

The way of an Eagle in the Air,] Amongst all the Elements, the air alone is
invisible and least palpable; it does most easily give a passage to any
natural body, and as suddenly comes together again. Amongst all fowls of the
heaven, the Eagle is accounted strongest, and therefore does fly very swiftly;
and being a bird of prey, her motion is exceeding various too, according to the
course of the game that is before her: Who then can guess before, or trace-out
afterward, the way of an Eagle in the air?

The way of a Serpent upon a Rock] is no less hidden. Oh! how does this
creeping creature wind, wave, and weave it as she goes? what felf-obliterating
chiverdils and indentures are made in her motion? Now the head does point this
way, in a moment it stands to the other hand; it is hard for him that meets
her, to guess whether or no she be coming toward him: But especially when a
Serpent goes [upon a Rocke] then there is no means to hear her motion as in
the sand and amongst the leaves, or to see and trace it as in the dust and
clay; no noise, no impression is made to help the ear or eye of him that
seeks her way.

But the way of the Ship in the midst of the Sea] is more abstruse and
uncertain then both the former. There are three principles of variation and
uncertainty in her motion: First, the wind above, that blows where it
lists, and we hear the sound thereof, but know not whence it comes, nor
whither it goes. Next, the waters beneath are the most inconstant of Elements;
for (besides that they are driven of fierce winds) their own natural ebbings
and flowings, are a daily constant inconstancy.

But (lastly) the greatest principle of uncertainty, is the mind and pleasure
of her Pilot within, who at his will does often turn her to half a point
against the motions both of winds and waters. In short, she finds no path
before her, she leaves no tract behind her, and all her movers, above, beneath,
with in, are most uncertain. Who then can know the way of a Ship in the
midst of the Sea? So, not-to-be-guessed, not-to-be-traced are the Lords
carriages of these kinds of salvation.

My Doctrine is somewhat like that piece of Ezekiels wheel, which he calls
[Rotam in rota] Ezekiel. 1.16. Their appearance and their work were as it were a
wheel in the midst of a wheel: So here is a Doctrine in the midst of a
Doctrine. The first is as it were the general Thesis concerning Gods great
salvations indefinitely. The second is as an Hypothesis drawn out of the womb
of that Thesis, concerning the redemption from Babylon in particular. And
accordingly I shall have an eye distinctly both in my demonstrative and
applicative parts, looking upon these two, severally and apart.

First then Demonstratively, Demonstration. In Thesi.
concerning the general the Thesis, that Gods great salvations of his people,
are commonly carried on in a mystery. O what rare Maps of saving wonders, what
admirable anatomies of public mercies could I here spread before your eyes
this day! Only let us cropoff some full ears.

First observe that great preservation of old Jacob and his family by their
removal from Canaan into Egypt, Jacobs Family.
in the time of the Famine: How strangely was that deliverance brought about!
The design was to preserve Jacob and his posterity, and to make a way for that
great work of redemption out of Egypt which followed after: But mark the
method; First Joseph, who by his own dreams and his Fathers hopes was to be
the glory and prop of the family, he must be given for lost to his Father, his
brethren, himself: His Father gives him for torn in pieces, his Brethren do
sell him into Egypt for a bondslave, and there he is cast into prison by
Potiphar after he had been first advanced. So that now not only the Fathers
hopes are dead and buried, but Joseph's own faith is put to the trial; and all
this to make way for the greater deliverance. Do not these things now look
like a salvation? Nay farther yet, old Jacob must be necessitated by Famine to
send down into Egypt to buy food, and there he must first lose his Son Simeon;
and next his dearest Benjamin must be sent and lost in his own and brethrens
apprehensions: And yet all this appears at last to be nothing else but a
mere plot of mercy, a very ambushment of Providence for the greater advantage
and advancement of the whole family, as you see in the issue. For first all the
brethren of Joseph with their houshol had thereby their preservation and
preferment whereas otherwise they had perished by famine. Secondly, Benjamin
who was the most hazarded and lost man amongst them when the cup was found in
his sack; he has gotten a multiplied portion. Thirdly, Jacob himself (the
father) he does gain five sons for one, that is, for his dear Joseph, whom
he conceived to be lost, he receives the same Joseph again with an addition
of Ephraim and Manasses; and also two of his own sons whom he conceived to be
lost, [Simeon and Benjamin,] are cast in to boot: Thus five are returned for
one. This was an ambushment of mercy. And finally as for Joseph him self, he
must have a double blessing and portion, and is made the head of two Tribes;
one of which (Ephraim) in short time after the throne was erected, did get away
ten of the twelve Tribes from the Scepter of Judah. Was not this a mystery of
mysteries? Thus far concerning the salvation of Jacob and his family when
they were carried from Canaan into Egypt.

But in the next place, (...) in Egypt.
the preservation of the seed of Jacob in Egypt, and their return from thence
to Canaan again, at the end of four hundred and thirty years, was more
admirable then their first going thither, their strange preservation in Egypt
was shadowed in that Emblem of a fiery bush not consumed, Exodus 3. ver. 2. And
the Angel of the Lord appeared unto [Moses] in a flame of fire out of the
midst of a bush, etc. a token of Isreal's continuance in the midst of the
iron-fiery-furnace. Their salvation or deliverance was in this manner. Moses
(not while he was in favor in Pharaohs Court, but) after that he was a
fugitive, an exile being a stammering shepherd must be the principal
instrument in the work; and he together with his brother Aaron, (another
contemptible Levite) with a rod in their hands, must fetch out of Egypt in
spite of an hardened King, and all his Magicians, (how many guess ye?) six
hundred thousand men, besides a mixed multitude with women and children. He
that can deny this to be a heap, a cluster of wonders, let himself be
recorded for a wonder of stupidity.

Once more; a third instance, in the time of the Judges; From Midian.
See but that great salvation and deliverance of Israel out of the hand of the
Midianites and their confederates; and let us cast our eye equally upon both
parties, the Oppressors and the Delivered. First, look upon the Oppressors;
consider their power, their cruelty. In Judge. 6. in the first verse you shall
read that Israel had served an apprentiship of seven years under their
tyranny. In the 2, 3, 4, and 5. verses, you shall read, that poor Israel was
feign to run into dens of the mountains, and caves, and strongholds, that
their fruits were destroyed as soon as they came forth; that their enemies came
up as grasshoppers, and left no sustenance for Israel, neither sheep, nor ox,
nor ass; and this fury still increased, for verse. 5. they came up with their
cattle and their tents, and they came as grasshoppers for multitude, for both
they and their camels were without number. That for the enemies part. Next,
look upon Israel the Delivered, and consider their power and strength. Their
General, would you know what he was? He was Gideon, a Thresher, afterward
called Jerubbaal, a man called away from the barn, from the threshing floor,
Judge. 6.16. His family poor in Manasses, and himself the least in that poor
family; a man taken from the very flaile to be a Captain-Generall. And for his
Forces, it is true, at the first they were a considerable number; they were
(the text says) two and thirty thousand; but then the Lord falls to
lessening of them. First, he begins with a Proclamation, and thereupon some
two and twenty thousand of them do go away. Next, the Lord has another
experiment, of lapping, and by that means he sends away all the remaining ten
thousand, except only poor three hundred; So that now about the hundredth part
of Gideons forces is left. This handful under the command of Gideon the
Thresher, must go against the numberless Midianites. But yet an handful with
choice weapons, at some advantages, may do great things? True, but in the next
place look upon their Arms, both defensive and offensive, Judge. 7.20. they
were to go with empty pitchers, and lamps within the pitchers in one hand, and
in the other hand they must hold a trumpet, and with blowing those trumpets,
breaking the pitchers, and holding out the lamps, they shall beat the
Midianites. Here is a Mystery with a witness; A numberless army, totally
routed and cut in pieces without any weapon appearing against them, broken in
pieces with the breaking of pitchers, frightened with the sight of lamps, and
utterly blown away by the sound of trumpets. This is Gods great salvation
carried on in a Mystery.

Yea, but what is all this to salvation from Babylon?

That I confess is the HYPOTHESIS, In Hypothesi.
and may as strangely and fully be shown and proved as the general; even that
Gods salvations from Babylon are carried-on in a mystery. There are two
Babylons mentioned in Scripture. First, Babylon the Eastern, which was that in
Chaldea, the literal Babylon; and Babylon the Western, which is that in
Italy, Rome, the mystical Babylon. Concerning both these, I could show you
distinctly that Gods great salvations out of them, are commonly carried-on in a
mystery.

First, From Eastern Babylon.
concerning salvation and redemption out of the hand of literal, Eastern,
Chaldean-Babylon, we find no less then four whole books of the Scriptures
spent to show the extraordinary deliverances of Gods people from thence. Two of
these books are historical, as Ezra and Nehemiah; other two are prophetical,
as Haggai and Zechariah. It would be too long for me to epitomize all the
expressions of those books, and of some others, which do show the wonderful
mysterious carriage of that work: Only take notice of two places to this
purpose.

First, of that vision of Ezekiel, which, as I conceive, does typifie the
Jewish return from Babylon, Ezekiel. 1. The whole vision is large, in it there is
mention of a whirlwind out of the North, a great cloud, a selfe-infolding
fire, and out of the midst thereof the color of Amber, verse. 4. Also out of
the same midst, the likeness of four living creatures, like men, verse. 5.
they had four faces, four wings, they had the feet of Calves, the hands of
men, etc. verse. 6, 7, etc. Strange mixtures and varieties! I will only pitch
upon that piece which concerns the wheels. Those wheels (as Interpreters
conceive) do signify the Lords providence: and the motions of the wheels, the
several acts and turnings of that providence in the deliverance of his people
from Babylon the Eastern; therefore, verse. 18. it is said the wheels were
full of eyes round about; (The eyes of the Lord do run through the world) But
I would especially take notice there of the [involucra providentiae] the
intricate involutions and incirclings of those wheels; it is set down, ver.
16. Their work was, as it were a wheel in the middle of a wheel, to
signify, the eccentricall and concentrical motions of that peoples return from
Babylon, where Ezekiel was now a captive amongst them, as you may read verse. 1.

But a more full and clear place to show the mysteriousnesse of the
deliverance of Israel from Babylon the Eastern, is that in the Prophecy of
Zechariah. Look but upon that one Text in Chap. 1. verse. 8. I saw by night, and
behold a Man riding upon a red horse, and he stood among the Myrtle trees that
were in the bottom, and behind him were these red horses, speckled and white.
This Man is CHRIST; These horses with him are his Angels; and their design is
to bring the Jews out of Babylon the Eastern, where they had lain under Gods
indignation these threescore and ten years, as you may read, verse. 12. But
mark how that redemption is carried in the clouds, there are no less then
five notes of obscurity in that verse, signifying the Mysterious progress of
the work.

1. It is said that this vision was in the [night] both in the night (that is)
of adversity, and in the night of ignorance. Little comfort, few Prophets were
left to revive or direct them.

2. This man is in [a bottome] that is, obscurely placed out of sight: And as
if that were not enough;

3. In this bottom he stood among the [Myrtle-trees:] There was a grove of
tall trees, in the center of a vallie; so that the Jews might well have said
unto him as here in the text, Verily thou art a God that hidest thy self. But
that is not all.

4. His forces, his Auxiliaries, stood [behind] him, says the text, that is,
they were not only covered by the valley and the myrtle trees, but they were
covered by the interposition of Christ's person too; they were trebly covered,
with the valley, with the myrtle-trees, and with Christ that stood before
them. And

5. This [Speckling] or dapling of the horses is observable, it does show the
interchangeable, party colored texture of that work; yea the red and the
white with the speckled, do show the mixture of peace and blood that they did
troop together in this work.

But here some might object, True, true, all this is confessed, that
great-salvations in general, and in special those from Eastern Babylon have
bin, are carried on in a mystery; but now such wonders and miracles do cease;
what is all this unto us in these times?

In the next place therefore, From Western Babylon.
I will show that salvation from Babylon the Western, from Romish Babylon
(that is, the salvation we are now upon] must also be carried on in a mystery.

For this purpose, first I would commend unto you a choice text for our times,
me thinks it is as a word upon the wheels in these our days, it is Dan. 2.
where you have a prophetique vision, a vision of an Image, whose head is of
gold, the breast and arms of silver, the belly and thighs of brass, the legs
of Iron, and the feet part iron, and part clay; Expositors do conceive that
this fourfold image does signify the four famous Monarchies of the world:
The Assyrian, the Persian (as it is commonly called) the Grecian and the Roman.
Monarchies. The first three of these are past, and (without question) we are
come now to the lower part of the fourth, I mean the Roman Empire is removed,
and we do see the mixture of Iron and Clay, whether you take the iron and clay
for the division of the Roman Empire into the Western and Eastern according
to verse 42. And as the toes of the feet were part of iron and part of clay, so
the Kingdoms shall be partly strong, and partly broaken, (or brittle;) the
Eastern Empire was first broken off: Or whether you will understand a kind of
compounding of succession between the Roman and the Germane Empires: Or
whither (lastly) a mingling and dawbing of the spiritual and temporal (that
is, the Imperial and Papall^ powers together; yet still, we are come to the
feet of the Image, and to the very toes of those feet, which are this Babylon
the Western in its present condition; for both branches of the proper Roman
Empire are withered, and the Germane Eagle was never so stripped of her plumes
as now: Yea the very Papacy of late does shed her Prelaticall feathers
continually: So that both Scripturechronologie, and common sense, do evince,
that the Image does stand at best but on tip-toe; and the time is at hand, (I
conceive it is present) in which it shall be thrown down and utterly
abolished. But (you will ask me) how must it be thrown down? by what means
shall Gods people be delivered out of the hands of this Roman Babylon? Truly
by as strange means as ever was read of; See the 34. and 44. verses of the
chapaer: First (in the 34. verse) Thou saw till that a stone was cut out
without hands (here is a mystery, a stone cut out without hands, or which was
not in hand) which smote the Image upon his feet which were of iron and clay;
and brake them to pieces. This stone is Jesus Christ, (as Matt. 21.42.) The
stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner;
(verse 44.) and whosoever shall fall on this stone, shall be broken, but on
whoms^ever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder. This Scripture is most
exactly true concerning Christ's governing in his Church, he will crush all
oppositions as the potters vessels. Again, this Stone is cut out of the
mountain without hands, etc. That is, the Image shall be cast down, and the
kingdom of Christ shall be set up, not by common carnal might and means, but
in a special and divine manner, for so it follows in Daniels interpretation
(verse 44.45.) In the days of these Kings (at the close of the last Empire)
shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom which shall never be destroyed, and
the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces
and consume all these Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever. For as much as
thou sanest that the stone was cut out of the mountain without hands, and that
it brake in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold:
The great God has made known to the King what shall come to pass hereafter,
etc. I could wish that this seasonable place of Daniel might come often into
the thoughts of all our serious active spirits in these times for their
encouragement: And the rather, Mariana. Cornel. a Lapide, and alii.
because I find that the Jesuits themselves do fall-in with my present
interpretation, so far, that they have much a-doe to make such a retreat as may
seem to excuse the Pope and Rome from the names of Antichrist and Babylon.
Another vision of the four Monarchies like unto this, is to be seen, Daniel 7.

Add to these, that place of the Apocalypse (which is, as it were, the Book of
Daniel in the New Testament) Revel. 14. verse. 6, 7, 8. there it is shown that
the salvation of Gods people from Babylon the mystical, shall be carried on
in a mystery, verse. 6. And I saw another Angel fly in the midst of heaven,
having the everlasting Gospel to PREACH unto them that dwell on the earth,
verse. 7. saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him, for the
hour of his judgment is come, etc. Hereupon in the eighth verse, there
followed another Angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great City,
etc. Fallen? why, what ayled her? What was it that threw her down? Surely it
was nothing but the Angel that did fly in the midst of heaven, having an
everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell upon the earth: It was
merely the preaching of the Gospel, if you will know it. So that it seems the
Lord will throw down Babylon the mystical, just as he threw down the walls
of Jericho, with an holy blast, by the breath of the Gospel; it shall be
preached flat to the ground. No marvel that our Prelates were so angry with
Lecturers.

Another expression of her overthrow might be gathered out of Revel. 17.13, 14,
15, 16. I will but name it, because my reverend Brother in the morning has
prevented me. And Chap. 18. verse. 2. where you shall find that Babylon shall be
thrown down merely by Gods immediate supernatural working upon the spirits of
those men that were formerly friends and factors for the Whore: For first it is
said, verse 13. that, these (that is, the ten horns, which are tea Kings) have
one mind, and shall give their power and strength unto the Beast. Verse 14.
These shall make war with the Lamb. Here they do unite and agree well enough
to persecute the Saints: but read on to verse 16. there they fall upon the
Whore their late mother and mistress; The ten horns which thou saw, these
shall hate the Whore, and make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh
and burn her with fire: A strange alteration indeed! But how could such near
friends fallin-to such bitter enmity so suddenly? No cause at all but this,
verse. 17. for God has put into their hearts, both to unite and fall off again.

Thus you see not only Gods great salvations of his people in general, but
especially those from Babylon, are to be carried-on in a mystery.

But is it not strange that the Lord does delight thus Quest.
to obscure and hide himself in the carriage of his great works? Would it not
do better (according to our judgments and apprehensions) if they were
carried-on in the common rode of ordinary providence, so that every man might
see them before him whilst they are a doing, as well as behind him, when they
are done?

I answer, the nature of man is apt thus to reason, Answ.
as Job, chap. 13. verse. 3. and Jeremiah, chap. 12. verse. 1. did. And I could
answer such questions with Saint Paul's, O homo tu qui etc. -- Romans 9.20. Nay,
but oh man who art thou that replyest against God? But that I may satisfy, as
well as confute, I shall add, that there are reasons to show that it is not
only fit, but necessary, yea, triply necessary, that such great salvations
(especially from Babylon) should be mysteriously carried-on. It Is necessary, 1.
For the Lords greater glory. The grounds
2. For his Peoples greater good. 3. For his Enemies greater confusion.


First, the Lord does thus hide himself whilst he is saving, For Gods greater
glory.
for his own greater glory. There is a clear and full place to this
particular, Prove. 25.2. It is the glory of God to conceal a thing, but the
honor of Kings is to search out a matter, REM ABSCONDERE, that is, so to hide
both himself and his work, that men may not be able beforehand to guess at
him whither he will go next; nor yet to trace after him, when he is gone
before. The latter expression, namely, [That no man might go after him] is to
be found in Eccl. 7.13, 14. Consider the work of God, for who can make that
straight, which he has made crooked? And verse. 14. In the day of prosperity be
^oyfull, but in the day of adversity consider; God also has set the one over
against the other, to the end that man should find nothing after him. Mark
this, [God has set the one over against the other, to the end that man should
find nothing after him] that is, the Lord does incurvate his works, he does
intricately and (to our apprehension) promiscuously mingle the a^^s and effects
of his common providence, he does traverse his ground, he does go on, as it
were, by jumps, that so the wit of man may not be able to trace and follow him,
but may sit down admiring the depths of his wisdom, and the strength of his
power: He does leave so much print of his footsteps as to convince the
Atheist, that he went that way, and yet so little as to puzzle the Naturalist
to find out the manner of his going.

And it is abundantly for the Lords glory in all his Attributes thus to conceal
a matter. Every common Painter is able to paint a plain piece of work, Erasm.
Adag.
[Simulare cupressum] as the proverb is; to paint a tree or a bough, but he
is an Artist indeed that is able to draw forth a shadowed piece. Every
indifferent good soldier is able to fight pell-mell, or upon a party, hand to
hand; but he is the skilful man that is able to order an ambushment, that can
manage a stratagem. Believe it brethren, therefore does the Lord draw his
salvations in shadowed works, that you may see the depth of his wisdom;
therefore does the Lord use to overcome by ambushments, that so the glory of
his grace unto his people, and the glory of his wisdom even amongst his
enemies, may be the greater. That is the first ground, for his own greater
glory.

The second ground why he carries his work in a mystery, is for the greater
good of his people. For the godly's greater good.
You have so choice a place to this purpose in the book of Deuteronomy, that
it alone may suffice, Deuteronomy. 8. beginning at ver. 2. And thou shall remember all
the way which the Lord thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness,
to humble thee, and to prove thee, to know what was in thine heart, whether
thou would keep his Comandements or no; And he humbled thee, and suffered
thee to hunger, and fed thee with Manna, which thou knew not, neither did
thy fathers know, that he might make thee know, that man does not live by bread
only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord does man
live: Thy raiment waxed not old upon thee, neither did thy feet swell these
forty years. God could have carried on Israel in a shorter time and in a direct
way, not in such a maze and labyrinth through the wilderness forty years
together; he could have carried them through within forty months: He could
have fed them from the earth if it had pleased him, and could have preserved
them so as they should never have bin straightened for want of provision, so as
that the water should never have bin scant or bitter; yea that they should
never have met with an enemy; these and all other hardships the Lord could have
prevented: But he did purposely suffer these intricate abstruse difficulties to
fall in, for the proving of his people, for so it follows in the 16. verse of
the same chapter, He fed thee with Manna in the wilderness, which thy fathers
knew not, that he might humble thee, and that he might PROVE thee: Not but that
he knew their hearts, but because they knew not their own hearts, much less
did others know their spirits. Alas how few of us did know our own hearts
whilst we lived in peace and prosperity in our countries and callings, until
the Lord by the intricatenesse of these carriages, and by the mazes of his
proceedings did pumpe-up and draw forth our inward parts! Thus humbling,
proving, improved, and engaging, were the Lords four grand designs upon
Israel: And upon the same grounds did he lead Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph
at their first calling in a strange country, by extraordinary providence, to
prove, and improve their graces; yea and to diet them and breath them (as it
were) for greater mercies and services. And I am persuaded that by that time
God has brought together both ends of this mysterious salvation that he is now
working, every serious christian amongst us shall be able to say, that he could
not have been without any one of all those obstructions and afflictions that
we have met withal: Nay I am persuaded that we shall all freely conclude at
last, that if we had not lost all, we had bin undone; if we had not been
plundered, we had been beggerd; if all these mysterious abstruse difficulties
had not fallen in, we never had seen half so much of God, of our selves, of
grace, or sin, reformation, as I hope we shall now discern. But I hasten,

A third ground, For the enemies greater confusion.
why God delights thus to carry on his great salvations; and especially, his
Babylonish redemption, is for the enemies greater confusion; either of their
faces, or persons.

First, for the greater confusion of their faces, when God having put them in
hope of winning the day, Of their Faces.
shall out-reach and outdo them at last; when the Lord shall so befoole them,
that in the conclusion they shall see themselves wiped out of all their hopes,
this will be abundantly for their greater shame and confusion of face: When an
oraculous Achitophel shall find his counsel overreached by a plain Hushai,
that is the next way to make him become his own hangman: When an insolent Haman
shall see himself degraded by a modest godly female Esther, it is the way to
make him fall down upon the bed, and almost to wish himself dispatched upon
his own Gibbet: When a Sisera, a triumphant Sisera, shall be nailed to the
ground by the hand of a Jael: When a Pharaoh and an Herod shall be beaten and
eaten with lice, so that they shall be feign to stand shrugging and picking
like a beggar in a bush, Oh what confusion of face must this needs be, not only
upon the persons themselves that do so miscarry, but upon all their Tribe and
adherents? What gross confusion of face (guess we with our selves) was there
to Sanballat, Tobiah, Geshem and the rest, when after all their secret fraud
and open force, after all their letters and machinations to hinder the building
of the Temple, yet the work was perfected at last? You shall read in Nehemiah
(Chap. 6. verse. 15.) that the wall was finished in the 25. day of the month
Elul in fifty and two days, so that all their pains, charge and diligence
came short, both their toil and oil was lost: Thereupon, (in the 16. verse)
says the Text, It came to pass that when all our enemies heard thereof, and
all the Heathen that were about us saw these things, they were much cast down
in their own eyes, that is, they knew not which way to look, nor where to
bestow their faces, but stood like so many thieves taken in the very act,
casting their eyes toward the ground.

O do but guess with your selves, do but guess with your selves, Honorable
and beloved, when God shall bring about this present mysterious work of his
salvation, and put a glorious issue unto it, (for this work must have a
glorious issue) I say it again in short, when at the end of these troubles the
worldly and wicked Politicians shall find themselves outwitted, the Potentates
over-powred, and the wealthy men out-pursed, and that all this shall be done by
those whom they accounted mere foolishness, weakness, and poverty; then, then
do but guess with your selves how will the most active, industrious and
impudent enemies be able to lift up their fereheads? How will they look upon
one another? Surely just like a kennell of hungry Curs that all the day have
been hotly pursuing their prey or game, and at night have mist and lost it in a
wood. I cannot but think with my self that it will be worth all the pains and
cost that an active man shall lay out in this work, but to see that Babel, that
confusion of tongues and faces, that will befall the enemies at last. A shadow
of this confusion of face and language you find prophesied in Revel. 18. verse.
15, 16, 17. The Merchants which were made rich by her, shall stand afar off,
weeping and wailing, and saying, Alas, alas, that great City that was clothed
in fine linen, and purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold and precious
stones, and pearls, for in one hour so great riches is come to naught. And
verse. 19. They (that is, the Kings of the earth, the Merchants, the
Ship-masters, and sailors) cast dust on their heads and cried, weeping and
wailing, saying, Alas, alas, that great City wherein were made rich all that
had ships in the sea by reason of her costlinesse, for in one hour she is made
desolate. Thus God does it for the greater confusion of the faces of his
enemies.

Or, secondly, if they want so much modesty as to be capable of confusion of
face, Of their persons.
yet these hidden carriages shall work for the greater confusion of their
persons: they shall be the more utterly confounded by these mysteries. If the
men of the old world will be so impudently wicked, as not to blush at Noah's
preaching and building, they shall wade knee-deep in the flood to beg
admission into the Arc, but not obtain it. If the King of Egypt and all his
Gypsies will be so shameless as to dodge ten times with the Lord, they shall
at last cry and fly against the returning seas, and all in vain, Exodus 14.26.
So that all the Meanders and intricate carriages of the work until then, did
but ripen them for greater personal confusion: Had Pharaoh come in upon the
first summons (the first miracle) or upon the second or third, the man might
have saved his life, and perchance his Kingdom; but therefore the Lord will
suffer him to be baited on with a kind of vicissitude of losses and victories,
that all this might harden his heart, and the hearts of all his Magicians,
desperately to plunge themselves into the bottom of the sea, where they might
be slain and buried at once.

This very ground [for the enemies greater destruction] is hinted in this same
Prophe^ie of Esaias, chap. 44. ver. 25. Says he, He fru^trateth the tokens of
the liars, and makes diviners mad, he turns wisemen backward, and makes
their knowledge foolish. Mark, he carries his work so mysteriously, that
he might frustrate the tokens of the liars, that is, of those that were so
confident upon some poor petty successes and victories which they had obtained
against the people of God, that (thereupon) they durst to divine, and promise
unto their party a total, final, speedy conquest. Now when God shall turn
all about again, in a time, in a way, where they looked not for it, doubtless
such a strange surprisall will put them into the condition of the men of Ai when
they were encompassed by Joshua's Stratagem, Josh. 8.20. They had no power to
flee this way or that way, verse. 22. They were in the midst of Israel, some on
this side, and some on that side, and they smote them so that they let none of
them remain or escape: And all this was done by a Stratagem, for before in
verse. 15. Joshua and all Israel made as if they were beaten before them (of Ai)
and fied by the way of the wilderness.

Thus you see it is a necessary and rational truth, that the Lord does thus
carry-on his great salvations, viz. for his own greater glory, for his peoples
greater benefit, and for his enemies greater confusion: Therefore it is not out
of want either of power or wisdom, but out of a transcendency of both that he
does order his deliverances in such a manner. So much may demonstrate the
Thesis or general part. But,

Secondly, if you demand a particular reason for the Hypothesis, viz. Why
salvations from Babylon are also carried in a mystery? I answer, that there is
a special ground for this branch also. And it is this in short.

Our Babylon (I mean the western) was raised in a mystery, and therefore it
is good reason that it should be thrown down in the same manner. In the 2 Thessalonians. 2.6. You shall find that Babylon is built up in a mystery; The mystery
of iniquity does already work.

That noble Frenchman throughout his Mystery of Iniquity, Mornaei Mysterium
Iniquitatis.
gives us a sufficient commentary upon this text, by discovering the parts of
that mystery, showing the Pedigree of Antichrist, and how he has gathered his
stolen feathers together, of which when every bird shall take his own, he shall
be left naked and bare.

Also in Revel. 17.4.5.6. You shall see that Babylon was raised in a mystery.
And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet color, and decked with gold and
precious stones, having a golden cup in her hand, full of abominations and
filthiness of her fornication. This woman is Rome, the western Babylon: And
upon her forehead was a name written in Capital Letters, Mystery, Babylon the
great, the mother of harlots, and abominations of the earth. Called [Mystery]
because she was raised in a mystery; that is, she got up to her height
insensibly, cunningly; her way in getting up was like the way of an Eagle in
the air, or like the way of a serpent upon a stone, winding, and scruing it
self onwards by degrees; untraceably; or as the way of a ship in the sea,
which goes on swiftly when she seems to stand still. Thus Babylon was raised
and built in a mystery, and therefore it is but just and proportionable that
she should be cast down and ruined in a mystery.

Nay we have an hint, yea a prophetique command that this proportion shall be
observed in the ruin and destruction of this Babylon in Revel. 18.6. Reward
her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double according to her
works: And verse 7. How much she has glorified her self and lived
deliciously, so much sorrow and torment give her; that is, let her be cast
down by the same steps by which she climbed up, both for manner and measure.

Thus you see grounds for the general and also for the particular, Application.
why Gods great salvations of his people and especially from Babylon, are,
shall be, must be so mysteriously carried on. The Application is the great
errant in which I am sent at this time. Use 1. Inquiry.


Are the Lords great salvations of his people especially from Babylon,
carried-on in a mystery? Then my first dose or portion shall be merely
preparatory. Let us make English of this text, by enquiring and searching
whether or no the present great work of salvation and reformation that is in
your hands (for it is a work of salvation) be carryed-on in a mystery? What? is
it a plain work of common providence in which ordinary causes do bring forth
their wonted effects and issues, without any remarkable variation? or rather,
is it not an extraordinary, elaborate, shadowed Masterpiece, altogether made
up of Stratagems, Paradoxes, and Wonders? If thus, then comfort your selves,
you may conclude it will be a great salvation, yea (as I shall show) a
salvation from Babylon. So then, the whole business of this preparatory use
will be to enquire and imforme our selves distinctly and critically in this
great question [when is a salvation carryed-on in a mystery? or, how may I know
such a work?

I answer, as Psalm. 111.2. the works of the Lord are great; yet they may be
sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. I shall endeavor for our
direction and encouragement, in these troublous times, to give some special
evidences of an [hiding Saviour] that is of a great, Babylonish, mysterious
redemption.

1. First when the work is carried on SPIRITUALLY: This I shall call [supra
Naturam] above nature. 2. When, CASUALLY; which is [preter naturam] besides
nature. 3. When, CONTRARILY and CONTRADICTORILY [contra naturam] even against
nature.
First when a work is carried on Supra naturam [SPIRITUALLY] that is,
Spiritually.
more by spiritual than by fleshly means. Thus we read of the Jewish
redemption from Babylon, Zecha. 4.6. Then he (that is, the Angel) speak and
said, This is the word of the Lord unto Zerubbabel, saying, Not by might, or
arms, nor by power, but by my SPIRIT says the Lord of Hosts. Who art thou,
verse. 7. O great mountain? It was a mountain of rubbish that lay there (as
some conceive) being the ruins of the former Temple, as Nehem. 4. verse 2. and
10. This mountain must be removed ere the ground could be levelled for a
foundation: But how shall this be done? Not by might, nor by power, but he
shall bring forth the corner stone thereof, with shoutings, crying Grace, grace
unto it. It should be done without hands, only by the word of the Lords mouth,
as the Earth and Heavens were created. But in Hag. 4. verse. 14. You shall find
a threefold stirring of spirits that carried on that work: And the Lord stirred
up the spirit of Zerubbabel (it was an immediate working upon his spirit, which
neither man or devils are able to reach) the son of Shealtiel, governor of
Judah; and the spirit of Josuah, the son of Josedech the high Priest and the
spirit of all the remnant of the people. God moved the spirit of the temporal
rulers, of Zerubbabel, that is as it were the Parliament; God moved the spirit
of those of the Church, of Josuah the high Priest, and of Haggai, and Zechariah
the Prophets, as it were the Assembly of Divines; and God moved the spirit of
all the remnant of the people (the whole commonalty) and they came and did work
in the house of the Lord of Hosts their God: It seems it was not for wages or
out of any constraint, but only because the Lord had touched their spirits and
inclined their hearts to this service. So it is said of Cyrus in Ezra 1.1. The
Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus King of Persia, he gave the Jews leave to
build, and did affist them, and supply them with necessaries for the service.
And Chap. 5. verse 1. The Prophets, Haggai and Zechariah the son of Iddo,
prophesied unto the Jews that were in Judah and Jerusalem in the name of the
God of Israel, even unto them: Then, verse 2. rose up Zerubbabel the son of
Shealtiel and Ieshua the son of Iozadek, and began to build the house of God.
Why, what moved them at that time above another? Only the Ministers preached
them about the work: As before I showed that the walls of Babylon must be
preached down, so it seems here that the walls of the Temple must be preached
up. Haggai and Zachariah do fall to preaching, and then the rulers and the
people do fall to building.

How parallel is our case with this? Has might or weakness, flesh or spirit,
(I ask of your own consciences) had the greatest stroke in our greatest
salvations hitherto? Have not the touched hearts, the willing spirits ever bin
the chief instruments? Is it not most evident that the Lord has touched some
hearts with the spirit of wisdom and counsel, as sometime he touched the
heart of Bezaleel and Aholiab, filling them with his spirit, in knowledge etc.
to devise cunning works, to work in gold and in silver etc. Exodus 31.2. so
amongst us has he not given an extraordinary spirit of counsel and wisdom
into the hearts of men, even then when 'twas feared that disuse and oppression
had quite worn out all the old race of true English hearts? Who had thought we
had bin so rich in Parliamentary spirits, as appears this day?

Again, others have been as it were inspired with a Spirit of courage and
magnanimity beyond president, and even unto their own admiration. Yea some like
that Fabius, or like Gideon in the story before, have bin called off from mean
employments; and yet have answered great expectations in the services of war:
so that I cannot but guess that succeeding generations writing the History of
these times will speak rather of a Creation than of a Generation of soldiers
in our age.

Once more; How many Nobles, Gentry, Ministers, and people, every where are
suddenly sprung up like Jonah his gourd against this hot season? men
accomplished with so many graces, gifts, qualifications, for this work, as if
they had bin inspired, cut out and created purposely for this service? Believe
it, these are things that deserve a most serious consideration, they do prove
that the work is carryed-on spiritually. But that is not all.

Secondly, Salvation is then carried on in a mystery when it is carried on
[PRAETER NATURAM] I English it [CASUALLY] or accidentally; that is, through a
multitude of extraordinary accidents and casualties. By casualties I do not
mean the acts or effects of Pagan fortune, but the acts and effects of
extraordinary and special Providence; when there is a frequent confluence of
such acts appearing in our salvations, this must needs be besides natures rode;
for Quae casu fiunt ea rare fiunt, that is, casualties are rarities, says the
heathen, or, things done by chance are seldom done. Now when we shall see such
events fall in frequently, then we must conclude that the finger of God is
there, this is not according to the common rule and rode of men.

That you may understand my meaning a little more fully in this particular, I
will give you an instance of this confluence of casualties in the book and
case of Esther, Chapter 6. When Haman had made sure with King Ahasuerus (that
is, Xerxes) for the utter extirpation of the Jews, and that Esther had now
begun another Mine to counter-worke him, see what a heap, what a cluster of
seasonable casual circumstances do happily fall in for the advantage of
Esther, and the disadvantage of Haman. Thus in short.

First, in verse 1. It is said that [on that night could not the King sleepe]
What night was that? Just the next night before that Esther stood engaged to
break Mordecai's matter to the King upon the morrow, Chap. 5. verse. 8. the very
night before that day, the King could not sleep: And it was also just the
night before that Haman meant to beg the execution of Mordecai. The night
immediately before that these two things were to be set on work, the King could
not sleep: why, what ayled him? we hear of no extraordinary sad tidings which
were brought him that could hinder his sleep; we read of no distemper of body
that lay upon him; then doubtless Gods hand was in it, therefore he could not
sleep. But that is not all.

Thereupon (secondly) he commanded to bring the book of Records of the
Chronicls to be read before him. True, we say reading and preaching will bring
men asleep though they have little disposition to it before: but all this could
not incline him to slumber. This farther shows the hand of God.

Well, thirdly, It was found written in the Book, that Mordecai had done a
choice piece of service for the King: Found, how was it sound? How did it come
to hand? did the Reader willingly turn to this place that so he might make way
to ingratiate Mordecai? That is improbable, because Haman that was now the
darling of the Court, was Mordecaies known and professed enemy: Or, what did the
King command that he should turn to that place? No, that is not probable
neither; because we find by the Kings next question that he did not know to the
contrary but that Mordecai had bin already rewarded for this service. How then
came this about? Surely, that very God that directed the Eunuch when Philip
joined himself unto his Charet to be reading that place of Isaiah the Prophet,
Act. 8. And that voice that cried to the Father Toll and lege, take up and
read, it seems that very providence did direct, that amongst all sorts of
books the King should pitch upon History, and amongst all sorts of History
this volume, and amongst all the parts of this volume, this page, this passage,
that so way might be made for Esthers intended motion.

Well, fourthly, verse. 3. And the King SAID, what honor and dignity has been
done to Mordecai for this? Why did the King take notice of this service at this
time more then formerly; for it is said, chap. 2. ver. 22. that Esther had
(formerly) certified the King of this business in Mordecai's name, yet then no
reward is thought upon? But it seems Mordecai's reward was kept for this very
time by an act of extraordinary providence.

But fifthly (to put a heap of casualties together) That, Haman should so
seasonably come in, in that very nick of time when Ahasuerus was studying how
to reward Mordecai. That, Haman should come in with that request and motion for
the executing of Mordecai. Add to these, the Kings admission of Haman; the
question propounded to him; and Hamans answer to that question, all which you
may read in chap. 6. verse. 4, 5, 6. And then all these grains put together do
make a great weight; Let all these casual circumstances be cast in, and you
must confess that every particular of them being a several piece of wonder,
the whole does make up little less than a Miracle.

Honorable and beloved, how easily could I show you the faces of such like
casualties, or petty-wonders, in the glass of your own proceedings? You have
instances enough of your own (I mean in your own History) to parallel all
these particulars and a thousand more; I need not to go a borrowing for you.
Only thus much in a word, this Manna of rarities from heaven, is your daily
bread. I must on-wards.

Thirdly, a work is then carried-on mysteriously, when it is carried on [contra
naturam.] What English shall I have to reach this expression withal? When a
work is carried on CONTRARILY and CONTRADICTORILY: It is an hard phrase, but
so overflowing are the mysteries of mercy, which God is now working amongst
us, that certainly our English tongue is grown too narrow to lend us words to
express them. I must therefore use the word Contradictorily. Contradictory,
what is that? That is, when a work is promoted and carried-on by its
contraries. I must show it by an instance. When the carriage of a work does
run like Samsons riddle, Judge. 14.14. Out of the Eater came forth meat, and out
of the strong sweetness. That the Eater should yield meat, and the strong give
out sweetness, this is such a riddle that a strict Logician hearing it would
be ready to cry out- Implicat, it is a contradiction in adjecto; yet so it is
when enemies do become furtherers of a work against themselves, and that is
common you see amongst us.

If Samsons riddle does not express it sufficiently, add another expression
out of the Psalmist; It is in Psa. 112.4. Unto the upright there arises light
in darkness. It is according to nature that the dawning does spring out of the
night, and that the more perfect day does arise out of that dawning is still
according to nature, because the increase is graduall: But when light shall
arise immediately out of darkness; when high-noone shall suddenly leap out of
midnight, such a jumpe is against nature, and you must call it a mystery;
because it is held as a Maxim amongst Naturalists, that Natura nihil agit per
saltum, the motion of nature is not by leaps, but by paces. Thus Mark. 4.28.
First the blade, then the ear, after that the full corn in the ear.
Therefore as often as we shall see a branch (I mean a fruit of Providence)
like the Rod of Aaron, that in one night was budded and brought forth buds and
bloomed blossoms, and yielded Almonds (Numb. 17.8.) so often let us confess
with the Psalmist, This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

Yea, but when, or where did we ever see such things as these?

I would give some few particular instances under this head of salvation
through contrarieties and contradictions. As

1. Enemies furtherers.
When Enemies do further a work against themselves, yea and that by fighting
against it. This contradiction we have found true ever since the beginning of
our present troubles. The enemy by projecting and fighting against Reformation,
has both hastened and hightned it more then our selves could (perhaps would)
have done in that time. When there had been a talk a while after the beginning
of this Parliament, of some solemn way of uniting the Kingdoms by some
special Association in those crazie times; the enemy by increasing our dangers
and obstructing (as I remember) the proceedings, do quicken us into a
Protestation: And because that obligation was easily broken (ah lamentable!) by
the generality of men who deserted their own protection and remedy, therefore
the enemy would never leave adding one horrid provocation to another, by
fighting against the Parliament, denying them a being, proclaiming them Rebels,
and owning the Diabolical Rebels of Ireland as good Subjects, to cut their
throats; until by such sharp provocations as these, they had spurred and
switch'd the three Kingdoms into a most Solemn Oath and Covenant for a
complete Reformation. The men would not suffer us (if we would) only to pare
and clip Prelacy, no, they will have it pluckd up Root and Branch. They will
not suffer the three Kingdoms to rest in several kinds and pitches of
government and worship, but they will have one true reformed uniformity in
these and all other Churches of Christ. Thus their rage has abundantly ripened
the work. This is seemingly contradictory.

2. When one and the same thing is at once helpful to Gods people,
Helpfull-Hurt.
and hurtful to the enemy. As it is said of the Angel, and of the Pillar of
the Cloud, Exodus 14.19. And the Angel of God which went before the Camp of
Israel, removed and went behind them, and the Pillar of the cloud went from
before their faces and stood behind them. ver. 20. And it came between the
Camp of the Egyptians, and the Camp of Israel, and it was a cloud of
darkness to them, but it gave light by night to these, so that the one came
not near the other all the night. Such helpfull-hindering occurrents have we
often met withal, that have proved like the extraordinary frost that ('it is
said) did suddenly happen in the North at the coming in of the present
Scottish Army; it blocked up the ways of the enemy by abundance of Snow, that
they could not plunder and fire as they intended; but it gave an unexpected
passage of Ice over the river unto our Brethren and their carriages. Many like
acts might be shown, which upon the one hand did show the Lords presence with
his people, (as I have seen some two faced pictures) and on the other hand in
the same side the picture of Satan for the ruin of the enemies.

3. When lesses are gains. Losses Gains
I have touched upon this before; let me only add the instances of the two
great Public Battles that have been fought in this Cause, at Keinton and at
Newbery. In the beginning of both battles, it is said, we were somewhat worsted,
to show that England had offended the Lord, and therefore our Father did beat
us: But then we conquered the enemy too, to imply that the Lord would own his
own Cause and people notwithstanding their failings. Thus victi vicimus, by
being first worsted, we were made more than conquerours [Periissemus nisi
periissemus] being beaten we got the day. This Examination is preparatory to
the following lessons.

Use 2. To inform and satisfy. Let no man think it strange that there is so
much shrinking, Use 2. To inform and satisfy.
stretching and warping from the right Party in the present times and
controversies. No marvel if mere Sensitive common worldlings and carnal
Politicians do fall off from this Divine and Supernatural Cause and task.
Such poor purblind creatures were mistaken in this work at their first
coming on. It was their lot to be cast upon the Parliament side; and in that
lot, they did look upon carnal and selvish ends and arguments; upon the
leaves and the bagg that were to be gotten by Christ's service, I mean majority
of number, probability of short dispatch and long preferments after, did draw
them to the right party: But finding the business to be an holy mystery,
finding that the Lord did carry his work through hills and dales of Land and
Seas; yea and that they should be forced to deny themselves, to adventure all,
to cross the stream, etc. Here they went away sorrowing, this was too hard a
saying, they could not bear it. To speak plainly: Honorable and Beloved, in
the beginning of this Parliament when the Lord did give you a plentiful
Breakfast of most smooth and happy success in your first proceedings, thereby
to strengthen you for the hard dayesworke and long journey that was to come,
(as he gave a double breakfast to Elijah when he was to travel without meat
forty days and forty nights, unto Horeb the Mount of God, 1 King. 19.5, 7, 8.)
You may remember that in those prosperous days you were compassed about with
swarming Proselytes, and seeming Patriots of all bores and sizes: But how did
many of those Pretenders fail you in the heat as brooks in Summer?

Some of them were mere sensitive friends; Sensitive friends.
These like incredulous Thomas, would believe and adventure no farther than
their senses (of sight and feeling) did lead them. They would have the ground
of their faith at their fingers-end, as Ioh. 20.25. and they were drawn on
merely as that mixed multitude (or a great mixture) that went out of Egypt with
the children of Israel, because of the miracles and mercies that there were
wrought, Exodus 12.38. And therefore anon after when your hardships began, this
same mixture were the first that fell to lusting, as that Egyptian mixture did,
Numb. 11.4. And the mixed multitude that was among them fell to lusting, etc.
Thus your mere sensitive friends did fall off.

Others were led by human reason and politic convictions; Mere politicians.
These did stick to Parliaments, Laws and Privileges, as Orpah to her mother
in law Naomi, that is, whilst she continued Naomi (pleasant) but when by
afflictions she became Marah (bitter) then they (as Orpah, Ruth 1.14.20.) wept
and kissed their mother in law, but departed.

Shortly, False and faint Professors.
a last sort were of false or faint-hearted Professors, led with some light of
Religion; they either brake-off like Demas, or warped-off like Paul's
acquaintance at his first appearing before Nero, 1 Timothy 4.16.

But would you know the cause of all this failing? Surely it was nothing but
this (as before) those shallowheaded narrow-hearted carnalists were puzzled in
this hard lesson of a Mystery. The mere natural man can read in the book of
the creatures, it is so fair a print in Capital letters. The Prudentiall man
can perceive the character, and construe the language of common providence: And
thus far they went with you: But they were not so much as, A-b-c-ederians in
the Lords Archivis (as they say) in his Manuscripts, in his Brachigraphy, I
mean in the strange language and abstruse character of Reformation, and
mysterious Babylonish redemptions; they wanted both Dictionaries and Spectacles
in those particulars. Then let not the apostacy of carnalists cast any
disparagement upon this glorious Mystery. That Is a second Use.

Thirdly, if Gods great salvations, of his people, especially that from Babylon
be carryed-on in a mystery, Use 3. Reproof of carnality. Both.
then away with that great old English sin of Carnallity, away with Carnality
in both extremes, upon the right hand, and upon the left hand, away with
carnal confidence, and carnal diffidence.

First, away with carnal confidence; Carnal confidence.
Be not too much lifted up with outward supplies, with outward strength and
successes; but remember that the frame of this work is mysterious and
spiritual; therefore for us to build our hopes upon things that are merely
carnal, must needs be a sin, both heterogeneous and most improper. We have bin
taught by experience, that fleshly and worldly advantages hitherto have
contributed little to the principale part of this work. Commonly (hitherto)
the race has not been to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor yet
bread to men of understanding, Eccles. 9.11. We never had (I think) too few
Armies for any service and engagement since we began; perhaps sometimes through
the corruption of our hearts we have had too many, as God said unto Gideon, The
people that are with thee are too many for me to give the Midianites into their
hands. Consider farther, that carnal confidence begets carnal diffidence, as
the hot and cold fits in an Aguish-fever do mutually intend and heighten one
another. Therefore away with carnality upon the right hand, with carnal
confidence.

And then on the other hand, Carnal diffidence.
by the same reason, away also with carnal diffidence in case of the want of
outward supplies and successes: Remember the Doctrine, that has said that this
work is a work of faith, and not of sense; and continual experience does
evidence that when we are weak we are strong: My meaning is, that we should not
be any longer like weather-glasses suffering our hopes and spirits to rise and
fall according to the tidings of good and bad successes; that we should not
live upon diurnallfaith, or upon the air of news and intelligence: But let
our hopes be like the life of the saints that is hid with Christ in God: Let
them have a surer foundation than any thing that base carnality can suggest:
Let not our confidence like heavy Eli fall backward and break their neck upon
the report of every defeat: Had Eli born up through that blast, he might have
seen that the loss of the Arc, was in conclusion, the advantage of Israel;
and that the Philistians were never so shamefully beaten as by that victory;
for that very Arc when it was set up in the house of Dagon did conquer the
Idol in his own Temple, for his head and both the palms of his hands were cut
off upon the threshold, and only the stumpe of Dagon was left whole: Yea, and
the Philistines themselves were feign at last, as it were to bribe their
prisoner with golden-Mice and Emrods, to be gone; and were forced to send the
Arc home again, with shame, and cost enough.

But there are many specious arguments given, in excuse of such carnal
diffidence. As

great opposition, many, mighty stubborn enemies there are against us?

good evidence that you are about a choysepiece of Church-worke. Show me a
Reformation (I think there is scarcely one) in the book of God, or in our
Protestant Histories, that went on without difficulties and obstructions. So
that these very crags and bogs which you pass through in the way, are not
discouragements, but way-markes, that is, certain signs that you are right in
the old Reformation-way that has ever bin trodden. Thus Asa had no sooner set
upon a Reformation in Judah, (2. Chron. 14. and 2. Chron. 15.) by Covenanting
strictly with God; by pulling down Idolatry, and by removing Queen Maacha her
Capuchins, but a thousand thousand Ethiopians are let in upon his Kingdom, as
though Hell it self had bin let loose. So King Hezekiah, After these things
(says the text) and the establishment of them, (2. Chron. 32.1.) that is,
after three Chapters full of Reformation that you read of before; Then
Senacherib, King of Assyria, came and entered into Judah with a great Army.
Therefore these bogs, crags, and brambles, are approved way-markes and
encouragements.

parting-Devills leave to tear and some when they are to be immediately cast
out. The evil spirit will have one pull with the possessed person, when he is
packing. You know it is so said, Revel. 12.12. The Devil is come down having
great wrath, because he knows that he has but a short time. And so in Mark.
9.26. When the dumb Devil was to be cast out (as how many dumb Devils are
now casting out of many Parishes in the land!) he did tear the man, and rent
him sore, that he was as one dead. This we must look for, it is a sign that
the Devil is going.

tedious, oh this prolixity is that which does weary us?

proportionable, when a humor has been so long a growing and crusting in the
Kingdom; it would be dangerous to purge it suddenly; our Body-Politique would
hardly bear the strength of the Physic. This prolixity therefore is a wise
mercy.

usual in such solid Church-work. The return of the Jews from Babylon,
taking-in the whole of it, that is, the two pieces, spiritual and temporal
(the building of the Temple, and of the wall of the City) was upon the wheel,
as I remember, thorough some seven Princes reigns, Helvici Chronol.
viz. Cyrus, Cambyses, Darius Histaspis, Xerxes or Ahasuerus, Artaxerxes
Longimanus, Darius Nothus, Artaxerxes Mnemon: But our Reformation as yet is but
in the reign of the sixth King since it began; The number may be thus
computed, King Henry 8. King Edward 6. Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, King James,
and our Sovereign that now reigns. Therefore this prolixity has a pattern,
it is usual.

profitable and advantageous for us. It is true, when a River runs with many
turnings and windings, the vessel that sails upon her does make the longer
voyage from place to place; but those turnings and Meanders of the River are
abundantly profitable to the bordering inhabitants, both to prevent
inundations, by breaking the strength of the slouds, and to multiply rich
Meadows and pastures by its various indentures: So there is the less danger,
and the more fruitfulaesse by the prolixity of this mysterious work.

undone in our estates?

Micha's language when he had lost his Idol. Take heed that we do not
idolize our estates and make them our gods, then indeed we shall cry-out and
say as he did, What have we more? But,

exchanges of temporals for spirituals, earth for gold: has not thy soul
gained something by these troubles in recompense of that which thy purse has
lost? What, not some experience, some humiliation, faith or holiness?

God is left with thee still, and that God is able to fetch sweet out of
bitter, good out of evil, not only out of the evil of punishment, but out of
the evil of sin it self. In short, this Doctrine does answer all carnal
objections that can be moved, but I must hasten.

Are Gods great salvations carried on in a mystery? Then in the fourth place,
Use 4. To Advise and Counsel.
let us be advised to look upon this work as it is to be carried-on, that is,
spiritually, extraordinarily, mysteriously; that so we may not be mistaken in
our way and task, as many carnal politicians and formal Neuters have
mistaken the work, and so miscarried and fallen away at last.

Consider, Honorable and Beloved, it is not a Journey, but a Voyage, which the
Lord has put you upon: You know the difference; in a Voyage there is one and
the same common safety or shipwreck to all the passengers, they must swim or
sink together: Not so in a land Journey: In a Voyage there is much hard-ship by
lodging, diet, straightness, and dangers by rocks, sands, Pirates, tempests;
Not so in a land-journey. But especially I call your task a Voyage, in respect
of the various motions and path-lesse ways into which your work does carry
you. Sometimes the Seaman is forced to board it to and fro, so that an
unskilful spectator would think that he does go forth and back: Another
while he is feign to strike all his sails, and to drive at Hull, so that he
seems utterly to neglect his Vessel; yet all this while he is at his work,
and does make way as he can. But above all the rest, you must remember that in
a Voyage there are no Lanes, no foot paths, no highway Mercuries to direct the
Seamen; all their directions must be fetched from the Pole and Stars compared
with their Card, their Compass, and touched Needle, their path lies in
Heaven, not below. So you have a God above, a guide in Heaven, you have his
Word and Will for your Card and Compass; and your own hearts touched within
you, still standing Godward: These must, these can guide you through a sea of
miseries and mysteries unto the Haven of Reformation and deliverance where you
would be. Let these Guides and Guidances be closely followed, and then no
matter for waves and winds, no matter for Sea-sicknesse, it is a good sign of
the progress of the ship, and it is good Physic to the passenger.

Quest.
But suppose all the premises are granted, namely that this work in its
carriage is so spiritual, casual, contradictory. tradictory, so truly
mysterious; how then may we so order and lesson our selves, as to discharge our
duties in such difficult service? This mystery does seem to leave us in a
mere muse of contemplation; what action or practice is there left to us to be
performed in this case? what doing lessons may be fetched from hence?

Answ.
There are some sure Practical Lessons to be learnt from the mysterious
carriage of our present salvations; and that I may show them the more fully,
you must know that in this work there are two parts.

Aliquid Divinum, etc. Something Divine, and Supernatural, which is chiefly
the Lords ends.

Aliquid Humanum, etc. Something more humane and secular, which is man's ends
and aims.

Now the great lesson in general which we are to learn, is to stick and
cleave to all Gods ends above any of our own. It was a great error of the
Jews, and Haggai complains of it, Hag. 1.2. that they fell a building of
their own houses, but let the house of God lie wast; therefore the Lord is
feign to curse, and cross them in their own selvish designs, even in the
fruit of the field, and in their very meat, drink, and cloth, as you may
read verse 6. You have sown much, and bring in little, ye eat, and have not
enough; ye drink, but ye are not filled with drink; ye cloth ye, but
there is none warm, and he that earneth wages puts it into a broken bag.
God did cross them in things nearest to them, that so they might look more
after his part of the work. And indeed it is the wonderful mercy of God to
us, that these two parts of the work ( Reformation and Deliverance) are so
twisted together, that we are not able to separate them. God has now so
indissolubly interwoven the reforming of religion with the settlement of laws
and liberties, that we cannot pick off the latter, and leave the former;
Otherwise (I fear) we should ere this, have bin playing the children, that use
to eat of their honey, and then throw the bread to the dogs. But our Father
has so wisely ordered the whole, that if we will have no Reformation of
Religion, we shall have no more Laws, Parliaments, Liberties, nor Privileges;
Therefore it will be our wisdom, to look chiefly after the Lords part of the
work.

Quest.
But, What is Gods Part, End, or Aim?

Answ.
I answer, the Lords ends, designs, or defires, (as I may call them) in this
great work, may be considered two ways; either generally, or particularly.

First, Promote Gods general designs. Of Piety.
his general, or public designs which he does own and aim at, requiring
us to promote them, may be reduced to these three sorts.

1. Works of Piety. The Lord does absolutely require the Reformation of
Religion at this time, both in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government,
in the Church. We must out with Idols, not only those in wood, stone, or
glass, that is in walls and windows; but those living Idols that are in Pewes
and in some Pulpits, they must out; I mean all Idoll-shepheards, and dumbdogs.
close with the handling of it teaching Priest, they were without Law: A
Preacherlesse people, will be a lawless people. In short, the Lord would have
you to demolish all high places, and not to leave so much as the stumpe of
Dagon remaining: Yea to bury all the relics of Romish Jezabel, even the
skull, and the feet, and the palms of her hands. Also the Lord does expect
that you should promote the late Solemn League and Covenant, that triple Cable
of the three Kingdoms, by which the Anchor of our hope is fastened, that
threefold Cord that binds all these Kingdoms together and unto God; and is
like that golden chain with which the Tyrians (when Alexander beleaguered
them) bound fast their tutelar god, Apollo; Curtius in vita Alex.
for fear he would leave their City. Thus if ye do first build the
Lords-house and do become faithful Midwives to his laboring Church, then
doubtless will the Lord deal well with you, and will make you houses, as
Exodus 1.17.20.21.

2. Of Justice.
Works of Justice are a part of Gods general design at this time, you cannot
but remember the service of Phinehas in executing of judgment when it was a
sad time with Israel, and the double reward that followed; public to the
State, (the plague was staid,) and private to his own family, the service of
God in the Church was particularly intayled upon him and his posterity. Numb.
25. And blessed be God, that you have now put in to the scales of Justice; the
Archest Prelate of the land. Believe it, such services as these, are the way to
procure unto us a valley of Achor for a door of hope, even then when we do fly
before the enemy, as Josh. 7.26. when Achan was found out and put to his trial
according to justice, the wrath of God was stopped; and the late victorious
City of Ai is soon taken in.

3. The Lord does now call for works and acts of mercy too, that is, Of Mercy.
that you take special notice of the most doing and suffering places and
persons, that have laid out themselves in this cause to the utmost, that like
that poor widow, 1. Kings 17. have made a cake for the public, out of their
handful of meal, and thereupon are much distressed and scanted. You remember
what David said unto Abiathar, when for his sake all the persons of his fathers
house were slain by Saul, Abide thou with me, fear not, for he that seeks my
life, seeks thy life, but with me shall thou be in safety: Much more ought
those faithful Persons, Towns, Cities, and Countries to be releeved that have
been most active and passive for God and the Kingdom in this Cause.

And here, A Digression for the West.
Oh how gladly could I weep in a Parenthesis, for, and over the Country of my
Nativity, the place of my fathers Sepulchers which lies wast, where so many
houses and places are consumed with fire! Oh the unparalleld misery of the
still-declining west! Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by! Behold and
see if there be any sorrow like unto our sorrow, which is done unto us,
wherewith the Lord has afflicted us, in the day of his fierce anger, Lamen.
1.12. Could I but draw forth in their due colors the doings and sufferings of
those parts of the Land, I am persuaded (what ever fame may chatter) that I
should prevail with the dryest-heart in this great Assembly, to contribute, at
least a tear toward our relief and succor. True, I confess the Lord is
righteous, for we have rebelled against his mouth; but yet for doing and
suffering in this great Cause, I am persuaded those parts may be ranked amongst
the foremost of the Kingdom: And my humble desire is, that accordingly they
may have place in your prayers and cares. Thus let the Lords general and
public designs and ends be first considered and promoted.

But secondly, Promote Gods particular designs.
I must tell you that God has other collateral designs, (and as I may call
them,) intermediate ends in this strange work, which we ought also to observe
and further to our uttermost; that is the second practical lesson. As it is
with those that labor to find out the Ph^losophers-stone by distillations,
their ultimate and principal end is to make gold, yet by the way and
collaterally they find out many rare experiments and excellent chymicall
extractions, which are of precious use and value: So is it in this great work
of God, his grand principal design is public salvation, both by Reformation
and Deliverance; but he has many collateral, occasional, intermediate
designs and effects which he intends and produces by the way. As for
instance he has (suppose) a design, and an experiment to be made upon his own
Church and people, as to try the particular graces of this or that saint, what
strength of faith, what depth of humility, what latitude of patience there is
in their hearts: Or if not for trial, then (suppose) for purging, or
correcting, or improving; and it should be our care to record such experiments
for after times, whether they tend to our humiliation, or to our consolation.
Another while the Lord has a design upon the enemy (as I showed in my
grounds) to make him fill up the measure of sin, and confusion of face or
person. The open adversaries must have their full load, and the secret Neuters
must be detected, as it is said, Luke 2.35. Yea a sword shall pierce through
thine own side, that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed. The stabs and
gashes of the present sword do open and let out many a secret thought. Who so
is wise, and will of serve these things, even they shall understand the loving
kindness of the Lord, Psalm. 107.43. Use 5. Encouragement.


Let the closing branch of application be a Cordial. There is a Cordial in
this Doctrine, and I hope a Cordial is not unseasonable at a Fast, so as it
enableth us the more heartily to go through the work of the day. Then here is a
melting Cordial, for by the mysterious carriage of our present work we may
easily gather that God is now upon some great salvation, yea upon a salvation
from Western Babylon. The whole work in all its progress looks exactly like
the foretold destruction of Babylon; For our God, even whilst he hides
himself, is still the Savior of this Israel. Mine encouragement therefore
shall lie in the same words (for so God has directed us) that you had in the
morning from my reverend Brother; it seems God will have us both to drive the
same nail, that it may be set home to the head. It is in Hag. 2.4. Yet now be
strong, O Zerubbabel, says the Lord, and be strong O Josuah, son of Josedech
the high Priest, and be strong O ye people of the Land and work (for I am
with you, says the Lord of Hosts.) Here is something for all ranks,
Parliament Men, Zerubbabel, Assembly of Divines, Iosuah; And all the people,
the whole Commonalty: The strength of the argument lies in that sweet
Parenthesis at last, and I shall close with the handlingof it (For I am with
you, says the Lord of Hosts.) In which you may observe but these two blasts to
fill your sails.

First, who is the Master Builder, the Architect that imployes you, and
accordingly you know whither to go for your wages. I am with you, says the
Lord of Hosts. Would any man ask a more honorable service than under the Lord
of Hosts? For honor est in honorante, and it comes properly by Arms.
Certainly, the Lord never put a more honorable employment into the hands of
the sons of England, than he has put this day into your hands. What, to be
Champions for God, to be Builders, Factors, Reformers for the whole Protestant
Cause and world! How many of our zealous Ancestors have cast in their prayers,
tears and blood, to entaile upon us but the preparations and probabilities of
this great work? How did they long to have seen one of these days a far
off, but did not see them? David was not permitted to build the Temple, but God
reserved that work for his son Iedidiah (for so the Lord himself called
Solomon) who was the beloved of the Lord. Do you think it a small thing to be
Gods Iedidiahs in this respect? To be builders of an House to the God of
heaven, is your honor. But that is but half.

Secondly, look upon Gods owning of the work; This Lord of Hosts will be with
you. Would any man in the world desire a clearer promise thnn was this to
Zerubbabel, I will be with you, upon my word, upon mine Honor, upon my Deity I
will be with you?

Object.
No (you will say) we would not wish a surer word to our selves, but that was
made peculiarly to the Jews: Had we but such a promise, we would stick at
nothing; Had we but the faith of heaven so engaged to us?

Answ.
I answer, You have it as they had it, nay, in some sort I may say, you have it
more fully; For they had it promised, and therefore it was in futuro, yet to
come: But you have it, in praesenti, in hand. Open your eyes and behold your
encouragements; the Lord speaks to you in deeds, and says, Lo, I AM with you
in all this work; you may feel my presence upon every occasion.

Let me reason with you a little before the Lord concerning his providence over
you. Consider.
Convention
Did ever the Lord so clearly, so visibly own an English Parliament as he
has owned you? Do but first look back upon your first Convention. Are you
not the very birth of the prayers of many generations? Were you, not as a brand
snatched out of the fire kindled between England and Scotland? Just as were
those Reformers in the Babylonish Captivity; Is not this a brand (says God,
Zech. 3.2.) plucked out of the fire? Suppose a man of judgment coming into a
room where there is a fire burning, and he runs hastily to the fireside,
snatcheth thence a piece of wood, and endeavors by all means to extinguish the
flame that is upon it; will not every rational man presently conclude that he
intends that piece for some special service? In this sense (as I conceive)
is that Metaphor used in that place; Is not this a brand plucked out of the
fire? As if the Lord should have said, Have I plucked Iosuah out of the fire of
Babylon, and so this Parliament out of the fire of the two Kingdoms, when they
were in a combustion some three years since, to cast them into the consuming
flames again at last? No surely, that is not the Lords usual manner.
Continuance.


Supply.
And as for your Convention, so secondly consider the progress of providence
in your settlement. How has God fastened you as a nail in a sure place? This
is an argument in which the Jews did comfort themselves at the time of their
return from Babylon, Ezra 9.8. And now for a little space, grace has been
showed from the Lord our God, to leave us a remnant to escape, and to give us a
NAIL in his holy place, etc. Surely, you are our remnant escaped, without
which we had been as Sodom, and as the inhabitants of Gomorrah; and you are
fastened as a nail in a sure place, by a special Act for your continuance,
above all former Parliaments. Well did the Lord foresee both what a great
work himself would put into your hands; and what great oppositions you should
meet withal, When God does thus fasten a nail of power and authority in a
sure place, he does usually intend to hang some extraordinary weight and glory
upon it, as it is said of Eliakim, who was a figure of CHRIST, Esai. 22.23. And
I will fasten him as a nail in a sure place, etc. verse. 24. And they shall
hang upon him all the glory of his Fathers House, the offspring and the issue,
all vessels (of small quantity) from the vessels of cups, even to all the
vessels of flaggons.

Thirdly, besides your extrordinary convention and unparalleld fastening,
Consider lastly what the Lord has done for you and by you since you came
together.

1. FOR YOU. How often has he given a new life to your whole House,
collectively and in common, and that sometimes by rescuing you from bloody
Assassinates? Oh! let the the 4th. of January Anno 1641. be unto you as the
5th. of November 1605. Sometimes by giving you the victory in the open field,
when your lives lay at stake in the battle, as in both those general Battles
at Keinton and Newbery. Besides, how many of your Members distributively have
had their lives given unto them as a particular prey, being snactht out of
natural and violent deaths since they began this service? I do not speak this
that your hearts should be lifted up within you, but that they may be lifted up
in the ways of the Lord.

2. Next consider what God has done BY You also; did ever the Lord do so much
work of this kind in so short a time (how ever we think the time to be long)
since Protestant Reformation began in the Christian world? Sleidani Commentaria.
If so, then I was mistaken or forgetful in reading that exact Record of
Reformation since Luthers beginning.

So much work done (you will say?) Alas, alas, what is there done all this
while, besides the kindling of an unnatural war? As for Reformation there is
nothing completely perfected in that to this day, for want of the Royal assent
etc.

spiritual part of the work does still go on, and the reason why we see it
not, is because we look to the politic and outward part of the business,
more then to the inward and spiritual part: For this abundantly goes on still
even in the midst of all the storms; The Wall is building though in
troublous times, as Dan. 9.25. Have you ever been upon the shore at low water,
and there observed the coming in of the tide; you shall see first one little
wave creeping forwards, and presently retiring it self again, and so another
and another, but every one does still retreat as soon, as fast, as it did
advance, so that a diligent observer viewing the water in motion, may easily
believe that the flood does not at all increase. But set a mark, or keep your
standing near the wash of the waves, for a short time, and then you shall
quickly and clearly see and feel that all this while it is flowing water, and
anon insensibly it will be full-sea. So in the present great work, though
there appears to be a vicissitude of victories betwixt God and his enemies,
though success does seem to a carnal eye promiscuously to go and come, yet
stand still a while and look upon the spiritual, the religious part of the
work, and you shall find the waters of the sanctuary still flowing and
increasing, as in Ezekiels vision, Chap. 47. first they were to the ancles,
next to the knees, then to the loins, and lastly they were a River that could
not be passed over. I mean that the work of Reformation still goes on; there
we do get ground, as to perfect a Protestation into a Covenant, to ripen an
Impeachment into a Root and Branch, and in a word, to settle an Assembly of
Divines as a general resiners fire to try all metals in the Church.

completely perfected for want of the Royal assent.

Know this, that the Lord does carry-on this frame of building in like manner
as Solomon's Temple was built. Do you not remember how Solomon built his
Temple? you may see it in 1. Kings 6.7. And the house when it was in building
was built of stone, made ready before it was brought thither, so that there was
neither hammer or axe, or any tool of iron heard in the house while it was in
building: And in King 5.6. it is said that the Cedar-trees were hewn and made
fit in Lebanon, and then they were brought down by water unto the place where
they were to be used: and verse 15. you shall read that Solomon had threescore
and ten thousand that bare burdens, and fou^score thousand that were hewers in
the Mountains etc. Just so is the building of this Christian Protestant Temple
carryedon: The Lord prepares one piece of the building in Germany, there he
has had thousands of hewers of wood and fellers of trees these twenty years,
to cut down some and to square-out others for this structure; he has others,
that bear burdens in Ireland, and they shall bring in another kind of
materials; And then Scotland does come in perhaps with soader and cement, they
shall further us in Covenanting; and at last, when all these materials shall be
brought in place by water (by our prayers) then you shall see a glorious Temple
set up, perhaps in one week, nay, in a day or a night, and that without the
noise of axe or hammer, or any tool of iron: You are hewing in the House of
Parliament; the Divines are squaring in their Assembly, in one night the Lord
is able to work upon the heart of the King (for he has it in his hand) and to
deliver him into the bosom of you his faithful Counsel, and then the whole
work may suddenly be passed and finished.

Onward therefore Noble Builders, onward, up and be doing your several parts;
your God is invincible; your Cause is invincible, and nothing is so like to
hazard us as not adventuring: Your labor, your cost, your adventures, cannot
be in vain, in the Lord. Oh remember that counsel in Peter, it is used there
in a spiritual way; I shall borrow it in this sense, 1 Peter 1.13. (...) Hope
unto the end, that is, adventure for God and trust him to the uttermost, to the
brinke, to the edge, to the end of all means and possibilities, to the last
inch of the candle, to the last dust of meal in the barrel, to the least drop
of oil in the bottom of the Cruze. Thus did that poor widow. Thus did
Abraham, Genesis 22. First his son Isaac, and himself went, verse 8. to the
mount, he built an Altar, laid the wood in order, ^ound Isaac his son, laid him
on the Altar upon the wood (yet the trial is not come to the edge, the brinke,
the uttermost:) But lastly, verse 10. Abraham stretched forth his hand, and
took the knife to slay his son. This indeed was hope against hope, as, Romans
4.18. This was trusting to the end. But was Abraham a loser by it? Sure I am
that King Saul did lose a kingdom for want of an hours faith, and adventuring
farther, as 1 Samuel 13.10. etc. Labor therefore to trust the Lord to the
uttermost end of means, yea above, and against them, rather then sin against
him by unbelife. Labor (in three words) to play the Solomon's, the David's, the
Samsons in this work.

First to play the Solomon's: The Solomon's.
that is, as you have begun this Reformation, so do your utmost endeavor to
finish it in your days. Believe it, when you have built the House of God, you
shall have both leave and ability to build your own houses. You read so of
Solomon in 1. King 7.1. When he had built the House of God, then he built his
own house, and a house for his Wife, and the house of the Forest of Lebanon.

Or if you may not be the Solomon's, yet labor to be The David's
yet labor to be David's in this work, You know God denied unto David the
honor of building his Temple: Yet David would not utterly be put of; he will
be doing as much as he may: First himself offers to the work, 1 Chronicles. 29.
he offers Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, Wood, etc. Next, he drawes-in his
Nobles and all his People, as deeply as he can. And thirdly, he leaves also
a Stock of Prayers behind him, 2 Chronicles. 29.10. Yea, finally he gives a charge
unto his son Solomon to go thorough with the work, 2 Chronicles. 28.11. And
leaves him a pattern of the House: And even those very preparations and
purposes of David were richly rewarded, 2 Samuel 7.4. Thus if the Lord for our
sins and unbelief has decreed that your carcaesss and ours shall fall in
the wilderness, and that we shall only see this Canaan afar off; yet let
these two lessons be learned. 1. Let every soul be careful to avoid all
those sins that are wont to draw down this punishment of notentring; See
some of them, 1 Cor. 10.6, 7, etc. Beware of lusting, of idolatry, of tempting
of God, of murmuring, etc. 2. Let us labor to contribute and store up
materials for those that shall finish the work after us.

And lastly, The Samsons
if you may not be permitted to do so much as Solomon, or as David, yet at
last, at least let us endeavor to play the Samsons in this work. What is
that? You shall read it, Judge. 16.29. When Samson could not conquer the
Philistines, could not make a thorough salvation of it, as he desired, yet the
text says, He called unto the Lord, and said, Remember me I pray thee, and
strengthen me I pray thee only this once, that I may be at once avenged of the
Philistines for my two eyes: And Samson took hold of the two middle pillars,
upon which the house stood, and on which it was borne up, and he said, Let me
die with the Philistines: and he bowed himself with all his might, and the house
fell upon all the people that were therein; so the dead which he slew at his
death, were more than those which he slew in his life. My meaning is this;
Better for us if we cannot outlive Antichrist, outlive Babylon, and the
enemies of Reformation; to adventure (as far as we are warranted) our selves
to death in the Cause; yea, Let us take hold of the pillars of the House of
Dagon, of the temple of Antichrist, and say, Now let me die with Antichrist,
Rome and Babylon; Better so (I say) than to live with the eyes of our Religion
put out, and to grind in the mill of slavery: For by this means the children
that shall come after us shall sit upon our tombs and say, that they had
active parents, which with the^r blood and carcasses did dress the ground for
Reformation to spring up after them. For mine own part, I shall say, he that
is of so base a spirit that can be content to outlive Protestantisme and
Parliaments, let it be his punishment to outlive them. I desire not to fall
under the just reproof of an heathen, Vitae est avidus quisquis non vult,
Mando secum pereunte mori.


To shut up all. Be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might; upon the
eternal and infinite faith of the Trinity, and in the word of Jehovah, your
losses for his sake shall be repaid. Will you take that word? Then there are
two special promises which I will commend unto you in the close of all; Oh
that they were Written over the doors of the Houses of Parliament!

Matt. 19.29. Every one that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sister, or
father, or mother, or wife, or children, orlands (can you reckon up any thing
else?) for my names sake, he shall receive an hundred fold; (God will pay him
the very interest) and he shall inherit everlasting life (to boot.)

Mark. 8. v. 35. Whosoever will save his life shall lose it, but he that loses
his life for my sake shall find it.

If these places do deceive an active believer at last; then let it be written
upon my grave;

HERE LIES THAT MINISTER THAT WAS MISTAKEN IN HIS GOD AND GOSPEL.

FINIS.

