Oriens ab Occidente: OR, A DAWNING IN THE WEST.

As it was delivered in a Sermon before the Honorable House of COMMONS, at
Westminster; upon their day of THANKSGIVING, for several Victories in the
West, etc.

By JOHN BOND Mr of the Savoy, and one of the Assembly of Divines.

Ezra 9. v. 8. And now for a little space grace bath been showed from the Lord
our God, to leave us a remnant to escape, and to give us a nail in his Holy
place, that our God may lighten our eyes, and give us a little reviving in our
bondage. Psalm. 2. v. 11. -- Rejoice with trembling. London, Printed by J.D. for
Fr. Eglesfield, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the sign of the Mary gold in
Paul's Churchyard. 1645.

Die Sabbathi 23. Augusti. 1645.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Mr Gourdon and Mr Bond
do from this House give thanks to Mr Case and Mr Bond, for their great pains
they took in the Sermons they preached yesterday before the Commons, at St
Margarets Westminster, it being a day set a part for public Thanksgiving: And
it is Ordered that they be desired to Print their Sermons, and that none shall
presume to print them without License under their hands-writing.

Henry Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

To the Honorable House of COMMONS, assembled in Parliament.
Worthy Senators,
AS this Sermon was too much shortened in time at its conception and birth, (in
the Study and in the Pulpit) so has it been too too long (in the cradle)
coming forth to public view. One principal cause of this slow motion
(besides some avocations of mine own) has been the great throng of your late
Victories, which crouded-in upon the Stationers so fast, that this Sermon (like
that 2 Kings 7.17.
Courtier in the gate of Samaria) has stuck fast in the press of good news:
and even now at last it is no sooner gotten through the crowd, but behold
another pair of Thanksgiving Sermons are ready to tread upon its heels. Surely
if the Lord of hosts did ever strive to overcome a Parliament of England with
giving them Victories, your selves are that Parliament: For what Nation is
there so great, that has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord your God is in all
things that we call upon him for? Oh what a Master do you serve? Deuteronomy. 4.7.
Or what does the Father of mercies mean to do with us? As for mine own part,
I must confess, that the present unexpected heaps of salvations do cast me
into the same trance with that of Genesis 42.28
Joseph's brethren, when opening their sacks for provender they found meat and
money to boot; it is said that then, -- Their hearts failed them, and they were
afraid, saying one to another, What is this that God has done unto us? The men
would have bin glad a little before with assurance of their lives, much more
glad with some corn for saving the lives of their families: and now behold
lives, corn, and money besides; your selves can easily apply. Only give me
leave in this Epistle, to be your remembrancer in two particulars, concerning
these glorious successes, and and this Sermon, viz. That

1. Great victories are (to mere nature) great Temptations: prosperity is an
heady wine, a little of it will inflame, especially if it meet with an empty
or distempered body; and therefore mortified Agur prefers a coarse commons,
yea, a piece of Prove. 30.8. (...) Statuit.
statute-bread before such Caveare. You know what befell 2 Samuel 11 2, etc.
David, whilst his Army was successful against Ammon, and lay besieging
Rabbath the City of waters. 2 Chronicles. 26.16.
You know Uzziah's sacrificing, and Amaziah's overthrow by conquering. It is
one principal end of this Sermon, as to prevent all such surfets, 2 King.
14.7, etc.
s;o to mortify and spiritualize our mercies, that we may freely and safely
feast our selves upon them.

2. Great victories are great engagements: It Is both a divine and humane rule
of proportion, that Luke 12.48.
to whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the more. The
Parliament of England has lately taken-up very great sums of mercy (to the
use of the Kingdoms) upon trust and credit, may it please you now to consider
of discharging these greatest public debts. May it please you as Abraham, to
set up some Genesis 22.14.
Jehovah-jireh, some proverbiall monument, [The Lord will provide.] Or as
Moses, some Exodus 7 15.
Jehovah-nissi; some monumentall altar, with [the hand upon the throne of the
Lord.] Or as Samuel, some Eben-ezer, some pillar of praise, with a [ne plus
ultra] upon it, as [the stone of help.] Some such thing I beseech you let there
be, to carry the name of this our God to posterity: let the Lord of your hosts
have some jewel from you for all these victories; it is another end of this
Sermon, to help you in this duty also. If your weighty occasions will not
permit you to read over the whole (as commonly we desire to hear good news once
and again) yet may it please you to cast an eye upon 1 Samuel 7.12.
some particular pages thereof. As page 36, etc.
As for my self, it must be my prayer, That this oil of gladness may equally
quicken both wheels of your proceedings; I mean in the affairs of Religion
and Liberty. It Is not long since that these two, like Genesis 50.
Joseph and Pharaohs butler, were fellow prisoners together, but the latter of
them (state-libertie) blessed be the Lord, is lately delivered and advanced in
great part, though not without the help of the former; and now Religion,
Joseph-like, does (in his words) supplicate to her quondam fellow-prisoner and
says, Think on me (or remember me with thee) when it shall be well with thee,
Verse 14.
and show kindness, I pray thee, unto me. Let the King of Saints and of
Nations go on to settle by your hands Truth and Peace in all the Churches and
commonwealths of these three Kingdoms, causing us more and more to fear the
Lord and his goodness in the latter days. Hos. 3.5.


So Prays continually, your servant for Jesus sake, JOHN BOND.
Savoy October. 8. 1645.
ISAI. 25.9. And it shall be said in that day, Lo, this is our God; we have
waited for him, and he will save us: This is the Lord, we have waited for him;
we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation.
Right Honorable, and Beloved,
Preface. I Have reaped some sheaves out of this field already, and have
threshed them out in part, for the home-provision of mine own flock: but there
is some of the finest of the wheat flour yet remaining, which with a second
bolting, may make a fit meat offering for this solemn day of Praise and
Thanksgiving.

Coherence. The whole Chapter is Eucharisticall, (rather a Psalm than a
Chapter) full laden with mercies and praises from the beginning to the end
thereof. And herein it is well like the scene of our times; for as every verse
of the one does drop fatness, so every week, and almost day of the other,
has presented us with new matter and forms of rejoicing.

The causes of joy here expressed, are partly in hand; these are set down
historically, in the phrases [art] and [hast] in the first four verses: and
partly in hope; these are expressed prophetically, in the futurall terms
[shall] and [will] in the next four verses, which do reach-home to the text.
The whole Chapter is generally most clear and perspicuous, as becomes a
Thanksgiving Sermon. Only thus, some Expositors would appropriate this to
spiritual salvations only; and especially to that final day of victory, when
Jesus Christ shall put all his enemies under his feet: and this opinion they
do fetch out of verse 8. 1 Cor. 15.55, etc.
where it is said, that he will swallow up death in victory, and the Lord will
wipe away tears from all faces, etc. which words are by the Apostle expressly
applied to Christ.

Others would wholly confine this song of deliverances to temporal salvations:
and these do take their hint from the verse next beyond the Text; where
mention is made of the threshing of Moab, and of casting it as straw for the
dunghill: and here again, some do take the word Moab literally for those
children of Lot which being turned enemies to Israel and Judah, were Calvinus
ad locum.
so much the farther off from them in heart and affections, by how much they
were nearer to them by blood, and habitation.

Others do take Moab (...), for all the enemies of the Church, which are of a
Moabitish strain and temper. I think the controversy may be easily
reconciled by taking-in both Interpretations together; that is, by
understanding the Chapter as well of spiritual as of temporal deliverances.
And thus also it will better suit with our present occasion and condition; for
every victory which God now a-dayes gives to his great cause in England, does
bring with it double mercies, namely, a spiritual step or advance toward a
pure Reformation; and a civil and temporal step or furtherance toward
outward peace and tranquillity. So much for the levelling of the way to the
Text.

The Text it self is nothing else but an [(...),] or Song of victory; and it
contains that holy shout, or acclamation, with which the Church does
entertain the triumphing Revel. 15.3. Heb. 2.10.
King of Saints, and Captain of her salvation, at his return from the
slaughter of their enemies.

Division. In it, you may take notice of two general heads:

First, here is the Churches confidence, [de promissis] of things in hope, Lo,
this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us.

Secondly, here is her thankfulness, [pro acceptis] for things in hand, We
will be glad and rejoice in his salvation.

Again, in the Churches confidence you may further observe, the two grounds,
or pillars, on which she builds it:

The first is her interest in God, This is our God; therefore we may be
confident that he will save us.

Secondly, her attendance upon God, we have waited for him; therefore he will
not forsake us: and this latter is twice expressed, to tell you that the Bell
is an-end, and therefore strikes double, We have waited for him, we have
waited for him: implying, either the length of their attendance, we have
looked and looked again: or the largeness of their reward, though we have
waited, and waited again, yet our labor is not lost; but God has paid us at
last for all our faith and patience, by the greatness of the salvation which
he has given us. This is the Churches confidence.

Secondly, in her thankfulness for mercies in hand, look we upon the several
acts and objects thereof.

First, the acts of her thankfulness are two; the one transient, passing
forth into outward expression, we will be glad.

The other immanent, abiding within in an inward affection, we will rejoice.
For so the words of the Text may be properly interpreted; as appears by
comparing (...) exultavit. So Isa 65.9. Pro. 23.24. (...) Laetaius fuit. So
Exodus 4.14. Pro 13.9
Psalm. 16. v. 9. with Grace, (...), and (...).
Act. 2. v. 26. Therefore did my heart rejoice, and my glory (or tongue) was
glad.

Next here is the object of these acts set down; this is expressed

Explic. First in general, so it is called salvation. But because there are
many sorts and ways of salvation, therefore next it is set down with a
qualification, or special restriction: not such a salvation, or deliverance as
God sometimes bestows in wrath upon the wicked, for he may be their deliverer
too in some cases; but to show that it was a special, extraordinary,
immediate, divine salvation, she calls it the salvation [of God,] or [his]
salvation Lo, this is our God; we have waited for him, he will save us: this
is the Lord, we have waited for him; we will be glad and rejoice in his
salvation.

[Loe,] This Ecce, behold, may refer either to the Enemies or, Friends
of the Church.

As it may refer unto the enemies, so (in the mouth of the Church) it is vox
objurgantis, the voice of one upbraiding: As if she had said, Come hither you
malignant Atheists, ye that have so often asked me, while I was yet under
hatches, where was then my God? What was become of my prayers? Come hither,
gnash your teeth, and let your eyes rot in their holes when you have beheld it;
Lo, this is our God.

Or, this [Loe,] may refer to the Friends of the Church, and so it is vox
exultantis, the voice of one over-joyed; calling upon her friends as the Cant.
5.16.
Spouse in the Canticles, to come away and see her beloved, if there were any
like him amongst ten thousand; to come and see the goings of God, and the
wondrous things that he has done for his people. As if she had said, Ye
saints and brethren, this, this is that God of ours whom we have waited on so
long, (as we thought to little purpose) behold here you see him like himself,
treading his enemies under his feet, and riding in triumph over ruined Cities,
and heaps of Palaces: will you but come hither and look upon him; Lo, this
is our God.

[Our God] that is, we are not ashamed to call him our Lord, neither is he
ashamed to call us his people.

[Wee have waited for him,] that is, we do not repent of our long, long
attendance upon him: and good reason; for, [he will save us.] But if you will
not, or cannot see him at once pointing, Again I tell you, this is the Lord,
and we have waited for him a second time: but, for double attendance we shall
have double wages: for we have cause both to [be glad] and [rejoyce] in his
salvation.

There is not a branch of this tree but does bear some seasonable and
profitable fruits for this days banquet: and although I have not time to
gather them all, yet give me leave to point out unto you where they grow.

First, at the very entrance, here stands a note of admiration, Lo, behold,
which is a kind of Selah in the front: Hence observe, The name of the Lord is
to be exalted and set up, when he does triumph gloriously over his enemies.

This in the Old Testament those very club-men of Israel did confirm by their
general acclamation, when Elijah at Mount Carmell prayed-down that fire from
heaven, that did burn up his sacrifice, wood, stones, dust, water, and all, in
opposition to those 850. 2 King 18.36
false Prophets; 'its said, that when the people saw it they fell on their
faces, and they said, (mark the words) The Lord he is the God, the Lord he is
the God. And thus in the New Testament, that great voice in heaven cries the
same, where they say, Allelujah, Revel. 19.1, 2, 3.
salvation, and glory, and honor, and power unto the Lord our God: and again
they said, Allelujah.

Let us therefore take heed how we do despise,

Secondly, the ground of the Churches confidence is her interest in God: [he is
our God] therefore he will save us.

The Saints interest in God,is a ground of hope in all extremities. Labor we
therefore, as to get, so to improve, this holy interest in all our streights.
The mother does love that child most tenderly, that does suck her most: and
herein also the Lord is more tender than a mother.

Thirdly, the other ground of confidence and joy too, is the Churches
attendance on God; we have waited for him, therefore he will save us: And
again, we have waited for him, therefore we will be glad, etc.

Holy waiting for mercies, does make them both sure and sweet unto those that
have so waited, so attended. A word to this as I go, because it is so useful,
and especially in reference to the West.

First, holy waiting does ensure mercies; because the very gift, and grace of
waiting by faith, and patience, is an earnest, a first fruits of the thing
waited for. No son of man that is ingenious will hold a petitioner in a waiting
suspense and attendance, if he intends utterly to deny him: Prove. 22.22.
and therefore it is said, wait on the Lord, he will save thee: He will, how
know you that? Even by this, if he give a heart to wait upon him; he cannot in
honor put thee off, if he does suffer and support thee to attend him.

Secondly, such waiting does ensweeten mercies too; because abstinence does
quicken appetite, and draws forth the desire to a greater length after the
object: To the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet: That is, Prove. 27.7.
because hunger is such a sauce as does ensweeten any dish.

the Lord loves thee, it shall either deprive thee of the thing so
over-desired, or that thing of that sweetness, which thou expectest in it.

First, sometimes such over-hast does cause the loss of the thing so hasted
for, so over-desired. Thus it fared with that Scripture-Tantalus, the
unbelieving Courtier at Samaria: 2 King. 7.2.
And behold thou shall see it with thine eyes, but shall not eat thereof. Thus
was it also with those impenitent, unruly Israelites, which thought to continue
their sin, and yet to put an end to their troubles; which would enter Canaan
before the time, in despite of God and Moses, and without the Arc; Numb. 14.40
Lo, we be here, and will go up unto the place which the Lord has promised;
for we have sinned. The men were desperately sullen, and (like some now a-dayes
in this Land) were resolved to have peace, whether God would or no; they are
sinners, they can but die, verse. 44.
and therefore will fall on, will have an end of their troubles. These
Israelites presumed to go up unto the hill top, notwithstanding the Arc of
the Covenant of the Lord, and Moses, departed not out of the Camp; verse. 45.
and the Amalekites came down, and the Cananites came down, and smote them
even unto Hormah, or utter destruction.

Nay, Rachell her self, (although a good woman) when too impatiently violent
for children, she lost her life in the obtaining of that, which to want she
thought would be her only certain death.

Let all impatient creatures of both sexs lay but those two texts together;
Genesis 30.1.
Give me children or else I die: and that other, And Rachell traveled, and
she had hard labor; Genesis 35.18.
and it came to pass as her soul was departing, (for she died) that she
called his name Benoni; that is, the son of my sorrow.

Secondly, or such impatient have does at least rob thee of the sap and
sweetness of the thing so overdesired: Thus was it with Jacob, a man whose
strong affections did draw strong afflictions upon him. Good man, he was (I
take it) somewhat too uxorious about his Rachel, and accordingly she cost him
dearest, brought him least fruit, and left him soonest. But especially he and
his mother Rebecah, were too too hasty and covetous for the blessing before it
was ripe: If we consider the manner, and the means that they ^^^d for the
attainment of it, it was somewhat a foul shift that they made to get it by;
Genesis 27.
and how much danger, hardship, and delay did that over-hast cost them both?
Jacob is presently feign to flee for his life into a strange Country; by the
way he lodges hardly; and at Padan-Aram what heates, and colds by night and
day; what chopping of wages, with other extremities does he undergo, for near
the space of thrice seven years? His father in law paying him home, for
deceiving his own father, by giving unto him a Leah for a Rachel, as he to
Isaac kids flesh for venison?

Besides in his return, what danger upon danger do meet and follow him? Esau
before and Laban behind; and at last the blessing from God cost him a halting
ere he could obtain it; and all this because they would gather-in the
blessing before it was ripe.

Surely, there is a vast difference, yea, diverse differences there are betwixt
green fruits forced from the tree, and those that are mature and ripe: There is
a two fold difference betwixt them.

First, in the very gathering of them; what climbing, and what clambering is
there with ladders? What threshing with poles? What casting of stones, and
sticks to fetch them down; to the endangering and mischiefing both of the
fruit and gatherer: Whereas your mature and ripe fruits do drop down of their
own accord.

Secondly, in the using and enjoyment, there is a great difference: Green
fruits are sour, and sickly, whereas the mature ones are both toothsome, and
wholesome, pleasant to the eyes, and good for meat: beware therefore of
clambering for sour, sickly, green, forced mercies. But tarry thou the Lords
leisure; stay till the mercy is cold enough, as well as sodden enough; or else
if thou get it too soon it will prove crude, and scalding: yea, stay until thy
desires after it are cool enough also; it is dangerous to drink deep in a
sweat.

cool enough for me? (may some men say) Or, when am I cool enough in my
affections for it?

holy indifferency in thy desire; as David at Ziklag, after Saul's death, was
somewhat indifferent whether to go up and take the Kingdom or not: And it
came to pass, after this, ^ Sam. 2.1.
that David enquired of the Lord, shall I go up into any of the Cities of
Judah? And the Lord said, Go up. And David said, Whither shall I go? And the
Lord said, Unto Hebron. Mark, the man did (as it were) set up his staff for a
Kingdom, he is indifferent whether to take it or leave it. And well might he
be thus moderate in his desire at Ziklag above all other places; for this very
Ziklag was that same town, which the 1 Samuel 27. v. 1, 2, 3, with 6.
King of Gath had formerly given him, when, in a pettish pang of distrustful
impatience, he left his own Country and fled to Achish saying, I shall one day
perish by the hand of Saul: In this mood he got Ziklag, which afterward he lost
again with a witness; even with all the women, children, goods, and cattle
that were therein; and had like to have been there 1 Samuel 30.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
stoned by his mutinous soldiers. Ziklag was hastily gotten, and remarkably
lost; and therefore now he will take heed of such over-hast ever after, but
especially at Ziklag. And hence it is, that he referrs the whole business to
the Lords pleasure, whether he shall be King, or no King: And now the Lord
thinks him fit for the Kingdom, because he is indifferent, and 2 Samuel 2. v. 1,
4.
bids him go up and take it.

While a patient does inordinatly cry and roar for drink, the Physician
denies it to him, and prescribes him (perhaps) julips, or some other coolers
altogether; but above all things he must now have no drink, or very little:
but when afterward the patient grows somewhat indifferent whether he drink or
no, and falls to liking of his julip, as well as of his drink, now the
Physician bids them give him as much as he will have, as knowing that now his
distemper is allayed, and cannot hurt him, his appetite is grown indifferent.
Thus deals our soule-Phisitian with those whom he loves.

Secondly, when thou art content that the Lord shall be served first; 1 Samuel
2.13, 14.
not while thou art like Elies sons and servants, who with their unmannerly
flesh-hooks would serve themselves before the Lord. No, come thou but to 1 King
7.1.
Solomon's temper and method; first to build the Lord house, and to do his
work, and then thou shall have leave to build thine own to thy content: This by
the way, now to the second General.

We will be glad and rejoice in his salvation. Here are the Churches two acts,
an outward expression of gladness; an inward affection of rejoicing. Here is
the object, both in general, a salvation, and with a restriction upon it,
[his] salvation. And out of all these I shall fetch that doctrine, upon which I
intend to spend the whole remainder of this time. Thence observe, that We
ought especially to be glad and rejoice in those victories, Prin. Doct.
salvations, merc^es, which have in them most of God.

Here are some five or six fingers in the Text, that do all point out the
special hand of God in this mercy.

First, the word [Loe,] it is like a digitus Mercurialis in the high way; yea,
it puts the finger upon God, that we should look to him above all, and to his
special working in this mercy, Lo, God.

Next, the pointing pronoune, [this] Lo, this is God; it is his extraordinary
hand and finger.

Thirdly, it is [our] God, that is, he has herein shown himself in his
relation, the God of Israel.

And fourthly, he has shown himself in his absolute sovereignty too; This
is [the Lord] therefore from all these you may conclude eminently, that this
work is properly and solely [his] salvation. There seems to be a kind of holy
Tautologie in the Original, Lo God, this God, our God, the Lord, his
salvation.

Lo, this is our God; we have waited for him, he will save us: This is the
Lord, we have waited for him; we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation.

So then, we ought especially to be glad and rejoice in this salvation, as it
has in it much of God. I have pitched upon this subject, because the
generality of men do overlook it.



none other, salvation is only of the Lord. I am the Lord, Psalm. 3.8. Isai.
43.11.
and besides me there is no Savior. But here we must admit of a distinction,
both of Saviors and of salvations.

First, if you consider a Savior efficiently, principally, independently, so
there is no Savior but God Jonah 2.9.
salvation is only of the Lord originally, and essentially; he alone is the
rock of salvation: and all the former places are true this way.

but if you take a Savior instrumentally, derivatively, with dependence, so
men may also be called Saviors; Thou gave them Saviors who saved them.
Nehem. 9.27.


Next, of salvations there are two sorts.

First, spiritual, reaching to the soul: of this the Lord is the sole Author.

And there are temporal, outward, civil salvations to the body, and estate:
And these again are wrought either by an ordinary and common providence, or
by special and extraordinary.

By ordinary providence, when there is a sufficiency in the means ordinarily
to bring about such an end, as when the greater number does beat the lesser;
This is a salvation in Gods common way.

But they are extraordinary salvations, Extraordinary salvation in 3. cases,
when there is not a common, natural power in the isntrumental causes and
means, to bring forth such an effect, or to attain such an end; only the
Lord does elevate and highten them above themselves. This may be in these three
cases.

above the means; 2 Chronicles. 13.
as when Abijahs Army of 400000. being surrounded by Jeroboams Army of 800000.
and taken at an advantage by them, yet did beat the surrounders, and routed
them utterly, though double the number: This was an effect above the means.

Or, without means, at least without any considerable, and proportionable
means: Exodus 14.16.
As when the very rod of Moses did divide the sea: when Gideons lamps,
pitchers, trumpets, did break the Midianites in pieces.

contrary to the means: As when Joh. 9.6, 7.
clay shall recover the eyes of the blind: when Joseph's bondage and
imprisonment shall make him lord of his brethren. In all these three cases
salvations are said to be extraordinary; because the water does run higher
then the springhead; therefore you may call them the salvations of God. Yea,
in the Hebrew, all extraordinary, excellent, strnage things, are commonly
called things of God. As the great and stately trees, they are called the trees
of God: Psalm. 104.16.
The trees of Jehovah are full of sap: That is, the extraordinary, excellent,
tall cedars. So, Job 1.16.
The fire of God is fallen from heaven, etc. That is, a strange and
extraordinary fire. And so a salvation of God is a divine, extrordinarie,
strange deliverance. Stand still, Exodus 14.13.
and see the salvation of God: That is, because it was wrought miraculously.

I shall demonstrate this whole Observation by parts, in two particulars.

showing the antecedent, [that] the Lord may be said to be much in some
salvations, and victories; yea more, much more visible in some than in others.

Secondly, proving the inference, that such victories and salvations, in which
there is most of God, ought especially to glad and rejoice our hearts.

As it is blasphemy to imagine a morenesse or lesseof any thing in God, The
Antecedent in the Doctrine proved.
so it is an absurdity to deny that the Lord does sometimes put forth more,
sometimes less of himself, that is, of his power, wisdom, justice, and
mercy, in and upon his works. And Nam peculiaris est quaedam sollicitudo quam
pro suis gerit, etc. Calvin. ad Isai. 52.10. Matthew. 10.29 30. Matthew. 6.16.
hence arises that distinction of providence, into general or common, and
particular or special. As there is a providence over sparrows and lillies, and
a providence over the hairs, heads, and souls of Christians, according to
these graduall puttingsforth of divine providence, we do find diverse parts and
members ascribed to the Lord, after the manner of men; as an arm, an hand, a
finger, all fighting, and working against his enemies, and for the salvation
and victory of his people.

The arm of God, Gods arm. Exodus 15.16. Isa. 52.10
that, I conceive, may note especially the arm of his power: This is sometime
called, his naked and bare arm: In which expression, there is an allusion to
Wrestlers and Artificers, The Wrestlers of old, when they descended into the
sand or stage to wrestle, did strip their arms, and having made them bare and
naked, did then anoint them with oil, that the adversaries, which conflicted
with them, might take no hold fast upon them. Thus the Lord is said to make
bare his arm, when he enters the lists with the enemy, as it were to try a
fall for his people.

And it may also be borrowed from Artificers or Handy-crafts, (as Smyths, and
Carvers,) who when they go about any extraordinary hard, or curious piece of
work, in which they would put forth their art, or strength to the utmost, they
use to turn up their sleeves to the elbowes or arme-holes, that they may
handle it strongly and exactly: Thus also God is said to make bare his arm for
the deliverance, and rescuing of his people.

Sometime it is called a stretched out arm, Exodus 6.6.
alluding to a man that labors to his utmost to strike a full blow, or to
grasp and pluck mightily at a thing. Thus the Angels that rescued Lot out of
the hands of the wicked, tumultuous Sodomites, are said to put forth their
hand, Genesis 19.10
and pull Lot into the house to them. See Isai. 14.26, 27.

And as we read of the arm, Hand.
so of the hand of the Lord. This may properly signify (I conceive) the hand
of his Providence, 1 Samuel 6.9.
Then we shall know that the hand of God has done this, said the Philistines;
that is, if such and such things do fall out, then we shall believe that our
punishment came immediately, and supernaturally, from heaven. Yea, we read of
a mighty hand, and of a right hand of God, as if he had a left hand also, with
which he uses to feed, or help his enemies, as they are his creatures, though
in judgment; but to his own people he lends his right hand, he is
dexterous in their deliverance and salvation.

And as we read of the arm and hand, Finger.
so elsewhere of the very finger of God, which, I suppose, may be aptly
understood of the finger of his special wisdom. And thus the very Egyptian
Magicians, when the Lord had non-plus'd them all with a lowse, did cry out,
This is the finger of God. So Luke 11.20. Exodus 8.19.
compared with Matthew. 12.28. The finger of God in casting out devils, is put
for his extraordinary, special, spiritual working: If I by the finger of
God, or spirit of God, cast out, etc. Because, you know that men and women do
both play, and work most curiously with their fingers, rather than with their
arms or hands.

All these expressions do clearly evidence, that there is a morenesse (if I
may so call it) of God in some salvations than in others.

Hence also it is, that we do read sometimes of Gods works, and then of his
wonders: And amongst his works, of his great, mighty, excellent works; his
act, his Isai. 28.22.
strange act, his exceeding mavelous wonders, and of the Job 40.14.
chief ways of God, etc. The Lord puts a magis and minus upon them, to show
that God is extraordinary in some salvations above others. This is the first
particular, demonstrating mine Observation, by showing that God is very much in
some salvations.

the more of God there appears in any victory, The Inference in the Doctrine
proved.
or mercy, the more we ought to be glad, and rejoice therein. There is one new
song or Psalm (therefore called new, says one, because it may have especially
reference to the state of things now under the Gospel) which alone, may
fufficiently declare, and confirm this particular. It is hard to say, Psalm.
98.1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
whether the expressions of the Lords extraordinary hand in that salvation, or
the exhortations to extraordinary praise and gladness for that hand of his,
are more vigorously there expressed.

First, O sing unto the Lord a new song: Why so loud? Why so lively? For he
has done mavelous things; his right hand, and his holy arm has gotten the
victory to him. And all this muchnesse of God (it seems) was most apparent
and undeniable, as verse 2. The Lord has made known his salvation: The
salvation is his, it was known to be his, yea, men were forced, or made to
know it; nay, the very Infidels could not choose but see, and say it: His
righteousness has he openly showed in the fight of the heathen. Verse 3. All
the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God. And what of all
this? Why, therefore we ought especially to be glad and rejoice in such a
work. Verse 4. Make a joyful noise unto the Lord all the earth; make a loud
noise, and rejoice, and sing praise. Verse 5. Sing unto the Lord with the
harp. Verse 6. With trumpet and sound of cornet; with instruments used both in
war and worship. Verse 7. Let the sea roar, and the world, and they that
dwell therein.

mostnesse of joy for those victories, in which there appears most of God?

grounds, or reasons. Grounds 2. 1. Ground.


First, because the more of God in a work, etc. the more of perfection, and
excellency; and by consequence then, the more of loveliness: Psalm. 111.3.
His work is honorable and glorious. The Original reads it in the
abstract, his work (that is, every work of his) is glory and honor. And that
only, because it is his work: For such as the Parent is, such will be the
child; such as is the workman, such must be his work. And in another song, He
is the rock, Deuteronomy. 32.4.
his work is perfect. The Greek reads it plurally, his Septuagins. (...).
works; implying says one, both his work of Creation, and his work of
Redemption: and therefore in that Psalm, entitled a Psalm or Song for the
Sabbath day, in which day, both those volumes of Creation, Psalm. 92.1, 2, 3, 4,
5.
and Redemption, or, of the Word and Works are to be studied: in that song we
find this sequel and inference most clearly and fully laid down; namely, that
we ought to rejoice most in the salvations that are most divine; because they
are most glorious and perfect.

Take but a taste in two verses, Verse 4.
For thou Lord have made me glad through thy works; I will triumph in the
works of thine hands. And why in his works especially? O Lord how great are
thy works! Verse 5.
And thy thoughts are very deep.

the more of God there is in a work of deliverance and salvation to a people,
the more may that people hope, and conclude ordinarily the Lords neerenesse to
them, and engagement for them, which is the greatest national cause of
rejoicing in the world. It is very much to have the Lord once to appear and
show himself openly in a cause for a people, or person: for he will not, nay,
(let me speak it with reverence) he cannot then easily, and slightly, retreat
and go back again, but his very honor is engaged to proceed. Hence it is,
that the Saints in their greatest difficulties and distresses, have taken the
advantage of this argument, even the Lords appearing for them, and have pressed
him with it, to spare and deliver them. Thus Moses at Horeb, when Israel, by
making a calfe, had so provoked the Lord, Exodus 32.20. etc.
that he said, Let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I
may consume them. At this sad pinch Moses betakes himself to this great
argument of the Lords engagement: Verse 11.
Why does thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou have brought forth
out of the land of Egypt, with great power, and with a mighty hand? Verse 13.
Wherefore should the Egyptians speak, and say, etc. Remember Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, etc. And by this argument he brings the Lord to a kind of
repentance, says the Text: O high expression! Verse 14.
And the Lord repented of the evil, which he thought to do unto his people.

The like practice we find in Joshua, Moses his Pupil and Successor: Jo^. 7.9.
(it seems he learned it of his Tutor) And what will thou do to thy great
name? Yea, a whole cloud of other witnesses might be brought to the same
purpose. But that which has been said, does suffice to evince both [that] and
[why] we ought especially to be glad and rejoice in those salvations, which
have in them most of God. Next let us draw down to Application.

Reproof to all such brutish Carnalists, Reprehension.
as both in their prayers for victories and salvations, and in their rejoycings
in them, do look altogether (at least principally) at that which is carnal,
temporal, and outward; but observe not how much or how little of God is to be
seen there.

That you may understand this Use aright, you are to know that there are two
sides, (as I may call them) or two parts, or (to speak plainly) two sorts of
benefits observable in every victory.

First, there is an outside of mercy; that is, there are benefits external:
and there is an inside; that is, all such internal benefits and commodities
as are gotten thereby. The outside, or externalls are all the temporal,
civil benefits and gains by, with, and in a victory: as the great number of
prisoners, with horse, and arms that are taken; the great quantity of
ammunition, provisions, treasures, etc. All these and the like are but the
outside of a victory; that is, the carnal, temporal benefits that do come
thereby.

Secondly, in a victory there is an inside, or there are benefits internal;
that is, of an inward and divine nature: such are all soule-mercies, and
Church-mercies, and all other spiritual profits and advantages, that may be
laid up in the heart, that may be laid out in the life for God, or that may be
laid up in heaven for our selves: These treasures are the inside of a victory;
the former are but as the husks, the shells, the bones; these are the kernells,
the fruits, the marrow within: and there is as much difference between them, as
betwixt the blessings of Jacob and Esau. Genesis 27.37.


Yet, alas, alas, how do the greater part of the world terminate both their
desires and joys in those carnal and huskie parts of deliverance? How do
they prefer them both in their prayers and praises?

In their prayers they do deprecate evils of punishment, Exodus 8.8.
saying, as Pharaoh, Take away, or keep away the frogs: and in their
petitions, they houle upon their beds for the corn, Hos. 7.14.
the wine, the oil, that may come by such a success. These men do measure
victories altogether by the greatness of external, temporal, Two differences
betwixt the spiritual and temporal benefits by victory. 1. In peculiarity.
carnal emoluments and commodities. But that I may discover their error
before I enter upon my great Use, let me tell them there is a vast difference
between the spiritualls and the temporalls of a victory, between the inside
and the outside, in these two things:

First, in their peculiarity and choicenesse: The temporal profits by a
victory are common to good and bad; whereas spiritual ones are peculiar to the
Saints: the dogs as well as the children may partake of these scraps; but
these are only the portion of sons and daughters. When the Israelites were
preserved in Egypt, and went out of that land through the red sea by a mighty
hand, Exodus 12.28.
there was a mixed multitude that went with them, which were not Israelites,
and that multitude shared as much in the temporal part of Isreal's salvation,
as Gods own peculiar people; for they passed through the sea as on dry land as
well as the others: they had their portion, and their commons in the quails,
and Manna, as well as they; as we read all along that story to Numb. 11.4.
Nay, in Egypt when God preserved his people amidst these plagues, the cattle,
the bullocks of the Israelites did share in the outward part of that
deliverance, as well as the Israelites themselves; for in the murraine they
were all preserved alive; Exodus 9.4, 5, 6, 7.
of the cattle of the children of Israel died not one. But now there was a
peculiar number of Israelites indeed, that did get higher benefits by those
deliverances; for they sucked inward sweetness, and spiritual good out of all
that chain of mercy and salvation, which the common multitude did neither
perceive, nor regard. For instance, Moses got extraordinary familiarity with
God, by his long march in the wilderness: Ezod. 33.14, 17, 18, 19.
he prevailed for Isreal's pardon; gat the Lord himself to go with them; and
obtained a sight of his glory: He gat so far into the bosom of God, that
he might have asked even what he would. This was the spiritual good and
benefit that Moses did get and laid up by those deliverances. So Caleb and
Joshua, they gat other spirits, Nom. 14.24.
and a kind of fullness in following after the Lord. These spiritual gains
are the very exstractions and quintessence of a victory. This is the first
difference.

Secondly, they differ in their durablenesse, 2. In duration.
or continuance. All the temporal gains of a victory, they are but temporary;
that which is gotten by the sword, may by the sword be lost again: as we see
this balance of war and victory has turned often in this land already; and
the Saw of war has been drawn from side to side many times, whilst the
poor Kingdom is cut asunder under it: But the spiritual, divine, inward
gains of a Christian are everlasting; they are implunderable, like Mary's part
that could never be taken from her. Luke 10.42.
See it exemplified in David, the man after Gods own heart: This David, in his
wars with Saul, and other enemies, got (by too too hard a shift) Ziklag,
which he made his head quarter and place of retreat; there he laid up all his
purchase, bag and baggage, and all the wealth that he had gotten in all his
wars: But now behold on a sudden, this Ziklag is taken, 1 Samuel 30.
and sacked by the Amalekites, and in it, poor David loses at once what he
had been so long time a gathering. Farewell now to all his temporal,
temporary, carnal, military gains, and estate: and now if he had not gotten
by his wars some more Si arbitrium dandi pones nos est, praecipue mansura
quaeremus, ut quam minime mortale fit munus. Sen. de Benefic. lib. 1.
enduring substance, something of a more spiritual, lasting nature, he had
been a man utterly undone; for he had lost both his wives, and the City was
burnt with fire, and the people spoke of stoning him. But David had gotten
somewhat else, and laid it up there where the Amalekites could not come at it:
he had gotten a vigorous faith by long experience; and this did stand by him in
this extremity, and by it he encouraged himself in the Lord his God. He
remembered that the Lord had been [his God] in former deliverances; as from the
1 Samuel 17.37.
lion and the bear, and Saul at 1 Samuel 24.
Keilah, Kiph, and Maon, and thence concluded that he would yet deliver him.
This faith and experience, which he had gotten in the time of his former wars,
travels, and trials, neither the Amalekites, nor all the powers of hell, were
able to plunder away from him, but it fetched back his temporals to him again.
Therefore you see there is a double difference between the spirituals and the
temporals, between the inside and the outside of victories. This also was
preparatorie. Now we go to the principal branch of Application.

Direction.
then be we effectually directed not to look so much with the eye of sense upon
victories and mercies, so do beasts; nor with the eye of reason altogether, so
do mere men, who are the children of this world only; but let us look upon
them with spiritual eyes, and taste them with a spiritual palate; let us see,
and resent how much of God there is in them, what divine profits we do get by
them, and accordingly more or less, let us rejoice and be glad in [his]
salvation. Every man (we say) yea, a bird, or beast can pick out the fish of
the oyster; but he is an Artist, and a wise man indeed, that can find and
gather out the pearls that are therein. These spiritual pearls are the
things which I do now press you to seek after.

Hic labor, hoc opus est; here is the task indeed, how shall I come to know
when there is more or less of God in a victory, or salvation? For, I grant
that I should rejoice most in such mercies, but how may I know them?

self unto at this time, The marks of Gods special presence in a victory.
viz. when Ju^g 14.8, 9. 1. There is much of his attributes: As,
to help you as with a prospective glass, to see and discern when there is
most of God in a salvation, or deliverance: to teach you (Samson-like) to find
out the honey comb in the slaughtered lion, that so I may bottom your joy upon
a sweet and solid foundation.

The first note or mark of the muchnesse of God in a mercy, and victory, may
be this, when there is much of Gods attributes appearing in such a mercy. The
Lords attributes are himself. The Lord passed before him, (that is, Moses) and
proclaimed, The Lord, the Lord God, Exodus 33.6, 7.
merciful and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth,
etc. There his mercy, justice, faithfulness, etc. are called himself. Now the
more of Gods attributes do shine eminently in any deliverance, the more of God
(we may conclude) there is in it: As, the more ingredients or simples there are
in any composition, or distillation, the more rare and excellent men do
account it, and the more of the Artist there is therein. To give instance in
some of the heaps of victories which you are to consider of this day.

What think we of Gods justice, His Justice.
has not that showed it self eminently, in hardening the hearts of the enemies
in their two strongest holds of Bridgwater and Sherborne, to over-stand
honorable proffers, that so they might bring themselves to the worst and
lowest conditions of all others? Whereas other men that defended sleighter
places, went off with better terms. Well knew the Lord that you could not so
safely let go the enemies that were in Bridgwater and Sherborne (being beasts
of longer teeth, and more deeply dyed in blood) as those in Bath, which were
less hurtful adversaries; therefore the Lord, in a special manner, did so
work it, that those fiercer wild beasts must bring themselves to be muzzled,
fettered, and caged up, that they might not do further mischief abroad: and
if any must march away, to let go those whom we need not much to fear.

Thus the Lord did sometimes harden the heart of Pharaoh, that he should not be
content to come off from Israel upon honorable and safe terms, as he might
have done at any time on this side the red sea; but he shall follow the Lords
people into the sea, Exodus 15.5.
that so he may at last sink like a stone in the migtie waters.

And what think you of the power of God in these late deliverances? His power.
Was there not much of that attribute seen, in helping our Armies to take-in
such extraordinarily fortified, and resolved strong holds, by mere strength,
force, and utmost extremities; by assault, battery, fire, and sword? Surely to
take a strong place by strength and storm, does argue that there is
extrordinary much of God in it, especially when such a storm is effected with
so little loss. I might add much more concerning the Lords wisdom, mercy,
and other attributes, that appeared even in the victories of this day; but I
shall open these cabinets anon. Thus where you see much of Gods attributes laid
out, engaged, When victories do come in the channel of the promises.
and as it were concentred in a victory, you may conclude that there is much of
God in that deliverance.

in the channel of the promises, then you may be sure they are merciful
mercies, and that they have in them much of God: For the promises they are the
buckets belonging to these wels and fountains of salvation. Isai. 12.3.
Therefore with joy shall they draw water out of the wels of salvation.

These wels do seem to be opposed to those cisternes, which are mentioned by
another Prophet; They have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, Jerem.
2.18.
and hewn them out cisternes, broken cisternes, that can hold no water. The
creatures are cisternes, the Lord alone he is the fountain, and out of this
fountain, or wel-head, we must draw all our salvations spiritual, temporal,
public, personal, by the buckets of the promises, and then they will prove
blessed blessings unto us.

Parliament, or Armies of England? Or, what are those Scripture-buckets to our
nation, or condition? Can there any victories come to us in these channels?

Englands Parliaments, and Armies in this present cause. Consider the great
promise to Joshua, Josh. 1.5.
there you shall see a title to the promises given even to us: I will never
leave thee nor forsake thee, says the Lord to Joshua: And this may be drawn
down to all Joshua's, or saviors of the Lords people, to the end of the world;
as appears by comparing that text of Joshua, Heb. 13.5.
with another in the new Testament: Let your conversation be without
covetousness, and be content with such things as you have; for he has said, I
will never fail thee, nor forsake thee. Whence we learn.

First, that the promises made to Joshua, or any other holy man in Scripture
for provisions, and protections in the Lords work and cause, may very well be
applied to us, and all others, in like works and causes.

Secondly, that a general promise of the Lords presence, and assistance for us
in his service, is as sufficient for all particulars whereof we stand in need,
as if they were expressed: Verse 6.
So that we may boldly say (with dividuall) the Lord is our helper. Thus there
are Scripdividuall) the Lord is our helper. Thus there are Scripture promises,
even to our English Parliaments and Armies, in the present cause and work.



Q. This is comfort indeed (you will say) if you can make it out unto us.

A. I will but point at two sorts of promises, Two proper promises applicable
to this days mercies.
which seem especially to sweeten this days mercies.

The one has reference to that Army, which was the instrument of these
victories.

The other to our selves, for whom these instruments have done that work.

the instruments themselves: You know what an Army they were esteemed, and
what low thoughts were taken up concerning them; then turn to that promise:
Because the foolishness of God is wiser then men, 1 Cor. 1.25, 26, 27, 23, 25.
and the weakness of God is stronger then men: For you see your calling
brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, nor many mighty, nor
many noble are called: But God has chosen the foolish things of the world, to
confound the wise, and God has chosen the weak things of the world, to
confound the things which are mighty; And base things of the world, and things
which are despised, has God chosen; yea, and things which are not, to bring to
naught things that are. That no flesh should glory in his presence. Let this
text be the Motto of this new Model.

This day (if ever) is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears: for now (if
ever) has the Lord done great things by such means; yea, he has confounded
carnal wisdom by folly, strength by weakness, and pride by humility:
Certainly, such effects, such deliverances as these, do come down in the
channel of this promise. That is one.

another promise with reference to your selves, and us (the rest) for whom
these deliverances were wrought, by those instruments. You know the general
frame of men's spirits, when the Lord began this turn of things, I hope we
were pretty well weaned from creature-confidence, and as low as ever in our
own eyes. Then turn to that other promise, Deuteronomy. 32.36, 37, 38, 39. For the
Lord shall judge his people, and repent himself for his servants, when he
sees that their power is gone, and there is none shut up, or left. -- And he
shall say, where are their gods, their rock in whom they trusted. -- See now,
that I, even I am he, and there is no god with me: I kill, I make alive; I
wound, and I heal; neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand. When
men are most low and lost in their own eyes, and do most of all distrust
themselves, and the outward means, looking up wholly to the Lord; then if they
get a deliverance it is in mercy, and flows in upon them in the channel of
this and the like promises. Such mercies cannot taste of the cask.

Honorable, and Beloved, let me instance here as a western man; the eyes of
the poor prisoners of hope in the West, have been long, long time lifted up
toward these Eastern hills for help, and for their relief: There was a first,
a second Army sent down, but alas, men's eyes and hearts were taken up with too
much expectation, and confidence (I believe) in those Armies which were
commanded by that excellent Peer, and by that valiant Knight; and I cannot but
think, that one principal cause why those Noble Generals could do no more
for those Counties, was this, because the people did look upon them too much.
If once we do make Idols of our Jewels, then the Lord will break them in
pieces: and it is a mercy; for if we should get deliverance by Idolized means
and instruments, our spiritual losses thereby, would be much greater than our
temporal gains and commodities.

Observe we therefore, what an Army the Lord has now sent down into those
parts, and what instruments he does there employ; even an Army of strangers,
men much unknown to the people of those Countries both by face and name, lest
they should Idolatrously, and carnally look upon them. Thus he causes (in
mercy) the Western deliverance (as he did their affliction) to arise
unexpectedly out of the dust. And this is a sign of a gracious mercy, when the
Lord so brings about the Victories, and salvations of his people, that he
does cross self, and kill corruption in them, even by the mannaging and
ordering of their mercies.

This is a double conquest, even of corruption, and of outward enemies both at
once. Doubly blessed be his name for such twinning favors as these. This was
the second note, or mark, that there is much of God in a salvation, when it
comes in the channel of the Promises.

When they are the fruits of duty: As, Of Prayer.
when it is the fruit of holy means and duties, as of prayer, and praises;
when it comes in the way of duties. Let me instance, but in those two which I
have mentioned.

And first in prayer, when a salvation comes in the way of prayer: You know how
Jacob got his garland, Genesis 32. Hos. 12.4.
his new name of Israel, even by wrestling with God; and that wrestling was, by
prayer and tears, says the Prophet Hosea: Now, what a solid blessing did that
prove, and how much of God appeared there in it? It got him the name of Israel,
it derived an honor to all his posterity, and it gave them a new relation to
God; which relation the Lord afterward gloried in, and they never pressed him
with it ordinarily, but they prevailed. And therefore it was such a solid
mercy, because it was gotten by prayer.

Shall I add an instance of a female wrastler? Hannah begged a son of God by
prayer, and she called him Samuel, that is, asked of God: she wrote the name
of God upon the mercy, to show that it was obtained by prayer; 1 Samuel 1.2.
Chapters.
and therefore she gives God all the glory, and sets him up in her praises.

Now bring we our mercies to this touchstone; have any of our victories
come-in by this way of prayer? have they been fruits of supplications, and
humblings? were the hands of Moses in the Mount, Exodus 17.1^.
as well as of Joshua in the Valley, in any of these great and plentiful
deliverances? What think you of the vertical, critical Victory at Nazeby? you
were pleased to command out some 9. Regiments of Volunteers out of these
Cities, I mean so many Congregations, to keep a solemn day of prayer and
humiliation, (and believe it, they are your Volunteers that must do the work,
both in your spiritual, and Civil Militia) these Regiments did beset heaven
upon the Tuesday, and lo, upon the Saturday after (in the same week) God gave
you that Victory of victories, the great, unexpected, necessary, England-saving
Victory of Nazeby.

Nay, and the poor West, out of its penury, may come-in here with an instance
too; the great late turning of the Tide of that desolate Country, was the
Victory of Langport; but when was it? surely, the very next day after the
Western Fast at Blackfriars; Two days of victory did immediately follow that
one day of humiliation.

These mercies came-in like Daniels Answer, Dan. 9.20.
When I was speaking to the Lord, the Angel Gabriel came and told me, Thy
prayers are heard. O! these are the jewels in a Ring of victory; they are
precious things of God, (and ought especially to be recorded) when mercies are
the fruits of prayer.

So when they are the fruits of praise too: Of Praises.
I read that Jehoshaphat had a great victory given-in as the fruit of praise, 2 Chronicles ^0.22.
When they began to sing praises to the Lord, (that is, for a promise of
deliverance sent by the Prophet) The Lord set ambushments against the children
of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, which were come against Judah, and they were
smitten. And has not the Lord answered your praises too, as well as your
prayers? Certainly, there are mercies in this kind to be found out. As, when
you gave command to praise the Lord for Nazeby victory, that very morning God
sent the tidings of the regaining of so-much-bewailed Leicester, thereby to put
one string more into our instruments of praises. So when you gave command for
blessing the Lord for that Western mercy near Langport, in that very day of
praise, as I remember, (to show how the Lord loves a thankful people) he did
give their impregnable Bridgewater into your hands. Let us also observe this
mark of God upon his salvations.

When they are improvements to grace and activity. 2 Chronicles. 14, 15, 16.
Chapters.
(this is higher) when victories are improvements to grace, and holy action
(it holds also in all other inferior personal mercies.) Honorable, and
Beloved, may you please to look upon that one King Asa, God gave him a
wonderful victory, (those Chapters are proper for your reading this day) even
the greatest, I think, that we read in the book of God: Ten hundred thousand
Ethiopians came up against him, God routed them all in one battle: And while
Asa was meditating a thanksgiving for this, Chap. 15.
God sent the Prophet Azariah to preach a Thanksgiving Sermon to quicken him:
Hereupon see how Asa expresses his thankfulness, principally by these two
sorts of duties.

First, by the destruction of Idols and Idolatry; Verse. 8. and 16.
not sparing the royal Priapus it self, and by the setting up of pure worship.

Next, by a holy, strict, willing, national Covenant. Verse. 12, 13, 14, 15.


O! that it might it please the father of spirits to bring up your hearts to
this Asa-like frame this day; both those works are now seasonable and necessary.

First, the throwing down of Idols and Idolatry, there is to much of the old
leaven still remaining, if it were narrowly sought after. I beseech you let the
remnants of Baal, and the Chemarims feel the marks and dint of our praises and
thanksgivings this day, and let them bear those marks to posterity. Let us
set up monuments of our praise, in the destruction of some more remnants of
Idolatry.

There is a pair of Idols of lealousie yet standing. The one of them, I
think, too near the eyes of your Senate; the other (I am sure) is too near
to my charge, and has leavened those parts too much already.

The other expression of Asa's thankfulness, was the renewing of their
Covenant: A Covenant is already made by us; but how much the renewing of it,
and the looking after it is wanting; you heard partly this morning. I hope we
are not weary of our Covenant? We do not begin to repent, that ever we
entered into that League with God? Sure I am, we have little cause so to do,
if we observe the success of things ever since our Covenanting; and if we
suffer some miscarriages, and disapointments, it is because there have been
miscarriages in our Covenants. But if we do not repent of this holy League, why
do so many deny it? Why do so many others refuse, and despise it?

O may it please you Asa-like to do some memerable thing for God this day. Two
Requests for the West.
And here besides what has been pressed upon you for the Lords sake already, I
have two humble suits to present unto you, with reference to the Western
occasions of this days praises.

spiritual garrisons into those three Western Towns now rednced: every one of
them being doubly considerable; partly for their long time of slavery under the
enemy, in which they could not but contract deep ignorance, profaneness,
and malignitie; and partly for their situation, strength, and greatness, they
being some of the most eminent places in all those parts. Such spiritual
garrisons, even in prudence, are well nigh as necessary as your Military ones.

concerning the Covenant, that the poor souls, in those lately reduced
Countries, may not have it abruptly forced upon them, without due preparation,
and humiliation; not as the Spaniards baptized the American Indians by droves,
and heaps, but rather that the business may be ordered as Hezekiah did order
his people for the Passever, 2 Chronicles. 30.
with all due warning, instruction, and consideration. I beseech you give them
time and means, first to disgorge and cleanse themselves thoroughly, of the many
direful, anti-Covenant, perjurious combinations, that many poor wretches, in
those parts, have swallowed since they were under the power of the enemy. Let
them first shave their heads, and pare their nails, as the Deuteronomy. 21.12, 13.
strange virgin of old was commanded to do, and so let them enter into that
sacred, and dreadful Covenant. Thus labor to set up some expressions of real
thankfulness this day to the Lord; for when there are such improvements of
graces by our deliverances, they have in them much of God.

But now on the contrary side, if our deliverances, and victories, instead of
improving our graces, should improve our corruptions (which God forbid) and
instead of laying us lower in our own eyes, should lift up our hearts in a
wrong way; you may guess at the sad consequence from Vzziah. 2 Chronicles. 26.
This King had gotten many victories, and his heart was lifted up by them, but
it was in pride, not in thankfulness; for he usurped the power of
sacrificing. What was the issue? It ended in leprosy; and so God did thrust
him out of his house, and did set him aside from the government of the Kingdom.

Nay, 2 Chronicles. 16.
good Asa himself when he had gotten these great victories, he turned aside to
unteachablenesse, and carnal compliance with Benhadad the King of Aram; and
when there came a Prophet and told him of his fault, he was angry with the
Prophet, and persecuted him; yea, and he oppressed some of the people at the
same time. But what was the end of this too? All Asa's glory, acts, and
victories, went out in a snuff: He was sick in his feet, and he turned aside
to the Phifitians, and died. The Text lays a blot upon his name at last, he
died as a pettish man, not thoroughly perfect in the way of the Lord.

It is pity that fair weather should do any harm; that so sweet a root
should bring forth such deadly fruits as these: Therefore I conclude with that
of Ezra; Ezra 9.13, 14
When we have received such deliverances as these, should we again break the
Lords commandments? Would he not be angry with us till he had consumed us,
that there should be no remnant, nor escaping?

wherein should our victories improve us? In what graces? In what particulars?

Victories should improve us in
Take these five more, in so many words.

dependence upon a tried God: Dependence
If hereafter the tide of victory shall turn again, and you shall be brought
back somewhat near your old low condition, yet I beseech you remember this very
day, in which you are to give thanks for five victories at once: Remember when
you are in that low estate, that there was a day when God served you in with
five pheasants in a dish, 1 S^m. 17.37. 2 Cor. 1.10.
with a feast of fat things: He is still the same, and his years do not fail.

love and prayer: Love and Prayer. Psalm 116.1, 2.
I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice, and supplications: I will
call upon him so long as I live.

holiness in our conversations: Holiness. Psalm 50. ult.
to offer thanks and praise, and to order our conversations aright: they may
not be separated, because God has joined them together; Obad. 17.
Upon mount Sion there shall be deliverances, and there shall be holiness; or,
they shall escape, and they shall be holy.

Self-denial
in humility, and self denial: Thus did mercy work with Jacob, I am less
(says ^ee, Genesis 32.9, 10
when he was greatest in estate) then the least of all the mercy, and of all
the truth, that thou have showed to thy servant.

Nay, good old David, 2 Samuel 7.18, 19.
when God had loaded him with benefits, he goes in, and as if he were not
able to stand under the mercies promised, he sits before the Lord, and there
his heart runs abroad as melting wax in his bosom, in a thankful, humble
acknowledgement, What am I? and what is my fathers house, that thou have
brought me hitherto?

Lastly, let it improve us in holy activity for God: He is my God, and my
fathers God: And what of that? Exodus 15.2.
Therefore I will prepare him an habitation. So in another place, I am thy
servant, and the son of thine handmaid, thou have loosed my bonds. I am thy
born-servant, Psalm. 116.
and thy bought-servant, and therefore am ready to serve thee in righteousness
and holiness all the days of my life. Thus you see I have hasted through four
several marks and notes of Gods especial presence in a deliverance. There is
but one remaining, which I will dispatch with brevity.

Fifthly, and finally, Circumstantiall impressions of God.
that accordingly you may be very much in praise and rejoicing? It is when a
victory carries with it some particular circumstantiall impressions of God. We
say In Morelibus plus valet circumstantia quam substantia.
in Morals, that the circumstance is more then the substance. So many times in
victories, the adjuncts may be more then the matter. The cutting of a stone may
be more precious than the stone it self: and the stamp and workmanship of more
value then the metal. These holy, divine circumstances of mercies, are the
things that do set them higher or lower in the eye and heart of every prudent,
spiritual discerner; especially when they appear to be the particular
impressions of God. I would bring this home to the mercies for which we bless
the Lord this day. And here, to show you the circumstantiall impressions, The
occasions of this Thanksgiving considered in their
and footsteps of the Lord, I desire you, First, to look upon them in their
bulk and quantity. Secondly, in their parcels and qualities.


bulk and quantity, Quantity.
as they do lie together: And here I desire you to remember, that this day of
Thanksgiving is not like other days of this kind; for it is not for one single
salvation, deliverance, or victory, that you do bless the Lord this day: nor
for one pair of mercies, in the duall: no, nor for a pair of paires; but for
an heap, a multitude of victories. I am persuaded confidently, that since our
unnatural divisions began, you have not had so many eminent causes of
thanksgiving, upon any one day of praise and rejoicing; nor upon any
Thanksgiving day might you so properly have taken up those words of the
Psalmist as now, Psalm. 68.19.
Blessed be the Lord who daily loads us with his benefits, even the God of our
salvation, Selah. And therefore the work of this day would require the skill of
the Master of the music; as in the Title of that Psalm.

The Papists talk carnally, and superstitiously very much about the five wounds
of Christ: and you know what King of Portugali.
King it is that accounts it a great deal of honor to carry those five wounds
in his Arms: Sure I am, you are to bless the Lord for no less then five
several healings and deliverances this day; yea, for five complete Victories;
and every victory is doubly as much again as a deliverance. Therefore you have
now five days works to do in one.

Shall I count the number of them? You heard something this way to day already:
But I shall speak only of this days mercies.

Remember Scarborough; remember that of Wales; remember Bridgewater; remember
Bath; remember Sherborne. Lo, a whole handful of mercies; indeed, for every
finger a several mercy. The Lord has deserved our hearts-full of
thankfulness this day.

Certainly, the first fruits of the West do come-in (me thinks) as the
first fruits of Canaan did; Number. 13.23, 24.
not singly, and by units; but as the grapes of Eshcol, by loading clusters. It
is a series, a chain, a stream of victories that the Lord has given us of
late: he seems to fasten victories to our Armies.

I remember it is said of the Athenians, Pausanias.
that in a politic kind of fancy they made the Image of their Goddess
[(...)] Victory, without wings, whereas other people did paint her winged.
Their reason was, that she might stay with their Armies, and not fly over to
the enemies side. Certainly, God has given you such an unwinged Victoria, as
flies not off from your Armies. She seems to have arms indeed, for she fights
for you; and to have legs, for she follows your Camps; but is without
wings, being fixed and dwelling amongst us, ever since this new despised Model
went forth to battle. And so fast does one victory tread upon the heels of
another, that as one said wittily, (O let us speak it humbly) The noble
General seems to have taken the work of this war (to do) not by the day,
but at a task.

Now they say of Physic, (Honorable and Beloved) that though it be weak in
quality, yet if it be much in quantity it will work even upon a flat and dull
constitution: Do but consider this great quantity of these your mercies.

qualities of them should be yet more effectual, Quality: at
as they have the impressions of God upon them. Next therefore let us consider
them in their parcels and qualities. Shall I take them abroad?

First of all, 1. Scarborough.
there is that Northern Castle, that so long, and often has been attempted,
and tampered withal, but all in vain: A Castle that was a kind of Amphibion;
a Monster, that offended us as well by sea as by land; and like a Crocadile,
preyed upon us in both elements. This consideration should make the mercy
double in our esteem, (and as I may say) a two-handed-mercy: behold this is
now given up into your hands; and with it, that great Apostate of the North,
who is paid home (Ahablike) in that place where he sinned.

Secondly, 2. Haverford-West.
there is a field victory given you too, that the Lord might appear to be the
God of the mountains as well as of the valleys, in the field as well as in the
City: a field-victory at Haverford-West in Wales. But when, and how was that
bestowed? Mark the time and manner in which that blow was given: the Lord did
cut them in a dangerous, unseasonable season. There is great difference between
the cuts that he gives to his enemies, and to his people: The one is when the
sap is down, and so is rather a pruning then a felling; and such have been the
former cuts which in merciful justice he has sometimes given your Armies.
But the Lord gives the enemy a cut when the sap is up, when they are rising,
growing, and gathering; and when a cut will undo them, then God provides to
give them a blow. And such was that stroke, or wound in Wales. Deuteronomy. 32.35.
Their feet shall slide in due time, faith M^ses, concerning the Churches
enemies, in his Swan-like song: In due time; when is that? When they are at
top. He does oftentimes suffer the enemy to climb higher, and yet higher, and
we stand wondering what he means in letting him to go up another, --
Tolluntur in altum ut lapsu graviore ruant. Claud.
and yet another round of prosperity, and preferment! have patience man, he is
not high enough yet to break his neck: Therefore the Lord suffers them to
climb, and climb, and climb again; but tarry a while (I say) and thou shall
see when he is high enough to break his neck, that his feet shall slide in due
time.

principal Cabinet for you? (besides the Northern mercy, In the West, these,
and that of Wales) the greatest causes of this days thanksgiving, are your
victories in the West. Victories in the West? Hark, how Paradox-like it
sounds! this is like the news of * Joseph's life and preferment to hopeless
Jacob, upon which we read, Jacobs heart fainted; Genesis 45.26.
for he believed them not. It is as Joseph's wagons, Verse. 27, 28.
at sight of which, the spirit of Jacob revived, and Israel said, It is enough:
So say I, It is enough, the West (my mother) is yet alive; O that I could go
and see it before I dye. O that sad syllable [the West] a Country so helpless,
and hopeless, that the enemy thought it a kind of charmed or enchanted parcel
of ground, too hot for any Parliamentary forces to stand upon.

The West, that heretofore has been as Nazareth, as the Mountains of Gilboa,
as a Golgotha to other parts. What! and is there now good (news) out of
Nazareth? Is there some dew of comfort upon Mount Gilboa? Do the dry bones of
Golgotha begin to hear a noise, Ezekiel ^7.7, 8, etc.
and come together, bone to his bone? do they live and stand up upon their
feet, a great Army? O my soul, they are praising the Lord for Three Western
victories this day! Oh, how willingly could I here fall to singing of those
verses of Hannahs song, 1 Samuel 2. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
they are exceeding proper to this day, with relation to these Western mercies.

But I would draw nearer, and see this great sight more particularly, this
burning bush that is not consumed. There are no less then two of the five
Western Counties reduced by these victories; and in these two, a City, a Town,
a Castle taken-in; can you reckon up more sorts? Let us seriously view all
these.

First, Bath.
the City of Bath is the City of waters: And in the taking-in thereof, the Lord
showed you how easily he could take a City. For there the God of spirits
casting a damp upon the spirits of the men which should have been the
defendants, they were not Masters of their own courage, an Ignis fatuus was
enough to storm them; for upon the sight (it seems) of a blaze, they sent out
for conditions of peace. So that upon the gates of that City the General might
properly write, (as you heard to day). [Veni, vidi, vici,] I came, I saw, I
overcame. Thus the greatest of those three places, the City, was most easily
taken-in.

But secondly, Bridgewater.
the Town of Bridge-water was a place as fully strengthened as the Enemies
themselves could desire. They had notice enough (Gods providence so disposing)
to provide themselves with men, arms, fortifications, ammunitions, treasure,
victuals, all things; and it seems they had accordingly taken their season;
for the greatest birds in that County, whose condition was most desperate,
betook themselves to that Town, as conceiving it their most impregnable
Fortress, their best Asylum.

This place is summoned, but they must not yield, because the Lord would show
us here how hardly he could take-in a Town, as he had showed us in Bath, how
easily he could do it: And because it was not safe for us to let these men
go, therefore that enemy must take a course that we shall be sure to make
them Prisoners; they will be taken by storm. Well, stormed they are, through
fire and water; and when they had brought themselves to a desperate condition,
that nothing but mere mercy could be hoped for, then they must give up
themselves, because it was necessary for us to take them Prisoners. And mark
here (in the close) the different dispensations of Providence, fire-bals could
not burn in Lyme, but they can burn at Bridgewater.

Thirdly, Sherborne.
(finally) there is a Castle taken-in too, yea, the Castle of Sherborne: O that
first Western nest of the Cockatrices eggs, the cradle of Cavalierisme, the
very bag of the Western Imposthume; now I hope the bag is plucked out: The
soar gathered again the last time, because only the Imposthumation was then
let-out, but the bag it self was not taken away; and therefore a company of
Club-men, (Neuters for their matter, acted by Malignants for their form) were
now gathered together thereabouts, to have hatched a second War.

This Sherborne Castle was the very Judge. 20.14.
Gibeah of of the West; the first place that durst to hold forth its defiance
of the Assembly of Israel, in defense of those Delinquents that had ravished
Religion, and Justice: and the Neutrall Club-men thought now to make it their
Succoth, Judge. 8.6, 8.
and Penuel, in which they might confide, and so denied relief to the Armies
of Israel. But behold this Castle is also stormed, and taken, and that upon the
old terms; because here were as dangerous birds as in Bridgewater. All these
have yielded upon the Syrian terms too, martching out as Benhadads Messengers
came to the King of Israel, even with roaps about their necks, and sackcloth
on their loins, 1 Kin. 20.32.
and with the same voice in their mouths, We pray thee let us live.

What shall I say? If I should turn this Feast into a Fast, by speaking away
both the day and my spirits, yet should I not be able to unkernell this
five-fold crop, or cluster of victories. Only let me entreat you, in the fear
of God, to lay all these things together, and then resolve whether it ought not
to be said in this day, Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, and he
will save us: This is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad and
rejoice in his salvation.

FINIS.

