THE SPIRIT OF PRELACIE, YET WORKING.

OR, TRVTH from under a CLOVD, IN A RELATION, of that Great, and Public
Contestation had in Gloucester, July, 1644.

Written then, and now published, as it were of necessity.

TOGETHER, With a POSTSCRIPT, containing some general and particular
Observations, upon Master Edwards his Gangraena.

By ROBERT BACON, M. A. Minister of the Gospel.

Psalm. 97.5. The hills melted like wax at the presence of the Lord. Mat. 11.19.
Wisdom is justified of her children. Tertul. Apol. contr. Gent. Cap. 3. Bonus
vir, Cajus Sejus, malus tantum quod Christianus. LONDON, Printed by R. L. for
Giles Calvert, at the black-spread-eagle at the West end of Paul's. 1646.

THis remarkable Relation, penned with a sweet spirit of meekness, one of the
most Sovereigne remedies for all our divisions, in my judgment deserves to be
Printed.

April 11. 1646. John Bachiler.

An intimation to the READER
THe Worlds full of Controversy already, and so full, that the truth is
woefully obscured, and obstructed by them, otherwise this Argument might have
swollen into a greater Volume, but there is no end of disputes, Solomon's advise
is good, the beginning of strife is, as when one lets out water, therefore
leave off contention before it be meddled with, wherefore here is only a
Narrative of what was done in the face of that whole City, and is left upon
Record, not only in the minds and memories of them that were spectators, but
also doubles in the books of Record, in the hands of those in Authority in
that place, there being nothing done but in their eye, and by their Order,
therefore no offense can be given by the repetition of the Names of any, it
being but the subscription of their own hands, which every one cannot choose but
own, all perticulars in the Dispute cannot be reported, but the general
carriage of the business is faithfully related from the beginning to the end,
the objection against the Printing of this Relation must be this, to what end?
the thing it self will answer, it serves to a twofold end, 1 to clear the
innocent, then the which nothing is more needful in the land, 2 to given an
experiment of the seasonablenesse of Master Colemans Caution to the Parliament,
that the Clergy (ut vocant) may not carry on their own self-designes, as here
they did, by the strength of humane power, a burden under which well-nigh all
Europe, yea, all the World groans: a Reply to the Questions, here stated, long
since given in, together with a Rejoinder made thereto then, is of purpose
omitted, because I think all men may now see, its high-time to apply our selves
to plant truth in the hearts of those that know it not, rather then darken it
by bitterness and wrath which fall out usually in disputes, even among those
that pretend to know it, for whiles men thus contend about it, experience shows
many lose it, and themselves with it: the Western parts did not more groan
under the late removed illegal power there, then they do yet under the powers
of darkness, which prevailing, keeps them in a worser, and a more dismal
bondage, yet scarce any eye pitties them, to proclaim the acceptable year of
the Lord unto them: Every man suspects his brother, that through the contention
of the Laborers, the Vineyards neglected, the Kingdoms darkened, Satan's
advantaged, and the Saints burdened, and the Name of God blasphemed, for if in
this we agree not, what do we more then they that began to build (a Babel)
which stuck in their hands, for by this confusion of language, each man is
hindered by his brother, Wherefore let the Apostles be received among us, follow
peace with all men, (especially with them that do believe) and holiness,
without which no man shall see the Lord, that we may further one another in
that wherein we do agree, and bear one with another as becomes brethren,
in the things wherein we differ, that we may be a joy and not a vexation each
to other: so prays he, for the brethren, that is himself a brother in the Lord
Jesus.

To the Right HONORABLE, WILLIAM, Lord Viscount, SAY, and SEAL:
My Lord,
I Have always since I saw your person, accounted my self exceedingly below
your taking notice of me, and should now have thought it as great presumption,
to prefix your name to any thing of mine, especially such a thing as this, had
I not in a sort been compeld thereto, and that not out of any respect to my
self, as having learned, being of a long time accustomed to suffer reproach: but
because I have bin so frequently an ear, and now in Master Edwards book, an
eye witness, what is in the dark, and as it were at a distance, whispered, by
them that now dare not, as heretofore, draw too nigh, as having once or twice
experience, that their disapointment in offering personal injuries, has not
only been an addition of honor to you, (which as the Sun appears brighter
after a cloud,) but have made themselves public examples, as well of
ignorance, as envy, and given men to see them such as were foretold should be
in the the last times, even such as Revel. 22.23. (...)
love and fashion a lie for advantage, therefore now like the Serpent (that
wounds the woman's seed in the heel, because he can do no further mischief,)
they remotely, seek, but in vain, to blemish your honor for entertaining me,
who in this turn of time, like a vessel of small quantity, have had some
dependence on you, whom God as the glory of your fathers house, for the safety
and honor of this Nation, has made to many, besides, like Eliakim, a Nail,
fastened in a sure place: and thus they direct their arrows, even bitter words:
I am charged afresh with error, though solemnly discharged, where I was first
accused, And this hinted, as patronized by you, in entertaining me, But the
whole Kingdom knows, and all the World may, That Errors of all sorts, whether
Political, Doctrinall, or Ecclesiastical, have been eminently, according to
the emenency of your honor, and deep understanding, as heretofore, so to this
present hour, mightily and successfully, to the Kingdoms joy, withstood by
you. Wherefore, the humble request I make to your Honor is, that as
opportunity may be given, both by your self, and others, by your advice,
enquiry may be made, whither these things be so or no, that God may be
magnified, the truth justified, error silenced, your honor in that act of
entertaining me, preserved, my self alone ashamed, if any such thing be proved
against him, that is willing to offer himself to the trial of all, that love
our Lord Jesus, and that the rather, because I have bin awhile, more
perticularly:

Your Honors servant (according to his measure) in the Gospel of God and our
Savior Jesus, ROBERT BACON.

A brief Relation of my usage in GLOUCESTER.
THere being an offense taken (none as I know given) by a Sermon I preached on
the public Fast day, As M. Holford reported.
the Major of the City was solicited by Master Marshall, By the Majors own
report.
a man living and preaching among the Cavaliers (as they call them) and one
that never heard me speak, or ever, I think with knowledge, saw my face, as
also by M. Holford and M. Corbet living in Town, that I might preach no more in
those parts, so that by the Majors sole authority I was silenced for one Lords
day, though M. Holford confessed he durst not gainsay the Doctrine, only he
said that the Major was greatly displeased with him for giving me leave, but
the Major himself to me affirmed the contrary, namely, that M. Holford did
most earnestly solicit him to manifest his power in hindering me from
preaching, though I was thereunto called, as by others so especially by M.
Heart, to supply his public Lecture, during the intervall of his journey to
London: thus M. Holford laboring to keep in with both sides by concealing
himself, lost most deservedly the esteem, which he expected to have, from
both.

This restraint of the Major was taken off again, by the sole authority of the
Governor Colonel Massy, being moved thereunto by a Letter I made bold to
write to him upon that occasion, so that I preached publicly again every Lords
day, for the most part twice, and on the Fast days, laboring to clear out of
Luke 13.5. the Doctrine of repentance, about which the exception was. Hereupon
one Wheeler, sometimes M. Dorneys Clerk, and then an under Commissary (if I
mistake not) in Sir William Wallers Army, told his acquaintance he would apply
himself to take an effectual courle to remove me out of that City, and
therefore addressed himself, not only to take notes of my Sermon, but also of
my Prayer, thereby to stir up adversaries by giving in information against me,
which M. Corbet, M. Holford, and M. Hodges, all then in the City, with all
readiness received: Therefore being confident of the Governors ear, being
nigh unto him, they afterward made use of his authority, to summon me by a
soldier, as a transgressor, to the Governors Chamber, on the Lords day after
evening Sermon, I hearing nothing of it before, where being present, the
Governor and diverse Soldiers, some of the Committee, and many of the chief of
the City, with I think, all the Ministers: The Governor with much courtesy
and clemency, told me, he had sent for me to speak with me, together with the
Ministers, for as much (as he said) he had received many great complaints from
them against me, that I became in my Ministry a very great burden unto them,
but he hoped there was no such cause given, as was reported, to whom I replied,
what I taught was public, and if I failed in ought, when it should be made to
appear, I should as publicly disclaim, though my aim was, as God is witness,
the increase of knowledge, unity and love, which is much wanting every where,
but before I had yet done speaking, the Ministers upbraided me with much
unbeseeming and reproachful language, not giving leave one to another, but
rushing upon me with a torrent of evil words, till that unseemlinesse was
remedied by the Governors Command: Then M. Holford began an invective against
the Heretics and Schismatics of old, backing his speech with the authority of
Austin and Calvin, but being required to make application of his discourse in a
particular charge aginst me, he openly co^fest in the audience of all that he
had nothing to accuse me of, only he had me in suspicion for this only
reason, because the people had such recourse unto me and their congregations
where he and the rest of the Ministers taught though heretofore they were like
to Pharoahs fat kine (which was a similitude he used) yet others like the lean
kine had even eaten them up: But having nothing actually to accuse me of, and
having (as it is evident) before hand laid their heads together, and determined
among themselves to examine me upon certain intergatories, that they might have
wherewithal, if possible, from mine own mouth, to lay to my charge, and they
did as they, thought, but this unchristian and un-ministerlike course of
theirs, Iutterly disclaimed for the present, as not being bound to accuse my
self; they industriously seeking and not finding matter sufficient for an
accusation against me, and because too it savoured so strongly of the
illegality of the High-Commission-Court, against which all men did of late most
justly complain, yet at length they prevailed with me, casting upon me much
reproach, Though he was a constant hearer of me.
and laboring with many words to bring me into contempt, and M. Shepherd of
the Committee began to urge that he now did suspect my Doctrine was not sound,
because I did refuse to confess it, especially said M. Corbet and M. Hodges,
being convented before the Magistrate (though indeed by the Ministers undue
instigation thereunto) to that very end as they said, till by their importunity
I was even ashamed to be any longer silent: whereupon I answered to ten
Questions which M. Holford, M. Corbet, and M. Hodges in their wisdoms thought
meet, in writing to propound unto me, whereunto I subscribed either
affirmatively or negatively as I thought meet, and as the Lord then gave me
understanding, but upon this condition only, that I might have time, which was
given me till Wednesday morning by the Governor to state the questions, as I
conceived them, when the time came, (for as for that night I was very
courteously entertained at the Governors Table.) I had the word of command
from Colonel Massy then Governor, by a Soldier sent to that purpose to
repair immediately to his Chamber, where after a little stay, I went in the
company, and by the direction of M. Holford and M. Hodges, to the place where
the Council of War was wont to be kept, whether there came after wards the
Governor, and many Commanders and Soldiers, the whole Committee that were
then in Town, the Major, and other chief men of the City, with diverse
Gentlemen, and very many Ministers and others, and they that could not get into
the room (it being an under chamber) they stood without at a broad window that
gave light into it, where they both heard and saw what was done in it. Every
one being settled in his place, I according to a formercommand, gave into the
hands of the Governor in writing an Answer to those ten Questions; which by
the Ministers were propounded to me the Lords day before: This by the
Governors command was then put into the hands of M. Corbet (who it seems was
intended to dispute with me about them) to read which he began in the audience
of the people, but gave off in the midst, as being unwilling that the company
should hear altogether, and therefore would dispute with me immediately before
he read, them all, which I utterly refused, because I was not ordered then to
dispute, but to give in my Answer to the Questions in writing, which answer was
but short, and might have been quick dispatched: Some reasoning yet there was
among us about the Questions, but with the greatest confusion that might be,
there being sometimes three, and sometimes four, and sometimes more, speaking
unto me at the same time, and challenging me to dispute, many using
reproachful language (especially young M. Dolman) against me, and some blows
threatened me, which had I not been a Minister (as they said) I should have
felt, but the company ashamed to hear such language from one in authority,
they salved it up with this excuse, that if I had been a Soldier I should have
had the censure of an offending Soldier: Another of no mean command (fiery
indeed in zeal, but without knowledge) haling me with violence by the arm,
said the devil was in me, and afterward openly professed by his consent, I
should be rewarded with fire and faggot, for which cause the people called him
Bonner, as himself acknowledged in my hearing in the Committee Room, besides
diverse of the Ministers, once a Cavalier, taken in Arms against the Parliamen,
seen reel in the streets through drunkenness, having now his freedom, openly
jeering me, the like I confess I never met with, but from Bishop Skinner of
Bristol, of whom I suffered very much.

In conclusion, a writing was drawn up by consent among them to this effect (a
Copy whereof I was not permitted by any means to have) that I had divulged
certain erroneous opinions, in which at a conference, I had given them no
satisfaction, Whereas the questions in controversy, were of their own
divulging, and for satisfaction, I am persuaded, I have given it in my answer,
to this writing many subscribed, with what willingness I will not dispute,
though some much stuck at it, that afterward submitted to it, the door being
purposely shut, and none suffered to go forth till he had subscribed, which
some suspecting refused to be there, this subscription many of all forts
present refused, and for it were much reproached, nay, threatened; the reason of
this subscription was, their resolution through the help of the Governor, as
was openly professed thereto send me up to the Parliament or Assembly the next
day: to whom indeed I had appealed, and do yet appeal to them, and all
faithful men, for a justification of the doctrine, I had either taught or
writ. Thereupon it was told them that refused to subscribe, that a Declaration
was expected from them of the reasons why, the principal men refusing to
subscribe were Master Joanes of Herefordshire, one of the Committee for
Gloucester, Master Alderman Hill of that City, Master Close an ancient grave
Minister, Master Majoh an honest Lawyer, Master Ketchman a Gentleman, and
diverse others.

Afterward there was much contention and mighty reasoning among persons of all
conditions about the matters in controversy, some affirming one thing, and
some another, according as they did apprehend, but the manner of the carriage
of this business was generally complained of, affirming their proceedings
against me were neither Christian nor justifiable by the law of civil
society, and this Master Shepherd himself confessed at the evening of that day,
and therefore told me he could have wished it had been otherwise; yet he with
the Major of the City in the evening, privately in the Committee room, spent a
long time in persuading me to depart that place, affirming, that if I were the
most orthodox Preacher in England, I were not a fit man for Gloucester, which to
me seemed very strange, that orthodox preaching, or which is all one, a
Preacher that is orthodox, should be a burden too heavy for Gloucester to
bear, yet this position of theirs, an ancient man belonging to the Committee
(if I mistake not, it was the father of M. Holford the Minister) illustrated by
a story and similitude of a Gentleman that had a very good woman to his wife,
which yet he would often say, was no blessing at all unto him: so I might be a
Preacher good enough, and have esteem elsewhere, but if I should stay in
Gloucester, I should be no blessing at all unto it, I was indeed willing to
depart, but for diverse reasons at that time I could not, neither indeed was it,
as the case stood, meet I should: for then it might have been truly said, that
I had deserted mine own cause, or rather Christ's, in turning my back upon the
Doctrine I taught, as if it had not been true and warrantable by the
Scriptures. They therefore not prevailing with me: On the next Lords day there
came an Order from the Governor, directed to the several Ministers, to be
read in the pulpit after Sermon, to this purpose as I remember, that whereas
some doubted of the approvednesse of their proceedings in my two last
appearances before the next day, satisfaction in that as likewise in the
questions that were put to Master Bacon, should be given before all the people
at the College, in a public disputation, which should begin about eight of
the clock, while the Psalm was in singing the Governors man came to me,
hearing Master Heart, and gave me warning to appear the next morning at the
College. What was intended I knew not well, or whereunto this would grow, and
therefore with many thoughts of heart, which lodged with me that night, I came
the next day at the time and place appointed where the Governor and Master
Brummidge of the Committee newly come to town, with much courtesy spoke to me
and engaged themselves to protect me from slander and wrong, which the one
heard, and the other saw, I formerly sustained, the people of all sorts being
come together to a great multitude, I being disposed of by the Governor in the
Quire, to stand opposite to mine opponent Master Corbet, who stood on the
otherside: the Governor, Committee, Major, and other chief men in the midst by
a table set there to that end. At my elbow there stood a Marshall with his
Holbert (though I confess, I did not observe it) of purpose if it might be to
daunt me, as I afterward heard, but God was with me, and through his power
mine adversaries fell before me, the Disputation continued from eight till
wel-nigh or altogether one, to the great contentment and satisfaction of the
believing and more sober-minded people, because there was clcered before them,
the objections made against me, that mine innocence now appeared even to the
convincing of those that led away by others opinion had before a prejudice
against me, this the standers by can witness, but the discontent that appeared
even in the faces of mine opposers was very remarkable, that Master Corbet
himself confessed, before all the people, that it had been better they had
never begun such a task as this, for the people will run said he after him
much more then before, so the last error shall be worse then the first, this
he spoke when he saw the people give audience with respect to what I said,
and therefore complained of it to the Governor, but with no success. For the
evidence of the truth, had for the present struck a deep silence in all my
opposers, which yet increased the envy against me: for some were that day
complained of by witnesses, that they had vowed to be the death of me; this day
only five of those ten Questions were made an end of, the other five left to
the next day, but many thought, and I with them, that that field would nere be
pitched again, because of their so great disappointment the day before, as also
because the remaining part of M. Corbets reply was far less to the purpose
then that which had gone before, it containing little else then invectives
against my person, which could not but have an ill savor in such an audience;
yet the next day we came together again, where the advantage I had in respect
of the matter in Controversy was much lost to me, in respect of the
discountenance that was given me, as all present might most evidently observe,
which gave oceasion to Master Cartwright, Treasurer (as I take it) of that
Garrison to upbraid them publicly of partiality, for which he was bid to depart
by Master Broughton, though by the Governor he was afterward persuaded to
stay it out, yet God upheld me in this conflict also, that in conclusion no
error or miseariage whatsoever could be fastened upon me, the Committee being
judge, in the name of which I suppose, Master Brummidge, who was principal in
the management of this business, drawing up carefully the result of each days
Dispute, gave the whole Assembly notice that there was nothing proved against
me, but what was according to the Orthodox opinion, but this would not give
mine accusers satisfaction, and therefore Master Corbet with much vehemence
exclaimed that I had another meaning, whereunto it was gravely, though in other
words replied, that my meaning could not be judged in that Court, it being said
by M. Brummidge its beyond our power, to judge any man for his meaning; but
because nothing of fact could be proved, I must suffer for my meaning. And
therefore the Ministers that afternoon got themselves into a Committee, from
which were excluded by consent Master Heart and Master Close, two grave and
approved men, beside some others that did exclude themselves in, which it was
very suddenly agreed upon, that of necessity I must depart the City, and give
place to them, or else (as it was given out) they themselves would leave the
City, wherefore to gratify them (as it is under the hand of some of the
Committee) there was brought an Order to me by the Governors Clerk, wherein I
was enjoined the next day to depart the City, that they might reign as Kiugs
there, as Paul speaks of those in Corinth, that took upon them in the like
manner: but I must submit, for they had a law to condemn me, though they first
openly judged me innocent. Of this order I very earnestly desired a Copy (which
they say will be granted in any Court in England) but by special command, it
was denied me, only I might see it, and read it, but take no copy of it, this
I desired, that I might have to show the reasons of my forced departure, not
obtaining it from the messenger, I applied my self to the Committee by way of
Petition, wherein I made bold to lay at their feet certain considerations to
move them, either to reverse their first Order, or give me a Copy of it,
together with reasons why otherwise I could not actively obey, but must
passively undergo, what they thought meet to inflict, which I presented with my
own hands: But there was after some consultation a second writing drawn up
(there being two members of the Committee more now in Town then before) by the
major part of the Committee, some of them denying their consent, wherein they
did desire me to obey their first Order, a copy of which. I could not procure.
I stayed two days after this in Town, intending rather to suffer imprisonment
there, then to expose my self to inevitable dangers abroad, in which time I
had diverse messagessent to me from the Governor by several Officers and
Soldiers to depart, and some grievous threatenings given me, to all which I
gave answer, that when I had horse and other conveniences, opportunity of
company, and a Certificate that I might pass safely, I would be gone,
whereupon on Saturday in the same week about two of the clock in the afternoon
there came unexpectedly the Captain Lieutenant of the Governors troop, with a
party of horse to the door of my lodging, when they came in to me, they told me
they were sorry that it fell on them to be employed in such a service, yet
being under command they must obey, and the word of command they had from the
Governor, they said, was, that I without delay must go with them, to whom I
replied, since it is so, I shall yield my self to God, and you, to be disposed of,
as the Governor had given them command, wherefore immediately taking my leave
of Wife and Friends, I went with them, but finding some dislike with the horse
appointed for me, the Captain Lieutenant, as also Captain Massy then
Governor of Sudely Castle (to which place I was appointed that night) engaged
themselves I should have the best horse could be got in town for me, and they
did accordingly furnish me with an able horse, which they put into my hands;
this party which the Captain Lieutenant commanded, had me three miles out of
town, where he left me, with the horse appointed for me, to the guidance of
the head Corporal of the troop, and one trooper more, both honest men, to
bring me safely to Sudely Castle that night, which they did, though it was
reported I should have come there in the company of the Governor of the
Castle, but he stayed behind, and came not home till somewhat later in the
night, but being there, I was very courteously entertained by him and his
Lieutenant, and preached there upon request the next day in the afternoon,
being the Lords day: The Monday morning the Governor of the Castle gave
command to the Corporal and Trooper to go with, and guide me safe to Warwick,
leaving the horse still in my hands, whence being brought in the way some
miles, by the Lieutenant of the Castle the next day betimes in the morning we
came safe to Warwick, where after some refreshing my two Guides left me, having
a command to go so far and no farther; of whom I demanded what should be done
with the horse, they told me, they had no order concerning it, but told me it
was in my disposal, in so much that they did endeavor to exchange it for me,
because it went very hard, but this I kept, and after a while rod on it to
London, where I kept it a while, till it was laid claim to by the wife of
Colonel Okey, to whom after a certificate from Gloucester from the Captain
there, I delivered, this I mention in all the particulars of it, because some
in Gloucester (that they might glory in, and increase my reproach) gave out that
I went about to defraud them of the horse, which notwithstanding was put into
my hands, with no hint of returning it, yea, it was often told me by the
Officers and Soldiers, the Governor had given it me, which if it had been, it
could not have countervailed the damage I sustained in that place: This is a
true Relation, God is witness, and the consciences of those that were (as
there were many) present.

A Copy of the Letter I presented to Colonel Massy Governor of Gloucester,
July, 1644. being suspended from preaching there, by Master Web, then Major of
the City, upon the information of M. Marshall, as M. Holford reported, but upon
the entreaty of M. Holford, as the Major himself told me in the Committee
room; I had my liberty by this Letter, which was as follows.
Most Honored Sir,
LEt the just request of the meanest of the servants of Christ be accepted of
you, whose person and Doctrine scandalized, by either the malice or mis-underst
anding of some, whereby his freedom in the Ministry (which he has exercised
with a good conscieuce, and with the approbation of many wise and Godly of
almost all degrees, well nigh this eight or ten years, excepting one quarters
suffering by the now suppressed Prelates immediately before this so desired
Parliament began, and this last three quarters banishment, into which he was
driven through the loss of Bristol, in which time, as many of note can
witness, be has not behaved himself unseently) has been stopped here, even
where he conceived to receive both countenance and encouragement, being as deep
in this Cause, both in respect of his endeavor to further it, and his losses
sustained for it, as any of his quality whatsoever: He humbly requests, either
his liberty in the exercise of his Ministry, or that his opposers that hinder
may be known, that his Doctrine which is dearer to him than his life, may by
him be cleared to be orthodox, and witnessed unto by all the Scriptures, and
particularly by all the reformed Churches, in the number of which we profess
our selves to be, and this he knows, through the power of Christ, he shall be
able to do. Though with all submission to your Honors wisdom, he conceives
there not being any Ecclesiastical power settled, of Ministers meddle to
suppress others (I speak not of those in the Assembly) they do it uncalled,
though I count it most meet and Christian (in the things within your Sphere) to
lay myself at your feet, in whom the sole government of this Garrison is most
worthily and most succesfully entrusted, yet humbly expecting shelter and
public liberty in the preaching of the Word, if opportunity be given, there
being not any reasons to the contrary according to justice proved yet against
one especially since at the times are, I have not elsewhere comfortably to
subsist, I mean in the Ministry, which I labor by all me an still death to
magnify, and I see many Churches empty, and the people in many places woefully
untaught, I pray God it be not laid to the charge of those, who, I know not
upon what pretence^, ^inder it: But I willingly submit my self to your just
power, praying for the increase of your most admired success and honor, which
is gone almost all the world over. And thus, most Noble Sir, I rest,

Your Honors servant, in the blessed Gospel, Robert Bacon.


The ten Questions propounded to me on the Lords Day after Evening Sermon in
the Governors Chamber, in the presence of many Citizens, Soldiers, Ministers,
etc. July 1644.
1 WHether the Moral Law be abrogated? Neg. 2 Whether good works be a means to
obtein salvation? Neg. 3 Whether God be displeased with his people that are in
Christ, for their sins, we mean such a people as are in the Covenant of Grace?
Neg. 4 Whether those in the Covenant of grace, are to try their justification
by their sanctification? Affir. 5 Whether faith be a Condition of the New
Covenant? Neg. 6 Whether godly sorrow for sin be required in such a one a^ is
in the New Covenant? Affir. 7 Whether Confession of sin (i.e.) of our original
corruption, and of our sinful actions, reckoning them up before the Lord be
required in a Christian? Affir. 8 Whether you hold Communion with the Church of
England (i.e.) in our Parochial Assemblies to be lawful? Neg. 9 Whether
Repentance be necessary [to] the forgivenes of sins? Neg. 10 Whether there be a
real change in the person that is saved? Affir.
These Questions were so proposed by us.

Johan. Holford. Williel. Hodges. John Corbet.
And thus answered by Master Bacon.

Though indeed forcedly, and somewhat otherwise then upon due consideration, he
would have done, there being not sufficient time given to consider of them, and
therefore they were subscribed only thus on condition, that afterward time
might be given, in writing to make out my understanding of them.

On the Wednesday morning following, betwixt eight and nine of clock, in the
room where the Council of War was kept, I delivered into the hands of the
Governor, Colonel Massy, (where were present as before, many Gentlemen,
Soldiers, Citizens, Ministers of Town and Country, besides the Committee and
Major of the City): this Answer in these words following word for word.

To the most Noble Governor of Gloucester, and the Honorable Committee of
Parliament in Gloucester. An Answer.
TO those ten Questions, which by the authority of the most Noble Governor of
Gloucester, (John Holford, William Hodges, John Corbet Ministers propounded) by
whose sole authority I answer, in some of which Questions we agree as in the
first, fourth, sixth, seventh, tenth, in the rest we differ, at least in
expression: I have answered briefly to them all, as the Lord gave me time and
knowledge, and as I was able lying under so many pressures and reproaches, which
God in due time will remove (I know) in the mean time there is need of
patience; my Answer is as follows.

1 Whether the Moral Law be abrogated? Neg.
For,

1 The Law moral was revealed from Heaven, of God himself on Mount Sinay, and
therefore in that consideration to be had in high honor and account of all.

2 Its part of the holy Scriptures, and therefore never to be slighted, but
highly to he regarded by the whole Church of God.

3 It is the very image of God, so that by the Law moral, we may see the
holiness and righteousness of God.

4. Christ himself was shadowed forth in the Law, for by the law we see what
a one Christ is, and was to be, even such a one, as has as much righteousness
as the Law requires.

5 All the world shall be judged by it at the last day.

6 The Law in the hand of a Mediator is the rule of life, for what the law does
command in the letter without, that the law of the spirit of life, does work
within, which is therefore called the law of faith, or the law of Christ,
or the law written in the heart.

7 Those that believe in Jesus walk more freely and more constantly in the
things contained in, and enjoined by the law, then they that are altogether
under the law, and without Christ.

8 The law is exceeding useful to take luen off from that damnable opinion of
their own righteousness.

2 Whether good works be a means to obtein salvation? Neg.
1 I do altogether reject this expression, as most unsavorie and unbesteming
the Protestant Religion.

2 Yet, I affirm, that it is as impossible to divide good works from faith, I
mean, that which is saving, as it is to divide the light from the Sun, or heat
from the fire, for says the Apostle, We are created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, which God has prepared that we should walk in them.

3 To affirm that good works are a means to obtein salvation, is in effect to
deny, that Christ is the only means to obtein salvation, for Salvation is by
Christ only. Act. 4.12.

3 Whether God be displeased with his people that are in Christ for their sins,
Gods well pleased with us [in Christ] and therefore (which is opposite) not
displeased with us [in him,] besides, our sins are done away [in him,] (ergo)
not displeased with us for sin [in him [to be in a covenant of grace or favor
and yet to be even in that covenant under disfavour or displeasure, seems to me
a contradiction.
we mean such a people as are in the Covenaut of Grace. Neg.
1 When we affirm that God is displeased, or is angry, we all confess that it
is spoken after the manner of men, for God is not subject to passion as men
are, only through our weakness we do so think, and therefore the Scriptures
so speak.

2 Even when we are chastned of the Lord, it is an argument of his love, and
not of his displeasure, and therefore the Apostle says, Whons the Lord loves
he chastreth, the Philosopher would not beat his servant in anger, and if it
be condemned in men why should it be affirmed of God, Fathers and mas^ers for
a few days, chastned us after their own pleasure, but he for our profit, that
we might be partakers of his holiness.

3 It Is most peremptorily to be affirmed that God hates sin in whomsoever it
is, even in his own Son, though it was not his, but ours, and therefore also he
must needs hate it in his own children.

4 So far forth as the children of God live off from Christ, and walk unworthy
of the Gospel, so far forth they lie under sense of wrath, in so much as the
Apostle says, He scourges every son he loves: it is not the will of God, nay,
it is impossible that a man should have peace in the ways of sin, then the
devils and wicked men might have peace, from whom the way of peace is hid.

5 There are but two vvayes the one of sin, and so of death and sorrovv, even
when the Saints walk in that way, they have no more peace, nay, for the
present not so much, as the wicked have, and they have no true peace at all. 2
The way of wisdom, Prove. 3.17. Whose ways are ways of pleasantness, and all
her paths are peace, who so walks in that way, and so far forth as he walks in
that way, shall never want peace.

6 So there are two ways by which God has made himself known in the
Scriptures, and is known at this day among men: The first is by the Law only,
so the natural man knows God and no otherwise so that so far forth as he keeps
the Law, so far forth he apprehends he pleases God, i.e. as he looks upon him
in the law; and again, so far as he comes short of obedience to the Law, so far
he apprehends he displeases God, as he is known in the Law i.e. out of Christ,
and it is so as he apprehends. 2 God has made known himself to us in Christ,
and so he is well pleased with us in him, Mat. 3.17. (...), in whom I amwell
pleased, to this all the Scriptures bear witness, Whom he loves, he loves
unto the end, for he loves them for Christ's sake, and not for their own and
loves them as much at one time as at another, now Christ for whose sake God
loves us, is yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, and therefore so
must needs Gods love to us be in him: God forbid that we should affirm that
God is up and down with us in his love, indeed a man, yea, a believer, to the
dishonor of God, does too frequently think so, but his thoughts are not as
our thoughts, only it is most true, that through sin the soul is sometimes so
clouded, and misted, that it cannot see its way to God, neither the light of
his countenance shining upon him, but apprehends himself under wrath, judging
himself by the Law, as he cannot easily otherwise do, for as Luther speaks,
it is no easy thing to apply Christ and his righteousness, and Gods love to
us in him at such a time: So far as natural we judge our selves by the Law,
but so far as spiritual we see our selves accepted of God in Christ, by the
Law we see our selves lost, by Christ revealed in the Gospel we see our selves
justified, by the first we are sinners, by the second righteous, this is judged
orthodox by Luther, and I am persuaded by all other so ber men.

7 As for our persons, God loved us when we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for
us when we were enemies, therefore, being reconciled, (...)
we shall be saved from wrath through him (that is) from that anger, as the
word from the Original may be read, meaning from that wrath or anger which was
due unto us by the Law, and therefore he adds in that Romans 5.11. Not only so,
but we boast or joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have
received the atonement, in so much that Doctor Sibbs affirms, that a man well
acquainted with the doctrine of reconciliation to God in Christ, may even go
singing to heaven.

8 I have used the more words about this question, because the manner of the
proposal, I confess, is not so warrantable by the Scriptures, therefore when
it was delivered thus (Whether God be displeased with the sins of his people.)
I affirmed it, but being thus delivered, I denied it, least it should be
thought, that God, with whom there is no variableness, or shadow of change,
should be unconstant in his love to his elect, whom he has chosen to himself
in Christ.

4 Whether those in the Covenant of Grace are to try their justification by
their sanctification? Affir.
For,

1 No man knows his justification, till he finds in himself in some measure
of sanctification or holiness, (i.e.) that seed of God which John says abides
in him that is borne of God, 1 John 3.9. For what is done without a man, in
foro Coeli (as they speak) in the high Court of heaven, that is done in time
within, in foro conscientiae, in the lower Court of our own consciences, by the
spirit of Christ which is given unto us: now where the spirit of Christ is,
there are the fruits of the spirit, and the fruit of the spirit is, in all
goodness, and righteousness and truth, yea, and much assurance, 1 These. 1.5.

2 But to affirm, when I do some good actions, I must believe my
justification, and when I fail in some actions (as who fails not) I must
suspect my justification, and so to measure my justification, by my acts of
sanctification, and works which I have done, I do utterly deny, as tending to
overthrow the most glorious doctrine of justification, for in time of
temptation, I see nothing but sin and death, at such a time, against hope I
believe in hope, that I am justified, and that is the height and glory of
faith, as Luther admirably speaks.

3 Yet this I profess, The more a man is assured of his justification, the
more he does abound in all the ways and works of justsication, and holiness.

5 Whether Faith be a condition of the new Covenant? Neg.
For,

1 This is one difference betwixt the Covenant of works, and the Covenant of
Grace, the one promises life upon condition, the other gives it of free
promise, the first commands much, and gives nothing, but blows upon default,
the other commands no more then it gives.

2 We are not, required to the ratification of the Covenant, to bring faith to
God, It goes indeed for current among many, that faith is the condition of the
New Covenant, but how many inconveniences comes in thereby, experience shows:
Some learned men therefore judge it to my knowledge, more meet to call it a
branch of the New Covenant. Faith in the New Covenant is the work of God, John
6. it being indeed a work meet for God, but infinitely too hard for man,
therefore the gift of God. Ephesians. 2.8.
but the Covenant is to give us faith to bring us to God, so that faith is a
branch of the new Covenant; for if God should stay to make good his Covenant
till we bring faith to the Covenant, the Covenant would be of none effect,
therefore the Covenant does not depend upon our believing, but upon Gods
promise and faithfulness: If we believe not, yet he abides faithful, and
cannot deny himself. 2 Timothy 2.13.

3 In the new Covenant God ties himself, and not the creature, we are in his
keeping, and not our own, or else our condition were now, as it was before in
Adam, which no Christian will affirm, only faith is urged in the ministry of
the Gospel, and in urging of it, it is given to them that shall be saved,
because no man is justified in his conscience before God, till be does believe.

6 Whether godly sorrow for sin be required in such a one, as is in the New
Covenant? Affir.
For,

1 It is by all means to be required in case of sin, of one in the Covenant of
grace, such a one, in such a case, is by all kinds of arguments to be exhorted
thereunto.

2 Sorrow of its self is not to be urged upon him, therefore the Apostle says,
I rejoiced not that ye were made sorry: but that sorrow which the Apostle
calls (...), or godly sorrow, sorrow according to godliness, is by all means
in the case above said to be pressed, and therefore the Apostle does in effect
affirm, that he did rejoice that they sorrowed, (...), to repentance, which he
opens in the next words, Ye sorrowed, says he, (...), according to God, or
after a godly manner: Now in what the Apostle rejoiced, we also may rejoice in,
in the behalf of others.

3 Yet, I utterly deny it in this sense, as if it were so required, that the
Covenant of grace did depend upon it, we do it not to that end, but because
the Covenant is immutable, and cannot but be fulfilled, therefore we do it,
for it is a part of the Covenant to lead us out unto it, therefore that may be
the understanding of that phrase of godly sorrow, because it is the work of God
in us.

7 Whether confession of sin (i.e.) of our original corruption, and of our
sinful actions, reckoning them up before the Lord, be required in a Christian?
Affir.
For,

1 This I have taught publicly, and therefore need not speak more, the words
in effect were these, Pharisees and Plypocrites may confess their sinful
actions, but they are not wont to confess their sinfulness, but the Saints
confess not only their sinful actions, but also their sinfulness, they do
not only see their actions unclean, but their very natures, and do bewail
their natures more then their actions, because their evil natures are those
corrupt Fountains, whence flow these soul streams.

2 The confession of the Saints is grounded upon the knowledge of Gods love in
Christ, but the confession of Hypocrites is upon some other information and
grounds.

8 How difficult it is to decermine what the Church of England is, we may learn
from Smectymnius.
Whether you hold communion with the Church of England? (i.e.) in our
parochial Assemblies to be lawful? Neg.
1 It is a matter that concerns discipline, and that This was given in answer,
July 1644
question is not yet resolved upon in the Kingdom, That every Parish Affembly,
should bear the name of the Church of England seems strange to me, for many
Parishes know not what the Church of England means. 2 Though there may be
Churches in many Parishes in England, yet they are not Churches as Parishes, or
Parishes, and therefore Churches: Parishes, as is confessed, are but of late, and
hamane invention, but by the Church of England, (I suppose) is understood,
either all the people in England, as they are by law enjoined to confess the
same Doctrine, and practice the same Discipline, and in this sense the Church
of England, especially in respect of discipline, is ceasing, or ceased, to be
what it was, therefore by the Church of England I hold it safest to understand
all, of all conditions, that have indeed faith toward our Lord Jesus, and so
are the Church of God in the eye of God, and are of a suitable conversation
toward men in practice, and God in profession, of this Church I rejoice that I
am a member, and with it delight to have communion.
the work of reformation is not finished, and scarce at all begun in some
places and Parishes.

2 For ought I know the people have not repented them of their false worships,
and that abominable prostituting themselves to the will and ways of the
Prelates, for which the Land, polluted with so much Idolatry, Atheism, and
profaneness, is now even made drunk with blood.

3 Yet I shall have communion with any people, in any Assembly, so far as
reformed according to the Word of God.

9 Whether Repentance be necessary [To] (i.e.) To bring in Repentance, a^ the
word apparently sounds.
the remission of Sins? Neg.
1 It is an unsavory, unsafe, and unsound expression, Repentance is either
legal or Evangelicall as M. Perkins and others distinguish: Now legal
repentance in these days of the increase of knowledge, is confessedly not
necessary to the remission of sins, the unreasonable urging of it, is
acknowledged to be one cause that rendered the Ministry heretofore so
unprofitable, requiring qualifications, to prepare for Christ, men conceiving
themselves to have ability to furnish themselves so, as to be judged meet, even
of God himself, to give entertainment to his Son. Now the Question is
understood of this sort of repentance, I suppose, by them that proposed it,
which gave me occasion so to express my self in the first Sect. But if they
meant Evangelicall tepentance, yet remission of sins mnst needs precede, for
remissio of sins cannot be the wages of repentance as it seems to be, if it did
go before: This is then the order. 1 The Gospel is preached, the sum of which,
is the remission of sins. Then 2 It is recived in the Spirit through believing.
3 Then comes (...) The change of the mind, repentance toward God, as a fruit
of faith in the Lord Jesus, in the which change of mind there are ever these
four things. 1 A right knowledge and high esteem of God. 2 A right knowledge
and high account of Christ, as the only way to God, to find acceptance with
him. 3 A right understanding of our selves, as loved of, and reconciled to God
in Christ. 4 A right understanding and infinite loathing of our selves, as we
are in our selves, denying and abhorring our selves, and sins, the world and
things below, for Christ's sake.
bordering nigh unto, if not altogether agreeing with that of Bellarmine, who
affirms that repentance is a way unto faith, and justification in the remission
of sins, which Master Willet in his Synopsis, in his fourteenth general
controversy of Popish penance confutes.

2 Repentance is not before remission of sins, as this question imports, for
that which is necessary to remission of sins, must be before remission of sins,
is, as we must walk in the way, before we come to the journies end: now
repentance is not the way to remission of sins as Willet against Bellarmine
proves, but the fruit of remission of sins, for remission of sins is in order
of nature before repentance, as all orthodox men I think confess, though both
at the same time in every true believer.

3 There is no remission of sins believed, after which, or rather upon which,
does not follow true repentance: yet remission of sins does not depend upon
repentance, but repentance upon remission of sins.

10 Whether there be a real change in the person that is saved? Affir.
This I have both publicly and privately cleared and proved, and shall yet
further clear and prove when God shall open a way again unto me.

Thus much for the present, I conceive, as touching these perticulars, wherein
I have spoken (my conscience bearing me witness in the holy Ghost) what I
understand to be the mind of God in holy Scriptures, and the judgment of the
Orthodox Churches at this day, and this not as pleasing men but God, referring
my self to all the godly learned, all the World over, for judgment herein.

What ever are the apprehensions of men concerning me, as they are very various
and strange, neither in word or deed, no, not in thought, have I intended, or
showed any disrepect to any man, as far as I know, that differs from me in
judgment, but have behaved my self with all good Conscience, both toward God
and men, I can speak no more then I know, neither shall I willingly speak less.

My humble request to all the Saints and Ministers of God is, that, whereunto
we have attained, we may walk by the same rule, for it is impossible that we
should in all things, and in all circumstances, be of the same mind, therefore
let us not by any means oppress each others spirit, for no man can well speak
more then he knows, or confess more then he believes: let the words of the
Apostle be always sounding in our ears, as if he were now speaking unto us,
as he was sometimes to the Romans, Romans 12.3. I say, through the grace given
to me, to every man that is among you, not to think of himself more highly
then he ought to think, (...), but to think to sobriety according as God has
dealt to every man the measure of faith: which rule if neglected, it is
impossible there should be peace, not only in the World, but even in the
Church, for there are diversities of apprehensions, even of the same things,
every one speaking according to the measure of the gift of Christ.

If this do not satisfy, I expect mine Opponents answer in writing, because
they are many, and I in a manner alone, besides, litera script a manet, yet
afterward I shall not refuse conference with any, that shall with meekness
desire it:

July 16, 1644. Robert Bacon.


The Wednesday following the two public disputes held in the College, there
was sent an Order (after that some of the Ministers had been in consultation
together) from some of the Committee, who had the day before publicly taken
off the charge of error M. Cerbet and others laid against me, (in which also
they did acquit me as from the matter of error yet enjoined me therein to
depart the next day, a copy of which I could not get, neither could then
actively obey: I humbly presented to them my reasons, which were, word, for
word, as follows.

To the Honorable Committee of Parliament, in Gloucester.
Honorable,
WHereas I have seen an Order agreed upon by some of the Committee, that I am
to depart this City to morrow, being Thursday, the five and twentieth of this
instant month, not to reside in any Garrison of this County, or under the
command of the Governonr of Gloucester, wherein if I fail, I am to expect
punishment from the Committee, I humbly crave leave to lay at your feet, these
following Considerations.

1 I have suffered in the cause of the Parliament, the loss of above four
hundred pounds in money and goods, unless I can recover it again in the time
of peace, so that I expect in justice, from the honorable Parliament (I
contiraring faithful unto them as I shall through the help of God, till
death) liberty and livelihood under their protection, which I beg for at your
hands, their representative, here.

2 I have not wherewithal, neither can I possibly with the safety and health
of my person depart so suddenly from this Garrison.

3 This I know, that if I fall into the hands of the Kings forces, unless God
does mightily deliver me, will endanger the taking away of my life by them, for
God is witness, and many men, how I have endeavored by all means to further
the cause of the Parliament, against them.

4 By this Order it cannot otherwise appear, but that I am put out of the
City as a Malignant, which if I am apprehended, so to be, I am infinitely
vvronged, for I never entertained the least thought of disrespect against the
Parliament.

5 I have behaved my self, both before, and since I came to the City, with all
good conscience, both toward God and men, saying, no other thing, but
witnessing both to small, and great, what Christ, the Apostles, and Martyrs,
and our first Reformers witnessed, and all the Protestant Churches, at this
day.

6 I am not such a stranger, but I am known to many of good report in the
City, besides, I have lived till after Bristoll was taken, a public Preacher,
in, and about that City (which is not far from this) eight or nine years.

7 Whether it be not an infringing of the liberty of the subject, to thrust me
out of the City for matters of Religion, especially, when all that have been
spoken or written by me, is in appearance truth, as is confessed, no error
proved against me, though many suspected, my heart and thoughts being judged,
when my actions are without offense.

8 Whether mercy be not to be mingled with justice, that I be not forced to
depart from my dear and loving wife (a woman of good birth and quality)
especially now she is near that perilous time of child-birth-bearing, grief,
by reason of my forced departure (she being but a vveak woman) may hasten her
death, especially in such a case.

9 Whether there be not an offense taken, and not given, by my preaching and
conversation, as is usual, at the power and truth of the Gospel.

10 Yet, if I must be put out of town, I humbly beg a Copy of the Order, that
I may have, to show the reasons why, and that I may have some longer time to
prepare for so long a journey, for whether to go but to the City of London, I
know not, and that I may take the next opportunity for company.

Lastly, for the justification of my innocence, person, and doctrine, I refer
my self to the tribunal of Gods justice and this most Honorable Parliament:
desiring God to forgive the malice and ignorance of mine enemies. And thus I
humbly take my leave, and rest,

Your Honors servant in the blessed Gospel: R. BACON.


A Copy of the Order sent me after the giving in this Petition.
WE the Gentlemen of the Committee, gave out our Order, upon a serious debate,
not by our selves (as according to our instructions, we might have done) but
with the ingredients and consult of many godly and learned Ministers; by both
parties, and upon emergent reasons our votes were concluded, and (in a more
civil manner then Master Bacon deserved) were sent unto him; yet, although he
has rather arraigned then entreated the Committee for an alteration of our
judgments, we are resolved not to alter our commands, as rather engaged to
gratify so many Orthodox Divines in this business then his fancy; the
passages we have received from his hands, we hold more sit to be transmitted to
the Parliament, as a greater abuse to their Ordinance, then an offense to our
persons; and therefore desire Master Bacon will be obedient to our former
Order, rather then put us upon a second course, which we not so much desire as
he deserves.

What affinity some passages in this Order have with that in the Revel. 17.13.
those that have wisdom from above, may consider. Besides, who to judge the
most godly and orthodox Ministers in these days of Controversy, is doubtless,
somewhat more difficult then is by most supposed, otherwise these glorious
(that I say not vainglorious titles (as godly, learned, orthodox,) would not
have been so confidently put upon these Ministers, whose doctrinall assertion
is most Heterodox, to name but that under their own hands, that by good works
we obtein salvation, and whose practice in this was far enough from being
godly, to undermine their brother, and seek his ruin, to establish
themselves, not rendering him, no not the Magistrate himself, a just reason why.

I shall here insert (as an acknowledgment of the sympathy of a faithful
Friend, and Minister of the Gospel) these few lines, which he in verse sent my
wife, to support her in her solitarines, and my forced departure.
Possess your soul in patience, Christ does reign,
His r^d shall feed, his staff shall you sustain,
Is husband gone? do friends begin to hind?
Let not your heart be sad, God will provide,
Life, livelihood, friends, husband, and withal:
Increase of honor, shall succeed your fall:
Pass by the frowns of men, contemn their scorn,
Be not dismayed with bonds, you are free born,
All things are subject unto Christ, and he,
Commands them at his pleasure, therefore we,
Of safety may be sure, Christ for us is,
No power, or hate, can hurt, those that are his.
The spark that was blown up into so great a flame against me, was my public
reprehension of a certain pretended plaster for a Sin-sick Soul, as being in
it self contradictory, and repugnant to that of the Lords own prescribing, of
which I spoke from Jeremy the 32.6. which is made up of those two sweet and
saving salves, Truth and Peace, both which as the Psalmist speaks, but in a
little different language, kiss each other in Christ, as also in them that are
Christ's, but because I mentioned faith and repentance, which are two of those
more then twenty other ingredients in this Mountebanke medicine, some, whether
inconsideratly or enviously, or both, I will not determine, reported, that I
denied Faith and Repentance, but let the Assembly, or others judge, whether the
Author of this Medicine, speak not rather the language of Rome, then Canaan,
whether he be not rather a stranger, then a homebred Protestant, deceiving
the people, feeding them with husks, under the specious names of the Crumbs of
Comfort, there being evidently in it, not only that which is popish, false,
and erroneous, but that which renders Religion, and the Mystery of God
ridiculous; a copy of which, that all may judge, is here inscribed.

A special Remedy, for a Sin-sick Soul.
FIrst, 1 Fast and Pray, In a book called the Crumbs of Comfort.
2 and then take a quart of Repentance of Nineve, and 3 put in two handfuls of
faith 4 in the blood of Christ, with as much 5 Hope and 6 Charity as you can
get, and put it into a Vessel of 7 a clean Conscience, 8 then boil it in the
fire of love, 9 so long till you see by the Eyes of Faith, the black foam of
the love of this World stink in your stomach, 10 then scum it off clean,
with the Spoone of faithful Prayers, when this is done, 11 put in the Powder
of Patience, and 12 take the Cloth of Christ's Innocence, 13 and strain
altogether in his Cup, 14 then drink it burning hot next thy heart, 15 and
cover thee warm with as many clothes of the Amendment of life, as God shall
strengthen and enable thee to bear, that 16 thou may sweat out all the
poison of Covetousness, Pride, Whoredom, Idolatry, Usury, Swearing, Lying,
with such like, 17 and when thou feel thy self altered from the forenamed
vices. Take 18 the Powder of Say-well, and put it upon thy tongue, 19 but
drink thrice as much,
do well daily, 20 Then take the Oil of good works, and anoint therewith thine
eyes, ears, heart and hands that they may be ready and nimble to minister to
the poor members of Christ, when this is done, then in Gods name, 21 rise from
sin willingly, 22 read in the Bible daily, take up the Cross of Christ
boldly, 24 and stand to it manfully, 25 bear all visitations patiently, 26 Pray
continually, 27 Rest thankefully, and thou shall live everlastingly, and come
to the hill of joy quickly, to to which place hasten us good Lord speedily.

A POSTCRIPT, Containing some general and particular Observations upon M.
Edwards his Gangraena.
1 General.
MAster Edwards with the help of others, that load to his mill, seeks to
fasten reproach upon the persons of those, whose faces he never saw, and the
errors he charge on them, he cannot prove, yet his aim, and perhaps, the
issue of his calumnies, may prove to this Nation, or to many in it, of as
dangerous, and as dreadful consequence, as was the insinuation of the
Highpriests and Pharisees against Christ, his person, Doctrine, conversation,
followers, to the Jewish Nation, and many in it: for to this day, that people
judge, as these men reported, that Christ was an Imposter, his Doctrine
blasphemous, his conversation loose, his followers accursed.

Christ his entertainment at his coming in the Spirit, is foretold to hold
proportion with that of his coming in the flesh, and therefore as little to be
discerned in the one, as in the other, because he is to suffer over again in
the Spirit, in the Gospel, in some way of proportion in the Saints, as he did
then in the flesh, in his own person, for the Saints: here is wisdom, and it is
that which is only from above, to discern the day of his coming, for he is
in the world now, as then, under disguises, as a sign to be spoken against, to
be judged in his members a blasphemer, a deceiver, a man gluttenous, a friend
of Publicans, and Sinners, a wine-bibber, yea, to be crucified, and put to open
shame: and of this he will upbraid the world at his appearing, and coming; I
was among you, but as hungry, and thirsty, and naked, and sick, and imprisoned,
wherefore you owned me not in my meannesse, and low estate, therefore depart
from me I know you not, I own you not, you shall not, you cannot, share with
me, and mine, in glory.

Men build the Sepulchers of the Prophets, seem to honor the memory of Christ,
glory in the story of the Martyrs, and call themselves after their names, and yet
persecute, blaspheme, and speak all manner of evil of that Spirit by which
they spoke, thus it was from the beginning, and it is so unto this present
hour, thus the Pharisces stood they thought in the truth the Prophets dyed
for, and yet were in their generation, open and professed enemies unto it, and
thus to this day, many contend in bitterness, and wrath, to their own, and
others trouble, yea, the trouble of the Land they live in, for the truth they
think, and yet remain without it, yea, revile it, where it is in truth, having
the form, and not the power, the pretense, and not the thing itself (as they
whom they pretend to be imitators of, had) which wheresoever it is, is
blasphemed, of them that have it not, though they pretend never so much to have
it. But this in somesort may be discerned, for by their fruits ye may know
them, they that have it in pretense only, are as others of the world are,
excepting this pretense only, proud, boasters, blasphemers, false accusers,
make-bates, fierce, unquiet despisers of them that are good, 2 Timothy 3. but
where it is in truth, it is like it self, even like Christ himself,
Overcomming evil with good, in all meekness, love, patience, long-suffering,
being reviled, they revile not again, gentle toward all men, and by this
means, and no otherwise, they heap coals of fire on the heads of those that
are enemies unto them, and so mightily still and succesfully, but so as by
suffering they overcome.

M. Edwards, more then seems in his Epistle, to endeavor to get himself a
name, to be in his, as some in the ages past were in theirs, famous for
opposing Schism, Heresy, this might come to pass, if the time to come should
exceed the present time in darkness, but the light that now shines manifests
his folly very much, and that to very many already, how then will his works
abide the fire? when the day shall reveal it to all; this therefore befalls M.
Edwards in his Treatise, which accompanies all that do things in the dark, he
mis-represents the truth, he stumbles at, which he must needs do, because he
sees it not in the light, in which alone it shines, in so much that that is now
from M. Edwards mouth, mistaken pen and judgment, undoubted blasphemy, might
be at the first speaking, everlasting Truth and Gospel, Christ's Doctrine, which
was truth, flowing from the glorious fountain of it, was yet when represented
by the Pharisees, such as they took it to be, very false, vile, and absurd,
witness the stories the Jews have of Christ and his Doctrine to this day, like
the stories the Papists have of Luther, and the Protestants, so that as the
Pharisees did Christ's; and as the Papists do Luthers, so does M. Edwards
mis-shape, and disguise, the glorious truth and doctrine of some, into a lie,
this time, the truths friend, will make appear, but I undertake not to justify
either Schism or Heresy, there is too much of either found in the Land, and
that even there, and amongst them, that most cry out against it Which is true
according to M. Edwards and his friends own maxim, the greatest Cutpurse cries
Cutpurse most, by the same rule, let all judge whether M. Edwards be not the
greatest Heretic, the greatest Schismatic: I pray God it prove not true.
, occasioned by the long time of darkness we have been in, and now truth comes
abroad, error goes forth with it, and in a mantle like unto it, yet this I can
be bold in, because of this likeness, truth receives more blame then that
which indeed deserves it.

2 Particular.
M. Edwards, pretending more eminently then others to conscience; has in that
Court of his (hearing only the witnesses of one side) past a threefold
sentence on me, and would have all men approve of the judgment he pronounces,
which is, that at Gloucester I was first erroneous, then incorrigible, and for
both cast out of town. Here he thought to strike at two at once, and one of
them, one of the greatest, and the most eminent in the Land, and that through
the sides of him, that is indeed one of the meanest of the servants of Christ
and the Kingdoms, viz. my self, he secretly upbraids, the ever honored, and
therefore most noble, because the most constant Patriot of his Country, and
lover of good men, my Lord Say, and that for respecting me (as Christ did the
man cast out by the Jews, for confessing him) when I had been so apparently
wronged by others, it being the true character of those that are both great and
good, to respect the unjustly oppressed.

M. Edwards might in conscience have thought (who ever were his informers) on
the English proverb, one man's tale's good, till another's heard, or which is
more to be beeded, that of the Wise man, Prove. 18.17. he He that is first in
his own cause, seems just, but his neighbor comes and searches him out,
and makes it to appear otherwise, so the first goes away ashamed: M. Edwards
knowing I was in Town, and entertained by a great man (as he confesses) might
have had recourse to me for satisfaction, if not for mine, yet for that great
man's sake, and not so apparently to wound his own reputation, to wound others,
in sending abroad in print, a most notorious untruth, but he had a months
mind to reproach my Lord Say, Wit. Mr. Cr.
and that he knew not how to do immediately, others having sped so ill before
him, for such like unheard of boldness, therefore he takes occasion from me,
when none was given by me, to do it. Surely a good man would have done
otherwise, been as careful of another name and honor (especially of one of
the Peers and Pillars of the Land) as his own, but it seems he thinks his
tongue is his own, and therefore under no control.

But that M. Edwards, and they that will may know, that I was neither
erroneous, or incorrigible, and therefore not cast out of Gloucester for either,
I have printed this relation, wherein may appear the whole truth of the matter
(the consciences of mine opposers being judge) that no error could be (though
it was industriously sought after) picked out of any Sermon, discourse, or
Prayer, was heard from me, either in public or private, and for this I
challenge M. Edwards and all the World, if they can, to contradict: but herein
it does sufficiently appear, because they could not fasten any error that way
upon me, they made trial of me, though in a most un-due, un-christistian, and
un-brotherly way; by these ten Questions, with what meekness and sobriety, let
the proposal of the second Question give all the Protestants in England to
judge, that they might be sure they thought to catch me, they would cast out
their line far enough, which surely they would never have done, it being so
great a blemish to the Protestant Religion, but that they were confident to
bring me into a snare: yet Gods wisdom was such, that after four days solemn
meeting, my Doctrine and conversation appeared far more innocent then before,
and therefore at the conclusion of the last days solemn dispute, I was
pronounced free from the charge of error laid against me, and that by M.
Brummidge, a learned gentleman of the Committee, who was as Moderator during
the dispute, which he did in the name of that whole Assembly, and therefore M.
Corbet spoke aloud to this purpose, that though my words were justifiable, yet
my meaning was otherwise, wherefore my meaning was indeed condemned in
Gloucester by M. Corbet, and perhaps by others, when my words and actions were
found, and therefore declared blameless, and that does yet more fully appear,
for though there was a double Order from the Committee for my removal, the
copy of the first is before inscribed, for the readers view, but the copy of
the other I could by no means get, yet in neither of them was I charged with
error, neither was it rendered as a reason of my removal, the only reason
that I could find in either, was to give satisfaction to the importunity of
some Ministers, to whom my Ministry, or rather the Ministry of Christ, was a
burden, and therefore M. Holford publicly desired the City, to ease them of
that burden, by putting Christ out of Town (for that was the expression he
used) to whom many were ready enough to submit.

As for my journey to Bristol which (M. Edwards having spies from every Quarter,
takes notice of) I need not make Apology, those that were his informers could
have told him my exceeding losses there, to a greater value, then I know how to
make up again, but our losses are nothing in these men's eyes; (therefore that I
may use M. Calamies words, in his Apology against M. Burton, page 8.) M.
Edwards and his informer, sitting as Lords over my conscience, are not ashamed
to judge of my intentions, the reason of my journey must needs be, to sow
Schism there, he might doubtless with more love; have thought he is gone to
recover, if it may be, some of the goods he was plundered of, as an eminent
Minister of the City, spoke with more moderation, when he saw me going forth of
Town, besides, all in and about Bristol know, that I have been exercised in the
public Ministry of the Gospel for many years in those parts, and that through
the grace of God, with a constant blessing from above, to the rejoicing of many
in the Lord, thereabouts, and who themselves are my joy and crown in the Lord,
and therefore I am not ashamed to declare my longing after them, to impart unto
them some spiritual gift, that we might be mutually comforted by the faith and
joy one of another, here again, therefore, I shall challenge M. Edwards, or his
informer, who ever he be, to make it appear, if they can, that either my
Doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, I have been these ten years
conversant in, has been any other then as becomes the Gospel, either in
Bristol or elsewhere, which if they do not, as I know they cannot, let all the
world take notice, they abuse their brother without a cause, and for this their
slander, are in danger both of the judgment of God, and men, whom yet I desire,
both God, and men, (as my self do), to forgive.

A Conclusion, by way of advice to Master Edwards, and those of his Spirit,
drawn from experience, but according to the Scripture: Rule, and Phrase.
SIR,
TWo things seem to trouble you, and those of your mina^, (for worser things I
will not presume to divine of you) and you being troubled by them, you trouble
others also, for they that are troubled themselves, are usually, if not always,
a trouble in the places where they are to others, whether families, Cities,
Kingdoms: And these are, 1 Diffidence in God. And 2 self confidence (the root
from whence springs all our sorrow.) Hence three things you seem perplexed with
the fear of, because of error, because of Schism, (to interpret the best of
you and others of your mind.) 1 The Kingdoms Wealo: 2 The Churches peace: 3
Your own and others settlement: But for the first consider, Is not Christ King
of Nations? does not he uphold the worlds by the word of his power? is not the
Kingdom His, and at His disposal? he sits at the stern, and guides it, who
has redeemed it with his blood? Oh that you, and all the Kingdom could see him
taking care of it, as hitherto he has done. And for the Churches peace, is it
not durable, like it self, and him that gives it? an everlasting peace
extended to it like a river, even the peace of God which passes the
understanding of either men or Angels, effectually to perturbe. Christ gives
peace, not as the world gives, to take it away again, wherefore it is a true
position, where men have not peace with God, and one with another, they are
rather out of, then in the Church, for the Church is a Kingdom cannot be
shaken: and for your selves, if Christians; are you not upon a Rock? why then
like Ahaz and his people are you moved, as the trees of the wood are moved
with the wind, and not rather are at rest in Christ, and in him, by faith,
quiet from fear of evil, he that wavereth, is like a wave of the Sea, driven
with the wind, and tossed.

The Advice then is, have faith in God, for Kingdom, Church, your selves, he
that believes, shall not be ashamed: A believing Kingdom, a believing Church,
a believing man, shall not be moved, but distrust the arm of flesh, your
wisdom, zeal, government, you so contend about, the weapons of that warfare
must not be carnal, that must take down those strong holds of Satan; Error,
and false worship, but such as are mighty through God, think not as Uzzah did
(of whom men speak so much at this day, though without knowledge) that the Arc
will fall, unless you put to your hand (in an un-due manner) to support it,
and know you not it is true alone of Christ, the government is upon his
shoulders, he that puts to his hand as thinking he supports it, profanes it,
and dishonours the High Priest that is entrusted with the care of it, more
commit the sin of Uzzah, then men at this day are aware of, the spiritualty (as
they speak, that would keep up the distinction still) more then the
temporalty, run upon this rock, and have done so of a long time, who have taken
all into their own hands, if as Christ were not King, and the inheritance not
His, but theirs, and therefore have divided it, (as the Jews did) among
themselves: let us then remit the care of these things, so far as we are
concerned in them to Christ, that cares for us according to the Apostles rule,
be careful for Phil. 4 6. (...)
nothing, etc. but will you neglect to do what you can to preserve the
Kingdoms weal, the Churches peace, our own, and others settlement in the
truth? God forbid, provided yet, we observe these three cautions: 1 That we in
the use of means, keep within our Sphere, as many do not. 2 That what we
do, we do in truth, for means used without faith, is like fire painted on the
wall; it makes a blaze, but gives no heat. 3 That the remedy be proportioned to
the distemper. For it does appear exceeding strange and unchristian (that I
say not Antichristian) and it will do so more and more, that Error, Schism,
Heresy, which is the Gangrene you pretend so excedingly to fear, (being in
the very nature of it a spiritual and soul distemper,) the temporal sword
(according to the Popish tenent) should be thought the only and the most
effectual means for the cure of, whether this be not to pretend only to be a
Physician, a soul Physician, and yet to have recourse wholly to another box
for ointment to do the cure: Hence it is that so many are proclaimed
Schismatics, Heretics in the Pulpit, to provoke and engage the Magistrate,
before there is any argument or Scripture sufficient brought for the proving of
them to be such; even to this day, well nigh all has been taken in for Oracle,
that some few men (pretending piety and zeal, for holy Church) has suggested
to the Rulers of the earth, to the shedding of the blood of Saints, and turning
Kingdoms upside down: But all praise be given to God, and Hallelujahs sung to
him that sits on the Throne, this Book of deceit begins to be opened, and the
Kingdoms learn of Christ to read it, that the Nations for this cause (we hope)
may learn war no more.

^ It is no Paradox to affirm, that self-confidence is haunted with exceeding
fear.
The Scriptures Emblem, Character,
Of an unbelieving, selfconfident man is, Magor missabib, Fear round about. He
fears where no fear is, a and fear has torment


Again,

The Scriptures, Emblem, Character,
Of him that has Faith in God, is, Noah in the Arc, or Moses in the clift of
the rock: He is not afraid of any evil tidings, he fears nor the loss of
life, estate, least of all, the loss of his Religion: His heart is established
with grace, and not with meats and outward things.


To the Reader, line 21. r. Apostles advice.

FINIS.

