JUS POLIET FORI OR, GOD and the KING. Judging For RIGHT Against MIGHT.

As it was delivered in a Sermon before the Honorable His Majesty's Judges of
Assize in the Cathedral Church of LINCOLN, Septem. 10. 1660.

By Edward Boteler, sometimes Fellow of St. Mary Magdalen College in
Cambridge, and now Rector of WINTRINGHAM in the County of LINCOLN.

Isa. 28.5, 6. In that day shall the Lord of Hosts be for a crown of glory, and
for a diadem of beauty unto the residue of his people.

And for a spirit of judgment to him that sits in judgment, and for
strength to them that turn the battle to the gate.

LONDON, Printed for G. Bedell, and T. Collins, at the Middle Temple gate in
Fleetstreet, 166^.

TO THE Right Worshipful, Sir WILLIAM TROLLOP Baronet, High Sheriff OF The
County of Lincoln.
SIR,
DVring the late Whirlewinde in Church and State (in which, He that could not
hold his tongue, could not hold his peace) I studied to Comment practically
upon that Text of the Prophet; Am. 5.13.
The prudent shall keep silence in that time, for it is an evil time. Privacy
was then a privilege, nothing so safe as solitude, and I could not but hug my
self, and applaud my condition, in obscurity. No ties of Interest, no
flatteries of the Times could draw me out of my recesses, or court me to make a
step on that public Theater, where I perceived little acted, but what would
put ingenuity to the blush, and make honesty ashamed: But now that by the
goodness of God, the clouds are scattered, our day cleares up, and we seem to
sit under the smiles of Heaven, I have adventured abroad under the Conduct of
your name, to salute our newborn Peace, and bid that desirable Stranger
welcome into our more then wearied world, and this I have done in the great
Congregation. Nor have I done yet, but that you may see how my obedience
strives to be as large as your Commands, I have followed them from the Pulpit
to the Press. And though I thought these worthless conceptions public
enough before, as having delivered them in the face of the Country: yet since
your self and others, neither the least, nor least considerable and
intelligent part of the Auditory, are pleased to think otherwise, I submit
what ever I think my self. They are now no longer mine, but yours, the
Dedication makes them so, design them your protection, they beg it, they need
it. I heard some whisperings, as if I were too tart, I value it not, error
must needs be the sore, where truth makes the smart. I shall not so much as
Epistle the Reader to be courteous, the candid and clear brow'd will be so, as
for the tetricall and angry generation, let them go;

Rumpatur, si quis rumpitur, invidia. I am Sir Your most humble and most
obliged Servant E. BOTELER.

PSALM. 72.4. He shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the children
of the needy, and shall break in pieces the Oppressor.

In our other Translation. He shall keep the simple folk by their right,
defend the children of the poor, and punish the wrong doer.


IT is not long since we were in as sad a case as the poor captive Jews, Psalm.
137.1, 2.
who sat by the waters of Babylon, weeping to remember our sometimes happy
Zyon. Hanging our harps upon the willows, and being out of tune for any song,
unless to descant upon our miseries with the lamenting Prophet: Lam. 2.1.
How has the Lord covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud in his anger, and
cast down from heaven unto the earth, the beauty of Israel, Amos 4.9.
and remembered not his footstool in the day of his anger! And we are now as a
firebrand plucked out of the burning: seasonably plucked out: For, Isa 1.9.
Except the Lord of hosts had left unto us a very small remnant, we should have
been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah: and the glory of
this flourishing Church and Kingdom, had been like that of the material Temple
at Jerusalem, which fell from courting the clouds, to kiss the dust.

So that when I recognize what we lately were, and take a view of what we now
are; when I behold our captivity turned as the rivers in the South, Ps. 126.4.
1 K. 10.9.
fully, sudde^ly, unexpectedly: The Lord delighting in the King, Isa. 1.26.
to set him on the throne of Israel: restoring our Judges as at the first, and
our Counselors as at the beginning. Jer. 30.21.
Our Nobles being of themselves, and our Governor proceeding from the midst of
us. Number. 16.2.
Our Tribunals and seats of justice furnished with Princes of the Assembly,
famous in their congregation, men of renown: Isa. 30.20.
Our Teachers no more removed into corners, but our eyes seeing our Teachers.
When I consider all these, me thinks I cannot keep my Meditations from running
those numbers of David: To climb the heavens, Psalm. 148.1, 2, 3, etc.
and call in the glorious Inhabitants, and powerful Hosts thereof, the Angels,
Sun, Moon, and Stars of light: To range the Air, and summon thence the Fire and
Hayle, Snow, Vapors, and stormy winds: To dive the Abyss of waters, and bring
up the Dragons and all Deeps: To traverse the Earth, and gather the mountains,
and all hills, fruitful trees, and all Cedars, Kings of the Earth, and all
people, Princes and all Judges of the Earth: both young men and maidens, old
men and children, that all may bear a part in the rejoycings of this day, and
join in praises to the God of Jeshurun, Deuteronomy. 33.26
who rides upon the Heavens in our help: who gives salvation unto Kings, Ps.
144.10.
who delivers David his servant from the hurtful sword, Ps. 78.71.
that he may feed Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance.

That he may judge the poor of the people, that he may save the children of
the needy, and break in pieces the Oppressor.

The Psalm, like the Times, presents us with a most pleasant, and delicious
prospect, full of blessings both: what is written in the one, you may read in
the other. The Travailer, who in his observations of several Countries,
reports he found in one Pulchrum Regem, and in another Pulchru^ Regnum, might
here see both, a gracious King, and a flourishing Kingdom.

If you take a view of the Psalm, you may find,

1. God prayed to, to bless the King, v. 1. Give the King thy judgments, O
God, etc.

2 The King made by God a blessing to the people: He shall judge the people,
etc. to v. 18.

3 The King and people blessing God, in the following verses.

I would not stumble at the threshold, by engaging in a quarrel about the
Title, which some have left worse then they found it, perplexing it with more,
whilst they pretend to free it from some difficulty.

A Psalm for Solomon. Lovinus in loc.
Not for Solomon the son of David and Bathsheba says one; but for Christ, who
is here called Solomon, as he is called David elsewhere: The children of Israel
shall return and seek the Lord their God, Hosca 3.5.
and David their King.

And therefore it is, Genebrard.
that he approves of another, making it a patronymie. In Solomonidem: for the
Son, the Nephew, one sprung from Solomon: or is willing to allow it an
Appellative, speaking no more then Peacemaker, and so is eminently the due of
the Lord Jesus Christ, Heb. 7.2.
who is King of Salem, that is, King of Peace.

But I cannot list under this opinion, to cut Solomon quite out of this Psalm,
to which the Inscription gives him so clear a Title.

I know, a greater then Solomon is here, but yet Solomon is here too; Solomon
in the figure, and Christ in the perfection of Kingly administration. Solomon's
kingdom shall be a mapp of Christ's. And as David was a type of him in his
encounters with, and triumph over the Churches enemies: so shall Solomon be in
the calm, and happy days of the Church, when Christ shall give his beloved
rest, and find a repose for the daughter of Zion, making peace within her
walls, and plenteousness within her palaces. In short, those blessings that
flow in with the rule of Christ, shall not be wanting to the Reign of Solomon,
only he shall govern by, and compose to, this model.

He shall judge the poor of the People, etc.

The Text seems to have some little dependence upon the first verse, we will quit
it of that, and then we shall come clear to it. The thread of connection runs
through both it, and the two former verses thus

Give the King thy judgments O God, etc. v. 1.

And then, He shall judge thy people in, etc. v. 2.

And, The mountains shall bring peace to, etc. v. 3.

And, He shall judge the poor of the, etc. in the Text. The connection then is
plain.

The King prays heartily: Give she King thy judgments, O Lord, etc.

The Kings son proves accordingly: He shall judge the poor of the people, etc.

The Kings Son, and the Kings Subjects and all fare the better for the prayers
of pious Kings. We are the happy witnesses of this truth this day: I am very
confident, the peace, the plenty, the prosperity, the rich confluence of
mercies we are now entering upon, and do in some good measure enjoy, are the
sweet fruits of his late Majesty's prayers. He sowed in tears what we are now
reaping in joy.

That Princely Martyr was excellent at those spiritual wrestlings, such
another devout duellist as Jacob, his faith made him more then man, a Match for
the Angel. Hos. 12.4.
And though his Treaties on Earth were sadly successesse, yet his entreaties
with Heaven were of invincible strength and urgency; as a Prince he had power
with God, Genesis 32.28.
and prevailed. God has heard the Kings prayer for the Kings Son, and given
him such a return of Judgment, and Righteousness, that we may promise our
selves in the confidence of the Text:

He shall judge the poor of the people, etc.

The Psalm being Depositum Davidis, (as it is called because of the last words
of it) David's Testament, the Text is one of those Legacies which he bequeaths
to Solomon, and in him to those happy people which should live in the peaceable
and plenteous days of his flourishing Reign, looking also through the
Perspective of Faith, at their incomparable condition, which should see the
most desirable days of the Son of Man, and follow the conduct of the Prince of
Peace in the glorious administration of his Kingdom.

Wherein David, (as elsewhere) sings of Mercy and Judgment.

Mercy: He shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the children of
the needy.

Judgment: And shall break in pieces the Oppressor.

Or if you please,

Here is all distributive justice sum'd up, and comprised in two particulars.

1. Defensive justice: (let me so call it) He shall judge the poor of the
people; that is one piece of it, and the second is like unto it: He shall save
the children of the needy.

2. Offensive justice: and shall break in pieces the Oppressor.

Each of these has an Agent, Act, Object.

The Agent; He: the same in all.

The Act; diverse, as it meets with an object: judge, save, break in pieces.

The Object diversifying this Act; The poor of the people: the children of the
needy: the Oppressor.

He shall judge the poor of, etc.

I begin with the Agent, his first Act and Object; He shall judge the poor of
the people.

He: But who is that? is he invested with Authority? is he qualified for so
great a work?

Is he commissioned first? that is a question would be asked: We have had many
invaders of late; some have taken Aarons honor upon them, Heb. 5.4.
and never were called of God, as Aaron was. Others have climbed Moses his
Chair by strange steps of their own laying, who shall give an account to him
that is ready to judge the quick and the dead, 1 Pet. 4.5.
when they shall be asked the Hebrews question to Moses; Exo. 2.14
Quis constituit te Principem and judicem? Who made thee a Prince and a Judge?

And is he sufficient? let that be asked too. For we have had some whose names
and places have been of the greater print, and themselves of little or no
letters. How many have possessed themselves of Gamaliel's seat, that never did,
nor were ever worthy to sit at his feet? of whom we may say as St. Paul of the
Gentiles in another case; That having not the Law, Romans 2.14.
they were a law unto themselves, I and to others too, who have cause enough to
complain they feel it yet. How many have been set on high, like the Idols of
the Heathen, Psalm. 115.5, 6, 7.
of whom the Psalmist, They have eyes and sea not, ears and hear not? it had
been well if they had been like them in that other defect too, that they had
hands and handled not: But they were too active with them it is to be thought,
and that makes so many poor of the people at this day. And hence it was that
Judgment, like Jordan's streams, was turned backward, or as the Prophet
complains; Am. 5.7:
Judgment was turned into wormwood, and Righteousness was left off in the
earth.

Oh! but the He in the Text, is infinitely furnished for his employment: Col.
2.3.
having all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge bid in him, knowing the Law
exactly, even as he kept it in every title of it, Jam. 4.12.
being that one Lawgiver, who is able to save, and to destroy.

He is a Judge that sees without evidence, and knows without witness.

He that can read the dark letters of the heart, as if they were written with a
beam of the Sun upon a wall of crystal.

He that can discern a false cause through a fair varnish.

He that shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, Eccl.
12.14.
whether it be good, or whether it be evil. He shall judge the poor of the
people, etc.

And he is commissioned too, in answer to the other querie. He brings his
authority with him, for on his vesture and on his thigh he has a name written,
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Rev. 19.16.
Isa. 9.6.
It is He whose name is called Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the
everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. Lu. 1.32, 33.
It is He who is great, and called the son of the Highest, to whom the Lord God
has given the throne of his father David, and he shall reign over the house
of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end. Psalm. 19.6.
It is He whose going forth (like that of the sun) is from the end of Heaven,
and his circuit to the ends of it. Mat. 24.30 Chap. 25.31.
It is He who shall come in the clouds of Heaven with power and great glory,
and all the holy Angels with him. Rev. 20.9.
It is He who shall sit on the great white throne, from whose face the Earth
and the Heaven shall flee away, and there shall be no place found for them. It
is He before whom the dead, small and great shall stand, Rev. 20.12
and be judged out of those things which are written in the books according to
their works.

It is He to whom the Father has given authority to execute judgment, John
5.27.
because he is the son of man. Jesus Christ as Mediator has had the Scepter
and rule in his hands ever since the fall, and the last and great act of his
Regal power shall be to judge the world, to settle the eternal and
unalterable estates of men and Angels, 1 Cor. 15.24.
and then he shall deliver up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, that God
may be all in all.

This is He, the first He, He in the Antitype, and by way of Eminency. He shall
judge the poor of the people, etc.

But lest some of St. 2 Pet. 3.4.
Peter's scoffers should question this Judge, and say, Where is the promise of
his coming? Or some desperate daring wretch should argue himself into folly
from the distance of the day; Eccl 8 11.
and because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, his
heart should be fully set in him to do evil.

Here is an He in the Type too, another He, deputed, authorized, commissioned
from Heaven, and in trusted with the management of judgment till that day, and
He also shall judge the poor of the people.

And if you ask who he is, though the matchless iniquity of the late times
interdicted all mention of him with that honor due unto his Name, forcing men
either to cancel or conceal it, and pouring contempt upon it: yet blessed be
God, we may now speak out! this He is the King. He shall judge the, etc.

Judgments is the King's, He has it from good hands, he comes fairly and
freely by it. Give the King thy judgments O Lord!

The power of judging is in the King, is from him, so St. Paul tells us. Acts
25: 10.
I stand at Caesar's judgment seat, where I ought to be judged. And Absalom, as
great a Rebel as he was, grants this. 2 Samuel 15: 3.
Thy matters are good, but there is none deputed of the King to hear thee. The
hearing Causes is proper to the King, and whom he shall depute. It is said of
Samuel, when he held the Kingly power engrossed in the Judiciary, that He went
from year to year in circuit to Bethel, 1 Samuel: 7.16.
and Gilgal, and Mispeh, and judged Israel in all those places.

But because as Jethro told Moses, Exodus 18.18.
ultra vires tuas est negotium, the thing is too heavy for one. Deuteronomy. 1.12
And Moses himself complains, Non valeo solus; how can I my self alone bear
your cumbrance, and your burden, and your strife? If you please, we will follow
that Model of Jethro, and take in wise and understanding men, known in our
Tribes, that they may take off part of the burden by subjoyning with the He in
the Text, and helping to judge the poor of the people.

And the He will be, He the King, and He the Judge. The King in person, and the
King in proxy. The King in himself, and the King in his substitute. He that
has the primitive, and he that has the derivative power. The supreme and the
subordinate Magistrate, the Co-Assessor, Counselor, every one that is
commissioned to act in matters of Justice, He is the man, it is He shall judge
the poor of the people.

And that for the Agent, He, of whom we shall speak no more single, but as he
falls in with the several Acts and Objects, to which we now proceed, beginning
with the

First, Judge. He shall judge.

And here we shall not make a stir about judging. To judge in its highest
signification, imports to Rule, to exercise the supreme power, to hold the
reins of Government in the hand, and stit at the Stern. To command in chief,
and give Laws.

-- Victorque volentes
Per populos, dat jura --
So the Chieftaines in the polity and Commonwealth of Israel, in the nonage of
Kings, or in the inter-regnum rather, Deu. 33.5.
betwixt Moses who was King in Jeshurun, and Saul the first anointed, are said
in their several Generations to have governed Israel.

But we shall wave this and other significations less of kin to our purpose,
and speak of such only as may go along with our sense, and be of concernment
to us.

The whole business of judging takes up in these two, Oppressos liberare;
Oppressores coercere; to support the poor, and oppress the proud, that is
judging.

Or thus, there is judicium comprobationis, and condemnationis, a judging for,
and against.

1. There is a judgment of comprobation, a judging for, in the safer sense, a
laying out of entrusted power for the behoof of those that want it. Judicare
aliquem, Ribera in Hos. a p. 3. n. 95.
est sententiam pro illo far. To judge a man is to give sentence for him, to
appear for his rescue. Isa. 1.17.
Or let the Prophet english it: Seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge
the fatherless, plead for the widow. This is a judging for, and is sometimes
rendered a delivering: As David in his compurgatory speech, and
selfe-vindication against the cruel, causeless, and unhandsome persecution of
Saul. The Lord be judge, 1 Samuel 24: 15.
and judge between me and thee, and see and plead my cause, and deliver me out
of thine hand.

They that are skillful in the left handed language, Plurimi ln bonam part
interpretantur judicandi vocabulum ut sit defendere ac tueri destitutos opisque
indigentes. Lovin. in loc.
render it indifferently, judge, or deliver, or by judging deliver. And
therefore what is here judge, in the other Translation we have keep, or
preserve. He shall keep the simple folk by their right: And the following
words are exegeticall, or expository, tell us what it is to judge, he shall
save. To save, to keep, to deliver, this is to judge, to judge for, to judge in
the first sense. Oppressos liberare, He shall judge the poor of the people.

2. There is a judging against, and in the severer sense, and that is all one
with condemning: Heb. 13.4.
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge: that is in plain English,
condemn. So St. Chrysostom and other Fathers understand that of the Apostle:
Know you not that we shall judge Angels? 1 Cor. 6.3.
that is evil Angels, whom we shall as glorious Co-assessors with the
righteous Judge, arraign, sentence, and damn to their miserable eternity. Quae
res Daemonibus superbissimis molestissima erit poena, says the learned Suarez.
It will be a cutting, tearing torment to the proud Devils to see the victorious
insultings of the Saints, that they, of whom they have been the accusers, shall
now be their Judges, and sit upon their Condemnation: and this is judging in
the second sense, to judge against; Oppressores coercere, To break in pieces
the Oppressor.

So that these two sorts of judging, suit with the two sorts of men in the Text.

Here is the judgment of comprobation, of deliverance, of salvation, and
that is for the poor of the people, and children of the needy. And

Here is the judgment of Condemnation, that is for the wrong doer, the
Oppressor. And shall break in pieces the Oppressor.

And that both these judgings may be regular and right, they must be made up of
these three principal Ingredients.

The Judge must Examine, Discern, Execute.

1. The Judge must examine; which is so necessary, that without it he cannot be
a Judge. Qui statuit aliquid part inaudita altera, aequum licet statuerit,
Seneca.
ipse hand aequus fuerit. To do right without hearing, is to do wrong. What an
ungrateful Traitor was Mephibosheth whilst Zibah's story was told only? 2 Samuel 16.3.
But let him have a hearing, and how faithful was he? his words are the very
breath of Loyalty: Let him take all, Chap. 19: 30.
forasmuch as my Lord the King is come again in peace into his own house.
Lud. de vita, Christi. p. 1. c. 83. n. 2. John 8.
Judex igitur qui audit accusantes, non debet statim sententiam dare, sed
discutere, says Ludolphus upon our Savior's writing on the ground at the
accusation of the woman for adultery. The Judge is to take discussion in his
way to determination. The Judge of all the Earth has cut us out this method in
his own proceedings in the case of Sodom, who though he sees the most secret
prevarications of the heart, the very first tendencies to sin; and so seeing
those monsters in their conceptions cannot but know them in their growth and
height: And though those wretches were both Accusers and Witnesses, and gave in
a Declaration against themselves (insomuch that impudent sinners are after said
to declare their sins as Sodom) Yet, Isa. 3.9.
I will go down, says God, Genesis 18.21
and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it, which is
come unto me; and if not I will know.

Nicodemus gave check to the whole force and fury of the chief Priests and
Pharisees against our Savior, with his (...) does our Law judge any man before
it hear him? John 7.51.
And well had it been if some had had either the courage, or the conscience, to
have said as much for our Law. We all know who complained sadly that he could
not be heard. But the just and righteous God has heard him, and now he is
making inquisition for blood: Psalm. 9.12.
He remembers him, he forgets not the cry of the humble. But I would touch
that sore gently. To examine, that is the first ingredient in judging.

2. The Judge must discern, see into the substance, as well as hear the sound
of the Cause. Though he must have no eye for persons, yet he should be all eye
for Causes, that he may look through all those Tinctures, and complexions which
are laid on with so much art upon the face of falsehood. It was Saint Paul's
happiness, that he might make his defense before Agrippa, Acts 26.3.
whom he knew expert in all customs and questions which were among the Jews.
When poor Truth comes to the Bar, assaulted by all the powers of wit, and art,
perplexed with difficulties, and doubts, and intricacies, then well fare a
sagacious Judge that can expedite her, and set her free.

The word of my Lord the King shall now be comfortable, 1 Samuel: 14.17.
(says the woman of Tekoah) for as an Angel of God, so is my Lord the King to
discern good and bad. It is no small comfort to a People, when their King, and
the Kings Ministers are terrestiall. Angels for their knowledge and intuition.
1 K. 10.9.
Blessed be the Lord his God, which delights in the King to set him on the
throne of Israel: because the Lord loved Israel for ever, therefore has he
made him King to do judgment and justice. And blessed be God for a more
knowing and learned Magistracy, that the Judges of the Earth are more
instructed then formerly, never more need of them. Time runs low, the very
dregs and all come, Impostors, Hypocrites, Pretenders, these overrun us;
sagacious Judges are necessary, are seasonable. To discern, that is the Judges
second ingredient.

3. The last but not the least is Execution. The Scire justitiam, we have
spoken of, discerning, knowing Justice, that is something, but that is not
enough; no nor Diligere justitiam neither, which goes further, to love justice,
so must every one; Nor does Quaerere justitiam to seek justice, carry it high
enough, for the Jury must do so as well as the Judge; but to execute it, that,
all that is his charge. Execution, though sometimes the death of the Offender,
is always the life of the Law. When we read of Idolatry, Rape, and other wild
exorbitances in the book of Judges, the holy Ghost, that we might not miss the
cause of such misdemeanors, Judge. 18.1. and Chapter 19.1. and Chap. 21.25.
gives us it no less then three times, non erat Rex, In those days there was
no King in Israel, none to invigorate and put life into the Laws, all was
either dead or dormant, they had no head to discern, no hand to execute
justice, there was no King in Israel.

Execution in a Judge is like Elocution in an Orator, it is primu^, secundum,
ultimum, it is all in all.

Travailers tell us of a law in Rhodes, that none should shave, and yet
observed, that none, or few in the Isle were unshaven: It was vox and praeterea
nihil, a Law talked of, but was nothing, for want of execution. And is not our
Island a transcript of that? have we not good laws against swearing, drinking,
debauchery? and yet where do they abound more? The one is counted the
Gallantry, the other the Civility of the Times: so that profaneness grows
daring and brass-brow'd, and out faceth the Law it self, because Magistrates
do not countenance and abett it, but Gallio like, Act. 18.17.
they care for none of those things. Will not this make men say the Magistrate
wears a scabbard only, and not a sword? Or if a sword, will they not say it is
rusty for want of drawing? O remember, my Lords and Gentlemen, you that are in
authority, Romans 13.14.
that you bear not the Sword in vain. Officium inane maleficium immane; a
vain Officer is a maine offender. If you know these things, happy are you if
you do them. To examine, to discern what you examine, and to execute what you
discern, this completes judgment. And that is the first Act, judge, which I now
leave, and remove to the Object, the poor. He shall judge the poor of the
people.

But why the poor? Does not the Philosopher call the Law (...), a mind
without affections? a soul without passions? insinuating that Justice sees,
but takes no notice; Knows but is not moved with any excentrick considerations.
Lev. 19.15.
And are they not the express words of the royal Law, You shall do no
unrighteousness in judgment; thou shall not respect the person of the poor,
nor honor the person of the mighty? True, not the person. It is not to prefer
the person of the poor under that nude and abstracted consideration that the
Magistrate must judge for him; but to bear him up against those incommodations
and disadvantages which poverty is apt to labor under. The hand of power must
keep the scales even, that the poor man's condition do not let down his cause,
must so regulate and guide the balance, that he who wants weight in honesty,
may not turn the scales by the odds of his honor.

Thus far the poor may be, must be respected in judgment, to set their causes
upon even ground with theirs, whose persons are higher then they.

Thus He shall judge the poor of the people.

The poor of the people. Cicero.
The plebecula in the Orators term, the lowest rank, and meanest sort of
people: and one of the Fathers makes them poor enough; In justitia judicabit
mendicos, Tertul. Cont. Marcion. c. 14.
so poor that they are scarce less then beggars.

I care not for dealing with the Allegorical senses, which usually rather play
with, then improve truths.

I Will but tell you how Euthymius taking judging in the worst sense, expounds
the poor of the people, the rude and raffle sort of the Jews, poor in
understanding, Lovin. in loc.
Qui nudae legis literae insistentes, ad occultas sancti spiritus divitias
prospicere non valebant. Who insisting upon the bare letter of the law, and
their beggarly rudiments, were ignorant of the hidden riches of the spirit: And
they have one that judges them, John 5.45.
even Moses in whom they trust. And taking judging in the better sense, by the
poor of the people understands the Apostles, mony-less for the most part, John
3.6.
as Peter, Gold and silver have I none, and at best having but one purse
amongst them all: And by the children of the Needy, the Disciples, who forsook
all and followed Christ, who has therefore promised to make them ample
reparatio^, when he comes to judge, and sit on the Throne of his glory. Mat.
19.27, 18, 29.
Every one that has forsaken houses or friends, or lands for my Names sake,
shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life.

Our two Translations will show us poor enough, we need not seek or make more.

In the other Translation, they are called the simple folk. He shall keep the
simple folk by their right. Not simple, that is plain and downright. As Jacob
was a plain man, Genesis 25.27.
vir simplex, says the vulgar Latin, a simple man dwelling in Tents. Simple,
that is sincere, and without guile, a man made after the honest plain mode of
those better times: Simple folk are folk without mixture, and those too
familiar compositions of subtilty, fraud, and cunning, of which the greater
part of the world are made up at this day. Men unsophisticated, uncompounded of
those semblances, artifices, and pretenses which have put so many cheats upon
the world. Single-hearted and clear breasted men, you may see what they are by
what they do, their thoughts and actions are both of a piece: so single in
every thing, that they will suffer, rather then double in any thing. These simple
ones are those our Savior calls poor in spirit, the blessed poor, Mat. 5.3.
poor as to possession, but rich in their reversion, for theirs is the kingdom
of heaven. Et quo longius affectu a terrenis distant, Novarinus in Man. p. 122.
n. 126. ^R. Paupertas spiritus est contemptus sui. Lud. de vita Christ p. 1.
cap 33. n. 4. Gen 32.10
eo coelo sunt viciniores. They are so far from the earth in their affections,
they must needs be near heaven. These are they that are poor in their own
opinion, being filled with their own emptiness, that (...), that
selfe-contempt, which makes them think and speak as Jacob with his minor
miserationibus, less then the least of all mercies, and they are as poor in
the worlds opinion too; for those Filij Zion inclyti, Lam. 4.2.
those precious sons of Zion, comparable to fine gold, how are they esteemed as
earthen pitchers, the work of the hands of the Potter! And therefore God will
judge better of them, and provide better for them; Ps. 74.19.
He will not deliver the soul of his Turtle Dove unto the multitude of the
wicked, nor forget the congregation of his poor for ever. His poor, the
simple folk, the poor in spirit, they are the first. He shall judge the poor
of the people.

This Translation, in which I have read and followed the Text, 1 Timothy 6.17.
seems to intend another sort of poor: the poor outwardly, the poor of this
world. There are the rich in this world, and the poor in this world, St. Paul
calls them so, Jam. 2.5.
St. James these; such as want not only the affluence and abundance, but even
the conveniences and necessaries of this life. Of these we may meet with three
sorts. There are poor by the hand of Negligence, Violence, Providence.

1. There are some poor by the hand of negligence, Act. 20.34.
Whose hands minister not to their necessities. And how should they? when the
wise man tells us, Abscondit piger manum suam sub ascella, Ascella, idem quod
Axilla. Pro. 19.24.
A sloathfull man hides his hand in his bosom, or under his arm, hugging it
because it is idle, and making much on it as it were for doing nothing, given up
to supiness and oscitancy. Oh! that is Manna indeed that will drop into their
mouths, and no diet so sweet as the bread of idleness. Indeed he must either
eat that or starve, for his own crop will not afford him bread, do but see it,
and you will say so. Pro. 24.30, 31.
I went by the field of the sloathfull, and lo it was all grown over with
thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof. The wise man by an elegant
Mimesis brings him in the person, posture, Verse. 33.
and language of the sleeper; Yet a little sleep, a little slumber: but this
sinite paululum ibit in Longum (as St. Augustine) all is little with them, and
their little will never be enough. Ep minondas.
It was the saying of a Captain: who ran his sleeping Sentinel through, talem
reliqui, qualem inveni, I left him as I found him. You into whose hands God
has given the Sword of Justice, as you may not kill these sleepers upon that
single account, so neither will you (I hope when you meet with them) leave
them as you found them. Especially remembering that expression of our Savior's,
Mat. 25.26.
Thou wicked and sloathful servant; a nequaquam facile transitur ad nequam.
Idle will soon be evil, 1 Pet 2.14.
and you are for the punishment of evil doers.

And another sort of Poor there are by the hand of negligence, which I humbly
crave leave to mention in this place, because they have hitherto passed with
little or no notice from the Magistrate, and I know some places have been
pestered with them, I mean a running sort of Sectaries, that are first
idle-headed, (...).
and then idle-handed, creeping into houses (and are commonly as poor as they
can creep) and these skrew themselves into the opinion and affection of their
Proselytes so far, till they call them from their callings, and make them spend
themselves in frequent treatments of their seducers. The former Solomon calls
sleepers, and these St. Jude 8.
Jude calls dreamers, filthy dreamers, despising dominion, and speaking evil
of Dignities. These religious kind of Vagabonds (pardon the expression) having
got a stock of Confidence and Canting, presently set up for themselves,
traverse the Country, and scatter up and down their wild and empty
discourses against Magistracy and Ministry, Church, and Church Government,
maintenance by tithes, and Paedobaptisme, and like Theudas, Acts 5.36.
boast themselves to be some body, to whom a number of men join themselves, as
in the late days of desection, and I wish I could not say, at this day. So
that what Pharaoh with cruelty enough charged upon the poor oppressed
Israelites, will without breach of charity be the crime of these Errants, Exo.
5.17.
You are idle, you are idle, and therefore you say let us go and do sacrifice
to the Lord: and some such employment as the Israelites had would be fittest
for them; Verse 12.
Better they were scattered abroad throughout all the Land, though but to
gather strawes, then suffered to meet in such riotous numbers to spread their
Heresies and Treasons. They are the first, and worst sort of poor, let them be
judged, but with judgment in the sharper, and severer sense. So, He shall
judge the poor of the people.

Poor by the hand of negligence, they are the first.

2. There are the poor by the hand of Violence. Some that make themselves poor,
and it is pity but they should be so, by laying violent hands upon their own
estates. Such the proud, that wear out their Lord-ships upon their backs. Such
the riotous, that sends an estate down his throat, and consumes all upon his
belly. Such the gamester, that crumbles it away with his fingers. Such the
Litigious, that quarrels it away at the Bar, and will be never the wiser for
the proverb that tells him, Lawyers houses are founded upon the skulls of
fools. Such poor will find no relief by the judging of the Text. But there
are some made poor by the violent hands of others, such who knew no goods to a
good conscience, and have lost all to keep faith unfeigned; as resolved as Job,
Job 27.5.
till I die I will not remove my integrity from me. Heb. 10.34
As stout as those noble confessors, that took joyfully the spoiling of their
goods, knowing they have in heaven a better and more enduring substance.
Keeping possession of their inward peace against all assaults, it being indeed
the unplunderable riches of a Christian, standing unbroken, unshaken in their
profession and Loyalty, even when times were like those antediluvian days,
corrupt before God, Genesis 6.11.
and the earth was filled with violence.

There is a He that will judge this poor of the People, and therefore you sons
of Violence, whoever you be, rest not wholly in an Act of Grace here below (for
which you have cause to bless God, and the King, and much good may it do you)
but sue out your pardon above too, and to your impunity add your repentance.
For if the Judge called him fool, Lu. 12.20. St. August.
who laid up his own goods: vos illi invenite nomen qui tulit aliena, Find a
name bad enough for him if you can, who takes away another man's. And if the
sentence shall run so severe against negative offenders, I was hungry and you
gave me no meat: Mat. 25.42 43.
I was thirsty and you gave me no drink: I was a stranger and you took me not
in: naked and you clothed me not: sick and in prison and you visited me not;
how dreadful must the doom needs be against all positive impiety? against such
as took meat from his mouth, clothes from his back, turned him out of his own
doors, and cast him into prison? He shall judge the poor of the people. Poor by
the hand of violence, they are the second.

3. There are the poor by the hand of Providence, such to whom the hand of
Heaven has carved more sparingly, and given a shorter allowance in the things
of this life. This sort of poor are one of the standing Orders of the Creation,
the great and only wise God having disposed of the Inhabitants as of the Earth
it self, raising some into mountains in estate and dignity, and laying others
in the plain and level of a mean and indigent condition. These are God's
poor, he makes them, he keeps them. He takes notice of them, and cares for
them. His notice is observable, in that whereas he calls the rich man by an
Appellative only, Luke 16.19, 20.
he ownes Lazarus by a proper name. His care is remarkable in that he is said
to prepare for them. Psa. 68.10.
Thou, O God, have prepared of thy goodness for the poor. As if they were
such extraordinary Guests, they could not be treated without preparation. The
rich have got all they are like to have. Luke 6.24.
Woe unto you that are rich, for you have received your consolation: The estate
of the poor lies in hope, he is but preparing for the poor. He will not put them
off with a portion in this life, with those pitiful riches, Ps. 17.14.
(of which the Father) nec verae sunt nec vestrae, they are neither true, nor
truly his that has them; but he will give them treasure in Heaven, where their
bank of happiness is going on. They shall have the riches of Grace here in
earnest, and he will most assuredly possess them of those untold sums of glory
which out-vy the Stars. They are his, they must be the Judge's care. He shall
judge the poor of the people. Poor by the hand of Providence, they are the
third.

I have now done with the Act and Object singly and by themselves, let us take
a short view of them jointly and together, and I shall leave this particular.

The poor you see are given in charge to the Judge; He shall judge the poor of
the people.

For which discharge there are these requisites; He that will judge the poor of
the people must be thus qualified.

With Magnanimity; He must not be fearful. With Humility; He must not be
scornful. With Impartiality; He must respect no persons. With Integrity; He
must receive no gifts.

1. With Magnanimity; he must not be fearful. The Athenian Judges were minded
of this courage by sitting in Mars street. And such remembrancers to Solomon
were the 12. Lions standing upon the steps of his Throne. 1 K. 10.20
If there be truth in the Armorial Ensigns of the children of Israel, Br.
pseudodex. lib. 5. cap. 10.
or in the four Legionary standards (under every one of which marched three
Tribes) the Lion was constantly the bearing of the Tribe of Judah the Royal
and Judiciary Tribe: And whether there be or not, I am sure there is in Jacobs
prophetique blessing, where with the Scepter and Law-giving power, he bequeaths
him the emblem of a Lion. He couched as a Lion, Genesis 4^.9. Com. in Genesis p.
314. l. B.
and as an old Lion; who shall rouse him? Hos leoninos Judae animos habeant
duces, (says A Lapide) Let the Chieftains and Judges of the people be spirited
like Lions, to on with courage in all their actings. A poor spirited Judge is
no Judge for the poor. The prey is often in the very mouth of the Bear and
Lion, and 'twill need the heart of David to make a rescue. And this is one
thing they are taught by being called Gods; Sciant se esse Deos ut homines non
timeant; Corn. a Lapid. Com. in Exodus
That knowing themselves Gods, they need not fear men, not the greatest of
men, their frowns, their threats, though armed with never so much power, and
interest for Revenge. As the shaking hand carries not true, so the cowardly,
timorous Judge too often misseth the mark of justice. Take but Moses's rule,
and it will keep you steady. Deu. 1.17.
You shall not be afraid of the face of man, for the judgment is Gods.
Magnanimity, that is the first Requisite which he must be furnished withal,
that will judge the poor of the people.

2. With Humility; He must not be scornful. The proud was never the poor man's
friend. Magistrates should be like clouds, exalted and taken on high by the
Sun, that they may with more advantage distribute their bounty to the craving
ground. V. 6. hujus Psalm.
He shall come down like rain upon the mowen grass, as showers that water
the earth, and sweet are those influences of justice which fail upon the lower
grounds. Let not your God ships swell you above the bigness and proportion of
men; if they do, Psalm 82.7.
remember, I beseech you, there is a Moriemini will spoil your Deity, you shall
die like men, and fall like one of the Princes. When you are culminant and at
your highest point, like the Sun, let your beams even then be most powerful,
and influence with life upon the lower world. God's seat is higher then yours,
Psalm. 11.4.
it is in Heaven, and yet his eyes behold, his eyelids try the children of
men, do not you then overlook them. Isa. 57.15.
The high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity; dwells also with him that
is of an humble spirit: And if he dwell with him, be not you strangers to him.
Humility, that is the second Requisite in him that will judge the poor of the
people.

3. With Impartiality; He must respect no persons. Not for Condition, not for
Relation.

1. Not for Condition; Ita parvum audietis ut magnu^ was Moses's rule, must be
yours, Deuteronomy. 1.17.
You shall hear the small as well as the great. Paul with his chain shall
have as fair a decision as Bernice coming into the place of hearing, (...)
with all her fantastique pomp and bravery. If that same (...) (as St. James
calls him) that gold-fingered man carry all, and the poor man in vile raiment
be set, sub scabello, Jam. 2.2, 3, 4.
under your footstool; Are you not then partial in your selves, and are
become Judges (indeed but it is) of evil thoughts? We read of twice when all
men meet without difference in their composition and first materials. The rich
and poor meet together, Prove. 22.2. Job 3.19.
the Lord is the maker of them both. In the Grave, and their last resolution,
The small and the great are there. I pray you, let them have a third meeting
upon even terms even before the seat of Justice. Let your Tribunal make no
more difference then was in their Rise, and Original, then shall be in their
dust, and Redaction, when they shall lie down alike in the chambers of
darkness. Be as eye-less as the Athenian Judges, who sat in the night, when
they might hear Causes only, not see persons.

Respect them not for their condition, that is first.

2. Not for their Relation: Favor looks ill-favouredly upon the Bench. Exuat
personam judicis qui induit Amici: He that will be a friend, let him be no
Judge. The Magistrate must be like Levi, who said unto his father and to his
mother, Deu. 33.9.
I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his
own children. Torquatus did not, Zaleucus did not, the one a Roman, the other
a Grecian, neither a Christian, and yet both eminently known for their
impartial severity toward their own sons. Amica veritas, Truth is the just
man's nearest friend, and let the Judge know no other favorite. This (...),
this impartiality, respecting no persons either for Condition or Relation,
that is a third Requisite in him that will judge the poor of the people.

4. With Integrity; He must receive no gifts. Love dazles, but gifts dash out
the eyes, blindes them; says he that made the eyes, Exo. 23 8.
Thou shall take no gift, for the gift blinds the wise. If the Cause go by
gifts, to be sure the poor must needs go by the worst on it. As therefore the
Judge must not be (...), a respecter of persons, so neither (...) an accepter
of presents. It is the glory of a Judge (but how few attain it?) when it may be
said of him non ditior sed clarior evadit, A Lap. Com. in Exodus
he leaves not such a name for being rich, as being righteous. When he can make
Samuel's challenge: 1 Samuel: 12.3.
Witness against me before the Lord and before his Anointed: whose Ox have I
taken? or whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I
oppressed? or of whose hands have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes.
Jud. 16.21 25.
What a sad spectacle was Judge Sampson without his eyes? but a bribe-blinded
Judge is so much the worse, because his own hands put out his own eyes. Oh!
this sententia venalis (as St. Ambrose phraseth it) a sale sentence is one of
the worst bargains a man can make, and the very next to that in the Gospel, of
taking the world in exchange for the soul. We have read and heard of strange
sales: -- Venalesque Lucan: Phars:
manus -- Sale-Armyes, Forces let out, Mercenary soldiers, though that be no
rarity now. We have seen stranger, the King, the Church (I had almost said)
Religion and all exposed to sale. The Law was at stake too for company, and
therefore you that are the Professors of it, add not to the number of
monstrous sales, by making any unconscionable sale of it, now it is confirmed
in your hands again; have not Os venale, sell not your speech, your silence,
your cause, your Client and all for advantage. Let not God complain, Mic. 3.11.
Hesiod.
as of old, that the heads of Israel judge for reward. The Poet tells us of a
(...), and a (...), a bribeeater, and a Bribe-devourer: but the time will come,
when every such devourer that runs open-mouthed at gifts, and swallows all that
comes, with so much greediness, shall be sick of his Morsels, and they shall
not stay with him. Job 20.15.
He has swallowed down riches, and he shall vomit them up again. Rain is good
(says one) and the earth is good, Tr. in Prove.
sed ex eoru^ commixtione fit lutum, mix them two together, and they make
dirt. To give is laudable, and to receive allowable: but the unequal mixing of
them two often makes foul and dirty the clean and fair paths of justice. Let me
therefore for a close of this lay the practice of holy David before you; I was
upright before him: Ps. 18.23.
and I kept my self from mine iniquity, therefore has the Lord recompensed me
according to my righteousness, according to the cleanness of my hands in his
eyesight. Keep your hearts right, and your hands clean, and the Lord
recompense you accordingly; that is your integrity, the fourth and last of the
Requisites, wherewith he must be furnished, that will judge the poor of the
people.

I have done with the first particular in the defensive part of justice, the
Agent with his first Act and Object. The Act, judge, the Object, poor: He shall
judge the poor of the people.

Let us on to the second: He shall save the children of the needy.

Which is not another Act and Object, but rather the same under other
expressions. For pauperes, and filii pauperu^: the poor and children of the
needy, Aug. l. 4. Cont. Marc. c.
are all one, as Zion and the daughter of Zion, so St. Augustine. And so the
children of the needy are but the poor in the lowest sense, and to save is but
to judge in the best signification, to employ and lay out the judiciary power
in maintaining the cause of the poor, and being an Helper to the friendlesse.
Ps. 10.14.


The words then being exegeticall, and declarative of the former, will need
little discussing, I shall be brief, very brief in their dispatch.

He shall save. In the other Translation, defend. And indeed where the Rich are
Plaintiffs, the Poor had need of a better Defendant then themselves. Ps. 82.1.3.
And therefore God, standing in the Congregation of the mighty, and judging
among the Gods, gives them this in charge, Defend the poor and fatherless: do
justice to the afflicted and needy. Defend them: be their shield to keep off
the thrusts of the mighty. Be a strength to the poor, Isa. 25.4.
a strength to the needy in their distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow
from the heat, that the blast of the terrible ones may be as a storm against
the wall. Interpose betwixt them and danger, bear off the blows which are made
at them. He shall defend the children of the needy.

But, if you please, we will keep to our own Translation: He shall save.

Which if we understand of Eternal safety, of that impregnable, and
inexpugnable security of the Saints upon the holy hill, when they shall be out
of Gunshot, and beyond the reach of the spoyler, and hands of violence, then
is it the alone work of the Lord Jesus Christ: Acts 4.12. Isa 63.1.3 5.
Neither is there salvation in any other. Who is this that comes from Edom,
with dyed garments from Bozrah? This that is glorious in his apparel,
travailing in the greatness of his strength? I that speak in righteousness,
mighty to save. Ego torcular calcavi folus, I have trodden the winepresse alone,
and of the people there was none with me. I looked, and there was none to
help, therefore mine own arm brought salvation. Chap. 45.15.
He that thus saves is a Savior alone, the God of Israel, the Savior.

But if we take it for temporal saving (as we have most reason in this place)
then does this great Savior communicate his name, and admit of partners: Judge.
3.9.
thus Judge Othniel is called a Savior. And Nehemiah says as much of the the
other Judges: Neh. 9.27.
According to thy manifold mercies, thou gave them Saviors.

So that the salvation of the Text is from both hands: Christ's and Solomon's:
Gods and the King's: It is a proper work for a God, for a Judge, for both, for
either of them, each has to do in it: He shall save the poor of the people.

God shall save; that is the best, the first, let us look a little at that: And
we can look no ways but we see it. We of this Nation are the most joyful
witnesses of this glorious truth, we have reason to make it our Motto for ever:
Salvos faciet, He shall save the children of the needy.

Our King miraculously preserved, graciously restored, and that when hope
seemed to be posed, and expectation non-plust, and his case little less
desperate then theirs which Heman bemoans to God: Psalm. 88.3, 4, 5.
His soul full of troubles, and his life drawing nigh to the grave: counted
with them that go down into the pit: as a man that has no strength. Free
among the dead like the slain that lie in the grave, whom thou remembrest no
more, and they are cut off from thine hand.

Our Religion rescued from the confines of Atheism, the very jaws of
irreligion and profaneness.

Our Church raised from the dust, and reared out of her rubbish and ruins,
after her Adversaries had a long time been chief, Lam. 1.5.
and her Enemies prospered, and spread out his hand upon all her pleasant
things: Verse. 10.
The ways of Zion mourning, because so few came to her solemn feasts: Verse. 4.
all her gates desolate, her Priests sighing, her Virgins afflicted, and her
self in bitterness.

Our Laws framed, and founded by the wisdom, and upon the well-grown
experience of prudent and more sober Ancestors for successive ages, the
boundaries of our liberty and property re-established, reinforced, against the
anomalous encroachments and arbitrary impositions of unreasonable men.

Our lives given us for a prey: when, Jer. 21.9.
with the widow in Timothy, (though in a far different case, she for pleasure,
we for perplexity) we were dead, 1 Timothy 5.6.
while we lived.

Our peace and happy calm after so great a tempest. Isa. 2.4.
Beating our swords into plow shares, and our spears into pruning books, Mic.
4.4.
sitting every man under his vine and under his fig tree, and none to make him
afraid. Ps. 144.14.
No breaking in nor going out, no leading into captivity, no complaining in our
streets.

Our plenty. Ps. 65.11.
The year crowned with Gods goodness, and his paths dropping fatness. Joel
^.24, 25.
The floors full of wheat, and the fats over flowing with wine and oil. The
years restored to us that the Locust had eaten, the Cancker-worme and the
Caterpillar, and the Palmer-worme, the great Army which was sent among us.

All these speak to us in a plain and loud language this salvos faciet of the
Text, He shall save the children of the needy.

This is prosperity to our King, glory to our Church, happiness to our
Kingdom, shipping to our Island, walls to our Garrisons, wisdom to our
Counselors, valor to our Soldiers, plenty to our borders, peace to our
Nation, joy and security to us all, this is all in all. This salvos faciet, He
shall save the children of the needy.

That Is one He. He indeed, the sovereign and supreme He, the first and great
Savior.

There Is another He, a second and subordinate He, a proxy, a sub-saviour, the
King, the Judge, the Magistrate, He also has a part to act in this salvos
faciet, He shall save the children of the needy.

It is not to be expected that the Lord should make bare his holy arm to work
great and miraculous deliverances every day: Isa. 51.10.
You that are as the hand to that arm, or rather the instrument in that hand
have your posse for that purpose. The Kingdom is the Lords, Obad. 21.
but from him shall come Saviors upon Mount Zion to judge the mount of Esau.
Therefore has the great God armed you with his authority, and fortified you
with his name, and strengthened you with his Commission, and entrusted you with
his power, that you may lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble
knees, and make straight paths for their feet, lest that which is lame be
turned out of the way; but let it rather be healed, let it be helped, let it be
saved. He shall save the children of the needy.

The children of the Needy. Of the Poor (says the other Translation) here are
two words used for poor, (...). The one signifies the poor that works with
his hands: the other the poor that has no hands to work, the poorest of the
poor, the most forlorn and wretched: the sons of misery the Chaldee renders it.

Videri potest exaggeratio in filiis Pauperum, in Loc. p. 325. l. F.
says Lorinus, there seems to be a whole heap of poverty in the expressions
here used. Every word speaks them poorer then other. Here is populus, or
popellus rather, people of the lowest sort, and least account. Then here are
pauperes populi, the poor of those people. And then filii pauperum, the
children of those poor. Of all people the poor are most have-less, and of all
poor the Children are most helpless: They are the neediest of the poor, and
the children of those needy. Children that were sold and slaved for want of the
(...), the redemption penny: and so signifies those that were a kind of
Orphans with living Parents, such as were destitute of all parentall helps and
advantages, like those precious Pilgrims, Heb. 1^.37
that were destitute, afflicted, tormented. These, the more lost they are, the
more need they have of saving misery is a moving plea where Compassion fits
Judge. The God of Heaven will not over-looke these children of the needy as
little, as low as they are: no more must the Gods on Earth. They need no
Advocate but their adversity, their condition is an invitation to their eyes to
see them, to their hands to save them. He shall save, etc.

But, I must not stay with this, I must have to the last part. Let me only mind
you by a review of what is past, that the Magistrate must be a compound of
justice and mercy. He must so do justice that he remember to be merciful, and
so show mercy, that he forget not to be just. God furnishes you with objects
for both; when you meet with the evil, idle poor, judge them and spare not:
when with the destitute, the afflicted, the children of the needy, save them.
Do justice, and love mercy, the one by force, the other by choice. Mica 6.^.
Mercy is a choice, a lovely attribute, God loves it, do you so too. It is said
of him that he made a way for his anger. Ps. 78.50.
As if there were no way for Anger to pass till he made it: or if it was made,
it was grown up again for want of use, till he had made it anew. When the Lord
was angry with Judah, and threatened to shave her with a keen and cutting
Judgment, it is said he will do it, Isa. 7.20:
in novacula conducta, with a Razor that is hired, as if he had no Instruments
of his own for so sharp a work. 2 Cor. 1.3. Romans 15.5. Hos. 14.3. Ps. 102.17.
He is the father of mercies, and God of consolation. With him the fatherless
find mercy. He regards the prayer of the destitute. He saves the afflicted
people and children of the needy. Be you therefore merciful as your heavenly
Father is merciful. It Is like you will find needy enough, and children of the
needy too, for some have slain, and also taken possession, every one has been
ready to tread upon him that was down, and go over the hedge where it was
lowest: I shall only be their Advocate so far as my Text warrants me (for I
would not repeat old injuries but repel new ones) remember the salvos faciet
lies upon you, He shall save the Children of the needy.

I have now done with the first general part of the Text, the defensive part
of justice, in it is double Act and Object: He shall judge the poor of the
people, and save the children of the needy.

The second, the Offensive part remains: but that it may not be so to you, I
shall contract with as much have as method can fairly and possibly allow.

And shall break in pieces the Oppressor.

Conteret: shall bruise, or grind, Ribera in Hos. c. 13. n. 19.
or break small. Metaphora a rebus quae minutissime confringuntur, and quasi in
nihilum rediguntur. It seems to allude to drugs, or spices in a mortar, which
for some time rise and fly about, but at length are brought under, and quieted
into a dust.

Contundet: is the word some use, shall bruise, shall knock, and by beating,
repress.

Confringet, is St. Hieroms word: shall break asunder, or into pieces: And
blessed be God our Oppressors were in so many pieces before, a little breaking
will serve the turn.

Comminuet, Perdet, are several words to the same purpose, and therefore it is
enough to name them, shall waste, destroy the Oppressor.

Humiliabit: so the Vulgar Latin, and most properly for some sort of
Oppressors, the affectors of Grandeur, men that are leapt a great height from
the ground, and got aloft in the world; grown into sudden estates: who, (it is
to be feared) would make but a slender, and faltring answer, should they be
asked Isaac's question to his supposed son Esau; Genesis 27.20.
how is it that thou have found it so quickly my son? Humiliabit, will sit
such, he shall lay them low, as their deserts are: he shall reduce them to
their former state, bring them down, and level them with their beginnings.

He shall humble the high looking Oppressor.

The word in the other Translation seems to speak all in one: He shall punish:
punish is all the other, bruise, and beat, and break, and repress, and waste,
and destroy, and bring down; and it seems to cut out, and square a size, and
proportion of punishment answerable to that of sin and demerit: the spoyler
shall be spoiled, and he that breaks others, shall be broken himself; He shall
break in pieces the Oppressor.

Oppressor: It is of large signification, and various rendrings. The other
Translation gives it, the wrong-doer, a man of uneven, or oblique actings,
guilty of deflections and swervings, that walks by no rule, observes no law in
his dealings, but perfas and nefas, right or wrong, he will have it; This the
Oppressor, or wrong-doer.

I find three expressions that have obtained most, and are of best credit; a
word, and but a word of each.

Calumniatorem, that is first. St. Hierom so renders it, the slanderer, the
false accuser, (...) in St. Chrysostoms language, the Devil himself, Revel.
12.10.
Satan the accuser of our brethren, whom Christ overca^e by his passion,
breaking the head of that Leviathan in pieces. But there is another Devil
besides him, a Devil incarnate, that can act that part to the life (...).
Lovin. in loc. p. 325. l. G.
Apollinarius calls him the false accusing man, and is excellently construed by
some, the fraudulent oppressor, one that by undue, and untrue practices,
strikes, wounds, kills the fame of another, to give life to his own. One that
cunningly lays another's honor in the dust to erect and set up his own; for
instance, what a male-Administrator of justice was David? how unfit to rule?
and what an excellent and well accomplished King would Absalom have made, 2 Samuel 15.3.
if you will believe him? See thy matters are good and right, but there is no man
deputed of the King to hear thee! Oh that I were made Judge in the Land, that
every man which has any suite or cause might come to me, and I would do him
justice! It is no pleasure to look back, or else you might see how this design
was driven on by our late Oppressors. Their calumnies, their false and fucated
accusations were very thriving, and they contrived it as their best and most
taking expedient, by traducing his late Majesty's government, to introduce and
set up their own. Remember Lord the reproach of thy servant, wherewith thine
enemies have reproached, O Lord; wherewith they have reproached the footsteps
of thine Anointed. The Calumniator, or false Accuser, the fraudulent
Oppressor, that is first.

The Greek version gives us the second, (...): Apud Athenienses Lege cautiu^
erat, ne quis ficus exportaret: unde quidam deferendo and accusando victum
quaerentes, sycophantarum nomina sortiti sunt.
which in the strict and genuine sense imports Calumniosu^ delatorem, a
clawing, daubing accuser; a pick-thank, a pick-pocket Informer and Prosecutor,
that frames and follows mischiefs by a Law: in the larger, and looser sense, it
denotes a Deceiver, a juggling, dissembling Oppressor: one that cries up
public, while he carries on private interests, and advantages: one that is
Master of his trade, can pray and oppress, Mat. 23 14.
(a trick of the Pharisees) cry and kill, shed tears and blood, carry Heaven in
his looks, and Hell in his thoughts, larvate himself and put on a face of
holiness, and justice upon the foulest, and most abominable practices that
ever the Sun saw.

Such was the contrivance of Jezebel, (who had skill in other paintings,
besides that of her face) Naboth's Inheritance will fit Ahab, but how must he
come by it? not take it away by arbitrary power, and force; that would be too
gross and palpable an oppression, a Tyranny, every one will see it, and cry out
of it. No: but let us have a Fast, and let us have a High Court of Justice; 1 K.
21.9.
Proclaim a Fast, and set Naboth on high, and then take away his life, and
estate and all, and who dare say he is an Oppressor that did it?

-- Nihil est audacius illis (sumunt Juven. Satyr. 6.

Deprensis, iram, atque animos a crimine
Such a sort of cunning, and cleanly Oppressors we meet with in the Psalmist:
Psalm. 58.2.
You weigh the violence of your hands in the earth. St. Hierome reads it,
Injustitias manus vestrae concinnant; you trim up oppression, and dress
violence in the cloths of justice. You have the very knack of Injustice, and
can do wrong as handsomely as if it were the greatest right. (...); So the
Seventy interpret it, you twine and twist up your iniquity with such shows and
pretenses of justice and piety, that though you draw iniquity with cords of
vanity, yet you seem to spin a fine thread. Or, which our Translation follows:
Iniquitates manus vestrae appendunt; your hands weigh violence, or you weigh
the violence of your hands. To weigh violence is velle videri agere in pondere,
Lorinus.
and aequitate, id quod per vim and inique fit: to seem to do that justly, by
weight, and measure, which is beyond measure sinful, unjust, and wicked. They
are such Artifts at Oppression, that they will not allow an action, or let it
pass, till it has been in the balance: as if they were afraid of the least
grain of injustice, when indeed whole pounds will not make so much as a scruple
in such men's consciences; but enough of them. The sycophant, the deceitful,
dissembling Oppressor, He Is the second.

Violentum: Let us look at him as a third. The violent man, the impetuous and
impudent Oppressor, that blusheth at nothing, Isa. 48.4. Jer. 3.3.
having a brow of brass, a whores forehead, refusing to be ashamed; ranting at
Jehu's rate, and driving furiously as the son of Nimshi, charging desperately
through all Obligations, honor, and honesty, no law can stop him, no oaths can
hold him. He sets up, and pulls down, and Leviathan like is made without fear.
A torrent of such Oppressors not long since broke in upon this more then
miserable Church and Kingdom, over running all banks and bounds; whose
language was Overturne, overturne, overturne, and cared not to throw the
foundations of the earth out of course, and unhinge the world. Psalm. 83.2.
For lo thine enemies, O God, made a tumult, Verse. 3.
and they that hated thee have lift up the head. They took crafty counsel
against thy people, and consulted against thy hidden ones. Verse. 4.
They said come let us cut them off from being a nation, that the name of
Israel may be no more in remembrance. Verse 12.
Come let us take to our selves the houses of God in possession. Lam. 4.20.
The breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord was taken in their pits,
of whom we said under his shadow we shall live. Genesis 49.5, 6.
Instruments of cruelty are in their habitations. O my soul come not thou into
their secret! and blessed be the living God, V. 14. hujus Psalm.
who has redeemed our soul from their deceit and violence, and let our blood
be precious in his sight. Psalm 9.6.
So that now I hope we may say, not insultingly, but humbly, not upbraidingly,
but thankfully, O thou enemy, destructions are come to a perpetual end. Ps
10.18.
God has judged the fatherless and the oppressed, that the man of the earth
may no more oppress.

The violent Oppressor, He Is the third.

I shall not take upon me to give you in a Catalogue of our late new devised
Oppressors, the remembrance of them is grievous, as the burden of them was
intolerable. Besides, it would over-match both my time and undertaking, and I
should be at a loss for their names and number, they were so many, so
monstrous: it is well we may have leisure to forget them, I wish we may do it
heartily. Nor would I now have remembered them, had not my Text pointed at them,
and led me to them. He that judges the poor, and saves the children of the
needy, has broken in pieces these Oppressors.

But we have some Oppressors of the old stamp, I would we were as well eased
of them too.

That we might have no racking, skrewing Landlords, that do not only fleece
their Retainers, and Underlings, and keep them bare: but go as near as those
Princes of the house of Israel, Mic. 3.2.
who pluck off their skin from off them, and their flesh from off their bones,
and are as attractive of their Tenants silver, as the Sferra Cavallo is of
iron, Br. Pseud. l. 2. p. 100.
which (they say) will not let a horse keep on his shoes by it.

That we might have no usurious Exactors, Psalm. 10.9.
who lies in wait to catch the poor, and ravisheth him when he draws him
into his net, his intangling net of Forfeitures, Mortgages, and Obligations.

That we might have no quarrelling litigious Great ones, whose full g^lls and
purses know no vent, but in Suits and Contentions. Such the Apostle complains
of: (...). Jam. 2.6.
Do not rich men oppress you, and draw you before the judgement-seats? and
that only, ob jejunam calumniam, (as the Orator terms it) upon a a nice, a
needless, a nothing Cavil.

That we might have no falsehood, nor treachery lurking under the long Robe in
unconscionable Chamber-practice: Pliny, and Aelian.
whilst, like the Amphisbaena, they move both ways: take a reward against the
Innocent, sell the Truth, and drive on Judas's bargain, quid dabitis? Matthew.
26.15.
What will you give me and I will deliver him to you?

That we might have no elusions of right, no cheats put upon Justice at the
Bar, by crying up Esau's hands with Jacob's voice, and decrying St. Paul's
cause with Tertullus his tongue: till Hypocrite-like, the cause is any thing
but what it seems, and seems nothing of what it is. You that are entrusted
with judging the poor of the people, and saving the children of the needy,
will, I hope, take care also to break in pieces these Oppressors.

I shall now but speak the sense, and deliver the Errand of the Text, to the
Judge, the Oppressor, and the poor of the people, and I have done.

To the Judge first. My Lords, I do not, I dare not take upon me to instruct
you, whose Commissioned merits, and well famed abilities set you above the
reach of such attempts: but remember you, I may, I must: My duty, my Text
commands me to it.

The Text tells you, you could have no power at all unless it were given you
from above. There is another He, whose person, whose power, whose Tribunal,
whose Attendants, are above, are beyond yours; who shall judge, and save, and
break in pieces, when you have done. O do not save what He would have broken,
nor break what he would save! Jam. 5.9.
He stands before the door, He Will be here presently, and he will judge all
man's judgment over again. Corn. a Lap. Com. in Eccl. c. 3
Hoc enim est officium Elohim, ut justis Laesis suum jus and famam restituat.
It will be the business of God in that great day, to scan the causes of the
world, and rectify all the errors of these lower judgments, and therefore it
behooves you to judge exactly: if he espy the least detaining of any truth in
unrighteousness, the least connivance at any iniquity, the least seducing by
any passion or affection, the least prevarication or obliquity, be sure to
hear on it. Job 31.4.
Does not he see your ways, and count all your steps? It concerns you then to
tread even that have such a looker on. Act 24.25.
Judge Foelix trembled to hear of another judgment to come; thoughts of Gods
judgment will notably influence upon yours. You had need be better then men
(if possible) when you remember that God sits among you, especially when you
remember that he shall sit upon you: and that as sure as you now judge, you
shall be judged by him that shall judge the poor of the people, and save the
children of the needy, and break in pieces the Oppressor.

2. To the Opressour, I shall apply my self in that of the Psalmist, Ps. 75.4.
Dixi iniquis: I said to the fools deal not so madly, and to the wicked lift
not up the horn. Proud dust! whether will thou be blown and scattered, when
the great Judge shall come riding upon the wings of the wind? Poor stubble!
where will thou stand before a consuming fire? Thou that tread'st upon the
necks of the needy with the feet of pride and cruelty, and bear thy self up
by thy outward advantages, as if (with those in Obadiah) thou would nest thy
self among the stars, Obad. 4.
and say in thine heart, Verse. 3.
who shall bring me down to the ground? Here Is a He in the Text, who has
(...), St. Chrysostom.
a most dreadful Tribunal, before which thy pride shall shrink up, thy high
looks be levelled, and thy thoughts laid low: Isa. 2.20, 21.
In that day thou shall cast away thy idolized silver and gold to the Moles,
and to the Bats; to go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the
earth; to go into the clifts of the rocks, and into the tops of theragged
rocks, for fear of the Lord and for the glory of his Majesty: when he arises
to shake terribly the earth. Heb. 12.26
Yet once more he shakes not the earth only, but also heaven. Matthew. 24.29.
The day is coming when all the powers of heaven shall be shaken, the Sun
become black, Rev. 6.12, 13. 2 Pet. 3.10.
and the Moon as blood, the Stars fall, and all the lights of heaven be put out
at once: the Elements melt with fervent heat, Mat. 24 30 Rev. 1.7.
the sea roar, and the Tribes of the earth mourn; and then shall appear the
sign of the son of man; Every eye shall see him, and thine also which pierced
him in the poor members of his mystical body; 2 Samuel 13.13.
and thou, whether shall thou cause thy shame to go? thou will then be glad of
a Covert that would cut thee in pieces, that thou might run into ruin, Rev.
9.6.
seeking death and shall not find it, desiring to dye, and death flying from
thee, Chapter 6.16.
saying to the mountains, and rocks, Fall on us and hide us from the face of
him that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. Dan. 4.27.
Wherefore let my counsel be accepted? Break off thy sins by righteousness,
and thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor: Ps. 50.12.
if it may be a lengthening of thy tranquillity. Now consider this you that
forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver^ For he
shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the children of the needy,
and shall break in pieces the Oppressor.

3. To the poor of the people, and children of the needy, the Text says so
much, I need say but little, very little, this.

Hail you that are highly favored, Luke 1.28.
the Lord is with you, blessed are you among men. You are the very darlings,
and delight of providence: You are God's care, and he has given you in charge
to the Judge: here is both Jus Poli, and Jus Fori for you, so that if either
Heaven, or Earth can do you right, you shall have it.

You have been oppressed it may be, and shed tears, and found no Comforter:
Eccl. 4.1.
And on the side of your Oppressors there was power, but you had no Comforter;
The Text will show you one, Rev. 21.4.
Who shall judge and save you, and wipe away all tears from your eyes, and set
you above death, and sorrow, and crying, and pain.

You have had your Names clouded, and over-cast with Obloquies, disgraces,
reproaches; Psalm. 36.5.
He will clear them up for you: Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also in
him, and he shall bring it to pass. Verse. 6.
He shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as the
noonday. Rest in the Lord, Verse 7.
and wait patiently for him: Mat. 13.43
You shall shine forth as the Sun, in the kingdom of your Father.

You have been despised, Isa. 53.3.
and rejected of men, they hid their faces from you, and esteemed you not; Mal.
3.17.
you shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make up my
Jewels.

You have lost all for keeping the Commandments of God, and the testimony of
Jesus Christ: Lu. 12.33.
You shall have bags which wax not old, treasure in the heavens which fails
not, Mat. 6.20.
where neither moth, nor rust can corrupt, and where thieves cannot break
through and steal: a better and more enduring substance: Heb. 10.34. Psa.
58.11.
So that you shall say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous, verily he
is a God that judges in the earth.

You can get no reparation for sufferings, no redress of grievances, but after
abundance of waiting; Prove. 13.12. Jer. 8.15.
Your hope is deferred, and your heart is sick: You looked for peace, but no
good came, and for a time of health, Lu. 21.19. Jam. 5.8.
and behold trouble. O but in patience possess ye your souls: Stablish your
hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh: Rev 3.11. Ps. 125 3.
Hold that fast which thou have, that no man take thy Crown: The Rod of the
wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous: The needy shall not always
be forgotten, the expectation of the poor shall not perish for ever. That
longing expectation of the souls under the Altar, Vsque quo Domine, How long,
Rev. 6.10.
O Lord, holy, and true? is answered with an Adhuc modicum, aliquantulumque
Heb. 10.37.
Yet a little while, and he that shall come will come and will not tarry. For
he comes, Ps. 96.13.
for he comes to judge the earth, he shall judge the world with
righteousness, and the people with his truth. Rev. 22.12
Behold he comes quickly, and his reward is with him, to give every man
according as his work shall be.

For He shall judge the poor of the people, He shall save the children of the
needy, and shall break in pieces the Oppressor.

Now the great God of heaven and earth, the maker of all things, the Judge of
all men, 2 Timothy 4.1^
who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom,
give you such a spirit of judgment, wisdom, counsel, courage, and the fear
of the Lord, that you which now judge men, may one day judge Angels, and sit in
glory before the face of the world, Angels and men! and grant to us all such a
spirit of meekness, moderation, holiness, humility, and obedience: that we
may so live as those that must dye, and after death, come to judgment: and
then be able to stand in great boldness, being made safe from all oppression,
fraud, and violence, secured within the embraces of the everlasting arms, and
called into a better Kingdom with that gracious invitation, Come ye blessed of
my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you before the foundation of the
world was laid. And all this, He gives us, who has so dearly purchased it for
us, Jesus Christ the Righteous! To whom with the Father and the Eternal
Spirit, be rendered of us, and of all creatures both in Heaven and Earth, all
honor, glory, adoration, and praise throughout all ages.

Amen. Hallelujah.
FINIS.

