A Few Words to those who look for ANOTHER DISPENSATION than what is known by
the Faithful CHRISTIANS in this Day, putting off and slighting the present
Manifestation of God unto them, and so by their Unfaithfulness to the Lord God,
in not walking answerable to him for his Loving Kindness in his present
Manifestation unto them, put the Day of the Lord afar off from them, etc.
FRIENDS;
WHat do you look for? what would you have discovered more to you of the things
of God's Kingdom, than can be discovered and known by the Light you believing
in it, and being faithful unto God in what he has at present manifested
thereby unto you? It Is said by one who was acquainted with the Way of the Lord,
In thy Light shall we see Light; whose Testimony is true, as you will be able
to witness in your own Particulars, by your living up to that Light, in being
faithful to the Father of Lights, in what he has at present thereby to you
made known. This I say to you in the Name of the Lord, Till you are faithful
unto him in what he has at present manifested or made known unto you, how can
you expect to know him, or the things of his Kingdom, any further or more than
at present you do?

Therefore do not dream nor imagine of another Dispensation, or of God's making
more known to you, or manifest to you of himself, or of the Things of his
Glorious Kingdom to your Comfort, than you know thereof at present, whilst you
believe not in the Light: If you do, I say and declare unto you by the Word of
the Lord, you will deceive your own Souls; which thing I desire you may not do.

You talk of a further Dispensation, and so of further Manifestations of the
Knowledge of the Glorious God, then they who are faithful to God, in walking or
living up to their Light in this Glorious Day of his Appearance are Witnesses
of, or are come to be acquainted withal: but this your Talk is without a true
Knowledge of them, or of what they do witness, and enjoy, and partake of
through the Lord's rich Love and Kindness, and Good Will unto their Souls.

Do you believe that when our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ was manifest in
Flesh, there were not as wise and as searching Wits amongst them that
gain-sayed, slighted and opposed him, as any are amongst you, who put the Day
of the Lord far away from you, though it be nigh, and the Kingdom of God be at
hand? You who slight, and disesteem, and regard not as you ought the present
manifestation of God unto you; were they not as seemingly Holy, and as
blameless in their Conversations, and as free from the guilt of Iniquity some
of them as any or many amongst you are? And was there not as much seeming
Holiness amongst them as is amongst you? And yet they knew him not, but missed
of the Knowledge of him, and so were without the Knowledge of God in the world
and his Ways, as you are, because they would not come to the Light; though
they could speak much of him, as you do.

Christ was not known to the Worldly Wise, nor his true Followers the Apostles,
etc. Therefore said the Apostle, The World knows us not, because it knows
him not: And our Life, said the Apostle, is hid with Christ in God, etc. Then
why should you in the same Wisdom they were in expect to know Christ's true
followers now any more than they did then? and if you knew the Gospel
Dispensation, (as they do whose Life from you is hid, who are faithful to the
living God in what he has manifested unto them by the Word of his Grace
(doubtless) ye would not talk so much, nor look so much for another.

Therefore while you have time prize your time, and sin not out your Day, lest
utter Darkness come upon you and overtake you, and so the Night come when you
cannot Work, which sad and woeful state and condition many have fallen into, and
doubtless many will fall into, if they Repent not: Therefore Pray ye to the God
of all Mercies, that ye may escape the same.

So Fear and Dread before the living God, and hasten for your Lives, by
abandoning and forsaking that Spirit which causes you to slight and disregard
the present Discovery and Manifestation of God unto you, and it by which he
discovers and manifests his Holy and Heavenly Mind and Will unto your
Souls; and so would have you to put the Day of the Lord afar off, which Day is
near, and ready to be revealed; lest he overthrow you, as he overthrew those
who put his Day afar off in times past, who would not be led to Repentance by
his Long-suffering.

From a Lover of your Souls, and one that seeks your Good Edward Bourne.
Worcester, the 21th of the 11th Month, 1679. Being moved with Fear have I
given this forth, and do desire, that it would please the Almighty to make it
of good Effect to such whom it shall concern, wheresoever it shall come.



Postscript.
FRiends where this shall come, to you this is my Request in Love, in the
Presence of the Lord, That you show it to such whom he shall please to let you
see there may be a Service in it, which is in my Judgment principally that
Generation, some of whom I have felt the Spirit of the Lord in me at times to
be grieved withal, because of their sleighting the Present Day and Opportunity,
which God gives them, dreaming and imagining of that which their Eyes will fail
them in their looking for in their imagined Way; such a Generation there is, as
(doubtless) many of you know, who hereby are warned, the Spirit of the Lord yet
striving with them, which if they regard not, they will be the more without
Excuse in the Great and Terrible Day of the Lord, when they shall have their
Reward according as their Works have been.

So, dear and faithful Friends, whom God has set apart for himself, in Him I
bid you Farewell.

E. B.


