TITHES Re-mounted and advanced BY The Word of God, FOR THE Ministers of the
GOSPEL.

PROVING, That Tithes are as due to the Ministers of the Gospel, as to the
Priests and Levites under the Law.

In Answer to a late scandalous and seditious Pamphlet entitled, The Ordinance
of Tithes dismounted.

Dedicated to the right honorable the Lord Mayor.

By MARTIN BOVVNE.

Imprimatur.

JOHN DOWNHAM.



1 Cor. 9.11. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing
of we reap your carnal things? LONDON, Printed for Thomas Bates at the
Mardenhead on Snovv-hill, near Holborne Conduit. 1646.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THOMAS ADAMS, Lord Mayor of the honorable City of
LONDON.
My very good Lord,
I Do understand and perceive that there is a Pamphlet exhibited unto your
Lordship, entitled, An Indictment against paying of Tithes unto the Ministers
of the Gospel: and therein are alleged Reasons, seeming by their Allegations
to prove them unlawful by the Word of God; and therein it does appear unto
me, they speak they cannot tell what, or else they care not what. J do
therefore humbly beseech your Honor to accept my poor endeavors, in this
ensuing Treatise, which does concern the lawfulness of paying Tithes to the
Ministers of the Gospel, and to give it your honorable favor, so far as
the truth of the Word of God does approve of it, and no further.

Your Honors humble Servant, Martin Bowne.

TITHES Re-mounted and advanced BY THE WORD OF GOD, FOR THE Ministers of the
Gospel.
In answer to a late scandalous and seditious Pamphlet, entitled, The
Ordinance of Tithes dismounted.
THere is a great controversy now adays, and has been a long time about the
maintenance of the Ministers Instruments of Gods Worship and Service, the
derogation thereof has hindered the propagation of the Gospel, and the
Reformation of Religion, in a most miserable manner: And that in these
respects, First in taking away the greater tithes of many Parishes in this
Kingdom, and making many impropriatitions from the Church, where there has
not been maintenance or means for a Preaching Minister, in those impropriate
Parishes; so that in many places there has not been means for a bare reading
Minister, much less for a preaching Minister: for Christ's Ministry is a
preaching Ministry, and not only a reading Ministry, and therefore cannot
be maintained with a little (as some do suppose they may) as Brownists
Anabaptists, Antinomians, Familists, Independents and such like, that have out
of pride and covetousness devised those errors and broached them in the
Church, to pester and hinder more the Gospel of Jesus Christ, then to further
it any way. They forsooth, will have no tithes paid unto the Ministers of the
Gospel, but they should labor in some other calling for their living (say
they) as others do, and as the Apostles did, some were Fishermen, and S. Paul
was a Tentmaker.

But I answer, there is a difference between the Apostles who had their
immediate calling by God, and our Ministes who have their mediate calling by
God also, but by means of schooling, and thereby to get learning, that they
may attain to the Ministerial function, and so consequently by study, whose
labor is greater then handy-craft trades, or husbandry: and therefore it is a
base opinion in those that said Ministers of the Gospel should labor in some
manual calling; I think their diligent study and preaching is labor enough
for them, we need lay no greater burdens upon their backs.

Again, it is fit for religious people, professors of the Gospel, to consider
that there is difference between a settling Church, and a settled Church; Now
the Apostles had work enough in settling the Church in their time, as well in
matters of faith, as in manners of life, according to the truth of Gods holy
Word and Will, and yet the Apostles do give rules and commands for Ministers
maintenance, as you shall hear anon.

OBJECT.

But what Tithes did the Apostle receive in that time when they were upon the
earth?

ANSW.

I answer: What Tithes did the Priests and Levites receive, as long as they
were in the wilderness? It is true; God did command Tithes to be paid then;
but the payment of Tithes was not performed, until the Children of Israel came
into Canaan, the Land of promise where every man did receive his portion in
possession. For the time they were in the wilderness, they had no settled
portion in possession to pay Tithes withal; for God did feed Priests, Levites
and People, and all in an extraordinary manner, as with Manna from Heaven; for
as long as the children of Israel were in the wilderness, God was settling his
Church, what they should do when they came to their promised place, and
portions: for all things commanded was not, nor could it be done in an instant
by men. So the Lord our God, in the time of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, when he came, he did (as it were) new mould the manner of Gods worship
and service: That whereas before in the time of the Law, Gods worship and
service was by all external means, as killing of Beasts, and making of
Sacrifices and all Offerings, and outward performances in the worship and
service of God.

But now, and since the time our Savior Jesus Christ came upon the earth, he
ordained, by the will of his Father, that his worship and service must be
spiritual and internal unto the end.

When God had made an end of describing the manner of his worship and service,
as he would have it performed in the time of the Law, as we may find in the
Books of Exodus and Levitieus. So at the end of the Book of Leviticus Chap. 27.
the Lord by Moses had reserved the maintenance of his worship and service to
himself, as namely, Tithes of those things that are spoken of in the foresaid
Chapter.

And after this the Lord gave the Tithes unto the Priests and Levites, as we
may read in the Book of Numbers 18.21, 24, 26, 28. And not only to the Priests
and Levites in the time of the Law, but also to the Pastors, Teachers and
Ministers in the time of the Gospel of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ; for
it was given for an inheritance for ever. If one of those adverse parties
should have the inheritance of a piece of land given him, I verily believe he
does expect it as a right to him and his heirs for ever, only by this title of
Inheritance: And if any one should offer to take from him this land, which he
so holds by this title of Inheritance, he would hold himself greatly
wronged and oppressed: You will say it is true.

Then, I say, consider the words of our Savior Jesus Christ, Whatsoever you
would that men should do unto you, even so do you; for this is the Law and the
Prophets, Matthew chap. 7. verse. 12.

Then consider what you would other men should do unto you, so do you unto
other men, but especially unto your Pastor and Minister, who does watch for
your souls, as he that must give an account for you; for you should not think
that too much, which your Pastor or Minister has, especially if they be
diligent in doing good to the Church of God.

OBJECT.

But what do you speak of the Law of God for Priests and Levites to have
Tithes, it was a Ceremonial Ordinance, and it was abolished at the coming of
Christ; and therefore this does make nothing for our Ministers of the Gospel
to receive Tithes, for private men are not to pay Tithes to the Ministers of
the Gospel.

ANSW.

I answer: It is false to say, That payment of Tithes by private people, and
receiving of Tithes by the Ministers of the Gospel, is a Ceremonial Ordinance.

First, Melchizedeck King of Shalem; who brought forth Bread and Wine, and he
was a Priest of the most high God, therefore he blessed him, saying, Blessed
art thou Abram of God most high, possessor of Heaven and Earth, and blessed be
the most high God, which has delivered thine enemies into thine hand: And
Abram gave him tithe of all: by these words it does plainly appear, that
Melchizedeck was not only a figure of Jesus Christ, but also a Minister of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ our alone Savior, and as Abram gave tithes unto
Melchizedeck so ought the Successors of Abraham that profess the Gospel of our
Savior Jesus Christ, to pay tithes unto the Ministers of the Gospel; and so
consequently unto our Savior Jesus Christ; For Melchizedeck was a figure of
Jesus Christ, and though our Savior did not receive Tithes personally, yet he
did receive Tithes figuratively, and this is to good purpose to prove Tithes to
belong to the Ministers of the Gospel. Heb. 7.

2. Tithes were paid before the Law, and therefore they ought to be paid after
the Law, for we may perceive and see that howsoever the manner of the worship
and service of God as before was altered; yet the maintenance of Gods worship
and service (the tithes) were then paid therefore; to be considered.

3. Abraham the Father of the faithful, did pay tithes unto Melchisedeck the
figure of Christ, and therefore those that will or are the children of the
faithful will pay tithes unto the Ministers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

The adverse party does object that this does nothing satisfy us in the old
Testament, show us out of the new Testament that ithes belong to the Ministers
of Christ.

I answer, First I will lay my ground on the old Testament, and then conclude
in the new Testament.

The Prophet Isaiah in his 66. chap. verse 19. prophesying of the calling of
the Gentiles, does foreshew the propagation of the Gospel that they shall bring
of all your Brethren for an Offering unto the Lord out of all Nations, and
verse 21. He says, and I will take of them for Priests and for Levites says
the Lord, to wit, of the Gentiles, as it was verified in the time of the
Apostles by Luke, Timothy, and Titus, first, and after to other sueceeding
Ministers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

The Prophet here does give us to understand by these Words, Priests, and
Levites, to have relation unto the Priests, and Levites, unto whom God gave the
tithes for an Inheritance, spoken of before, Numb. 18. from the 21. verse to
the end of the Chapter, this Title I say Priests and Levites does intimate unto
us, that as God gave the tithes for the maintenance of his worship, and service
unto the Priests and Levites, the then ministerial Instruments of the same,
his worship and service which was then but temporal, and tipicall, so he will
much more continue the same maintenance of the Tithes unto Luke, Timothy, and
Titus. The Prophet Isaiahs Priests, and Levites, to the same men Luke, Timothy,
and Titus, our Christian Pastors, Teachers, and Ministers of the Gospel, and to
their successors for ever.

Again, the Apostle Saint Paul does reason of the case very plainly, 1 Cor. 9.
and shows that he has power to require maintenance, as in the 6. verse. I
only and Barnabas have we not power to forbear working, I marvile then with
what face the Seperatists dare to speak so bouldly, as they do, to say that
Ministers ought to labor in some bodily or outward calling, when the Apostle
says that it is in their power to forbear working at any handie Trade, then in
the 7. verse the Apostle further says, who goes a warrfare at his one charge
at any time, giving us to understand that if Captains and Soldiers do not go
to wars at their own charge, then very well may Ministers forbear their
duty if they cannot have maintenance; for he shows his reasons for it, who
planteth a vineyard and eats not the fruit thereof, or who feeds a flock
and eats not the milk of the flock?

The Apostle does reason from a twofold experience of man's own practice, first,
in planting a vineyard, secondly, in feeding of a flock, as if he should have
said, Is there any man that is so foolish as to plant a vineyard or feed a
flock, and not expect some benefit for his pains and charge?

I know your answer will be, you will say no, I my self would not take such
pains, and lie on charge for nothing.

Then consider a Ministers friends are at great charge for keeping him at
school, and when he has got learning, to be at great cost for Books, and to
attain to the Ministry, and to bestow his pains with diligence in his study,
and then to have little or nothing for his labor; Is this equity, and can this
stand with a good conscience, let conscionable men judge; but says the carnal
worldly man, Ministers will speak well enough for their own profit.

The Apostle does answer that cavil in 1 Cor. 9.8. say I these things as a
man, or says not the Law the same also, Deuteronomy. 25.4. Here the Apostle cites
the Law of God for the maintenance of Ministers of the Gospel, and yet our
Anabaptists, our Antinomians, our Brownists, and Jndependents, will not in any
case hear of the Law of God, truly either the Apostle or they must needs be in
a foul errout: But they will not say the Apostle is in an error, therefore
they are in an error for want of grace, and Judgment. Certainly, if men would
(that do profess the Gospel) leave of pride, and covetousness, there would
not be such variances among professors of the Gospel as there is, which does
breed and bring a great scandal to the truth. It makes ignorant people to
speak idly and harshiy of Religion, and say there be so many Religions, that
we cannot tell which way to take, when indeed there is but one Religion that is
the truth that must bring us to true faith, true fear, and the true love of
God.

So amongst many differences here is one about Tithes; for the maintenance of
the Ministers of the Gospel, which the Apostle does prove by the Law of God, 1 Timothy 5.17.18. and so does reason the case in a fair exemplary way, in the 1
Cor. 9. the 9.10.11. and 12. verse. and in the 13. and 14. verse. he comes close
to the matter in these words, do you not know that they which minister about
holy things, live or feed of the things of the Temple, and they that wait at
the Altar are partakers with the Altar?

Even so has the Lord ordained that they which preach the Gospel should live
of the Gospel.

I hope you are not ignorant, how the Priests and Levites the Ministers
Jnstruments of Gods worship and service, how they did live, so, if you will not
hear and learn what the Law of God says, then hear learn and practice,
what the Apostle does tell you, do you not know that they which minister about
holy things, live of the things of the Temple, and they that wait at the Alter
are partakers with the Altar.

As if the Apostle should have said, you have a sufficient precident before
you, how our predecessors before us were maintained: howsoever we differ in
title, they were Priests, and Levites, we are Apostles, Pastors, and Teachers,
their worship and service to God was external and temporal, and our worship
and service to God is internal and spiritual; you see though the manner of
Gods worship and service is changed, yet the maintenance of Gods worship is not
changed, the Apostle goes on in the 14. verse. That as he said even now, that as
they which minister about holy things, live of the things of the Temple, and
they that wait at the Altar are pertakers of the Altar; even so says the
Apostle, has the Lord ordained that they which preach the Gospel should live
of the Gospel, mark I pray you the Apostles words, even so has the Lord
ordained, that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel, they and
none but they.

I would very willingly know of any one that does deny this truth, that the
Ministers of the Gospel should not receive Tithes for their Maintenance, and
where they can prove that God has ordained maintenance other ways for an
inheritance then in the 18. Chap. of Numb. the 21. and 24.

And if any shall say that is ceremonial for all that which has been spoken
before; Then I say they are wilful, and will have their own will, being
perverse in judgment and understanding Mehuge like proup and will teach God,
how he should maintain his Pastor and the Ministers of his Gospel.

This does savor both of Pride and Covetousness.

First, of pride in thinking themselves to be such as have attained to so much
knowledge in the Scriptures, as they can convince any that say, Tithes do
belong to the Ministers of the Gospel, when as indeed they say nothing.

Secondly, it savours of Covetousness; for there are many that think if they
can save their Tithes to their own use, they have gotten a great Booty, and
much benefit to themselves, when as indeed it makes the other 9. parts to be
accursed. It is like unto Achans Babilonish Garment, and his wedge of gold and
silver that he stole, Josuah 7. a deed that will never prosper, or as a woman
that byes a peck of meal and divides it into 9. parts, and puts a tenth part
of Rats-Bane into the 9. parts and see how that will prove, you will say that
will poison as many as use it, and have part of it. And so will the Tithes that
comes of the owners, that does or shall retain them: Therefore hear and
consider. Experimental knowledge is the best knowledge, I have known those
that would not endure paying of Tithes in kind, to their Pastor and Minister at
no hand, except they may buy their Tithes of their Minister, and so to have it
for half that it was worth, they have let land lie still, because that he
shoud have nothing, but the Lord who gave those Tithes took them to himself,
and laid such a curse upon the other nine parts, that they in their days, nor
their posterity did ever prosper: Nay now shall we think that God does not see
into this sin, as well as into other sins, yes certainly, and has and will
punish it too. The Lord by the Prophet Malachi says, 3.7, 8, 9, 10. Even from
the days of your Fathesr ye are gone astray from mine Ordinances, and have not
kept them, return unto me, and I will return unto you, says the Lord of
hosts; but ye said wherein shall we return, verse, 8. will a man rob God, yet
ye have robbed me; but ye say wherein have we robbed thee, in Tithes and
Offerings, verse. 9. ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have robbed me, even
this whole Nation, verse. 10. Bring ye all the Tithes into the Storehouse, that
there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, says the Lord of
Hosts, if I will not open the windows of Heaven and power you out a blessing,
that there shall not be room enough to receive it.

This portion of Scripture does deserve a good Commentary to be made upon it;
for further instruction and stirring up of people, to the duty of paying their
Tithes the right way, and not to Church-Robbers, viz. to private men, dumb
dogs, idle drones, and non-Residents: But to faithful, painful, and diligent
Ministers that have a Pastoral charge over a Parish or Congregation whereby
the Souls of Gods people may be fed with spiritual food, unto eternal life.
For the true and sinceere preaching of Gods word is the means of faith, and
true faith does bring us to Jesus Christ, and Jesus Christ is the way to
eternal life in Heaven.

If it had pleased God in the beginning of King James His Raygne, that all
Impropriations had been called in, and a faithful diligent Minister placed
over every Congregation in a Pastoral charge, and the Tithes of every several
Congregation, paid unto every several Minister that had such a Pastoral
Charge, and the true dissipline and reformation of the Church, had then been
established as it was then hoped it should have been at the coming in of King
James. Then had this misery (that is now upon this Land) never come, but the
time of Reformation was not then come, and God had a Controversy with this
Kingdom, and therefore this Land was not fitted for such a good work: yet the
Lord did in mercy and judgment send a great Plague and Pestilence, and since
he has sent a greater Plague and Pestilence, and yet nothing of all this would
call this Land to Repentance; For the people of this Land are as proud as ever
they were before, as hateful to true Religion, Prophaners of the Lords day,
full of railing, blaspheming the name of God, and foulmouthed swearing,
swearing false, whoreing, murdering, and blood, sucking Church-robbing, and
irreverent behavior in the very Public place of Gods worship and service, but
I have something digressed.

The Apostle Saint Paul says in his Epistle to the Galathians, 6. Chap. 6.
verse. Let him that is taught in the word make him that teaches him partaker of
all his goods. I marvel who shall decide this partaking of these goods, which
the Apostle here speaks of; shall any man do it? No, for then he will be a
Mehuwell a Teacher of God: For seeing God has apparently set down in his Word
that Tithes must belong to the Instruments of his Worship and Service, as is
aforesaid, and our Pastors and Ministers of Gods Worship and Service are the
Instruments thereof. Now therefore the Tithes must of necessity belong unto
them, for that is a true partaking of all his goods.

Furthermore, the Apostle to the Hebrews, Chap. 7. makes it very plain that
Tithes do belong unto our Pastors and Ministers of the Gospel.

Concerning this 7. Chap. if there were no other Scripture in all the New
Testament to prove Tithes to belong to the Ministers of the Gospel; but this
one Chapter, it were yet sufficient for touching Melchisadec, it is said he was
King of Salem, a Priest of the most high God, and in that he was a Priest of
the most high God, and meeting Abraham when he returned from the slaughter of
the Kings he blessed him, and Abraham gave him the Tenth of the spoils: From
whence we may very well observe, That when the Ministers of the Gospel do
perform their Pastoral Charge, in setting forth Gods Ordinances to their
Parishioners, the Congregation is to give unto their Pastor and Minister, the
Tithe of all they do get by their labor that comes of the Fruit of the
Earth, Genesis 14.19. Gal. 6.6. 1 Cor. 9.9, 10, 11.

First, because it is Gods part, Levit. 27.30. to the end.

Secondly, God has given the Tithes to his Ministers, that has a Pastoral
Charge, Numb. 18. as you have heard before.

Thirdly, Gospel Doctrine was taught before the Law, and the tenth part was
paid before the Law; Therefore the tenth part of the Fruits of the Earth is due
to the Ministers of the Gospel, Genesis 3.15. Chap. 17.7. and 28, 12, 14, 22. and
49.10. Revel. 10.2.

Fourthly, as it was lawful for the Priests and Levites to receive Tithes for
the performance of their Duties in the Worship and Service of God, then being
but types and shadows, much more then the Ministers of the Gospel deserve
Tithes for their maintenance, being they do labor in the substance of Gods
Worship and Service, Heb. 7.11.

For the Priests and Levites were but temporal, and also corporal, and
therefore not perfect. But our Ministers of the Gospel are Spiritual
Laborers, and therefore the more precious, as the Apostle himself shows in
this 7. Chap. verse. 7. and without all contradiction the lesser is blessed of
the better, giving us to understand, That as the Lord has commanded the Sons
of Levy, to receive Tithes of their Brethren after they had received the
Office of Priesthood; Those I say who had paid Tithes unto Melchizadec, and so
consequently to our Savior Christ whilst they were yet in the loins of
Abraham, and then Melchisadec blessed him and them; that is to say, Abraham and
his Seed.

And further in the 8 verse, and here, men that dye receive Tithes, but there
he receives them; of whom it is witnessed, that he lives, and who is he that
ever lives, was it Melchisadec, or our Savior Jesus Christ? if it was
Melchisadec, then it cannot be denied but he was a figure of Christ, as Chap.
7. verse. 1. and 3. it does appear. Then Melchizadec receiving Tithes, verse.
4.6. it must needs follow consequently, that Jesus Christ our blessed Savior
did receive Tithes: and what did he with them? I answer, he did leave them with
Melchizadecs Successors, until he brought the Children of Israel forth of
Egypt into the wilderness, and then he gave them his Law, showing them how
they should carry themselves toward God, and toward themselves, and their
Neighbors; And withal gave them Priests and Levites as Instruments of his
Worship and Service, and then he gave them the Tithes for their maintenance an
Inheritance, viz. for ever as you have heard before: And these Tithes being for
an Inheritance, the Ceremonial Law being but shadows and Types of better
things to come: These things ended, and the substance came, when Jesus Christ
came in the flesh: the Office of the Priests and Levites being ended, to whom
should the Tithes belong, but to the Ministers of Christ that preach the Gospel
to continue for ever for their maintenance, as God has before commanded.

I do verily believe, that if any of our Reverend Divines of the Synod should
but commentary upon this seventh Chapter to the Hebrewe, they could not but
yield the tithes to the Ministers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, if there were
no other proofs in the Bible to prove it; but if they should, one adverse party
or other, would be ready to raise aslander upon them, and say they preached for
themselves, when as indeed it is as necessary a truth as any is to be
preached: for take away the maintenance of preaching the truth, how long can it
stand?

You keep much ado about payment of Tithes, as if there were nothing to be
done but paying of Tithes; but if this paying of Tithes be a Moral Law, as you
say it is, I marvel how it is that Offerings are not paid as well as Tithes. I
am sure else Lord did complain by the Prophet Malachi in his 3. Chap. 8. Verse.
That they had robbed him in Tithes, and Offerings; And now no Offerings are
paid, and the refore it should seem the Law for Tithes and Offerings to be
paid, is Ceremonial and not Moral.

I answer, you think you have spoken wisely, and home to the purpose, but
alas, you are quite befogged in the dark shadow of Ceremonies.

It should seem you never in all your life paid Offerings, and therefore no
marvel that you would pay no Tithes.

But to the matter. As the Doctrine of the Gospel is spiritual, so are the
paying of Offerings spiritual: The Prophet Dania did well prophecy of these
spiritual offerings, long before the coming of Christ in the flesh, Psalm.
40.6. saying, sacrifice and offerings thou did not desire, but mine ears have
thou opened, as if the Prophet should have said, Lord, as thou have given me
the Spirit of Prophecy, to speak in the person of the Messia^ to come, so O
Lord thou have opened mine ears to hear, and my heart to understand, what
manner of worship thou have in thine eternal Counsel appointed, the Messiah
at his coming shall be performed in these words, burnt offerings and sin
^fferings have thou not required, and so forwards in the 7, 8, 9, and 10,
verses, so that the coming of our Savior Jesus Christ, he set forth his
Fathers will, what manner of Worship he would have, John 4.23, 24, 25. so here
we see what Worship and Service be requires, as namely, spiritual Worship,
and spiritual Service.

In the 5. Book of Moses there is mention made of many sorts of Offerings,
especially in the three middle Books, and above all offerings, the burnt
offerings are most spoken of, as in the 28. Chapter of the Book of Numbers, the
Lord does most of all press those offerings made by fire, now what have we to
learn by this, that our offerings must be spiritual. That is, our prayers must
burn with zeal, with ferventnesse, and pure affection: we must be zealous in
prayer and praising God, James 5.16. Psa. 119.7. in uprightness of heart, our
love must be zealous and fervent to set forth the glory of God in Jesus
Christ, zealous of a true justifying lively saving and working faith
apprehensively, Romans 3.24. Jam. 2.17, 18, 21, 22, 23. to be zealous of
repentance, to be zealous of obedience, to be short, that we be zealous of
every good work, and duty. Tit. 2.14.

Thus you see what spiritual burnt offerings are, and they that have received
the Spirit of God in any good measure, can and will be zealous; and those that
have received the spirit of illumination and understanding of Gods Word may and
can prove that Ministers of the Gospel ought to have Tithes for their
maintenance, though it be in Cities and Towns, there it may arise in moneys.

But here may very well arise a question, how Tithes are to be raised in
Cities, and Towns, not wronging the Parishoners on the one side, nor the
Pastor and Minister on the other side; must the Parishioners pay the tenth
penny of their labors?

I answer, No, neither are laboring men that live only by their mere labor
to pay Tithes, in the Country they do not, therefore not in the Cities or
Towns, but if those laboring men, or women have a garden or a cow, or any
thing more then their labor, they are to pay the tenth part of it in those
Cities and Towns, but how must Tithes be paid?

I answer thus, T^^ Merchants or Shopkeepers buy in their ware to their shops,
and then he himself or his servant, or servants are to attend all the day, to
sell their ward, either by gross, or retaile; and then when the night is done,
that he has shut up his shop, he looks in his Cash-box to see what money he
has taken for that former day, and what he has sold, and what that he sold
did cost him; then he lays out the moneys it cost him, and his charge for his
labor and attendance in sale of it, to those he does employ, and lays out of
the money for that, and then that part that is left is clear gain^. The tenth
penny must arise and be paid out of this clear gains to the Pastor and
Minister of that Congregation, and by this means those that do in right pay
their Tithes, shall void the curse that is threatened against defrauders of
Tithes.

But there is enough spoken of this before, only this, All they that shall
refuse paying their Tithes to their Pastor or Minister are Church-robbers: I do
understand there be some that have petitioned the Parliament, that Tithes may
not be paid unto the Ministers of the Gospel, because (as they say) it is
Jewish and Popish.

O horrible impiety! That men should be so graceless, as to derogate from the
word of God, and also to abuse the power and authority of the King, and the
most Honorable and Supreme Court of Parliament, making it a Bawd to their
sinister designs.

If those Petitioners had petitioned for a license to rob upon the Road-way,
their sin had not been so great: But you will say this were a gross sin, the
Parliament would never have granted such a wicked Petition.

I answer, No; and I hope they will not grant this, except they mean to
procure another curse upon the Land, Malach. 3.9. But their vigilancie is
better than so, for they labor to bring blessings upon the Kingdom, and not
cursings. But such as keep the maintenance of Gods worship and service to
themselves, do draw on a curse upon their heads, as is said before.

And this is the beloved sin, the private sin, and the hypocritical sin, that
Church-robbers both in themselves and in their posterity are plagued for.

And thus we may see the perverse natures of these cruel, proud, covetous
wretches, that make no care or conscience how they get the riches of this
world, so they have it: As for to covet the Tithes, is the Lords portion,
Levit. 27.32. It is his Ministers portion, 1 Cor. 9. verse. 8, 9, 13, 14. Hebr.
7. verse. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. And therefore those private men that do retain Tithes
to their own private use in possession, and do not deliver them to their
Pastor and Minister that have the charge of their souls, they do procure the
curse of God upon themselves, Malac. 3.8.9. as is before spoken.

Howsoever the Adversaries of the maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel
will not approve of it by Tithes, yet those that do receive the earnest of Gods
sanctifying spirit, 2 Cor. 5.5. they will with modesty read the holy
Scriptures with understanding, and moderately to judge the truth of it, when as
indeed those that are possessed with a proud, scoffing, and scomfull spirit,
they will never have done with their scoffing, jeering, and cavilling.

FINIS.

