CAPT. BADILEY'S ANSWER UNTO Capt. Appleton's Remonstrance, Given in To his
Excellency the Lord General CROMWELL, And the Right Honorable, the COUNCIL OF
STATE. AS ALSO: His true RELATION of what past between the Great Duke of
Tuscany, and himself.

WITH Sundry Letters, Affidavits, and Certificates, discovering the
Fallaciousnesse of the said Pamphlet, called

A Remonstrance of the Fight in Legorn-Road, between the English, and the Dutch.

With some other particulars, not impertinent to the purpose, of clearing up
the TRVTH.

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons, in Aldersgate Street. 1653.

AN APPENDIX, Showing the Chief Heads, and Principal Things in the ensuing
Answer.
For the right understanding of such as would in brief be ascertained of the
Truth.
PAge the 9 shows how the dealing of the Remonstrancer and his Associates, was
like unto them that triumph before Victory, but Capt. Badiley was encouraged
with other thoughts in his home-ward way.

P. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. showing how little reason the
abovesaid had to bespatter their Commander unjustly, if multiplied acts of
civility would have wrought upon them.

Part of p. 19. shows Mr. Longlands expression and the Remonstrancers, differ
greatly about Mr. Redding.

P. 20. Mr. Longland and the deceased Cap. Wood are vindicated, from Capt.
Badileys experience of their faithfulness.

P. 21. something is said to show the Remonstrancers malice, in saying, The
Phoenix Frigot was not regained by his Order, and the Great Duke had not
complained of that, if Capt Appleton had not meddled with his Centinell.

P. 22. it is cleared up to rational men, the regaining of the Phoenix Friggot
was no disturbance to the Great Dukes Port.

P. 23, 24. the Remonstrancers Fallaciousnesse is discovered, in saying There
was a Treaty between the English and the Dutch, as also the impertinacy of his
endeavors to acquit the Great Duke from any blame, with some observable notes.

Part of p. 21. and 25. declaring how marvellously it pleased the Lord alone,
to preserve a confiderable part of the Nations strength and wealth from the
Enemy.

P. 26. shows how well the weak endeavors of such of the States servants,
were resented by the authority of England, and withal there is expressed what
unworthy scurrilous language was given such not long after, occasioned by the
fallacious expressions of the Remonstrancer and his Associates, in their
Letters.

P. 27, 28, 29. relate how it was not Capt. Badileys ordering Capt. Appleton to
hasten out to him as for life, but his breach of a first and second Order or
direction, that next to a hand of God against them, proved the ruin of that
Squadron: And Capt. Wood at his going out of the world confessed, Capt. Badiley
was not at all to blame, but themselves, in not following Order.

P. 30, 31. shows that Capt. Badiley did hasten in to the relief of them who
rashly and indiscreetly came out of Legorn Mould, with all the sailc was
possible, until he came within Musket shot, and then inregard his ship would
not work, could not get on board the Leopard, or the Enemy on board her, until
it was judged too late, if it had been to save the Nation.

P. 31, 32, 33. shows not the least of Capt. Appleton's failings, if it was,
as he expresses in his Remonstrance.

P. 33.34, 35, 36. declares the fallaciousnesse of that part of his
Remonstrance, which says Capt. Ell, and Capt. Fisher would have relieved the
Leopard, but Capt. Badiley would not do that work himself, nor suffer them
to do it.

P. 37, 38. does manifest the great ridiculousnesse and vanity in the
Remonstrance, to relate what a company of drunken Eum-boat men, or he knows
not who, said to the reproach of Capt. Badiley, upon his leaving Legorn as he
did, thinking thereby to disparage him.

P. 38, 39. show what Capt. Badiley's endeavors have been, and in the close he
somewhat passionately desires that justice and right may take place in this
and all other cases, from a Scripture consideration; his meaning is, that if he
have done wrong to the Remonstrancer, or any others, he may be a sufferer for
it; but if the Remonstrancer has heft dirt in the face of the States faithful
Servants most wrongfully, he may be made to know it, that others after his
example, may not presume to do amiss, contrary to Command, and then bespatter
their Commanders, in hopes to escape the lash by such a Matchevillian practice.

P. 40, 41, 42. contain a brief abstract, and what may justly be termed the
causes of the great disaster befell that Squadron that was cooped up so long in
Legorn. Mould.

P. 43, 44. speaks out how much Capt. Badiley was sensible of the affront cast
on him in print, and that by the Printer to the Parliament, as if they had
fathered it; and in all humble manner he closes with a word of advise, least
such further mischief might follow upon it, as may be soener discerned then
remedied.

P. 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50. containing five Letters from Mr. Charles Longland,
who therein declares the backwardness of the ships in Legorn-Mould, to come
out thence, and that if Capt. Appleton would have taken his Counsel, our
conjunction had been effected ere the Dutch first Engaged us.

P. 51, 52, 53, 54, and again 47, 48, 49, 50. contain six Letters from Consul
Reed, declaring how exceeding importunate he had been with Capt. Appleton, and
also with Capt. Sea man and others, to go out to assist Capt: Badiley about
Porto Longone, but no means could prevail with them.

P. 51, 52. are two Letters from Capt: Wood, and two from Capt: Cox, declaring
the backwardness of our States ships, and some of our Merchant men, to come
out of the Mould, and withal complaining of some who retarded the service, and
betrayed our design on the Phoenix Frigot.

P. 53, 54, 55. contain three letters from C: Appleton, telling C. Badiley in
his first, he was warping out of Mould, to come away to the assistance of the
ships at Longone, but came not, although in his second letter he says the
Dutch confessed as there had not been a greater Sea Fight in their remembrance,
so they were as much shattered as those at Porto Longone.

P. 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61. are five letters more from Mr: Longland, showing
not only how we were troubled with false brethren, but how gallant an
opportunity was lost by our ships not coming from Naples, to Porto Longone, and
how cauteous he was about impresting of Merchants ships into the service, had
not the necessity of their occasions required it: And withal he declares how
much he was troubled for Capt. Appleton's imprisonment, wherefore he did not
triumph in it.

P. 62, 63. contain two letters from Capt. Gilbert Roop, declaring no man
would please him to command the Mary, but Ben: Fisher.

P. 63, 64. contain Capt. Cox's letter, showing that bad weather forced him
from Naples to Messina, with the Harry-Bonaventure.

P. 64, 65. contain the copy of Capt. Badiley's letter to Capt: Appleton,
March 1 bidding him to hasten to him as for life, if the Dutch came out to
engage with the wind off shore, although afterward he was ordered to the
contrary.

P. 66. contains a letter from Mr. Longland, telling Capt: Badiley the Great
Duke would not let loose the Dutch he had in prison, unless Van Gallen would
agree to come out, and fight us without the Malora.

P. 67, 68. show first the contents of Capt. Badiley's letter to Capt.
Appleton, March 3. at four a clock in the morning, if his memory do not
greatly fail, which appears by his Answer annexed, at 4 a clock in the
afternoon.

P. 69. contains Mr. Longlands last letter before our Engagement, causing some
to doubt we were dealt withal as those that were betrayed.

P. 70. contains the Resolves of Counsels of War, which is not handsome to
publish, but as we use to say, Necessity has no law, without it some men will
not know where to lay the blame. The Author hereof supposes he is more troubled
then any man in Engl: to think that, such things as these should come to
public view.

P. 71, 72. Two Letters under Mr. Longland's hand showing the issue of the
Tragedy near Legorn-road, the 4 of March last, and the scurrilous language and
great abuse of C: Seaman, to whom he had been so courteous.

P. 73, unto 92. Certain Affidavits clearing up the truth to all rational men.

P. 93 A relation about C. John Wadsworth.

P. 94. C. Wadsworth's Letter to M: Longland, complaining of the failings of
the Commanders of the Frigots, but of none elsewhere; And a Certificate from
one, which might have been signed by others.

P. 96. showing C: Badiley very moderate in relating how the Phoenix was lost.

P. 97. showing how C: Wadsworth's folly caused complaints to be made of him.

P. 98, 99. showing that by his Letter and otherwis as by Certificate
appears, he sully acquitteth C: Badiley from any blame.

P. 99, 100. The first Letter from the Great Duke, after the regaining of the
Frigot, complaining of C: Appleton's assaulting his Centinell, but nothing of
the Fenix.

P. 110. Something is spoken in answer to Signior Mountemagnies relation.

P. 101, 102, 103. contains the Great Dukes Letter of Credence, with what
discourse past between Signior Mountemagnie the Great Dukes Secretary, and C:
Badiley, near Legorn, about the end of Feb: last.

P. 104. contains a Letter from C: Badiley, to the Great Duke, occasioned by
the insolency of the Dutch.

P. 105, 106. conteins his reasons for writing that Letter, and an Answer from
the Great Duke translated.

P. 107, 108, 109. containing the last discourse C: Badiley had with the Great
Dukes Secretary, and how earnest he was for 30 or 40 days time, until our
ships could be got together.

P. 110, 111. containing his last letter to the Great Duke, wherein he
earnestly desires that he would be pleased to move that as well for keeping his
Port unviolated, as for other reasons, our conjunction with the Squadron in
Legorn might be effected.

P. 112, 113, 114. contains certain propositions he made for bringing about
what is before denoted, with his reasons for it.

P. 114, 115. contains the Great Dukes last letter to him, telling him he
might have staid till the 8 or 18 of March, before the ships in Legorn-Mould
went forth, if wind and weather hindered, that we could not come near one
another sooner, and no other liberty could be obtained.

P. 116, 117. Some fallacious passages in Sig: Mountemaignes Relation, are
answered: And a notable discovery of truth, by way of Query p. 118. where the
blame may be justly laid, in regard of the late disaster.

P. 119, 120. showing the issue of what refers to the Great Duke, with an
Apology for C: Badiley, least any thing has slipped his pen that should be
distasteful, and withal in the close there is a short expression, showing his
amazement, that after his great endeavors for public good, he is by the
Printer to the Parliament, rendered liable to contempt.

In most of these Books is Capt. Badiley's Answer to Capt. Seaman, Capt. Ell,
and Cap. Fishers Declarations.

Captain Badeley's Answer, unto Captain Appleton's Remonstrance, or (at least)
that part which he judges concerns him in any kind to Answer: as it was given
in to the Committee of Scoth and Irish Affairs, with very little Digression.
It Is more then three months since I came home, out of the Mediteranian Sea;
and none, high or low, has said to my face, this or that has bin il done by
you, whilst you were on the said Voyage.

Yet about the time that Captain Appleton's Remonstrance was given in, as those
that triumph before Victory, news must needs be carried to my Relations in
Family (whilst I was absent) a file of Musketeers was provided for me, to
carry me to the Power; another friend coming to my house, said, the Watermen
upon the Thames gave out I was gone to prison, and this Report was raised about
Chattam, and the Exchange: But when I heard thereof, and that some were
troubled at it, I answered; One that is accused of theft, and never played the
Thief, either directly, or indirectly, he knows not wherein he is guilty: So I
know not of any offense to the State, that I can be made capable of. Surely
therefore, before they do such a thing, they will tell me for what, and
wherefore it is.

I shall now crave leave to make a little further deviation, before I come to
answer the contrivers of the Remonstrance, who have thereby kindled a fire
which is like to end I know not where. And in the first place I shall lay down
before you, how I have labored to deliver, and by multiplied acts of civility
have endeavored to engage these who appear against me.

He says in his Remonstrance, whereas his sickness and Captain Witherages death
was cause of his not coming forth to assist me (although I wanted not
Information enough) as by the Letters appears, which herewith I present you,
how backward he was to come out, and how unready the Ships were to do service:
so that among others, his great Friend, the great Duke, that knew very well how
he did, expounded it not to be sickness, but treachery; for who knows not, that
a man may draw up a Commission in an hour, and he might have done it as well
then for Captain Line, as he did afterward to jostle out Captain Cox: And if a
man have an Ague, or some such small distemper, an Engagement with the Enemy
may shake it off sooner, then a Cartooch of Grego. But if it would not, must
therefore such a piece of the Nations strength lie still, when there is an
opportunity of doing service, and in his power either to put in another man, or
else to sit in his Gabbin and order others to do the business? And although in
his first, second, and third Letter he mentions nothing of his sickness to me;
and though Mr. Morgan Reed the Nations Consul, laments to me greatly of his
dullness in several Letters within a few days one after another; as also Mr.
Longland the States public Minister in sundry of his Letters, saying, he had
little or no mind to do service for the State; and in one Letter says, If
Captain Appleton would have followed his counsel (rather then the advice of
others, the chief of which he declares in some Letters, made open defiance to
the State) we bad joined our Forces, and so I had not been left to fight the
Enemy all alone; and notwithstanding much more wrote against him by Captain
Wood and others, for his backwardness; yet for all this, when I wrote to the
Higher Powers about him, I did, as it were, take a Mantle and cover his
failings, and miscarriages, using but his own words, saying, I believed, or
judged his sickness and Captain Withrages death retarded the coming out of
those Ships to our assistance Again, when he did that filly act in his own
person, fetching a Dutch man out of the Great Dukes Sentinels house, because he
rescued the Fleming: Upon which came all our trouble about the Phaenix, as
says Mr. Longland by his Letters; and he that will open his eyes, may see,
that if that foolish business had not been, there had not an extraordinary
Messenger been sent from the great Duke into England, complaining of him; and
consequently there had not been so much discontent given him in the Answer by
that person, as made the Dukes Secretary say publicly on the place of Legorn,
the Parliament of England had sent his Master so much poison when they sent him
that Letter.

I say, notwithstanding this, when as he was sent to me as a Prisoner to Port
Longone, that I might do justice on him, really pitying his Condition, I
desired some of our Captains to wait on him from Porta Feraro; and when he
came, although something was done in a private civil way, that the Duke might
not be greatly enraged, when as we should appear to mock at his justice; yet he
knows I did effectually end eavour to help him out of that trouble; and when he
had made his Remonstrance to send home, wherein he weakly declared his men
forced him ashore to the Mould, I hope him to make a better Remonstrance then
so; and if he had come to acknowledged my Favors, I might have helped him to
draw up one now, according to the tenor of Truth more to his repute then this,
that is full of horrid Falsities; If I had directed him to write thus, it had
been according to very truth, Briefly.

When God was pleased to give us a very good opportunity, insomuch that we
might have relieved C. Badiley, if we had had hearts to have been unanimous,
and had vigorously prosecuted it, or had wills to take his counsel in coming out
in the night, as we ought to have done; but omitting it, the Lord was pleased
so to order it, by the alteration of Winds which are in his fists, that when
the said Badiley would have relieved us, and have cleared us of Legorn, he was
made unable and incapable of hindering, or preventing our Ruin and Destruction.

To come to the business of Legorn, when he came thither in his home-ward way,
at the time when the great Duke had newly declared we must be gone to engage
the Enemy, let the ods be what it will; I say seeing me now busy in fitting
the Ship with all Accoutrements for an engagement, and filing a Vessel with
Lumber to make the Ships ready and clear, when as he was making up his things
to go for Genoa, for his friend. The great Duke declared he should not stay in
his Territories, or come ashore into his Town, he comes to me; Oh says he,
this almost breaks my heart, to think that you should go to fight, and I go
home to answer what is alleged against me. My Lieutenant also having heard him
sadly express, he knew they sent for him into England to question his life:
Truly I could not but pity the man, and answered, Captain Appleton, it is a
dangerous thing to dally with the Commands of the Council of State: But since
the Captain of this Ship, Jonas Pool, cannot be sent for from Venice in any
time, if you be real indeed, and that your peace can be made with the great
Duke, I will be your friend to further you all that lies in my power, and to
that purpose Mr. Longland and a Council of Officers shall be called together
to consider of the business; and there upon Debate it was concluded in the
Affirmative, if he could procure that leave as before: Oh but then how should
he get that leave! I answered not (at that private meeting or Council) as he
in his Remonstrance (like some Chancery Bills) says, it was then agreed he
should give six hundred Dollars to buy his peace, which is a most notorious
untruth, there was not one word about Dollars spoken there; but I said to him,
your best way in my opinion was, to confer with Consul Read, who has great
friends at Court, and it may be by means of a little grease to his Highness
Secretary, or Master of the Ceremonies, and upon your humble submission he will
remit your offense; and it seems it was so effected after I was gone: but if it
cost him more to do it then his feasting with the great Duke was worth, it will
show he has been as simple as he is now malicious. In all ages some there be
that will reward others evil for their good; I think it would have been a good
business for this man, who feared the questioning of his life at home, to have
an opportunity given him, that by his Gallantry in Service, he might have done
something to remove that fear, as also the dis-reputation, which otherwise he
could not.

And then as to his Engagement at last, whereas no effectual course was taken to
rid himself of those ships that were on board him, after our example in the
Paragon, who notwithstanding a great number of men were killed and wounded on
the upper Deck and elsewhere, to the number of about fourscore, so that all
was ordered to withdraw thence but the Commander himself; and howbeit almost as
many were run down into holes, the Enemy being board and board: and although the
Fleet had all left her without any encouragement, yet three or fourscore men
was got up to bear away the Enemy by main force of hand; how much more should
they have done it, that had so much encouragement as their Admiral, and other
their friends, to be within two or three ships length of them; and although I
was so near as about Musket Shot off, about half an hour together, not seeing a
Man, stirring upon the upper Deck, I think it a great fault in a wise
Vice Admiral, what ever it be thought of the Remonstrancer: And although an
Anchor was not let go, which was the duty of his place to have ordered, for so
the Ship in all likelihood had been saved. Nay, as there is good testimony,
although I had heard, when my Lieutenant was on board the Leopard, to tell him
how effectually I recommended to him the coming forth; but they neglecting it,
his Mate Wrightington, whom he highly commended to me, I am sure a man that
knew when it was a fit season for them to sail, he was at their neglect so
transported in passion, that he either stamped, or tore his hair, or used some
such gesture, saying, These cursed men (meaning the Captains) are besotted, or
bewitched to this Mould; why cannot we go to Sea now we have so gallant an
opportunity, and that the Admiral sends for us.

I say, that neither in my Narrative, nor else how I should cry up this man's
faults, but rather take a garment to cover them, when as I say he was forward
to come out, but overpowred by others, forbore it; yet after all, that a man's
heart should be so like a Forge, to blow up coals of Mischief and Falsities on
another (which are like to fall on himself) could hardly have been imagined,
but that Experience shows it.

One word more of the Witnesses, by many Letters that came to Port Longone
from Mr. Longland, Consul Read, and others, wherein was Complaints upon
Complaints of Captain Seaman, and another. I say, whatsoever reports came from
Legorn concerning their backwardness, or rather stubbornness to come out with
others of their Neighbors under the same obligation with themselves, as we use
to say; he that has but half an eye in his head, and one dram of honesty in
his heart, knowing what then past, as that there was but four ships of the
Enemies in Legorn Road; and as Captain Appleton himself confesses, the Enemy
that fought us was shattered as much as we: if they had come to our Relief, we
must have been (in humane appearance) in England with the Merchants great
Cargazon long before the last year ended. And yet I wrote not any thing to
those in Power or any others that I remember against these by name, that were
the cause of so much loss and damage as the Nation received thereby.

Again, about the beginning of February last, seeing a stout gale of wind of
the shore, it was much on my heart to go out at that time; and seeing but nine
of the Enemies men of War in the Road, and there could be expected but two more
in the Offing: A Council of Officers being called, the Question was carried
from me, and answered in the Negative; and why Captain Seaman, said he? it is
the way to lose three or four good ships, showing cowardice enough I think. It
was replied, not so I trow; here is besides others the Leopard, the
Bonaventure, the Sampson; and since I have gone to Sea, any one of these would
not fear half a dozen, or the whole number of these our Antagonists; but what
said Mr. Longland to me, you do but strive against the Stream, in seeking to
get out these Ships, they think they shall have their pay, and then it is no
matter what service they do; you must get Ships elsewhere to fetch them hence,
if you will make any use of them; whereupon I wrote (upon that very score)
somewhat passionately unto the Council of State among other matters, the
ensuing passage.

Right Honorable,
THe Merchant Ships imprested will be little better manned, then when they
carried Merchants goods: However, if it pleases God to open a way that the
greatest part of our Ships can join; and that it will not be judged too great a
presumption, I shall endeavor to fight the Enemy, that the ships in the Mould
may be freed hence. I do not in the least doubt, but your Honors has the
Common wealths affairs in these parts under consideration: Yet I beseech you
give me leave humbly to mind you, that some assistance (when least) what is
signified in former Letters, seems to be most necessary, not only in respect
to the Honor of our Nation, which is so much concerned in this Transaction, at
such a place especially, which in some sense may be called the Center of Trade,
upon which is the eye of all Europe: But it is reported P. Rupert may be here
every day with his prizes from the West Indies, according to his own intimation
by Letters; and if he comes before our conjunction, what disorder our Mariners
may be put into, cannot be foreseen, besides that other inconvenience.
Ordinarily men's spirits are debased to lie so long together without any succor
from their friends. I humbly conceive, if half a dozen Ships or Frigots had
been sent out to us, when it was first known in what a condition we were in
after our dispute, I do verily believe we had been in England, peradventure to
have assisted in the last Engagement against the Dutch, whereas now a
considerable part of the Nations strength lies at no easy expense, to little
or no purpose.


I also wrote to the Generals of the Fleet, and the Copy of that Letter is
hereunto annexed.

Honorable,
SInce sending forward unto your Honors the Original to the foregoing Copy,
there has been various Transactions, which calls for immediate Consideration
from such as sit at stern: Hearing you are like to be at Sea before this comes
to band, I thought it my duty to write my mind freely and largely unto the
Council of State, that in plain English (by one means or another) their Affairs
in these Parts may be rightly understood; here enclosed is the Copy of my late
Letters to them, unto which I humbly refer you for advice of such Occurrances
as passes among us in the Mediterranean Sea, not doubting but your Honors
will put to your helping hands for what shall be judged most necessary to be
done, not only in reference to the freedom, and reprievall of some of your old
servants from out of a labyrinth of Sares but chiefly in regard of the honor
of the Nation, which is so much concerned in point of our supplyment, with some
additional strength.


I wrote also another Letter to a Friend at White Hall, to this effect: I wish
it may not so fall out, that the State had better give a hundred thousand
pounds a ship, and ten pounds a month to a Mariner, then that their ships
should lie in Legorn Mould so long, without any relief.

And further; however I wrote not a word against this man, but when I came to
speak of the Sampson in my Narrative, hid all his failings, saying; That the
Ship being taken abackstaies, the Enemy had opportunity to fire her: yet Mr.
Longland, (who I believe would write no such thing without good proof) says,
it is no such matter; The Captain and Company run under hatches, and did not
look after trimming of Sails as they should have done.

But now, as if he were no small Proficient in Machiavels School, in hopes that
something may stick, writes hideous things against me, that made some of his
Kindred talk of coming to Execution Dock, of those that withdrew from Legorn;
and since his return for England, his malice has been let out to the full,
charging me with horrid falficies.

Capt. Marsh another of the Witnesses, knows very well that when his great
failings has much transported me, so after keen arguments in private, and
promise of amendment, I have been civil toward him: And though he has put his
hand to Capt. Appletons Remonstrance, that would make men believe Mr. Longland
were one of the veriest Villains in the world; yet coming to my house since his
coming home, he told me he could not but vindicate Mr. Longland, when he was
spoke against, and therefore in their homeward way, he was called by the rest,
Longlands creature, but it may be this man was merely drawn in, and therefore I
pity him.

Again Captain Ell, after he had presumptuously left the Convoy, where all care
was taken for his preservation, once and again, being come to Messina, upon his
acknowledgment I passed those things by. Four days after, in Circa, being
about ten leagues from Zant, he tells me he had a mind to be gone for Smirna;
but I answered, have a care what you do, lest you loose the ship your friends
have entrusted you withal, I must carry my business before me, in regard the
Harry stops there: but I intend not to Anchor there, if the wind be fair. Well
says he, I will speak with you again, yet did not, slipping away in the night.
But though pragmaticall self-conceitedness was judged a higher Tower then the
Convoy, it was a thousand to one it had not occasioned his Merchant, and Owners
to bid farewell to their Ship and Goods, for had not a strong gale of wind
brought him in after us to Zant, four Turks Men of War had called him to an
account, This made me hint to the Committee of the Navy, how the Convoy was
slighted, as it was by him unto the very last. But to see how things are
carried by way of Retalio, he and others well know, and the Levant Companies
purses heaviest feel.

Yet being he had embraced the States Service afterward, I advised him, no man
should be more willing to pass by prejudicatednesse of opinion against him,
then my self, as may appear by my Letters to him: However, after he had been in
the service of the State a few weeks, I sent him an Order to go for Naples, or
M^ss^na: yet he stays, putting the State unto charge of some hundred pounds,
which fault he laid on his men; and although I have heard the contrary, yet I
winked at that time, and hitherto mentioned nothing of it.

Next, in our Engagement at Legorn, such was his failing, that I told him and
others, at our very next meeting, after we came thence: Those that had nimble
ships were extremely too blame: But said I, since we are home-ward bound, and I
know not what eminent Service we may be called too for the Honor of the
Nation, I will not cause contention now among you; but where ever there has
been a failing, let every man amend one next time, and one would have thought
it would have wrought upon ingenious spirits.

But after we came to the Bay of Legos, I sent a Warrant to him to spare two
men, exchange of 2 Dutch men, to help man the Augustine Prize, yet he
absolutely refused it, although earnestly advised to the contrary by Captains,
and others about him, that told him he could never answer it, yet peremptorily
he denied it. Whereupon I bid the Captains, and others about me to take notice;
he and his Consort Fisher, that made the like refusal, were discharged out of
the States service, and that I would never give them any kind of order more,
until we came to the Generals, where their contempt should be laid open, and I
did forbear knowing any of them a long time.

But at length through persuasion of friends, and their own solicitations in
public and private, to forgive that one failing, what amendment should I see,
I was prevailed with all to lay aside prejudice.

Although I suppose by this time, that he very well knew that howbeit upon his
own quarter Deck (as some pragmaticall men in former times have done) he might
cry, Am not I king now? am not I King now? Yet by the Laws Martial, which were
either made to be put in Execution, or to be like Bug-bears which are to skare
children, all the Council he can find in England, can hardly save him from a
most severe sentence for his contempt.

Again, coming into the Downs, this Captain Ell comes to me in the Evening,
desiring he might have leave to go to Canterbury to meet his Wife; yea said I,
go, but pray be here speedily, I know not what Orders may come from Authority,
nor who suddenly may appear on the back of the Goodwin to engage us; In words
he would comply, and return accordingly; but was wanting thence ten days, and
upward, as if (at least) he were a Prince, not to be accomptable for any
disservice to the State, which caused his men to mutiny, when his Ship was
ordered to go to Sea. All this time I wrote nothing against him.

Next they bring in one Whiting, that was heard say so, and so, it may be it is
true as spoken from him; but I deny that I ever spoke such things, neither is
there any reason or sense for why I should. But admit the latter had been true,
it would have showed ingratitude enough in him, a man whose life and freeedom I
had first begged of the great Duke, and then at my request his estate, and his
worthy and grateful friends (by the rule of contraries) to the value of 3000
crowns, and the ship, all sentenced for lost, and confiscated, were reprieved,
remitted, and given back to them; at length being made Commander of the
Fire-ship, his wretched cowardice in not prosecuting the work he was sent
about, with Main-saile and all: which had he done, having such an opportunity
as he had upon the Dutch Admiral, for ought I know it might have turned the
day; and then the base leaving the next man to himself behind him, would have
caused many a man to have brought him home in chains, and tried him for his
life; and if so, I know not what would have become of him.

In fine, I have always endeavored to govern with serenity, mixed with some
authority, and rather by multiplied acts of Civility have labored to engage
them, then by rigorousnesse to dishearten them: and let whose will say to the
contrary, I have been always ready to cry up to the height in any service of
worth in them, and have covered all failings at the same time, as my Letters to
Authority do witness for me.

But we see not only many of the Proverbs fulfilled now and then, but old
Stories. Wash some creatures ears with never so much water, and they will be no
whiter, heap coals of love on some, and they will turn back coals of fire on
you, when it lies in their power, Traitor or any thing they will not baulk at.

But not to be tedious in rehearsing ingratitude, I shall return to the
Remonstrance, where I find Mr. Redding magnified in an employment he was sent
on by M. Longland, who with the deceased Captain Wood, is vilified to some
purpose.

A word of the former, of whom Ditto, Mr. Longland enform'd me something, as
that Captain Appleton should create him Agent, and that he went to Florence
contrary to his advice, and at the great Dukes Court he made Master Longland be
looked on as an Impostor, which forced him to send away from Florence in the
night for his Commission. I also heard him say, that for ranting in Naples,
wherein he and his Company killed a Child, or for shooting at the Justice, he
was arraigned at the Bar on life and death; yet by crying out he was forced to
fly from his Country in his Kings Cause, it fell out so, that he was saved on a
general day of grace, and set free with fellons, and murderers: but as for
service for the Common wealth of England, I heard of none he did; yet if by a
day of grace of greater advantage, his spirit is changed, that now he shall
think of doing it in good earnest, I shall be very glad.

Next a word of Mr. Longland, one of the abused persons in charity I can do no
less then speak out a word of my knowledge concerning him, and the dead: It Is
16. years since I knew Mr: Longland first at Aleppo, and as he then showed
himself as grave; sober, discreet, and as religious a Merchant as ever I met
withal abroard: So ever since the Parliament begun (oppose who would) as there
wanted not Scoffers, and Opposers enough in those parts, he would still
justify the Parliaments proceedings, and the Armies, as by very many Letters
of his appears altogether as freely and effectually before, as since he was
the States servant: so that although they might have Friends abroad, I am
confident they had no man like minded, that has made it so much his study to
advance the Benefit, and honor of the Nation, and good people in his restless
motions that way, and to rejoice at their good success, as if he were to be
looked upon more like a Statesman, then a Merchant; and he deserved not the
imputation of such a wicked wretch, as would betray the States Captains into
Prison, and send away a Post into England to complain of the Remonstrancer; and
then for Captain Appleton to say the deceased Cap: Wood triumphed over him, I
dare say is a most false thing, in that there are many can testify he was a
man restless to serve other Captains in their necessities (who had showed them
selves his great enemies) in so high a nature, as that the like can hardly be
paralleled, and so much I can further say for the said Captain, according to
what Mr: Longland denotes (as his opinion) in his Letter to me at my first
coming into Porto Longone, he was a man more readier to serve the State, then
such as eat their bread, before ever he entered into the States service to
receive their pay, not only in taking care to hasten Ammunition, and other
things to me at my first harboring in Longone, but otherwise. And if Captain
Appleton, and Captain Seaman, the letter of which struck him as I have heard,
for expressing his zeal to the States Affairs; I say, had they hearkened to his
counsel, or those keen Arguments he used to draw them forth to my assistance in
Porto Longone; at my first coming there, we had been in England long since; and
all along to his death, he was a faithful, stout honest man, and one that to
his last breath would acknowledge their destruction was of themselves, they did
not follow Order, and went out too soon in the morning, being they went not in
the night.

But again to the Remonstrance: Whereas he says, that he stirred about taking
the Phaenix Frigot by my order, if I forget not, that will prove very false,
because he had hindered it once before, and so I was minded to make no further
use of him in that business, yet I do not deny, but that (without giving
disturbance to the Dukes Port) I ordered that she should be stolen away from
the drunken Dutch, and to that purpose I picked out (at was Capt: Cox his
desire) some chief persons: and having encouraged them all that lay in my
power, I sent them away about it, and at the time it might have taken place, I
went on the mountains to see her steal away, at my return being certainly
informed how it had taken effect, to the joy of my heart, being confident it
was as good a piece of service as could be done the Nation at that time: And so
the Council of State esteemed it, when they were pleased to give Mr. Longland,
and my self thanks for it: And truly if such service meet with no kind of
esteem, such an ill Consequence may follow, as that those that eat the States
bread, will turn as very Drones as their hearts can desire, who are on the
other side.

And Cap. Appleton well knows; if not, I am sure I have heard, at first the
great Duke commended the Exploit, saying the Turks had stole her away from the
drunken Flemmings, whilst they minded their business no better, and all seemed
to be covered, so that in many days after, the Duke sent me not a word about
it; and it is judged (by prudent men) he would never have taken notice of it as
a disturbance to his Port; had not that foolish childish act of Captain
Appletons in taking the Dutch man out of his Sentinels house, with his own hand
(as if he had been Lord Paramount in that Country) highly incensed him, as
indeed it would any other Prince, or State in the like Case. And when the great
Duke did dispatch away a Messenger to me to lament that high affront in his
first Letter, as one in whom the thoughts about the Phaenix Frigot were utterly
extinct, and drowned, he mentions not a word to me of that business, until his
second Letter came long after, and then I could do less then own it, and
labor to justify it, as I can do now more fully.

And I could wish also, that Authority had been pleased to have done it more
effectually in their Answer, and not leave Mr. Longland, and my self (their
Servants) in some kind of difficulty, or shame upon us about it. For I fear it
opened a gap to some further trouble.

Now to prove that the said Act was no disturbance or affront to his Port (or
at least) ought not to have been esteemed so without great partiality, it is
clearly thus, against which (I believe) there can be no rational Objection.

Some weeks before the Phaenix was surprised, a small English ship bound for
Barbary, comes out of the Mould, and was shot at by the Dutch men of War, with
diverse shot, and they afterward chased her; now if the great Duke accounted
that no disturbance, so as to make a public complaint, by imprisoning the
Captains, denying them provisions, or by sending an extraordinary Messenger
into Holland. Then he ought not to account Capt. Cox slipping away with the
Frigot (after the drunken fit of the Dutch was over) in such a manner as that
the vessel (being far without shot of his Cannons, when the attempt was made)
did get away, and yet not discerned by his people from the shore, to be any
affront, or disturbance at all to his Port.

But if it be objected here, they did the Duke service therein, in regard it
was contrary to his Laws that a Ship should carry Lead to Barbary: I answer,
they might have acquainted him with it while she was in his Cubert, or in the
Mould, and not let him know of it afterward by the rattling of their shot. And
thus I have answered the Remonstrancer in that particular, wherein peradventure
he hoped I would have come under the Lash of Justice for breach of Orders; but
he is not so secret in laying the plots of his malice, but it may be as openly
discovered.

Again, the next thing mentioned at his coming to Legorn the last time is, That
the Dukes Secretary, my self, and the Dutch had concluded to Fight; A pretty
story, that made me smile, though malice enough lie under these sinders; but as
cunningly as the Remonstrance is dressed up, the knots about it are not so tied,
but a little skill and honesty is able to undo them all, and make the
filthiness that is underneath, to be sufficiently discovered. I know there was
a Treaty, if you will have it called so, between the Dukes Secretary, Mr.
Longland, and my self, as there was it may be the same between the Dutch, and
that Secretary, but to say between us three was a Treaty, is a horridfalsity,
or much less, that it was concluded amongst us to Fight the Dutch, and yet the
searcher of hearts must be appealed unto in this thing, amongst other
falsities, as if they were very truth; Great impiety, and God may be a swifter
witness against false Swearers, then they are aware of.

One would wonder to see how the Great Dukes failings should all be covered by
Cap. Appleton, whose name he could not mention, except with a scorn, but that
we know by an old practice, Two arch enemies will make friends to bring about
their ends upon those that are faithful

There Is not a man or Boy in the Fleet, but must needs take notice, that the
Great Duke thrust us out of his Port, and that after all means had been used
for the gaining of thirty days time, until our Venice ships that had cost the
State of England so vast an Expense, came up to our Assistance, insomuch that
Mr. Longland and my self, proffered the Great Dukes Secretary as much money as
the Phaenix Frigot was worth, to give the Dutch, or do what he would withal,
and although he knows thereupon, what a Speech I made in the face of each Ships
Company, saying, our condition was much like those Leapers we read of: The
Great Duke commanded us to be gone hence in ten days time, and if not, here
are more Guns brought down (for ought I could perceive) to expiate our
Destruction; so that if we stay any longer we must perish, and if we go forth,
we can do no more; wherefore as Gods providence had put us on such necessitous
service, so I hoped our sins should not hinder his High appearance with us in
it; and the rise I had from thence, to stir them up to quit themselves like
Englishmen, was not unknown. And though he very well knows in the steerage of
every ship it was pasted up, to this effect, That whereas the Great Dake had
required us to go thence in so short a time, each individual man, as well
Captains as others, were therefore required to give their attendance to their
respective Shipped, and not to go thence on shore upon any terms, without
special leave, as they would answer the contrary at their perils, etc.

And moreover, though he very well knew the Duke had an opportunity to procure
our Conjunction (or at least) to have caused our Enemy to have gone out, and
Fought us in the Sea, yet slighted it, and at length set at liberty the Dutch
Captains, and many of their Mariners, which he had in Prison, and though our
Ships were taken very near the Mould head, shoots not a shot in their defense;
yet notwithstanding all this, Capt. Appleton takes no notice of it, as if he
would Petition him for the money back again, which he says it cost him
formerly to procure his pardon.

But it may be some will say (as I have heard they have already) the Great Duke
is a Worthy and Magnificent Prince, and wrote you, that the ships might stay
longer in his Mould, if there was a necessity for it.

I answer: Truth is, until we had a loss here in England of the Garland, and
other ships, I had very good respect from him, (and I endeavored with as much
reverence, respectiveness, and thankfulness to acknowledge the same) and he
told me he was not my Friend so much because I was in an eminent Employment for
the State, but upon an old score, I might Command him, yet the News of a
forementioned loss turned the stream presently; for like Politicians they
took the strongest side, and then I could no more be heard in what was but
Justice and reason, then if those words had never come out of his mouth. I very
well know what was wrote in answer to mine, about the latter end of Feb: last, I
desired when winds and weather hindered my coming to Legorn (within the time
limited) it might be looked upon as a just impediment. The Answer runs thus, You
shall have eight days added to the former, and longer if necessity required.
What necessity is that, but the being crossed by winds and weather: for all men
know, who use those parts, that the Northerly wind blows sometimes so fresh,
that a man may be put to Leeward, so that in eight days he cannot get up to
Legorn-Road. If he had meant otherwise, that knew how importunate I was, But
for thirty days time, would have said, take the time you desire, then should I
have known what to have done. If yet any will make a more favorable
construction of his words, I shall only say thus much, I wish he may find what
I have often times thought on, to be a true saying, One ounce of real honesty
and integrity, will turn better to account in all cases, then a whole pound of
Court policy, where mental reservations are used, by which they will have
liberty to make two several Constructions.

And for this crying up of magnificency, I know not what to make of it, except
there be such abroad as differ in judgment from some Atheistical spirits, I
have met withal in the parts, where I have been, both of Egypt and Greece, who
have held, that in so many hundred thousand years (I forgot the just number,
there shall be a Revolution of all things, as if I should be a writing, and you
should be a reading, just as we are now, I say peradventure some men may be of
the mind, the Revolution may come about sooner.

In fine, Let others judge of that Transaction what they will, I am of opinion,
that the blood of the men of our Nation which fell that day, will lie (in a
special manner) at the Great Dukes door.

But to the Remonstrance in answer to my charge of Treachery or Cowardice, or
they know not what themselves, I suppose the proofs that are herein included
will acquit me of the former, and if those, (who very well know I have
complained of them as great failers in service) do not acquit me of the latter,
let me lie under that indignity. I ever counted it one of the unhandsomest
things in the world, to be speaking out any thing tending to self applause; yet
I am in a manner constrained to write like such a one at this time, although my
aim is that God alone may have honor by it.

The 29 of August 1652 it fell out that more then the seven eight parts of our
ships Company mutinied against me (notwithstanding about midnight before every
individual man in the Ship, who was not wounded, gave me his hand to live and
dye with me if occasion were, against the enemy next day) but then got on their
best clothes, or one way or another declared themselves, by making the Ship
incapable of steerage, or otherwise, that they would leave the Ship Paragon,
and the rich Merchants Ships to be destroyed; nay, so high was the mutiny, that
some gave out they would destroy my person, if I would not give them leave to
call for quarter, in case the enemy had come up again. And when I had made a
speech among them, to encourage them what in me lay (although now so spent,
that it was a very great pain to me to speak so as to be heard twice or
thrice my length) notwithstanding some Commanders came after me, where I was
heaving over board the lumber our men had got up to cloy our Guns, and told me,
I strove against the stream, and those very men that held up their hands
before to stand by me, had declared they would call for Quarter among the rest,
when ever the Enemy came near; and upon that score begged of me to loose no
more time, but forsake the Ship, and give them leave to fire their Merchants
ships with rich Goods, and fly also: But my answer to them was to this effect:
As it is said, was given to Queen Eleanor in another case, I will not give you
such leave as you desire, but if you will begin upon your own account, do it;
I can fire our Ship when the Enemy comes within Musket shot. And adding, Be but
patient, and wait upon God a little, and I am persuaded God will save this
part of Englands strength and wealth, whether men will or no; and so it sell
out through Gods mercy in causing it to fall flat calm; of which miraculous
preservation (if some Merchants were rightly sensible) they would not murmur,
and quarrel, and be ready to speak all manner of evil, whether right or wrong,
against the States faithful Servants. It Is feared, because really and truly
they are such, although the pretense be otherwise, and yet as far peradventure
as the former from Christianity; Oh the event and success has not answered
the great desires of gain that was on their hearts, being the Goods were left
by the way, and not brought through.

But for the Service before mentioned, the Council of State by Order of
Parliament, sent me a Letter of Thanks, wherein they did no more declare how
well they resented my weak endeavors, and how it should be advantageous to me
at my return (which includes kind Acceptance, the most I aspired after) then I
with all reverence and thankfulness did acknowledge.

But peradventure some will say, What need all this discourse concerning what
past in your first Engagement? You are not blamed for Cowardice then; it is
thought, according to what was reported and openly said on the Exchange, when
as this Remonstrancers Letters came for England, with some other Letters from
(Malignant) Merchants, such as would be gladder that the Dutch, then that the
English should prevail, and no other, Badiley was turned Coward, Badiley was
turned Coward.

When all things that have been said in the foregoing expressions, and shall
yet be declared, be weighed in the balance of Truth, and be found down
weight, not having a tittle of fallaciousnesse in them; and when the Testimony
is likewise considered, I believe there is hardly ever an honest man in
England, but will confess with altogether as much honesty, they might have
cried out, and said, Badiley was turned Turk, Badiley was turned Turk.

But naught says (I should say naughty people) he had Currants, and I know not
what in his Fleet, and for private advantage sake turned his back upon the
Enemy: The contrary to that has been declared to the Committee of the
Admiralty, and it can be fully proved that for ought I could know, my loss in
the Perrigreene (for want of timely succor) was more then I had in our part of
the Fleet, that came away, although the shirt on my back had been prized at the
highest value, but if there were some small difference, that were a likely
matter indeed, sithence that it now appears before the Commissioners of the
Navy. In zeal to the States Service, and it cannot be imagined to any other
end, at Porto Ferraro, I run out of my own particular stock, to the value of
1000 l. in Circa, which I believe the State will make me good hereafter.

I shall now come to ravell out the later end of the Remonstrance into some
parts, and so answer them.

Captain Appleton says in one place (that after I was gone for Port Ferraro)
I sent him order to hasten to me as soon as the Dutch weighed Anchor, and
upon his life to do it with all diligence; and a little below he says, without
Mr. Longland he durst not act, my order being to the contrary.

As Elihu well said; Just as the mouth does taste meat, so the ears of wise
men tries words: To whom I appeal, whether there be not Nonsense, or
Contradiction enough in that part.

For he that looks in the Letter, wherein I advised him to hasten after, as
for life when as the Dutch were coming out, that we might not be too much
over-prest before they came for our assistance, shall not find that I there
ordered him (however) he should not act any thing without Mr. Longlands
presence and assistance.

Wherefore such an Order must be either before, or after that Letter was sent
him; if he says it were before, then this Letter makes it of none effect; but
if he says it were after, it made the former order null, and void.

Whether it were before or after, certainly no knowing man will imagine, that
by my Letters, or Orders, I shut out my own Authority, so as to say, although
I come there my self in person, yet you are to act nothing without Master
Longland: and if this be believed, I would not part with the Command I had over
that Squadron.

Then thus it will follow: Why did not he and the rest come out when I sent
for them (as it were in person) by my Lieutenant? And if my former order of
hastening as for life were in his eye, why then did he not hasten as for life?
For if so, in all likelihood we had got together, and obtained the Victory over
our Enemies.

If yet he says, Mr. Longlands opinion was to be taken before he stirred next
morning, why did he not conform to his Counsel (for what ever they say in
their Remonstrance) it will be proved by what Mr. Longland has wrote to the
Council of State, Committee of the Admiralty, and my self about that
Business, is a real truth.

When he saw they would go out so soon, contrary to his Advice, he shut
himself in his Chamber, giving up all for lost; and as it is proved, when Cap.
Wood came ashore wounded, oh says he (as he confessed to his last breath)
Master Longland, Our Destruction is of our selves, our Destruction is of our
selves, we cannot blame Captain Badiley, nor any body else, since we went not
out in the night when as we were sent for, I saw we went too soon in the
morning; if we had staid while the Admiral had been engaged, all might have
been well enough, or words to that purpose.

Truth is, I did write him such a Letter as he mentions, wherein he was ordered
to hasten after me as for life, in case the Enemy came to look after me in
the Sea, and I did it for these reasons.

First, because all men had complained of his dullness and backwardness in
coming to our assistance the time that we were formerly engaged.

And secondly, in regard that I had sent some Propositions to the great Duke,
humbly begging him to endeavor the Dutch might comply, and not fight our Ships
under his Cannons, but come out to Sea, and do it there.

Now who could imagine, that he that had made such a deal of pudder,
complaining of English Commanders in a^ high manner about violating his Port,
would not have constrained the Dutch, if they would have fought us, to come out
and fight at Sea, and upon that score did I verily believe they would have been
with me, either at Port Ferraro, or as soon as ever I came thence; much less
could we imagine, that ever the Duke would turn all the Dutch Captains, and
others of that Nation that had affronted him out of Prison, and unworthily
suffered some of our Ships to be taken within Musket Shot of his Works, and not
shoo^ a shot in our defense.

And it is as true as the former, that after that Letter before mentioned (upon
other news I did advise) that in my absence I would have them consult with Mr.
Longland about the time of their coming out: but they that run may read, and
clearly see, that Cap. Appleton has neither conformed to my Order and Advice,
in coming out in the night, having such a fit opportunity, which made the
Masters Mate, or Pylot say, they were cursed people to be so bewitched to that
Mould, as not to go when their Admiral sent for them; neither has he
conformed to Mr. Longlands advice, which was; that since they did not go in
the night, they should not go out so soon as they did, but stay whilst I was
engaged with the Enemy before they went out.

But Cap. Appleton does not confess in so many words, that my Lieutenant came
to call him away in the night; however, besides the testimony given in, such
juggling is discovered by his own expressions; he says he had thoughts of
coming out, but that the wind faltered; now, how came he by such thoughts?
either they were from me, or from Mr. Longland, but they were not from Mr.
Longland, he confesses that the want of his Order was an impediment.

But what says he? Cap. Badiley sent to see in what readiness we were in, and
to tell me the Constant Warwick would be sent near the Mould head in the
morning to assist us, with the Fire-ship.

Cap. Appleton well knows I saw the Ships all clear, and ready to engage at a
quarter of an hours warning before I left the place of Legorn, which was about
eight or ten days before: and besides, by Cap. Appletons own Letters, and by
Cap. Coxe that was in with them the night before, I heard they were in a
readiness: so that now to send my Lieutenant at midnight through the Enemies
Boats, or Scouts that lay in wait for ours, it had been as vain a thing in me
as in him, to make such a lame excuse.

But he adds, the Messenger told him that the Constant Warwick, and the
Fire-ship should be at the Mould head in the morning to receive him forth: were
it not now an easy thing to condemn him out of his own mouth, and say, why
went you out of the Mould so soon in the morning (being you went not in the
night) since you had word sent, the Constant Warwick and the Fire-ship should
be at the Mouldhead to receive you, and in effect intimating, that until then
you were not to come forth: For as soon as they began to loose Sail in the
Mould, I was heard say, surely they will not be so mad as to come forth before
the Constant Warwick and others be near the Mould-head to receive them.

But to proceed; he says when he first engaged, Cap. Badiley and his Fleet
might have come to us quarter winds, if they would: To that I shall only say
thus much, let me lie under the censure and dis-reputation about it, if I
cannot prove by some hundred Witnesses, that as the wind gave leave, so we
plied in.

And I make no question, but as many Witnesses can make it clearly appear, no
time was lost after their coming out of the Mould, but all diligence was used
to hasten in to their succor, and many of the Parragons men can aver, they
never see me more earnest then I was at that time, in looking after the Sails
and Steerage, and in laboring about hoysing the Top-gallant Sails so long,
until it was feared all would have come down about our ears; and always gave
the Ship Brace and Sheat as the wind would give leave, and slackned no other
Sail until we came within shot, and then haled up our Main-saile (as was all
the reason in the world) being the Capstain that heaves our tacks aboard in
those Ships would have hindered the use of four Guns, besides other
inconveniences that might have happened.

Next he says, at last we came within half shot, as if we had lost time
before (an easy understanding can trace the malice that runs through his
expressions) I have given the Council of State already an Account what I did
when I came near, as that I went directly with the Admiral of the Dutch,
preparing to grapple with her; but casting my eye about, and feeing none of our
Frigots had executed my Orders about relieving the Leopard, considering she
was worth three of the Dutch Admiral, I powered about thirty pieces of
Ordnance, and a volley of small shot into her, and stood away for the Leopard,
with a real intent to have gone on Board those were on board her, but it was
judged no wisdom to run stemlings on board with all Sail, being a fresh gale
of wind when we first came near her: And passing by the Julius Caesar stern
within two or three ships lengths from her at most; and within half
Musket Shot of the Leopards stern, it may be that is half shots length, Cap.
Appleton speaks of, having discharged first a broad side, and a volley of small
shot, on that ship, and the Sun, in hopes to have cut one Mast or another by
the board, we made way to flat our Ship round, fully intending to have gone on
board with our fore-saile haled up either between the Sun, and the Julius
Caesar, (and so should have been able to have fenced on both sides) or else to
have lain along the Suns side, with my Bow-sprit over the Leopards Poop:
but it pleased God the wind so dullard all on a sudden, that our Ship with as
much endeavor as ever was used, would not wear nor bear up, so that we were
forced to bring our Ship to, and stand further, before we could make her stay;
and when we had got her about, we stood away for the Julius Caesar's side again,
resolving to get on board that time; and having passed another broad side on her
about Musketshot off, the Helm was put a weather to bear up again, but the
Ship we could not make work with that little wind, if a thousand Commonwealths
had lain upon it: And the sight of it transporting me into a passion, I called
to my Lieutenant to pass the word among the nimble Ships, that I would have
them go on board the Leopard, or those Ships on board her to see to
dis-intangle her from those Ships: Whereupon having none within call but the
Mary Rose, he called to her to go on board; but they being no better manned
excused it; thereupon I stepped up to look for the Lewis, with words in mouth to
this effect; Where is this vapouring flash Ell now, with his forty men, and his
20. Guns, or his thirty Guns and his fourscore men? where is he? see if you
can make him hear, that we may employ him in this service? but he was gone out
of call after his own inventions. In all this time there apappears not a man
upon the Leopards upper Deck that I could discern: and being extremely troubled
to see the Leopard managed no better, I called to man the Pinace, and the Lord
my great witness knows, with a full resolution to have gone on board her
with my boat, when I could not with the ship, verily believing the Captain had
been killed, and chief Officers, and had kept my resolution.

But although Capt. Appleton now says the two Ships on board him called for
quarter, or he knows not for what; those Ships until I was gone fired five
times as many Guns as the Leopard did in my sight; for I never saw her shoot
but once in half an hours time: I say the withdrawing of the Leopards men
within doors and hatches, and their not appearing to let go an Anchor in any
time, nor doing any thing else toward their own preservation, caused me to
think some part of the Leopard might be in the Enemies possession, and so was
diverted from going in my Boat.

But Captain Appleton says, his men called to the Constant Warwick, to tell
them the Enemies called for Quarter, and therefore they should forbear firing
on those that lay on board her. As for the Frigots Commander, let him answer for
it, that he did not acquaint me with what he was informed of from the Leopard.

But if I had been in Cap. Appletons place, and expressed so much as now he does,
truly I should have feared I should have been accounted one of the greatest
Cowards, or fools in the world; for if the men did call for quarter, which I
believe is as true, or as false as many other things mentioned in the Libell,
or Remonstrance, then why did he not call his men upon the Deck to enter them,
(at least) why did not he himself appear on the Poope, when his Admiral came
by, and have told him so much: Or if his withdrawing were through fear, why
was not some body else sent on the Poope to have done it, and have shook his
hat, crying All is ours, all is ours. I but says he, to color the matter, (as
if we were all asleep in the Fleet besides) by a story he tells in his
Remonstrance (in point of truth, like that of 600 Crowns agreed on at a
Council of War to be given for his re-establishment) how that 5 of the
Enemies ships so gal'd him, that he was not able to possess them that called
for quarter. If it be not a dream, I am sure they were invisible, above two
hundred persons beside my self will depose the contrary; none was near within
Saker shot, if any were within shot of their best Ordnance, but only the
Admiral of the Dutch, that made what means he could with his Sprit-saile, and
Sprit-saile top sail to get away; and being twice Musket Shot from him,
discharged no Ordnance upon him that I and others could discern: and I believe
it will be very hard to prove by the testimony of any honest man, that ever
they were struck with a shot from any Ship of the Enemy while we were near,
but only from them two on board the Leopard: Now then except his ship had been
shot-free between Decks, since no man can aver any Enemy was near but those on
board, or had been within Musket Shot of him, his men would have been as secure
on the upper deck, as on the lower, and they might have bin as safe all the
time they were entering the Dutch ships, he says called for Quarter, as to have
staid in their own; and therefore I know not what to make of that passage, it
shows so like a frenzy Fiction.

Next, Cap. Appleton magnifies the valor of Cap. Ell, and Cap. Fisher, telling
how they did assist, as if no body else did; and again he declares, Cap. Ell
did great execution on the Enemy. This is just the old proverb, Claw me, and
I Will claw thee: But you have sufficient Witnesses given in already, and I dare
say there may be found above a hundred more to attest those that did least
service in reference to the Leopards relief, did as much service, or rather
more then was done by the Lewis or Mary.

Next Cap. Appleton says I called off the Lewis and the Mary that would have
assisted him, and set my Main-saile to go away, etc.

For answer; When I saw all hopes past, in humane Reason, not because the
Enemy was now grown three to one, there being four of our best Ships lost
before I could come up, and one since, nor because many more expected from East
and West every hour to their assistance, but none to ours; Although I believe
it is justifiable for a Commander in Chiese to withdraw in such a case, or else
old Van Trumpe had been in a poor condition, when as twice together, although
the numbers were upon the matter equal, he let us take away so many ships, and
staid not by it, but withdrew with the rest.

Neither was the Leopard left in that Case (whether sunck or afloat we could
not tell) in regard most of the Commanders of our nimble Ships had acted quite
contrary to order in this (as they did in my last) engagement, which yet is a
sad, and heart-discouraging mischief.

And although I had of my self no inclination to leave the place, as I did,
yet when half a score of the Chief Officers in the Paragon came, and gave me
it, as an opinion they would justify upon their lives, saying to this effect:
Sir, if now you go on board the Leopard, and those with her, to relieve the
former, we cannot see how it is possible you can dis-intangle your self again
before both ships be ashore; besides says many, it is very questionable whether
she be not sunck already, and ly on the ground. Hence it was, I set my
Main-saile, and came away; and if he looks on that, to be the sign of calling
off the Fleet, Capt. Appleton is in the right; but if his meaning be according
to the litterall sense of his Expressions, how that I called to Cap. Ell and
Captain Fisher to come away, when as they were going to relieve the Leopard, by
sufficient Testimony, it will be proved a most false thing.

I know not upon what other score the Machiavelian policy (except it be to
tickle the minds of some of their Owners) they should appear against me, who
before sundry upon the Parragons decks, and in her Round-house, as has all
other Captains said in our passage home-ward; in case the Admiral had gone on
board the Leopard, or those Ships lay entangled with her, in all likelihood the
whole Fleet except the Frigots (who could have fled) had been lost: And now we
come to the stresse of all, what Capt. Appleton says of Cap. Ell and Cap.
Fisher, and they say of themselves the Leopard had been relieved, but that I
hindered them.

I know not what to make of such impudency and insolency, I profess were I in
their case, my own Conscience would tell me, that although other contempts
were pardoned, which the Law Martial says is Death, I deserved the severest
sentence for coming short of my Duty, and not complying with the Admirals
Order, in point of the Leopards relief: But a word more.

First, for Capt. Ell, before we came near the Leopard, seeing our
Rear-Admirall aground, whereas all the Frigots had special order to relieve
any who were oppressed by the Enemy, and seeing they did not act accordingly, as
I was hastening in to the Leopards relief, being he was near me, either I
called to him, or did expect although he were of the Rear-Admirals Squadron, he
should follow me, and keep near me in my Weather-quarter, where then he was,
his Leader being aground: for knowing that the Lewis was almost double manned,
in proportion to other Merchants Ships, I thought to have her by me to employ
upon some eminent service, when as there should be occasion, but whilst we
were endeavoring to bear up, and go on board the Leopard, he goes after his
own inventions, so that when our Ship would not work (it being little wind,
and our Ship heavy and foul) I bid call to the Lewis to bear up, and go on
board the Julius Caesar; and seeing she was gone out of call, and that the Mary
Rose had made her excuse for want of men, I confess I was almost distracted
with passion, saying (amongst other things in my mind) to this effect, When
such vapouring Blades are in a Gentlewomans Chamber, oh then they are mighty
men of valor; but now here is service to be done, they can turn shifters
above all that ever any Commander in chief was troubled withal, before me.
Yet as he lay in my way as we were withdrawing, when we saw it was too late to
do any more then what was done, I might bid him follow me.

As for Capt. Fisher thus, knowing there was such pitiful Captains to be
employed with me in this service, that peradventure would forget in the
morning, what they did over night; I sent a Copy of what was agreed on at our
Council of War, to Capt. Fisher, wherein among other Orders it was agreed as
follows.

If any of the Admirals, Vice-Admirals, or Rear-Admirals Squadron, were laid on
board by the enemy, then such as were next to them of that Squadron, ought to
have laid any such Ship of the Enemies on board again on the other side. But
now pray mark, not to tell you how peremptorily he has refused my Warrant or
Command, before or afterward expressed in some kind elsewhere, see how he lays
himself open under the lash of the highest censure, or severest sentence, take
but his own words, He broke through the Dutch Fleet, and then did very good
service a second time, meaning he made a board or two near the Leopard, I say in
that he did not go on board the Leopard according to the Order of the Council
of War, he being of that Squadron, the Vice-Admirals Squadron, what has this
man to say, but that truly he is not such a novice in Matchiavels Arts, nor yet
such a sottish person as some of his men complained to me of, when as they
mutined in the Downs; nor yet such a reputed Coward, which made me desire any
one might Command that Ship rather then he, and sure enough he had never been
in that place, but that Mr. Longland advised me the owners earnestly desired
it, and for quietness sake it were best I yielded. But I say, he knows well
enough (it is said being well backed) how to abuse his Commander, in hope that
(right or wrong) something may stick to his disparagement.

But in the close, Capt. Appleton declares how the Mariners wrested his sword
out of his hand, and put his arm and shoulder out of joint; whether that were
true as that the Ships on board him called for Quarter, some of his chief
Officers are not able to tell, for though they saw C. Appleton the day they were
surprised, yet heard nothing of any such thing, but however it seems he was
able to hold it before, then one would think I should have seen it, or himself
at least (in his place) on the Poop, all the time I was near him, so long
together. After that comes in a story of the Gunners order to blow up the Poop,
I am sure his time had been better employed if he had ordered the Gunner to
have turned the muzzles of two or three Guns down into the Hatchway, and have
sunk the Ship, which he omitting to do in time, did very much trouble my
spirit, and I think may be ranked among the highest of his failings: But I
think there is too much of that before.

In the last place he tells a long story of what the Great Duke said, among
others I think it will little advantage him; for is that Expression because
Authority should be incensed against me: Then thus, The Great Duke said Capt.
Appletons Crime was unpardonable in that he came not out to my Assistance in
nor after my first Engagement; would he therefore have Authority incensed
against me merely upon such a score?

But then, some of Mr. Longlands house, some about the Duke, Italians, French,
etc. are brought in to speak he knows not what, nor it may be they themselves;
but two witnesses are brought in at last, that were then so sober as to
remember some French and Italians had said they would tear me in pieces for a
Coward if ever I came thither. I suppose if this stuff be weighed (in the
Balance of understanding men's Judgments) it will be found very ridiculous.

Because some English Merchant has said sundry times upon the place of Legorn,
What News from our Rogues at Westminister? meaning the Parliament (although
it is a shame English men should so speak (was the Parliament ever the worse for
that? And although Italians and French have been heard many a time say, They
could tear some worthy member of our State to pieces upon the account of being
enemies to the Romanists, would it not be a ridiculous thing for him that heard
such expressions, to acquaint the Higher Powers of it, in hopes to bring them
into dis-reputation upon such a score?

What though the Spectators at Legorn, were a thousand Legorn Ladies, and as
many Fools and Knaves among them, is that any thing to me? Were they not like
a Company that being in a Ladies Chamber near the Seacoast, seeing a Ship with
some little wind and sea, to their understanding, driving into a Bay, and not
being able to get off the shore, by weathering one point or other, cut the mast
by the board, and all that time they cried out, Oh Fools, oh Knaves, what, cut
your Masts by the board this weather? loose so much of your friends interest
that might be saved? not considering the accidents that are subject to happen
on board Ship, when those that were there saw they could not get off with a
sail; and peradventure he that had Command perceived there was nothing in his
Ship but an old Junck, unto which there is no trust at all to be given, without
his Masts be parted withal.

Indeed if the Spectators had fleshed some of the Great Dukes old Galleys, and
had with them such instruments, and instrument-users, as walk to and again
among the Banks in these Vessels, and would have come to tow our Ship too and
again, when she would not steer, and if then we would have done no more then
we did, indeed they might justly have said something in our disparagement.

But what need I speak so much of them, I wish there may be none in the world
who pretend to better principles, that would not (at least in word and thought)
condemn and execute before they hear, contrary to the manner of the Roman
Heathens.

I have now finished my Answer to the Remonstrancers, wherein I have not only
opened the dress it was made up in, but showed the filthy malice from whence
such productions as are there held out, did issue forth; and I do believe most
noble and ingenuous spirits will confess, I am no more worthy to be blamed in
what past near Legorn the 4 of March last, then I was to be blamed for what
past among as the 28 and 29 of August before, wherein God made me isntrumental
to save a better Ship then the Leopard, and a vast Estate of the Nations, for
then I did but my endeavor, and both that, with my resolution will be proved
to be every whit as much in the last, as in the former Dispute, so long as in
reason there was any hope; although I confess it was not answered from Heaven
with such success: And if any man will yet say, I would have done more had I
been in your place, I hope he will give me leave to think, that more knowing
men would have blamed his prudence, then there is, that would have commended
his valor.

In fine, I suppose if all the pains and care I was at, were well weighed, to
keep our Ships from ruin in Porto Longone, and what was done to get Victual
and other necessaries for the people ten Months together, with the
correspondence I held with most adjacent places.

As also, what hardship I under-went in sundry Journeyes by Sea and Land, to
effect the conjunction of both Squadrons, having been waylaid as I was
informed sundry times. And if it be also considered what averseness and
contrarinesse was in most peoples spirits (unto this Commonwealths service)
with whom I had to do, which men we were yet forced to make use of, it must
needs be concluded, Never any subject of State or Prince, could possibly
undergo more trouble in the time, then I have gone through.

To conclude all, what I crave is only good acceptance, and that which of
right belongs unto me; and the like I desire in the behalf of the States
faithful Servant, Mr. Charles Longland, whom the Remonstrancer has greatly
abused. My practice shall not be after the manner of those in Constantinople,
who going up to that Palace, take fire on their head, and cry, Justice,
Justice; but I hope I shall have that when I go elsewhere, which will be like
fire in my heart, to kindle desires, that David's last words may be remembered:

2 SAMUEL 23.3. The God of Israel said, and the Rock of Israel spoke: He that
Rules over men must be Just, Ruling in the fear of God, etc.
Upon mature Consideration, I shall humbly crave leave to add a short Breviate
or Abstract of what to my understanding appears to be the Causes of that
great Disaster befell the Squadron near Legorn, the 4 of March last. And I
hope what I have to say, will not be accounted impertinent to the purpose of
clearing up the Truth.
NOt to mention any thing of those crying sins which did not only make a Turk,
that being taken with the Excellency of the way of Christ, and had made some
profession of our Religion, for some Months together abord the Leopard, to
naucite it, and turn from it (concluding if God were a Holy God, those that
run into such Enormities must not be his people) which yet doubtless did
provoked God to stretch out his hand against us.

Nor yet to mention any failing of those in England, which should have done well
to have sent us some kind of relief.

But abroad, by what has been said, and is hinted in several Letters I now
present, there may be clearly discerned a perfect number of particulars,
showing what were the impediments to our Conjunction, and consequently where
the blame ought to be laid; and if the Conscience of the Remonstancer, and his
Associates will but speak out, I am assured they must six and and annex their
Acknowledgement thereunto, as unto a most real truth.

First, The stubbornness of the Commanders of the Sampson and Mary, and the
dullness and backwardness of the Commander of the Navy Ships to come out to
our Assistance, upon and after our first Engagement, although greatly incited
thereunto by other Commanders, that in every respect were under the same
capacity and obligation with themselves; and it appears by sundry Letters
from Mr. Longland, Consul Read, Capt. Wood, and others.

Secondly, That imprudent act of the Remonstrancer, performed in his own
person, forcing back a Dutchman his prisoner from the Great Dukes Sentinels
house, whereunto he had made his escape, caused the Duke to send a Messenger
into England, which otherwise had not been sent, as (upon good grounds) Mr.
Longland advised me from time to time, and as was the opinion of the Consul,
and other knowing Merchants, and consequently the dissatisfactory Answer he had
returned by that Messenger, had not more incensed him against us then the
natural genius of Princes toward young Commonwealths would have prompt him
unto; so that peradventure, although he loved not the Parliament of England,
yet he would not have thrust their Ships into the mouths of their Enemies (upon
the matter) as he did afterward.

Thirdly, The not coming of our three Friggots and the Harry Bonaventure from
Naples unto Porto Longone, whilst the Enemy had no considerable strength to
resist us, but contrary to Order going back to Messina, and I know not where,
spenda great deal of time, while we might have done our business with as much
seasonablenesse as our heart could desire; and this appears by sundry Letters.

Fourthly, The exceeding backwardness and unwillingnesse of some of those
Commanders of English Ships at Venice, to embrace the States service without
such terms as could not be well agreed unto by the States servants; for
thereby such a needless dispute arose, that caused so much time to be spent to
no purpose, which (in all probability) had been sufficient to have effected our
Conjunction, before the 4 of March last; and this will appear by sundry Letters
from indifferent persons that were lookers on, as well as from the States
Servants.

Fifthly, The Great Dukes partiality, whether because the Dutch were then like
to be the strongest side, or for other reasons I know not; but I am sure he
dealt very unworthily with the States Servants, in commanding us out the Port,
when as the Enemy was near three to one; and after he had made many complaints
of the abovementioned, for violating his Ports, to give the Dutch liberty to
assault our Ships when their sternes were in the Mould-head, and although we
were promised from time to time, great assistance from his Cannons, in case the
Enemy should meddle with us within their reach, not to shoot a shot in our
defense, when as some of our Ships were surprised within little more then
musket shot of his works, was worse then all the rest.

Sixthly, The Remonstrancers omitting to come out in the night, when as I sent
for them in such a season, wherein some of those that were Pylots, in effect,
said of their Commanders, They were cursed because they took not hold of that
opportunity; and the omission was quite contrary to Capt. Appletons promise, by
his Letter to me of the 3, 13 of March, for therein in Answer to my former
Letter, he would come out in the night, if he had my approbation, and he wanted
not that, with expressions from my Lieutenant, how earnestly desirous I was to
have had them come away with all speed.

Seventhly, and lastly, Coming out (contrary to their own deliberate result at
a Consultation) before that I was engaged with the Enemy; whereas
notwithstanding, whatever he simply inserts concerning my requiring him to
hasten out to me as for life, three or four days before the Dispute, his
Letter of the 3, 13 of March tells me he had received my Letters and Orders
dated that morning at four a Clock, if that were produced (of which I had no
time to take a copy, or have lost it) I am confident therein it will be found
expressed, I was so far from bidding them hasten to me as for life, that per
contra, I desired he would not stir (meaning in the day time) until he saw me
engaged, and in effect he confesses as much, by saying in the afore-mentioned
Letter, that He thanked me for my care in not hazzarding that Squadron: Unto
which I shall add no more, but that I am,

Your Honors Very Humble Servant, RI. BADILEY.

AS I was upon returning in with the foregoing Answer, I have met with a
printed paper entitled, A Relation of the Fight near Legorn- Road, the 4 of
March last.
And casting my eye upon it, I find a Declaration from C. Seaman, from C. Ell,
and from Cap. Fisher, which I had never liberty to see before, and so it is not
possible for me to give an Answer thereunto at present.

And although therein I find such horrid falsities, as fills me with admiration,
in regard such is their boldness to do it, even as we use to say, in the very
face of Authority, annexing, it is Printed by the Printer to the Parliament of
ENGLAND.

I beseech you give me leave to declare what is on my heart, like as in a
vessel that wants vent, and I hope no levity will be found therein.

As the Lord is sometimes pleased to prevent his by the blessings of goodness,
so the Remonstrancer, and those that seem to imbark in the same cause with him,
such I hear, as would have been well pleased with a second Revolt, I say they
have prevented me, or quite out-stript what I could imagine (in point of
broaching about their mischievous slanders) so far as the condition of London
(in the case it now stands) is different from the condition of Oxford, eight or
nine years since.

I shall not yet say all men are Liars, or that many have been so, neither
shall I yet Query (as one did with his so^ (in another case) whether we must
indeed bow down to that Image the Enemies of this Commonwealth were
denominated by a few years since.

Nor shall I yet conclude they have been happy men to be (at least) so wise, as
to stand Newters, such as have looked on, and said nothing, whatever they have
thought, thereby escaping many a knock that others have met with, among
malicious Anvils.

But this I shall conclude, that as the people is happy whose God is the Lord,
so that particular person is happy whose interest lies there: And give me leave
to add, of him that has truth on his side, like Oil, it will be uppermost
when all is done, and let men do what they can.

I have only one or two particulars humbly to mind you of: in a word,

Whether it would not be best (for the sifting out of truth) to enquire whose
hand is in all this: I do not deny but some whom I have highly honored in my
heart, may be surprised about it; yet I say the root or spring of all this
would be looked into.

In the next place, although I would not exasperate a matter, or hunt after the
utmost severity of Justice, but rather seek after lenity and mercy in case of
acknowledgment: yet in the close I shall commend unto your Grave Consideration,
what I heard was concluded among some ancient Commanders, many years since: To
suffer an inferior Officer to be abused, is just as if a man should suffer his
servant to take hold of any part of his arm, and that commonly opens a gappe,
or proclaims some kind of liberty to take hold of his Collar; or those
Officers (that although subordinate) are very near to him: And further, for
that to be suffered, it opens a passage to the Masters throat, which every man
knows is very dangerous.

Your Honors very humble Servant. As per supra.

Here follows five Letters from Mr. Charles Longland, the States Public
Minister at Legorn. Six Letters from Mr. Morgan Reed, Consul to the English
Nation in that place. Three from Captain John Wood, and two letters from
Captain Owen Coxe.
ALl declaring more or less of the backwardness, dullness, and negligence of
the States servant, Captain Henry Appleton; and withal, the desperate
perverseness, and stubbornness of Captain Edmund Seaman, and his Consort to
assist in the States service, with others under the same Obligation, in point
of Merchants goods with themselves. And whereby all those that are unprejudiced
may see (as clearly as that which is most discernable in the face) the Cause
why the Conjunction of the English Ships of War within the Mediterranean Sea,
was not effected, which in all outward appearance was the reason the Dutch, and
not the English obtained the Victory in those parts. And withal who is really
in the fault, and to be blamed, in regard the Merchants great Estate by Goods
laden in the Levant, was not brought under the States Ships Conduct as well all
the way, as preserved a good part thereof.

Mr Charles Longlands first Letter.
Captain Badiley. Sir,
THis morning I received yours by Mr. Lightfoot, and am in a readiness to obey
all your Commands: I have seen with much grief the troubles have lain upon
you in the late fight with the Dutch, especially by your own men: God be
praised that has delivered you out of them. Last night I sent down my man,
Edward Goodwin, in a Feluca laden with powder and match; To morrow I shall
dispatch away a Frigot with what I can get ready, salt flesh, nor salt fish any
to be had, so you must be content with fresh, till a month more be over. I
have sent you some money, and shall supply you with more as occasion shall
present. I have sent to Genoa to buy 100. barrels of powder, and sent up to
Florence to get another parcel, so all, or part shall be sent you by the
first. As well the Men of War as the Merchantmen lie very safe in this Port,
for I see no inclination in the first to stir without the later; if they
would have done it, you had not come hither (or so far alone) for I often
importuned Cap. Appleton before the Warwick departed to appoint you a place of
Randezvous, either at Maritimo, or Tunis, but without the Merchant men went
with him he would not stir. This day dyed Cap. Witherage, not being above
four days sick: Our freshest Letters out of England the 29. of July, the
States have promised the Company a Fleet of Ships to be sent into these Seas
to bring off these ships. I have nothing more to enlarge, so I subscribe my
self

Your faithful servant, Charles Longland.
Legorr. Sept. 12. 1652.
Mr. Longland's 2 Letter.
Captain Badiley.
THis is to accompany a small Brigantine or Lint, laden with provisions,
according to the enclosed Bill of Lading, which I have consigned to Mr. John
Wood, in case the Boat should not be able to get into Porto Longone, that then
Mr. Wood might follow your Order in its disposal in Porto Ferraro, or
Piombeino, which I am assured he will be careful of it, for he is an honest
man, and more forward to do any service that concerns the benefit or honor
of our Nation, then those in this place that are trusted with it. Yesterday
came in one ship from the East, another from the West, and the Flemmings sent
out one of their ships to see what they were, if it had proved the Harry
Bonaventure, or any other English ship, you may judge what had been become of
them; for the States two ships ride very safely in the Mould, without the least
appearance of going to Sea. I herewith send you some Letters, and shall send
you more by the next conveyance. You will hear of Capt. Witheradges death. In
Holland are two parties, one for the Prince of Orange, another against,
accordingly is their affections to England. I rest,

Yours, Charles Longland.

Mr. Longlands 3 Letter.
Capt. Badiley, SIR;
UPon receipt of yours of the 14 current, I was resolved to depart hence
immediately toward you, but the return of my servant Edw. Goodwin the next
morning, brought me better News, that you were not in so bad a condition. I
stay for the gold Chain from Florence, which when it comes I shall be going
toward you; in the mean time I send you a second Boat laden with Provisions,
and is consigned to Mr. Lightfoot in Porto Ferraro, who I have commended there
to Signior Boucetano the Governors Secretary. This day we had received Letters
out of England, to the 16 or 26 of August, General Blake was returned from the
North, and was about Yarmouth, Sir George Askue was at Plymouth, the Dutch with
a hundred sail (whereof one third men of war) were past the Channel westward,
some say they were put into Torbay. The general advise from England is, That
no succor is like to come hither till the 2 Fleets have fought. Capt. Appleton
is gone to Pisa and Lucca: The Phaenix is come hither, and has but 30 men on
board, which I told the States servants, but they have no mind to her.

I rest your Servant. Charles Longland.

Mr. Longlands 4 Letter.
Capt. Badiley, SIR;
I Have received yours of the 12 or 22, the Bristow Ship came into this Road
yesterday, where she still continues, we have in Road two men of War, and two
others lately come out of Holland, the one bound for Scanderonne, the other for
Smyrna, to convey three ships thither; the rest of the Ships are at Sea, but
where, or whether gone I know not, I believe some are gone to Tellone, to raise
men and victuals. Three new raised ships at Venice departed to Westward ten
days since, it may be they will look into your Port. Concerning what you wrote
of the 11 or 21, about the Governor of Porto Ferraro, his denial to let you
come into that Mould; I went to the Great Dukes Secretary, that the Merchants
ships at leost, that had Goods for Legorn, might go and liver such Goods, or
if the rest of the Ships would lay up their Goods there upon such terms as
the Sampson does here, till they find an opportunity to depart for England,
they might do it. I have had an Answer, that whatsoever Goods the ships will
liver, shall be received, and well looked to at Porto Ferraro; for which purpose I
dispatch this Footman with such an Order to the Governor from England, but I
doubt affairs there will require Forces about them, supposing a Conjunction
has happened with you, and Capt. Appleton. God direct you for the best. I did
put Capt. Appleton, and M. Longland in mind thereof yesterday, it has been a
business too much omitted formerly, I wish remedy in future. The Little Lewis
is in Civita Vechia, I wrote him to carreene his ship, and to attend your
Commands, I am confident my Letters may somewhat prevail; if you think good,
notwithstanding former misunderstanding, he is near at hand: I could wish care
were taken by Felueas, for the preservation of the Harry bonaventure, and
Employment. With my kind Salutes I rest,

Yours, Morgan Reed.

Consul Reed's 3 Letter.
SIR,
I Wrote you by M. Goodwin, and since by M. Wood; the last can further tell you
how much I stirred upon the first News of your Engagement with the Hollanders,
for these ships to assist you: I found in Capt. Appleton courage and
resolution, I am sorry it was not put in execution; both that and somewhat
else, God grant the obstructions and delays prove not prejudicial. I was
sorry to hear somewhat concerning your doubts, wherein I am not satisfied; but
M. Longland tells me, M. Goodwin brings better News, and the confirmation
of that Governors constancy toward your security; I told M. Longland my sense
of the business. I have wrote a friend in Rome to procure from the Spanish
Ambassador, Letters unto the Governor for continuance of his friendship
toward us, happily you may have it thence directly. Time gives the Enemy
opportunity to recruit, they are diligent and vigilant, I wish we were, or had
been so from hence. God direct you for the best, and give you, and those with
you, courage and strength, to act what the honor of our Nation, in you all is
required, for your own safeties. And I put you in mind, Authority must be in
such cases made use of, unto the uttermost, both in fair and rugged ways,
when fair cannot take place. With my salutes I rest,

Levorn, 18 Oct. 1652. Yours, Morgan Reed.
Sir, I wish you have a special care no parlies from the Enemies, or meeting
be permitted out of your own Ship, or any of your Squadron to go on board
theirs, or entertain discourse on board, or ashore, but by your Order, and the
less you have, I hold the better. Again, God direct you for the best. The
Harry Bonaventure is safe at Naples, I wish care be taken for the Employment.
Sir, have a care your people avoid eating of Grapes, and Mellons, all Fruit
breeds Fevers, and Fluxes, whereof ours begin to smart for it.

Idem 16 October, 1653. Livorn.


Consul Reed's 4 Letter.
Good Sir;
ALthough I have domestic sorrow in the loss of my servant this morning, yet
my mind runs on the great danger I apprehend may befall you there, if others
beside your self do not stir, and take it into consideration. I was once in
hope of the going out of Capt. Appleton, and some others with him, that I
assured unto my self a defeat of these ships that lay in this Port, as well as
a relief, and beating the Enemy thence, which doubtless upon the sight of
these would gladly have escaped hence; but however it has been delayed, and
let slip so probable an opportunity, Heave to them it concerns to answer, I
wish they themselves with your Squadron, do not come endangered thereby, the
unhappy loss of the Phoenix Frigot has daunted some, and encouraged the enemy,
who as I wrote was diligent and vigilant both in gathering Merchants ships into
their service, as in shipping any sort or Nation to man them, and therein they
stir; we have now 8 ships of them lying in the road, comprehending our intended
Fire-ship, and that unhappy quandum Phaenix Frigot in the Mould. God strengthen
you all, and those here, with spirits to provide for your selves. I have noted
to you all the ships here, and the Harry Bonyventure at Naples, as the Lewis in
Civita Vechia. An assurance of a reward, and a loving Letter from you, as
Authority to command, if they, or these should refuse assistance in so emergent
an occasion; when you by a Council of War shall think convenient for the
preservation of that Squadron, and wherein lies involved, as I apprehend, in
part, the Honor of our Nation, together with the great Estates of many
Merchants (I say under correction) I apprehend all ought to give their
assistance; but in this, and matters of such concernments, I shall leave unto
your Results, in case you please to debate thereon. And I will pray God to
direct you for the best, and in the interim, neither will I be idle; I have
wrote unto a friend at Rome, to procure the Spanish Ambassadors Letters as unto
Genoa, for others thence, all in your favor to that Governor. This is what I
thought upon, when I see my endeavors could not procure these ships going
forth. If I can think of ought else may be serviceable unto you, or that you
may apprehend I may serve you in, please to command, you shall always find me
(no less then ever you knew me) ready to serve and promote the welfare of our
Nation, as if I may in your particular serve you, so it be without jealousy to
encroach; you shall find me always

Your affectionate Friend, Morgan Reed.
This is the fourth Letter I have wrote you; the first per M. Goodwin, who
tells me he had delivered the same; the other per M. Wood, who I assure my
self he has delivered, the third I delivered to M. Goodwin, who tells me he
had delivered it to M. Lightfoot: I wish you all happiness, and rest as above.

I have put our Factors here in mind to study some way to send for the fine
Goods there, in case of eminent danger; but I observe no resolution. God direct
all for the best; I apprehend the ships will be less pestred, and more
serviceable.

Livorn, 19. 7 ber. 1652. Vale.


Consul Reed's 5 Letter. Livorn, October 26. 1652.
SIR,
IN Answer unto yours 21 current, I have not failed upon all occasions to
further and solicit the going out of these ships, but Capt. Seaman, and M.
Roopes flat denial, without Order from their Owners, or Commands from the
State, gives such a dullness in the prosecution thereof, that I have little
hopes of the stirring hence of the men of War; God knows the vexation of
spirit I have had hereabouts, and the more for that unto me it appeared facill
to have at the first destroyed, or beaten out of the way the small force of the
Enemy then lying before this Port; and the more, in relation to the weakness
ours would have found that battered Fleet before yours: so that I apprehended
the sight of these would have made them fly, or if stood, not able to
encounter these; my opinion at first was embraced with a seeming forwardness
and alacrity in Capt. Appleton, and some others, and voted requisite by most of
the Nation at that time, but how dulled, and not put in execution, I leave it
to them it concerns to Answer, for its not putting the same in execution in
such eminent and emergent occasions, I apprehend Authority with compulsion
should have been used, with promise of pay from the State for the service, and
indemnity unto the Commanders for their Ownets and Merchants, this would have
rendered them unexcusable, and without question the State would have gratefully
ratified such a resolution in their Ministers and Commanders, which I not only
pressed often unto Capt. Appleton, but unto M. Longland, out of zeal to the
preservation and reputation of the Nation. What Answer Capt. Seaman, and M.
Roope since have given in to Capt. Cox, upon your desires, as how he finds the
men of War fitted, and their results, I leave unto Capt. Coxes Relation, who
also can certify you how far I stirred therein.

I have from the friend I employed at Rome, a return with a Letter from
Cardinal Triultio, the greatest Minister the Spaniards have in Italy, who
recommends your interest unto that Governors care. From Genoa, the Ministers
of Spain were abroad, as M. Lewis his Letter will tell you, which I send you
for the News therein, after perusal you may return it me. The Cardinals
Letter is open, so you may read it, and then wet the Wafer, and close it before
delivery. I pray God put into your hearts resolution, and to act what may be
for your safety speedily, ere more Vessels sent hence: And with my salutes to
you and your Officers, my old friend M. Watts, Leiv. Stone, M. Tanner, etc. I
remain,

Yours, Morgan Reed.

Consul Reed's 6 Letter.
SIR,
I Wrote you under the 26 past, and therein sent a Letter from the Cardinal
Triultio, chief Minister of Spain, and Ambassador with the Pope for the King
of Spain, unto that Governor, and being I was then going to Pisa, to assist
Capt. Cox about the Corn-ship, I left it unto the care of Capt. Appleton, for
its speedy conveyance unto you; telling him withal how much it might import
its speedy being with you, he promised to further accordingly, and I shall
gladly understand you have it, as that it may be useful unto you; and if in
ought else you can imagine me capable of doing any service, freely command me.

Enclosed I sent you such News now come to hand from Genoa, which anticipateth
our Letter not yet arrived from London, when you have perused the same, please
to return it. I am still sorry no resolution hence in our Ships going forth to
relieve you; and I fear, as I tell them, Friar Bacons last Vote will soon come
upon them, viz. That since time was, and time is (that time draws near) will be
past: I can tell you the Enemy is vigilant, and diligent, both here, and at
Genoa, and speedily may be in such a posture as may give you reason to doubt to
engage: God of his mercy put in your hearts to resolve and do what is requisite
for your preservation. In have I rest. I am told a Fireship is gone now toward
Longone, hence.

Legorn, October. 1. 1652.
Captain Woods first Letter.
Cap. Ri. Badiley.
Honored SIR, I desire to bless God for your safety, being delivered from
your Enemy, and sorry for the loss of one of your Squadron, as also that you
could have no assistance from any that is here; but of that no more now.
Captain Witherage this day departed this life, and Captain Appleton not very
well, consequently the Squadron not in a good posture, which I am sorry to see,
rather wishing that we had some good Resolutions to do a little work before us.
Not above four sail of Ships do keep us all here, and I suppose at last it
will be put to you to contrive our work for us, and the Lord direct you in it:
so time not permitting at present, but by the next shall be larger, of our
cross providence. No news from England, with my humble respects to you

Legorn, Sept. 3. 1653. Remain your Servant, John Wood.

Capt. Wood's 2 Letter.
Capt. Ri. Badiley, SIR;
YOurs by the Satty, and another by Capt. Cox, came to my hands, and am glad
you have found out such a way to secure your Provisions, as for the Governor
to own it: I do wish in the mean time, none of our Boats run into danger, for
the Barque men are very incident to lead them, if they will be ruled by them;
so am I also glad of your care in sending Capt. Cox to stir us up at Legorn, in
each business I shall not be wanting according to my power, the success I
shall refer to God, who is able to judge of all our intentions. The Lord in
mercy send us united hearts in this time of Trial, unto whose goodness I
commend you, and respectfully rest

Piombeene, 7ber 8. 1652. Yours, John Wood.

Capt. Cox's 1 Letter.
SIR;
AFter the tender of my service, I salute you, trusting in the protection of
the Almighty, you are in good health, with all our Christian friends; I desire
to be excused for not writing at my first arrival to this place of Livorn; the
cause of my delay was to see the resolution of Capt. Appleton, with the
Commanders of the Merchants ships, but from the first day to this time they
have kept their resolution. The Sampson and Mary will not budge, they say they
did not com to convey men of War, I believe they have been put on by the
dissaffected porty here of Merchants. So having not else at present, I humbly
take leave, and rest, etc.

L^g. Sept. 24. 1652. Owen Cox.

Capt. Cox's 2 Letter.
Sir;
AFter the tender of my most humble service, I give you to understand that I
have received yours the 30 of the last, wherein you are pleased to hint to me
my slacknesse in writing to you; I desire your favorable excuse in that
particular: The great and chiefest cause of my omissien, is because I hoped we
might do some acceptable service here worth the imparting to you. I wrote you
in my lost the hopes I had of the reducing the Phaenix, the business was
brought to a head, I then received a Command from Capt. Appleton not to persist
any further in it, which has been a great trouble to my spirit, yet resolved
to proceed in it; but to cross me in my resolution, the Flemmings were made
acquainted with it, and set a strong guard abord the Frigot: I had fitted two
Barques with forty men a piece, to board her, which I did not question in the
least, but to have carried her, but was betrayed by him whom it does so much
concern. Sir, the Fireship departed this Port with a man of War, about two a
clock this morning, intending for Porto Longone, I hope God will preserve you:
Having not else at present, humbly take my leave, and rest

Levorn, 9 Oct. 1652. Owen Cox.

Capt. Appleton's first Letter, and two more were received from him of this
tenor, mentioning nothing of his Sickness.
Capt. Badiley,
BY the Vessel Capt. Cox found at Sea, which arrived late bear yesternight, we
perceive that the ten sail of Hollanders have met with you, and were in Fight,
we have sent two Felucas on purpose to see how it is with you, of which we hope
well; if you go in for any Port, I pray give me notice, that I with the rest
of our ships here, may give you our best assistance, we are hauling out of the
Mould with the Leopard and Bonaventure. The ship Mary, Perrigreen, Levant
Merchant, and one M. Edge of 18 Guns, will be all ready to depart this place in
the morning, and shall watch the motion of these five ships that are here. I am
minded to take in a hundred Barrels of Powder more, in case you should want,
and intend to bring two Felucas along with me, to go to and again upon
occasion, in having correspondence, and taking advise with you. I have not else
but my prayers to God for you, and the ships under convoy, and that our meeting
may be safe, and successful, remain

Yours, Henry Appleton.

Captain Appleton's fourth Letter follows; telling me that the Dutch
themselves confessed, a greater Sea Fight had not been in their remembrance; and
that they were as much torn as the English: One may wonder since it was so,
why he came not out.
Capt. Badiley,
YOurs by M. Light foot yesterday-morning, came to my hands, and received this
morning yours by M. Cartwright, and am very glad to hear of your prosperity and
welfare, after this hot and tedious dispute of yours with the Hollanders, and
of the good service which Gapt. Cox in the Warwick performed, and under God in
your behalf. Sir, I wish with all my heart that my self and the Bonaventure
had been with you in this your late Engagement, questioning not but by Gods
assistance to have gained the Victory, yet blessed be his name it is no worse
with you, if considering aright your condition, and the carriage of some
Commanders under you, in this business it could not have been conjectured for
you, with your Merchants ships to come off with those Flemmings so well as you
did, acknowledging God was much seen in it. I hear by the Hollanders who have
writ to their Agent here, there has not been a hotter dispute on the Sea to
their remembrance, then this has been, confessing themselves are as much torn
as you are. The loss of the Phaenix I am very sorry for, knowing no man can
govern any more ships then himself is abord of. I would desire your
approbation in placing a Commander in the Bonaventure, in my opinion none more
fiter then Capt. Cox for the said place, if it stand with your liking pray
persuade Capt. Cox to it, that ship has never been well governed this voyage;
I would have Capt. Cox sease his resolution to come from you as yet; I intend
if it please Almighty God to give me strength of body, within two or three
days to come over with M. Wood and other Commanders to you to Porto Longone,
the Merchants want two weeks Letters; we have notice now that the Great Duke
has received a Letter from his Agent in London, that Capt. Nicholas Reed has
the Command of fifteen ships which are in the Downs, and as he says ready to
depart to this place: Not else at present to advise you, with my prayers for a
safe meeting, remain

Lego. Sept. 3. 1652. Yours, Henry Appleton.

Capt. Appleton's 5 Letter.
Capt. Ri. Badiley,
YOur Letter by Capt. Cox of the 8 instant received, since had not an
opportunity to write to you, nor have not received any from you; I perceive you
do approve of what I wrote concerning placing Capt. Cox Commander of the
Bonaventure, which is accordingly done. Mr Longland, my self, and Capt. Cox,
have several times used the best Oratory that we could, for the persuading of
Capt. Seaman Commander of the Sampson, and Mr. Gilbert Roope, Commander of the
Mary, to fit their ships to go out with us, but they will by no means
condescend unto it; there was then, and is now in this road, nine sail of
Hollands men of War, one of which we suppose to be a Fire-ship; my self and
the Bonaventure, with Mr. Wood and Mr. Marsh, who show both willingness to the
service, have not above seventy men betwixt both their ships, it would be too
great an advantage for the enemy upon us, we being but four ships. I do well
approve of your advise in standing to the southward of the Island; if we were
well able to encounter these nine in the road, that then you would endeavor to
break through them seven ships which keep you in that Port; but I see not in
any likelihood which way we can do it, being but two men of War to confide in:
No man should be more forward or willing then my self, to advance the service
of the State, if that I did see any probability thereof. I have received
several Letters from Mr. iNich: Gold, one of the Committee of the Novy, and
he, and Capt. Ryder, both write unto me that there will be very suddenly a good
Squadron dispeeded for our supply, Mr. Longland has the like News from Col.
Thomson, but it is desired it may be kept private. I have notice of the Express
I sent on purpose is arrived with the States. I have not received any Letters
or Orders from the Committee of the Navy, since I came into this Road, but
expect by the next Post. I remain

Abord the Leopard in Leg. Mould, 18 Sep. 1652. Henry Appleton.

Mr. Longlands 6 Letter. October. 19
Telling us, that among other Troubles we had false Brethren.
Captain Badiley. SIR;
I Have received yours of the 2 and 5 current, the latter came to my hands this
day: Your Letters for England came too late for this ordinary, by the next they
shall be sent forward. The Dutch have advice of a great Sea Fight in the mouth
of the Channel, wherein they say they have sunk 14 sail, and as many of our
ships are returned into Breast; I have Letters from Amsterdam as fresh as any,
but they writ nothing thereof they there heard of your dispute, so next week
the News will be in Eng. I send you this man expres to advise you that last
night departed hence the Bristow Prize, which is made a Fire-ship, so it were
convenient you sent up to the General to acquaint him with it, that he may
deny her coming into Port, for her coming thither can be with no other intent
but to destroy your ships; at least let the Governor send abord to search her,
and he shall find the Ship full of Faggots and Brush, and such combustible
matter. I refer you to Capt. Coxes Relation, to tell you how his design on
the Phaenix is discovered, by some false Brother from abord the Ships. Van
Trump is now come hither to take possession: so no more thoughts of her till it
please God to send some other succor: Col. Thompson gives me hopes of succor
for these ships.

Legorn, October. 19. 1652. Charles Longland.

Mr. Longland's 7 Letter.
Showing how gallantly we had be en to pass, in case the three Frigots and
Harry Bonanaventure, had not gone to Messina, but have gone to Porto Longone,
as it was desired.
Capt. Ri. Badiley, SIR;
I Wrote you yesterday by the present, in answer to yours received by the
Footman; this day I called the Commanders together, and delivered them your
Letters, who are now making all ready to sail: Last night went out Van Gallen
and another ship, who in the night run ashore at Vada, as the Bearer hereof
will inform you: when you writ your last Orders to these Commanders to come
away, you did not know otherwise but that the Frigots and the Harry Bonaventure
might be with you to join together, but I fear your Order to them to that
purpose came short, for ten days before they were all together in the Vare of
Messina, so you may imagine which way they are going. Six of the Enemy lie at
the entrance of the gulf of Venice: I dispatch this Feluca to you to know
where Van Trumps Squadron is, for if these ships depart, it is probable the Five
ships of the Enemy will fly before them, till they come nigh with another
Squadron, and ten or twelve ships together may much prejudice these; wherefore
pray inform us well by return of this Feluca where they are; and give us your
absolute Order whether these ships shall come, and accordingly they will
proceed by Gods blessing. We have made choice of Capt. Seaman to Command the
Leopard, Mr. Roopes Owners desires Fisher to be Commander, so I think it best
to let it rest for quietness sake. I take leave, and rest,

At your Command Charles Longland.
Legorn, Feb. 10. 1653.
Mr. Longlands 8 Letter.
Showing how cauteous he was in Impresting Merchants Ships into the Service.
Capt. Badiley, SIR;
I Writ you the 19 instant by a Footman which I sent you Express, that the
Dutch had that day sent hence the Bristow Prize, whereof they had made a
Fire-ship: This morning is come into Port about nine sail of Dutch, which are
said to be those that lay at Porto Longone, if so that your place be clear of
them, I hope the Merchants ships that have Goods for this place, have made use
of the opportunity to go into Porto Ferraro, where immediate Order will be
taken for delivery of their Goods.

This day I have received large Letters from the Council of State, whereof the
enclosed to you will give you notice, and impart unto you. I suppose the
Contents of what they have writ to me, about taking up Merchants ships for
their service; wherein I am to advise with you and Capt. Appleton, how far it
will be convenient to do it; for as I would not by any means spare their money
for the National good or service, so I would not willingly freight ships at
the public Charge, to lie still in Port, and do nothing. I am sorry you are
at such a distance that we cannot so well confer together, wherefore pray send
me your advise for my Government herein. Here is the Perrigreen a fit ship if
men may be got; at Genoa is the Lewis, M. Ell, at Venice may be others, but the
great difficulty will be want of Men: All things together considered, give me
your advise whether I shall freight those two ships, and upon what terms (for
the State prescribes not any) and that you may the better understand their
meaning, whereby you might give me some insight thereinto: I herewith send you
copy of their Order word for word. And so I rest

At your Command. Charles Longland.
Legorn, Octo. 22. 1652.
Mr. Longlands 9 Letter.
By which all men may see what a horrid Lie Capt. Appleton puts out in Print
against him, saying, that he should triumph in his Imprisonment.
Capt. Badiley, SIR;
I Am now come to Answer yours of the 17 and 19 current: The Great Duke has
writ down News hither to the Colonel, that 22 English or Dutch ships have
been seen on the Coast of Spain, I believe about the end of the next Month we
may expect our ships if their resolutions hold. The Letter you sent for the
Great Duke I sent forward, and herewith return you his Answer: About the
demands you make of the Great Duke for your free Egresse and Regresse, I
thought it more secure to write for it, that I might have it under his hand,
then to take an Answer by word of mouth, so I herewith send you Signior
Pandolfini his Secretary of State's Letter to me in Answer. For what you say
about the Dukes imprisonment of Capt. Appleton, unheard, all the Princes in the
world are on the same trade, and steer their course after one manner. What do
you think had become of the five Members of Parliament, if the late King had
found them; besides his imprisonment, not a man could be suffered to speak with
him, those few lines he wrote were all translated at Court, before they came to
our hands. You know very well how unlimited a thing an absolute Prince is,
wherefore in this Country we must have patience. I told the Great Duke the
Commonwealth suffered in their reputation by Capt. Appleton's imprisonment,
but he answered he would give them good satisfaction therein. I perceive Capt.
Roope will know nothing of Capt. Bowman to Command the Mary, the Bonaventure
extremely wants a good Commander, for the Master is not right, never from the
shore. I herewith send you Capt. Cox Letter, wherein you may see what there
passes, I have given him credit on M. Baker for what his occasions require to
repair his Ship. C. Peacocke is to bring you out twenty sail of Ships to be
under your Command: The enclosed from Eng: will acquaint you with what passes
there; you need not doubt in the least of your free coming hither, this is my
opinion, and you will see as much by the Secretaries Letter. I rest,

Your Servant. Charles Longland.
Lego. Dec. 24. 1652.
Mr. Longlands 10 Letter.
Showing what a gallont opportunity we had, in case the Frigots had come from
Naples, (and not have gone to Messina) unto Porto Longone, where the Parragou
rode all alone in expectation of them.
Capt. Badiley, SIR;
I Wrote you yesterday by the return of your Feluca, this is intended by the
Purser of the Mary Rose, with whom I have had some discourse about the livering
of the ship, wherein can be no difficulty, whilst they keep the Goods in their
own possession ashore, so he tells me he will liver her, wherein you may please
to urge him likewise. I sent forward your Letter to Genod by the Lions Post,
and writ to Mr. Wright, to whom the John and Concord is commended, about
sparing 30 men and 20 Guns, upon the terms you propound; what the issue will
be we must attend. Here is not above 6 or 7 Dutch in the Road. I wish the
Frigots were come from Naples, and then 'twere a good opportunity to come
hither and clear this road; for if these ships in the Road could be destroyed,
or at least removed, I hope we should never again be put into a pin-fold. The
Dutch have now showed us the way, that it is lawful to do any thing in Road or
Mould, when we have a power and opportunity to do it; for two days past I
laded 50 Chests of Tinn upon a French ship, for Smyrna, upon which I took 2400
d. of the Captain at Cambio, but the Tinn was worth 1600 d. more, the Dutch
having intelligence of it, the French man riding to the north of the Road, two
ships made sail toward her, and sent 4 armed Boats abord her, and took away
the Tinn: I have sent away a Carrier to the Great Duke, to acquaint him with
it, but I fear his Answer will be the same as the Governor gives me, that it
must go upon account of the Frigot: At least we now clearly see by this
action, that when we have a power we need not be scrupulous in what place we
fall upon the Enemy; and although an unhappy loss be fallen upon me, yet it
may prove advantageous to the general business: I shall to morrow have answer
from Florence, what the Great Duke says to the bufinesse, whereof my next
shall advise you. These Dutch talk much of their wedding the Kings Quarrel, but
Mr. Webster writes me nothing of it. This is what occurres, I rest,

Legorn, Feb. 8. 1653. Charles Longland.

Captain Roop's 1 Letter, about putting off Fisher into the Mary.
SIR;
MY humble service presented unto you, some few days since I made bold to
trouble you with a few lines, advising Mr. James Bowman's reply unto your
proffers, in which I conceive you are well satisfied, as likewise am I, so do
again recommend unto you my Mate, Benjamin Fisher, requesting you by the first
good occasion, to send him a line or two with your Warrant to take the Command
of the Mary, that I do now again confirm, humbly entreating you to favor me
with it, quitta primo, that so I may settle him before the ships are required
out. Thus humbly requesting you to remember him that is, and whilst remaining
will be,

SIR, Your humble Servant, at Command, Gilbert Roope.
Legorn the 9 of Feb. 1653.
Capt Roop's 2 Letter, desiring none but Benjamin Fisher might Command the Mary.
Cap. Ri. Badiley; Honored Sir,
MY most humble service presented, your courteous lines of the 28 of January, I
have from the hand of Mr. Charles Longland now received, and cannot but return
you humble thanks for your willing assent unto my request, whereby you have
obliged me to you, so, as that upon all occasions I shall not want to manifest
the same by my thankfulness^ and readiness to observe your Commands.

And in order to what you advise, I shall take out my name of the Commission,
and put in Ben: Fisher, he being one I am confident that will deserve your
love. I have considered what you are pleased to write about Mr. Watts, in
answer say, That by no means I can admit of him, nor any other, only Ben:
Fisher, for he is the man that I have advised my Owners, has the charge of the
Ship: Now as you have been pleased so freely to favor me in my request
heretofore, so I humbly beseech you to confirm the same, and not to put any
other Commander in, save Ben: Fisher.

Your humble Servant, Gilb: Roope.
Legorn, Feb. 10. 1653.
Capt. Cox's Letter, speaking of the Reason why he came not from Naples, but
went to Messina.
SIR,
WIth the tender of my very humble service, I salute you, trusting in the
protection of the Almighty, you are in good health, with all the Commanders
that are with you. Sir, I received yours at Naples, but the Post came two days
after his usual course, and my great trouble and grief in my imprisonment,
prevented me in writing by the last conveyance from thence: it was Wednesday
late in the night, before I had my liberty, the next day in the evening I set
sail, and put to Sea with all our Fleet. Sir, I endeavored to perform
according to your desire, but winds and weather proving so bad, which forced me
to Messina, where I left the Harry Bonaventure. I stopped not at Messina, but
went through about five in the afternoon, by the south Lantern: about ten at
night we met with one of the Dutch Fleet, whom we took; the next day we engaged
the Fleet in hopes to have given a good account of them, but providence has
otherwise ordered it. I have had much spoil among my men, my ship much torn;
when God sends me well to meet, I shall give a full relation of our passages;
in the mean time I shall refer you to Mr. Lightfoot, who is in some measure
sensible of our dispute. Sir, if you are not pleased that I shall not come in
to you, let me hear by the first, and withal to send me a supply of Powder and
Shot proportionable, for that I much want, I could not have a supply at
Messina. I humbly take leave and rest,

Your humble Servant to Command, Owen Cox.
From abord the Phoenix at Sea, Feb. 17. 1652.
Here follows the Copy of my Letter to Capt. Appleton, three days before our
Engagement.
Capt. Appleton;
I Am heartily glad the Great Duke is so far pacified to you, as that he is
willing you should continue your Command until this dispute be over, and then,
God sparing me life (at a consultation of Friends) I shall do for you what I
can, and I hope we shall reach your desires; I would have all the ships to be
of your Squadron for the present, except the Bonaventure, that I desire may be
of mine. I came from Porto Ferraro last night, with these eight ships and a
Fire-ship (blessed be God) all in a good equipage, having got the Fly-boats men
and Guns, and all our men seem to be gallantly resolved.

I suppose we may be almost a third part of the way over, and ere this come to
hand we may be in sight, pray desire Mr. Longlands company on board, and consult
with the Commanders what is best to be done, whether it were not best to ward
your ships without the Mould head, or not; I think it were best this fine
weather; and if I see the ships plying out to meet me, I intend to keep plying
to windward of them, until I see you under sail, plying after us, and then
when it is a gale I shall endeavor to break through them, that so I may come
and join with you.

If the wind be of shore, and you see them coming out to me, pray hasten as for
life, to follow with all the sail you can make, that we may not be too much
oppressed before you come, for other matters I must leave it to you that are upon
the place; I doubt the only want of our ships will be Powder and round Shot,
pray desire Mr. Longland (at least) to put some on board of you for us. I
suppose your self and the Vice Admiral of the Dutch will try a pluck for it;
although he be the great Boar, yet he is but a Boar, and (who knows) being the
Game of this Country, he may be hunted as well as others: And not to enlarge,
I remain

Yours, Ri: Badiley.
On board the Parragon, Tuesday, Mar. 1. at 6 mor: of Pompalonia, the 1 Letter.
Here follows Mr. Longland's 11 Letter; telling me the Great Duke would not
suffer the Dutch to do any acts of Hostility in his Road.
Legorn, the 12 of March, 1652. Capt. Badiley, SIR,
LAst night about Sunsetting, came to my hands by your Feluca, your Letter,
dated 4 leagues to the northward of Porto Ferraro; in answer, all things shall
be punctually effected as you Order.

I carried Capt. Seaman and Capt. Wood twice to the Secretary, as sent by the
rest of the Commanders, to acquaint him, that if the stormy weather continued,
'twas not possible for them to go out, nor you to come in: As also if the
Dutch lay at the Mould head, their ships could not get out; and as it was his
Highness pleasure to Command them hence, so it concerned him in honor to open
the door or passage to let them out. Last night the Secretary showed us the
Great Dukes Letter to you, in answer to yours from Porto Ferraro, that he gave
us liberty to the 18 of this month to get out, and longer then, if wind and
weather hindered: He takes very well what you propounded concerning the freedom
of his Port, and has been all this day (as he says) endeavoring to get Van
Gallen to under-write the same likewise; but whilst they were in Treaty, News
came to Van Gallen that you were on the way from Porto Ferraro, so nothing was
effected; the Secretary tells me within this hour he will send again to him, and
I hold it not convenient that the ships stir out of the Mould, til an answer
come, except the Dutch weigh Anchor, and go out to you, in such case they must
all out of the Mould, come what will. The Secretary tells me they have three or
four Captains, and fifty or sixty Dutch Mariners in hold, who shall not be
set at liberty except Van Gallen subscribes the writing to use no hostility in
the road. Our men and Commanders are all cheerful and ready to use their
utmost endeavors, upon which I hope the Lord will give his blessing. Capt.
Appleton is permitted by the Great Duke to stay here during this Engagement: I
hope the two Felucas are arrived with Powder, Shot, and Money, I gave them
order to look out for you at Sea; let me know if you want any thing, it shall
be sent you. A few hours will resolve us what the Enemies intents are. God I
hope will appear for our Nation, in his wonted mercy, to whose protection I
commit you, and rest,

Wednesday morn. at 9 a clock Mar. 2. abord the Leopard. Your servant, Charles
Longland.

In the next place here follows the substance of my Letter (to the best of my
remembrance) unto Capt. Appleton of the third of March, at four a Clock in the
morning; but as for the direct Copy, either I had not time to take it, or else
it is miscarried.
Capt. Appleton,
I Perceive the Dutch have no mind to come out to me, but remain in the Road,
with hope to ruin you at your coming forth; and the Squadron with you being
somewhat the less, what ever I suffer my self, I would not have it hazarded:
wherefore be very cautious what you do as to coming forth, if you have not an
opportunity in the night. I would have you remain at the Mould head while I
come near that place to receive you, unless you see me engaged, and in that
case pray take Mr. Longlands opinion what to do, who is a discreet Gentleman,
and one that will not only give you the best Counsel he can, but I am
confident is as loath to hazard you, as my self.

Yours, Ri: Badiley.

Here follows his Answer to my Letter, dated at 4 a clock that Afternoon.
Capt. Ri. Badiley,
I Received yours, bearing date 4 a clock this present morning, and do
acknowledge your great care in advancing the public, and of not hazarding this
Squadron. The Agent being on board, I sent for all the Commanders, and showed
them not only your Letter, but the results of your Council of War, which were
all with a unanimous consent, very well approved of; together with your
intentions for managing the Fight, Squadron to Squadron, I shall to my utmost
endeavor to execute what you please to order; we being at present in a very
good posture, all men exceeding willing. If you can draw near in the night,
within the Malora, the wind being off the shore, we shall by God his
assistance, and your approbation, break through the Enemy, which by a general
consent is referred to you. Our eyes are toward him, who by the breath of his
Nostrils can make these Vaunters fly before us, for which I continually pray,
in the mean am

Leopard, Lego. Mould, Mar. 3. 1653. at 4 in the afternoon. Henry Appleton.

Master Longland's 12 Letter, being his last before our Engagement; wherein it
appears that we were dealt withal, as those that were betrayed.
Legorn-Mould, abord the Leopard, March 13. 1653. at 22 hours. Capt. Badiley,
Sir;
I Now Answer yours dated this morning at 4 a clock, and I must write you that
the Dutch (...) ^rison are releast and sent abord; the business betwixt them
and the Duke seems to be adjusted, which must turn to our prejudice: the
Colonel told me his opinion was, as soon as our ships had their sternes to
the Mould, the Dutch would assault them; he likewise asked me if you intended
to assault them in the Road; these are symtomes that the Road is theirs that
win it, as I cannot get so much from them in plain terms, neither will I
persuade you to begin any hostility in the Road, for I believe you will not
want provocation, or at least the ships now here before you come in, yet I
would not wish you to desist from any notable advantage, upon nicities, when no
assurance or certainty can be got from any of these great Officers. The ships
are all ready to undertake any thing that is within the compass of
possibility, but except part of the Dutch go out to you, or at least your
Fleet come in to our succor, it is impossible for these ships to get away
without great loss and hazard. The Great Dukes Letter unto you was sent to
Porto Ferraro, and is thence come back to my hands, which I would have sent you
translated, if time would permit, but I doubt not but it will be well done, by
some with you. I must not omit to tell you, that the Colonel this day told me,
if our ships were worsted in this encounter, and came back thither for a Port,
the Frigot must then be restored. The great design of the Flemmings is to
spoil them ships in the Mould, which I believe is the cause they will not stir
to come out to you.

Your Servant, Charles Longland.

Here follows the Copies of the Orders and Rules agreed upon, for every man's
better Government in the time of Engagement.
UPon the Question, whether we shall stand into Legorn-Road with the wind
westerly, so that we judge our Ship cannot come out of the Mould; it was
resolved in the negative.

But rather, that we shall keep the wind off our Enemy, and not wilfully engage
them without hope of help from our other Squadron.

Upon the Question, in case the wind be Easterly, when we come near
Legorn-Road, whether it were not best tack, and stand off to the southward a
little while, thereby to endeavor the drawing or touling off our Enemy out,
that our dispute might be where we may have Sea-roome enough, it is resolved in
the affirmative.

Upon the Question, what shall be done in case the Enemy board any Ship of this
or the other Squadron, it is resolved that those of the same Squadron (with all
speed) shall board that Enemy on the other side, as most conveniently it may be
done.

On board the Parragon, March 1. 1653. Ri. Badiley. Owen Cox. George Hugham.
William Vpshot. John Turtle. Jonat: Reeves. Will: Ell. John Godolphin.


It followed the 3 of March.
Upon the Question, whether we were not best keep our ships loose when we draw
near the Enemy in Legorn- Road, let the wind be where it will, it is resolved in
the affirmative.

Upon the Question, what the ships of any Squadron shall do, in case the
Commander in chief of that Squadron, be removed by any disaster; it is
resolved, that in such case they shall keep near the Admiral by night or day
to receive his Commands, if possible it can be done.

Ri: Badiley. Will: Ell. Jo: Godolphin. Jo: Turtle. Pet: Whiting.

The Frigots were about a League within us, to watch the motion of the Enemy,
the Commanders could not be with us, but every one of them, with others, had
Copies sent them of these Resolves, that no man might plead excuse herafter.



Mr. Longlands 13 Letter.
Showing what was the issue of that Tragedy near Legorn the 4 of March last.
Legorn, Apr: 25. 1653. Capt. Badiley,
BY Peter Whyting I received yours, dated the 16 of March, which it seems was
a Copy of what you writ me by Captain Hewes, the Original I never heard
further of, nor the bearer: I hope this may meet you well arrived at home, and
bid you welcome thither. I need not write you the various censures here upon
your going away. All the 4 ships were lost before you came up; of this you will
hear at home, as also the full relation of the unhappy loss of our ships. For
my part I was no Spectator, for when I saw them so suddenly go out of the
Mould, upon the back of the Enemy (contrary to their own deliberate result in a
Council of War that morning not to stir thence till the Enemy had engaged you)
I went into my Chamber, where I kept my self, fearing that success which
befell them: By noon the Tragedy was ended, the Leopard being the last ship,
who had strength enough to clear her self, if she had either the courage or
discretion to make use of it: The Dutch themselves report, if she had but asked
for those ships that lay abord her, she might have had them. Mr. Spradlerow the
Minister (now at my house) confesses that he and others looked in at their
Ports, but saw not a man on their Gun-decke, but such was their fate, that they
still delayed until it was too late. I rest,

At your Command. Charles Longland.

Here follows Mr. Longland's 14 Letter; complaining very justly of Cap.
Seaman's Ingratitude, and of the great abuse he received from him. Vale.
Legorn, May 23. 1653. Capt. Badiley, SIR;
AT request of Capt. Appleton, Seaman, and Marsh, I entered into Bond to the
Dutch Vice Admiral for 12000 Dollars, that in two months they should render
themselves Prisoners in Holland, the Dutch having lost their prattick (by
taking a Polatto which brought some Wools from Tunnis) our Captains were
necessitated to make Purgo in the Lazareta, when they came thither: Two days
since I went to see them, and bid them welcome ashore, but I found such an
encounter from Seaman, that in all my lifetime I never was half so much
abused, he called me all the base scandalous names he could imagine, took up
great stones and flung at me to have brained me, and I am confident if he could
have come at me had done me some notable mischief, if not to the loss of my
life. If the State take not some order to tame such men, it will not be in my
power to do them any service, nor fit to be a Commissioned servant of theirs,
when I shall be subject to the abuse of such a scandalous fellow, whose extreme
Malignancy and backwardness, has been the ruin of all our ships here; and
now he has basely lost his ship, he vents his venom to the full; there were
above forty Witnesses of this abuse. Neither did he leave you and Capt. Cox
un-abus'd, but toold me before all men, that Cowardly base fellow Badiley, and
that base Rogue Cox, were likewise Confederates. In fine, if he could have
named any man else that bore any affection to the State, or served them with
faithfulness, they had likewise come under his abuse. I am certain I have not
injured him in the least, but contrarily I am engaged for him a great sum of
money. If the State do not make me some reparation upon this man for the
injury he has done me herein (and likewise to let him know it) I shall be
subject to all abuses from such fellows, which rather then I will be, I will
return the States Commission; and so much I pray let them know from

Your Servant. Charles Longland.

Certain Affidavits, and Certificates, Showing the Fallaciousnesse of that
Pamphlet, called The Remonstrance of the FIGHT near Legorn, the 4 of March
last, 1652.
The first Affidavit.
THese are to certify whomsoever it does concern, That being Lieutenant in
the States ship Parragon, about midnight, before the 4 of March last, our
Admiral seeing a fresh gale of wind off the shore, calls me to him, when as we
seemed to be near the Lantern, and with great earnestness bids me hasten
into Legorn-Mould with the Feluca, and tell Capt. Appleton that he should call
the rest of the Captains immediately, and there acquaint them, that he did
effectually recommend it to their consideration, to come away to him: I went
accordingly, and told him my message, but notwithstanding some of the Captains
came together, Capt. Fisher could not be made rise to come thither in an hour
after, and when they did come together, they were so long in concluding what to
do, sometimes they would, and sometimes they would not, Capt. Seaman lying on
Capt. Appletons Couch like a Lordaine most part of the time. In conclusion,
when it was noised on the Leopards upper deck that they would not go out til
morning, I heard one Wrightington a Masters Mate, or Pylot of the ship, say
these words in a passion, as if he would tear his hair, These cursed men
(meaning the Commanders) are so bewitched or besotted to this Mould, that they
care not for going hence, why cannot we go having such a gallant gale of wind,
now that the Admiral has sent for us.

Returning to our ship the Parragon, at break of day, finding our selves to be
somewhat further off then we made account, I am able to testify, all sail was
made to ply into Legorn-Road, as possible could be, until about an hour after,
that the Dutch Fleet was come out near Mount Negro, and then their head-most
ships bearing off directly upon us, our Main-saile was hailed up for half an
hour, as was all the reason in the world, that we might have nothing hinder us
from plying all our Guns between Decks, that our men might be ready to stand by
our great Ordnance; but as soon as ever our Ships came out of the Mould, all
the sail the wind would give leave, was kept abroad, and the Admiral plied in
with all diligence, and to my knowledge it was first declared by him, his
resolution was to board the Dutch Admiral, but coming so near her as that we
could discharge a Volley of small shot to any purpose, we did it, together with
a broad side of great Ordnance; and seeing none of our Frigots going on board to
the relief of the Leopard, our Captain seeing so many of the Fleet lost,
judging it the most necessariest service to relief her, we stood toward that
ship, but being the wind was very fresh, it was not held fit we should run
stemlings with all our sails (except the Main-saile, and top-gallant sails,
for ends before denoted) however after we had powered a broad side into the
Julius Coesar, and past within two or three ships lengths of her stern, great
endeavors were used to make our ship Parragon bear up, that we might come to
the other tack, that so we might go on board with the more ease; but it pleased
God the wind dullard all on the sudden, so that we could not make our ship
work, nor bear up in any time, if all our lives had lain on it, and then
bringing our ship to again, before we could make her stay, we were shot so
far, that before possible we could get abord the Leopard, she was driven so
near the sand of the Malora, that it was my opinion humbly given in to the
Admiral among other Officers, in case we should have further endeavored to
have gone on board, it would be almost impossible ever to disintangle our selves
from them again, until we had been upon the aforementioned sand, the wind
being at E. S. E. most commonly: And to my knowledge, when the Captain saw
that the ship would not work, he ordered some of the nimble ships to be called
unto to do that service, and if the Mary or the Lewis had been near us, they
had been called to as well as the Mary Rose. And I am confidently assured, that
such as did least in our Fleet, did as much service against the Enemy, to
destroy such as borded the Leopard, as did either Capt. Ell, or Capt. Fisher;
and whatever the Captains of these ships say now we are come home, I am sure
in our homeward bound way it was the vote and expression of them, and all other
Captains in the Fleet, that if we had engaged any further in the business of
Legorn, all had been lost.

Dated this 13 of Sept. 1653. Tho: Hughes, Lievt.
I do also attest over and above what is inserted in the foregoing lines, that
being at Legorn about the latter end of November last, I was upon the
Bonaventures Fore-castle, when as Capt. Appleton did send men on shore to the
Mould head to take a Flemming that had escaped thither, out of the Sentinels
house, and the Soldier refusing to deliver him, with his sword drawn, Capt.
Appleton went himself ashore, and forced the Prisoner to come thence, and had
carried him back on board his ship, but that more Soldiers came down with
their Muskets Cocked, and forced the Mariners to let him go, and so he made
his escape.

I do also Attest, That being on board the Parragon in Porto Longone, about the
latter end of Jan: last, Capt. Appleton having received an Order from the
Council of State, to com for England, taking his leave of me, said, They have
sent for me home to question my life, to which I replied, You may heartily
thank God that your life was not taken from you when you took the Dutch man
out of the Sentinels house.

And more-over the 4 of March last, being all the time on the Parragons Deck,
that we were so near the Leopard, as is denoted by what is expressed before, I
could never discern that any one man appeared upon the Leopards Deck, to
signify unto us whether she were in our possession, or in the Enemies.

Dated as above, the 12 of September, 1653. Tho: Hughes. Lievt.
Sworn, September 12. 1653.

John Page.





The second Affidavit.
THese are to certify whom it may concern, That upon the fonrth of March
last, being in the Fleet, a Masters Mate in the ship Mary Rose, all the night I
observed we had a fine fresh gale of wind off the shore, with brave weather
that our ships might have come out of the Mould if they would, and in the
morning all along I could not discern to the contrary, but that our Admiral and
our selves made all the way that could to succor those that came out of the
Mould; and being got near the Leopard, I am confident as much means was used
by the Admiral, and the backwardest of the rest to destroy those ships on board
the Leopard, and to bring her off, as was used by the Commander of the Lewis,
and Mary, I may truly say notwithstanding their vapouring, much more was used
by the Admiral, who having a heavy foul ship, could not work that time, the
wind being so fickle, sometimes much, sometimes little, whereas they having
clean nimble ships, might have gone on board, to the Leopards relief, if they
would: Also whilst we were near the Leopard with our ships, whereas it is said
five ships of the Enemy gaul'd the Leopard to the Lee-ward, it is an abominable
untruth, all of them (except their Admiral) being to the Northward of the
Sampson, that lay then a burning, so that their shot could hardly reach the
Leopard, and as far as I could discern, did not shoot at her, for we with our
ships past several broad sides upon those ships that were on board the Leopard,
within Pistol shot of them, and when the Dutch Adm: was to the South ward of
the Leopard, our Admiral endeavored to lay her abord, as far as I could
discern, and she bore away from her before the wind, into shoal water, to the N.
wards, at last the Leopard was driven so near the sand of the Malora, with the
wind at E. S. S. that no prudent men would have stayed longer in hopes to have
brought her off, then we did, which if she had let go an Anchor in time, and
stopped their own ship, as their head would have come to windward, the two
Enemies ships that were abord her, would have backed off with their own fails,
with the help of the Leopards men upon their own Deck, to clear the Ropes, for
most part of the time, all the Enemies ships were a great distance from her to
the N. wards, for truth of the aforesaid premises I make Oath.

James Thomas.
James Thomas makes Oath, that the Contents of the aforesaid Certificate are
in substance true.

Sworn, September. 9. 1652. John Page.



The third Affidavit.
I William Poole, being Lieutenant of the ship within mentioned in the
abovesaid Certificate, do testify that the Contents hereof are true in
substance.

William Poole.
Sworn, Sept. 22. 1653.
The fourth Affidavit.
THese are to certify whom it does concern, That being Lieutenant on the ship
Tho: Bonaventure, near Legorn, upon the 3 of March last, we were near the
aforementioned place, lying Leeward most part of the day, and after ten a
Clock the night following, we had fine fresh gales of wind, that lasted until
morning, so that I believe the ships might have come out of the Mould, if they
would, and the next day, although our Admiral made a board or two, to get clear
of the Malora, and haled up his Maine-saile for half an hour, to have his Guns
clear when some of the Dutch Fleet bore away directly upon him, before the
English ships come out of the Mould; yet after they came forth, I never
perceived to the contrary, but that the English Admiral hastened to meet them
with all the sail he could possibly make, ned being come near them the wind
was very fickle, sometimes much, and sometimes less, so that I verily believe
those on board the Parragon could not work her, being a heavy foul ship, as
they desired to do: And further, that I am very confident, that there was
never a ship in the Fleet but did as much or more execution on the Enemy, then
did the Lewis, or the Mary, after the latter broke through the Enemy to come to
our Fleet: And (all things considered) I could see no reason why we should have
stayed longer near Legorn then we did, in hopes to have relieved the Leopard.
Dated near London, Sept. 13. 1653.

Sam: Dunn.
Sworn, Sept. 13. 1653.

John Page.



The fifth Affidavit.
GEorge Hewes, aged thirty-six years, or thereabouts, makes Oath, That he this
Deponent being at Legorn about the middle of January last (and having not then
received the Stater Commission) but this Deponent being taken into the States
Service upon the third of March last, being near Legorn, having the Command of
the ship Thomas Bonaventure, does say, that all the next night following after
ten of the Clock, they had a fine fresh gale of wind off shore, so that the
ships in the Mould might have come out if they would; and the next day although
our Admiral made a board or two off to get clear of the Malora, and haled up his
Main-sail for half an hour, to have his Guns clear, when as the Dutch Fleet
bore away directly with him, before the English ships came out of the Mould;
yet after they came forth, this Deponent further says, That the English
Admiral hastened to meet them, with all the sail he could possible make, and
being near, the wind was very fickle, being sometimes much, and sometimes very
little, so that he verily believes those on board the Parragon could not work
her, being a heavy foul ship, as they desired to do.

And further, this Deponent is very confident, That there was never a ship in
the Fleet but did as much or more execution on the Enemy, then did the Lewis
or the Mary, after she broke through the Enemy to come to the English Fleet.
And this Deponent further says, That (all things considered) he conceives
there was no reason the English should stay longer at Legorn, then they did, in
hopes to relieve the Leopard. And moreover this Deponent says upon his
knowledge, that Capt. William Ell, being in the Bay of Logos, about the latter
end of March last (notwithstanding this Deponent advising him to the contrary,
did absolutely refuse to obey our Admirals Warrant, or Order which was sent to
him for two men to help Man the Augustine Prize, in lieu of two Dutchmen, and
afterward C. Badiley bid me bear witness that the said C. Will: Ell was
discharged out of the States service, from the time he made such refusal.

George Hewes.
Sworn, Sept. 12. 1653.

John Page.



The sixth Affidavit.
THese are to certify whomsoever it may concern, That Thomas Hewes late
Lieutenant of the States Ship Parragon, Capt. Ri: Badiley Commander, being
sworn upon the Holy Evangelists, does say, and deposed on his Oath as
follows, viz. That on the third of March last, 1652. betwixt the hours of
twelve and one that night, he this Deponent was Commanded by the said Capt. Ri:
Badiley, to go in a Feluca to Capt. Henry Appleton Commander of the Leopard
then in the Mould, and to defire him to loose no opportunity to make to the
said ship the Parragon, with the r^st o^ those ships in company with them,
where, in going, this Deponent did certainly see the Holland Fleet lying at
Anchor some two mile distant from the said Mould, riding East, and West
nearest. And moreover, I do attest, That on the 4 of March last, in the
afternoon, being clear of the Malora, by the Admirals Order we shortened sail,
and staid until the Mary past by us, within Pistol shot, where they were called
unto from our ship, and not only as'kt how it was with them, but directed what
course they should steer when it was night. All which premises this Deponent
affirms on his Oath to be true, this 30 of September, 1653.

Thomas Hewes.

The seventh Affidavit.
THese are to certify whomsoever it does concern, That being Master of the
States ship Parragon, and on the 4 of March last, in the said Ship near Legorn,
which place I am very well acquainted with, having used it these twenty years,
and upwards. At break of day, finding our selves to be somewhat further off
then we made account, I am able to testify, all sail was made to ply into
Legorn-Road, as possible could be, until about an hour after, that the Dutch
Fleet was come out near Mount Negro, and then their head-most ships bearing off
directly upon us, our Main-saile was hailed up for half an hour, as was all
the reason in the world, that we might have nothing hinder us from plying all
our Guns between Decks, that our men might be ready to stand by our great
Ordnance; but as soon as ever our Ships came out of the Mould, all the sail
the wind would give leave, was kept abroad, and the Admiral plied in with all
diligence, and to my knowledge it was first declared by him, his resolution was
to board the Dutch Admiral, but coming so near her as that we could discharge a
Volley of small shot to any purpose, we did it, together with a broad side of
great Ordnance; and seeing none of our Frigots going on board to the relief of
the Leopard, our Captain seeing so many of the Fleet lost, judging it the most
necessariest service to relief her, we stood toward that ship, but being the
wind was very fresh, it was not held fit we should run stemlings with all our
sails (except the Main-saile, and top-gallant sails, for ends before denoted)
however after we had powered a broad side into the Julius Coesar, and past
within two or three ships lengths of her stern, great endeavors were used to
make our ship Parragon bear up, that we might come to the other tack, that so
we might go on board with the more ease; but it pleased God the wind dullard
all on the sudden, so that we could not make our ship work, nor bear up in any
time, if all our lives had lain on it, and then bringing our ship to again,
before we could make her stay, we were shot so far, that before possible we
could get abord the Leopard, she was driven so near the sand of the Malora,
that it was my opinion humbly given in to the Adminal among other Officers, in
case we should have further endeavored to have gone on board, it would be
almost impossible ever to disintangle our selves from them again, until we had
been upon the aforementioned sand, the wind being at E. S. E. most commonly:
And to my knowledge, when the Captain saw that the ship would not work, he
ordered some of the nimble ships to be called unto to do that service, and if
the Mary or the Lewis had been near us, they had been called to as well as the
Mary Rose. And I am confidently assured, that such as did least in our Fleet,
did as much service against the Enemy, to destroy such as borded the Leopard,
as did either Capt. Ell, or Capt. Fisher; and whatever the Captains of these
ships say now we are come home, I am sure in our homeward bound way it was the
vote and expression of them, and all other Captains in the Fleet, that if we
had engaged any further in the business of Legorn, all had been lost.

I do also Attest, That being on board the Parragon in Porto Longone, about the
latter end of Jan: last, Capt. Appleton having received an Order from the
Council of State, to com for England, he told me, They have sent for me home to
question my life.

And more-over the 4 of March last, being all the time on the Parragons Deck,
that we were so near the Leopard, as is denoted by what is expressed before, I
could never discern that any one man appeared upon the Leopards Deck, to
signify unto us whether she were in our possession, or in the Enemies.

Dated the 12 of September, 1653. Anthony Watts.
Sworn, September 12. 1653.

John Page.



The eighth Affidavit.
THese are to certify whomsoever it does concern, That whereas I was a
Masters-Mate on the States Ship Parragon, coming near Legorn-Road the 4 of
March last, in the morning, to my knowledge as soon as ever it was known on
board our ship, that the English Squadron were coming out of the Mould, and that
it was seen the Dutch intended to stand back and meet them, (according to the
Admirals Order) we hastened in to them with all the sail we could make, and
never shorted sail until either the heads of our Top-masts were ready to go
by the board, or that we came near a close Engagement with the Dutch Admiral,
and then our Admiral in the hearing of several of us, at sundry times expressed
himself, that he intended to have gone on board the Admiral of the Dutch; and
after we had discharged a broad side, and a volley of small shot on her, leaving
her by the Lee, his Boat was then sent to require the Commander of the Fireship
to execute his duty in endeavoring the destruction of the said Admiral, which
if he had with, Main-saile and all, I believe she had been ruined; and when we
left the Dutch Admiral, I heard our Commander say he would on board those ships
that were entangled with the Leopard, seeing none else going on board that
Cluster of ships to her relief. But we all judged it madness to run stemlings
on board her, when we first came to her, b^ing then a fresh gale of wind; but
passing by the Julius Caesar, we poured a broad side in to her, and passing by
within Musket shot of her, the Sun, and the Leopard, I could not see a man
stirring fore and aft the Leopards Deck, but when our Capt. Commanded to flat
our ship, that we might either lay our Bowsprit over the Leopards stern, and so
lie along the Suns side, or else between the Sun and the Julius Caesar, our
ship with the little wind we had all of the sudden, would not bear up, with all
the means we could possible use; and by that time we had brought her too again,
and stood a little way to make her stay, the Perrigrins Mainmast went by the
board (and it seems she was surrendered to the Dutch, with the Levant Merchant
before) and being on the other tack, I heard our Captain say again, he would on
board the Leopard, and that knot of ships, but then when all, or the chiefest of
his Officers came, and gave him their opinion, that if we should go on board, it
would be very hazardous, and questionable whether we should be dis-entangled
again, before we were all ashore together, or have been otherwise destroyed by
fire: Therefore he thought fit to order us to set our Main-saile, and withdraw,
in regard we could hardly weather the Malora: And being thwart of the Malora,
or very little without (it being about an hour after we had set our Main-saile)
I saw the Leopards Flagge down, but the Vice Admiral of the Dutch had her
Flagge out, on board of her. And moreover I do aver, That most part of that
day, and as we stood out, the wind was at E. S. E. and S. E. b E. insomuch
that we could lay South, and S. b E. to the S. and by W. with the stemm, and
weathered the Gorgano, about 3 or 4 Leagues.

And moreover I do testify, that in my opinion, if the ship Mary had been at
an Anchor in the place where she was when we first left our Main-saile, the
nearest of the Flemmings (being then on the edge of the Malora-sand) would have
been about 6 or 8 miles running before they could come to her, who then can be
so mad but sottish people, to judge her in any danger; and suddenly after we
were clear of the Malora, long before night, our Admiral staid until all the
ships came up with us, and especially the Mary, who was called to from our ship,
and was directed what course we should steer when it was night.

Dated the 6 of October, 1653. John Jeakins.
Sworn, October. 6. 1653.

John Page.



The ninth Affidavit.
THese are to certify whomsoever it does concern, That being Carpenter of the
ship called the Perrigrine, then in Legorn Mould, upon the fourth of March last,
in the morning I heard our Captain John Wood say, that we went out too soon;
and after our ship was lost, being at Mr Longlands when the said Captain came
first ashore, very much wounded, I heard Mr Longland say, In regard Capt.
Badileyes Order was not followed, therefore our Squadron was ruined.

And moreover, I heard Capt. John Wood Reply to this effect, We cannot blame
Capt. Badiley, but must confess that our destruction is of our selves, for had
we staid a little longer, while the said Badiley had been engaged, no doubt but
that might have been saved, which is lost.

And moreover I heard Mr. Longland say at that time, as soon as ever he heard
they were under sail (to say, our ships in the Mould) he shut himself up in
his Chamber, and there in his thoughts gave them all for lost.

And moreover I am able to testify, That in August 1652. a Flemming coming
from Zant, declaring how he came out of the Levant with C. Badiley, and that he
might be expected every day at Legorn, yet notwithstanding the States ships
with us, lay in the Mould unrigg'd, and unprepared, so that when it was noised
about that Capt. Badiley was in the Offing, in Fight, although we in the
Perrigreen had our Top-masts an end, and were kept Victualled, yet the Leopard,
and Bonaventure, were not in a readiness to go to Sea, nor could not have been
in a day or two, the Leopards Mainmast being all unrigg'd.

Dated the thirteenth of September, 1653. John Butt.
Sworn, Sept. 13. 1653.

John Page.



The tenth Affidavit.
THese are to certify whom it does concern, That whereas I was Carpenter of
the ship Perrigreen, in the Engagement near Legorn-Road the 4 of March last, to
my knowledge the aforementioned ship was surrendered the Dutch about an hour before
the Mainmast of the said ship fell by the board, and long before we were
surrendered it was noised up and down the ship that the Levant Merchant was
surrendered to the Dutch. Moreover I do confidently affirm, That the Leopards
Flagge was down, and the Flemish Colors spread in that ship, ere the English
Fleet that withdrew, had wanted an hour, in my judgment, or at most two
hours, from discharging their Ordnance on the Enemy: This is as near as I can
give an estimate, to the best of my remembrance..

Dated the 30 of September, 1653 near London, John Butt.
I can attest the substance of the abovementioned particulars to be true.

Gregory Barnett.



The eleventh Affidavit.
I David Booth, being a Mate on the Parragon, do testify, That the 4 of March
last, from one a clock in the morn: until it was day (when we seemed to be near
the Lantern of Legorn) God was pleased to give our ships in the Mould as fair
an opportunity for coming out to us, as men could desire, by a fresh gale of
wind at E. N. E. so that in all likelihood they might have weathered the Enemy
above a mile, they riding all fast at an Anchor in the Road, but neglecting to
put Capt. Badiley's Order in execution, proved their ruin, as also their not
working, as men ought to have done, next morning, for had they stayed while the
Dutch had com to Lee-ward upon us, and engaged us, they might have done good
service, by following on the back of the Enemy, for all men saw, coming out as
they did, they thrust themselves into danger, and all reasonable men might well
have thought, the Enemy would have tack't back on them, seeing us so far to
Lee-ward, that we could not come in to their succor, in two or three hours
time.

And moreover I can testify, That as soon as ever the word was given, the
ships were coming out of the Mould, we did as much as was possible for men to
do, hastening in with all the sail we could make, to the hazard of our Masts.

And being come near, I am sure no man could show more resolution to carry on
the work of the day, then our Commander showed, and required all men to fit,
for that he intended to board the Dutch Admiral, and when we gave her a broad
side, that had been done, but that we saw the Leopard wanted relief, so we went
to disentangle the Leopard, from those Enemies on board her in the first place,
and going by those ships within Pistol shot, our ship would not bear up, that
the Capt. desire in going on board that cluster of ships, might be effected, if
al our lives had lain on it; but if the Leopard had let go an Anchor, they
might have cleared themselves with ease, yet they did it not, all men were
housed, not a man to be seen on her upper Deck.

And whereas I have heard, that Capt. Appleton should say Capt. Badiley would
not succor him, nor suffer any others to do it, it is a most false thing; for
I am confident our Captain was in such a passion when he saw our ship would not
work, that he seemed to tear his hair, in regard none of our nimble ships
would do what he was not able to do; and afterward, when the Parragon was
got about by making a short trip, and staying, there was then no reason to have
gone abord the Leopard, she being laid so far toward the sand, the wind being
at E. S. E. without it had been resolved we should perish together.

David Both.
Sworn, Sept. 20. 1653.

John Page.



The twelfth Affidavit.
THese are to certify whomsoever it may concern, That whereas I was a
Masters-Mate in the Phaenix Frigot, being near Legorn in the Fleet upon the 4
of March last, I observed that the night before (or at least) after ten of
clock til morning, we had a fine fresh gale of wind, so that the ships in the
Mould to my understanding, might have come out of the Mould if they would, and
after it was light on the day aforesaid, I never saw to the contrary, but our
Admiral hastened in with all the sail he could make, and although he sent order
for us to go before, to the relief of the ships coming out of the Mould, yet I
am assured there was no diligence wanting in him that had the Command of all,
to ply in, but the wind being sometimes much, and sometimes little, I believe
that heavy foul ship the Parragon, could not be wrought to their minds, and
consequently they could not board those ships on board the Leopard, to their
relief, as they desired to do, and it was the opinion of most knowing men in
our Frigot, there was no reason to stay longer, in hopes to relieve the
Leopard, then we did.

And moreover, I am able to testify, that such as did least in our Fleet
toward the abovementioned ships relief, did as much as either the Lewis, or
Mary.

And moreover I do attest, That being in the Bay of Logos, about the end of
the said Month of March, the Admiral sent me on board the ships Lewis and Mary,
with a Warrant to each Commander, Authorizing them to spare two men of each
ships company, to man the Augustine Prize, but both one, and the other, refused
to render any conformity or obedience thereunto: Nay notwithstanding (I carried
two lusty Flemmings in their rooms) with all the arguments I could use to the
contrary, they utterly denied the same.

Dated, Sept. 14. 1653. John Plumpton.
Sworn, September 14. 1653.

John Page.



The thirteenth Affidavit.
THese are to certify whom it may concern, That being a Reformado on the
States ship Parragon, having had a fresh gale of wind off the shore the night
before the 4 of March. At break of day finding our selves to be somewhat
further off then we made account, I am able to testify, all sail was made to
ply into Legorn-Road, as possible could be, until about an hour after, that
the Dutch Fleet was come out near Mount Negro, and then their head-most ships
bearing off directly upon us, our Main-saile was hailed up for half an hour,
as was all the reason in the world, that we might have nothing hinder us from
plying all our Guns between Decks, and that our men might be ready to stand by
our great Ordnance; but as soon as ever our Ships came out of the Mould, all
the sail the wind would give leave, was kept abroad, and the Admiral plied in
with all diligence, sending me in a Feluca to hasten in the Frigots before, which
I did, and to my knowledge it was first declared by him, his resolution was to
board the Dutch Admiral, but coming so near her as that we could discharge a
Volley of small shot to any purpose, we did it, together with a broad side of
great Ordnance; and seeing none of our Frigots going on board to the relief of
the Leopard, our Captain seeing so many of the Fleet lost, judging it the most
necessariest service to relief her, we stood toward that ship, but being the
wind was very fresh, it was not held fit we should run stemlings with all our
sails (except the Main-saile, and top-gallant sails, for ends before denoted)
however after we had powered a broad side into the Julius Coesar, and past
within two or three ships lengths of her stern, great endeavors were used to
make our ship Parragon bear up, that we might come to the other tack, that so
we might go on board with the more ease; but it pleased God the wind dullard
all on the sudden, so that we could not make our ship work, nor bear up in any
time, if all our lives had lain on it, and then bringing our ship to again,
before we could make her stay, we were shot so far, that before possible we
could get abord the Leopard, she was driven so near the sand of the Malora,
that it was my opinion humbly given in to the Admiral among other Officers, in
case we should have further endeavored to have gone on board, it would be
almost impossible ever to disintangle our selves from them again, until we had
been upon the aforementioned sand, the wind being at E. S. E. most commonly:
And to my knowledge, when the Captain saw that the ship would not work, he
ordered some of the nimble ships to be called unto to do that service, and if
the Mary or the Lewis had been near us, they had been called to as well as the
Mary Rose. And I am confidently assured, that such as did Jest in our Fleet,
did as much service against the Enemy, to destroy such as borded the Leopard,
as did either Capt. Ell, or Capt. Fisher; and whatever the Captains of these
ships say now we are come home, I am sure in our homeward bound way it was the
vote and expression of them, and all other Captains in the Fleet, that if we
had engaged any further in the business of Legorn, all had been lost.

Christopher Mings.
Sworn, Sept. 13. 1653.

John Page.



The fourteenth Affidavit.
THese are to certify whomsoever it does concern, That being in the ship
Advance with Capt. Badiley, his Mate in Anno 1637. near Malta, being all alone,
in the abovementioned ship, by his well managing of that business, so were 3
vapouring Turks men of War of great force baffled, that they fled from us, and
we chased after them as long as we had any hopes of fetching them up, although
we were all alone, and not above 44 men in us.

And in 1640. I was a Masters-Mate on the said ship with Capt. Ri: Badiley,
about Cape Paul, we were laid abord by 2 Turks, men of War, that were Castles
in comparison to us, and by report had at least 500 men to our 44, who entering
us, were beat back, where many were forced to leap overbord; and although many
times we were fired and burnt very much, in several places, yet God keeping up
the resolution of both our Commander, and Company, so it was (through Gods
assistance) that I believe never any could do more in a dispute of that
nature; the Commander coming to encourage the men, would say, Come gallants,
let me know how it is with you now, they would cry fore and aft, we want
nothing, but a new place in the Enemies side, to make a new hole in. In fine,
how they were baffled, that ones Foremast and Bowsprit was shot by the board,
and the other torn so lamentably, as I believe ever ship was, as not being
able to budge or stir. Several men yet living, well know, who saw many of their
great platformes of Ordnance dis-mounted, and not above one man on all their
middle Deck, with their Guns, but the greatest part of their men run into the
Hold, and the Turks can best of all tell how they felt it.

And in Anno 1644, of Matril with Capt. Badiley, in the said ship all alone,
three Turks men of War came fiercely up with us, as if they would destroy us
at once, who could not have less then 4 or 500 men, to our 44, yet by Gods
assistance, although our Commander called them abord, they were so disheartened
at our first broad side, that like Dogs with their tails between their legs,
they run away from us, with all the sail they could make, and never shot at us
more, for hindering their way.

In the Parragon being a Mate and Pylot there, in our Engagement with the
Dutch, near Corsigo the 27 and 28 of August, such was our Commanders resolution
in the face of the Enemy, that I am persuaded it is impossible for any man to be
more; and after that we had about fourscore men killed and wounded in our ship,
and my self wounded in three places, so that I was not able to help my self,
or Commander, yet I know whereas he placed every man anew at his Quarters, and
each man over night gave his hand to live and dye with him next day, if
occasion were; howbeit the 29 day in the morning, about the coming down of our
Main-yard, most of the men were so rallyed into a mutinous distemper, that they
said, If the Enemy comes up we shall have no Quarter, let us be gone with the
Frigots, another shot shall not be made; but I suppose it was occasioned
withal from a report there was of 45 foot water in the ship.

At that time seeing one Hide with two or three others standing in a knot, I
said, Good Sirs, we that did such good service yesterday, let us not leave the
Commander to day; if this ship, and so great a strength of the Nations be lost,
it would be the greatest disgrace that ever befell our Nation; he replied,
We Will fight no more, the State has better ships, but we have no more lives.
Nay to such a height the mutiny was grown, that I have heard some say, If the
Captain would not suffer them to call for Quarter, they would stowe him well
enough, or words to that purpose.

And whereas in the last Engagement near Legorn, I was next subordinate to
Peter Whyting in the Fire-ship, called the Spy, thus much I did observe, That
the gale Easterly of the shore continued all night, and if they in the Mould
had come out whilst God gave them an opportunity by the Eclipse of the Moon, I
believe they had not been shot with many shot from the Enemy, who of necessity
they must have weathered, and so have joined with us very handsomely; and when
it was day the Admiral plied in for the Road, with all possible diligence,
until he came near within Musket shot of the Dutch Admiral, and that he altered
his course to go for the Leopard. In this interim, I being on board the
Fireship aforsaid, know that our Admiral sends us word to do our execution upon
the Dutch Admir. who was brought by the Lee, but I never understood that he
would ever come nearer to us with his own ship, then he was, and I know not to
what purpose he should, there being (except the Dutch Admiral) none to hurt us,
within shot, that I saw, but those on board the Leopard, and to windward we
might go on board what ship we would, which was our own, but our Capt. Whiting
would not let us set our Main-saile to do the service; and when it came to,
get into the Boat one of the first (as I have heard) shaking like an Asphen
leaf, leaving me on board between drowning and burning, in a most miserable
condition; and I doubt it would go hard with him for his life, if he should
come to be questioned in the business, for so great Cowardice.

Dated Sept. 7 1653. John Steel.
Sworn, Sept. 7.

John Page.



And now that such as wish well to Captain Wadsworth, may not have any
prejudicate Opinion against me, nor conceive I have received little or no wrong
from him, who as I have heard, instead of humbling himself, has been at work
to blow up these Coals, adding to that what I have heard both by the weekly
intelligence that came from Genoa, to Legorne, and otherwise by private
Letters, how that the said Wadsworth had aspersed and be spattered me in
reference to what past in our first Engagement with the Dutch, the 28 of
August, 1652. (although the particulars I could yet never be fully informed of)
I can do no less then briefly express my self about that business, and
show all rational men how little reason he has had, either for one or the
other.
IN February, 1649 or 50, hearing how well he had carried himself under Col.
Lidcott, upon the Coast of Ireland, and withal considering how earnestly he had
desired to be employed under me in Merchant Affairs, having then the most
considerablest interest in the ship Perrigrine, that was impressed into the
States service, I did in a special manner recommend him to the General, for the
Command of that ship.

And fithence he was employed in the States service under me, in our late
troublesome Voyage, in the beginning thereof he very well knows I endeavored
to engage him by several acts of civility, yet notwithstanding all persuasions
I could use, he presumed to make the first breach among the three ships of War
of us, which were sent out: whereupon, as I told him, it was very ill done, so
I wished it might be the last breach he might make, although I feared the
contrary.

But now to come to the Engagement before signified.

Whereas he was ordered to lie in one of the Quarters of the ship I was upon,
and yet goes a head (contrary to order) appears by a Letter to Mr. Longland,
under his own hand as follows.

SIR;
I Kindly salute you, These being to acquaint you with my sad disaster of the
loss of our Frigot; I shall not need to write the circumstances of the
business, because I believe you have them already, but I shall give you a true
relation of the loss of her. About three of the clock in the afternoon, the
28 of August, the Admiral having two great ships of forty piece of Ordnance a
piece abord of him, and another ready to clap him cross the Hause, and another
upon the Bough, I espying their design, being two or three Cables lengths a
head of him, tackt my ship to interrupt one of them, but my Sails, Rigging,
and Masts, being all torn, I could not work her so well as I would, fell abord
of him, but having many of my men, about fifty slain, and twenty wounded, and
some running away in my boat, and being fired, and oppressed by their men, and
finding not the other Frigots to relieve me, as I did the Admiral, and having
two other ships lay gauling me under my Lee, we were forced to surrender; but I
doubt not but they will be called to an Account for their Cowardly courage in
this business. Not having else at present, I take my leave, and rest,

From Porto Longone, Sept. 3. 1652. Your Servant to Command, Jo: Wadsworth.


And although I heard in effect what the Certificate here-annexed certifieth,
how that if a careful person had made fast the Doors of the Round-house and
steerage, as they ought to have been made fast when an Enemy was entering, the
ship might have been saved.

The Certificate made by Captain Wadsworth's Clerk, follows:
BE it known unto all men whom it may concern, That on the 27 day rf August,
1652. meeting with ten sail of Hollands men of War, the Parragon being our
Admiral, and with her the Phaenix, Elizabeth, Constant Warwick, with four
Merchants ships, about four of the clock in the afternoon the Fight began,
and continued till night, and the next morning being the 28 of the said Month
we began again, and about twelve of the clock one of the Hollands men of war
laid the Parragon aboard, and about half an hour after another laid him aboard,
each having forty Guns, and Captain John Wadsworth being Commander of the
Phoenix Frigot, seeing a third coming on board his Admiral, tackt and went about
for the security of his Admiral, and being then close upon a wind, and two
Hollands men of war coming up with him, and lying of his broad side, shot at
him as fast as they could, and tore all his Rigging, whereby his Friggot was
taken astais; and then another of the Hollands Ships named the Endrath, by
accident fell cross the Phoenix Haise, and presently entered her men, and the
Phoenix having been in fight all that day, and a great many men slain, and
wounded, and wearied out; these Hollands Ships being new come up with us, with
fresh men, beat our men off the Deck, and we retreated into the Round-house,
and steerage, and presently after we were beaten off the Deck; Captain John
Wadsworth went down between Decks for to encourage his men; and all the
powder we had in the Round-house being spent, only what were in the guns, we
sent one man down for powder, who was slain as he went down the stairs in the
steerage; and whilst we expected his coming with powder, the enemy approached
so nigh, they thrust in their swords, and cut the snet which made fast the
leaves of the door, whereby we were forced to retreat down between Decks; and
as I was going I saw one of the leaves of the steerage-doore open, but whether
it were cut open as the Round-house door was, I know not, neither could I see
any man in the Steerage, or Cabin, but one which came down out of the
Round-house with me, who was slain on the stairs of the Steerage. This I
testify to be of a truth,

whereunto I have set my hand on board the Parragon, in Port Longone this 28 of
Ianu. 1652. Christopher Bovey.

YEt notwithstanding what is before denoted, and howbeit it was not unknown to
my self and others, that Merchant Ships having but forty and odd men, by
being careful to make all doors and hatches surely fast, have maintained their
Ships against such of the enemies as have come on board them, and have had
above four hundred between them.

However in my first Letter to Authority in England, I wrote only thus; In our
dispute the Phoenix Friggot was lost very strangely, I wish (to speak the least)
there had not been carelessness in it.

Now I appeal to all rational men, looking back to what is before related,
whether I could have wrote more moderately if Captain Wadsworth had been my
brother; for by that expression, I did not so tax him, but he might have
cleared himself by imputing it on his men, if by their carelessness the doors
had not been made fast, or by their cowardlines they had left their quarters in
the steerage and Cabin, and run elsewhere.

But before I sent away my next Letters, I heard the man's spirit was very
high-flown, that now we were all taxt, as those that dealt basely, cowardly,
and unworthily with him, according to the contents of the Letter he wrote Mr.
Boneale, as follows.

Mr. Boneale,
SIR, I kindly salute you, giving you many thanks for your kind remembrance of
me, though in affliction, and to advise you that I have received your Letter
with the enclosed, and that Mr. Mussell, and William Powell are very well,
though many others lost, and wounded, my self being wounded in my hand, so that
I cannot write unto you the Relation of our sight (but I have wrote to Master
Longland of the whole, which I question not, but he has certified you of) our
fleet has dealt most unworthily, cowardly and basely by me, and that is all I
shall advise you at present; but they will be made to know it, when it shall
please God to send me well home: naught else at present: I rest

From aboard the Rear-Admiral of the Hollanders in Port Longone. September, 3.
1653. Your loving friend John Wadsworth.


Whereupon lest he should have wrote to my disparagemen into England, I could do
no less then signify what I did in my next Letters about the two great
Friggots lying like Chickens under the Parragons wing. contrary to Order,
making many men in the Fleet, cry out upon them, what a shame it was; yet I
profess I did it not so much to the end they might be called to account, or be
sharply rebuked about it, as I did to the end, that when the carriage of the
Commanders of our Fleet, and my own Company were deciphered in point of their
backwardness, it might be a more effectual argument to such as sat at Stern
in England to send me some additional strength, and other persons out in half
a dozen, or a dozen Ships and Friggots (as to them should seem most meet) then
a thousand arguments of another nature.

One word more: that it may be known what kind of conscience some men have
that act in the world, and how little reason Captain Wadsworth had to bespatter
me either in England, or elsewhere, the Letter following under his own hand
does sufficiently manifest, as also the following Certificate.

Captain Badiley, September 2. 1652. SIR,
I Kindly salute you: these being to acquaint you of the intents of my
proceedings in the time of the fight, by reason I hear so many false tales,
and such reproachful speeches come from those you sent, of which I conceive you
might be an eyewitness of their unworthy carriage before our coming to fight,
in making no more haste to us, and in the latter part of the fight, in not
coming to rescue your self and me. When I saw you laid on board of both sides,
and others ready to clap you thwart the hawse, and one coming on your Bough, I
thought the rest would be as forward as my self, being in a better capacity;
but finding it contrary to my expectation, and their unworthy promises, I have
suffered, but the Fleet is preserved by it, when I tacked, I intended not the
laying of him aboard, but the keeping him off your self; but our sails and
rigging being torn, we could not work our Ship, and had either of our two
Friggots seconded me, however I had carried him; but my men being many of them
killed, and desperately wounded, and so many of the likeliest of my men run
away in my Boat, which I hope you will call to account: for had it not been
that they ran away, I had got clear of them, for they had cut their Mainstay to
get clear of me. Now if this my acting in the whole time has been
cowardlinesse, I appeal to the whole world. Besides, I will have sufficient
testimony from the whole Ships Company; I could net have thought that men had
been so inhumane as Captain Cox, to report to the Flemish Captains that came
on board him, that it were better I had been killed; for if ever I came home, I
should be hanged; the which death does least of all trouble me, but rather take
care how to get there, where I shall call him to account for his treacherous
actions, and his running away at that time when he should have come to my help.
I am much troubled that I cannot come to speak by word of mouth to you, by
reason I have abundance more to relate, which time now will not permit to
write; having nothing else at present, I rest

Your loving Friend John Wadsworth.

To which my answer as briefly thus:
Captain Wadsworth,
I Have received your of yesters days date, and take notice of what you say,
but by the way, I must needs tell you, that if you had followed order, I
suppose, the trouble of yours had been prevented; however I shall not make it
my business to add affliction to the afflicted, but sending you such things
as you stand in need of; I remain

Yours, Ri. Badiley.

THese are to certify all whom it may concern, that Captain John Wadsworth,
late Commander of the Phoenix Friggot, having made his escap from aboard the
Flemings, came aboard the States ship the Leopard, and (after morning Sermon,
on the 17th. day of October, 1652.) made a speech (among all the people there
then present) tending to the vindication of himself, from those aspersions that
were cast upon him, because of his losing the said Friggot; in which speech he
seemed to asperse others. But being demanded, whether Captain Badiley could do
any more then he did? his answer was, No; to which he added this reason:
Because his Ship was so much battered and torn, that he could not come to his
assistance, but had work enough on board his own ship. He added moreover, that
he spoke concerning the Commanders of the other two Friggots. To the truth of
the above written Certificate, we whose names are here subscribed, are ready to
make depositions at any time, being thereunto lawfully called.

Reynold Newham, Master. Ed. Spradborrough, Minister. George Wrightington,
Masters Mate.


In the next place, I have thought fit to insert one of that great Dukes
Letters, to show, Capt. Appletons assault of his Sentinel, and not the Phoenix
Friggot caused him to be agreeved.
Sir,
MAster Appleton has been so uncivil, (not remembering the courtesies and
advantage which the English ships have received in Livorno,) which besides
the other his unreasonable proceedings and attempts, which he has let run
against all conventions established; has also laid hands upon the Arms under
the faithful trust of our Sentinel of the Mould, and to take a person away in
so much violence from such a man which was in his house there appointed, has
put me (in obligation) to premeditate upon sincere satisfaction, and doubting
he might draw himself out of chastisement by flying: I have ecteemed it
necessary to have him come hither, and have arrested him, putting him in the
custody of this Castle of Pisa, that he may have such chastisement as
meriteth; I would not do it without giving you this to understand by
dispatching an express, being assured that you will be displeased with things
so ill acted, and how much it imports to let alone loose respect, concurring in
this my understanding, which always shall be within the limits of that
observance which I profess to the Parliament and Republike of England, and to
those and all such which do depend upon them, shall always demonstrate in all
occasions my sincere estimation; and in order therefore, have renewed the
commissions to my Officers in Livorne to be vigilant in defending the English
ships which are there, as they did at first; and also with so much the greater
attention, in regard of the absence of the said Appleton, and your self; so
rest, praying for your prosperity.

Pisa this fifth of December. 1652. Signed the great Duke of Tuscany.

To Capt. Richard Badiley, Admiral of the English Ships wirhin the
Mediterranean Sea.

(Now follows)

AN Answer to Signeur Montemagni's relation, (one of the great Dukes
Secretaries) as I find it in a Pamphlet, called the Remonstrance of a fight
near Legorn Road.

What past between him and Van Gallen the Dutch Admiral, concerns me not to
take notice of.

But whereas he says, that he did first acquaint me with the necessity of
finding out a way to give the Dutch satisfaction, but it was all in vain.

I believe no less, for who can imagine that short of all we had, would be
satisfactory to an enemy?

But thus, upon the 10/20th. of Feb. the aforesaid person comes to me on board
the Leopard, having presented me with his Letter of Credence as follows.

Translated out of Italian.
UPon occasion of the answer which is come from the Parliament of the Republic
of England, concerning the business of the Friggot Phoenix; I did dispatch for
Legorn Desiderio Montemagni, my Secretary of State, who shall deliver unto you
these presents, concerning all that which I shall have to treat with you about
the said matter; and therefore you may be pleased to give full faith to that
which he shall declare in my name: our Lord preserve you.

From Florence the 18th. of Feb. 1652. from the Incarnation. At your pleasure,
The great Duke of Tuskany.

To Captain Richard Badiley, Admiral of the Ships of the Republic of England
in the Mediterranean Sea.
ANd in the presence of Mr. Longland who was interpreter between us both, (for
I profess not to understand every word that shall be spoken in Italian) he
expressed himself to this effect.

That his Master, the great Duke had received a Letter from the Council of
State, appointed from authority of the Parliament of England, wherein were
courteous expressions; but there was nothing mentioned concerning the Phoenix
Friggot, which the Dutch pretended unto; and absolutely his Master must, and
would see them satisfied.

To which I made this modest reply;

Sir,
AS you have well denoted, I believe the Letter sent his Highness, by order
from the Parliament of England; is not only full of courteous, but real
acknowledgements of the great esteem they have of his Highness favor, in
vouchsafing protection for their Ships in this place; and I believe at all
times his Highness may be confident that (in a reciprocal manner) the English
Nation will acknowledge the same.

The Council of State also has been pleased to signify unto me that their
pleasure is, Cap. Appleton shall return over land into England with all speed,
to give an account why he did assault the great Dukes Sentinel, (for, as I
always understood, that uncivil act caused his Highness to dispatch away the
Messenger into England) and in the next place, I suppose they will be informed
from him, how the Phoenix Friggot was regained; whereupon, if they find it
justice, or reason, doubtless they will give immediate order, that the great
Duke shall make the Dutch satisfaction in the best manner he may, and what he
does therein, they will so stand to it, as that his Highness shall be no
sufferer. But now lest Capt. Appleton should not arrive in England so soon as
the ordinary; if it please you, I will add to what I have formerly wrote the
Council of State, such a full relation about the manner of that Friggots
surprizall, as that it must give a clear light to the understanding of that
business; and I will presume once in 45. or 48. days the great Duke shall have
a punctual answer, so that he will see what they will do in that matter, which
referres to the Phoenix Friggot, and so we parted at that time.

About two or three days after he sends for me ashor, and I could not deny but
attend accordingly: for you must note, although this were a Treaty, it was a
forc'c one; (on my part) I was constrained to attend what this Secretary of
State would say to me, and could no more (as I conceive) avoid hearkening to
what he should say, then I could prevent the great Duke from putting one of our
Mariners to the Torture (at our enemies instance.) I know not for what cause,
next to the reverence we did him, and respective salutes we made him at passing
by, except it was, because he had heard two or three days before that the
Dutch commanded in our Channel, and were like to be the strongest side.

But when Mr. Longland, and my self came thither; he asked us, whether we had
thought on what he had before motion'd concerning giving some satisfaction
about the Phoenix Friggot?

Answer was made in words, to this effect.

We have wrote by this ordinary expressly to know what the States pleasure is
in that business, doubtless they will give the great Duke satisfaction about
it; He answered, oh the great Duke would have present satisfaction that he
might stop the mouths of the Dutch.

It was replied by us, the Dutch had taken a great parcel of Tin which
belonged to our Nation, out of French vessels and others, even under the
Cannons of his Highness, importing upon the matter as much as the Phoenix
Friggot was valued at; and besides, we told him the Dutch themselves bragged
every day upon the place, that they had taken an English Ship from under the
Castle of Lant, and another from under the Castle of Allicant, and so were made
good four times the value of the Phoenix Friggot already; and in our opinion it
could not but render his Highness among all Princes to be very partial, if he
looked for further satisfaction.

In fine, he told us plainly, the great Dukes pleasure was, that one of the
States Ships should be disarmed, and have her Rudder and Sails taken ashore;
To that his conclusion, we made answer thus: The great Duke is Patron, and he
may do what seems him good; but one day an account must be given of the damage
that the State of England should receive thereby, or words to that purpose, and
so we were dismissed.

About this time one of the great Dukes Subjects Vessels going out of the Mould
with some provisions for our Ships at Port Ferraro, as soon as ever she was
about the Mould head, was chased by the Dutch Tartan, and without the Master
had cut away his Boat, and bore his quick-side in the water, she had been
snapt; and yet (upon the matter) no notice was taken of it.

This piece of insolency added to all the rest, caused me, with the advice of
friends to write to the great Duke these nsuing lines.


May it please your Highness,
WHereas it has been your pleasure to honor me with a credential Letter,
bearing date the eighth instant; four days since I received it by the hands
of that Right Worthy and Honorable person, your Secretary of State, from whom
I was informed of what was his message from your Highness, and unto whom I
returned such a modest, and humble answer, as I hope has been satisfactory.

Among other commands, the Council of State (appointed by authority from the
Parliament of England,) has required me (as well out of respect of what I
obliged my self unto your Highness for in my former Letters, or humble
addresses, as for other ends) in no case, nor upon any pretense to assault the
Dutch in the Ports, and Chambers of your Highness, except they first began
with us the English, which commands, or orders of theirs, according to my duty,
I shall readily render obedience unto.

But, may it please your Highness, sithence our enemies the Dutch do
continually persist and go on, without rendering that respect which is due unto
your Highness within your Ports and Chambers, and lording it over all men of
sundry Nations, do undertake to search their vessels, and being dexterous at
the trade of plundring, in hopes of such lucre, chase Barks, and Vessels
passing about the Mould head, and that as well of the Subjects of your
Highness, as else how.

I do therefore humbly disoblige my self from what I have been formerly by
Letter, or otherwise engaged unto; and being it is judged they have given the
first assault, since the receipt of the commands before mentioned, I do hope it
will not be taken amiss from your Highness; although, (when ever power is in
the hand of us the English,) we may take the advantage upon them in a
reciprocal manner; and so wishing your Highness all increase of splendor and
happiness, I shall subscribe my self, as I am,

Dated on board the Leopard in Legorn-Mould, the 4/14th of February, 1652/3.
Your Highness very humble servant, Rithard Badiley.


SO that in ditto Letter I gave his Highness to understand, that although I
would be very careful to obey the command I had received from the authorty of
England not to disturb his Port, without the enemy began with us first; since
it was very perspicuous to every rational man, the Dutch had begun with us, I
humbly withdrew my word, and craved leave to do what was reciprocal to the
actions of the Dutch, whenever a power came into my hands.

Now my reasons for writing in that manner, were these briefly.

First, whereas (peradventure) the great Duke might think that England was
lost, because the Dutch commanded in our Channel at the present; yet I judged
not our Nation in so low a condition, but that I still expected a Fleet of
Ships to our assistance: And it was done that (at least) he might be so much
amused about it, as to believe I had private intelligence of some Friggots that
were departed from the West of England, whom I might expect every moment, and
thereby be enabled to destroy them in his Road, who had layen so long at the
door, watching for our destruction. In fine hereby I thought the great Duke
would be somewhat startled, and begin to open his ear to what was propounded by
me, so just and equal, and not appear so partial as he had done all along,
since he heard of some defeat we had by the Dutch elsewhere.

Secondly, I did it, that the Dutch (who were like to hear of it immediately)
might be in some measure mortified; and for ought I knew instead of persisting,
to have the Ammunitions, Sails, Rudder, and Ship Leopard, or Bonavanture to be
consigned into the hands of the great Duke for their use, they might be put
into some pannick fear, and have thoughts of removing either to meet their
eight ships about the mouth of the Gulf of Venice, and at Messina, or else to
go Westward about Telloon to join with five good Ships of War they had that
way, lest when the strength came out of England that I expected thence, they
might be ruined where they rode.

The 19th. a return of that Letter was presented me by his Highness
Secretary, who having intimated he was at leisure, and had something to declare
unto me from his Master, Mr. Longland, and my self waited on him accordingly;
but first the Letter follows.

Translated out of Italian.
I Have seen that which you have expressed unto me by your Letter of the 4/14th.
of this month concerning the Negotiation by me remitted unto Montemagni my
Secretary of State to treat with you; and you shall understand by my said
Minister, that which shall be needful for me to reply, and confirm unto you of
my good will, and of the hope which I have that you will yet contribute on your
part to the things of common satisfaction, and for the good effecting of the
Treaties which are in hand: And if they should not take effect, I shall declare
the resolutions which I am constrained at this present to take, to my great
displeasure; but in the mean time, I will preserve every desire to give you
consent, serving the Parliament of the Republic of ENGLAND, to which I shall
always be glad to show my firm and singular observance:

Our LORD prosper you. From Florence the 28th. of February, 16^2. from the
Incarnation. At your pleasure, The great Duke of Tuscany.

To Capt. Richard Badiley, Admiral of the Ships of the Republic of Eng. in the
Mediterranean Sea.

And when I had read it, he asked me why I recalled my word? It was answered,
the Dutch violated the Port every day, and I hoped the Great Duke would not
take it amiss if I could when I had power in my hands destroy them that were
not only originally the disturbers thereof, but persisted therein from day to
day; However, said I, his Highness may be confident I shall be at his command,
so that I shall not proceed any further (in point of giving any disturbance to
his Port) then himself shall give liberty.

But, says Ditto Secretary, What will you do in order to what I spoke to you
the other day, about Consigning one of the States Ships into the hands of the
Great Duke, until the Duke had satisfaction?

I answered, It is not in my power willingly to deliver up one of the States
Ships to the Duke, or any other Prince or State, without special order from my
Masters in England; Well then, says he, His Highness pleasure is, you shall
depart his Port, what say you to that? I replied, that rather then I would
willingly give consent, that any of my Limbs should be cut off, I would fight
for the whole Body as long as I could.

To which he made a further Reply, and said; It was the Great Dukes order to
tell me, that I must depart his Port, or Mould with the English Ships of war,
that were there once in ten days.

To which I made this modest Reply, in effect, as I said before, The Great Duke
is Patron, he may do what seems him good, and although he knows best what
he has to do; yet in my opinion to require us to go out into the mouths of our
enemies, when as they shall be three to one, would be an Eclipse to his Honor
among all the Princes in Europe, and I instanced unto him the carriage of the
King of Portugal toward Prince Rupert, having once promised him protection in
his Port; and proceeding in that discourse, I told him, that as I was employed
under the Generals in a service near Lix. for the reduction of our revolted
Ships, so I was a spectator of what past there, and although our General made
it his request to that King again and again, that a day might be appointed for
the forementioned Ships to be commanded forth, that so we might keep the Honor
of his Port unviolated, and yet dispute for our own in the Sea; However he
would not be prevailed withal about it: For, said he, it would not stand with
his Honor to command such forth into the enemies hands, when there is odds,
who had craved his protection, and notwithstanding all the time our Ships were
under his command, we carried our selves civilly, not searching and plundering
the vessels of Portugal, and Lording it over all, as the Dutch did in Legorne
Road; wherefore how can the Great Duke in point of Honor command us forth to
gratify such insolent enemies as ours were? yet, said I, the above named
practice cannot be commended in the aforementioned King, because the Ships we
then looked after, were the Common wealths of England, paid for with their own
money, only most of the persons entrusted with them, revolted from their due
obedience, which alters the case between their condition and ours, as much as
may be; yet it holds out thus much, that Princes have had much respect to their
Honor, in commanding those with whom they are in amity to go from under their
protection into the mouths of their enemies, when they judge themselves in no
capacity for an engagement.

To all which discourse the Secretary answered; all the favor I could expect
was the last, and the first day should not be reckoned into the number of the
10 days.

And yet once again I replied, sithence the great Duke began to be aweary of
us, and would necessitate us to go forth; I earnestly desired one thirty, or
forty days to gather together our Ships at Venice and Naples, adding, his
Highness the Great Duke must needs be acquainted what a vast ch^age the State
of England has been at to impress ships into their service at Venice, and
elsewhere; and if we be commanded out, and consequently be forced to engage ere
those ships can come to join, all their charge would be to no purpose; and I
added, that is no small matter.

For but the other day having occasion to converse with the Admiral of the
Great Dukes Galleys, he could tell me what ships we had fitting here and there,
as well as my self, and computed our present charge to be (when least) an
hundred and sixty thousand Crowns.

In fine, again and again I am sure more then. a dozen times, with all
earnestness I did humbly beg but for thirty or forty days time to get our
ships together, and that the dispute about the Phoenix Friggot might make no
obstruction; the Secretary was proffered by Mr. Longland at my instance, as
much money as the Friggot should be judged worth, that he might do what he
would withal. But seeing all our endeavors were rendered fruitless, and that
the said Secretary would harp upon no other string then what is before denoted
about giving us the first and the last day, I took my leave of him; and
considering how more guns had been lately brought down, and planted against our
ships; to what end I could not tell, except it were to further our destruction,
if we were not gone at the time set us; and calling to mind how vain a thing
it was ever counted to lie in the ditch, and not stir to get out; I labored
in those two or three days I remained at Legorn to put our ships in as good an
equipage as I could, and went to Port Feraro to fetch up the rest of our
strength that was there; and seeing how unready our ships were, and unlikely
that even our ships should get up to Legorne to succor our friends before our
set time would be expired: I wrote the Great Duke a few lines, the copy whereof
follows.

May it please your Highness,
LAst Saturday I received those lines which your Highness was pleased to
honor me withal, bearing date the 28th. of the last month; and although I
heartily wished the dispute about the Phoenix Friggot, might have been ended
with the Treaty; yet having by so notable a stratagem regained the said Vessel,
I could no ways be satisfied, how I could answer it to those that imposed this
trust in me, to part with her again willingly, or any of the States ships for
her.

And in conclusion when I saw what was your Highness pleasure concerning the
limited time for our going forth, I did immediately labor that a very ready
compliance might have been given unto on my part, and I hope it shall take
effect accordingly; only I humbly beg, that if our ships be not out of
Legorn-Mould until the last day, and then the wind and weather be against us,
it may be looked upon, (as really it is) a just impediment.

I am only in fear, that because we cannot ride quietly one days time in the
Road of Legorne, to take in ballast, some of our ships may overset, in case a
gale of wind should come down upon them before the dispute be over.

Your Highness may also be pleased to take notice, whereas by my former Letter
of the 4th. ult. I humbly disobliged my self from what I had formerly promised
in reference to the Dutch, and such as related to them, or at least begged
leave to act in a reciprocal manner, seeing them so exceedingly to domineer.

I do assure your Highness upon my reputation, it was occasioned in regard of
the insolency of our enemies, that upon the knowledge thereof, they might be
mortified, or curbed in some measure, and consequently be brought (by the
Treaty) to what is judged reason: For seeing no other means like to prevail,
I conceived by that expression they might be cast into no little fear, thinking
we had more force at hand, then they were aware of.

It has been always clearly my opinion, that if any two persons come into a
private man's house, there to refresh themselves, they ought to be civil in that
place, much more in the Chambers of Princes; wherefore (for my own part)
according to the commands I have received from my Masters in Engl. (if the
Dutch will agree to conformity, and in a reciprocal manner promise the same) I
shall render your Highness all manner of due respect, and give no kind of
disturbance to your Ports, especially in Legorn- Road; but as I suppose, all
within the Malora, to be your Port, and Chamber; so I shall neither directly,
nor indirectly meddle with the enemies of our Nation, nor any that belongs to
them; neither shall I at any time, either weigh Anchor from the said place, to
give chase to any that shall be coming in, or going out, or be disobedient to
any of those just commands your Highness shall be pleased to lay upon me, as
well by withdrawing out of sight with all the English Fleet, for three or four
days more or less, as else how.

And I do verily believe, the Parliament of England will always give order
that the like civility be rendered unto your Highness, by all other their
Commanders that shall follow me into these parts; that so the flourishing Trade
of Legorn, that has been so eminent for many years, might meet with no
impediment from the English.

If the Dutch will not hearken to such a correspondency now, in regard they
suppose they are strong enough to ruin us, surely they may be deceived: We are
eight men of War in this place, and Longone, and six in Legorn, which bears
no great disproportion to what strength they had in Legorn yesterday.

And if it please your Highness to send anothor Messenger to the Admiral of
the Dutch, to know whether they will render that respect unto your Highness in
your Ports, which the English promise to do:

For their encouragement, and to take off all manner of trouble from your
Highness for the future; I have thought of some Propositions, which I shall
fully comply withal in each particular herein inserted.

To the performance whereof, I believe Master Longland, a public Minister of
the Commonwealth of England, will become obliged with me, as per contra it is
desired Signeur Van de Straden, shall oblige himself together with Van Gallen
before some public Minister of your Highness; So leaving what is herein
denoted unto your Princely wisdom, I shall add no more, but that I am

Your Highness very humble Servant, RICHARD BADILEY.


Certain Propositions sent the great Duke.
IN case the Admiral of the Dutch Fleet will oblige himself, that without
molestation or impediment, I may quietly enter into the Road of Legorn with the
eight ships, and a Potash that are now with me, and will be ready to set sail
once in 48. hours; and shall, as is before denoted, suffer us to ride there
until our other ships come out of the Mould, and take in their ballast; Then
per contra I shall reciprocally become obliged, not to molest the Dutch in any
kind whilst they are there; and that business being accomplished, I shall go
without the Malora as soon as he pleases; and being there, shall freely stay
until his ships come within Musket Shot of ours, there to fight it out like
men, so shall we not be any way isntrumental to dishonor, or give any
disturbance to the Port of that Prince who has granted us both refreshing from
the fruits of his Country.

Secondly, whereas the Dutch did lately give out, that they would fight the
English when they were seven to seven; lest it should now be objected, if this
Squadron and that at Legorn meets, we shall be too hard for the Dutch, then
thus; if it pleases them to accept of the proportion, there will be granted
them to advance, one in every seven ships; so that if we be 14, they may be
sixteen; and lest they should say some of our ships are bigger then theirs;
there will be allowed them to advance (when the men are poll'd) one man in
every seven, so that there may be nothing to object against such endeavors as
has been used to preserve the great Dukes Port from violation.

3ly. In case we the English have the better, and then come into Legorn Road
with all our Fleet, and find riding in that place some Dutch Merchant ships,
and it may be some of their Men of War, that may be laim'd, or otherwise they
need not hail into the Mould: we the English shall not shoot a shot, nor
meddle, nor make with any of them within the Malora, provided the Dutch will
oblige themselves per contra, not to molest the English (in a reciprocal
manner) to what the English promise in reference to the Dutch.

My reasons for writing this Letter, and propounding such Propositions, were
briefly these.
FIrst, I was in very great hopes, that by this means the great Duke, who had
expressed himself in former times with so much bitterness against Capt. Hall,
and Capt. Appleton, for disturbing of his Port, as he called it, although what
they acted was far without shot of his Cannons; (as I have understood) would
now have his ends in keeping of his Port unviolated, and we should have had our
end in like manner by our conju^ction: I was more especially persuaded of
obtaining such an effect, as is before denoted, considering that at this time,
such a number of the Captains and others of the Dutch were in his custody, for
threatening to shoot down his Palace; that rather then Van Gallen would have
been without their help, he would have agreed to what I had so reasonably
propounded; And I am yet apt to believe, the great Duke had never freed the
Dutch out of prison, nor yet have given them liberty to assault our ships
within Musket Shot of his Mould-head, without the Golden Pistols had flowne
apace.

Secondly, Although I had expressed so much before to his Secretary of State,
that no pretense might be laid upon me by the great Duke for withdrawing my
word, I thought fit to open my self to him, so freely and fully as I did by the
said Letter, to the end that he might be in a manner constrained to show forth
the nobleness of his mind; and that reality of affection, which in all his
Letters he professed to bear unto the Parliament and Republic of England, by
saying,

My Ministers have been endeavoring to persuade Van Gallen to sign the
Propositions; but he will not be prevailed withal, and therefore, Badiley, take
the thirty or forty days, that the other day you were so earnest with my
Secretary for, that so you may meet your Venice ships, and come up, or do what
else seems best for your advantage: Thus should I have known what to have
done.

The great Dukes Letter follows.
SIR,
JN answer to your Letter received this day, I cannot but tell you, that
although the times are so disturbant, I see your resolution and diligence is,
that those ships may depart which are under your command at Levorno; and I
being desirous to pleasure the Parliament and Republic of England, am
contented to prolong your time, for the departure of your ships above
mentioned, till the eighteenth day of this present month, that they may have a
considerable time for their getting out, not dissenting from what you in yours
advise; that if wind and weather do not present, and your said ships cannot
depart out of my Mould of the Port of Levorno, shall suspend till some other
day.

Now unto the Propositions which you imparted to me, that I might take notice
of, concerning the ships which are under your command for engaging with those
of the States General, it is not a thing convenient for me to meddle in.

I do accept of what you mention, not to offend my Ports with your ships
against the Hollanders, which promises I do expect from you to be fulfilled,
and doubt not but to have the like from the Hollanders, in such manner, to the
content of both parties; and for the time to come all quietness, and liberty
shall be had in Ports, and the Almighty prosper you. From Florence, the 9th.
March, 1652.

I hope that this favorable weather will cause the departure of your ships out
of my Mould of Levorno, so that you need no obligation for the regaining the
Friggot.

At your pleasure, The great Duke of Tuscany.

To Capt. Richard Badiley. Admiral of the ships of the Republic of England in
the Mediterranean Sea.

It Is well I have this Letter under the great Dukes hand, for otherwise
peradventure more such confident people then these who had a hand in that
Remonstrance of a fight near Legorn: would have outfac'd me, and have
endeavored to make me believe, we might have staid longer in Legorn, if we
would: It Is true, if winds and weather had not given our ships leave to come
out as they did, then they might have staid: But if once wind and weather gave
leave, they have not liberty to stay an hour above the prefixed time, that I
can find.

I suppose (in the foregoing passage, which relates to the great Duke of
Tuscany,) I have made answer to the substance of Signeor Mantemagni^s relation,
and discovered the fallaciousnesse that is in diverse passages thereof, as also
in the copies of the Letters from the aforesaid Duke unto my self, and per
Contra of mine to his Highness.

Yet there is one or two fallacious passages more that have slipped me, which I
must needs give answer to.
In Page 114. he tells a mere story, (and you know what that is) saying the
insolency of the Dutch, caused by the unacquaintednesse of the time of our
departure (after we knew it) constrained the great Duke to put diverse of the
Dutch Captains and others into prison: Whereas by sufficient testimony it will
be made appear, the Dutch knew of the time when we were to be thrust out of
Port some days before us, and to that purpose had opportunity of hyring
Felucas, and sending them away with Dutch Captains or other Officers in them,
this way and that way to call in their ships of strength together; and being an
eyewitness of it my self, I wondered what was a brewing, until the occasion
thereof was taken away by my being ordered to depart in ten days according to
what has been before signified.

Whereas it is said, I might have staid four days longer, it has been
sufficiently proved by the great Dukes own Letter, and I know not what better
proof to make, I could not have staid an hour longer, without wind and weather
had hindered.

And to say I came out by my own election, is a story of the like nature with
the former, and that is sufficiently proved by what is before mentioned.

But at length he that has spread abroad in Print Signeur Montemagni's
relation, thinks he has struck the nail on the head, saying, we had
sufficient advantage against the enemy, if our fight had been better managed.

I would here appeal to all knowing men in the World, whether 'twas not likely
to have been better managed, if the dealings of the great Duke, and his
Ministers with us had not been like unto such as had betrayed us by the ensuing
particulars, that may be added to what is before denoted.

FIrst, As appears by my Letters of the 2/21th. of Mar. whereas the great Dukes
Secretary promised the Dutch Captains and others should not be let out of
prison, unless their Admiral would sign the Propositions, for keeping the
great Dukes Port unviolated; and yet afterward, when as we were come so near,
that there was no going back. I say now to let the Dutch out of prison, and
tell us plainly they would assault us, when our Ships sternes were to the Mould.

Secondly, Whereas the great Duke and his Ministers have many times told me,
that if the Dutch at any time should affront us within reach of his Cannons,
all the force they could make, should be discharged upon them; and yet
notwithstanding when it came to the point, should suffer our ships to be
surpised within little more then Musket Shot of their works, and not shoot a
shot in their defense.

Thirdly, whereas the great Duke wrote me in the close of his Letter dated the
9th. of March, he hoped that fair wind and weather would put all our ships out
of the Mould of Legorn, that so the dispute about the Phoenix Friggot might be
over; and yet notwithstanding that his Colonel who commanded Legorn, and all
that Seacoast (as a subordinate Minister under him) should give me to
understand the 13th. of March stilo novo, that if the English ships of War had
any further occasion of their Mould of Legorn, the Phoenix Friggot must be
restored, which was as much to discourage us as possible could be.

For I would make but this one querie in the close of all.

ADmit inferior Officers shall have liberty to asperse their Commander in
chief, (when as he shall think fit to call them off,) because of so great a
disproportion between the enemies and themselves. as is three or four to one,
which was our case in Legorn Road.

And although some peradventure will say, what although you had as knowing
Pilots on board as any were in the Fleet, and (howbeit) their opinion was if
you had engaged any further about the Leopards relief, the great ships would be
a ground together, and hazard the losing of all that way; yet you should have
forced the doing of what was in your own thoughts, with your sword in the faces
of them.

Again, admit it be granted a Commander in chief ought to prosecute the service
he is upon, although the Commanders of most of the nimble ships should not act
according to what was required of them, but neglect their duty, so that he
sees he has little or nothing to trust to but his own ship; and howbeit the
Mariners on board had proved formerly like a rotten staff, which deceives him
that leans on it, he ought still to carry on the service, above all hope.

Yet when the Commanders of one or both our Friggots, shall tell him their
Masts were shot through, and like to fall every moment, (as they were)
considering we could not be furnished in Legorn without surrendering the Phoenix
Friggot; would he not have been reputed as mad a man as any was in the world,
to have renewed the engagement at that time?

For suppose we could have relieved the Leopard, and not have been on ground,
and brought her off, to be sure by that time, all the Dutch Fleet, twenty and
odd sail, that were standing away to the Southward under our Lee, would have
got the weather-gage of us; and if so, I think every one will grant, that
although we might have defended our selves, yet it would have been an hundred
to one, but on of the Friggots maimed Masts, or some others would have gone by
the board; and consequently as the wind was, we must have gone into the great
Dukes Mould for a supply; which if we had, we were told beforehand,
(notwithstanding the great Dukes Letter) the Phoenix Friggot must be delivered.

Now as things stood.

Although it might have been more to the honor of the Nation to save the
Leopard, then the Phoenix; yet in a word, I suppose it would not be more to the
profit of the Nation, if all things be considered.

TO wind up all, when that fallacious Remonstrance of a fight near Legorn came
to my hand, seeing the great Duke, his Secretary, and I know not whom besides,
(among some of our Captains interest) all woven together; I thought of those
words, a threefold cord is not easily broken, how much less that which may be
compared to a sevenfold cord, to draw on mischief (if possible) on the heads of
the States faithful Servants; yet a little skill, where there is honesty and
integrity, may make it like unto rotten tow; whether it has or no, I shall not
query.

But in my proceeding in this short discovery of Truth, I shall only say thus
much by expressing what is before denoted; I have been cautious that none might
be offended, except it be such whose contentious spirits have sufficiently
discovered themselves: And although that some may think Sir Walter Rawleigh's
words concerning those times, are like to prove true in all ages, (He that
traceth Truth too near at the heels, may chance to have it kick out his
teeth;) For my part, I am of another opinion, and do yet hope better of the
present season.

But as a Gentleman expressed himself not long since, upon another occasion; I am
in a land of miracles, meaning in England; I was thinking whether it may not be
added, are we not in an age of miracles?

That a Commander of a Force havein been sent forth should be so neglected, and
as if he had been sent abroad for d^^ (...), (although I confess I had better
hopes) and being in foreign parts, should there conflict with as many hazards
and troubles, as almost was possible for any man to undergo in the time; and
yet when he shall come to his own Country, hoping to find that as good
Harbor after a storm, shall per contra be made liable to contempt from such
as have absolutely disobeyed commands, and have been the causes of all the
damage which has befallen the Nations in those parts, in which he has been,
and few seem to take notice ot it. To which I need add no more, being

Your servant as before. Ri. Badiley.

FINIS.
ERRATA,
PAge 2. line 27. read had for bad. p. 3. l. 19. r. helped for hope. p. 4. l.
1. r. odds for ods. l. 3. r. filling for filing. l. 29. dele. the p. 5. l. 12.
r. were for was. p. 10. l. last. r. sense for it, for sense for, p. 11. l. 20.
r. any service for in any service. p. 25. l. 1. r. mutined for mutinied. p. 26
l. 16. r. has for have. p. 31. l. 1. r. the balfe for half p. 31. l. 33. r.
my mouth for mouth. p. 34. l. 27. r. then for the. p. 36. l. 17 r. Machiavels
for Matchiavel. p. 37. l. 11. r. him for me. p. 38. l 9. r. flushed for
fleshed. p. 38. l. 11. r. those for these p. 40. l. 8. r. provoke for provoked.
p 41. l. 17. r. spending for spend. p. 41. l. 38. r. to for in. p. 45. l. 17.
r. conjunction for conjunctiou. p 49. l. 9. r. carreen for carreer. p. 54. l.
17. r. 18. for 16. p. 47. l. 32. r. particular for particular p. 54. l. 26. r.
cease for sease p. 58. l 19. r. Perrigrine for Pilgrim p. 62. l. 3 r. Recommend
for Recommending. p. 64. l. 30. r. warpe for ware. p. 70. l. 12. r. Jonas for
Jonat. p. 70. l. 19. r. Hughes for Hugham. p. 70. l. 26. r. so that the for
the. p. 71. l. 17 r. sp. adbarrough for spradlerow p. 76. l. 27. r. Leeward for
the Leeward. p. 77, l. 3. r. E. S. E. tor E. S. S. p. 77. l. 21. r. becalmed
for Leeward. p. 78. l. 5. r. came for come. p. 82. l. 22. r. was for were. p
82. l. 26. r. shortened for shorted. p. 84. l. 2. r. set for left. p. 86. l. 2.
r. Masters mate for mate. p. 86. l. 32. r. Captains desire for Captain desire.
p 87. l. 8. r. sagg'd for laid. p. 91. l. 30. r. 4. or 5. foot for 45. foot. p.
92. l. 16. r. sent for sends. p 92. l. 26. r. he was one for one p. 95. l. 24.
r. sennet. for net. p. 95. l. 20. r. was for were. p. 96. l. 3. r. that for
and. p. 96. l. 7. r. has for had. p. 96. l. 27. r. fight for sight p. 96. l.
32. r. not for naught. p. 98 l. 11. r. not for net. p. 98. l. 26. r. yours for
your. p. 98. l. 28. r. this for the. p. 99. l. 19. r. the for that p. 99. l.
20. r. assaulting for assault. p. 100. l. 32. r. and having for having p. 103.
l. 16. r. Zant for Lant. p 103, l, 39. r, ensuing for usuing, p. 105. l, 10. r.
yet since for fince, p, 106, l, 29. r, content for consent, p, 107, l, 17, r,
Dutch for Duke, p, 109, l, 34, r, ever for even.


