THE DESCRIPTION AND CONFVTATION OF MYSTICAL ANTICHRIST, the FAMILISTS; OR, An
Information drawn up and published for the Confirmation and comfort of the
Faithful, against many Antichristian Familisticall Doctrines which are
frequently Preached and Printed in England: particularly in those dangerous
Books called Theologia Germanica, the Bright Star, Divinity and Philosophy
dissected.

Written by Benjamin Bourne.

2 THESE. 2.7, 8, 9. For the mystery of iniquity does already work; only he who
now withholdeth shall let, until he be taken out of the way, and then shall
that wicked man be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the Spirit of his
mouth, and shall abolish him with the brightness of his coming, even him
whose coming is after the effectual working of Satan, with all power, signs,
and lying wonders.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Symons for B. B. and are to be sold at the Sign of
the Angel in Cornehill. 1646.

To all the Elect of God Inhabiting within the borders of England, particularly
to them that have now a being in London, grace, mercy, and peace be multiplied
from God the Father through our Lord JESUS CHRIST.
BEloved in the Lord, I have dedicated this Book, not to any one City or
place, but to all places in this Land whatsoever, where any of Gods people are
inhabiting, and this I have done for these reasons: First, because I have many
that are near and dear to me dwelling in many parts of this Kingdom.
Secondly, because the matter is general, and does concern all those in
general, that have any relation to the Lord Jesus. Thirdly, because Antichrist
is a large beast, yet is like to be larger, having many of his brood sitting
under his wing, in all parts of the world, deceiving and being deceived, by
reason of those delusions, which God has for his own glory sent unto them, 2
These. 2.11. I have many weighty considerable scriptures and grounds from
thence, to do what I have undertaken. First God has bestowed all upon me, and
revealed all to me, for 1 Cor. 12.7. Chap. 13.1. Romans 12.10, 11. 1 These. 2.8.
this one maine end: that I might be an Instrument of help and comfort to my
brethren, before Israel can come to have a quiet possession of Canaan. Deuteronomy.
Judge.
Many Nations of enemies must be subdued, and never was there more opposition
in Sions way then there is now: the devil has a mighty Kingdom, Antichrist a
mighty Nation, besides many other enemies that we must encounter with, and
therefore there is good reason that we should help and assist one another.
Suppose a man with many friends be traveling of a journey, and at a distance
from them be opposed by an enemy, will not the rest be ready to manifest their
love and courage in assisting him, have they not a sufficient call thereunto?
now the Saints are a traveling together toward heaven, they do meet with
many enemies that do lie in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4.14. If ever any had a
call to bring in their assistance to Sion, if ever any had a fit time and
opportunity to do good, surely now they have, O therefore let us arise as one
man, as one body, as one Army, to wrestle with this enemy, the devil is
already come with his millions, the world with her thousands, Antichrist with
his ten thousands, I think it is time to rise to help and strengthen the body
of Sion against these soul-destroying doctrines, these spiritual plots and
conspiracies, those who aim not at a single person, but at the whole state of
the Church, to rob them, if it were possible, of salvation and comfort, Mat.
24.24. by cunning sophistries, seeming Angelical doctrines, such as can
deliver their minds so, that every expression shall be a mystery, a strange
paradox, unheard of maxims, words that are neither according to the
scriptures, nor according to the terms of Schools, or those words which in
our own language are commonly spoken amongst us; they are just like to the
devil, transforming himself into Angels likeness, and would have all men to
look upon him, according to that appearance, although in truth, he in all
shapes and forms, cannot cease from being a devil, therefore if we have any
love in our hearts toward God, toward all men, now is the time to manifest
and express it, against such hell borne new found doctrines, such as are like
to some sorts of sea monsters, that are so seldom seen, that the sight or
appearance of them, becomes a wonder to all that shall behold them: the devil
works cunningly by these doctors, by reason of their fewness and scarceness,
starting up once in an age; this sect was in the Apostles time, and it is of
such a nature, that no man can be of it, especially teachers and ringleaders
of them, but such as are full of knowledge, men that have amongst the Saints,
and in Churches been famous for preaching of Christ, these prime Agents for
Antichrist: Here is their sheep clothing to be seen, their voluntary
humility, their excellent knowledge, their high and eloquent wisdom, See
Theologia, page 2. l. 1.
that they can sum up all Religions, all creatures, all spirits, and all
things whatsoever in one, and one in all. The second ground is this, that I may
by that which the Lord has bestowed upon me, be an Instrument of glory to his
Name, not by increasing, but by 1 Cor. 12.7.
manifesting and revealing to men, what he has discovered to me. Lastly, that
I might stop the mouth of Antichrist, who says, that none are able to stand
before them, or answer them in writing, disputing or reasoning Romans 7.18.
of my self: I can do nothing, but Gal. 2.20.
through Christ I can do all things, which is one cause, why their matter does
take such deep effect, in the hearts of many, yet in no more, then God has
ordained, either to a present or eternal fall. I have presented this present
to thee, whosoever thou art that have any communion with God, in our Lord
Jesus, by Election, Redemption, Creation, and Conversion, I pray you accept of
it, as one mite cast into the whole treasury.

Thy Friend in the Spirit, BENIAMINE BOURNI.

To the Reader.
I Shall in the Treatise following, as plainly as I am able lay open to the
view of all men, not at the second hand, but by experience, having often heard
them both preach and dispute, what that is which commonly goes by the name of
Familisme, what I shall say concerning it, or them that uphold it, is not out
of malice to them, or any person whatsoever, neither shall I speak at random,
charging them with that which they hold not, but what I shall say, I shall
speak positively and certainly. Had I not enough to say, I should never set
pen to paper: or were it a low slight inferior heresy, I should not in this
public way, in the least measure have to do with it, all the favor that I
crave at thy hands, is this: Take these three directions or rules in reading,
first, (...)
Philips expression to the Euauch of Ethiopia, read, but labor according to
thy ability to understand what thou read: the second rule is this, (...)
Try and examine every word that I have written, and judge to the utmost, but
(...)
be sure to judge and try all things in the spirit: the last, is this, Make
trial of all things, and judge according to thy (...)
understanding, but do it in love, read not, nor esteem not of this that I
have presented to thy view, in respect to its novelty. New things do much
delight the fantasies of this age; we are too apt to look upon the things of
God, with such an eye, as we do upon the things of men, love new fashions, we
should not love things in reference to their newness, but to their goodness.
My desire is to spend, and be spent, in discovering truth and falsehood, for
Sions sake, and for their sakes, whose return out of Egypt is much longed for:
many of them being such formerly, as were to be beloved and delighted in. Now
supposing that this Book may come into many of your hands, whose spirits are
wrapped up in darkness by delusion, you that think, that there is no other God,
Christ, heaven life or religion, then that that you dispute for; give me leave
in my discourse to the Reader, to direct a word or two to you, and they are
these: first, consider, that formerly none have been more forward to exalt and
acknowledge the Lord Jesus, then you have been, I mean a crucified Jesus, by
preaching, disputing, praying, and suffering, but now it is otherwise. Give me
leave to speak according to men, Were you not once as real for Christ, as you
are now for Antichrist? yea I will be one witness, what close communion had
you with God? and how many times have you to the refreshing of many drooping
spirits, made a large acknowledgement of the manifestations of Gods love and
favor to you, in Jesus Christ? how is it that the Lord Jesus is become such a
stranger to you, and you such strangers to him, whom you have formerly so
dearly loved, and embraced? how often have you in your pleadings for Christ,
disputed against Antichrist, and prophesied that such a one must needs be,
whereof now you your selves are members? can you deny this? I pray you in love
consider, if you be elected, without laughing at Christ in the face to scorn.
But one word or two, that from him I have to say to you, and that is this, How
dearly and exceedingly does Christ love you, even now, whilst you are a
denying his truth, and blaspheming his name? Are you able to express or
declare it? he is unchangeable. Again, consider, how much he bath done for you
from all eternity: by (...).17 ^1.
doing of which, he will abide with you, and in you to all eternity, and will
work all delusions, corruptions, temptations, Apostatisings, and weaknesses,
for your everlasting joy and welfare. Go on, and continue in your mischievous
way of iniquity and darkness, but no further, nor longer, then what is
according to Gods eternal purposes and determinations.

THE DESCRIPTION And Confutation of mystical ANTICHRIST the Familists, Who in
a mystery, as God, fitteth in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God.
CHAP. I. What Christ is unto, and in the heart of a Christian.
ONe of the greatest troubles that ever befell many of Gods people, I appeal to
their several experiences, is, those fiery darts, which the Devil by
Antichrist, does continually cast at them; and it must needs be a trouble, yea
a wounding trouble, to those that have ever in truth tasted of the goodness of
God in our Lord Jesus, and that for these Reasons.

First, because the trials are fiery; Take a flash of fire, and cast it
suddenly in a man's face in a dark night, and it will cause a sudden
astonishment to ceaze upon him: these Antichristian darts, in private
meditations are many times cast in the face of a Saint, which does prove worse
then a sudden flash of fire in the night, causing him to be taken with a deeper
amazement, in such a manner, that he scarce knows either where he is, or what
he is. First, he knows not where he is, whether in heaven, or hell; in the
light, or in darkness. Suppose a man were to go a journey for his life, in such
a way wherein he never was before, and in his way lies many cross ways, so
that he knows not which to turn to, he must needs be but in a poor condition,
except he have a person with him to direct him, that knows all ways, and a
principle in him to understand a direction. A Christians way is very difficult,
and troublesome, especially in such a case as this, when his desire is to enjoy
most sweet and constant communion with God, which he esteems and values above
his life; but for the in oyment and continuance of this, he knows not which way
to take too, or persevere in; seeing many ways before him, he must needs hang
down his head like a bulrush, until he meet with the Spirit of the Lord Jesus,
that knows all ways without him, and within him also, and is both able and
willing to give him knowledge and understanding, which way to take to, when he
is at such a stand, or in such an amazement as this is, although he was never
with his dear Savior, so far in his way before. Now for thy consolation,
consider three things. First, Christ is a Christians guide, a Christians
comfort, a Christians companion.

First, Christ, who is a Christians way, is a Christians guide also Joh. 14.
18. Chap. 17. 20. Thou can not have a better guide then Jesus Christ is; he
knows all mysteries and secrets, all the close chelled ways of Antichrist,
with all the multitudes and numberless numbers of them, although they lie
never so secretly in the bowels of darkness yet they are all naked and open
before him. Joh. 21.17. Romans 9.5. Joh. 1.50. Matthew. 12.25. And this must needs
be so for these Reasons. First, Jesus Christ was before all things, Joh. 8.58.
(...).17 ^1.
Secondly, Jesus Christ is above all things, Col. 2.9. Joh. 3. 31. Lastly, Jesus
Christ is the principal Governor and manager of all things, 1 Cor. 15.52.
Psalm. 110.1. Hebr. 1.3. Joh. 21.22. If thou have Christ to be thy guide, thou
may without fear encounter with the whole world. David could do more with a
sling and a stone, then the whole Army of Israel could, because God was his
guide, and did guide the stone also that went out of his hand. Though many
Antichristian Goliahs come against thee, boasting of their strength, taking it
disdainfully that such a one as thou art should offer to come against them,
supposing to make but a shrimp of thee, and thy imaginary God and Savior, as
they call it; yet assure thy self thou shall as certainly conquer, Ro^. 8.37.
as ever David did; Antichrist cannot well be more sures of victory then Giliah
was; but he was, and so shall they also be destroyed by the power of God, which
is in Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Jesus Christ is a Christians comfort too, Joh. 16.33. Chap. 14.27.
although thy way be troublesome in this and many other respects, an evil heart
and spirit within thee, many able subtle Antichrists without thee, the Devil in
a black shape says, that this visible world, and the external things thereof,
is thy only comfort; in a bright or Antichristian shape he says, that
religion must needs be thy only comfort, he has presented many Religions to
thee, but to thy spirit being made spiritual, none of them will please thee;
this is the last, the greatest and brightest Religion that he has to show
thee, and that which of all his shapes, appearances, or Religions, is the most
likest unto God; this is the greatest kingdom, the highest heaven, and glory,
the loveliest, and sweetest shape or form that possibly he can devise, or
imagine to cheat thee withal: if thou know him, or art able to hold fast
thy comfort the Lord Jesus, thou have quite disheartened him, and foiled him for
ever; God will manifest himself unto thee, and in that sight will show thee all
things. Joh. 12.45, 46. and 17.24. Chap. 14.21. He will show thee what the
devil is in all forms, he will acquaint thee with his appearance in darkness,
then when he leaves off that shape, and transforms himself seemingly in to a
glorious Angels likeness; the Lord will show thee that it is the same devil,
though in another appearance, he will manifest him to thee, as he cunningly
under this notiond wels in Antichrist, and as he secretly lodges in thy own
spirit: consider of the love of God to thee, in respect of these real lasting
consolations; let the devil speak in never so many languages and forms, yet
that power by which he was created will uphold and refresh thy languishing
spirit.

O man, whosoever thou art, whose spirit the Lord has kept, from being
overwhelmed by the powers of Antichrist, I pray thee further to consider of the
love of God, in two respects; in its greatness, in its goodness. First,
consider of Gods love in reference to its greatness, the personal glory of the
Lord Jesus, is the exceeding greatness of Gods love. The second thing is, that
the person or glory of Christ, is the exceeding goodness of Gods love, the
infinite and unspeakable glory of Christ is, his heavenly being in the blessed
Trinity: where can you see a greater manifestation of Gods greatness, then to
look upon the Divine and Humane nature, both meeting in the person of our
Savior. 1 John 1. v. 14. Matthew. 1.16. 1 Pet. 1.17. Matthew. 17.5. Luke 3.23. 1 Timothy 3. vlt. Again, where can you see a greater discovery of Gods love in the
goodness thereof, then by seeing that Jesus in whom the fullness of God
dwells, Col. 1.17. and 2.4. this is a Christians revivall in the saddest and
weakest condition.

Thirdly, Jesus Christ will be thy companion also, he will not leave thee upon
any terms, though thou art filthy and unworthy of him, and would often
forsake him if he did not keep thee. Matthew. 28.20. Job. 14.16. Romans 7.18.

Suppose a thousand men were traveling in a wilderness, and they should see so
many wild beasts coming to devour them; suppose that the third part of them
should consult and conclude, to take some course for to a void this danger, but
the other that out of some fuller knowledge of a certain way, which they all
take not, leave their company, and refuses all their virgin forcing Reasons and
Arguments; yet it would be a great temptation and provocation to them, to draw
them away from that way of safety, which by their knowledge was so seated in
them. Many men are professors of the Gospel, in this world which is a
wilderness to a Saint, and in their professing or traveling together, do meet
with many enemies devouring and destroying at once according to their power all
that is before them: A Christian sees many Councils held, and many persons
conclude, some to worship God in this way, some in that, he knows and
apprehends by the teachings of the Spirit, that most, if not all of these ways
are destructive, dangerous, and erroneous; this fight saddens a Christian, that
most of his friends and acquaintance should leave him alone as it were single
in judgment: yet not alone, for the blessed Trinity is with him, God is in
Christ, the Spirit is in both, and Christ is in a Christian. Now were it not
for this glorious company, how sad, low, and miserable would his condition be!
it would go worse with him if he were left and stripped of all, as sometimes for
a time many precious Christians are, then with a thousand others; and why,
because he has in truth, seen, known, and enjoyed communion with God in the
Spirit; and now to be left, and forsaken is worse, and more dreadful to him,
then to them who never had a true fight and enjoyment of Christ at all. Suppose
a Kings Son that is born to be an heir to Crowns and Kingdoms, should come to
be a beggar, beggary would be more tedious to him being a Prince, and such an
Heir, then to him who has been so from his cradle. Let all men say what they
will or can of God, with never such eloquent glorious phrases and expressions,
yet if they once come to take away a Christians Christ from him, See the book,
entitled, Theologa Germanica, p. 52. l. 6. See the Bright Starr, That there is
nothing in the creature but is the Creator. pa. 77.
then he knows what will follow: though many do come and tell him, that they
can live sweetly and quietly upon this consideration, that God by assuming of
humane nature, becomes al things in man, and man by being divine, by being
deified, becomes all things in God, with ten thousand times more, yet all this
will not give satisfaction, to him there is no life or goodness, no heaven
neither of grace nor glory, but all things out of order in respect of him, if
God in Jesus Christ be not within him; his actions are kingly and royal, like
an Ambassador, whose business is most of all with the King: So it is with a
Christian, all his work and spiritual employment in this world from the womb
to the grave, is with Jesus Christ. I say again, it is with a particular
crucified Jesus; take him out of his Saviors company, and he is like a man
that has never a hand to work with; or if he have, there is no strength in
them, but goes about all things in a fumbling, confused, distracted manner, not
knowing where nor when to begin or make an end. A Christian is not himself, nor
in his right mind, when he is not in communion with Christ.

Now to come a little closer to the matter, which by way of confutation I
desire to inform you of, which are as so many spears thrust through the heart of
Christ and a Christian; the heart of Christ is the Spirit, the heart of a
Christian is Christ, who is this Spirit. The method that I shall use is this.

First, I shall set down the errors, laying them open and naked to thy view.

Secondly, lay down the truth, by which I desire to proceed against them. It Is
true, that one of them includes and contains them all, and whatsoever else they
can devise to write or say. Yet for distinction, understanding, and profit, I
shall divide this one great mystery into many distinct several mysterious
Doctrines.

CHAP. II. Antichrist described, and confuted in his first Error, which is,
that there is but one Spirit or life in all things both in heaven and earth,
and that is absolutely and essentially God, and something concerning the coming
of Christ in the flesh.
I Shall lay open this Error to you thus: there is but one Spirit in the
world, that is, there is but one spirit or life, internal fire, heat or motion
in all things whatsoever, without exception, in God, in good Angels, as we call
them, in devils, as we term them, in all creatures, and in all the sons and
daughters of men.

The confutation. I do not know any thing to the contrary, but that there is
and may be seemingly, or for want of knowledge, some difference amongst them;
but this I say, that he that holds not closely and firmly to this one ground
and principle, cannot be an absolute able direct, but must needs be a neutrall
Familist. The truth that I shall lay down is this; that this expression,
thesis, or doctrine is an erroneous Antichristian blasphemy: whatsoever is
erroneous is Antichristian; whatsoever is Antichristian in this sense
concerning the essence or being of God, is blasphemy. It Is treason for any man
but the King, to say that he is the King; it is treason, rebellion, and blasphemy
against God, for any man to say, that that which is created and finite, is the
Infinite and Essential Godhead. I shall prove that to be an undeniable truth
which I have to say to you concerning this first Error, both by Scripture and
Reasons, making it clearly manifest, that there are more spirits in the world
then one, and that the life and being of man and all creatures is not the life
and being of God. 1 John 4.1. Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit, but try
the spirits whether they are of God, for many false prophets are gone out into
the world. Let us solidly and lovingly search out this mystery, and see what
this spiritual and divine truth will afford us; you may plainly see, that
these words are an exhortation, a conclusion, and a. Reason, all which he
delivers with these two loving foregoing expressions, Dearly beleved, the
exhortation lies in these words, Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits
whether they be of God: the Reason lies in these words; For many false prophets
are gone out into the world. The conclusion is this; that there are more
spirits in the world then one: And it lies in these words, spirits and
prophets, speaking in the plural number. Then there is another employed, and
that is this, that every spirit is not of God, ver. 2. and 3. It is impossible
that one spirit should act in such a way of opposition, or contrariality, as
these two spirits do which the Apostle gives a description of. The good Spirit
which is of God, is known by this action, which is a real confession and
acknowledgement of the coming of Christ in the flesh: The other spirit is known
by another contrary work, viz. to deny this Christ in his coming.

The last thing that I shall observe from these Scriptures, is this, What
manner of Christ is this that the Apostle here speaks of, is it a particular
body, a perfect man, which God created and assumed in the womb of that Virgin
that was for this end ordained, and set apart by God from eternity; I mean that
Virgin which was espoused or affianced to Joseph, whose name was Mary; or is it
a universal Christ, as Antichrist calls him, that is, the flesh and blood of
the whole world, to which this Scripture with many others is applied, 1 Timothy 3.
last: Without controversy great is the mystery of godliness, viz: God
manifested in the flesh, that is, God manifest in the flesh of all men, which
flesh, outward form, body, or orgine, See the Bright Starr, That it is chiefly
remarkable, to find Christ in his passion in us, that he be considered and
beheld as crucified in us. page 205. li. 4 11. That if we deal with the passion
of Christ in himself it must be imaginary, but if we look upon it as it is in
our selves, it is not then to be imagined, but beheld, just such as we feel in
our selver really. p 211. l. 17.18.
was created by one life, good or God which is eternal; and this good, God, or
life eternal, in creating this man, did assume it, and by assuming or uniting
it to himself, Godhead, or essence, does make out a discovery and manifestation
of himself, to himself, in and by all creatures whatsoever.

The first I acknowledge to be the truth, and of Christ: the second I prove to
be false, and of Antichrist; one Scripture has dependence upon another, like a
golden chain, break one link, and you break all; deny one truth, and you deny
all. Compare one spiritual truth with another, and that is the only way by
the Spirit, to find out the spirituality of all truth. These Scriptures that I
am now treating or speaking of, are sufficient witnesses to justify or bear me
out in all these inferences or conclusions that I have drawn from them. But
besides these, I shall produce many others to confirm this truth, which is so
plain, that the devil and Antichrist in all their appearances cannot deny, I
mean in such a manner, so as to take away the essence and being of it out of
the world, I mean a new creation, the heart of a true believer.

The other Scriptures are these, Luke 27.28. so onward to the 55. I pray you
read this History in love to the Lord Jesus, without any selfish by-respect
either to your selves, or to any person in this world; if any will deny a
particular crucified Jesus, he must race and blot out all these with many other
Scriptures, concerning this: Isa. 7.14. Dan. 7.14.27. Micha 4.7. Isa. 30.18.
the 41.8. the 54.5. Jer. 31.3.20. Genesis 17.19. Psalm. 132.11. Luke 1. last.
Matthew. 28.5, 6. Joh. 20.19.25.29. 1 Cor. 15.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Isa. 53.5. 1 Pet.
2.24. Act. p. 4. Matthew. 8.17. Jona. 2.1. Matthew. 11. from the first to the 6.
Isa. 61.1. Matthew. 3.3. the whole Chapter. Isa. 40.3. The Lord is pleased to lay
this truth upon a sure foundation, in all which he does confirm his word and
promise; and also discovers his love and glory for the comfort and salvation
of the world, the Godhead united the humanity to the second person in the
Trinity, the Lord Jesus, and now in that nature he is Emanuel, God with us:
Isa. 7.14. for he in no sort took on him the nature of Angels, but he took upon
him the seed of Abraham: Hebr. 2.16. This is a real truth, all the Antichrists
in the world cannot nullify or make it of none effect, that Jesus Christ is a
particular man, in which nature he suffered, and in which he is also glorified.
Phil. 2.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Heb. 5.7, 8. And the Apostle says, that there is
but one Mediator between God and man, which is the man Christ Jesus. The
Reasons or Arguments are of two sorts: the first sort is to prove, that there
are more spirits in the world then one. Secondly, that the life and being of
God, is not every thing, and that every thing is not the life, essence, and
being of God. The other sort of Reasons is to prove, that Jesus Christ is come
in the flesh. Secondly, that this Jesus, is a particular Savior, such a one as
had, and still has a particular soul and body, that was created in the womb
of the Virgin, for the falling and rising of many in Israel. Now the first
Argument for the confutation of this first error, viz. that the life of man
and all creatures is God, which is one Spirit, besides whom there is no other,
is this.

First, whatsoever is the Godhead or essence, the name of that is
uncommunicable, thy name alone is Jehovah, says the Prophet, Psalm. 83.18. I am
that I am, all in all, Exodus 3.14. 1 Cor. 15. But the name of man in reference
to his Spirit is not uncommunicable, therefore the life of man or all creatures
is not God. I will speak a little of the Name of God under this threefold
consideration. First, the Name of God is such an infinite glory, that it cannot
be attributed, or communicated to any creature either in heaven or earth, an
Angel is not Jehovah, the spirit of a man is not the Name of God; Jesus Christ
in reference to his conception and creation, is not this God, or Name Jehovah.
Secondly, the Name of God is I am that I am, all in all, but no creature is I
am: The word signifies, all that God is in himself, in his attributes, in all
creatures, it discovers his eternity, immutability, blessedness, and
perfection. Thirdly, the Name of God is All in all, all in all things, all
before all things, all above all things, all besides all things: but I will
speak more of this anon, for the present I desire to proceed.

The second is this, whatsoever is the Godhead or essence is also the blessed
Trinity; for the Godhead is the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost is one and the same God. 1 John 5.7. Joh. 14.9, 10, 11. But
the life and spirit of man and all creatures is not the blessed Trinity. Ergo,
the life of all creatures is not God. The major Proposition is clear, the
assumption also is undeniable. Yet I shall open and enlarge this Argument, by
these three particulars. The Godhead is the Father, God is a Father in three
respects. First, he is the Father of Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. 1 Pet. 1.3. Secondly,
God is the Father of a Christian. 1 Cor. 1.3. Chap. 10.17. Thirdly, God is a
Father to all creatures both in heaven and earth. 1 Cor. 8.6. Ephesians. 3.15. The
spirit of man is not the Father of Christ, of a Christian, and of all
creatures: therefore not God. It Is true, many men care not what they say,
although never so blasphemous, and will stand to avouch whatsoever they think
or apprehend, to be truth, and of God, though never so false. And why, but
because they conceive it to be so, and therefore it cannot be otherwise. It is
not men's right apprehensions of truth that gives being to it, but it does give
being to all things.

Secondly, the Godhead is the Son also, yet so as that he is the Father too:
this is that very God, and that eternal life, 1 John 5.20. there is no other
God, or eternal life. Besides the Godhead of our blessed Savior the person of
Christ was begotten, but the Godhead of our Lord Jesus is not only the Word
begotten, but the Father begetting, and the blessed Spirit which in its person
proceeds from the Father and the Son. Thirdly, the holy Spirit in its Godhead,
is, not only the third person in the Trinity, but every person, Joh. 4.24. The
three persons in the Trinity, are all one God, which is a Spirit; the spirit of
man, in man is not the person, nor Godhead, neither of the Spirit, or our Lord
Jesus.

The third Argument is this: God is immutable, eternal, alsufficient, and
infinite: but the spirit and life of man and all creatures is not so, therefore
is it not God. First, the spirit of man is not immutable or unchangeable, he is
not always of one mind, desiring, embracing, loving, and exalting of one
thing, but is flexable, to day for one thing, to morrow for another; now for
Christ, and anon for Antichrist. Can any man deny this which we know to be true
by our daily experiences. Secondly, no man is eternal, not so eternal as God
is; he is the Father of eternity, Isa. without beginning, without end: Revel.
the beginning and end of all things. Thirdly, no man is alsufficient for
himself, for any weighty spiritual employment, nor for any friend or creature
to save or destroy, to help him in a trouble or out of trouble; many things,
yea all things without the strength and assistance of God is impossible to him;
to God all things are possible. Lastly, no man is infinite in power or wisdom,
glory or mercy; man, instead of being infinite, is impotent, impudent.

Fourthly, whatsoever is God, has infinite and eternal communion with God:
but the life and Spirit of man, and all creatures is not infinite, and eternal
in their communion with God; therefore the life and spirit of all creatures is
not God

Fifthly, whatsoever is the essence or Godhead, is also the whole discovery and
manifestation of the mind of God in Jesus Christ, for God is his own
discoverer: but the spirit of man is not able to reveal the whole mind of God
in Jesus Christ concerning all things. Ergo, the life of man is not God.

Sixthly, whatsoever is God is without measure, partakers of the divine hature
of God, for it is the Nature it self: but all creatures without measure are not
partakers of the Divine nature of God. Ergo, all the creatures are not God.

Now to prove the other truth concerning Jesus Christ, in respect of his coming
in the flesh, it shall be when I shall come to handle such matter, as that I
shall have an opportunity to take it in in order. Therefore I desire to go on
in the prosecution of what is in hand, it being a truth of a high concernment,
that we are all bound and engaged to inquire into.

The being, nature, and essence of the Almighty God, is such, that we may
quickly and easily be mistaken in our highest and greatest meditations we may
think that to be God, which in truth is not God; and think also that not to be
God, which in truth is God. The true and real knowledge of God is the
foundation of all Christian Religion; if a man be not spiritually firm, and
sound in this one main principle, he must needs be sandy in all; the true
knowledge of God will bring a man to the knowledge of all things. J^b. 17.3.
Chap. 14.7.17. The knowledge of God is that that makes us to embrace him, to
love and exalt him above all, to worship and obey him in the spirit. Joh. 4.24.
Suppose the King should give a rich Jewel to a poor child, although it were
worth many thousands, yet he would not look upon it or esteem of it any more
then an ordinary stone or trifle. What is the cause why the men of this world
do slight and undervalue the glory and excellency of the Lord Jesus, and do
exalt and embrace this present evil world, and the glory thereof, but because
they never have seen him nor known him. Joh. 8.19. Chap. 15.21.24.

The seventh Reason to prove that the life and spirit of all things is not God,
is this: God is above all things, but the spirit of man is not above all: Ergo,
the spirit of man is not God. Joh. 3.31.

Again, eighthly, God is also the Creator, preserver, and governor of all
things both in heaven and earth: Genesis 1. Act. 7.49, 50. Isa. 66.1. Hebr. 1.3.
Psalm. 104. But the spirit of man in the highest respect cannot rule it self,
neither is it the Creator, preserver, and governor of all things; therefore
that spirit is not God.

Ninthly, that that is the Godhead or essence does all things according to the
good pleasure of his will, and works all after the counsel of the same. Act
4.28. Exodus 33.19. Romans 9.16. Act. 2.23. But it is impossible that ever this
should be done by man, and blasphemy it is to attribute to him: Ergo, he is not
God. This error is not only against the Scriptures, but also against all
Reason both Divine and Humane; pull down this pillar, and the foundation of
this mystery will quickly fall to the ground: this is the first and greatest
principle, if they forsake this, they can hold forth nothing either in
preaching, disputing, or writing, but what shall be so confused and intricate,
that a man shall hardly know where they begin, what they speak of, or where
they will end. Thus much for the first Error. The second in order by way of
confutation is this.

CHAP. III. Whether all things are the act of God, yea, or not. Whether every
creature in all its actions, be acted and ruled by the Spirit of God: the truth
is acknowledged, the error explicated and confuted.
I Have included this in the general, in what I have said before; I will now
speak of it in particular. Let us now see wherein this is a truth according to
Scriptures, and then I Will set down the contrary Antichristian falsehood: I
entreat you to consider what I shall say, without mistaking or misapprehending
of me, that none may justly say, that I go about to call out or confute many
Antichrists without me, by a greater and a subtiller Antichrist within me: The
truth is this.

First, God is the supreme, chief, and only Ruler of all things both in heaven
and earth; all sorts of creatures, whether angels, devils, or men, all
creatures, all things whatsoever without exception, are under his power and
heavenly jurisdiction: No man, Angel, or devil can rule and dispose of himself
according to his own will and pleasure, in any condition, work, or action
whatsoever, contrary to Gods eternal will, counsel, and determination. Jer.
10.23. O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself: it is not in man
that walks to direct his steps. The power by which all men does turn and
wind their hearts and hands to do all things is of God. David says, Once have
I said it, yea twice, that power belongs to God. And St. Paul says, Romans 13.1.
that there it no power but of God. Matthew. 28.18. our Savior says, that all
power it mine both in heaven and earth: Joh. 17.2. Secondly, the way in which
man walks, is not in himself, but in him that created him. Act. 17.28. Every
man's being, life, and motion, is in God. Secondly, there is nothing that can
have a being in this world, which is absolutely against the will of God; if the
devil had not been ordained from all eternity, for that condition into which he
fell, then had he never fallen into it: 2 Pet. 2.4. Job 4.18. they that were
elected could never fall: 1 Timothy 6.21. Thirdly, there is nothing in the world
whatsoever that is absolutely evil under all considerations, but in some
respects is necessarily good, and must needs be; the greatest evil in the world
is the sins of the world: now sin although it be the greatest evil, Romans 7.13.
yet in some respects it is good and absolutely necessary, and must needs be in
the world; Of him, to him, and through him are all things, Rom: 11.36. that is,
in reference to his eternal purpose, counsel, and determination. The devil as
a devil is not of God; sin in reference to it self is not of God. 1 John 2.16.
for all that is in this world, as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye,
and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of this world. The sins of
the whole world, are comprehended under these three aforenamed. Joh. 8.38. I
speak that which I have seen with my Father, ye do that which you have seen
with your father: Ye are of your father the devil, his works ye will do: he
has been a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because
there was no truth in him: when he speaks a lie he speaks of his own, for
he is a liar, and the father thereof. verse the 44. Sin is not of the nature of
God, it is exceeding blasphemy to speak it; sin is not of God, that is, in a
respect to it self, as it is the will of man and the devil: but sin in respect
of Gods purpose, ordaining it for such an end, to manifest and exalt his glory,
in that respect it is good. Now all this is not the act and will of man, nor
the devil: for the will and end of God in ordaining sin, in the being of it,
and the will and end of the devil, and of man in acting of sin, are not one but
directly contrary, and in this he is a devil, and man a sinner, and worthy to
be condemned. I will give you two or three instances, and many Scriptures to
prove this. Matthew. 6.13. Exodus 9.16. Isa. 6.9. Joh. 17.12. Romans 9.33. Matthew. 6.
How is this a truth that God leads into tentation, let no man say when he is
tempted, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither
tempts he any man: Jam. 1.13. Dowe not know by experience, that we are
intised and tempted to sin, by that secret lust and concupiscence which is in
our own hearts, to commit all those sins against God, which continually we do
delight in, this is not the act of God, but the act of the devil, and of our
own spirits, the spirit that is within us lusts to envy, and by nature we do
that, that we have seen and learned of our father the devil, continually
delighting in the lust of the flesh, in the lust of the eye, and in the pride
of life; being inclined to all filthiness both in flesh and in spirit: Romans
7.18. to Atheism, The fool has said in his heart, that there is no God: God
is not in all his thoughts; or all his thoughts are, that there is no God. The
spirit of this man cannot be God, neither is the motion of his spirit the act
of God.

Are we not often tempted to Idolatry, many times apprehending God to be that
which he is not, 1 John 5. last. God does not lead a man in to this: Is there
not many men that worship the creatures more then the Creator? Romans 1.25. Is
there not many that set up Images which are the works of men's hands, and bow
down to that, Dan. 3. Act 17.23. this is not the act of God.

There be diverse sorts of temptations, some that are good for men, and others
that are hurtful and destructive. It is said, that God leads in to temptation,
because he has ordained it, and created him that is the principal Agent in
it, for this one end, that the Saints might be led into it for their
everlasting joy and peace: Jam: 2.1. My brethren count it exceeding joy when ye
fall into diverse temptations: the devil is the principal Agent in some
temptations, not in all, and not in any but in a way of subordination unto God;
that, that the devil aims at in all his temptations, is not according to the
will of God, yet all that he does is ordained: there is a great difference
betwixt ordaining a thing in rererence to its being, and the acting of the same
thing when it has a being.

The sins of the world are not committed by the Spirit of God, for then it
would be unclean and unholy. Judge what a great blasphemy this is, for a man to
lie, swear by God, to say, God damme, refuse and destroy me; and then to say,
that all things is the act of God. God has made a promise, that whosoever
sins against the holy Ghost, he shall never be forgiven; because that men
said that of Christ, that many speak now, viz. that he had an unclean spirit:
God cannot lie, nor deny himself. Tit. 1.2. 1 John 2.27.

Now why should the Saints rejoice when they fall into temptation, should they
rejoice when they fall into sin, when they do break Gods Commandments, then
they should rejoice in that; that is their greatest grief and bondage, which
makes them cry out, O wretched man that I am: Romans 7.24. Again, secondly, if
men should rejoice in sin, then they rejoice in that which Christ by his death
has freed them from; this is a contradiction, and cannot stand: a Christian is
ashamed of nothing but sin. Gal. 5.16. Romans 13.14. Thirdly, if sin bring joy to
them that are in union with Christ, then with all speed let all sins be
committed, and let all kind of filthiness be the continual practice of a
Christian, for he is to do whatsoever lies in his power for the furtherance of
his joy.

Therefore it cannot be so as those do say, who cavil against the truth
purposely to blot out the truth, and to make it appear unto all men, that it is
nothing else but a lie and a shadow, and is no real substance of divine truth
as we call it, but is a mere bauble.

I will sum up all temptations in these three, temptations by sinning, by
wounded conscience, by all losses and persecutions. Now let us in a word
inquire what sin is, whether it be a positive created substance, or a thing
that is privative only. Answer. Sin is nothing else but an evil work which is
not conformable to the Law of God. We must know that sin is not the real
substance, or being of any created thing whatsoever, neither of the devil, nor
men; sin has its privative dwelling in the heart, but it is not the heart; it
is not the created power of the devil, yet it is in the devil. Now that that
makes the devil to be a devil, and to be so denominated, and man like unto him,
is nothing else but a want of power; for this they want, and that is their
misery, that is, they want power to obey the command of God, which is to
believe in Jesus Christ, and to love one another. 1 John 3.23, 24. The devil
has the same power still, that he had before his fall, but not the same
degree; sin is not the nature of the devil, for then it may be proved, that God
created sin, and is the Author thereof; but sin is the corruption that is in
the nature of the devil, and that is the reason why he is so, and is called
so; for his name signifies not his substance or nature, for that is of God, it
came from God, and was created, and then it was good as all things were when
they were created. Compare Genesis 1.31. with the 2.3. but it signifies the work
or action that he did, and that lamentable estate or condition which he is
fallen into, by reason of that work of wickedness and folly which he acted.
Job 4.18. First, the devil was one of those Angels that God created. Secondly,
the devil was one of those Angels that God charged with folly; both these are
expressed and employed in this Scripture: the name devil signifies that, by which
his glorious nature was corrupted, and that condition of corruption and misery,
into which he is fallen; so that he cannot be no other then what he is, nor
possibly do any other work then what he does. The word Devil is not sin, for
God himself in the proceedings of his righteous Justice gave him such a name,
as was according to his corrupted, fallen, condemned nature: sin altered the
nature of the devil, not in being, but in his manner of being; he was a good
Angel, and in happiness and glory, before he had sinned: but now he is an
unhappy evil being, he is still the same substance that he was, but he has not
the same manner of subsisting, he is the same power that he was, but he has
not the same power that he had. Now I shall give you a further description of
sin by these considerations. First, sin is contrary to the Attributes of God, I
shall speak but of some of them: first, sin is contrary to the wisdom of God,
the inventions of men is the wisdom of the world; The wisdom of this world is
foolishness with God: 1 Cor. 1. The wisdom of God is pure, peaceable, gentle,
and easy to be entreated: But sin, which is the wisdom of the world, is
carnal, sensual, earthly and devilish. The wisdom of God is that by which
God himself knows how and in what way man might be redeemed, justified, and
glorified; but sin brings death, shame, and everlasting ruin and destruction
to men. Romans 7. Chapt. 2 and Chapt. 3. Jam. 3.1.16, 17. so along; where the
Apostle shows what misery and eternal bondage sin has brought upon the whole
world; and how Christ by his death has freed men from this eternal thraldom.

Secondly, sin is contrary to the power of God, the spirit does make weak,
poor, dying men, strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might: But sin is
the cause why men are weak, and miserably poor, and it makes them to be in a
continual dying, heartlesse condition. The power of God is that that changes
the heart, and makes a person conformable to the Image of Christ, translating
him in to his kingdom. But sin makes a man conformable to it self, and so
translates the whole world into the kingdom of the devil. Ephesians. 2.1.10, 11,
12, 13. Heb 9.14. Luke 1.14. Ephesians. 6.10. Romans 5.

Thirdly, sin is contrary to the mercy of God; the mercy of God is sweet, and
lovely: but sin is filthy and abominable; God is love. 1 Ioh. 4.16. But sin is
hatred, and is at enmity with God, it cannot be subject to his Law, Romans 8.
Christ died to reconcile the persons of men; but he never died to reconcile the
sins of men. The sins of a Saint are as contrary to the mercy of God, as the
sins of a reprobate are.

Fourthly, sin is contrary to the providence of God, that does feed and nourish
all creatures. Psalm. 104. But sin is that that brings a universal famine upon
the whole world. The power of God bears up all things, Hebr. 1. and the
providence of God is that that orders all: but sin is a universal faintness,
that distempers the world, and causes all things to be out of order.

Fifthly, sin is contrary to the Justice of God, in it self, and in all the
righteous proceedings of it, it is just, holy, pure, and heavenly: but sin is
unjust, impure, and unholy. But I leave these to your meditations. Secondly,
sin is contrary to the Name of God. Thirdly, sin is contrary to the nature of
God, as it is in all Saints, and in all Angels too. Fourthly, sin is contrary
to the being of God; God is a Spirit, and a spiritual substance: but sin is a
mere vanity, and a spiritual wickedness.

Last of all, sin is contrary to all the works of God; Ple name three of them;
the work of Creation, Redemption, and Regeneration. First, sin is contrary to
the work of God in the Creation; when God made all things, they were very good
and beautiful: Genesis 1. but sin causes all creatures to loose that goodness,
beauty, and joy, that then all creatures had; and fills all full of sorrow, and
evil, and makes all to be subject to vanity. Genesis 3. Romans 8. Every creature
suffers by the sin of man, it causes all creatures to groan and travail in
pain, waiting for deliverance. But then secondly, sin is contrary to the work
of God in our Redemption. By reason of sin we are heirs of hell, children of
wrath, and of the devil; torment eternal, torment unexpressable is the
punishment due for sin; But Christ has delivered us, he became sin for us, he
took upon him the curse that was due to us, he satisfied his Fathers Justice,
and made us who by nature were heirs of hell, and children of wrath, to be the
children of God, and annexed coheirs, together with himself of an immutable,
immortal, incomprehensible glory. In the work of Redemption consider, first,
that sin is contrary to the coming of Christ. Secondly, sin is contrary to the
life of Christ. Thirdly, sin is contrary to the death of Christ. Fourthly, sin
is contrary to the Resurrection. And lastly, to the intercession of our Lord
and Savior.

The last work that sin is contrary to, is, our Regeneration. First, sin is
contrary to the Spirit. Secondly, it is contrary to the work of grace wrought
in us by this Spirit; sin is contrary to all the graces and glorious virtues of
the Spirit. First, sin is contrary to the faith of a Christian: secondly, to
the hope of a Christian: thirdly, it is contrary to the love that a Christian
has to God: fourthly, sin is contrary to the grace of self-deny all: fifthly,
contrary to the grace of Repentance in all the parts of it: last of all, sin is
contrary to the grace of Mortification; it is as contrary to all these, to
whatsoever God is in himself, to whatsoever he is in all creatures, by
Creation, Redemption, and Regeneration, as light is unto darkness: sin is not
a noune substantive, for if there were neither men nor devils, sin could not
be, sin does subsist in, and is a dependence upon men and devils, sin is not a
substantial being, but has a being, and is upheld by these beings: the devil
is sins original, the first rise of it sprung out of his substance, and he is
the greatest upholder thereof: the devil was a particular principality, Angel,
or power before he fell, so he is still; for when the devil had sinned in
heaven, if God should have taken away the same power from him in respect of his
substance when he cast him down to hell, which before he had when he was in
glory, and had not sinned, then would he have been altered in his very being;
and so he that was in the light and glory of God before could not be the same
now; that now he is in darkness. But this is against the Scripture, and
against all Reason too: the Scripture says, that those Angels which were once
in glory, and were happy; by sinning and leaving their habitation were most
miserable, and unhappy, and so came to be devils. Jude 6.

So that they keep their power still, but not the same degree of power, they
had power to glorify God willingly, and with delight; now they bring glory to
God, yea, but that is no thanks to them, it is not in the will of the devil,
nor any defire that he has at all by doing all that mischief that he does, to
bring any glory to God, or good to man, if the devil did know the glorious
effect, and event that many times God brings to pass by his cunning,
devilish hellish subtilty, he would do the best he could to avoid many
abominable exploits that he takes in hand; What is the condemnation of men and
devils, but because the Lord is pleased to catch them in their own snare, that
is, he makes their own actions to be the means of their own confusion.

They in the Gunpowder-treason would not have begun the Plot, had they but
known the event thereof; little did the devil think when he came to our first
parents in the form of a created Serpent, to tempt them, with many fair
stories, curious lies, and loving expressions, to eat of the forbidden fruit,
that so he might be lord over all, that ever that action of theirs should bring
such glory to God, as by the Almighty power of God it did.

Power in God cannot increase nor decrease; but his power in his creatures
has, and still does; the least Angel in heaven is greater in power then the
greatest Devil that is in hell; yet the greatest devil that is now in hell, for
any thing I know to the contrary, was the greatest Angel that was in heaven,
next unto the Lord Jesus.

When a man has lost an arm or any other member, he cannot do that after which
he could before: why, not only because he has lost a member, but also he has
lost the power; the power does not go in to those members that are left to
strengthem them, but rather they are all made the weaker by that loss: you may
put the member to the body, but not put life and power in to it again. Now his
inward spirit may be one and the same in the power of it, not in its degree.

When God does convert a man to the knowledge of himself, he does put that
power in to him that he never had before, such a power as is divine and
heavenly; for the spirit is the power of God; and a Christian in the first
instant of conversion does receive the Spirit of God, which changes and
transforms him from the image of the devil into the likeness of Jesus Christ.
Now God leads into temptation, that so he may bring light out of darkness, and
good out of the greatest evil; contrary to the thoughts and expectations of men
or devils.

Now shall we sin that grace may abound, God forbid: let the Lord work which
way he pleases according to his secret counsel, yet it is impossible that we
who are once dead to sin, should live any longer therein: Romans 6.1, 2.

Secondly, its a great temptation to be for a moment forsaken of God; now God
does this sometimes mediately by means, and sometimes more immediately from
himself; it may be God has ordained that the devil shall come to a Christian
in this estate of weakness, as he did to Christ when he was an hungry, Matthew.
4.2. and think by some divellish trick or other to bring him to utter
confusion: but if God be pleased to work by this means so, as to deliver a
Christian in this combat from his unexpressable sorrow, the devils action is
nevertheless devilish and sinful. So God by this means brings glory to his
Name, by raising a Christian, and confounding the devil.

Again, Gods leads into temptation by persecution, and to exalt his glory, and
to make manifest his power, he raises up Pharaoh and hardens his heart for the
affliction and trial of his people. Now here is an act of Pharaoh, and an act
of God too: the act of God was to harden, the act of Pharaoh was his several
actions being hardened.

The act of Pharaohs heart was not the act of God, not in its several
thoughts, See Theologa Germanica, he says, that sin is a great torment to God,
that he wouldwillingly endure corporal death that it might be extinguish ed.
pa 87.
purposes and inclinations; did God think as Pharaoh thought, and were Gods
purposes and Pharaohs both one and the same, and was the Almighty inclined and
resolved to make war with himself, as Pharaoh was? and did God lay that
punishment, and these seven grievous plagues upon himself, and upon his own
Spirit, which he laid upon Pharaoh and all Egypt? and was God sensible, or did
he feel that grief, pain, and torment which he felt, or that, that our spirits
feels often in many conditions of sickness, fears, sorrows, passions, and
extremities, that we know to be true; now all things cannot be the act of God.

Again, when God requires and commands me to yield obedience to him, to repent,
and believe the Gospel, and to forsake my self, and this world; to look up to
him for salvation; to prepare for death, affliction and judgment; who does he
speak to, to himself all this while?

Again, God does not rule all things in all respects; there are many rulers
under and besides God; the Devil is a ruler, a governor, and there are many
rulers under the devil. Again, man is a Ruler, and there are many Rulers under
man; The Pope is a great Ruler, and he holds up his kingdom for the Devil:
Antichrist among the Familists is a mighty Ruler, a subtle politic one, he
rules by the power of the Devil, by all his doctrines, miracles, and lying
wonders: Revel. 13.13. but he is not grown so great yet. Again, there are many
Rulers under men; the King under an Emperor, and many Rulers under a King;
some are Christians, some Heathens: God does not rule all things, nor act all
things.

When a man resolves to kill or rob such a person, and all his thoughts run
upon it, and he cannot rest until it be done; when he does it, is this the act
of God? If this were true, there could be no order nor government in the world.
Theol. Germ. pa. 80.
If a man should come, and before thou art aware should knock out thy brains,
would you, if you should return to life again, thank him for his pains,
desiring him that he would do so again; telling him it was not his act but
Gods? Thou may say this, but who will believe thee, Germ. p. 8. Germanica,
Chap. 29.
and what truth is there in all this? sometimes thou say that God is not
active, but now he acts all things.

CHAP. IIII. The third Error, which is, that nothing shall remain eternally
but the essence, life, or Spirit of God, which is now in all creatures: The
contrary is proved both by Scripture and Reason. And three Errors more
nominated, but handled in order. Hebr. 1.10, 11, 12. Psalm. 102.25.
I Shall open this Error thus: the bodies of men shall turn to dust, or to
what it was before; if it was nothing, it shall turn to nothing. But they say,
that it was hid potentially in God, and so it shall return into silence with
God again. There is no created thing whatsoever shall continue; if Angels were
created within those six days in which God did make and finish his work, they
also shall perish, and come to nothing; but those spirits that we call good and
evil Angels, they call good or evil motions of man's mind.

The Confutation.

I do not know any truth that is either expressed or employed in this Error,
either according to Scripture or Reason; if there were I should be willing to
plead and contend for it. I shall include three Doctrines or Errors in this
one, and set them down in order, and so open and discover them to you; The 4.
Error is this.

That the Scriptures are a confused Allegory, a mere shadow, a false history,
and ought not to be any man's foundation no more then any other book, or the
Apocrypha.

Fifthly, they deny the coming, dying, Resurrection, Ascension, and
Intercession of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Sixthly, that all Ordinances are but meat for babes; that a man should live
above them without the use of them. Now the first of these which includes the
rest, I shall prove is against the Scriptures, and against Reason too.

I shall divide the third Doctrine into two branches; first, if nothing but the
Godhead shall remain or continue to eternity; then it is plain, that the
Godhead or essence is in every creature. Secondly, that nothing but God shall
continue to eternity; this first branch of. this mystical Antichristianisme, I
have already opposed, by such plain Scriptures and Reasons, as none that have
any desire to acknowledge the truth can willingly deny: yet because I desire to
make sure work as I go, for the profit and comfort of all those who do in truth
love and acknowledge the Lord Jesus; I shall bruise the first head with the
whole Error also by these positive conclusions.

First, that the present universal frame and state of all things in this world
shall not remain to eternity; here is two things to be inquired into, and they
are these. First, what is the present estate or universal frame of all things
in this world. Secondly, how shall it be proved that this world shall not
continue in the nature, being, and course of it by the multiplications of ages
to all eternity. I le discover the present estate of this world under these
several considerations.

First, this world in respect of the universal composall of all things, is
ordained and created for to continue for a set time, and not to be eternal in
its generation: Jam. 5.7. 2 Pet. 3.13. Ephesians. 6. 1 Pet. 1.24. Isa. 65.17.66.22.
Revel. 21.1. This world has had many alterations and changes in it since the
creation; we know it to be true both by Scripture, Revelation, and Reason too:
all these have and do still declare unto us, the mortality, mutability, and
insufficiency of this world. Matthew. 24.34. Genesis 7.1. Joh. 2.15. Job 5.17. Isa.
40.6. Jam. 1.10. The glory of this world in all things has been one and the
same for the matter and manner to all persons in all ages; it is not an
increasing glory, it has no new thing to show us; it has no after depth of
sweetness to empty or power forth in to our bosoms, in any other respect, or
any more then what it has already discovered unto our Fathers.

Secondly, God has promised, that out of the ruin, and by the destruction of
this old world, he will raise up a new one, a world that shall be full of
glory; a new creation that shall be full of righteou^nesse and peace, in
another manner then ever it has been in this world. Rev. 21.17. 1 Pet. 3.10,
11. Isa. 30.20. and 66.9.

Thirdly, the whole world at this present lies under a bondage of corruption;
and is altogether subject to vanity. Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher,
all is vanity. Eccles. 1.2. The greatest glory of this world is nothing else
but an earthly vanity, Again, it is not only vanity, but its also subject to
it: Romans 8.20.

Fourthly, the constant waiting and present desire of this creation, is for a
Revelation and discovery of a Christians glory, which will be to them also a
day of joy and freedom from all corruption and vanity: Romans 8.14.21. The day
when the King comes to his Crown is a day of liberty and freedom to poor
prisoners and captives; the glory of God shall be so stamped in a higher,
sublime, divine degree then ever, upon the subjects of that kingdom; that it
shall be a great comfort and refreshment to all creatures, I mean to all that
are ordained, to all those to whom God has promised it.

Lastly, the present condition of this creation, is a poor, dying, consuming
condition: Job 15.15. Revel. 16.15. Chap. 1.7. Dan. 7.13. Jam. 5.1. Matthew. 6.
last. Care not for the morrow, for the morrow shall care for it self, the day
has enough with his own grief; this we all know by our experiences, unless we
will deny that that is as plainly to be understood as that the Sun is in the
firmament.

CHAP. V. Antichrist described, and confuted in his fourth Error, which is,
that the Bible is a mere shadow, a false History, a confused lying Allegory,
being of no more Authority, then any either book, or the Apocrypha. The
Scriptures are proved and vindicated from these Familisticall blasphemous
reproaches and aspe^sions cast upon it by the lying spirit of Antichrist.
COnfider of the truth and sufficiency of the Scriptures, by these following
confiderations.

First, if the truth of God were such a thing, as that it might be understood,
and spiritually apprehended by flesh and blood, by humane reason, which is not
Divine but below God; then is it possible for darkness to comprehend light,
and to be united too and made one therewith. But the first is impossible, and
therefore the last: for St Paul says, that there is no fellowship between light
and darkness, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. between righteousness and unrighteousnes,
Christ and Belial: now if there be no fellowship, communion and agreement
between God and the Devil, Christ and Antichrist, sin and grace, how is it
possible for flesh and blood to know or understand the mind of the Spirit? And
although many say, that all things are gathered up into one fullness, as the
rivers by returning are gathered into the Sea; yet the contrary is daily made
manifest to us, by those direct oppositions which we see between the hearts of
men, and betwixt their lives too, there is no truth in this, namely, that the
infiniteness of God gathers up all creatures into it self, as the Sea gathers
up all Rivers: and I prove it thus. First, when the Rivers by returns are
swallowed up in to the Sea, they are made one with it; whilst they were, they
might be distinguished; but now they are not as they were, all distinctions are
annihilated; every river by running into the Sea is made one ocean, and one
water together with it. For if it were possible for a man that knows all things
to look upon the Sea, and in that to see and know what the waters were; if he
could distinguish between the waters in the Sea, which ever has been the Sea
originally, and those waters which are Sea, by being in the Sea, and of the
same element, but before were Rivers, he would acknowledge that all creatures
are not thus gathered up into, and made one with God; for then all creatures by
being gathered up by one fullness, in to one which is God, then should all
creatures by being thus gathered become one fullness with God.

Secondly, there is no truth in this, because there is no truth neither in
grace nor nature that will or can uphold this, (for) all Rivers that are
swallowed up by the fullness of the Sea, were, before they were thus gathered,
one element together with it. But all creatures are not of one and the same
nature, or divine spiritual substance, together with God; therefore its
impossible that ever all creatures should thus be gathered up in too, and by
being thus gathered should become one fullness with God. If this were true,
then, as some affirm, every thing were the word of God, and so the knowledge of
every thing, and of any thing whatsoever, were the only knowledge of the Word
of God. St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 2. that no man knows the things of a man, but
the spirit that is within him: so no man knows the things of God, but the
Spirit of God. It is impossible for that light that is below God, to know that
light which is God. No man can know the light of the Sun by the light of a
candle; the light of Reason is but Moon or candle light, it is too dark, weak,
and waterish to discover the light of the Sun by it; nothing below God can
discover any thing of God: but all creatures in all respects, consider them as
creatures, are below God; considering of God in reference to himself:
therefore all creatures cannot discover God, nor thus be made one with him.

Again, whatsoever is infinite, to that nothing can be added: but God was the
same fulness before the creature was, that he is, now the creature is, therefore
no creature, nor all creatures can not be so gathered up in to God, as to be
made one fullness with God, who is not, nor cannot be no other now, now all
creatures are, then he was eternally, before any creature had a being.

Secondly, if a carnal spirit could understand the mind of God in the Word,
then could it no longer continue to be a Christians center; that that flows
from Christ, to that Christ must be a center. But all Christianity flows from
Christ, therefore it must needs be centered in him.

Now if the written Word could be known in the letter, and in the spirit, by
one who has not the spirit, then darkness would be turned into light, and
light into darkness; the Word of God would then be not heavenly but earthly:
But as nothing can change the being of God into that which is not God, Romans 1.
though many seek to do it; So nothing can change the Word of truth into that
that is not truth, that is, into a lie, this the power of men and devils shall
never accomplish. If the Word of truth in the letter, and in the spirit, could
be discerned by a lie, then consider what a great loss all the people of God
would then have, and that for these Reasons.

First, the Word of God is the foundation that a Christian has or ever shall
have to all eternity: 1 Pet. 2.7. 1 Cor. 3.11. Christ is a Christians
foundation in these four respects. First, the foundation of our election, this
the letter declares; and as that declares it, so we know it, and are able to
prove it. Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6. A Christian was chosen and beloved of God, in Jesus
Christ from eternity, Christ is the Word, Joh. 1. the Word bears up all things,
Hebr. 1. A Christians election is born up, and kept from being abolished, by
the glorious person of our Lord and Savior.

Secondly, Jesus Christ is the foundation of our Redemption too: 1 Pet. 2. Joh.
10.9.18. He was the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, and he is
that person also, consider of him in his Godhead, that ordained, and set apart
himself to be a sacrifice and an atonement for the world.

Thirdly, Christ is the foundation of a Christians conversion also. Ephesians.
3.17. 1 Cor. 8.6.

Lastly, Christ is the foundation of a Christians everlasting glory. Romans 8.34.
Joh. 17. Persuade me if you can whosoever you are, that would race and blot out
the Gospel of Christ both in the letter, and spirit, that I have no other
Father, Redeemer, Governor, and Creator, then that spirit which is within thee,
which thou did receive in the womb; and then I shall believe this that you
have said concerning the Scripture: therefore to consider you as you in truth
are, the more you speak against the Word of God, the more cause I have to
believe it, for the devil will never speak well of Christ, unless it be for
some devilish end or other. Gal. 5.17. Thirdly, no man ever would write such a
word that is so much against him, and altogether contrary to him, as the two
testimonies of our Lord Jesus are, for then man would make a law against
himself, which is against all Law and Reason. Who is the man that will accuse
himself, and betray himself to death through his own accusation; man instead of
making spiritual Laws, is the only breaker of them, Romans 2.13. and 3.10, 11.
Does not our daily practices continually declare the truth of this unto us? But
some will object, that I do all this while prove the Word to be true from it
self, which is a contrary thing, and gives no satisfaction at all. To this I
answer. That I do thus I acknowledge, and that for this Reason: Because I have
no other way to prove the truth, that it is true, but by the truth. No man can
know the Sun that is the Sun, but by the light thereof. Secondly, the
testimony of the Word is of it self a sufficient testimony for it self: 1 John
5. There are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, Word, and Spirit,
and these three are one: they are one God, one Spirit, one Truth, and one
Testimony. The Lord says, that there is no other God besides me, Isa. 45.6.
Now by the same rule men may say, how shall we know thee to be the true God, we
have no witness or testimony but thy own. I answer. The record and testimony
which God bears of himself is true, and sufficient, because he does not only
say that he is God, and so leave men there, but he acts according to his Word,
sending forth an Almighty power, causing men to acknowledge him, to be in truth
that he is, and causing all creatures to discover and reveal his power and
Godhead to the world. A man may say that he is God, as many do, but they cannot
prove what they say; for their saying that they are so, does not cause them to
be so, unless they could come forth with an infinite Almighty power to act as
God does.

Thirdly, Whatsoever is besides the Word in comparison of the Word is not a
truth but a lie, and then what is it besides the truth that can come in, really
to justify and bear record to the truth.
the testimony of the truth is a sufficient witness for it self, because there
is no other truth besides it. The Word in the Spirit bears witness to the
truth of the Word in the letter; and the truth of the letter bears witness to
it self in the spirit: the letter in it self is dead, but the Spirit of that
truth which is in the letter, quickneth and gives life: The bare letter is but
a History, or a Relation, yet it is a true relation. For the Apostle says,
that no lie is of the truth, there is no lie in the truth, consider it either
in the letter, or in the spirit. We know that there are many lies cast upon the
truth by him who is the father of lies; but consider of truth in it self, and
no lie can be any part thereof: for the Word does imply this, it could not be
thus denominated, if its nature were not according to its name. The term light,
signifies the nature of light; so the Name of God, signifies the nature of God;
so the word truth signifies the nature of it: the name of truth is truth, and
so is the nature of it too.

Now consider that nothing is so contrary to the inward nature and internal
disposition of man as the Gospel of Jesus Christ is: the Word of God is
contrary to all the principles of folly that are in the hearts of men. Psalm.
14.1, 2, 3. The fool has said in his heart there is no God: this was a secret
spiritual wickedness that lay lurking in his heart, he was a cunning fool, he
thought in his heart as the Familists do, that that he would not often confess
with his tongue, and although he loved this Atheistical religion well, yet he
was not very willing to suffer for it. The conclusion that I shall draw from
this first verse is this; that the wisest man in the world is a mere fool
until he be a Saint, until he leaves the wisdom of the world, and those
politic logical doctrines which that wisdom teaches, and be filled with the
wisdom of God. So St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 2.13. that the doctrines and words of
man's wisdom makes the cross of Christ of no effect. Chap. 1.17. The word of
God, the doctrine of a crucified Jesus is mere foolishness to them, it is too
holy, too plain and simple for them to deal with; if they should teach the
truth as it is in Jesus, and not mix their own words and corrupt imaginations
therewith; if they would declare the whole truth, and keep back no part of Gods
counsel; what then, why then their perfection must fall down to the ground.
Therefore you see how contrary the Word of God is, to all the principles of
men's hearts, and contrary to all their practices too. What will not, what does
not many men do, who are taken to be great Preachers of Christ, I say, what
will they not do, to exalt Babel, to prefer their own bellies and outward
estates, before the Word of God, they take it up in their Sermons, in the sight
of the people, but lay it aside in their lives and conversations.

Fourthly, no man could ever parallel any other book or writing to this Word of
God; but in all ages, for all sorts of persons, it has been, in one respect or
other, the foundation of all Writings, Councils, and Disputations: whatsoever
is or has been under heaven concerning Religion, there is but one truth, as
there is but one God, which in the power and spirit of it is God. Joh. 1.1.
Chap. 5.32.

Fifthly, the Scripture is written for this end, that it may be an occasion of
offense, and a stone of stumbling both to the Jews and Grecians, and by this
means their eternal destruction; and to others a savor of life to eternal
life. 1 Cor. 1.23, 24, 25. 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. Isa. 8.14. Joh. 3.14. There is no
writing that ever has been besides this, that has been accompanied with such
life and power, by which it has raised up, and cast down, saved, and
destroyed, as this Word of God has: No word has been such a discovery of the
mind of the invisible immortal God unto men, as this Word of God has. Joh.
1.18.

Again, what writing has discovered the nature and condition that all men by
nature are in, unto men in such a manner as the Word of God has: Romans 7.7.
which proves, that it was written by that Spirit that knows all hearts, and all
things: 1 Cor. 2.10, 11, 12. Reason it self tells us, that it is impossible for
any power to change the carnal, stony, lofty spirit of man, but that power
that is above all things, and can do all things. See Matthew. 12.17, 18, 19, 20.
Christ by doing that which the Scriptures do declare to us, did open that
sealed book, which none would undertake, but the Lamb slain from the beginning
of the world. Revel. 5.3, 4, 5, 6. Isa. 42.1. The Apostle says, that the Word
of God is lively, and mighty in operation, sharper then any two edged sword,
and enters through, even to the dividing asunder of the soul, and the spirit,
and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. Hebr. 4.12. Some
do object, and ask what is here meant by this clause, soul and spirit, being
that they are both taken for one and the same in Scripture. Luke 1.46, 47. Mary
says, My soul magnifieth the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior.
To this I answer.

There are two interpretations upon this Scripture: the first is, that the soul
of a man is not the spirit of him, but it is his body in which his spirit is,
and from which it is divided. And to prove this, there are these Scriptures:
David speaking of Christ says, that his heart did rejoice, and his flesh did
rest in hope, because thou will not leave my soul in the grave. Now how can
this be, say they, that the soul of Christ should be left there where it never
was, if it be not the body it implies that it was there, and if so then it must
needs be mortal. Act. 2.26, 27. Psalm. 16.9, 10. Genesis 3.20.

A second interpretation is, that by soul is meant the heart and spirit of a
carnal man; and by spirit is meant one that is regenerate: To which they bring
this Scripture, 1 These. 5.23. Now take it which way you will, this must be
granted, that the Bible is the Word of God, because these arguments are drawn
from it; and if there be any truth in either or both of them, then is the
Scripture that declares them a truth also.

The Word of God is powerful in two respects: first, it is powerful in it
self, and so it is the fullness or God. Secondly, it is powerful in all its
operations in respect of it self, it is infinite, the operations and workings
of it is mighty, as it is in the creature; look upon the hearts and lives of
those that have been ungodly, and abominable, see what a change there is, all
this does declare the truth of the Word. O what a fin it is for you that have
been such, and have been changed by the Word, so to fall away from God, as to
deny his Word: Just as if I should deal by a man that had often ventured his
life to save mine, and to requite his love, I should adventure my life
unjustly, and without cause, to take away his. The life of a friend ought to be
very dear unto me, but the truth of God more dearer. The Word of God is the
life and glory of the Lord Jesus, the cause of life in every Christian is the
life that is in Jesus Christ; because I live, says our Savior, ye shall live
also: then how grievous and lamentable a thing is it for a man that knows this
life to crucify and make a mock of it, the secret thoughts and intents of all
hearts are discerned, and made manifest by the Word of God: Matthew. 12.25. Saint
Paul says, that the whole Scripture is given by the inspiration of God. 2 Timothy
3.16. this is expounded by St. Peter, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21. where he says, that no
prophecy of Scripture is of any private interpretation, that is, it is not the
writings of men, consider them as men, the Prophets and Apostles that writ the
Scriptures, did not write down their own private meditations; for the prophecy
came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the holy Spirit, that is, they spoke by the inspiration of God, by a
Spirit that was infallible, and could not lie. Tit. 1.2. But some may say, that
though they were infallible in writing, yet they were no more then you are, for
you say that you are infallible also. Answ. First, so far as I cleave close to
this truth, and do not derogate in the least, so far I am infallible.

Object. But how do you know when you write such and such truths, that you do
not in the least measure add to, nor diminish from the Word of God?

Ans. When I write from such as need no interpretation I am then infallible.
And that there are such Scriptures, I prove, 3 Job. 16.17.27.31. Hebr. 2.14. 1 John 4.1, 2, 3, 4. 1 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. so on. This is a truth that I write,
and an infallible one, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, it is Christ
that is dead, yea or rather that is risen again, who fitteth at the right hand
of God, and makes request for us, Romans 8. Another is, that there is but one
God, but one eternity, and not two. Isa. 64.4. Again, that every man shall be
raised up with his own body: 1 Cor. 15.38. Matthew. 25.32. to receive a reward
according to his works. Revel. 22. That perfection of spirit and body cannot be
obtained in this life: Romans 7. 1 Cor. 13.15. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. with many others of
the like nature. Now when I write this, and say that I am infallible, it is not
my word, nor another particular infallable truth besides the Scripture, but I
write the same truth which was written by the inspiration of God: I know that I
write infallibly, because I write the infallible truth; and I know the
infallible truth by the light of that Word that I write from both, in the
letter, and in the Spirit. I know there are many nice curious questions abroad,
which are not worth the answering, because they do not tend to edifying; for if
a man, as St. Paul says, 1 Timothy 1. would give heed to them, they would be
endless, and to no purpose, but to stir men up to contention, and vain
jangling.

Sixthly, there is no book whatsoever that is so full of truth, and so free
from error and contradiction within it self, as this Word of God is, although
the eye of sense and reason cannot see it: Joh. 17.17. 1 Cor. 2.13. All the
writings of men are subordinate to this, and all the truth that is in all
creatures did flow from this, and is a dependence upon this. Now I prove this
by these arguments: that that is a divine truth, cannot contradict itself, for
then God would be divided, and light would be at enmity with it self: but the
Scripture was written by a divine Spirit, and so must needs be a spiritual
truth, and therefore free from all opposition and error within it self.
Secondly, that that by one Almighty power, causes all to be holy and
spiritual, that in it self must needs be so; for it is impossible but that the
stream should be according to the fountain, and every effect according to its
original: But the Word of God when it changes the heart, causes all the
parts of it so far as it works to be holy and spiritual; therefore in it self
it can be no other then according to its workings. The Word of God is the
original cause and fountain of all holiness: Joh. 15.3. Ephesians. 1.13. Col.
1.5. Jam. 1.18. all that infinite holiness and purity which are in, and flow
from, men and Angels, are but as so many streams flowing from this fountain.

A seventh reason to prove the truth and sufficiency of the Scriptures is this:
because no word has enabled poor simple illiterate men to understand the
mind of God, and to suffer reproaches and persecutions in the defense thereof,
as this Word of God has. Ephesians. 6.17. Joh. 17.33. 2 Cor. 6.7. He'r 11. whole
Chapter. The letter only cannot do it, the letter is no help to the Spirit,
for the Spirit is the same truth that is revealed in the letter, and was before
it, and now is no more then it was; for the letter does not add to the Spirit,
but is only a relation which is absolutely useful to man, and without which
nothing can be; But the Word in the Spirit is the same truth which will remain
when the letter shall be abolished. Many times when men could not enjoy the
Bible, they have been enabled by the powerful enjoyment of the Word in the
spirit to suffer in the defense of the Word.

Last of all, they that do deny the Word, yet notwithstanding do make the
Scriptures to be the ground of all their Sermons and writings: now if their
Sermons and writings have any truth in them, and they draw that truth from the
Word, then the word must be a truth also; for it is as impossible for them to
draw a truth from the Word, if the Word were not the truth, as it is for any
man to draw a real substance from that which is but a mere shadow. The mad
man's divinity is called the mystery of the History, yet he will not acknowledge
that to be a truth, all his writing will sufficiently prove that there is
little of the Word of God to be seen in it, being nothing else but a compounded
confusion of Logic, Philosophy, and Astrology altogether, which in truth is no
better then Familisticall Atheism: and although they father these confused
heresies upon the Word, yet the Word of God does remain entirely pure in it
self without mixture, and so will continue for ever.

CHAP. VI. Proving the Coming, Death, Resurrection. Ascension and Intersession
of our Lord Jesus, which is absolutely denied by all the principal writings
and Doctrines of the Familists.
NOw comes in that matter, which I left, in its proper place, I shall prove and
discover this truth concerning a particular Jesus by these four lights; by the
light of the Word, of the Spirit, of Reason, and experience. See thee Bright
Starr, where he has this expression, But now to untie this knot, we are to
transcend all Reason, and fly to faith, which seeing him man, stands
invincible, that he is God without all f^rm and image whatsoever, and though
Imagination iniect the form man, yet faith (disdaining all sense) considers no
form, fastening her eye on God: so that, though an Idea of Jesus Christ
crucified present it self to us, yet the oce^n of faith drowns and annihilates
the same. page 188, and 189. now what manner of Christ and passion does this
acknowledge.
First by the Word and Spirit: consider of the coming of Christ under a double
notion; his coming in the flesh, his coming in the Spirit: his coming in the
flesh was to be with us, and to suffer for us, yet so as to be without us.
Matthew. 20.28. Chap. 26.74. the 11.5. Isa. 42.1. Joh. 2.24, 25. Chap. 9.55.
Revel. 5.3. but his coming in the Spirit is, not only to be with us, but to be
within us too: 1 John 5.10. Joh. 17.23. Chap. 12.41. God laid our chastisements
and griefs upon him, 1 Pet. 2.24. Isa. 53.5.9. God did this out of love to
Christ, and to the world; neither Jesus Christ nor a Christian should ever have
been so exalted and glorified in such a measure and manner as they are, had not
Christ suffered in the flesh: Phil. 2.9. Romans 3.9.29.

Jesus Christ did lay down, and nail to his Cross, all that glory which he had
in the flesh, and under the Law, together with all the glory which he formerly
in the time of the Law in all his appearances, gave to the Fathers, and then
raised up the same again in a greater, brighter, livelier manner then ever it
was in the world before. 2 Cor. 3.7, 8. That, that was the greatest glory of
God in Sion before Christ, is now by his coming and dying turned into the
greatest obscurity and darkness, as God did by Lazarus, in taking away his
life, that it might be restored again to him; which thing should be a wonder,
and a miracle to all that should hear it: God took away the life of Christ, and
all the glory that did depend thereon, that so in an unknown, miraculous way,
he might give a better and a higher degree of life and glory both to him, and
to all his, to the admiration of all things both in heaven and earth, then ever
they had before; Ephesians. 2.15, 16, 17, 18. Col. 2.14, 15. Romans 9.4. Chap.
2.17.28.

Secondly, to prove it by the light of Reason and experience, if Christ be not
dead, yea or rather is risen again: Romans 8.34. I say, if he have not died for
sin, then shall we never die to sin, but be for ever dead toward God, and our
Lord Jesus. Romans 6.1, 2, 3, 4.

Secondly, if there be no death of Christ, then there cannot be any
resurrection of life either to himself, or to any creature. Joh. 11.43.

The sixth Error I will now take in viz. that there is no resurrection nor
last judgment for the world.

Thirdly, if there be no death, no life, or resurrection at all, then is there
no God at all, there is none of these but in this way; he that denies one,
denies all; he that denies the Son who is begotten, denies the Father who does
beget, 1 John 1.1. and 2.22, 23. Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not
the Father; for the Son in reference to his essence or Godhead is the Father,
Chap. 5.1.20.21.

Fourthly, See the Bright Starr, It may be truly said, that this book and
passion is no other but the gate of heaven, and the house of God: and though in
this passion he made darkness his pavilion, nevertheless as his darkness, so
also his light, page 185. li 9 soon Christ crucified at Jerusalem is imaginar^,
but in man, in one that is deified, there he may be seen really crucified; this
is notable iugling.
he that denies Christ, and has no other way to acknowledge God by that
Reason, that is flatly contrary to his very nature and being; these are two
direct contraries, which cannot be reconciled by all the humane wisdom and
policy in this world. For if there be no other God, nor no other nature,
essence, and Divine motion, then according to their description, then by the
same rule I Will prove that there is no God at all. Again,

Fifthly, if all this were true, then there cannot be any sin in the world; and
if no sin, then no need of a Savior: for God did never make a breach in
himself, nor ever was at enmity with himself, neither is it possible that he
ever should be capable of Redemption.

Sixthly, if this were true, then is all preaching vain, and faith is also
vain, and we are yet in our sins, and all they that are asleep in Christ are
perished. 1 Cor. 15.17, 18.

Seventhly, if this were true, then of all men religions and opinions in the
world, we who have no other life and glory, no other God or salvation but what
our hope reaches forth unto, we should of all men be the most miserable, ver.
19. But here is our comfort, and everlasting joy, ver. 20. that since by man
came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead.

Some men would persuade us that bread is stones, and stones bread; and why,
but because they conceit it to be so; but if they had no other bread or meat
then stones to eat for a month together, I believe they would be of another
mind, and would find as well in the things of God as men, that a conceit or
imagination does not alter the nature or being of any thing; but because it is
what it is in it self really; therefore it ought to be so known and apprehended
of all men.

Eighthly, if there be no resurrection, nor last judgment for the world, let us
eat and drink for to morrow we shall die; this door is wide enough to let in
all whorish filthiness and profaneness, all sins of all sorts and degrees
whatsoever; its no matter how men live, what they say or do, or how they die,
there is no account to be given for any thing, if you should conceit that all
the goods that I have, or any other man, to be thine, by this reckoning it were
so, so by that means we should be starved, unless thou would have mercy on
us: if this be love, the Lord Jesus keep me, and all his, from being of such a
Family. We bless God for the Civil Magistrate, and the Law; without which we
know not what this world would come to: the Lord prosper these who are, and
have been the makers of it, according to the truth as it is in Jesus.

The resurrection of Christ, and of the dead, See the Bright Starr, That real
suffering which we taste in our selves, presents a far more excellent Image of
the passion of Christ, then that which hovers in imagination alone: and that,
that we feel inwar^ly, then that which is speculated outwardly. page 200.
is such a work as cannot be believed or apprehended by the eye of sense and
reason; and indeed this is one main cause why many men do so peremptorily deny
the truth of the Gospel, and set up their own imaginations in the room
thereof; for when they cannot apprehend all things by the light of Reason, then
they do condemn all things, although never so contrary to all Reason. The
light of Reason that God has set up in the hearts of men, is very useful,
necessary, and commendable; all the while that it keeps it self within its own
compass and center: but when once it begins to make any attempt for the
finding out, apprehending and discerning of that which is not within its reach,
it then comes to be lost and destroyed, a man by this light cannot discern the
things that be of God. 1 Cor. 3.14.

The light of Reason is the wisdom and glory of this world: Isa. 29.14. 1 Cor.
1.20. and the wisdom and glory of this world is darkness and foolishness with
God: 1 Cor. 1.19, 20. A Familist is in this like unto a Papist, who says, that
the Popes unwritten verities are of equal value with the Word of God, so say
they; that the outgoings of Reason in them, are the outgoings of God in his
highest and greatest glory. Now the conclusions of their Reason, are
infallible, theological and heavenly; this is the mystery of Divinity, the
real divine substance, the true light, and the perfect, infinite, and only
good; the Bible is a shadow, a confusion, and a mere lie; and all that ever any
man can say from thence, and all that which they themselves have said formerly
which is contrary to their judgments now, this is so also a real shadow, a
lie, a low light, and vanity.

For how is it possible, say they, that ever there should be any resurrection
either of Christ or the dead? how is it possible that that blood which was
trampled upon, and spilt under the feet of the Jews, should be by the power of
God gathered up again, and put into the body of our Savior. A second objection
is this: How can any man prove the resurrection of the dead, when men are so
scattered and divided by death, sometimes men are drowned, and so become food
to many hundred of creatures that are in the sea, and those are afterward eaten
by men, and those men consumed by creatures again; and so many thousand times
over one creature is devoured by another: now how is it possible that these men
should ever receive the same bodies again that are thus destroyed, and consumed?

These Objections are not worth the answering; yet if I should not speak
something to them in particular, they would say that they were such divine
mysteries, that we could not tell what to say to them: a fool may put forth
such a question, and cause more trouble to come thereby, then seven wise men
that can render a reason.

Now the Resurrection is such a thing, as that it cannot be received by any for
a truth, but such as have the truth thereof made manifest in their spirits, by
the power of that eternal Spirit that raised up the Lord Jesus: 1 Cor. 6.14.
Now that which I have to say is this; O fool, that which thou sowest is not
quickened except it die; and that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body
that shall be; but bare corn as it falls of wheat or some other: but God
gives it a body at his pleasure, to every seed his own body.

If thou will but look upon this world in its creation and generation, thou
may continually in the large book thereof read many excellent stories of the
Resurrection: is not the world in its creation as wonderful in many respects as
it is in its Resurrection? Do thou believe that man was made of the dust of
the earth? consider of the work of God in that respect, and what was the dust
made of; we say of nothing. Thou say that of nothing can come nothing. Then
it must needs be of the essence of God; for nothing is without beginning but
God: that, I think, you will grant. Is God such a being as that any thing can
be made of him? Did God make all things of himself? Is the essence compounded?
the bodies of men and all creatures are. Is it possible for the infinite,
immutable, and unmovable Godhead to be divided? but men are, divided in their
limbs and lives too, yea, divided in all things, in his Spirit, and in most of
the employments and outgoings thereof; what work is it that the heart of man
can undertake to manage in all respects without division? how are the spirits
of some men set at distance from others, by reason of pride, malice, hatred,
and envy? Do not you yourselves sometimes meet with some kind of men that are
of such a spirit as this is, that would be glad to see you stoned, murdered,
and destroyed? And would not they themselves, if it might be suffered, quietly
be your executioners? Now what is the spirits and bodies of these men made of?
is it eternal, without beginning? is it a being of it self, and does it
perform all its actions by its own power? Is this the true God, and is there no
other Gods besides it? If this Spirit be God, then what is that spirit or life
that thou have within thee; that is God too: so then there is but one God which
is one in all creatures. Now if life be one and the same in all creatures in
this sense that now we speak of, then tell me one thing: Is not the tree in the
root and fruit thereof both one and the same? is it possible for a corrupt
fountain at one and the same time to send forth sweet waters and bitter? Does
not the words and works of a man's heart continually declare the frame thereof?
Now how comes it to pass, if God be one and the same in all spirits, that
there is such a vaste difference between them; if they be all one and the same
power, good, life, and glory? how then comes in those mighty differences,
contradictions, and direct oppositions that are amongst them; if every creature
be a branch, or an out-going of divine glory, then is it not possible that it
should in the least measure be contrary to its original; and so there could
not be any of that unhumane cruelty, that unreasonable oppression, those
grievous bloody wars and slaughters, that does produce so many sorrows, and
cause so many spirits to droop, and lie a languishing as do continually: this
is not the bodies of men, for that without the spirit is dead, that does cause
and act all this. When a man's life is gone, all wounds, griefs, and pains are
nothing to him, he feels them not; it is his spirit that makes him sencible,
and active either for the obtaining of joy, or for the avoiding of fear and
torment. If the spirit be God, and the body or outward orgin made of his
essence, how then can all this be, I know no reason that you can have to
maintain any Argument, or to raise up any objection by.

True Reason is able to vindicate it self against it self, when its light is
put out; and against Reason turned into darkness: now when Reason is thus
divided, it is like a man that is distracted; Reason is a servant to man in the
spirit of him. Now there is a power in man that is above Reason, and through
this power Reason many times comes to be captivated and enthralled: Reason in
it self, and about its own affairs, is without contradiction; Now when once it
come to be opposed by the heart of man, so that it cannot any longer rule and
prevail, it leaves its habitation: and when once it comes to be void, of that
which before it took much delight in, and gave continual entertainment to,
then it comes to pass that a man loses himself, and all that glorious
sweetness and consolation that did depend thereon.

When a man has a Counselor to be his guide in all his weighty employments,
so long as he hearkens to him, and is ruled by him, he may flourish and
prosper: But if once he through his own conceit and imagination come to forsake
the light and glory of that Reason by which he was guided, he then comes to be
lost and destroyed. Now the resurrection of the dead, though it be above
reason, and against it, as it is ordered and managed by the hearts of
unreasonable men, yet it has more reason of its side then it has against it:
for whatsoever is a truth in the light of grace, is not a lie in the light of
reason; for grace in its original gives being to reason, and it does not give
being to it for this purpose, that by its light and strength it shall darken
and put out the glory of the Lord Jesus. For then that Proverb would be true
which is common among us, That we have nourished and brought up a child to
pluck out our own eyes.

Now consider, that the resurrection of Christ, is the cause why the dead are
raised, 1 Corinthians. 15. and if Christ be not risen, then the dead shall never be
raised: But now is Christ risen, and become the first fruits of them that
slept; See the Bright Starr, pa. 198. where he says, that Jesus Christ is
within us, it follows where he is to be adored in our selves, and it is more
excellent to see him crucified in our selves, then at Jerusalem* Their own
thoughts and writings is all the Scripture they have to prove this by, I am
certain they can have none out of the Bible.
there was never such a resurrection as the resurrection of our Savior was;
many were raised up again, but not to life for ever, to live and return to the
grave again. But Jesus Christ was more glorious in his resurrection, he was
raised by that power by which he suffered, to inherit such a crown of glory as
never none did before, nor ever shall receive for ever, Phil. 2.9, 10. Joh.
17.4, 5.11.13. I will further prove the resurrection of Christ, by the
Scripture, by the light of the Spirit within me: and thirdly, by the continual
sufferings and heavy persecutions of the Saints without me in all ages. 1 Cor.
15.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. what mystery is there in these expressions, are not these
sufficient witnesses, and of more authority then vain imaginations?

This is one of the Articles of my faith, to believe that the Bible is the Word
of God, and is of more Authority then all words and writings whatsoever. Can
you disprove me and persuade me to believe, thy excellent, new-invented,
devilified, Angelical maxims? is not every one of your words unchangeable,
mystical divinity? And are not all your thoughts and conclusions from thence
wonderful and miraculous? is there any other Divinity besides this? Joh.
20.19. Act. 9.4. Ephesians. 3.8. Joh. 15.26, 27. Chap. 21.19. Act. 2.31, 32. Psalm.
16.10. If there were not, both I and many thousands of Gods people must needs
be in a sad and lamentable condition.

Secondly, I^le prove it by the witness and tesimony of Gods Spirit within me.
First of all, it is neither the devil, my own heart, nor all the powers of this
world, that has made such an unexpressible alteration in my heart and
conversation as is made by the knowledge of my Saviors resurrection: all sorts
and degrees of sins would be the continual delight and practice of my spirit,
were it not for the Almighty power of the Spirit working in me through the death
and resurrection of the Lord Jesus. Romans 6. from the 2 verse. to the 10. Gal.
3.27. Col. 2.12, 13.

What is the sin that by nature I do not love and delight, all covetousness,
pride, dissimulation, whoredom, lying, and cursed speaking, backbiting,
cheating, blaspheming, unthankful, Atheistical, disobedient, and unfruitful
both toward God, and toward all men. Col. 3.6, 7, 8. Ephesians. 5.3, 4, 5. Chap.
4.25, 26. so to the end. Chap. 2.1, 2, 3, 12, 13. and I am, and would willingly
if I might have my own will, turn the truth of God into a lie, set up, and bow
down to my own vain imaginations, exalting and lifting up this above God,
Christ, and the Scripture; not regarding the knowledge of God, but continually
mock hate, and scoff at the Spirit, undervaluing God and the Lord Jesus; and
if it were possible would bring him down into subjection under my will: Romans
11. from the 25. to the last. Can you disprove me in what I say? is this a lie,
that I know to be true by experience? Now if this be such a truth as none can
deny, then what is it that has subdued and changed my spirit, I have nothing
to rejoice in but this; It is Christ that is dead, yea or rather is risen
again; who sits at the right hand of God, and makes intercession for us.
Romans 8. Consider these truths, and believe that it is truth, because of those
witnesses that will come in to justify the certainty thereof: The first truth
is this.

The Cross of Jesus Christ has humbled, renewed, and brought down to the
earth the stoutest, and proudest loftiest spirit that ever has been in this
world: them that have been forward for the devil, them that have been
resolute, that would venture life and all for Antichrist; even them God has
changed, and of these that never men had any hope of, has God taken and made
the greatest instruments of his glory. Did ever any man's fins exceed the sins
of Manasseh? and was ever any man more forwarder in wasting and persecuting the
Church of God then Paul was? was he not a true and trusty servant to the
Devil? Gal. 1.13, 14. Act. 9.1. And what manner of men are those that God is
pleased to call in all ages? Now what is it that makes a change, but the power
of the Cross of our Lord and Savior? Romans 6. Gal. 1.16, 17. Ephesians. 3.7, 8.
Hebr. 2.14. and 12.1, 2. 1 Cor. 6.20. 2 Timothy 2.12, 13.

Secondly, the greatest degree of light and glory that ever rose or sprung up
in the hearts of men in this world, was produced by, and only issued forth,
out of the glorious Cross of our Lord Jesus. Hebr. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13. Psalm.
2.7. Matthew. 9. 1 Timothy 1.15. Mark 11.8, 9, 10. Luke 1.46, 47. verse 41.44. 1
Cor. 3.7, 8, 9.10, 11, 13. Ephesians. 3.18, 16. 1 Cor. 2.9. Isa. 64.4. Jeb. 16.22.

Thirdly, the greatest battle that was ever fought, and the greatest conquest
that was ever won over the devil, See the Bright Starr, he that cleaves to this
man, cleaves to God, so he that embraces this passion, injoyes the highest
good. page 242. That God and the Cross are both one in man. page 244. li 17*
That to approach the infinite being of God, the creature is not to be stuck at
as any thing, but is lost in this boundless ocean, and thus you see how God is
all things, and that nothing is but he. page 19.
and the powers of Antichrist, was by the death and resurrection of the Lord
Jesus. Revel. 12.7, 8, 9. there is a description, and a true revelation of the
batteil fought between the devil and Jesus Christ: this opposition of the devil
and Antichrist, was the greatest that ever lay in the way betwixt Christ and
the Cross: Col. 2.14. Ephesians. 2.15.

There was two Gods that met at the Cross of the Lord Jesus, the God of
heaven, and the god of this world; the battle was begun as soon as ever the
promise was made: Genesis 3. and the devil many times grew so strong in force and
power, that many times to the eye of man, there could be little or no
appearance of the glory of God, which in every respect was but darkness, to
that glory which God revealed by the coming of Christ in the flesh, at which
time the devil made full account to conquer; the devil then drew all his forces
together, and never made such a bold attempt in any age upon any person, as he
did at that time upon the person of Jesus Christ: and had he but found any
thing at all in the least measure in Jesus Christ, that so he might have had an
opportunity, and have found some footing for his temptation, he then had
overthrown him, and God for ever. Matthew. 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. so to the 10.

Last of all, I prove the resurrection of Christ, by the suffering torments,
and hard usage that the Saints have ever had, and still have, for acknowledging
and contending for a crucified Jesus, and the resurrection. Act. 4.7. and 5.17,
18. The Sadduces were as great mockers and haters of the Apostles as the high
Priests were, yet they were contrary in judgment, Matthew. 22.23. Act. 23.6.
Chap. 21.31. and 17.32. The Sadduces and the Familists are alike in these three
respects.

In denying the Resurrection, in holding forth but one Spirit, and in mocking
and jeering at the Apostles for preaching of Christ. In this respect I prove
this by two or three Scriptures, Luke 20.27. Act. 23.8. Chap. 17.32.

Fourthly, it is a truth that Christ ascended with the same body in which he
suffered; I Will prove it by Scripture and Reason. Act. 1.9. Luke 24.51. Mark
16.19. 1 Pet. 3.21, 22. Job. 14.3. Ephesians. 4.8. You say, that nothing ascended
but what first descended. To which I answer.

That the humane nature of our Lord Jesus in many respects never descended from
God out of heaven no otherwise then the whole Creation did; yet there is an
unexpressible difference between the creation of Christ and the world.

Secondly, the humanity of Christ did not at all descend from heaven in
reference to it self, but in respect of its original; and so in some respects
the whole Creation descended, for God in the Creation did descend down into a
low disguised appearance, in the form and appearance of every creature, and
the outward form of every creature is a real appearance of God. But more of
this anon. Now I Will prove that Christ in reference to his conception and
creation, never descended before he ascended, in reference to his Godhead, as I
said before: he descended, and made forth a continual manifestation of himself
unto the world. Joh. 1.10. He was in the world, and the world was made by him:
Heb. 11.3. Now the Reasons why Christ never descended, in that respect before
named, are these.

First, there was nothing in heaven before all things but that being that is
eternal, without beginning; but the humanity of Christ was not in reference to
it self eternal, without beginning, and without end: Ergo, not in heaven. For
nothing can descend from heaven that has not in every respect a real being in
heaven; Now in this respect Christ had not, and therefore he cannot.

Secondly, Christ ascended that he might be clothed with that glory which
before he had not; but the Divinity is an infinite glory, and therefore it
could not ascend up to that, that it was it self from all eternity.

Thirdly, the essence is infinite in power, at all times filling all places
with its presence. Now to say that the Divinity ascended, is to speak a
contradiction, and plain nonsense: for what should it ascend to, to it self? it
is always one and the same glory, and always alike in reference to it self in
all places. Therefore if they hold no other Ascension then this, they hold none
at all, as in truth they do not.

Fourthly, Jesus Christ ascended up on high, that he might fill his humanity,
and all things else both in heaven and earth, full of glory. Now further to
prove the falsehood of this Doctrine, namely, that nothing ascended but what
first descended, consider this: the infinite glory of God was never increased
but only manifested, by the resurrection and ascension of Jesus Christ. Christ
ascended, not that he might fill his Godhead full of glory, for that is
infinite, but all things else that were ordained, and prepared for glory from
all eternity in our Lord Jesus. Even for this Jesus Christ ascended up on high,
that he might fill all things full of glory by the manifestation thereof, who
were ordained to have a share in his death and resurrection: Ephesians. 4.10. and
2.10. Joh. 16.7. 1 Timothy 3. last. Joh. 17.1. Act. 1.8, 9, 10, 11. The joy and
glory of Christ and a Christian does depend upon the resurrection: 1 Cor.
15.17. The Spirit had never descended into the heart of a Christian, if Christ
had not ascended into glory.

Last of all, concerning the intercession of Christ, wherein consider: that the
purpose of God from eternity to bestow Christ upon, and manifest him in all
Saints and Angels, was not in any other way but through the intercession of our
Lord Jesus. Romans 8.26. Col. 1.20. Joh. 14.2, 3. and 17.19. and 14.16. Heb.
9.24. the conclusion.

Jesus Christ ascended up to heaven that he might send the Spirit; and when
that had finished its work on earth, that he might again descend at the last
day for the salvation and damnation of the whole world, in the appearance of
the power and glory of his Father. Hebr. 9.28. 1 Pet. 3.18. Mat. 28.38. Act.
1.11.

I know, and do expect nothing from the hands of many, but that many
reproaches, mockings, and slanders shall continually fall upon me, from them: I
desire not to speak out of malice or envy to any person whatsoever, I appeal
to him that knows all hearts. The thing that I plead for, is for the truth,
against the opinion of Antichrist.

CHAP. VII. Mystical Antichrist described, and confuted in his sixth Error,
proving, that the Ordinances of God are absolutely useful to all Christians
whatsoever whilst they have a being in this world, they being the worship and
service of God, commanded and observed both by Christ, and his Apostles.
FIrst, the Saints in their highest estate of strength and glory, whilst they
have had a being in this world, have ever lived in the use of all Gods
Ordinances. I shall give you these Scriptures, and these three instances to
prove it. First, the Son of God himself made it his continual practice to walk
in the use of his Fathers ordinances, I will name three of them: The Ordinance
of Preaching, Baptism, and Prayer. First, our Savior did walk in the use of
the ordinances of Baptism, Matthew. 3.17. Secondly, he commanded his disciples
both to Preach, and practice it too, as he had done before them: Mark 16.16.
which commandment they constantly obeyed, Act. 2.38. So as that no persecution
whatsoever could take them off from it. Matthew. 10.22. Act. 20.23, 24.

Secondly, the ordinance of Preaching the Gospel, was the act and work of our
Lord Jesus from the womb to the grave, either in his own person, or in the
person of another. Luke 1.15. Matthew. 11.4, 5. Isa. 61.1. The ordinance of
Baptism is necessary, and ought to be practiced, so it be in a Gospel way, to
a Gospel end, by a Gospel Administratour: Act. 8.31.38, 39. 1 Cor. 1.14. But
the ordinance of Preaching is of absolute necessity, and a work that God has
carried on in all ages to the converting and increasing of his Church and
people: Baptism, and other ordinances are subordinate to this; this is the
highest and greatest of all. 1 Cor. 1.6. Jam. 5.20. Act. 13.2. Romans 1.1. Others
are questionable, and disputable, men know not hardly who is in the right,
whether for Infants, or believers, or for neither as they are instituted. But
concerning the other, God has raised up famous Instruments of his glory, even
of both parties, by preaching the Gospel, which none can deny: 1 Cor. 1.17. St.
Paul says, that the chiefest business which he had to do, and for which
principally he received a commission for, was not to baptize, but to preach the
Gospel. See Paul's exhortation to Timothy, Epistle 1.4.13.

Last of all, the ordinance of Prayer was the continual practice of our
Savior, Joh. 17. and 11.41, 42. and of all the Apostles too, Act. 2.42. Now I
appeal to all Saints, whether the highest and sweetest communion that ever they
have been made capable of in this world, has not been enjoyed by, and in the
use of, these two ordinances, in the preaching of the Gospel, and in spiritual
Prayer and Meditation.

Again, the ordinances of God is the worship and service of God, Joh. 4.23.
Act. 2.42.46, 47. in and by which they have fellowship and communion with God.
Now if a man ought to live above the ordinances, according to the expressions
and continual practices of those who are deified and immutable, then a man
ought to live in fellowship and communion with God, without worshipping,
acknowledging, or serving of him. So then according to this, darkness and
light are both in one, by being one; light is darkness, and darkness is
light, that is, sin is in grace, and grace is sin; the holiness and purity of
the most holy and blessed Spirit, is the unholinesse, blasphemy, and abominable
filthiness of the devil, and man: and the abominable filthiness of men and
devils is the act of the holy Spirit of God; yea, it is the divine and
immortal glory of this Spirit, and the Lord Jesus. O horrible blasphemy! that
ever any should presume to say, that all the motions and actions of all spirits
whatsoever, are the motions and cut-goings of the blessed God. This is a truth,
that the motions and actings of the Spirit, is the divine and immortal glory
of God in the spirits both of Saints and Angels, Joh. 15.8.

Secondly, see the nonsense and contradiction of this: if the life and spirit
of man and all creatures be God in his essence, then all creatures in all
conditions whatsoever stand in need of nothing. I prove it by this argument:
Wheresoever the essential power and glory of God is, there is such a perfect
fullness, so that there can be nothing wanting. 1 John 16. Chap. 14, 8. Psalm.
4. Act. 17.25. But the life and spirit of man, and all creatures, is God in his
essential power and glory: Ergo, there can be no want of any thing in any, or
in all creatures. Now all ordinances must needs be useless, and to no
purposes; a man must preach and pray with the understanding, or else he does
act like a fool. Now the understanding of man is the soul of man; and the foul
or spirit of man is a purer understanding, and this is one with truth, and this
truth is essentially God. The result of all this, is this, that the soul of man
is God. Now if the essence of the soul be the understanding, one with truth
essentially God; then man stands in need of the use of no ordinance, he is now
past learning, or rather past grace, he is not an Infant now, he stands not in
need of milk; what need a man regard the beam that is in the Sun? to what
purpose should a man run after the stream, who is the fountain? Now if the
understanding or spirit of man be essentially truth, as God is, then man has
all things, and can do all things; and neither preaching, hearing, nor praying
can add any thing to him that is perfect, who has all things, and is in want
of nothing. Act. 17.25. Now if the spirit of man be God, as they often affirm,
then he must, absolutely, without all controversy, See the book, entitled,
Theologa Germanica. page 37.
have the fullness of the Godhead with him: but I think that none will openly
say this, nor answer to this; and all that they have or can say in preaching,
private disputing, or writing is nothing else but cunning Sophistery, devilish
Philosophy, being nothing but a proud, selfish, vain imagination.

Last of all, a man ought to live above the ordinances in many respects, in the
lawful use of them, but in no respect without using them so long as they may
be enjoyed: 1 These. 5.17.20. 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. so on: Nahum 1.15. Isa. 52.7.
Romans 10.17. No man ought to ascribe that to an ordinance which belongs not to
it, they are but creatures, and so a man is to use them, as that by them, they
being by God set up as the means, to bring men to God who is the end. Act.
20.21. God is pleased to convince, to convert, confirm, refresh, and revive the
drouping souls of his Saints, by them in the use of them. 2 Timothy 3.16. yet so
as not to live upon them, but upon Christ who is in them, and above them. Now
for any man to cast aside the ordinances of God, as things of no use, for him
that is strong as well as he that is weak, he goes on in a way that is no
better then enmity and rebellion against Jesus Christ: Joh. 15.14. Ye are my
friends if ye do what I command you. They are not friends, but enemies and
rebels, who out of wilfulness or ignorance do practice the contrary; Jam. 4.4.
Consider these two things: first, for a man to live in the use of the Ordinance
by the light of Reason, and of the Word in the letter, this is to live below
that light that he ought to live in: See both these in Isa. 58.2, 3, 4 so on.
Matthew. 23.14, 15. Romans 2.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. A man may notwithstanding the
light of the Word and Reason, be an enemy to the Cross of Jesus Christ. See
the same Scripture, Romans 2.23. Matthew. 19.20. Revel. 3.15, 16, 17.

Last of all, for one that is truly spiritual to live upon Christ in the use
of some, and not in the use of all, which thing is possible, and too often
practiced; a Christian may walk spiritual in one, and legal in another: a
Church may walk orderly in some things, not in all. Now so far as a Christian
is not spiritual, so far he is condemnable, and walks in that action contrary
to the principle of divine light that is within him: a Christian can expect no
less, then to receive, against all actions that are not issued forth, or do
not flow from a principle of light, even from him who is eternal life in all
Saints, causing them to fix their eye upon the great point of eternity.

CHAP. VIII. The seventh Error divided into two branches: the first handled in
this Chapter by way of question, Whether perfection in the highest degree, both
of grace and glory be attainable in this life, yea or no.
THis must needs be true if the rest be, but I have something to say against
it, and that is this.

First, where perfection is, there can be no addition or increasing either in
one part or other; perfection has nothing above it, nothing under it, nothing
about it, I mean in reference to it self, that wants any thing; if there be
any thing wanting, then it is not perfection: But the best of men here in this
world have not at all times, and in all things that which they do desire, or at
least what they stand in need of: Ergo, there is no perfection to be enjoyed
here. Romans 7.15.18. Now I reason of it not as it is in it self, which is the God
head, but as it is in and enjoyed by the creature.

Secondly, in the estate of perfection, there shall be no bringing of the soul
under clouds of sin and darkness, as it is here whilst in this body of sin
and death, nor no bringing of the body under clods of earth which requires a
resurrection, but all this befalls us and all men here, therefore here is no
perfection. Romans 7.21.23, 24.

Thirdly, in the estate of perfection the whole body of Sion shall meet
together in glory. I Will prove the argument thus: The Saints, not before one
another, but altogether, shall receive their portion of glorious perfection:
Ephesians. 4.13. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. 1 Cor. 13.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. From these Scriptures
I draw these considerations.

First, neither Enoch nor Elias which were translated, and were not, for God
took them, yet these have not, neither shall have their full portion of divine
glory, till all the Saints do meet in the unity of faith, and that
acknowledging of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
age of the fullness of Christ.

Secondly, the race and course of a Christian shall be finished in respect of
faith and obedience, so that he shall not have any work of this nature to do or
finish when he comes to heaven, even so says the Spirit, what is that? Blessed
are the dead that die in the Lord, for they rest from their labors, and their
works follow them. Rev. 14.13.

Thirdly, God has ordained, that all these weaknesses, temptations, corruption
and obscurities should befall the Saints here, that so heaven and glory may be
the more exceeding heavenly, and out of measure glorious to them. Bread is more
sweeter to the hungry, then to him that has his fill of it every day. Jam.
1.2, 3. Romans 5.2, 3. Chap. 8.18. The King who is above all men, cannot think it
such a high and glorious condition to be a King, as he does who is a beggar:
all the afflictions of this world, although they are one of the greatest
glories that a Christian has here, yet it is not worthy to be compared to that
glory that shall be given and showed to them in heaven.

Fourthly, if any man ever had perfection in this life, then that person
enjoyed a greater privilege then ever the Apostles, or any other eminent Saint
have enjoyed since the Creation. Paul had it not, nor none else that can be
thought of, but do stay till we all meet: Hebr. 11. last: it is the will of
God, that they without us should not be made perfect.

Last of all, the time when they shall enjoy this, shall be at the glorious
appearance of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, in the estate of perfection a man shall have no enemies, neither
death, nor devil, nor a deceitful unbeleeving heart, nor any person to
reproach, backbite, or be any trouble to his spirit: here a man cannot be free
from them. Ergo, here is no perfection. Again,

Fifthly, in that estate of joy unspeakable, and full of glory, a Christian
shall not only see himself thus changed by the power of God, from the
likeness of him in his grace here, to a higher degree of glory hereafter; but
he fees all creatures both in heaven and earth thus changed also: he sees the
whole Creation that is now under the bondage of corruption, freed from this
imperfection: Romans 8. And God has promised so to discover himself by the
teachings of the Spirit unto the elect, that all shall know him from the least
to the greatest. Heb. 8.11. Jer. 31.33.

A Christian shall not see God obscurely, but perfectly in every creature; they
shall see God in his naked glory as he is in himself, and in all creatures: 1
Cor. 13. yea they themselves shall appear with God in that glory, in which they
shall have communion and converse together in to all eternity. 1 John 2.2. Then
shall every Christian be perfect in the glory of Christ, when he shall have
resigned up his office and kingdom of his Mediatorship to God his Father, that
God may be all in all, and above all. 1 Cor. 15. But all this is not here,
therefore here is no perfection.

When a Christian shall be clothed with perfect glory, he no longer is a doing,
but a praifing God for what he has done for him, and for all the Saints and
Angels which are in heaven; and for what he has done to all creatures in all
places, either in light or darkness, although it be for the condemnation of
him who in the flesh was his own father: thy Name, says Moses, is fearful in
praises. Revel. 1.19.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Chap. 14.3. and 5.8. to the end.

If they can disprove this, then perfection is in this life; this is true, that
the rest and glory that a Christian has here, is the same that he shall enjoy
to all eternity: a man in Christ here, and Christ will be his rest, and heaven
his perfection and joy for ever. Hebr. 4.3. Joh. 12.26. and 17.21. Yet this is
not manifested too, nor enjoyed by the Saints whilst they are here, not in
that perfect fullness and excellency which they shall live in and enjoy
hereafter. As they are all here in one body helps to one another, by way of
administration for their edification; so shall they all meet together in one
body without division, at the time of their glorification, of which Christ
shall be the head. Ephesians. 4.11, 12.

The humanity of a Christian in heaven shall not be humane but divine, not
earthly but heavenly. Our Savior says, that they shall be as the Angels of
God in heaven: Luke 22.29, 30. Mark 12.25. And Saint Paul says, that the body
of a Christian is sown in corruption, and is raised in incorruption; it is sown
in dishonor, and is raised in glory: sown in weakness, and is raised in
power; it is sown a natural body, and is raised a spiritual: it is first a
natural body, then afterward that which is spiritual. And as we have born
the image of the earthly, so shall we bear the Image of the heavenly. For
corruption, that is, flesh and blood which is in an estate of weakness whilst
it is here, in this mortal sinful condition, cannot inherit the kingdom of
God. He does not say, that the spirit of a Christian is in perfection in this
life; neither does he say, that at the last day the spirit shall be glorified
without the body, but he says, verse the 51, 52, 53, 54. Behold I show you a
secret thing* viz. we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed. There
shall be some Saints, if not all, alive at the coming of Christ, and they shall
be translated as Enoch was, though in a fuller and perfecter manner.

Now the Apostle does plainly prove, that, that body which before was weak,
mortal, and dishonorable, although it was no longer before then a moment, or
the wtinkling of an eye, yet it shall be made spiritual, glorious, and
immortal. Mark what he says, and it will be clearly manifest, that perfection
of spirit and body is not until the last day. Matthew. 24.31. 1 These. 4.15, 16,
17.

Whosoever you are that light of this book, I pray you seriously to read and
consider, all those Scriptures that I have quoted; it is not my judgment and
opinion that I desire to plead for only, but more especially for the truth of
the Gospel.

CHAP. IX. The second branch of this Error divided into two parts; I. What are
the Attributes of God? 2. Question, what is the mortal flesh of man? The
second part that man is not as perfect as God, nor God himself, with a little
addition concerning the passion of Christ.
I Shall divide this Ravishing Book, Miracle, or Prodigy, into two parts and
the first is this: See the Bright Searr, where he says, O Ravishing Book! O
Miracle! O Prodigy! O new and unusual thing! transcending and passing all
reason, and far surmounting the tertitories of man's capacity, that all the
Attributes of God, proper to his divine Majesty, should be described in our
mortal flesh, that all the internal perfections of God should be depainted
in man, and to know that person as perfect as God; yea, to be God himself,
page 182, 183. O lying wonder, Matthew. 24.24. O false Miracle! O unheard of, and
unusu^ll bl^sphemy! Revel. 13.4, 5, 6. O Ravishing and wonderful lie! Joh.
8.44. for men to say that, that never was, that never is, that never shall be,
that ever the Almighty, Infinite, and ever blessed God, should be, by the
blasphem ous words, and proud thoughts of men, brought down to nothing, and man
that is nothing, exalted in the room of this God.


That all the Attributes of God, proper to his divine Majesty, should be
described in our mortal flesh; here are two things to be opened, and narrowly
inquired into; in the first part of this Ravishing Prodigy, and they are these:

First, What are the glorious Attributes of God?

Secondly, What is under the highest Ravishingest Respect, the mortal flesh of
man?

Now by this we shall see whether the Attributes of God, which are God in his
essential glory, are described or made manifest in the mortal flesh of man: I
shall speak of Gods Attributes under these nine considerations:

1. The power of God is one of his Attributes, and is proper to none but him
only, Matthew. 28.18. Joh. 17.2. Romans 13.1. Consider of the Power of God under
these Notions; The power of God, in his essence, in his works: Of Gods power in
his essence, I shall in brief, as I shall in all, say thus much, take this
Rule, whatsoever is in the Nature, Essence, or Being of God, that is
essentially, perfectly, and absolutely God, 1 John 1.5. Chap. 4.16. Joh. 1.5.
Chap. 8.12. this the Scriptures, and Writings of the learned Fathers, does
confirm and testify; take this distinction to this Rule, and that is this,
that all the power of God, under all considerations is not in the essence,
nature, or being of God; I shall clear up this distinction, by speaking of the
power of God, under the second notion, consider of the power of God in two
respects, as it is in all his works, by Creation, by Regeneration, concerning
the power of God in the creatures, in reference to the Creation; take this rule
that the (essential power of God creating) in all creatures created, consider
of it wholly in a respect to the Creator, and it is in the nature, essence and
being of God, Act. 17.28. Esa. 40.26. and so that power is absolutely and
essentially God, now to this rule take this distinction, that created power in
all creatures, that in many respects is the creatures as well as Gods, is
created, and then is ruled and preserved in its being, by that infinite power
which did create it, Nehem. 9.6. Jer. 10.23. Heb. 1.3 powers and all creatures
must needs cease to be, if they were not preserved by that power, that is
Infinite: but God does not give spirit or power to any creature, that by that
he may come to be essentially in the creature, and so by being essentially
there, the creature may come to be essentially God, I distinguish between the
power of God creating, and the power of God created: God gives power to the
creature, by causing it to be, and by preserving it when it has a being;
that power comes from God, yet it is not God, it is but a creature, it is not
the Creator; now consider it in reference to its original, and it is in the
being of God, but consider it in reference to it self, a particular, created,
limited being, that had a beginning, that is not eternal, and it is not in
the nature of God, neither is it the essence of him; it is true, that all
things do live, move, and have a being in God, but how, every thing does not
live, move, and have a being, in the nature and essence of God, for there is
nothing in the essence, that is not the essence, but all creatures are not in
the essence, therefore all creatures are not God.

All things do live, move and have a being in the appearances and discoveries
of God, all the manifestations and discoveries of God are God, not God in his
essence, but God in that discovery.

All creatures do live, move, and have a being in the Sun, that is, they live
and move in the appearance and discovery of it, they live not in its essence,
if any creature had a real being in the essence of the Sun, it would then
lose its being, it must needs lose its name, and its nature too, it must cease
from its being, and could be no longer called light but darkness.

So if it were possible for any creature to live, move, and have a being in
the nature and essence of God, God would then lose his name of being God, and
the nature of his Godhead too; if any can prove the creature thus to be, God
must then cease to be, and all the essential and infinite glory of the Lord
Jesus, must needs be turned into obscurity and darkness.

We cannot divide betwixt the essence of God, and God in his appearance, but we
must distinguish between them, we cannot divide the heat from the fire, nor
the beam from the Sun, but we distinguish, but it is necessary to make out the
highest Truth, by its own light, I think that is the only way not to
undervalue it, but to reveal and declare it.

In the Trinity, the Father is not the Son, yet he is in the Son, it is not God
divided, but distinguished into three persons, the three persons confider them
distinct, are a threefold appearance of God. But consider of them in their
Godhead, and they are all one God essentially, so that one person, or all the
persons in the Trinity, consider them distinctly as persons, and they are
really God, yet, but God in an incomprehensible appearance; the person of God
the Father, is not the Godhead of the Father, so the person of the Son, is not
the essence of the Son, nor the person of the blessed Spirit, is not the Spirit
in its essence, if you will not acknowledge this, you deny the blessed Trinity,
the Word of God to a spiritual eye does plainly discover this, Joh. 14.16, 17.
Let us a little open and seriously consider this Scripture, says our Savior,
I will pray to the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that shall
abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth, whom the world cannot
receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him, but ye know him, for
he dwells with you, and shall be in you. In the first part of the 16 verse.
which is, I will pray to the Father, consider these four things: first, the
person praying; secondly, the person of God the Father, which our Savior
prayed to; thirdly, the thing; fourthly, the persons he prayed for; concerning
the first, the person praying, here will arise these Inquiries, first, whether
the person of Jesus Christ, God and man, that is the nature of God, and the
nature of man, both meeting in and making up one person, did put up this
petition or supplication to God the Father; Secondly, whether Jesus Christ not
in his person, but with his spirit and body, being made spiritual in the first
Instant of creation, such a spirit and body for matter as all men have, sin
only excepted, whether this did pray to God the Father yea, or no; thirdly, and
last of all, whether Jesus Christ prayed to the Father in consideration of his
being the Word, yea, or no; now to all these I give this Answer, that it was
Jesus Christ God and man, that prayed to God the Father.

The union of natures in the person of Christ is such, the like whereof is not
to be found no where, neither in heaven nor in earth; yet the union of natures
in the person of our Lord Jesus, are not one without distinction, they are not
confounded, nor converted into another, so as to be one and the same in all
respects.

The Word is the divine, and is not the humane; the humane is the humane, and
not the Divine; take it thus, the divine nature in Jesus Christ, is not the
second person in the Trinity without the humane.

The humane, a complete spirit and body, as John or Peter, or any other had,
which was in Christ, is not a person without the divine Nature; See St.
Augustine, St. Christostom, Erasmus, Roterodimus, Eusebius, St. Ambrose, Mr.
Perkins, Dr. Sybbs, Dr. Preston; all sorts of learned Writers, do express
this, that both natures do go to the making and completing of the glorious
person of the Lord Jesus, and although they are one person, yet they remain
entirely and perfectly two natures, both in his suffering state, and now in his
glorified state, the glorified body of our Savior, does really remain in one
place, and is not every where, the divine nature is not limited, but is at
once in all places, yet the principal seat of it is the soul and body of
Christ glorified in heaven, it is no where as it is there, the divine nature of
Christ is in the humane, and the humane is made divine and heavenly by
participation, the divine nature is not comprehended in the humane, that is
made divine immortal, perfect, and heavenly, for Christ, as the word is in all
the Elect, both Angels and men, in reference to his Godhead, he is in some
respects in all creatures. Joh, 17. ult. Gal. 2.20. 2 Cor. 5.17. Job 34.13, 14.
Mat. 10.29, 30, 31. Chap. 6.26, 27, 28, 29, 30.

Christ is in all Christians, and all Christians are in Jesus Christ, that is,
as he is the word, and by the spirit he is in a Christian; the humane nature is
not in any one, nor in all Christians, nor any Christian is not in the humane
nature of Jesus Christ, it is true, God is made manifest in the flesh, Jesus
Christ is in our natures, and our natures the humane and divine is in Christ.

Jesus Christ is in two natures, so is a Christian too, in the same natures
that Christ is in, the humane and divine nature that is in a Christian, is in
the humane and divine nature of Christ, but it is not the same in all respects
that Christ's is.

Christ has took upon him the nature of man, and he is now in this, and will
be so for ever, my nature is in Christ, but how? in two respects, in a respect
to our creation, and so all men are in that nature that Christ is in in this
respect, Act. 17.26. Heb. 2.14. the lump was one that all mankind was made
of, Romans 9.21. One man depends upon another and all upon God, and so
generations comes to be, all men are one in reference to their original the
earth, but in their distinct forms they are many and not one; all men is not
one man, though of one man and one blood, 1 Cor. 15.39. yet they are not all
one body, nor spirit, there are so many distinct bodies and spirits, which
every particular man has, and not another.

Secondly the humane nature of Christ and a Christian are both one by union, 1
Cor. 6.19, 20. now you see how the divine and humane nature of Christ is in a
Christian, and the humane and divine nature of a Christian is in Christ too,
here is a great unexpressible union, but yet a distinction too, I am not the
person of Christ, the person of Christ is not mine, for any man to speak this
as the Familists do, it is to speak a mere Phantisie, and acknowledge no
Christ at all nor God neither, but what is within him: now to Answer to the
questions propounded, there was four sorts of actions acted by Christ, the
action of his divine, and the actions of his humane nature, not in any way of
division or separation, but in a way of distinction; thirdly, the actings of
both natures in one person; last of all, the actings of Christ in his Godhead
or essence. Now this was not the act of his Godhead, for then the essence
should make supplication to it self, which is a contradiction, for duties
proper to man, which God commanded, and Christ observed, are not proper to God,
neither is God capable of duty or service, neither does he stand in need of it.

Secondly, it was not the act of Christ the Word alone, for this was a part of
Christ's Mediatorship to intercede with the Father for the Saints, for the
coming down of the spirit: Thirdly, it was not the act of Christ man, without
the word, for that was not able to undertake any thing in the work of
Redemption for man without the help of the Word, Spirit, and Father, but I
apprehend it was the act of Christ, God and man the second person in the
Trinity, to intercede with God the Father the first in the Trinity, that he
would send down the Spirit the third person, to be a Comforter to them and in
them, all this does discover the power of God to you.

The second thing is the person of God, which the person of our Savior prayed
to, God is a Father to Christ in two respects, the divine nature, the Word, was
begotten of God before all worlds, he was begotten of God, of the nature of
God, and was ever with the Father, Joh. 1.1. Prove. 8.22. Secondly, he is a
Father to Christ in reference to his humane nature too, Psalm. 2.7. Matthew. 3.17.
Isai. 42.1. Jesus Christ in reference to both natures had but one Father which
is God, now Christ as God the Word, begotten of the Father from eternity, as
man created in the fullness of time, now as God and man both in one person,
coming forth from God, did, whilst in the world about the work of his
Mediatorship pray unto God. I will give you one instance, and some Scriptures
to prove this nstance, Joh. 17.5. And now glorify thou me with thy own
self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world was, Christ says,
Father glorify thy Son, thy Son how, glorify the humane nature without the
divine? no, verse. 1. And secondly, as thou have given him power over all flesh,
all spirits and creatures whatsoever are subordinate and subject to the person
of our Lord Jesus, Matthew. 28.18. Col. 2.10. Ephesians. 1.21, 22.

Thirdly, that he should give eternal life, to as many as thou have given him,
God gave power to Christ, to give eternal life and glory to all those whom he
had before elected and ordained in Jesus Christ, from all eternity to have a
share in his death and resurrection, Ephesians. 1.4, 5. Last of all he has power
over all flesh, He has the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession,
Psalm. 2.8. But all flesh is not saved by the cross of the Lord Jesus; verse. 9.
Thou shall break them with a red of iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a
Potters vessel.

O unheard of and unusual miracle and prodigy!
What is become of thy wonderful ravishing excellency?
That that passes the territories of man's reason,
Is nothing else but absolute blasphemy and treason.
Father, glorify thou me, with that co-eternall unlimited glory, which I had
with thee before the world was: to all this take this Rule, that God never
decreed before all time, to do any thing in time, but what was from eternity
seated, and ordained to be, by the glorious person of our Lord Jesus, that is,
all the decrees of God concerning the accomplishing of all things from
everlasting to everlasting, were, as in one glorious Roll, written with Letters
of Gold, set down by the finger of the spirit, of the eternal immortal God,
from all eternity, in the glorious person of the Lord Jesus Christ, Prove. 8.22,
23, 24, to the 32 the person of Jesus Christ, ever had a possession of all the
Decrees, Purposes, and Counsels of God from Eternity.

The glory of the divine nature was, that it was from eternity united to the
humane, and the glory of the humane nature was, that it was from eternity, and
in the fullness of time actually united to the divine nature, Gal. 4.4. Heb.
2.14. Chap. 1.6. Psalm. 97.7. thus both in one, did receive glory from God, as
if he had said, now I am united to the humane nature, and both natures the
divine and humane met in one; having done that work which thou gave me to
do, glorify my person with such a glory even the same that I had with thee
before the world was.

Thirdly, the thing that our Savior prayed for was for the coming down of the
Spirit, not unto, but also into the hearts of the Saints. I shall Answer one
question, and that is this, whether the Spirit of the Lord Jesus descended in
its person, or in its essence, yea or no?

Answ. The essence of the Spirit is the Godhead, which was the Creator and
great manager of all things before Christ came in the flesh, Job 26.12, 13.
when the Spirit came, it came to perform the work or office of a person, which
was to reveal and discover God in Jesus Christ, J^h. 16.13 14. to and in those
whom God had ordained to be partakers of such a glory. Last of all the persons
which our Savior prayed for, was first, for his Disciples, secondly, for all
the Elect, Joh. 17.20. I conclude with this, the blessed Trinity are always
acting in and for the person of a Christian, the Son he prays, and suffers
too, the Father he hears the Son, and sends him into the world, Joh. 3.16. the
Father and the Son do send the Spirit, and the work of the Spirit being sent,
is to dwell with, and in the hearts of the Elect, the other verse is, And he
shall send another Comforter; another besides Jesus Christ, this particle he
[him] proves the Spirit to be a person, And he shall send, here is the person
of God, and the act of God; the person of God in the first part, And he shall
send, meaning the Father, the act of God, He shall send the Comforter, that
he may abide with you for ever. In the last part of the 16. and in the 17
Verse, you may see the person of the Spirit, and the action of that person the
person of the blessed Spirit, I prove by four words: The world sees [him]
not, neither knows [him] but ye know [him] for [hee] dwells with you. Then
here is the action of the Spirit in these two expressions, to dwell with the
Saints, to dwell in them too, not to dwell with them as a Husband with the
Wife, but to dwell with them as the spirit with the body, so to dwell with them
and in them, as that they and it should be both one spirit in God.

The last thing that I shall observe is this, our Savior did take occasion to
open and illustrate the glorious coming and working of the Spirit in the
Disciples, by its being a stranger to the world, and the world a stranger to
it; as if he should say, I will out of my free love and grace to you, as I have
in your natures dyed for you to redeem you, send the Spirit to reveal the
excellency of my Death, Person, and Resurrection to you, by that spirit that
the world cannot receive, the world has no heart nor mind to receive him; our
Savior gives two Reasons for this, first, Because it sees him not; secondly,
it knows him not. Now see what an excellent and glorious thing it is, for to
see and know the Spirit of Jesus Christ, and this I have spoken concerning the
first Attribute, the power of God, which the world knew not, nor saw not, and
why? because it was not with them and in them. I shall now be brief in
speaking of the rest of Gods Attributes, having already discovered them all in
this.

The second Attribute that I shall speak of, is the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor.
1.24. this is that by which also God does all things, Prove. 3.19, 20. The Lord
by Wisdom has founded the Earth: by understanding has he ostablished the
Heavens. By his knowledge the depths are broken up, and the clouds drop down
the dew. The Wisdom of God is absolutely and essentially God, Job 11.7, 8.
Chap. 12.16. Chap. 23.6. Chap. 25.11, 12, 13, 14. Chap. 28.12, 13, 14. here is
in these Scriptures a glorious description of the Wisdom of God, and when you
read these, consider of the infinite glory of your Saviors person, Chap. 32.8.
Chap. 37.16. Chap. 38.36, 37.

The third Attribute is the Mercy of God, Psalm. 100. Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
11, 12, 17. Ephesians. 1.3. Romans 9.15. Chap. 4.16. Ephesians. 3.18, 19. Gal. 3.13. Romans
8.28. 32, 33, 34, 35. From this observe these things: first, there is a greater
manifestation of the Wisdom and Power of God, in the Mercy that he shows to
man through Jesus Christ, then there is in the creation of all creatures.

Secondly, the eternal love and mercy of God in the Lord Jesus, is the cause
of the eternal being, and eternal well-being, both of Men and Angels, 1 Timothy
5.21. 1 John 4.16, 17. The immortal, invisible, and incomprehensible glory and
blessedness of both, is conceived in, and brought forth out of the womb of
the free grace and mercy of God; the free grace and mercy of God is the light
of his countenance, lifted up upon the person of a Christian, in the person of
our Lord Jesus, Psalm. 4.6. The free grace and mercy of God, consider of it, as
it is in it self, is the Majesty and essential glory of the Lord Jesus, the
Majesty and essential glory of Jesus Christ, is absolutely and essentially
God, Romans 11.32, 33. Joh. 15.13. 1 John 1.3. Romans 8.16, 17.18. Joh. 17.21.22,
23, 24. Mal. 3.2, 3, 4.

The fourth Attribute is the Justice or Righteousness of God, Psalm. 145.17.
Isai. 6.3. Psalm. 5.4, 5. Job 34.10, 11, 12, 23. Mal. 4.1. Isai. 53.6. Romans
3.23, 24, 25, 26.

Consider of the Righteousness of God in two respects, in Christ, and in men,
from hence I draw these conclusions; first, all that unexpressible wrath and
misery which God laid upon Jesus Christ for the sins of the world, was an
unspeakable glorious manifestation of Gods Justice and Righteoussnesse.

Secondly, the everlasting death and perpetual misery of the whole world, is
another excellent discovery of Gods Justice and Righteousness, Psalm. 51.4. the
Justice and Righteousness of God is the nature and being of him, for God is an
Infinite being of divine holiness, the nature and being of God, is absolutely
and essentially God, Heb. 12.29.

The fifth Attribute is the presence of God, Jer. 23.23, 24. Psalm. 139.7, 8, 9.
before I speak of the presence of God, here are these questions that will
arise; first, what difference is there between the presence of God and the
nature of God? Secondly, whether Gods presence is, where his essence is not?
Now for Answer to the first: Consider of the presence of God in a twofold
respect, first, there is the presence of God, secondly, his Omne-presence;
First, consider of the presence of God, now to open this I shall take these
Scriptures, Joh. 14.25. the second Scripture is this, our Savior says, That
wheresoever two or three are met together in my name, there will I be in the
midst among them. Jer. 23.23. Am I a God at hand, says the Lord, and not a
God afar off? Psalm. 139.10. Psalm. 104. There is the presence of God, and the
special presence, from these Scriptures I draw thus much; first, every
creature does enjoy the presence of God, I say enjoy, that is, the joy and
glory of every creature, is the presence of God with and in that creature, I
mean all but them that are in torment; take it thus, whatsoever any creature
is, has, or ever shall have possession of, the cause and continuance of that
creature, is the presence of God with that creature, Matthew. 6.26. Psalm. 104.27.
God does not feed, cloathe, and preserve all creatures without his being
present with them, does God do any thing for any creature, and yet is not
present with and in that creature?

Secondly, God is present with no creature in such a glorious manner, as he is
with those that are elected, Joh. 17.23. I in them, and thou in me: A
Christian does enjoy the presence of Christ, I in them, as Christ injoyes the
presence of the Father, Thou in me, Jesus Christ dwells in a Christian, and God
dwells in Jesus Christ; God is present with the devil, and so he is with the
damned, Psalm. 139.8. for it is not possible that ever he and them, should
subsist in eternal torment, by dying, yet never dead, consuming, yet never
consumed, but must perish and cease to be, were it not that God does uphold,
and cause them to subsist by the power of his presence; hell and death it self
would not be, were it not born up, and upheld by this power, Heb. 1.3. my
distinction concerning the presence of God with the creature, is clear and
plain, I will a little further illustrate it. It is true, God is present with
those that are in hell, but not after the same mannet as he is in heaven; God
is present with the damned, but that is not any cause of joy to them, but it is
their torment, it were better for those poor wretched creatures, by a thousand
degrees, yea, ten thousand, if they had not the presence of God at all with
them, for then their torments would end, and they would be at rest, it would
be an unexpressible happiness to them if this might be, Matthew. 26.24. God is
present there, but not as a Father, there he is in the power of his wrath, a
Judge, a consuming fire there, think of this all ye that forget and blaspheme
God, God is there, and the Devil sees him together with the damned, but Gods
discovery is in a way of obscurity and darkness, the same God is in heaven,
filling all with joy unspeakeable and full of glory, and he does manifest
himself, not as a Judge but a Father of mercy and God of all consolation, not
in a way of obscurity, but in his own personal glory, Joh. 17.24. yea, in the
glory of his Godhead, 1 Cor. 13 12. 1 John 3.2. We shall see God, as he is,
now the presence of God with any one creature, and the presence of God with all
creatures, in reference to the creation, in reference to their damnation, is
not the essential nature and Divine being of God essentially, God is present
with those that are in hell, that is, he is present by his Justice, and the
Justice or righteous vengeance of God, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. that is, there is the
nature of God, that is, it is not the essential nature, for that is infinite,
and cannot be circumprized or comprehended in any place, now reckon, how much
of the justice and righteousness of God there is in hell, and there is just so
much of his nature there, but no creature can comprehend either the one or the
other, and although the justice of God, as it is in hell, cannot be
comprehended, neither by them nor all creatures, yet, as it is there, it is not
infinite, and so not God essentially; I will give you two or three instances,
God the Father is present in the person of Christ, the nature of God is in the
glorious person of our Savior. Now we must apprehend, that though the nature
of God, be in an unexpressible measure in the person of Christ, yet consider of
that nature in reference to Christ as a person, and that divine nature in that
glorious person, is not the nature of God essentially, the person of Christ is
not the godhead, but a person subsisting in the godhead.

Another instance is this, grace and glory, is the nature of God, now this
nature is in a Christian, for the Spirit of God, Jesus Christ, and God himself
dwells in him, Jo^. 17. now the nature of God, and the presence of God the
Father. Son and holy Spirit is in a Christian, consider of the nature of God,
and it is his being present there; consider of the presence of God in a respect
to it self, and it is the nature of God, Gods presence is his being, Gods
being is a spiritual Divine substance, now wheresoever God is (there his
presence is, and where his presence is, there his nature is, we cannot devide
betwixt the nature, and presence of God, but we distinguish concerning them,
Gods presence in Reference to it self, is his nature essentially, but not in
reference to all creatures, now I have spoken of Gods presence in reference to
it self, and so it is the nature and being of God essentially.

Secondly, I have spoken of Gods presence in Christ and so it is
Incomprehensible, but not the Godhead.

Thirdly, I have spoken of Gods presence in a Christian, and from thence I
prove that the presence of God, and the nature of God in a Christian are both
one, yet not without some distinction for our understanding, in respect of
order, and term, last of all I have spoken of Gods presence, with every
particular creature, and I have proved, that the presence of God with them,
consider it in a respect to it self, and it is his nature, consider of it in a
respect to the creature, and in respect of those things that it produces, and
it is not it, the presence of God is one thing, and that that the presence
produces and causes to be, is another, every torment in hell is in some
respects produced by the presence of God, but every torment is not the presence
of God, now all the Righteousness of God causing and producing those torments,
and the presence of God bearing them up in the torment in it self is the
nature of God, it is not the nature or presence essential, but a degree
thereof, the presence of God is one in all places, not one in all Respects, the
same presence that i^ life, Heaven and everlasting glory to some, is death
torment and everlasting misery to others, yet one and the same God, though not
in one and the same discovery and appearence, God has not a double presence,
yet many disoveries, and appearances of that presence, and thus much in answer
to the first question. And the first particular, the presence of God. I come
now to Answer the second question, whither the presence of God is not but where
his essence is, I will give a further Answer, having spokenssomthing to it
already by speaking of the second thing, which is the Omne-presence of God,
Ier. 23.23, 24. Psalm. 139.7, 8. God fills all places with his presence and
spirit, all places are full of the presence and Spirit of God, the presence of
God, is where his Spirit is, and that is in all places.

The presence and Spirit of God is where his essence is not, I shall speak in
particular too, and illustrate some things that I said before, observe this,
all places cannot comprehend the essential nature of being of God, God is in
heaven, and in all creatures that are in heaven, every particular Saint and
Angel, shall be so full of the glory of God, as that now no heart is able to
conceive of, yet every particular Saint and Angel, shall receive for
themselves a particular Crown of glory, 1 Cor. 2.9. 2 Timothy 4.8. yet there
shall not be two, but one Infinite essential glory, that shall give so many
several crowns of glory, to so many sever all persons as shall be in heaven,
Rev. 22.5. Gal. 3.20. yet all these glorious numberless beings in Heaven,
cannot comprehend the essential glory of God, God will be in heaven and in
hell, and in all places, and creatures, that shall have being, yet all places,
and all creatures too, cannot comprehend the Infiniteness of the Almighty. So
then this is a truth, that the presence and Spirit of God, is, and for ever
shall be, where the essence of God is not, nor cannot be, I suppose I have
given sufficient instances in my first Answer to the first Query, the
greatness, and goodness of God, is so in all creatures, as that in respect of
all creatures, it is Infinite, yet God is greater in power, and being in
himself essentially, above what he is in greatness, presence, power, and being
in all creatures, and thus much for the fifth Attribute, the presence of God.

I now come to the sixth, the providence of God, Psalm. 103.19. Jam. 1.17. Amos
3.6. Jane. 5.17. 1 King, 17.1. Chap. 18.45. 1 Cor. 2.9. Isa. 64.3, 4. A
question will arise, and that is this, whether the providence of God have any
hand, in the redemption and convertion of a Christian, yea, or no? to which I
Answer.

That us God by his power does bear up and preserve all things, so by his
providence he rules and orders all things,

First, God by his Providence does rule all things in the creation, but then
secondly, the Redemption and conversion of a Christian is an act of Gods
providence, it is not only one creature, but all creatures are ruled by the
Providence of God, it is not only one thing, but all things do come to pass
by Gods Providence, the eternal power and God head is made manifest, by its
Providence, in ruling and ordering all creatures, and all things too.

Last of all, the Redemption and conversion of a Christian is such a work, as
that all the Attributes of God have a great hand in the accomplishing thereof;
if I may speak after the manner of men, then consider, first, there is a
Providence that is external; secondly, a Providence that is internal; yet
this distinction makes not this Attribute, the Providence of God, to be two
but one, that Providence, which I say is external, is that that rules those
things which are external and visible; the things of this world, as they are
carried on in the course of nature, in the compass of the creation, and in
this respect, the Providence of God becomes visible by the workings and
appearances of it, in those things which are visible, the invisible perfections
of God, consider them in reference to the creation, are made visible to the
creature, by the creation, Romans 1.19, 20. the Providence of God, is the element
that every creature does subsist in, and every creature under this notion, is a
dependence upon the Providence of God, Psalm. 104. Mat. 10.29, 30, 31. Act.
27.34. Secondly, the Providence internal, is that which rules and orders all
things in the new creation, things that are internal, spiritual, and
invisible, this is the same Attribute, but not the same act, nor in the same
appearance: the actings, and internal appearances of Gods Providence in the
new creation, makes all things one with it self, I do not say, that the
spiritual divine workings of Gods Providence in this invisible internal
world, does make all things to be one essential Attribute with it self, for
then a man by conversion, might approach so near to the obedience of Christ, as
to be made and called, and so become divine, and God essentially, but every
thing is made one with Providence, by the sublime outgoings of Providence, in
respect of union, and conformity, but no creature can be made to be, the
Providence essentially. The providence of God consider it, not as it is in any
form or creature only, but in the Abstract, in it self, and it is Absolutely
and essentially God. The Seventh, Attribute is the Immutability of God, James
1.17. Mal. 3.6. Psa. 102.26.27. From hence observe that the cause of our
present, and eternal union with God, is the Immutabilitie or unchangeablenesse
of God, this is our present, and will be our Eternal glory in Heaven, that
those whom God loves once, he loves for ever; The immutabilitie of God; by
which he is one and the same from Eternity, to Eternity, although he make
changes and alterations in all creatures, is absolutely, and essentially God,
the uttermost, and highest, glory, of Gods Immutability, stretched out upon the
highest pin was never made manifest in one, nor in all creatures both in
Heaven and Earth.

The Eighth Attribute is Gods faithfulness, and truth, Romans 3.4. Tit. 1.2.
Heb. 6.18. Numb. 23.19. That which I have to say is this, God is faithful,
because he is Immutable, God is faithful because he is God, he cannot but
perform what he has promised, he cannot deny himself, nor that word of Truth
which is gone out of his mouth, nothing shall be ever able to Alter or change
his mind from doing that which he has ordained from Eternity, Romans 8. Last 2 Timothy 2.13. it is Impossible that God, and his truth should sease to be, or from
being what it has been Eternally, first the truth and faithfulness of God is
the salvation and glory of this world, the truth of God is his unlimited power,
by which men are freed from the bondage of corruption, to serve the true and
living God, Joh. 8.32. Luke 1.74 1 Thessalonians. 1.9. This is that which is one, and
cannot be two, it cannot be divided or separated from God, Secondly, All the
truth that is in all Saints, in all Angels, is no other; but this one truth
which is God, Thirdly, the life and glory of the Lord Jesus, together with the
life and glory of all things both in Heaven and Earth, I mean all things that
have the truth of life and glory in them, is, the truth and faithfulness of
God, this is that that has exalted both Angels and men, this is that that all
the Saints and Angels in Heaven and Earth do depend upon, if it were possible
for God to lie or deny himself, Heaven it self, with all those persons and
glories which are there, subsisting in glory through the truth and faithfulness
of God, would then seace to be, yea and all things else whatsoever must needs
perish and come to nothing, were it not for this there would be no Heaven, nor
Hell neither, for how could these be, when God himself should seace to be?
last of all the truth and faithfulness of God, is the essential glory of the
Lord Jesus, the essential glory of Jesus Christ is Absolutely and essentially
God, God is so true and faithful, that were there ten worlds as, there is not,
and though every soul in them were filled, above what we could express, full
of Gods truth and Spirit, yet could not all these worlds, nor all these
multitudes and numberless numbers of spirits, thus enlightened by the spirit,
be ever able to see and to express the utmost and highest glory, that is wrapped
up in the truth and faithfulness of God, I Appeal to all that in the truth
do love, and in the spirit do know God, whither the consolations of Gods
truth and faithfulness are not dear unto them, Job 2.2. chapt. 15.11.

The ninth Attribute, and the last that I intend to speak of, is Gods
Eternity, 1 Timothy 1.17. Revel. 1.8 Psa. 90.2. Who is able to declare the
Eternity of God? now if the spirit of any man be Immutable let him come forth
and Answer, concerning this Attribute of God, I shall ask these questions, and
so end with a conclusion or two, and they are these; behold God exalted by his
power, can thou teach or instruct like him? can thou understand the
spreading of the Clouds, or the voice of Gods Tabernacle? have thou an Arm
like God, or can thou Thunder out with thy voice like the Almighty, if all
the Internal Invisible perfections of the most high God, are according to thy
words are depainted, and discribed in the mortal flesh of man, come forth and
discover this perfection, that all the world may wonder, and be Astonished at
the appearance of thy greatness. Where wast thou when God laid the foundations
of the Earth? who has laid the measures thereof, or who has stretched out the
line upon it, whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened, or who has shut
up the Sea with doors, when it brake forth, as if it had issued out of the
womb, have thou commanded the morning since thy days, or caused the day
spring to know his place? have thou entered into the springs of the Sea, or
have thou walked in the search of the depth; have the gates of death been
opened to thee, and can thou command the doors thereof? have thou perceived
the breadth of the earth? declare it if thou have understanding, where is the
way where light dwells and as for darkness where is the place thereof?
Know thou it because thou wast then borne, or because the number of thy
days be great, have thou entered into the treasures of the snow, or have thou
seen the treasures of the hail? by what way is light parted, which scatters
the East wind upon the Earth? have thou divided a water course for the
over-flowings of water: or away for the lightening and thunder? thou that
know man to be as perfect as God, yea to be God himself, Answer me, out of
whose womb came the Ice, and the hoary Frost of Heaven, who has gendered,
can thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades, or loose the bands of
Orion, can thou bring forth Mazzoroth in his season: or can thou guide
Arctuerus with his sons. Know thou the ordinances of Heaven, can thou
set the dominion thereof in the earth? can thou lift up thy voice to the
clouds, that abundance of waters may cover thee, can thou send lightenings
that they may go and say unto thee here we are? who has put Wisdom into the
inward parts, or who has given understanding to the heart, can thou number
the Clouds in Wisdom, or can thou stay the bottles of Heaven? declare this
if thou know it all.

My conclusions are these, God is infinite in Immortallitie, Secondly, it was
never, neither can be for ever, fully declared by all creatures in Heaven and
Earth, last of all the Immortallity or Eternity of God, is absolutely and
essentially God, and thus much for a description of Gods Attributes.

The second thing that I am to speak of, is this, what is the mortal flesh of
man, and this our Savior and Saint Paul tells us, Joh. 10.1. chap. 8.44. Romans
3.9. chap. 7.18. Ephesians. 2.2, 3, 4, 12 Psa. 39.4.5.6. the 103.14.15. and 19.47.48.
Job 10.9.10.11. Chap. 14.1, 2, 10. Law. 3.22, 39. observe these conclusions:

First, the mortal flesh of man is the throne and seat of all filthiness and
abominations.

Secondly, the mortal flesh of man is subject to mortality and vanity.

Thirdly, the mortal flesh of man is subject to all sorrows, miseries,
torments and judgments, that by sin do fall upon the world.

Fourthly, the flesh of Christ whilst it was mortal, had not all the
internal perfections of God depainted in it.

Last of all, the flesh of all men whilst it is mortal, is not, nor when this
mortality shall put on immortality, yet then it shall never be as perfect as
God, nor God himself. Now this must needs be most false and untrue; that all
the Attributes and internal perfections, which are proper to the great Majesty
of God are depainted and described in the mortal flesh of man, the mortal
flesh of man is not eternal, immutable, and infinitely powerful, as God in
his Attributes is, and now I have done with the first part of this Ravishing
Book or Prodigy. I now come to the last part, which is, that man may be known
to be as perfect as God, yet to be God himself. I shall speak but a word to
this, being I have already proved the contrary, no man is so perfect as God.

Secondly, man is not God himself, Jesus Christ is perfect God and perfect man;
now his perfect manhood, is not his godhead, it is not as perfect as God, nor
God himself, and if Christ's manhood be not God himself, then much less, the
mortal flesh of man, and thus much in Answer to this Ravishing Book, Miracle,
or Prodigy.

And now it is possible, for less then the highest territory of a Christians
capacity, to find out the depth of this, O unheard of blasphemy!

The last branch of the error I shall conclude with, is this, that though
imagination inject, that is, conceit and include, the form man, though an Idea
of Christ crucified, that is, a resemblance, form, or Image, present it self
to us, yet the Ocean of Faith, drownes, and annihilates, that is, makes void or
of no effect, the same, that is, that all the apprehentions of an outward
created form or Organ, crucified at Jerusalem, it is but a thing injected, it
is but an Idea, like a shadow that presents its self to us, it is but our
Imagination that does inject such a thing, and cause such an Idea, but the
Ocean of faith drownes, annihilates, makes void and of no effect, that Idea or
imagination of Christ crucified at Jerusalem. Now if this were true, then what
truth can there be in the Scriptures which does declare Christ crucified no
other ways then at Jerusalem? Saint Paul says, I am crucified with Christ,
but he does not say, that Christ is not crucified no other ways then in me,
this has no sense in it, I dye with Christ by the power of his death, working
in me causing me to dye to sin, and to be crucified to the world and the world
unto me, again, I rise with Christ by the power of his Resurrection to live in
newness of life, but how can it be true that Christ dies in me? what do men
understand Christ to be, that they talk thus of his being crucified in man?
what is the Spirit of God subject to death as it dwells in a Christian? can any
thing Anathamize the glorious Image of God there? or is Christ the outward
form of man? or is Christ the outward form and inward corruption too? and so
both must dye and be crucified, and come to nothing, that the new man, God in
his essential glory, may be set up and adored in man, now let all men judge
what truth there is in such a description of Christ crucified, as this is.

CHAP. X. A brief description of God according to the Doctrines and Writings
of the Familists.
THat which is perfect, says he, 1 Cor. 13.10. is that which is so in it
self; mark and observe what is delivered, and in that which it is,
comprehends and contains all things, the life of the least creature, of a
worm as well as a Christian, is such a life or being, that it comprehends
and contains all things.

Secondly, God is the being of all things.

Thirdly, that God is namelesse, Look into that book, Entitled Mystical
Divinity, p. 2. lin. 1, and lin. 22. Chap. 4. Chap. 9. pa. 19. lin. 6.
that he is eternal and the true good

Fourthly, that God is good or to be made good.

Fifthly, that God is such a good, as he is neither this nor that good, which
can be named, known, or manifested, but God is also and above all, neither is
it needful that it should now enter into the soul, for it is already in it.

Sixthly, that God is such a thing as cannot be spoken or written, Page 31. lin
last.
but of him who is the self same thing and knows it.

Seventhly, that some may approach so near to the obedience of Christ, as to
be made and called, and so to be Divine and God. Page 37. lin. 11.


Eighthly, that he who is not the thing, cannot say it, neither can he that
is it, and knows it, speak it, but if any desire to know it, let him expect
until he be the thing. Page 45. lin. 7.


Ninthly, that true and perfect God, and true and perfect man are one, and man
do so yield and give place to God, that God himself there is man, and work
alone, and do and leave undone whatsoever he will. Page 52. lin. 6. Page 8.
lin. 3. Page 52. lin. 7.


10. that God is such a being is may be disturbed and hindered in his work.

11. that God as God is man, and man God, that is, man is Deifyed, made Divine
and God, Page 74. lin. 12. Page 52. lin. 7.
and God is hominifyed and made man.

12. that God as God is good, and goodness it self, Chap. 9. pa. 19. page 76.
and is neither this nor that good, if God were this or that, he were not all
things, nor above all things.

13. That there is no action but essence in God, that as God is good,
knowledge, light, love, justice, truth, and virtue, that all these are all one
essence in God, Page 74. Page 78. lin. 4. and so onward.
and that they cannot be brought into action, yet he says, to God, as God, it
appertains, that he lay himself open, know and love himself, that he
manifest himself to himself, in himself; and this opening of himself is the
distinction of persons, but in the Deified man, there is something belonging
unto God, which only is proper and appertains to him, and not to the
creatures, and God is that in himself without the creature, originally, or
essentially not in form or action, and yet God would have the same put in
practice, for there it is that it might be conferred to action, and so
exercised, for what else should it be, should it be Idle, what then should it
profit, for that which is of no use is not at all, now this neither God nor
nature would have, but if God would have himself exercised and brought into
action, which cannot be done without the creatures, it is then necessary that
it should be so done, what then, if it were neither this nor that, nor if it
were not any work nor action or the like, what should it be, or what should
God himself become to be, or what should he himself be.

14. Chap. 29.
That a deified man, knows nothing but to love, that he is kind to all men,
and loves all men, and all things, and that he should do them good without
putting a difference, and whatsoever is done to such a man good or bad, yea
though a man kill him, and he should return to life again, he would forgive
and heartily love him, Page 80.
respect and wish him well and desire all good to be fall him, this he proves
by Christ who said to Judas, friend; wherefore art thou come? Page 88. line 1.
God is the essence of all things that are. Again that there is nothing
contrary to God, or that can grieve or make him sorrowful; Page 87. line 7.
and yet he says that God is troubled for the sin of man, this is not in God
himself but where God is man, that sin is a great torment and grief to God
in such a measure, that he would willingly endure corporal Death, so that it
might be extinguished; again, Look into the book Entitled Divinity and
Philosophy dessected.
that God is the Creatures Reasonableness, God gave himself and all that he
had to man, and man lost and sold God, and all to the Devil, again, that God
assumes an Angel of darkness.

CHAP. XI. Antichrist, in his Athiesticall description of God, discribed and
confuted by a description of God, as he has discovered himself in his word.
A Description of God, in his Attributes, in his Person, and in his Works, the
Essence of God is the Spirit, Joh. 4.24. God is a Spirit, God is one Spirit,
one in the Spirit and this one Spirit is God, consider of God in Reference to
his Eternity, Immutability, Immortality, All Sufficiency, Blessedness, and
Infiniteness, which I have spoken of before; Gods Attributes, as his Power,
Immutability, Presence, Mercy, Love, Truth, Light, Wisdom, Providence,
Righteousness, or whatsoever belongs to God only, all is Comprehended in the
former, but I have spoken of these also, God in his Person, is first in the
Trinity, God in his works, either Uisible, or Invisible, is such, as that he
cannot be known by all Creatures, now God in his Essence, and Attributes, in
his person and in his Works, in Reference to himself is one and the same, God
is Eternal, Joh. 8.58. 1 Timothy 1.17. Psalm. 90.2. I shall now give you a
description of perfection, as it is in it self, Gods perfection is his
Eternity, he is Immortal without beginning and without end, who is the
beginning and the end, there is nothing but had a beginning but God, nothing is
so Eternal as God, Angels are Eternal, the spirits and bodies of men
Eternal, Jud. 2 Pet. 2.4. Job 4.18. Matt. 24, 31. 1 Cor. 15.52. But they had a
beginning, Genesis 1. the Administration of the old Covenant is said to be
Eternal, Genesis 17. That is, it should be until it was abolished, Heb. 8.6.7. 2
Cor. 3.11. God is unchangeable, Mal. 3.6. James 1.17. Psalm. 102.26.27. Titus
1.2. Angels are made unchangeable, so are all Creatures that shall continue,
but nothing is so unchangeable as God, who in several appearances, and by the
changes and continual alteration that he makes in all creatures in this world,
yet he himself is unmovable and unchangeable, without any shadow of turning,
it is said in many Scriptures, That if the people will repent, God will repent
him of the evil that he thought to do unto them: but if they will not, he will
repent him of the good that he thought to do to them, Jon. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 11.27.
Isa. 1.19, 20. Mal. 3.10.

Answer, God spoke to them after the manner of men, and his business with them
in this dark obscure appearance, under the Law, was not very high and glorious,
and in this respect, the case was such betwixt him and man, as that he was
altogether upon such terms with them under the old Covenant of works, that
whatsoever they got they should have, if they would have outward and inward
blessings, they must deserve them, and that they could never do, and so never
obtain them; now these were the thoughts of God to that people, under that
Covenant, and in that appearance, all must be considered, that if they would
work and obey, they should eat the good of the Land, Esa. 1. if they would
not, he would destroy them; It is true, they could do nothing without his
power, but once he gave them power to do all things whatsoever he should
command of them, but they lost it, and God was not bound to restore it again,
neither was he bound to take away that Law of Commandments, which before he
gave unto them, when they had power to fulfill it.

What would man have been after his fall, if God had in all respects left him
to himself? if he had left him Lawless, he would have been like a wild
beast, making further havoc of himself and all things; he was not able to
subsist of himself, nor to wind and turn all things in the world, but must
presently sink and perish, now man had a great desire to live, though he and
all his posterity were to dye at last, then to have dyed presently out of hand;
Adam thought to hide himself from God, now if God did any thing for him, it was
out of love, merely for his names sake, man could not challenge any thing at
the hands of God, now whilst man and all his posterity was under this cloud of
darkness, God himself found out a way of deliverance.

O man, what can thou say for thy self, or what can thou charge the
Almighty with? I do hear many objections raised up by many spirits, if my
matter did tend toward it, I should be more at large concerning it, O
Antichrist, what haste thou to say against God? my bunnesse is with thee will
the Almighty delude and harden thee, and then will he condemn thee for thy
being so? Is this the highest objection that thou can raise against the truth
and people of God, God must needs be just and righteous in thy way, or else
not at all, let God be true and every man a liar.

I shall Answer to, and discover most of thy conclusions in thy description of
God, thou do let thy tongue and heart run forth to any thing, I have and
shall speak to all that which thy heart has imagined, and thy tongue
expressed, that is worth the speaking to, I have already and shall to the end
of my book, principally, direct all my discourse concerning God, and in this I
have, and shall comprehend all that I have to speak against, and all that I
have to contend for:

First, of all, all things whatsoever, is not God in his essence, Bright Starr,
That the creatures are fully to be reduced to the Creator, and consequently, as
whatsoever is in the beam and heat so considered, is no other then Sun and fire
it self, so is there nothing in the creature, which is not the Creator himself,
page 77.
of all creatures, none are so glorious as Saints and Angels, which are
elected, and that for these reasons.

First, the life of Christ and a Christian is both one and the same spirit, 1
Cor. 6.17. he that is joined unto the Lord, is one spirit; Again, the life of
Christ and a Christian, is both one and the same God, Joh. 17.22. whatsoever is
absolutely pure and divine, is God, but the life of a Christian is absolutely
the pure divine glory of the Lord Jesus, therefore that life is God, 2 Pet. 1.4.

Secondly, the essence, is all in all, and will be so for ever, but the nature
of God in a Christian, is not all in all, therefore, it is not God.

Thirdly, the essence is the first cause of all things, a Christian cannot be
the cause and effect too, therefore not God, that is, not God in his essence,
but God in his appearance, God in electing a Saint and converting him, is not
in one and the same appearance in reference to the creature, in electing there
is but one infinite appearance of God, to himself, and all things that are
ordained to be, God sees them in that one appearance, or in himself, as really
as he does now they are, God sees all things at once, and all things at once
are one eternal act of God, and every thing in this respect is from Eternity.
God decreed all things before any thing had a being, before any creature did
appear to any creature, then was God all.

Secondly, God was not all from Eternity any other way then he is now, for if
God were all things from Eternity, so he is now, he is not less then he was,
neither is he more, all the glory that he has given to all creatures, is no
decreasing of his glory, God is all things, misapprehend me not I pray you,
that is, he is all the divine sweetness, that is in all creatures; the
devil, as a creature is good, but God is not the nature or being of any
creature but a Christian, and he is not his nature neither, in reference to
his corruption and creation, but in reference to his Regeneration.

Thirdly, God is in and present with every creature, I prove it thus,
whatsoever it be that has any thing of God in it, in that, and with that God
is present, but every creature has something of God in it, therefore God must
needs be in and present with all creatures.

Fourthly, every creature is present with, and comprehended in the glory of
God, Gods glory is his infiniteness, if there be any thing without God, or
that in this respect is not in God, then God cannot be infinite, Act. 17.28.
In him we live, move, and have our being, there is not any thing of God
(observe I pray you) in any creature, without God, unless we will have more
Gods then one.

Fifthly, all things are God in his works and several appearances, every work
and creature is an appearance and discovery of God, for God has therefore made
all creatures, that he might discover himself to them, and not to discover
himself to himself, so then every appearance, discovery, manifestation or
work of God, is God, the way that I shall take to make good this according to
the Word is this, every appearance or work of God, is God in that appearance,
the devil is a creature, an appearance of God, therefore, in that notion and
respect he is God, yea, but how? there lies the mystery, not in every respect,
for in some respects it is as great a falsehood, as in any respect a truth, as
he is a creature or work of God, good in his creation, the manifestation of,
and being ordained for this condition, for Gods power, as his servant, to do
all things, Job 1.12. Chap. 40.19. Chron. 2.18.21. Prove. 16.1. according to his
eternal counsel, for to bring about his end, so he is an appearance of God,
and God is in that appearance, now consider that Gods end, Genesis 3.4. Romans 9.22,
23. and the devils are not one, but two, and in this he is a devil, an
abominable liar, and the Prince of darkness, yet all this is not absolutely
against his will, yet God cannot justly according to truth, be made to be the
author of sin, 1 Cor. 14.33. neither does he work, it into the devil, or
into the hearts of men, it is horrible blasphemy to speak it, the devil is the
first founder and father thereof, Joh. 8.44. 1 John 3.8. Chap. 4.3.

The fall of men and Angels was ordained from Eternity, and if they had not
been ordained for destruction, they should never have been destroyed, Prove. 16.
God has created all things for himself, and the wicked for the day of evil,
Jude 4. Therefore he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
hardneth: At the potter has power over the clay, to make a vessel either for
honor or dishonor, so has God power over all creatures, to save or condemn,
according to the good pleasure of his will, for the manifestation of his power
and justice, through his infinite patience and long sufferance, upon them which
are vessels of wrath, and to make his mercy known on them which he has
prepared unto glory, Romans 9. All things shall be according to the will of God,
for nothing can ever be, that is quite contrary to his will; consider of Gods
will under these two notions.

First, a Secret; secondly, a revealed will, now the revealed will cannot be
against the secret, for then the Kingdom of God, or God in his will would be
divided, which thing can never stand, whatsoever God is in his Word, the same
he is in himself, for God does not discover himself to be one thing in his
word, and yet is not the same in deed and in truth, then the Scriptures were
worth nothing, being but a mere shadow, and a confused History indeed, and
when a Christian should come to enjoy God, according to his Word and Promises,
according to his Oath, Seals, and evidences of his Spirit he should find no
God at all, all Ordinances were then meat for babes, for fools, and men void
of understanding, O then cleave to the Scripture for if that be not truth, then
is there no truth at all, nor God neither.

I do not say that all or every Word that is written there, is truth, there is
some that is not, through the faults of translators, yet God has bin pleased,
not to suffer it to be violated or changed in the being of it, but has kept it
in their hands from such an extingushing corruption, suppose it were possible,
so to juggell with a wise man, as to persuade him that he were an Emperor and
he were not, yet it were impossible that he should never come into his Right
mind again, to know the contrary, or some of his generation after him, if men
should come and tell us, that such a book were the Word and power of God unto
Salvation, and we should not see the same coming along in it and with it, it
is not possible that so many wise men should be deceived in the receiving of
it, but should in one age or another by some means or other hear of the
contrary.

Every appearance of God is God, not God in his essence, but God in his
appearance, all the beams of the Sun is the Sun, no man can say it is any
thing else, and it is a truth that cannot be denied, but how, the beam is not
the Sun in its essence, but in its appearance, for the essential body of
light is in Heaven.

The greatest falsehood and lie in the World may be a truth in its first
Denomination, but in the way or manner of proving, confirming, and enlarging
it, it may be made to be a lie, some men withhold the truth of God in
unrighteousness, if men could but hold to the first principle, which is the
ground of all Religions, and not forsake that in one Respect which they
acknowledge in another, a Papist would then be a Protestant, a Familist would
then not be Heriticall, but heavenly, and so there would be but one Religion in
the world.

Every thing both in Heaven and Earth is one Infinite universal appearance of
God, and every particular Creature, is a particular appearance; the Devil is
God, in one of his greatest appearances, namely of his great power, Job
41.24.25. a Worm is God also, but in a lesser appearance, yet God in himself
is neither less nor more, bu^ ^^ his discovery, God is in every Creature, but
not Infinitely, every particular Creature has God in it, but not the Godhead
or essence, for if God who is Infinite, were Infinitely in any one Creature, or
in all Creatures then he could be no where else, and that Creature must needs
be equal with God, or if his Essence were in all Creatures he would then be
limited, so you may see the falsehood of that Doctrine, that the life of the
least Creature is Incomprehensible, comprehending and containing all things, if
the essence were in one appearance, then all the light and glory of the Sun,
would be comprehended in the breadth of your hand.

Objection, But some will say, that the same light that is here, is also every
where one and the same in all places, for life is one in all Creatures.

Answer, I grant, that the Sun is one and the same in all the world, but not
in every respect, it is the same in its essence, unchangeable without
increasing or decreasing, but it is not the same in its appearance, the Sun
at one and the same time may be in its beams waterish in some places, in other
places it may be glorious, God is the same God in all Creatures, that he is in
himself, that God that is in the Creature, is the same who is one light and
glory, and is essential, but he is not the same in his appearance, for then
every particular appearance would be an essence, and so there would be many
essences and Gods.

God is the same in all Creatures, that he is in himself for substance in many
respects, not in degree, I do not mean that the substance which every
Creature is made of, is the nature or essence of God, yet we cannot exclude God
from any Creature, you cannot see any Creature but you may see God there,
neither can he be Included in all Creatures, he is all things, yet he is
above all things, and is not the being or nature of any thing, Secondly, God
is not namelesse, as some affirm, or so invisible as not to be known or
manifested, first of all, No man has seen God at any time, Joh. 1. Whom never
man saw nor can see, 1 Timothy 6.16. Yea, but Jesus Christ has revealed him, Joh.
1.18. 1 John 1.1, 2. That that we have seen declare we unto you, Joh. 14.
Philip, He that has seen me has seen the Father, how say thou then show
us the Father, Verse. 9. The Word was made flesh and dwelt amongst us, and we
saw the glory thereof, Joh. 1.14. Thou shall call his name Immanuel, which by
interpretation is God with us, Matthew. 1.23. Esa. 7.14.

Again, secondly, God is such a good as that it is impossible that he should
be made better; my Righteousness extends not unto thee, he that is wise is
wise for himself, and a man has the profit of his own labors: this does deny
God to be infinite, I speak as to wise men, judge ye what I say, and what
Antichrist says, and see what sense there is in their description of God.

Thirdly, God is all, but God is not the universal frame and inclination of
every creature, God is all the divine sweetness that is in them, God is all
things and in all things, as all things were conceived in the womb of his
eternal Counsel, God is not the nature of any thing but of a Christian, and
not his nature neither, as I said before, in reference to the old Adam, but the
new; and indeed that is not so properly a Christians as it is Gods, the nature
was before as good, and it is no better when it is in all creatures and Angels
but not good to them so, as to be a good actually within them, yet good to
them in reference to Eternity; I say again, that God is not the frame and
inclination of any creature, God is not the frame of the devil, nor the frame
of man's heart; Remember the distinction, all that is divine and heavenly in all
creatures, that God is, and so he has been from everlasting, the life and
goodness of all creatures that he had ordained to be created in time.

Fourthly, God was not every creatures goodness from Eternity, in a respect to
the creatures particular being, as it is now, neither was the creature good to
God through his goodness, from all eternity in every respect as it is now, for
God in his decree, did not see things confusedly, nor in a shadow, nor out of a
divine order, God did never look upon things that were not, neither did he
look upon things that were ever to be more then they are, he did not look
upon the world and all things, from Eternity, as he does now, yet he sees nor
knows no more now, then he saw and knew from Eternity, the understanding of
God is infinite, Job 14.12, 13. Esa. 40.13, 14. Romans 11.34, 35. Thou art the
same, and thy years shall not fail, Heb. 1.13. He saw all things then as
perfectly before they were, as he does now, now they have a being, for he
cannot increase in knowledge, power, or wisdom, he cannot do that now which
has not been in his thoughts from Eternity.

Fifthly, the essence is not moveable, nor active according to the motion, or
after the manner of men, to begin now, and anon to have done so much, and to
morrow to end, but when God begins all things, he ends them too; God in all
his works and Counsels, is the beginning and the end, Rev. 1.8. Chap. 22.13.
Esa. 41.4. Chap. 44.6. if God should act according to men, judge what will
follow, let us a little weigh and consider the business.

First, if man could begin and end a work at once, he in that work would not
be man but God, but this he cannot do for want of power, we must not think,
that because all things are at once one act of God from Eternity, that
therefore God ever did, or can do any thing confusedly, but by such infinite
wisdom that is above the knowledge and apprehension of all things both in
heaven and Earth, in respect of God nothing had a beginning; to us all things
have their real beginnings and endings, yet God does begin a work and end it,
in reference to it self really, but to God all things are eternal; when an
Artist would make a curious work that was never made, before he can work it
with his hands to make it visible and fit for use, he must first contrive it
in his mind, it must be made there, and then according to that inward
platform, he guides his hand and instrument, now in some respect it is so
with God, not in all.

The Works of God are first in his mind, before he begin any thing to make
it visible, either to it self, or to any creature whatsoever, and then,
according to that eternal principle of infinite and divine wisdom within him,
he orders and does all things.

Now the first difference is this, Arts and curious works, do come into the
mind of man that was never there before, for that is it that increases his
glory amongst men, but, with God it is otherwise, for in the beginning of the
creation, a work, that neither men nor Angels had a hand in, nothing came into
the mind of God, that was not there from Eternity, either in the beginning, in
the Progress, or end thereof.

The second difference is this; God by doing of all things, did not enrich
himself, in wisdom, power, ^r glory, not in the least measure, but did all
things for the manifestation of the same unto those whom he had ordained to
know it, either for their salvation or damnation, but with man it is otherwise;
for all that he does, he does it, that by it he might enrich himself and
increase his honor and excellency amongst men; and when he has it, then he
can discover it, now as God never did any thing to enrich himself, so he never
did any thing to be a manifestation of himself to himself, in any other way,
then he knew from Eternity, Prove. 8.22, 23.

Sixthly, God is all things, that is, God is the first original cause of all
things, and all things in their original is God, now we must distinguish
betwixt God and his works, the works of God are all in God, and God is in all
his works, but, the works of God are not God, nor never were, when God did
purpose to create Heaven and Earth, and all things in them, then, when they
were in his purpose, they were not God, before they had a being, no more then
they are now; now they have a being, the purpose or Counsel of God, take it
in all respects is God; but all the works of God are not his Counsel, Will, and
Determination, but the effect and discovery of it.

The Will and Counsel of God is in all creatures, and all creatures are in
Gods Will, but all creatures are not his will in the essence of it; but in the
manifestation of it, the Will of God is absolutely God, but how? not in a bare
single respect, for then we should make God to be nothing but Will, the Power
of God, the Wisdom, Knowledge, Love, Light, and Mercy in God, (...) God, 1
Cor. 1.24. 1 John 4.8. Chap. 1.5. Job 12. God has not an infinite Will to do
any thing, but so as he has also an infinite understanding to know why he
wills the being or good of any thing, and he is as infinite in power also to
accomplish and bring to pass whatsoever he will, Matthew. 19.26.

Again, seventhly, God is this and that good, both in his servants and in all
creatures, that is continually named, known discovered, and enjoyed, the name
of God is whatsoever God is, I am says God to Moses, I am infinite, I am such
a being, as thou nor all creatures are able to conceive of, unless you were
gods equal with my self, I am God the Almighty, the Everlasting.

Secondly, This name signifies the blessed Trinity, I am that I am, I am
Jehovah, I am All in all.

Thirdly, The name of God, is the Word, Revel. 19.13.

Fourthly, The name of God, is the Spirit, Joh. 4. and this is that by which
he does discover and reveal himself unto us, and that by which we come to
enjoy communion with him, 1 Ioh. 1.3. We know that God in his highest and
greatest glory, cannot be known, named, or manifested, not to any creature,
but God knows himself, and all things in himself, for nothing can be above
that that is infinite, God cannot be above himself, now it cannot any way be
made good, that God is namelesse, either in respect of himself, or in respect
of his creatures, what should we call him, when we call upon his name? There
is no man but calls him God, unless it be an Atheist, and these that say that
he is namelesse, do call him by many names, the true Light, the true Love, the
true Good, the true Life, and many other terms which they give him, as you may
see in their Writings.

Eighthly, The invisible power and Godhead, is in, and made manifest by every
creature, Romans 1.20. When God does discover himself to us by the creatures, he
does discover no more of himself by them, then what is in them; it is by the
light and glory of the Spirit of God within me, that it comes to pass that I
know any thing of God in those creatures that are without me, now if God
should discover himself no other ways then in and by the creatures, then we
should never know more of God, then what ^his works do declare, nor know him
no other way, then by the creatures, but God does discover that to the Saints
by the Spirit, which they cannot see in the whole creation, 1 Cor. 2.2. ver. 12.

First, This world in its highest estate of glory, could never discover a
particular crucified Jesus to us.

Secondly, None are able to discover the Glory of God either in his person or
Godhead, but to discover a glimps of it* That I desire this truth trinity in
unity may be often read and considered of, it being, the ground and foundation
of all Christianity.
We cannot Read in the large book of this Creation, the pardon of our sins
by Jesus Christ, nor our Reconciliation with our God.

Thirdly, This world in its brightest appearance, cannot discover that
deceitefull Antichrist that is within us and without us too, no, it is the
Blessed Spirit of our Lord and Savior, that does discover all such secret
mysteries of Divine glory unto our spirits, the whole world in the time of its
continuance before Christ, did never discover God in such a manner and measure
as Christ did, if a man knows all things in this world; yet if he know not God
in the spirit, he knows nothing as he ought to know.

Fourthly, What difference is there between the essence of God, and God in his
person?

Answer, Consider of God in his Person, and he is the first in the Trinity, the
Father, and is not the Son in his Person, or the Holy Spirit, so consider of
Christ in Reference to his Person, and he is the second in the Trinity, and not
the first, nor the last; Consider of the Holy Spirit in his Person and he is so
likewise, but consider of God in his Godhead or Essence, and he is the whole
Trinity, he is the first and the last. Now I desire with Reverence and
submission, for the confounding of Antichrist in many of his conclusions, who
would if it were possible pluck God out of his Throne of Majesty and glory,
and set himself down in his Room, to discover this mystery to you. Consider
of the order of the blessed Trinity, and observe this, that God is not in every
Respect, above all order, it cannot be true, for, first, the order of the
glorious Trinity is God, the being of God is not a confused, but he is a
being of Divine order.

Secondly, the order of the blessed Trinity is Infinite, and cannot be
apprehended, nor comprehended by all creatures in Heaven and Earth, art thou
able to discern the Infinite wisdom of the Trinity in the Divine order
thereof, art thou able to express the mystery of that Essential glory, that
all Saints and Angels in Heaven and Earth have ever bin inquiring into? but can
never find out, the depth of that unexpressible wisdom; that from Eternity
has bin seated there.

Thirdly, The order of the glorious Trinity is the Trinity, the Father, who is
first, the Son second, the Holy Spirit the third, we cannot consider of the
order of the Trinity without the distinction of persons, and we cannot consider
of the order and distinction of Persons in the Trinity, without the union, both
of Persons and natures, the distinction is, God distinguished into three
persons.

Fourthly, The Godhead is not the three Persons, the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, in a way of confusion, but in a way of order; again, the Father Son
and Holy Spirit is not one and the same God but in a way of order.

Fifthly, God is above all created order, either of Angels or men, for the
order of the Godhead, in some Respects is the Godhead, the Father he is
first, and that by order, and he is not the Son, for then there would be
more Sons then one, or rather none at all; again, the Son is the second,
and not the first, nor the third, so the holy Spirit is the third, and not the
Father, nor the Son, now if it were not for this, there would be no Trinity,
abolish this, and you deny the Trinity.

Sixthly, God is a being of Divine order in all his works, Adam was first
formed then Eve, God divided the time wherein he did all things, into six
days, Genesis 1. and he did that by a divine order, look upon the whole
Creation, as it is the work of God, and see what a glorious order there is
amongst all Creatures, Jsa. 64.4. if you consider of the consent that there is
amongst the Creatures, notwithstanding all those differences and contrarieties
that are in opposition to one another, look upon the universal composuall of
all Creatures, and see how they are fitted one to another, look upon the
combination and connection that is among the creatures, and in all this you may
see the sweet order that is among them; O then, how Heavenly is the order of
the Trinity! disorder is the confusion of all things, and sin is that that has
put all things concerning man out of order, for a man to see a mighty Army, in
a difficult place, against a cunning Enemy, set in order, what sweet union can
they then have in all their Battles so long as they keep order? What a
blessed thing it is to see a Kingdom in good Order, we all pray for such a
day, that so many precious lives might not be lost as are, what a glorious
thing it is to see a Parliament in order, do we not at this present see and
enjoy the benefit of it, so consider of it, in the things of God, is it not an
excellent thing to see a man walk orderly? is it not an Angelical heavenly
thing, to see a Church gathered and governed by a positive Gospel Order, to
see every Ordinance instituted in a spiritual Order, what a profitable thing
it is to hear a particular Christ and him crucified, preached in order; Order
in many respects, is the first cause of union; O look and admire, at the sweet
and unexpressible order and union of the blessed Trinity! if there be no order,
there cannot be any union, union is not first, and then order, the Father is
first, and begets the Son, Psalm. 2. Heb. 1.6. Matthew. 3. the Spirit proceeds
from both, and then there is union; consider of the order, union, and
distinction of persons and natures in the Trinity.

I shall open what I have said by speaking a word concerning a Christians union
with Christ, Christ and a Christian are both one in their original, in nature,
in the spirit and glory of God, Bright Starr, If the Son of God, by taking on
him the humane nature, made himself of no worth, and descended to be nothing,
it follows that man is nothing, page 73. lin. 18. Now he says so, but
sometimes he says that man is as eternal, as perfect as God, yea, God
himself, see Theologia, page 31. and page 37. and page 52. lin. 6. See the
Bright Star, page 77. and page 182. See Divinity Dissected, page 1. If the
creature, be something, says he, God cannot be infinite, for there should
his being be bounded, where ours began, page 78.
the Father. Ioh. 17. 1 Cor. 6. both begotten from Eternity, Ephesians. 1. Prove. 8.
Ephesians. 2.10. Romans 8. Heb. 2.14.

First, Christ is the Son of God, so is a Christian too.

Secondly, There is two natures in the person of Christ, the Divine, and the
humane made heavenly by participation, so there is in a Christian, the
difference is this.

First, Christ in his person, is the first begotten and first born of God. Romans
8.39. Col. 1.17. the person of a Christian is the next begotten of God, in the
Lord Jesus.

Secondly, the person of Christ is the Word of God, 1 Ioh. 1. and was ever with
the Father, Prove. 8. the person of a Christian was eternally with God in his
eternal Decree, but not the Word, as Christ was.

Thirdly, The person of Christ is that by which God made the worlds, and by
which he does uphold and bear up all things, Heb. 1.3. but the person of a
Christian is not.

Fourthly the union betwixt Christ and a Christian is a made union, a union
that in respect of a Christian had a beginning, but the union of Christ in his
person is without beginning.

Fifthly, A Christians union may be increased, and that may be discovered
concerning it, that he never knew before, Ioh. 20.9 but the union of Christ
cannot.

Sixthly, The person of Christ is the second in the Trinity, 1 Ioh. 5. but a
Christians person, although it be there, yet not a person there, the second
difference is this:

In respect of the Offices of Christ, in his Kingly Office, he is over all
Christians, Angels, and creatures, Heb. 1. 1 Pet. 4. last. Col. 2.15. so a
Christian is a King too, but not as Christ is, he is a made King by Christ,
Revel. 5. he is a King in the kingdom of Christ, Rev. 3. he is a King toward
God, and shall receive a Crown, 1 Timothy 6. he is more then a man in this world;
more then a Conqueror, through Jesus Christ, Romans 8.

Secondly, Christ is a Priest, so is a Christian too, but Christ is a Priest
for ever after the Order of Melchisedec, Heb. 5. A Priest to offer up himself a
sacrifice for sin, to make reconciliation, to purchase liberty, and everlasting
glory for men, 1 Cor. 5. Esa. 53.5 1 Pet. 2.24. But a Christian cannot be the
saved, and Savior too; he cannot reconcile, save, redeem, or give life to
any, he is to praise God for ever for Christ, and all that comes along with
him, Romans 8.32.

Thirdly, Christ in his Prophetical Office, he is the only true Minister of
the Gospel, he did bring glad tidings to the world, a Prophet to teach and
inform his Church by the Spirit, Ioh. 15. So a Christian is a Prophet too, but
how? Follow me as I follow Christ, 1 Cor. 11.11. To teach the Truth as it is
in Jesus, for so he has been taught of the Lord Jesus, 1 Pet. 4.10. 1 Cor.
14.3.33. He knows nothing of himself, but what Christ reveals unto him, Ioh.
15.5. 1 Cor. 4.7. The third difference in a Christians union, is this:

Christ in his essence is not only the Word, A Christians union with God is a
Glorious discovery, of the incomprehensible union of the blessed Trinity.
but also the mind and spirit too, Ioh. 14. Philip, he that has seen me,
has seen the Father, Romans 10, He is God ever all, blessed for ever, 1 Ioh. 5.
last. This is that very God, and that eternal life; But the person of a
Christian is not the mind, word, and spirit, yet he has all within him.

Last of all, Christ and a Christian in their highest glory, are not one by
union without distinction; a distinction without separation, Romans 8. last. Now
you see the oneness that is between Christ and a Christian, and you see the
difference too, the glory of a Christian is so great, that none are able to
express, to apprehend or comprehend, Ephesians. 3.18, 19. That that eye has not
seen, nor ear has heard, nor it ever entered into the heart of any man, to
know that love of God, that passes knowledge: Now if the glory of a Christian
be so great, how infinite is the glory of the Lord Jesus? the union of the
Trinity is so great, so infinitely glorious, that all Saints and Angels knows
not the utmost mystery thereof, the union is so great, that they are one in
essence, though three in person, they are not three Gods but one, every person
is God, not the Godhead or essence.

The Father in his Essence is the whole Trinity, and so is the Son and Holy
Spirit also, but in his Person he is not; Christ in Reference to his Person is
the second in the Trinity, that created, assumed, and is united to the humane
nature, and in that he suffered and reconsiled God to man, and man to God, this
is not God the Father, he sends his Son into the world, Jo. 3.16. nor the
Spirit, for he reveals Christ, Jo. 14.17. this is an undeniable truth, the
Scriptures does plainly declare it, Jo. 1.14. Matt. 1.16. 2 Pet. 1.17. the
Spirit is called another Comforter. Jo. 14.26. Chap. 15.26. this is in
reference to their Persons, they are one in Essence, Jo. 4.24. and in their
Persons they work one and the same way, to one and the same end, Jo. 14.18.
Joel 2.28. Esa 24.3. some Scriptures concern Christ as man, soul and body,
Jo. 5.30.31.32. Matt. 26.38.39. the 20.28. Phil. 2.7, 8.9. Heb. 5.7.8. Again,
some are to be understood of Christ God and man, the second Person in the
Trinity, Heb. 5.9. Jo. 6.62.63. the 2.19. Luke 21.33. Jo. 3.13.14.15. the 1.14.
Isa. 41.2. Again, some Scriptures speaks of Christ in his Godhead or
Essence. Jo. 10.30. verse 18. Chap. 16.14. the 14.15. 1 Jo. 5.20. Romans 10.9. so
we must understand of many that speak of God as a Person. 1 Jo. 5.8. Matt.
3.17. Heb. 1.8. Psalm. 45.7. Psalm. 12.28. 2 Pet. 1.17. some of his Essence or
Godhead, Act. 17.28.29. Romans 11. Last, so Esa. 40.25.26.28. 1 Timothy 6.16. John
1.18. Job 36.26. so also of the Spirit, as a Person. Io. 14.17. Matt. 3.17.
some speak of his Essence, Io. 4.24. Act. 5.4. Job 26.12.13.

CHAP. XII. A Description of the Devil.
OF all the ways, and works of God in this world, the Devil is the greatest
and the Chiefest, Job. 40.19. and 41.34. there in no created being in this
world, that is so great in power as the Devil is, Ephe. 2.2. he is called the
Prince that rules in the Air, and he is thus called for two Reasons. First,
because of the greatness of his Dominion. Secondly, his greatness in being,
there are but two kingdoms, the Kingdom of God, the kingdom of the Devil,
the Kingdom of light, and the kingdom of darkness, Secondly, this world by
reason of sin, lies under a thick cloud of darkness, the Devil by his
works is this covering and cloud, that over-shaddows the face of the whole
Earth. 1 Ioh. 5.19. the Universal frame of this present evil world is nothing
else but a frame of wickedness, the Devil is called the god of this world, in
reference to its defilement and pollution by the sin of Adam. Thirdly, the
Devil is the great Ruler and manager of all things that are in his kingdom
and dominion he is the Ruler of all things, and of all spirits too, who have
brought themselves under his power, by iniquity, he is for the greatness of
his power compared to Leviathan, Job 49.23. Behold he drinks up a River and
hastes not, he is confident that he can draw up Jordan into his mouth, we know
that Nations and Kingdoms are compared to waters Revel. 17.15. The Devil is
such a devourer of Nations, as Leviathan is of waters, as Leviathan by his
power does comprehend those Rivers that he drinks up, so the Devil by his
power does comprehend all the Nations and Kingdoms that are in this world,
consider of Leviathan in these three respects, his greatness in being, he is
above all Creatures, his power in action, and those mighty effects and events
that are continually produced by him, by reason of these he becomes a wonder to
all that shall behold him.

So consider of the Devil also, his greatness in being, by which he can be
present in all places in this world, his power in action there is no Creature
can out-goe him in wickedness, and there are many things ascribed to him that
cannot be ascribed to any other Creature either in Heaven or Earth, he is
called Legion, that is, many, he is called God, and Father, the Father of
sin, the Father of sinners, Ioh. 8.38.44. Ye are of your father the Devil,
says our Savior to the Pharisees, Ye do that that you have seen with your
father, 1 Ioh. 3.8. Saint John says, that he that commits sin is of the
Devil. Thirdly, consider those mighty effects, that are continually produced
by him and in this he is above all Created powers whatsoever. Fourthly, all
things in this world under this notion, are at once, and at all times
comprehended by the heart and eye of the Devil, Job 41.34. he beholds all
high things, there be two sorts of things that the Scriptures calls high things,
the things of God, and they are really high, so high that none can comprehend
the height of them, Ephe. 4. the other sort of high things, are the things of
men, and these are not really high, they are high only in the accoumpt of men,
now these are the things that the eye of the Devil does behold and comprehend,
Matt. 4.8. The Devil at once did show our Savior all the Kingdoms and
Glories of this world, there be two principal thrones which the Devil Rules
in; the Air, and the hearts of ungodly men Ephe. 2. both these are the proper
constant seat and throne of the Devil, he is not the Air, as some say and
affirm, but is in, and Rules there, he is not the hearts nor breath of men,
but is in, and is the chief Ruler there also.

Fifthly, the Devil is the greatest power, and highest principality, that
does continually oppose the glory of Christ, and the salvation of a Christian,
Ephesians. 6.12. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
Principalities, against Powers, and against the Worldly Governors, the Princes
of the darkness of this world, against Spiritual wickednesses which are in
high places: The Devil is one of these Principalities and Spiritual
wickednesses that the Saints did, and do wrestle against, we know that there
is no such wrestling or striving between two parties that are agreed, the
Devil he wrestles and strives with a Christian, and thinks to conquour; a
Christian, he wrestles with the Devil and is sure to conquour, now if they
were of one mind there could be no difference between them. Secondly, a
Christian does wrestle against flesh and blood, but flesh and blood are not
these Principalities, and Spiritual wickednesses that a Christian is to strive
against, here is a distinction, because there is a difference, were there no
difference, there would be none, but, no such distinction, flesh and blood are
the powers of this world, the powers of this world in this respect are subject
and subordinate to those Powers and Principalities; observe this, there is a
power that a Christian is to strive against, which is a greater being then the
power of flesh and blood, or thus, the power of flesh and blood is not the
greatest opposition, that lies in a Christians way toward Heaven, I think the
power of the Devil amongst the Familists is a higher Principality and a
greater spiritual wickedness, that all Christians are to strive against, then
the powers of flesh and blood; now the question is, whether power were created
or ever had a beginning, yea or no, I further Answer, that if it had no
beginning it must needs be Eternal, if it be not a Creature it must needs be
the Creator, and if this be so, then what truth is there in this Scripture, and
the Word of God, if there be no power but what is the Creator, then we must
strive and wrestle against the will of God, again, if power in all creatures
be not the Creature it self, but the Creator himself; then if this Scripture
be true God himself is no better then a Spiritual wickedness, a greater
blasphemy I think cannot be expressed by the tongue of man.

Sixthly, Jesus Christ by his cross, has spoiled, captivated, and conquered
all the principalities and powers of this world, Heb. 2.14. Col. 2.15. the
Devil is compared to a Lion, so is Christ too, yea, but the devil is compared
to a devouring Lion, for his name in Hebrew is Abadaon, in Greek Apollyon, that
is, a destroying destroyer, Revel. 9.11. the Devil in action is like a hungery
Lion, always seeking whom he may devour.

Seventhly, The devil is mighty in understanding and knowledge, They do
believe and tremble, Iam. 2.19. Their knowledge of Christ does cause them to
believe, but to tremble also, We know who thou art Jesus the Son of God, art
thou come to torment us before the time, Matt. 8 29.

Eighthly, The Devil for number is greater in his kingdom and Generation then
Jesus Christ is, Revel. 13. and all the world wondered and followed the beast,
and power was given him over every kindred Tongue and Nation, verse 3.7. the
Saints of God did not follow him verse the eighth.

Ninthly, The Devil is a particular power or spirit above all Devils that are
in darkness. If power were one, then it cannot be many, but we prove that
there are many powers, they are called Angels, Jua 6. Job 4. the Devil said
that his name was Legion, he is called Beelzebub, the chief or Prince of
Devils, he is called Dragon Revel. 12. Wheresoever any wickedness is, there
he is, for as his being does exceed the being of other Creatures, so his
wickedness and corruption does exceed all others too the nature of the Devil
is the fountain of all evils, it is the throne and top of all wickedness,
all the sins and abominations that are committed by all persons in this
world, are but as so many streams flowing from this fountain, the Devil is
called the father of lies, the seed of sin in the bowels of the Devil is
absolutely begotten by the Devil, he is the first inventer of that work, he
is called the old Serpent, a murderer from the beginning, the first of liars,
we must not understand, that though the Devil be the father and fountain of
all filthiness, that therefore he shall be condemned for the sins of men, God
is Just and Righteous in the condemnation not only of men but of Devils too,
he does not condemn man for the sin of the Devil, neither does he condemn
one Angel for the sin of another, and although there was one who was the first
beginner of all, and by that greatness which he had, came to be King over all,
yet we must know that God never laid the sin of other Angels, to the charge of
Beelzebub, nor the sin of Beelzebub, he never laid to the charge of other
Angels, Revel. 22.12. Romans 2.6. Psalm. 62.12. Matt. 16.27. though the Devil is
the father and fountain of all sin, yet it is not he that does act and
commit all, it is true, that there is no sin committed upon the face of the
whole Earth, but the Devil has some hand or other, either first or last in
that sin, the Devil and the heart of man are both one, in one action, not
both one power or substance, but too several distinct powers, both one in
action, as a thousand men may be all one in the murdering of one man, and yet
remain so many several distinct persons as they were before, they have all
one mind in that work, which causes such a oneness and union to be among
them, so it is the will of man to commit sin, and it is the will and mind of
the Devil also, that that sin should be committed, the Devil he tempts, man
he acts, so that there are two works united in one, and yet in the greatest
neerenesse betwixt man and the devil as they remain distinct in substance, so
also in action now the sins of men, so far as it is their own for which they
shall be condemned is not the Devils, nor never shall be laid to his charge,
when a man does commit Fornication, or Uncleanness, the devil does not commit
and do that, yet he has a hand in that, it could not be committed without the
help and assistance of the Devil, now by all this you may see what a mighty
spirit, and what a great hard worker the Devil is.

Observation, wheresoever any wickedness is, there the devil is, Job 1.7 and
that for these two Reasons:

First, If the devil had not power to be at once in all places in this world,
then he could not devour and delude in such a great measure as he does; It
would be a long tedious piece of work for the devil to go by degrees, first to
one heart, and there to stay until he had finished all his wickedness,
Whatsoever the devil is, that is his essence, but the power of the devil in
one or many respects in one person, or in a thousand, is not whatsoever the
devil is, therefore one appearance of the devil, is not the essence of him.
and then go to another; no, he can, and is by his power in all hearts at once,
where Jesus Christ in the spirit is not, yet we must conceive that every person
has an evil or a good Angel waiting upon him, yet there is no Angel in
darkness, but does that work which he is the chief and principal agent in;
I do not say that the person of the devil is at once in all hearts, that is
so great, that one, nor all hearts in his kingdom cannot comprehend, but the
devil is every where by his power, by his temptations, by his servants, and
evil instruments which do obey his will, now the power of the devil in one
or in many respects is not the person of the devil, that is, it is not his
essence or being, but an appearance of his being, and thus much for the first
Reason.

The second is this, all sin flows from the devil, therefore wheresoever that
is, there he is, a corrupted fountain does send forth corrupted streams, now
wheresoever the stream is, there the Fountain is: the Fountain is there in
part, and in appearance, but not in essence, now were it not for this the
stream would cease to be, or if the Fountain in some respects were not there,
it could not be, wheresoever the fire is, there heart is, for that is its
nature and property; and wheresoever the heat is, there the fire is, take away
the fire and the heat ceases to be, now the fire is not where the heat is in
its being, but in part, and in appearance, wheresoever the devil is, there sin
must needs be, unless he could cease from action, so wheresoever any evil
is, there the devil is in one respect or other, take away the devil and sin
ceases to be, if the devil could leave tempting, deluding, and blinding the
eyes, and hearts of men, men would then leave sinning. Mr. Perkins says, that
wheresoever Ignorance reigns, there reigns sin, and wheresoever sin reigns,
there the devil rules; now it is impossible for the devil to rule where he is
not, it is unpossible, but that sin should be where the devil is

10. The devil is not only the fountain of all corruption in all hearts, but
is in his self, a particular power and spiritual wickedness, that is, though
he is so great in being, yet he is a particular being, and though his nature
does comprehend such an Ocean of filthiness, yet is all this filthiness the
devils own, and not another, this great power, I do not say the corruption
thereof is God in its original; for when God first created this being, it had
not this name, the name devil, nor the nature neither, the devil was a good
Angel, and was glorious and happy, for the time that he continued in that
estate wherein he was first created, but he together with his Angels, kept not
their first standing, 2 Pet. 2. and so were cast down into hell, to be kept
unto damnation, Jude 6.

This power is God in two respect; first, consider it in its first original;
secondly, it is God in his appearance.

For, he has therefore created him, that by him he might manifest his power
and discover the greatness of his own Majesty unto all creatures.

There be some affirm, that wheresoever Gods power is, there also his essence
is, for his power is his essence; Again, others say, that the devil is the
air, from this Scripture, Ephesians. 22 and the breath that is in man's body, he
proves the latter by the former, if the devil be the air, says he, man does
breathe in and breathe out the air, and in this respect, he does breathe in
and breathe out the devil, these juggling counterfeits, by these expressions,
do deny the coming of Christ in the flesh, I shall ground this upon this
Scripture, 1 John 3.8. for this purpose was made manifest that of God, that he
might lose the works of the devil; the proposition is this:

The end of God, manifest in the flesh (was) to loose the works of the devil,
I shall bring one Scripture to show what is here meant by loosing the works of
the devil, Heb. 2.14. that that is here called loosing the works of the
devil, is there called the destruction of the devil, it is not as the
Familists would have it, when they speak of self-denial that God must be all
and the creature nothing, that the created form, nature or substance of the
devil was destroyed, in respect of being or subsisting, for they hold that all
created things must perish and come to nothing, that God may be all, now if the
devil be thus destroyed, then is not Christ come in the flesh, and if Christ
be not come in the flesh, then his death is made void, for he cannot suffer
that never had a being, and the Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession, and
coming of Christ to judgment, must needs be nothing but a mere fantasy,
and imagination, and if this be so, then nothing shall remain but the Godhead
and if nothing shall continue but God, then there is but one spirit in the
world, and if there be but one spirit in the world, then all things must needs
be the act of God, and if all things be the act of God, then the highest
perfection that ever man shall enjoy, he shall enjoy in this life.

My Argument to prove that he that denies this, that the devil has a being,
denies the coming of Christ in the flesh, is this, whosoever denies the work
that Jesus Christ came to do, denies Christ himself, but to say that Christ
came to destroy the being and substance of the devil, a work which he came
not to do, is to deny the coming of Christ in the flesh; I shall give one
instance to prove this, he that denies that to be God, which in truth is God,
he denies the being of God himself, but he that holds that there is but one
spirit or life in all creatures, which is the true God, besides which there is
no other, he affirms God to be that which in truth he is not; Therefore he
denies the being of God himself, so he that affirms that to be the work of
Christ, which in truth is not, he denies the coming and being of Christ
himself, but he that says, that the end of Christ by his coming, was to
destroy the very being of the devil, he affirms that Christ came to do that
work which he has not done, nor never will do, therefore thus to speak is to
deny the coming of Christ.

Objection. What is meant by these words, Destroy him, that had the power of
death, that is the devil?

Answer, To destroy him, is not meant to destroy the devil in his being, but
the devil in his enterprises, Christ by his cross, dealt by the Devil, as
God did by the Spanish Invasion, in which all the purposes and plots of the
enemy were drawn up to one head, Simil.
the execution thereof being set on foot all their hearts were linckt together
in one as their ships were, and all instruments being ready, making full
account to conquour and destroy all that was before them, God for the
preservation of his people, raised up an instrument, to defeat the enemy in
the height of their villainy, by which all their ships bonds, purposes,
resolutions, counsels, and determinations, were all loosed, destroyed,
spoiled, and captivated, and the Kingdom saved and delivered in a miraculous
manner from such a sudden ruin and cruel overthrow, we know that they were
all destroyed, though not all slain.

The plot of the Devil from the beginning, and all his purposes and
resolutions, concerning the total overthrow of Sion was drawn up to one head,
the Devil and all the instruments of Hell and this world, had made all things
ready for execution, indevouring to bring a sudden ruin and perpetual
overthrow to the kingdom of Jesus Christ, Christ by his coming, when the
Devil was in the prime of his strength, when he had gotten almost to the top
of all his desires, I say that Jesus Christ by suffering for sinners, by
satisfying Gods Justice, by reconciling God and man together, spoiled, loosed,
captivated and destroyed the Devil, and all his assistance, in all their
purposes, councels, and preparations that he had made, and delivered all the
Saints from bondage, darkness, death and thraldom, which they were in under
the Law, and brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel. The
similitude is full and clear, the difference is, that Gods work by Christ in
the redemption and salvation of the world, was more excellent and exceeding
glorious then this outward deliverance by man, from an outward calamity. I do
not bring this only to compaire the work of God in our outward deliverance to
his work in our spiritual, but I bring it to prove that Christ by his coming
has destroyed the works of the Devil, as God destroyed the divices of these
enemies in that exploite which they had in hand, that as God defeated them by
causing their own purposes to be their own confusion, so God by Christ,
spoiled and destroyed, not the Devil in his substance, but in all his works,
purposes, and determinations by the power of his Death and Resurrection.

I shall further Discover the Devil to you by these following considerations.
First, the Devil is an enemy to the name of God, I shall prove it by these
arguments, first whatsoever is not Spiritually subject and obedient unto the
command of God, is an enemy to his name, for a persons obedience to Gods
Commandments, is that by which the name of God is glorified and exalted, but
the Devil is not spiritually subject and obedient to the Commandments of God,
therefore he must needs be an enemy to his name.

Secondly, that spirit that would exalt himself so as, that by his inventions
he would be equal with God, that spirit in so doing is an enemy to his name,
but the Devils desire was, and still is to exalt himself so as that by his
inventions he would be equal with God, therefore the Devil is an enemy to
the name of God.

Thirdly, that spirit that does endeavor to destroy all the decrees and works
of God concerning the Redemption and Salvation of man, which are for the glory
of his name, that spirit is an enemy to his name, but the Devil has and
still does endeavor to Annihilate and make void all the Decrees and Works of
God, concerning the Redemption and Salvation of the world, therefore, the
Devil is an enemy to the name of God.

Last of all, that spirit whose nature, is contrary to the nature of God, that
person must needs be an enemy to the name of God, but the nature of the devil
is in an unexpressable measure contrary to the nature of God, therefore the
Devil cannot be any other then an enemy to God, the Scriptures to prove these
arguments are these, Revel. 12.7.8.9. Genesis 3.1.2.3.4.5.14. Matt. 4.3.6.8.9.
Revel. 12.3.4. Matt. 2.16.20. Ephe. 6.12. Job 4.18. 1 Pet. 2.4. Ioh 8.48.

Secondly, the Devil is an enemy to the nature of God, I prove it thus,
first, that that is not or has not the nature of God in it, in one respect or
other, he must needs be contrary to it, for that which is not light, or which
light is not in, that must needs be darkness and so consequently contrary to
it.

But the devil is not the light, nor is not in this respect in the light,
therefore he must needs be an enemy to it.

Secondly, That which any person seeks continually to destroy and devour, that
he cannot at that time countenance and be a friend too, but the continual
practice of the devil is, how and by what means he may devour and destroy
the nature of God in a Christian, therefore he is an enemy to it, the joy of
the devil, if he have any is, that he by his might and power, being premitted,
can deface the Image of God, and hinder the workings of the divine nature in
the person of a Christian.

The desire of the devil is, that he might, never to all Eternity, be made
partakers of the divine nature, nor ever be united or reconciled to God, this
is a Maxim in Divinity, that a true and real desire of Grace, is Grace, the
Devil cannot have a spiritual desire to be united to God, but that desire
must in the rise of it, be produced by his union with God; your Familisticall
Infants, I mean those of the veil, do say, that all things without exception
are reconciled from this Scripture and the like, 2 Cor. 6.18, 19. Col. 1.20.
Now if all things be, then the devil is, if this be true then this absurdity
must needs follow, if the devil be reconciled, then Christ dyed, to reconcile
that which by his cross was totally captivated, and destroyed, Heb. 2.14. Col.
2.15.

Secondly, If this be true, then the Apostle does say that in one place, which
he denies in another, compare Col. 1.26. with Col. 2.15. Now if they say that
the Scriptures are false, and that there is no devil, they speak that that
their fathers in a better, subtiller way have spoken before them, therefore
they may save themselves a labor.

CHAP. XIII. A Description of the Spirit of man.
ALthough this be a difficult point, to show what the spirit of man is, and a
thing that I intend not to meddle with, in that way that many do, yet give me
leave to describe unto you what the spirit of man is; it is described in the
Word of God, therefore I make bold to give a definition of it, God has carried
my spirit through algreater and harder work then this is.

There be these opinions of the spirit of man, one is, that it is mortal, and
shall dye and perish with the body; others say that it shall dye with the body
but shall be raised again at the last day; others say that it is God, God in
his essence, as for this last sort I have made it the principal part of my
discourse to show the mysterious Antichristian falsehood thereof; and for the
further confutation hereof, I shall go on in this matter concerning the spirit
of man.

I desire to keep close to the rule, and I think this to be the surest way to
take to, that no man may wind and baffle me out in what I shall say and then
we shall see the blasphemy of these Doctrines to appear nakedly to our view,
consider of and lay to heart what I shall say to you, for I think that I shall
have many witnesses and testimonies on my side, when I have done, I shall
describe the spirit of man to you by these queries; the first Inquiery is this,
what is this spirit in its self? secondly in its action.

First Answer, The spirit of man was created and received a being, which it
had not before, by the Word of God, Genesis 2.7. Joh. 1.10. He was in the world,
and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not: the world was not
finished before the spirit of man was made, for the spirit of man was one of
those works that God made in the creation, God breathed in man, in the face of
man, the breath of life, and man became a living soul, 1 Cor. 15.45. The first
man was made (observe that expression,) a living soul, it had a beginning, God
had ordained that it should be, Heb. 11.3. But it had not a real substance
and being, before it was created, all things are eternal in reference to the
purpose of God, but nothing is eternal in reference to it self, nothing was
really neither in respect of it self, as it was in the creation; Gods purpose
was that it should be one of his works in the creation.

Some do conceive that because it was, and in a great measure still is, such a
great and glorious being, therefore it must needs be, not only of, but the
essence, or God himself, for when God breathed in Adam the breach of life, he
then did breathe in himself, and could breathe in no less then himself.

Again secondly, we acknowledge it was made by the Power, Spirit and Word of
God in its creation, yea, and we acknowledge further, that it is not only by
the power of God, but of the power, and is the power of God, we dare not
acknowledge any thing because of our imaginations, for they are deceitful, but
we are bold to affirm and contend earnestly for that that God has revealed
unto us by his Word and Spirit, 2 Cor. 5.6. 1 Cor. 2.22. ver. 10.

Thirdly, It is said by some, that if we will prove that the spirit of man is
the power of God, which indeed we do, here is our warrant, it is of God, Romans
9. last. Of him are all things.

Again, It is of God, once have I said it, says the Psalmist, yea twice, That
power belongs to God; it is suck a thing as cannot be attributed to any being,
so as to God, no man can challenge it, and say, that power in the least measure
belongs to me, no man has power of himself, either to be, or not to be,
either this or that, rich or poor, a King or a Beggar, to live or dye, to walk
or refrain from walking, Romans 13.1. There is no power but of God, now thus
far we can go and no farther, not in a way of truth, modesty, and safety,
unless we will make our selves of the number of them, or compare our selves to
them that praise themselves, saying, that no man can Preach such strange, high,
care, divine mysteries as they can.

He that is baptized with the Holy Ghost, knows all things by the same light
that God does, but this is not high enough, this may be plainly seen within the
Scriptures, he knows all things as God does, nay a little higher, he that does
submit to them, to God, may be made and called, and so be divine and God; This
is mystical Divinity, that none can understand but themselves, deifyed men,
therefore they live above the Moon, for they live in the Sun, but if we will
prove what was said before, they will disprove us by this that such a God is
not worth any thing (I am ashamed to express the very word) whose essence is
not where his power is; well, what I have said we have proved, and will
acknowledge, but not in every respect, for in some respects, it is an
Antichristian lying blasphemy, I Will speak but a word, it being already
sufficiently proved.

The spirit of man is God, and God is the life of man, God is all things, and
all things are God, not in his essence but in his appearance.

First, If the spirit of man be God, then why is it said that God made it, or
that man became such a thing? God cannot be made, he is without beginning, blot
out that Scripture.

Secondly, If the spirit of man be God, then he did know all things sensibly
and infinitely, and did do all things, and still does know all secrets both in
heaven and earth, in grace and in nature.

O mystical Antichrist, prithee tell me one thing, do not be found to be a
liar in every word, do thou know really and absolutely, that thou thy self
art God, and know all things as he does? then tell me this, what did
thou do? what was thy employment and work from all eternity? can thou not
tell? If thou art God thou can not forget thy self, nor be ignorant of thy
self, before thou did appear in this Organ or visible form, which before
was hid within thy self in silence and darkness.

But thou will answer me with this word, that he, that is the thing cannot
speak it but if any desire to know it, let him expect until he be the thing.

This is a poor come off, is not God as infinite in his Word, as he is in his
mind? observe that.

Again, if thou art God, why do thou not in thy preaching and writing,
discover unto thy members the secrets of all hearts, thou know not what I am
nowdoing against thee, thou know not how long thou shall live, nor how soon
thou shall die.

Again, if thy Spirit be God, show me all things in the path of nature, can
thou number the Stars, and call them all by their names? Can thou number
the sands of the sea, and count the measure of the Waters to a drop? Can thou
cover thy self with Darkness, and make the thick darkness thy Pavillion?
does the eyes of all Creatures wait upon thee, and do thou give them their
meat in due season, it is time to stop? If thou can, come forth and answer?
If not, Why do thou so exalt thy self, speak against, and without measure
blaspheme the Almighty,

The Spirit of man is not the Essence, but it is God in the appearance of his
power, and the power or spirit of man is God in that appearance.

When God made man, and put a spirit into him, he did put in or go into man
himself, but he did not put in, or go in himself, in his Essence, but in the
manifestation and discovery of his Essence; and so he appeared in all
Creatures, but in man after another manner, setting up a greater light and
manifestation of himself, than he did in all other Creatures besides, except
the good Angels; Job says, that the spirit of a man is the Candle of the Lord,
it is not the Lord in his being, for light and darkness are both alike to him.

The spirit of man is not, in the course of nature, a light to the Lord, to
discover any thing to him, but it is the Candle of the Lord, set up by him in
the bodies of men, by which light, they come to know God, and to know all
things that he has decreed, that by that light shall be revealed unto them,
Romans 1.19. For as much, as may be known of God was manifest in them, for God
has showed it unto them, now if that light had bin able to carry them forth,
into a spirituallity in all things, that as they knew God, so they might
glorify him as God, and not become vain in their imaginations, and so turn
not, nor make use of that knowledge which they had of God, to the exaltation
and setting up of that, that was not God, they had bin saved, verse
20.21.22.23.24.25. but that light was not sufficient for such a work.

Secondly, the spirit of man is of, through, and to God, that is, as he is the
Ordainer, Creator, Governor, and Upholder thereof, surely, there must needs be
a wonderful appearance of God, in all this, and this must needs be God in a
glorious appearance or discovery of himself in man, and yet his Essence is not
the nature life and spirit of man, a wonderful appearance of God in man, to
give and measure out into his Spirit, so much power and glory.

Thirdly, the spirit of man as it came forth in its first estate, out of the
hands of God, was the sweetest and the excellentest of all Creatures in this
world, and was heir of all things, being very frequent in Communion with God,
now the same spirit that he had then, he never lost, for then he would have
ceased from his being, and therefore all men have such a spirit as then God
gave unto Adam, that which he lost by falling, was that good, peaceable, holy
and glorious condition wherein he stood with God, this he lost, both for
himself and his posterity, in the day that thou eatest thereof, in dying thou
shall surely dye, now if by dying the Lord had meant, to take away his Spirit
in the being of it, then how comes it to pass that he lived so long, knew his
wife, and increased in his Generation, by which means we come now to have a
being in the world, what cunning Antichristian Poetical, Philosopher is there,
that can wind us out of any of these truths.

Fourthly, If Adam lost his spirit, and it was not one and the same with ours,
then did God raise up another contrary Generation in the World, and then what
kind of Death is that which he did, and we do now suffer, if that spirit was
destroyed in the being of it then it never after felt, or could be any ways
capable or sensible, See the book Entitled Divinity and Philosophy dissected.
either of a condition of Joy, or torment, but that, that we call the loss and
fall of man, that Antichrist, says, is nothing else but God in an appearance
of darkness, for the sins cause, and for the good of the man, that God and
man had made, that he might take an occasion by this darkness and obscure
appearance, to manifest himself to, and in the man, in all his Essential
glory, Answer, man by his fall instead of bringing Death to himself and to his
posterity, by this means he brought life and immortality, the Godhead and the
Essence to himself, if all this be true, it is time I think, to throw away
the Scriptures, in the beginning God made man Righteous, but he has found out
many inventions Eccles.

Fifthly, Bright Starr, That light is a pure simple naked and habitual faith,
Residing in the crown of the of the soul, and beholds God without any mean,
page 115. As if he should say, that the soul, by a habitual faith, beholds
God, without a Mediator, for, says he, nothing is but Gods will. page 70. the
will of God is God himself, therefore, nothing is but it, page 71. line 14.
and that this is a Divine truth according to the Scriptures, he turns you to
the first chapter, and there you shall see one lie proved to be a truth by
another, if this be a truth it is Impossible that there should be any
Mediator, and if this be true then the soul is God, and so God does behold
himself without any mean.
the spirit of man is a particular substance and power; besides the Essence of
God, yet there is not another Essence or Godhead besides that one, who is
Infinite and Eternal, all spirits whatsoever are so many particular
substantial powers, all powers, whatsoever are one in their Original, but
many in reference to their particular beings; if any man has locked himself up
in secret, and is very loath to come forth to show himself plainly to the
poorest capacity, whether he be for Christ or for Antichrist, yet let him now
come forth to help us against the mighty, or to help the mighty against
Jehovah; I will prove this truth to you by the Scripture and by Reason too.

Which is, 1 Pet. 3.22. At the right hand of God, gone into Heaven, unto whom
the Angels, Powers and might are subject, here is included in this, all the
spirits that are both in Heaven and Earth, now I prove that they are perfect
particular powers and beings besides God, the power of God in the Godhead is
God, and it is not compounded of parts and degrees, but the power of God, in
the several appearances of God, is not the life and being of him, but is the
life and being of Angels and men.

Secondly, the power of God, in his Essence cannot be made or brought into
subjection, under Jesus Christ, but the power of God in his several
appearances are, for God has so exalted the Lord Jesus, that all Creatures
both men and Angels are made subject to him, Philip. 2.9.10. But God cannot be
made or brought under subjection to God, as these Angels powers and mights
were; Again,

Thirdly, There cannot be a higher confusion, or A greater contradiction
imagined and expressed by the heart and tongue of man, then this, to think
that God, should ever bow down to the Lord Jesus, God in his Essence is the
blessed Trinity, in his person he is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, take
away a man's, or an Angels power from him, and what is he? Again,

Fourthly, It is impossible that ever God in his power, should be spoiled, by
the cross of our Lord Jesus, Col. 2.15. and has spoiled principalities and
powers, and has made a show of them openly, and has triumphed over them in
the same cross.

Fifthly, God had ordained and created these invisible powers for this one
maine end, that Christ in his cross might spoil, and triumph over them, for
the Everlasting glory and exaltation of his own name, The seed of the woman
shall break the Serpents head, Genesis

When has ever any Army, bin so exalted in glory as at that time, when they
can by one thousand, bring into subjection and to confusion many thousands?

This is the unspeakeable glory of the Lord Jesus, that he can bring forth from
under a poor low appearance on the cross, such a mighty and Infinite power
and glory, so as to spoil, to pull down, and lay in the dust, all the glory
of this world, thus much for a certain truth is clearly held forth in the
Word. Again,

Sixthly, The spirit of a man has many faculties, that goes, to the making up
of a complete spirit, and these had a beginning and were Created, and so were
all powers both in Heaven and Earth, for by him were all things created, which
are in Heaven, and which are in Earth, things visible and invisible, whether
they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalites, or Powers, all things were
created by him, and for him. Col. 1.16. I could give you a large Description of
the will of a man, what an irresistible power it is, until that power that
made it, do, or is pleased to persuade and allure it, there is no compelling
of it, will that is forced is not will, so also, the thoughts of a man, how can
he with his thoughts, soar up and down, and incompasse heaven and earth, and
bring home tidings of that which the tongue is never able to express, nor
indeed the whole heart able to conceive of, or comprehend, the devil, as I
said before, of all creatures, is the greatest power that is in this world, but
a Christian in the spirit of the Lord Jesus, is a power above the devil, in a
greater measure then the devil is in power above all creatures, Romans 8.37, 38.
He only is able to trample upon the devil, James 4.7. And by Faith to
overcome this world, 1 Job. 5.4. A Christian in power is next unto Christ, the
devil is next unto a Christian, Antichrist in power, is next unto the devil,
and a natural man next unto Antichrist, so a man in his affections is very
strong and mighty, who is it, or what is it, that can take off the mind of a
man from that which he has affection to, all the powers that are in the soul
are never in a Joynte^ Harmony, nor are ever knit in a stronger union, then
when they are upon one thing, met together in a band of love.

What is that that makes a man a monster in nature, but because his limbs and
joints are not according to the course of nature? what is the cause why some
men are foolish, and altogether void of Reason, but, because their spirits are
not according to that common frame, which usually the generation of the Sons of
men are in? the continual action of man's heart, is to live and move in the
devil; to have his heart so set upon himself and the things of this world,
that all created powers in Heaven and Earth are not able to take it off, 1 John
2.15. Ephesians. 2.2. what is that that makes men to be so resolute, so positive,
and wilful in all Heresies, Opinions, Disputations, and Works whatsoever, but
because that these three principal powers in their spirits, are deluded and
captivated by the god of this world.

Lastly, The life and spirit of man is not the wind in the Air, nor the
breath that is in man's body.

Objection, The spirit is a reasonable creature.

Answer, The wind is reasonable in reference to the creation, but in
comparison of man it is not; Man is fallen down into everlasting misery, and
raised up again into everlasting glory, does the wind know or understand this?

Again, The breath only is not the spirit, for the same reason that I said
before.

Secondly, The breath is visible, and may be seen, but the spirit is invisible
and cannot be seen, therefore it cannot be the spirit.

Thirdly, The breath that is in man, and the breath of a beast are both one,
under some considerations: first, they are both one in their original.
Secondly, They are both one in motion, and visible appearance; Lastly, They are
both one in their end, consider this, first, how God has united himself to
all his works, by which they come to be, and to subsist in their being.

Secondly, Consider how God has united one work to another, yet
notwithstanding this union, they remain several and distinct in their beeings
natures, motions, and possessions, the being of a Beast is not the being of
man, the nature of a beast is not the nature of Man, the motion of a Beast is
not the motion of Man, that which a beast has possession of, that is not, nor
cannot be the inward, internal eternal possessions of men, a Beast knows his
own kind from a man, this is not man's motion, nor the motion of breath,
therefore that cannot be the spirit. Thus much for a Description of God, of
Angels and men.

CHAP. XIV. A Description of the sin against the holy Spirit.
THe sin against the Holy Spirit is this, when a man is enlightened, and tasted
of the heavenly gift, and of the good Word of God, and is partakers of the Holy
Spirit, in such a measure, as not to be entangled or polluted with the world,
when a man out of that light and knowledge which he has of God, does make a
large acknowledgement of the Lord Jesus, a man that does delight to know God in
Jesus Christ, and does seek him daily, for such a man to fall away thus, he
does commit that sin which shall never be forgiven, neither shall there ever
be any mercy for that man in this world or that to come, the sins I shall sum
up in these several expressions; When a man shall make use of all that light,
knowledge, and strength which formerly he has received, in a wilful way, to
this end, that now by all this, he does deny the coming of Jesus Christ in the
flesh, for a man that has known Christ by the light of the spirit, and has
received a taste of the goodness of God, for such a man, with a good will and
delight, purposely against his conscience, against the strivings and motions of
the spirit, out of a hatred and malice against him and his members, for such a
man to deny Christ in his coming, to undervalue him, to laugh and make a scorn
or jeer of the spirit, in all that it says in the Scriptures, for a man to
mock at the servants of Christ; when they write, dispute, and contend, for that
Faith that was once given and cannot be given again, the Word says, that it is
impossible that such a man should be renewed again by repentance, seeing they
crucify again to themselves the Son of God, and make a mock of him, Heb. 6.4,
56. 2 Pet. 2.20. Matthew. 12 45. Esa. 58.2, 3.

O Antichrist, what do thou say to this? art thou able to come forth and
confirm thy Doctrine, by signs and lying wonders, can thou by thy turning
of Divinity into Philosophy, and Philosophy into Divinity, and so make up one
great mystery of Iniquity, draw away the third part of the Stars of Heaven,
the third part of Professors after thee, well this may be, thy number
increases apace, but those that are elected, shall never fall, we do look for
what we already see, for trying, apostatating, and backsliding times, but be
of good comfort, whosoever thou art that haste but as much Faith in, and love
to a particular crucified Jesus, as a grain of Mustardseed, which is the least
of all seeds, thou shall never fall off for ever, from thy communion with God
in the Lord Jesus, Romans 8 38. nothing shall be ever able to make a separation
betwixt thee and thy God.

But some may object and say, to what end do I thus labor to discover the
spirit of the Devil, and of Man, and the sin against the holy Spirit; wherein
does this describe and discover that mystical mischievous Antichrist, whose
Doctrines you undertake to overthrow by the Word of God.

Answer, By discovering and describing the devil, I prove and bear record to
many truths, and by proving and bearing witness to the truth, that it is the
truth; I condemn many Doctrines as being false, untrue, and not of God, but
such as would if it were possible, blot out the true knowledge and remembrance
of the true God, from the midst amongst us; there be these general Doctrines,
and particular heretical parts, which are discovered to be no other, then the
imaginations and lies of blasphemous lying spirits, the Familisticall Doctrines
in general which are described and confuted by the discovery or description of
the Devil are these;

First, It weakens and annihilates this Doctrine, viz, That there is but one
spirit in the world, and that is essentially God, if the Devil have a being,
as the Scriptures declare he has, than there are two spirits in the world, and
if there be two spirits, then of necessity one of them cannot be absolutely and
essentially God, unless we will acknowledge two Gods; now if there be such a
being or spirit, which is absolutely evil, and so a Devil absolutely; and
really, then this Doctrine is false which acknowledges but one spirit.

Again, If there be no devil, as they in all their writings often affirm
there is not, then is there no God neither, and this I prove by these Arguments.

First, He that willingly denies God in one respect, he denies him in all, but
this Doctrine does deny God to be in this respect, under this one maine
consideration; Therefore it denies God under all considerations, I shall
explicate this Argument thus, he that denies the Works of God, he denies God
himself, but this spirit will not acknowledge a devil, who is one of Gods
Works in reference to the Creation, it will not acknowledge that ever there was
such a being or spirit, such a work or creature, as he is whom we call by such
a name, therefore in denying him who is one of the works of God, yea, the
chiefest of his ways, as Job says, they deny God himself.

Secondly, Every work or creature that was, or ever shall be created, is an
appearance of God, my Argument is this, he that denies any of Gods works, he
denies the appearances and discoveries of God himself, but this Doctrine does
deny God in respect of his creatures, which are so many discoveries of him,
therefore it denies God himself, he that denies any one beam of the Sun, and
will not acknowledge it to be the light thereof, he denies the Sun it self,
for as sure as the Sun is, so sure is it that all its beams are its own proper
light, and there cannot be any division made, unless men will say, that it is
not in Heaven.

Thirdly, He that denies all the works of God, by him God is not acknowledged,
but this Doctrine does deny all Gods Works therefore it denies God himself,
all creatures do declare this Truth, that God is, now if all creatures which
do discover this, that God is, are not, then God is not, if that which in
truth discovers God to be, is not, then God, who is really discovered to be,
by these creatures which he has created, (is not.)

He that will not acknowledge that to be a creature, which in truth is a
creature, he denies all creatures, and holds that nothing is but God and his
will, Bright Star. Theologia.
he that denies Beelzebub to be, who is the prince of Devils, he denies all
the devils that are in hell, and hell it self, now if there be no evil
Angels, then are there good ones, for these Angels which are now evil, were
once good, and if the Scriptures which speaks concerning this, be not a truth,
then is no thing a truth that it speaks of, and then this damnable Paradox
stands firm, viz. that there is nothing in the creature, which is not the
Creator, nothing in the Creator, that is not God.

Fourthly, He that denies him that is begotten, Bright Star.
denies him also that does beget, but this Doctrine does deny Christ to be who
is begotten of God, Psalm. 2. Heb. 1. Joh. 1. Esa. 42. Act. 2. 1 John 4.
Therefore it denies God himself, I prove it thus, the devil tempted our first
Parents, and they obeyed, and so were condemned, and upon this Christ was
promised, Genesis 3. Romans 5. Now if the devil was not, how could he tempt, if
the devil never tempted, then man never sinned, if man never sinned, then
Christ was not promised, if Christ was not promised, then he never appeared, if
Christ never appeared, then he never dyed, was not raised, nor never ascended,
if all this be true, then you that have any knowledge of Christ, any relation
to Christ, any fellowshop with him in the spirit, 1 John 1. Phil. 2.1. Judge
for I appeal to you all, of all different opinions whatsoever; I say, judge
whether this does acknowledge any God, but what is in the creature, and so no
God at all, and this is the first general Doctrine, and some particular parts
together with it, which is described and confuted by a description of the
devil, and the Spirit of man; the second general that is described and
confuted by a description of the devil, the spirit of man, and the sin against
the Holy Spirit, is this, that all the abominations of men and devils are the
act of the Spirit of God; now if there be two spirits, then there are two
distinct actours two different works, all which cannot be the act of God; The
third Doctrine described and confuted is this, that nothing shall remain but
the godhead, their meaning is, that this world shall be eternal in its
generation, this present succession of ages and generations shall never end,
for God is all things, and all things are God, Bright Starr, Theologia.
now if it be a Truth, that there are more spirits then one, then this is true,
that they shall all come to judgment, they shall appear before God to receive
an everlasting portion, either of life or death, joy or torment, glory or
shame, Mat. 24.1. Cor 15. 2 Pet 3. Revel. 22. 1 These. 4 13, 14, 15 16, 17. 2
These. 1. even according as they are ordained, according as they have walked;
The fourth and last general is this, that perfection is in this life, their
meaning is, that there is no perfection at all, Divinity dissected. Bright
Starr, Page 77.78. lin. 13. page 79. l. 13 Theologia page 25. page 74. page 87.
l. 12. page 37.
for they define perfection to be God himself, now if the devil be, then he
is a creature, if he be a creature, then all creatures cannot obtain perfection
here, for the devil was charged with folly ever since the beginning, and
delivered unto chains of darkness, to be kept unto damnation, Jude. 2 Pet.
2. Job. 4.

Again, If the Scripture be a truth, then all men shall not be saved, and those
that shall, yet in this life, they have but a part of that which they shall
enjoy hereafter 1 Cor. 13. 1 Thessalonians. 4 13, 14, 15, 16. Now I leave the rest for
you to consider of.

CHAP. XV. An Exhortation to all Christians.
I Have a word or two to speak, and that is, to a public Preacher, to a
private Christian.

You that are famous for preaching of Jesus Christ, deliver not your minds in
such a way of mysterious obscurity, so as that not ten in a hundred can
understand your meanings, whether you be for Christ or Antichrist, 1 Cor. 14 19.

Secondly, Condescend and stoop down without thinking it to be a disparagement
to you, to the poorest weakest capacity, Romans 14.7. Chap. 1 14. Take heed of
preaching your selves and your own words to the people, 2 Cor. 4.5. Gal. 1.10.

Thirdly, for the confirmation and comfort of the members of Christ, by your
preaching of Christ, for the confounding of the hopes of Antichrist; clear your
selves from those Antichristian, Familisticall Reproaches and aspersions, that
are cast upon you, and upon that truth that you deliver, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2. to all
Christians that are not so public in your trying and examining of all
Religions, Doctrines, Spirits, and opinions whatsoever, be sure to hold fast a
particular crucified Jesus, 1 Thessalonians 5.21. Revel. 3.11.

Secondly, do not believe nor put confidence in any spirit or doctrine, what
ever it be, before thou see the spirit of the Lord Jesus, bearing witness to
the truth of that in thy own spirit, 1 John 4 1. Romans 8. for Satan,
Antichrist, and his false ministers, and Apostles, are now very thick to be
seen, in the form and shape of true Ministers, and good Angels, 2 Cor. 11.13,
14, 15.

Thirdly, look well to your communion, delight not, nor be be not taken up two
much with those who do preach and glory in that, which is not within the
measure or compass of their strength and understandings, boasting of things
which they never saw, 2 Cor. 11.12.13: Col. 2.18. vainly puffed up, with deep
secrets, Divine mysteries, unknown paradoxes, Col. 2.18. Delivering most of
their matter, unless it be now and then a gob, to feed their own bellies,
and the weak, Romans 16.18.

Last of all, labor to be much in love, if thou have any love in thee, now it is
time to manifest it, this is the greatest and highest excellency of all, there
is no grace nor glory above this, neither in God, nor men, 1 Cor. 13. this is
that, that shall abide with thee for ever, this is that, that makes thy spirit
to be so like unto God, this is that, that makes thy face to shine in glory,
what is all without this, knowledge does puff up and make men lofty, loose
and vain in their conversations, therefore love, wheresoever thou see the
Image of Christ in the least measure, without partiallity without Hypocricie,
James 2. Do not Respect, exalt, and cry up any man's faith and knowledge, with
a respect to his person, because he is Rich, has a gold Ring, and is in good
apparel, and bravely housed, and is in favor with the best and Richest sort
of Gentry, these are common actions amongst many, but consider of the life of
our dear Savior Christ whilst he was in the flesh, I know it is hard to do
this, but Remember the promise, to him that over comes will I grant, to sit
with me in my throne, even as I over came, and sit with my Father in his
throne. Revel. 3.

CHAP. XVI. A Petition presented to the Familists, with a further confutation
of their Erroneous Doctrines.
O Bewitched; deceiving Antichrist, I have some Requests to present unto thee
and they are these; first, you that are perfect men, you that can yield
obedience so, as to be made and called, and so become Divine and God, if ever
you would help and deliver a poor miserable damned Creature, Bright Star That
whatsoever God did or thought from eternity, is discovered and made known to
man, page 183. it is impossible that this should be true unless man were
infinite, Romans 11.33.34.35. Job 26.14. Chap. 11.7.8.9.12. Isa. 40.13.14.15. 1
Cor. 2.16. he that has the mind of Christ is not, whilst he is in this
world perfect in knowledge, neither does he know all things in such an Infinite
manner as God does, 1 Cor. 13.12. Chap 15.52.53.
according to your notion, out of misery and darkness, one that has had God
and all; but now have sold him and all to the Devil; and does still remain in
an estate of Emnity and Rebellion against God if your Religion be a truth, then
grant these petitions that I put up to you, and I will come into your
Congregation, and before ten thousand people deny all that I have written, and
willingly submit to you, the Requests are; these.

First, That you would but bring me into that place where I may enjoy but one
hours communion; with the spirit of that godly Priest, which made that book
that is so highly commended by you, but is dead as you say, above two hundred
years ago, that I may be Informed, convinced and converted by him, if man be
God as both you and he do say, Then is this possible and easy for you to
accomplish, God is al ways in communion with himself, and knows all things in
himself, for all things are God, and are in God, neither is it possible that
he should ever cease from his being, one and the same for ever;

Secondly, In all respects declare unto me, what is the present motion and
universal frame of every Creature, that has a being upon the face of the
whole Earth, the Words of the Holy Spirit are; that all things are naked and
open before him, with whom we have to do. Show me the way of an Eagle in the
air, the number of hairs on thy head, and tell me how many measures of dust
there is upon the face of the earth; how many sands upon the Sea shore, and the
wind that blows upon the earth, which some affirm is God, tell me from
whence comes it, and whether does it go? I say still that God knows all
things, but I cannot yet see that the winds and the sea do yield obedience to
thee.

My third Request is this, tell me you that have obtained perfection, whether
at all times, and in all estates and conditions whatsoever, you have and can
have according to your will, presently at your commandment, all things that
you stand in need of, to free you from all poverty, sickness, or any other
trouble, that does here in this estate of your perfection, commonly befall you.

Fourthly, See Theologia Germanica, That God is good, or to be made good, chap.
4. and yet he is such a good, as he is neither this nor that good, that can be
named known or manifested, but is also and above all, page 19. line 6.
show me who it is, and how it is possible, by any means that can be thought
of, or imagined by the heart of any deified man, to make God good, who is a
being of Infinite goodness, last of all come and declare to me, where I shall
be, and what I shall be, at all times, and in all places, whilst I have being
in this World, do you not know that some have undertaken to discover unto
many, what shall befall them while they are in this World?

You say that God is such a thing as cannot be spoken or written, but of him
who is the self same thing and knows it, page 31. line last, he who is not
God cannot say it, now you do grant that he that is the thing can know it, and
speak it, and none but he, now show me the man that will say that he is God,
I should be glad to see him, and talk with him, and I do believe if I could
but meet with such a one, that he would do more good for me than all the men
that ever I yet could see or meet with, God is not a shamed of himself,
neither is the afraid of man, whose breath is in his nostrills, for wherein is
he to be accounted of, be not ashamed of your Religion, if you be God what are
you a fraid of, you do deliver your minds in a corner, and are loath to
speak that at one time, which you will impudently affirm at another.

And what is the Reason that you do hear or preach at all, if the spirit of
man be God, who do you speak to, to your selves? life you say is one in all
Creatures, then what is it that you do declare, you will say, that you do
discover God by Preaching, why? thou art God, and so am I too, what can thou
discover, is there any thing besides God, nay, is not every thing that has any
life or being, God? do thou Preach God, to God, why, he is Infinite, in
knowledge, what can you Reveal to him? what is the Reason that many of you do
keep a babbling in private and public, is not all this needless and to no
purpose.

But you will say, that you cannot feed your bellies and cloathe your backs,
and provide for your Families without this, you must do something for a
living; Answer, The earth is the Lords and the fulness thereof, Secondly, God
stands in need of none of these things, he is not, nor cannot be subject to
hunger and want as we are, and besides all this I Will show thee where thou do
bring another gross contradiction and absurdity upon thy self Germanica, page
45. line the 7. you say, that he who is it, and knows it, cannot speak it,
will you be your own Judge in this, then do but look by the light of Reason,
and you shall acknowledge the falsehood of these two, a forenamed.

First, There is a God, that is true, Secondly, there is but one God, that is
true also, is it not? now give me leave to discove^ thy Familisticall Atheism
in this, if there be none of you that will deny this, that God is, and that
there is not two but one, now how is it possible that either one or both of
these should hold true, by thy confused confounded Description of God?

First, you say that he that is God can know it, say it and write of it, this
is a truth and cannot be denied by any, that will acknowledge God, but how this
a truth? why thus, it is a truth if it be right in its original, in its sense,
and in its end, now take away any of these, and it cease from being a truth
under all considerations, truth in all these is God.

God is truths Original, it came forth from God, Joh. 16.28. and 17.8. and was
ever with God, Chap. 17.5. and 14.24. Proverbs 8.22. Joh. 1.1.2. and 3.11. the
whole Scriptures does witness to the truth of this, Act. 14.3. Joh. 8.18. Act
15.8. 1 Cor. 2.1. 1 John 5.6. 1 Cor. 1.6. 1 Timothy 6.13. Joh. 7.7. Act. 10 43.
Jere. 31.34. Mich. 7.18. Isa. 41. Again, the true sense and meaning of truth,
is not sensual and carnal, but divine and Heavenly, Tit. 1.2. 2 Timothy 2.13.
God is also all truth in its end, God is one in his end, as he is in being, 1
Cor. 8.4.5.6. Ephesians. 4.4.6. 1 Timothy 2.5. Revel. 21.6. Joh. 3.33. Romans 3.4. 1
Cor. 1.9. 1 These 5.24. Heb. 6.18. 1 John 1.9. and 5.20. now that, that you say
is true, but how? not from a false original.

Though men by reason can discover, and speak that, that in many respects is
true, yet if they seek to make themselves, Reason, or any other, the Original
of truth, they then do no longer speak it, but withold it in
unrighteousness, as for an instance, or example, for a Familist, a Papist, or
an Atheist to say that God is, or that there is one truth, which is God, now
this saying is a truth, that is, so long as men hold it forth as the original,
but for any man to say that God is, and I am this God, Essentially he destroys
truth, and sets up false-hood.

Secondly, so long as truth, is kept to its own sense, and discovered according
to its own meaning, it abides one and the same, I speak now of it in
reference to men, but when once a truth is spoken, and then a sense or meaning
brought in, either by Men or Devils, such a sense as is according to reason,
then is truth denied, and man separated.

Lastly, if truth do not hold firm in its end, it is not then truth but
error, now truth in it self cannot be changed into a lie, but men withold
it, and mix their own mind and reason with it, so that whereas it was truth
in the first, its now false in the last, for a man to say that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh, and to speak it to an Antichristian Familisticall end, that
he may by degrees allure and deceive, and so by speaking one truth, put of a
hundred heresies, now judge what truth this can be, just as the Devil did to
Christ, Matt. 4. Who did seem to ground all upon a principle of truth, but to
this end, that he might overthrow him in the work of Redemption.

Again, you say that he that is it, and knows it, meaning God, cannot speak
it, but if any desire to know it, let him expect until he be the thing, now do
but observe the contradictions that I draw forth from your own principles, if
the spirit of man be God according to your many affirmations, then what sense
or Reason is there in this expression, should God expect to be that which he is
from Eternity, but I Will go another way to work, with you.

You seem to hold forth thus much by this expression; first, That there is a
condition wherein man is and may be, in which he is not God.

Secondly, He not being God in this estate, but having a desire to know God,
he must expect until he himself be that God, that he desires to know, now it
is manifested plainly, that you say one thing now, and another anon, and do
not well know what to say, for it being a confused Religion that you plead for,
I know no other way that you can have to plead for it, but in a way of
confusion.

It is impossible for you, and altogether against all reason, both humane and
divine, to go about to maintain order, by that that is confused and out of
order, if you will but hearken to reason, I have by the light thereof
sufficiently proved and discovered, the falsehood and impossibility of
maintaining, that opinion that you plead for, to be a truth, and of God, is it
not impossible for any man, though never so great and mighty in carnal wisdom
and Phylosophicall understanding, to maintain a truth by a mere lie, to hold up
a divine substance, by a mere shadow.

Again, If man be not God, as in truth he is not, not in these respects that we
have spoken of, then shall he never be God, for it cannot stand with the
nature of any thing in God, to be, and yet not to be, thou do to the
understanding of the weakest capacity, plainly in all thy conclusions deny the
very being of God, for, I reason much with you under the consideration of
Atheism, if there be any God at all, which you will not deny, then is it not
possible that ever he should be such a being as you describe him to be; you
acknowledge nothing perfectly, neither God, man, nor devil, but with a
compounded mixture of all together; deny Scripture both with heart and tongue,
and yet seemingly, for fear, to allure, for profit, fashion, and custom, draw
all things from the Word, and would make that a cloak for all your heresy,
corruption, and outward filthiness, and because the truth of God can never be
turned into a lie, God in his infinite and glorious being, overcome by the
devilish oppositions, powers, and blasphemies of the devil and antichrist,
who would feign drive all to this, to cause men to wonder at them, follow them,
and acknowledge no other God, Christ; and Scripture, than themselves, and those
words that do proceed out of their mouths.

Now because the truth does vindicate it self from all such devilish
interpretations, by inabling the Saints of the most high God, to go forth in
the power of the spirit, and to put to silence.

These seeming Angelical subtle beasts, that would by their enchantments draw
the whole world a wandering after them, therefore they blaspheme.

These are such as speak evil of those things which they know not, they would
that all men should know, that none knows God but they, and under this notion,
of their knowledge of God, they cease not continually to breathe our evils and
blasphemies against him, whom in truth they never saw, and whatsoever they know
by nature; as beasts which are without such a light of Reason now in all those
things which formerly they have known by the light of grace and all things that
they now know by the light of Reason, in all these, for want of a true and
powerful principle of grace, to overcome and master their own proud
self-conceited imaginations of God and of all things, I say, that in all this
they are most abominably corrupted and defiled, confused and so confounded,
that their own words will, and are already come in as sufficient witnesses to
judge and condemn them.

Jude 10.12, 13. Then is the love of a Christian made manifest, when he does
feast his brethren, with all those sweet and glorious things that he has
received from God, but these men are clouds in such feasts of charity, who with
one high elevated word or expression of God, will according to their power,
turn all joy into sorrow, and all light into such a mystical darkness, that
though it be so, yet knowing men shall be so deceived, that they shall take it
to be the highest light and glory of all, these are they that feast with you
without all fear, feeding themselves, for when we ask them why they are so
merry and joviall, they will answer that none have such a right to all things
as they have; and whatsoever they do, they do it without fear, either to God
or men, there being no account to be given to God, they themselves being God,
for one while they say that the spirit and life of all men are God: at another
time they will say, that if any desire to know God, let him expect, and so
indeed he may expect long enough before he be what they themselves say they
are.

These men do preach and pray, feast, laugh, and talk, without fear of hell,
sin, death, or damnation, for there is nothing that shall remain to eternity
but, the Godhead that is in all creatures, they do feed themselves in two
respects:

First* They feed their bellies; Secondly, they feed their fancies too, and
they have many men's persons in admiration, because of these two advantages.

Again, In page 52. line 6. He says, That perfect God and perfect man are
one: how can this bed? why thus, Man cannot be perfect unless he be God, and
God is not perfect without man; so that perfect God, and perfect man, are one
perfect God, what sense is there in all this, and what other conclusion can be
drawn from these words? for, says he, when man does yield and give place to
God, that then God himself there is man, and do and leave undone whatsoever
he will.

Wherein observe that God cannot be man, until man give place to God.

Secondly, That whatsoever work he has to do, in that work he may be
disturbed and hindered by the opposition of man, so that if man will, then God
shall be true man, See Theologia Germanica, pa. 8. lin. 3. page 52. lin. 7.
and work alone, and do, and leave undone, whatsoever he will.

Thirdly, When man will yield, then God becomes that that he never was before,
for God is not man, nor man God, whilst man is in rebellion, but when man does
submit and give place to God, then God becomes man, and works alone, and does
all things, but it cannot be till then.

Fourthly, How can this be? if the spirit of man be God, then who must man
yield and give place to? and upon what terms must it be done, must he give
place to God? why, he himself is God, and must he give place to God, upon this
condition that he may be deifyed? why, that by his own talk he is already, now
is it not a senseless thing for a man that is already in London, to go a
hundred miles about that he may come to it, will any man be so void of
reason, as to give me ten thousand pounds, Theologia Germanica, pa. 78. lin. 4.
and so onward.
that he may quietly possess his own estate which he has already quietly in
his possession? He says that there is no action but essence in God, that as
God is goodness, light, love, truth and virtue, all is one essence in God, and
that they cannot be brought into action.

Answer, Then we must conclude thus much, that good knowledge, light, love,
truth, and virtue in God, are not nor cannot be brought into action.

Let all the world that knows any thing judge of this, here be two branches in
this Doctrine; first, That there is no action, but essence in God, and this I
deny, for these Reasons;

First, All things are in God, his essence comprehends and contains all
things; see page 2. lin. 1. Now if there be nothing but essence in God, and yet
all things are in him, then every creature is the divine and incomprehensible
essence.

The second is, that if there be no action in God, then all creatures as they
are in God, are without all life, being, and motion, Act. 17. Every creature
does live, move, and has a being in God, this is an absurd contradiction that
they say. My second Reason is this:

All things in all heavenly, spiritual, and glorious respects, are the act of
God alone, the creation, and preservation of all things in heaven and earth,
are the act of God.

Secondly, A Christians Election, Redemption. Justification, and eternal union
with, through, and by the Lord Jesus, is the glorious and unexpressible act of
God.

O Christians, if it were not for this, where would your comfort and
everlasting glory be? but you shall hear Antichrist in another language
presently. Chap. 29. He does now confute himself in such a manner that I need
not to speak much concerning it, except it be now and then a word, to help
him, as I do in all my writing, to make out his matter in plain English, he
says, to God as God, it appertains that he lay himself open, know and love
himself, and that he manifest himself to himself, in himself.

Answer. What need is there that I should know that which I already know in
such a measure, as that I cannot by any means know any more?

God is Infinite in the knowledge of himself and of all things in himself,
without all beginning, without all increasing in knowledge from Everlasting to
everlasting, but is, or can all this be without Action, now he calls Gods
opening of himself to himself, the distinction of persons, this cannot be
true in that Respect whereunto he speaks it, in the deified man there is
something, says he, which belongs to God, and not to the Creatures, and
this God is in himself without the Creatures, Originally, or Essentially, not
in form or Action, because he cannot conceive of God to be brought into form
or action according to men therefore he denies all motion in God* he does it
but in this, mark the next, and yet, says he.

God would have this same, what is that; put in practice, God wills a thing
without motion, can that be? I mean a Divine motion, a life that is Infinite,
as God is all in his works in reference to himself, for says he there it
is, where is it? that it might be conferred into action and so exercised, now
he gives you Reasons enough himself to prove this, if there were, says he,
no action but Essence in God, what should God be? should he be Idle, what then
should it profit, for that which is of no use (be careful in Reading,) is not
at all, now this neither God nor Nature would have, but if God would have
himself exercised and brought into action, which cannot be done without the
Creatures, it is then necessary that it should be so done, what then? if it
were neither this nor that, nor if it were not any work or action or the like,
what should it be, or what should God himself become to be, or what should he
himself be? Now by these questions; all which, are his own, he has saved me
a labor: one word or too to the mad man in his three particulars, that God is
the Creatures ^easonablenesse.

Secondly, that God gave himself and all to man, and ^^an sold God and all to
the Devil, Last of all that God ashumes an Angel of darkness, here lies the
mad simple contradiction, of this she female Familisine, in it self. First,
if man be God, so he has bin from Eternity, for God has no beginning, now to
whom should man sell himself and all to, to himself? can God give any thing
to himself that he has not in himself, now as you say all things are God
and are in God, there is nothing, besides God or without him, this I Will prove by
more then a hundred expressions in your writings.

Secondly, if man sold God and all to the Devil, than man had a greater power
then God, or was God willing to sell himself to the Devil.

Thirdly, if God be sold, then he stands in need of a Redeemer, or of a
Ransom; Now who can Redeem God? Who can give a sufficient Ransom to deliver
him out of the hands of the Devil, what, there is two Eternalls, is there, and
thou art one of them, prithee which is the greatest?

Lastly, this cannot be, by thy own words, for sometimes you say that there is
but one Spirit or one God, sometimes you say that the body or outward organ of
man is without beginning and without end, being hid potentially in God, and
sometimes thou say that God, is both God, Man Devil, and all things, now
how can this stand, or how can God be so, and be called so: now if there be but
one God, then what Devil can there be, and to whom can the Almighty,
Omnipotent, and Infinite, ever blessed God be sold to, Do thou not
blaspheme; this Monster I have already strangeled, therefore I Will speak no
further to it.

The Conclusion.
NOw you cannot choose but love and embrace me for what I have spoken; and
though I speak never so much against you, yea though I should kill you a
thousand times if it were possible, yet you would wish all good to befall me
Germanica, page 80. and that for these Reasons, First, adeified man knows
nothing but to love. Secondly, all things are the Act of God, be not angry with
God. Thirdly, if your words were true, I am God as well as you. Thus much for a
Description of Familisme, other ways called mystical Ant christ.

The Postscript.
Dearly Beloved,
I Am engaged to add this, at the conclusion of all, because of the brevity
and shortness in my Epistle, I entreat you, not to except against the
universality of my Dedication, it concerns you all as I said before, to you I
speak, whose defire is to embrace a particular crucified Jesus, I do not
present this to any other, because it concerns not any other, but you, you are
all engaged in this quarrel, as well as I am, you are bound to the Lord Jesus,
who is your Savior and my Savior, your God and my God, in a bond of Faith and
love, to lay out all your strength and ability for the exaltation of his name,
against all those who are enemies to his truth, and contemners of his glory, I
speak to all that are in union with Christ, high and low, great and small, from
the richest Palace to the poorest Cottage; I have a Question or two to ask
you; an Information or two to declare to you; and a Request or two which I
desire to present unto you, most humbly craving these of you, not for my own
sake, but for your Saviors sake. The first question is this:

Is not the glorious person of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, very dear
and precious to you, in all your private and public meditations, I remember
what the Prophet David said, Lord, who have I in heaven but thee, or on earth
that I desire in comparison of thee? as if he had said, although there are
Gods many, and Lords many, yet to me there is but one God, in heaven, nor in
earth neither, there is no person in heaven, that is so dear to me as thou
art, no being is so glorious as thy being is, no spirit in heaven has done,
or is able to do that for my soul, which thou have done, thou have loved me
with an everlasting eternal love; Lord who have I in heaven but thee? Psalm.
103.1.2. Thou have loved me with such an unexpressible infinite love, such an
exceeding love, as never eye has seen, ear heard, nor none of all thy Saints,
that either have been before me, or shall be after me, can conceive of, 1
Cor. 2.9. Lord who have I in heaven but thee? There is no other God besides
thee, I know this to be a truth which I speak of thee, Psalm. 73.28. and 83.
last, Thy love is so exceeding high, that Angels do admire at the glory
thereof, Ephesians. 3.18. Lord what is man that thou art mindful of him, or the
son of man that do visit him? Who have I in heaven but thee? thou have done
much for me, thou art my portion and inheritance, I have no other portion in
heaven besides thee, thou have no reason or cause on my part, to do any thing
for me, my righteousness extends not to thee, it cannot add to thy glory,
it cannot increase thy blessedness.

Thou haste forgiven me all my iniquity, thou have not left one unpardoned,
thou have blotted out all my sin, as a thick cloud that it shall never be
remembered, nor laid to my charge, Psalm. 32.2, 3. and the 103.1. Lord who have I
in heaven but thee?

Or on earth, that I desire in comparison of thee, thou have made me to be
one of thine anointed ones, thou have conferred an earthly Crown of glory upon
me, and committed a Kingdom to my charge, all the delights and glories of
this world, are round about me, I am incompast in the midst thereof, (yet) who
have I in earth, that I do so highly prize and value in comparison of thee?
Are not all the glories of this world as a heap of dross in comparison of
thee? is my life and kingdom so glorious in my eye as thou art? shall not my
honor, glory, and outward greatness praise thee, Psalm. 108.1.

My second question is this, are not the members of Christ dear to you above
all things in this world, next unto Jesus Christ, are you not willing to assist
them upon all occasions, are you not willing in all your pomp and glory, to
own a poor Lazarus, if Christ be in him, for your Brother, are you not
willing for their sakes, to do much, to suffer and undergo much, by
contending for that Faith, which was once given, and cannot be given again?

My last question is this, is any thing more contrary to the inward temper and
inclination of your spirits, then those Doctrines which do not acknowledge
Jesus Christ? are not these great enemies to you, and do they not make great
breaches in your spirits, is it any joy and pleasure to you to hear many able
knowing persons, scoff, and make a mock of Christ and him crucified, do you
not continually put up supplications to God, for these poor, fallen, apostatized
spirits, who once made Christ their chiefest joy, and would have been very
contrary to them, that should have said but that of Christ, which they
themselves speak now.

My Information is, concerning my particular judgment, and those that I plead
against, and it is this, I present this to all you that fear God, whether
Presbyterians or Independents, you that are for the Baptism of Infants, or for
the Baptism of Believers, to you all do I present this, my information
concerning those that I write against, is this, whilst we are striving and
contending about different opinions, many of which are things of indifferency,
whilst we about these are a striving and contending, the common and grand
enemy of our peace, takes an advantage at these contentions, and vain
janglings, and so makes this time, which is a time of disagreement and discord
amongst the Saints to be his opportunity to step in and rob you all, of all
the sweet and precious things of God, which are most sweet, and dear unto you,
just as if two loving dear Brethren, should for a small matter fall out with
one another, and in the mean time a common Theife, an enemy to them both, comes
and cuts their throats, My Petition and humble request to you all is this:

I pray you for Jesus Christ's sake, to except of this pooremite, that I have
cast into your treasury, and to cover all infirmities with love, I hope I have
spoken to the experiences of many of you, if this be a truth that I have
written, then you know who is the Author thereof, when you speak, says our
Savior to his Disciples, it is not you that speak, but the spirit of your
Father that speaks in you: The person of the Lord Christ, is the Author of
all Truth, and if so, then receive this, if it be a truth, not for my sake,
but for your Saviors sake.

My second Request is this, assist me I pray you, against this spirit, who
would rejoice in the total overthrow and confusion of us all: He that hears
you, says our Savior to his Disciples, hears me, and he that hears me,
hears him that sent me: he that is an enemy to Christ, cannot be a friend
to any of his Members; venture life, and all for Christ, and whatsoever we part
with, let us never either for fear or favor, let go a particular crucified
Jesus, of our selves we can do nothing, but through Christ we can do all
things, 2 Cor. 3.5.

FINIS.
The Contents.
CHAP. I.
WHat Christ is unto and in the heart of a Christian. The Doctrines and
Arguments of the Familists, do prove great troubles and trialls to many
Christian, p. 1 Jesus Christ will be a Christians guide, in the greatest
trouble that can befall him. p. 2 The Familists are very confident, that by the
knowledge of Astrology and the strength of Reason, they shall be able to
conqueour over the whole World, as Goliath made account to conquour over David.
p. 2. 3 Jesus Christ by guiding a Christian, will so comfort him, (as) that
though all the Antichristian Familisticall floodgates thorowout the world be
let out upon him, yet they shall never drown and destroy that faith and
confidence which they have in a particular crucified, Jesus. p. 3. 4 Jesus
Christ will be a Christians companion also, although his way may be darkened,
by Reason of that Familisticall Jesuiticall cloud of darkness which may over
shadow the face of the whole earth. p. 4. 5
CHAP. II.
There be seven Antichristian doctrines, which are described and confuted in
order, the first is laid down in this second Chapter which is this, that there
is but one spirit or life in all creatures both in Heaven Earth, and Hell, and
that life which is one and the same in all creatures, is absolutely and
Essentially God. p. 6 This Doctrine, is proved to be a greevious blasphemous
lie, by nine Arguments, there is no Scripture or Reason, either Divine or
humane, that can be brought in for to justify the truth thereof. p. 7. to the
13
CHAP. III.
The second error which they hold, that go by the name of Familists, is this,
that all things whatsoever are the act of God, that all creatures, Angels, and
Men are at all times, in all works acted and ruled by the spirit of God, p.
13. The truth is laid down and acknowledged, which is this, that God is the
supreme ordainer and mannager of all things, the power is Gods, the impudency
is the creatures. p. 13. 14. and 22 That God is not the actor of all things, is
proved both by Scripture and Reason, but that many works are acted by men and
Devils, which cannot be attributed to God, but by speaking as high blasphemy
as any heart can imagine, or tongue express, p. 15. A description of sin, p.
17. 18. 19. 20
CHAP. IIII.
The third error is this, that nothing shall remain to Eternity, but shall
perish and come to nothing, but the Deity that is now the life of all
creatures, p. 24 That the world shall not continue to Eternity, is proved to be
a truth by the Scriptures, that is, not in the same manner of subsisting as it
is now, that it shall perish and come to nothing, and all creatures together
with it is disproved, for there shall be a new world for the Saints, and a time
of judgment for those that have not obeyed the Gospel. p. 24. 25. 26
CHAP. V.
The fourth error is, that the Bible is a mere shadow, a false History, a
confused lying Allegory, being of no more Authority than any other book or
the Apocrypha. p. 26 The Scriptures are vindicated, and proved to be the Word
of God by ten Arguments, from, p. 26. to the 37
CHAP. VI.
Which proves the coming, Death, Resurrection Ascension and Intercesion of our
Lord Jesus, which is absolutely denied by all the Principle Doctrines and
writings of the Familists. p. 37. to the 49
CHAP. VII.
The Sixth Error is this, that all Ordinances are but meat for babes, that a
man should live above them, without the use of them. p. 49
CHAP. VIII.
The Seventh Error is this, that perfection in the highest degree both of grace
and glory, is to be enjoyed in this life, before the dissolution of this
form, or death of the body. p. 53 The Error is divided into two branches, the
first part of it is in this Chapter overthrown by ten Arguments, proved by
Scripture to be a damnable lie, being no other but a Jesuiticall imagination.
p. 53. 54. 55. 56
CHAP. IX.
The second Branch of this error, is handled in this Chapter, which is this,
that all the Attributes of God, proper to his Divine Majesty, are described in
our mertall flesh. p. 57 Wherein these two questions are propounded. First,
what are the glorious Attributes of God? Answered, by discovering nine of them.
1. The Power of God. p. 57. to the 65 2. The Wisdom of God. p. 65 3. The Mercy
of God. p. 66 4. The Justice of God. ibid. 5. The Presence of God. from p. 66.
to 70 6. The Providence of God. p. 71 7. The Immutability of God. p. 72 8. The
truth and Faithfulness of God. ibid. 9. Gods Eternity. p. 73, 74
The second is, what is the Mortal flesh of man? Answered by five particulars.
p. 75 Something concerning the Passion of Christ. p. 76
CHAP. X.
A Description of God, according to the writings and Doctrines of the
Familists. p. 76
CHAP. XI.
Antichrist in his Athiesticall description of God, discribed and confuted, by
a description of God, as he has discovered himself in his word. p. 79 In this
Chapter, these four things are treated on. 1. What God is in himself. p. 80.
to the 92 2. What he is in Christ. p. 90 3. What he is in a Christian. p. 92.
to the 95 4. What he is in all creatures. p. 81. to the 95
Three things concerning the Trinity. 1. The union and distinction of natures
in one person. 92 2. The union and distinction of two persons, in one nature.
p. 94, 95 3. The order of these three persons, thus distinguished. p. 91
That Christ and a Christian are both one by union, yet not without distinction
both of persons and natures. p. 81 The difference between Christ and a
Christian, in this glorious union, is handled in these particulars. 1.
Difference, concerning the Person of Christ. 2. Difference, concerning the
Offices of Christ. p. 93 3. Difference, concerning Christ in his Essence. p. 94

CHAP. XII.
A Description of the Devil, as God has discovered him in his Word, and by
Reason, proving him to be, and to be such a one as he is discovered to be. p.
95. to the 106
CHAP. XIII.
A Description of the spirit of man in two respects. First, What it is. p. 106.
to the 114 Secondly, What it is not.
CHAP. XIV.
The sin against the holy Spirit described, wherein there is one objection
nominated, and Answered. p. 115 to the 119
CHAP. XV.
An Exhortation to all Christians, whether private or public. p. 119
CHAP. XVI.
A Petition presented to the Familists, with a farther confutation of their
erroneous Doctrins. 120. to the end A Postscript.
FINISs

