THE Copy of a Letter from THE REARE-ADMIRAL OF THE ENGLISH FLEET FOR THE
COMMON WEALTH OF ENGLAND, TO AN EMINENT MERCHANT IN LONDON.

Being a true and plain Narration of the whole Proceedings and Fight betwixt
them and the Dutch Fleet near the Downs, upon the 19. day of May, 1652.

June 1st. LONDON, Printed by G. D. for William Hope, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the North door of the Old Exchange, 1652.

The Reer-Admirals Letter to an Eminent Merchant in London.
SIR,
LEast my silence altogether may breed suspicion of neglect to my friends,
although you may well guess I have little time yet to write, being scarce
recruited with any rest, and having many things in head and hand at this
season; yet I shall briefly offer thus much by way of advice, to the end you
may with us acknowledge, that we have great encouragement to believe, that the
pledge of Gods favor to us, is a sufficient Testimony amongst many more, that
he is amongst us, and will appear in glory. The 18 of this Instant about ten a
clock in the forenoon, Van Trumpe with 40 sail of Ships of War more, appeared
very near the back of the Goodwin, the weather being haisie, we could not see
him before. At which time of his appearance, my self being commanded thereunto,
was left in the Downs, and wore a Flag at the Maintopmast head, and with me
seven ships were left, the rest of the Fleet being with the General to the
Westward, they consisting of 12. sail, when I saw them luffing round in with
the Southsands head, the tide of Flood being just then come; I concluded he was
resolved for the Downs, and intended to have dealt with us, he knowing by
intelligence that our Fleet was divided. I presently got loose, and those with
me, and were in readiness for them with that small strength we had. But within
two hours after he had lain muzled between the Sand-head and the Forland, two
Frigots appointed by the General Trump, came toward us, which were met by one
small Frigot, I sent out for that purpose to understand their Resolution; who
answered, that they had a message to deliver to the Commander in the Downs, so
they came into the Road, and the Captains of them both came aboard me, who in
the name of their Admiral saluted me, and gave me this account of his approach
so near: Namely, that he thought it necessary to send them to give this
intimation of assurance, that he came with no intent to offer any injury to
the English Nation, and withal desired there might not be apprehension of any
such thing, for he was forced thereunto being put to Leeward with his Fleet by
the Northerly winds that had blown hard, and that the day before he rode off
Dunkirk, where diverse of his Fleet had lost their Anchors, and so forced to
Leeward. This complement I received with great allowance on my part, in point
of Credence; looking at this but a juggle, and could not otherwise expound
this, but a high affront to this State, and a great provocation to us, and by
his Messenger returned this Answer, that in part I believed their coming so
nigh was occasioned by the winds. But I know well it was in their power whether
that day they would have come so nigh us, and so returned a complement to their
Admiral, and desired, if he were real in what he pretended, he would remove
his quarters, else we should interpret it otherwise, and gave him to understand
that our Admiral was plying up toward this place being Crucing abroad. Among
other discourse they told me their Admiral would have come into the Road, but
was not willing to strike his Flag: To which I returned him answer, that we
should expect nothing more nor less, but what they know to be the ancient
right of this Nation, and that would be expected not only here, but elsewhere
in these Seas wherever we met him. And whatever our strength was in their
outward Observation, we had the strong God on our side, who would judge between
the Nations, and whether they intended War or Peace, it did not signify much
to me, but wished the hand of God might be upon that man, who should be first
cause or ground of the breach between us. For our parts they might see sensibly
that we had no such intentions, unless forced thereunto. So they returned with
this message, and that evening the whole Fleet anchored off the S. Foreland in
the fair way. Of all this I gave account to the Council of State, and also
dispatched away a small Vessel with the like to the General Blake, which came
to his hand that night, and in the morning I received return from him, being
between the Nesse and the Foulstone. All that night I kept a guard by two
Frigots that lay at a distance from me, and one from another, betwixt us and
them, to give sight of their motion, but they moved not that night. About noon
the nineteenth day, we set sail with my Squadron toward Dover, supposing by
that time I had the length of the Foreland, I should see our General, who that
Flood would be with us: And immediately the Hollands Fleet weighed anchor, and
all stood off toward the coast of France. I bore away to the Westward, and
within an hour saw our Fleet at three Leagus distance almost, they plying we
came near them apace; all this while Trump stands over, and as I suppose, was
fitting his Ships, and consulting, what to do, for by this time he saw our
General: Indeed I thought surely he would have plied homewards to avoid
striking. But very suddenly after he bore up, and all his Fleet, forty one in
all, and made all sail, himself in the Van steering right our General, and so
seasonably did God order things according to our thoughts, that were just, and
were in conjunction with both our Squadrons by the time that he was come to
our Admiral: He most insolently bore right to him with his Flag abroad, at
which the General shot once, a second time, and a third; Upon which Trump fired
his broad side, or the greatest part at him, and withal put abroad a bloody
Flag under his other, upon which every of us addressed to the Engagement,
according to that God called us unto: Their Ships generally firing upon us
first, and indeed the reason of that in part was, because we would get nearer
them, that so our Ordnance might do the better execution on them, and withal
we look at it as our advantage in point of Innocence, that they struck us
first.

About four in the afternoon we began, and continued fighting till it was
dark. Trump steered a way right before it, the wind being Easterly, his Fleet
followed accordingly, we being on his right wing, some of us endeavoring to
break his body, divided them into two or three parts, wherein they shuffled
themselves into clusters, but by reason many of our Ships and Friggots sailed
very heavy by reason they are foul, we could not so fully attain our desire
upon them, yet by the help of God gave them so much, that they had no mind to
engage any further then we could force it: for they made all sail they could,
most of them, and as we coveted to be near them they declined, and I do
verily believe they were heart-strucken notwithstanding their insolent Bravado.
This gave us a clear call, and added a great deal of resolution to us, that
they sought us, and came to us to make the quarrel, when as they might have
avoided it do what we could. Our men very unanimous in the Work: And I am very
confident upon very safe grounds of Faith, that they should be as driven
stubble before the whirlewind of the Lord. I shall not add more, I bless God I
fear before him, He is our strength and our confidence. But surely they quitted
themselves very dishonorably: forasmuch as they suffered us to take one of
their Fleet, of thirty Guns, and as I presume by all circumstances we sunk
another of the same force: both which fought very stoutly, yet none of their
Fleet would succor them, so great was their haste, and I do verily think, that
if we had had one hour or two more before it was dark, you would have received
a better account of many of the rest. As for that Ship that was taken, she is
with us, and her men which are about ninety or one hunured, are divided aboard
our Ships, the Captain of her is a Flushinger, who was aboard off me at Calis,
when I was abroad with a squadron, about three weeks ago, and he cries out
against Trump, and the rest, for their cowardly carriage in leaving them to our
mercy, having so great a Fleet with him, we being but half his number, and
withal avowes he had no knowledge of any intention to fight with us. As for
the other Ship, I presume she sunk in the night, forasmuch as when our ships
left her, she had six foot water in hold, and her mainmast shot overboard, and
our men durst not keep in her, the Captain of her forsook her, and came
aboard in the Boat we sent aboard, but what is become of the men we know not,
it being in the night, and our Fleet scattered were constrained to gather about
our General, to the end we might consult what to do, we having been surprised
before we could speak a word together, or receive any thing of command from
him. What other spoil we did them we know not, what they have done to us is
not very considerable, unless the blood of our men, which will be called for
in due season. The General had six men killed, besides diverse wounded, some
others lost four, some two, and one, and some none killed, but few hurt. Our
Rigging, Masts, and Sails shot, most of us, and many shot in our Hulls,
notwithstanding we have lost so few men. All I shall say is, this is the first
of Gods appearing for us by Sea, and though the fight was running, and not so
hot as otherwise it would, if they had not declined it, yet we look at God in
his providence, giving us great boldness to believe that the War was his,
and that if they go on to make war, it is that they may be broken, although
we are very unworthy of any such favor, and very weak and inconsiderable in
strength.

The 20. being yesterday, we saw them in the morning as far as we could
descry them, plying over as I suppose for Deip Roads, or the Coast of France,
that night it was resolved at a Council of War to ply into Dover Road, or the
Downs, there to recruit some things we want, and also to receive a positive
Order from our State in order to our proceedings. The Lord of Light be their
Counselor, and then fear nothing. I have been more tedious in this narrative,
(not that I love long discourse, neither am very fit at present to write) but
to satisfy you and all friends who are with us in heart, and are deeply
concerned in this beginning. The Lord help you to remember us, and keep us
faithful unto him, and his Interest, and honor us much more in doing him
service if he have any pleasure in us, which is the greatest ambition I have in
this World, and so I crave leave to remain,

Your very affectionate and faithful Servant, N. BOURNE.
Aboard the Andrew, in the Downs, May, 21. 1652. in the afternoon.

