THE MARTIAL-FIELD OF EUROPE: BEING A Geographical and Historical Description
of those Parts of EUROPE, which are most Famous in this Present War, Viz. I.
Flanders, II. The Rhine, III. Savoy, IV. Catalonia, V. Hungary, VI. Greece.


With an Account of the several Revolutions of those Places, either by Conquest
or Treaties of Peace, particularly from the Treaty of Munster in 1648. to this
present time.

By A. BOYER, Gent.

London, Printed for Tho. Salusbury, at the King's-Arms near St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. MDCXCIV.

The CONTENTS.
SECT. I. Flanders.
GEneral Division. p. 1. Chap. I. Of the Netherlands in General. p. 1. Chap.
II. Of the Catholic Provinces or Flanders in general. p. 3. Art. 1. Of the
County of Flanders. p. 6 Art. 2. Of the Dukedom of Brabant p. 22 Art. 3. Of the
Marquisate of the Holy Empire p. 35 Art. 4. Of the Lordship of Malines p. 37
Art. 5. Part of the Dukedom of Gelderland p. 38 Art. 6. Of the Dukedom of
Limburg p. 48 Art. 7. Of the Bishopric of Liege p. 42 Art. 8. Of the County of
Namur p. 48 Art. 9. Of the Dukedom of Luxemburg p. 51 Art. 10. Of the County of
Hainault p. 55 Art. 11. Of Cambresis. p. 63 Art. 12. Of Artois p. 65
Sect. II. The Rhine.
Chap. I. Description of the River Rhine in general p. 73 Art. 1. Of Alsatia p.
75 Art. 2. The Palatinate of the Rhine p. 85 Art. 3. The Archbishopric of
Mayence or Mentz p. 95 Art. 4. The Archbishopric of Treves or Triers p. 98
Art. 5. The Archbishopric of Cologne p. 102 Art. 6. The Succession of Cleves
and Juliers p. 108
Sect. III. The Duke of Savoy's Dominions.
Chap. 1. Savoy p. 121 Chap. 2. Piedmont p. 132 Chap. 3. County of Nice p. 146
Chap. 4. Montferrat p. 149
Sect. IV.
Catalonia p. 153 Art. 1. Description of the Places of Note under the Spaniards
p. 156 Art. 2. Catalonia belonging to the French p. 162
Sect. V. Hungary.
Art. 1. Hungary p. 166 Art. 2. Transylvania p. 190 Art. 3. Podolia p. 194 Art.
4. Moldavia p. 196 Art. 5. Walachia p. 198 Art. 6. Bulgaria p. 200 Art. 7.
Servia p. 202 Art. 8. Rascia p. 205 Art. 7. Bosnia p. 207 Art. 10. Sclavonia p.
209 Art. 11. Croatia p. 212 Art. 12. Dalmatia p. 214
Sect. VI.
Greece p. 223 Chap I. Albania p. 227 Chap. II. Epirus p. 230 Chap. III.
Macedon p. 232 Chap. IV. Thessaly p. 235 Chap. V. Achaia p. 238 Chap. VI. Morea
p. 245 Chap. VII. Of the Islands about Greece p. 262
ERRATA.
PAge 4 l. 1 read Graveline, p. 33 l. 7 r. Neerlanden, p. 65 r. Art. XII. p.
134 l. 20 r. Masseran.

THE MARTIAL-FIELD OF EUROPE
SECT. I.
THE Places of Europe which are now most famous for Great Actions and Warlike
Exploits may be reduced to six, viz 1. Flanders. 2. The Course of the Rhine. 3.
Savoy and Piedmont. 4. Catalonia. 5. Hungary. 6. And Greece. I shall begin with
Flanders because it is the most remarkable of them all, as being the Field
where our Glorious Monarch has so often signalized his Conduct and Bravery at
the Head of our Gallant Englishmen.

CHAP. I. Of the XVII. Provinces or Netherlands in general.
THese Provinces were known to the Romans under the Name Name.
of Belgium, at present they are called, sometimes, Low Countries, sometimes
Netherlands, and sometimes, Lower Germany, from their Situation on the lower
part of the Rhine.

They are bounded on the South with France, on the East with Germany, Bounds.
on the North and West with the Ocean.

Their extent Extent.
is from the 49th d. 10. m. to the 53. d. 37. m. of Latitude; and from the 21.
to the 26. d. 28. m. of Longitude; in form somewhat Triangular; being in length
from the Northest parts of Groningen, to the South parts of Luxemburg 264
miles; and in breadth from the West parts of Artois to the East parts of
Luxemburg 192 miles.

Division.
They are divided into XVII Provinces, which are, IV. Dukedoms, viz. Brabant.
Limburg. Luxemburg. Gelderland.
VII. Counties, viz. Holland. Zealand. Zutphen. Flanders. Artois. Hainault.
Namur.
I. Marquisate of the Holy Empire. V. Lordships or Baronies, viz. Mechlin or
Malines. Vtrecht. Over-Issel. Friesland. Groningen.



To which we may add the Archbishoprik of Cambray, and the Bishopric of Liege,
which are enclosed in them.

These Provinces were first Conquered by the Romans, History.
afterward by the French, and then divided into several Governments depending
on the Crown of France, till the year 1305. reduced to one by Philip Duke of
Burgundy (of which house is the King of Spain) Then they passed to the Crown of
Spain by Mary Henrietta Heiress of the House of Burgundy. The Emperor Charles
the Vth (having gotten from Francis I. King of France, his Prisoner at Madrid a
renunciation of the Old right the French had to Flanders) was sole Master of
these Provinces; But in the year 1581. some of them openly revolted from Philip
II. his Son, King of Spain, having two years before made their Union at Vtrecht
to secure themselves from the Cruelties and Barbarous usage of the Duke of Alva
their Governor. Since that, there are in the Netherlands two very different
States; the one is a Republic called the United Provinces or Holland, (from
the chief of them) The other belongs to the King of Spain, under the name of
Catholick-Provinces or Flanders (the principal of them) but is possessed partly
by the Spaniards, partly by the Hollanders, and partly by the French, as you
shall see in its proper place.

The United Provinces are eight in number, viz. 1. The County of Holland. 2.
The County of Zealand. 3. The Barony of Vtrecht. 4. The Dukedom of Gelderland
in part. 5. The County of Zutphen. 6. The Barony of Over-Issel. 7. The Barony
of Groningen. 8. The Barony of West-Friesland.


These Provinces being not, as yet, the Seat of War, 'twould be beyond my
purpose to say any thing more of them, and therefore I pass to the
Catholick-Provinces.

CHAP. II. Of the Catholick-Provinces or Flanders in general.
THE Spanish Netherlands, or the nine Catholic Provinces, commonly called by
the general name Name.
of Flanders, (the principal of these Provinces,) including the two Fees of the
Empire, viz. the Archbishopric of Cambray, Bounds.
and the Bishopric of Liege, are bounded on the North with the Ocean and the
United Provinces; On the West or, North-West, with the Ocean: On the South and
South-West with France: and on the East with Germany. Their Extent Extent.
South and North is about 140 miles, from Thionville in Luxemburg to Boisleduc
in Brabant, and about 150 West and East, from Gravelins in Flanders to Aix la
Chapelle on the confines of the Dukedom of Juliers.

Flanders is generally one of the best and most plentiful Countries in the
World; Quality.
extremely Populous and full of excellent Towns and Villages; its Air is good;
its Soil most Fertile; the People good natured, hardy and laborious. This
Country was once so very rich, Riches.
that the King of Spain's Revenues from thence, when he had all, was greater
than any Prince in Christendom, the King of France excepted; but at present the
charge of keeping is much greater than the Revenues. The strength Strength.
of these parts is very great; but its best and strongest places are in the
possession of the French; and for a long time the Spaniards have not been able
to keep those they have still, without the help either of the English, Dutch or
Brandenburghers.

The Traffic Traffic.
in Flanders has been always very great, but now nothing so much as formerly,
by reason of the prodigious increase of the United Provinces in these late
years. It chiefly consists of several sorts of Manufactures, as rich
Tapestries, fine Camlets, Serges, colored Says, Mock Velvets, great quantities
of fine Linen, Damasks, Cambricks, Taffaties, Points, Laces, and striped
Stuffs for Beds, which are transported into many Countries; all sorts of
Ribbons, Bastard Sattins, and many other things of this Nature, made at the
Cities of Mons, Ghent, Brussels, Ypres, Lille, Bruges, Mechlin, Valenciennes,
etc.

The Inhabitants Inhabitants.
of these Provinces consist of Flemmings, Walloons, Spaniards, with some
intermixture of French, Dutch, and English, especially at present. The Religion
Religion.
among them is various, according to their several Nations. In those places
which are in the Possession of the Spaniards and French, that of the Roman
Church is only publicly allowed, and the Protestants tolerated out of Policy
by the Spaniards only. On the contrary in those places that belong to the
Hollanders, the Protestant is only publicly exercised, and the Popish suffered
in private. The Archbishopricks and Bishoprics are all Roman Catholic.

The Languages Language.
most generally used in these Parts are the Walloon and Flemmish; The Walloon
is a corrupt French, spoken in Artois, Hainault, Namur, Luxemburg,
French-Flanders, part of Brabant, and the Bishopric of Liege. The Flemmish or
Low Dutch, is a Dialect of the German, spoken in the Marquisate, Mechlin, part
of Brabant, Flanders, and part of the Bishopric of Liege. The Spanish is also
much in use among the King of Spain's Subjects, and the French among the better
sort; The German has been lately introduced there by the Duke of Bavaria
Governor of the Spanish Netherlands.

The Principal Rivers Rivers.
in these Parts are the Maes or Meuse, and the Scheld or Escaut.

1. The Maes Lat. Mosa has its source in France near Mount de Vauge in the
Bishopric of Langres in Champagne, passes through Charlemont, Bouvines,
Dinant, Namur, (where it receives the River Sambre) Liege, Maestricht, Venlo,
Grave and Dort, and falls into the Wahal (a branch of the Rhine) near
Hervoerden, where it takes the name of Merwe, and having formed an Island
called Ysselmonde near Dordrecht, runs into the Ocean.

2. The Scheld has its source in Picardy a Province of France, and having
washed the Towns of Cambray, Valenciennes, Tournay, Ghent, and Antwerp; and
embraced the Island of Zealand, it falls into the Ocean big with the Waters of
the Rivers, Lys, Lieve, Dendre and Rupel.

In these Provinces are two Archbishopricks, Archbishopricks. 2.
viz. Cambray and Mechlin; and eleven Bishoprics, Bishoprics. 11.
viz. Antwerp, Boisleduc, Bruges, Ghent, Ruremond and Ypres, under Mechlin;
Namur, Arras, St. Omers, and Tourney under Cambray; and Liege under Cologne in
Germany. Here are also 155 Cities or Walled Towns, Towns 155.
besides those in Cambray and part of Gelderland, Chief City.
(and 6867 Villages, Villages 6867.
besides the Castles, Forts and Noble Men's Houses which are almost innumerable.
The Chief City of the whole is Antwerp, but Brussel is now adays the most
remarkable, being the seat of the Spanish Governor. The Chief City of the
French is Mons; of the Hollanders, Boisledue or Maestricht; and of the Bishop
of Liege, Liege.

The Government Government.
of this Country belongs by right to the Spaniards, but at present they have
only the Marquisate, Mechlin, Spanish.
about 3 quarters of Brabant, nigh half of Limburg and Flanders, a quarter of
Hainault, with some of Gelderland. The French have Artois, Cambray, Luxemburg,
Namur, three quarters of Hainault, French.
nigh half of Flanders, and a quarter of the Bishopric of Liege. The
Hollanders have above half of Limburg, Dutch.
above a quarter of Brabant, a sixth part of Flanders, and a small part of the
Bishopric of Liege. The Bishop of Liege has above half of that Province.

Flanders comprehending the Cambresis the Country of Liege, Division.
and part of Gelderland is divided into twelve parts, viz. 1. The County of
Flanders Ghent Bish. 2. The Dukedom of Brabant Brussel Capital. 3. The
Marquisat of the Holy Empire Antwerp Bish. 4. The Lordship of Mechlin Mechlin
Archbp. 5. Part of the Dukedom of Gelderland Gelders. 6. The Dukedom of Limburg
Limburg 7. The Country of Liege Liege Bish. 8. The County of Namur Namur Bish.
9. The Dukedom of Luxemburg Luxemburg. 10. The County of Hainault Mons 11. The
Cambresis Cambray Archbp. 12. The County of Artois Arras Bish.


Article I. Of the County of Flanders properly so called Comitatus Flandriae.

FLanders is the first County of the Low Countries, and the most considerable
and noble in all Christendom; some derive its Name Name.
from Flandrina, Wife to Lideric II. Prince of Buc and great Forester of
Flanders, who governed it under Charlemaigne, and Lewis the Debonair. Others
fetch it from Flambert Nephew to Clodion King of France, who having married
Blesinda Daughter to Gol^uerus King of the Ruthinians, drove the Romans out of
the Belgic Gaul.

This Province borders on the North, the Ocean and the Mouth of the Scheld,
Bounds.
(called the Hont) that divides it from Zealand. On the West, the Ocean and
part of Artois. On the South, Artois and Hainault. And on the East, part of
Hainault and Brabant.

It is extended South and North about 66 miles, Extent.
and near as much West and East.

It is a very fine and rich Country; Quality.
most plentiful in Corn and Pastures; it has Fish in abundance affords Kine and
Warlike Horses. There are in it 28 or 30 Walled Towns, Towns.
and some others of no small consideration; 1154 Villages; Villages.
48 Abbeys, Abbeys.
and a great number of Priories, Priories.
Colleges Colleges.
and Monasteries. Monasterys.
It is in most places so populous that the Spaniards who followed Phillip II.
in Flanders were used to say that the whole was but one City. It has five
Viscounties, viz. Ghent, Viscounts.
Ypres, Furnes, Wynoxberg and Haerlbeck; 3. Principalities, Principalities.
viz. Steenhuyse, Gavre and Epinoy. Ports.
4. Famous Seaports, viz. Dunkirk, Newport, Ostend, and Sluys. And 31
Chattelenies or Castelanships.

This Province was heretofore governed by Earls, which did Homage to the King
of France, History.
as did also Philip Duke of Burgundy, after that Flanders was fallen to him by
marrying Margaret Daughter of Lewis Malatin, Earl of Flanders in 1369. passing
afterward into the House of Austria, by the Marriage of Mary Daughter and
Heiress of Charle les hardy Duke of Burgundy, to Maximilian Emperor of Germany.
Charles V. (as we have already hinted) when he took Francis I. Prisoner, in the
Battle of Pavia in Italy, enfranchised it from that servitude. But afterward
in King Philip II's time, it was extremely curtailed and harrass'd, which made
many of the inhabitants retire into England, and this did not only depopulate
it, but impoverished it considerably, by carrying away a great part of its
Trade. The Hollanders revolting at the same time, added to its Calamities by a
War of 40 years continuance, and the French have of late made great
Devastations in it.

A Chronological Succession of the Earls of Flanders.
Years of our Lord. Gov. 1. BAldwin I. Ironside. 860 17 years. 2. Baldwin II.
the Bald. 878 40 years. 3. Arnold I. the Great. 918 45 years. ( Baldwin III.
the young) 4. Arnold II. the young 963 26 years. 5. Baldwin IV. 989 45 years.
6. Baldwin V. of Lile. 1034 33 years. 7. Baldwin VI. of Mons. 1067 3 years. 8.
Arnold III. the Unfortunate. 1070 1 year. 9. Robert I. the Frieslander 1071 22
years. 10. Robert II. of Jerusalem 1093 18 years. 11. Baldwin VII. Hapeule 1111
7 years. 12. Charles the Good of Denmark 1118 9 years. 13. William the Norman
or the Cliton. 1127 1 year. 4 M. 14. Thierry of Alsatia 1128 40 years. 15.
Philip of Alsatia 1168 23 years. 16. Baldwin VIII. the Brave 1197 4 years. 17.
Baldwin IX. Emperor of Constantinople. 1195 11 years. 18. Joan 1206 38 years.
19. Margaret I. 1244 31 years. William of Bourbon Dampiere. 20. Gay Dampierre
1275 30 years. 21. Robert III. of Bethune 1305 17 years. Lewis. 22. Lewis II.
of Creci 1322 24 years. 23. Lewis III. Malatin 1346 38 years. 24. Margaret II.
1384 20 years. Philip of France. 25. John the Undaunted, or Sans Peur 1404 15
years. 26. Philip the Good 1419 48 years. 27. Charles le Hardi 1467 10 years.
28. Mary of Burgundy 1477 5 years. Maximilian Emperor. 29. Philip of Austria
1482 24 years. 30. Charles V. Emperor 1505 49 years. 31. Philip II. King of
Spain 1555 43 years. 32. Elizabeth-Clara-Eugenia 1598 38 years. 33. Philip IV.
King of Spain 1636 29 years. 34. Charles II. King of Spain 1665

The Chief Rivers Rivers.
are

1. Scheld which here washes Tournay, Oudenard, Ghent and Antwerp, and soon
after falls into the Sea.

2. Lys, which here washes Armentiers and Courtray and falls into the Scheld at
Ghent.

3. Dender, which washes Geersberg, Nienove, and Aelst, and casts its Waters
into the Scheld at Dendermond.

4. Scharp which washes Doway and St. Amand, and then discharges itself into
the Scheld.

Flanders is commonly divided in three, Division.
viz.

1. Flemish-Flanders, or Flammingant, where the Country Language is spoken; it
is extended from the North Sea to the River Lys.

2. French-Flanders or Gallican, where French is most in use; it lies on the
South of Flammingant, and on the North of Cambresis, and borders the Scheld on
the East and Lys on the West.

3. Imperial-Flanders which lies between the Scheld and the Dender, and
comprehends the County of Alost, and the four Offices which formerly belonged
to the Emperor.

Flanders is also divided into, Teutonick, Walloon, Imperial and Dutch. The
first lies between the Sea and the Lys. The second between the Lys and the
Scheld. The third between the two others. And the fourth on the North of them
all.

But now adays it is usually divided into three parts, according to its
Masters, viz. the Spaniards, the French, and the Dutch, as you may see in the
following Table.

1. Spanish-Flanders in which the most remarkable places are, Ghent. Bish. Cap.
Bruges. Bish. Ostend. Newport. Oudenard. Alost or Aelst. Ninove.


2. French-Flanders in which are Lille or Rissel. Cap. Ypres. Bish. Tournay.
Bish. Dunkirk. Graveling. Wynoxberg. Courtray. Doway. Furnes. Dixmude. Cassel.
Orchies. St. Amand. Armentiers.


3. Dutch-Flanders. in which are Sluys. Sas van Ghent. Ardenburg.


Description of the Chief Towns in Flanders.
Chief Towns belonging to the Spaniards.
I. Ghent.

GHent or Gaunt, in Latin, Gandae aut Gandavum aut Gandavium, Gand.
is one of the largest Cities in Europe, being seven Miles in compass within
the Walls. They give out, that it was founded by Julius Caesar in a very
Commodious place for Trading, viz. on the Confluent of four considerable
Rivers, (the Scheld, the Lys, the Moer, and the Leye) which run through it, and
divide it into 26 Islands which are joined together with as many great Bridges,
and 72 little ones. It is well Walled and Trenched about, and the private
Buildings for the most part fair and stately. There are a great many Water and
Wind-Mills; Seven Churches, and 55 Monasteries or Hospitals. Several
Marketplaces, of which that of Fryday's has no equal in Europe. The Castle,
which is the Princes Palace, contains as many Rooms as there are Days in the
Year, there the Wooden Cradle of Charles V. is still to be seen. The Cathedral
is a most Magnificent Building, and the Tower Bell-fort is above 400 steps
high. The Townhouse is also worth taking notice of. The Citadel consists of
four regular Bastions, but it lies not so very convenient as many others in
these parts. This City is the seat of the Parliament or Provincial Court of
Flanders; yet one may appeal from it to that of Mechlin, which judges without
further appeal. The Trade of this City consists chiefly in Cloths, Stuffs and
Silks of which there are so great quantity made, that among the 50 Companies of
Tradesmen, those relating to Commodities of this Nature make one third. It
stands about twelve Miles from the Sea; 27 miles South West of Antwerp; 30
North West of Brussels; 94 South of Amsterdam; 154 North East of Paris, and 160
East of London; Long. 22 d. 58 m. Lat. 51. d. 6. m.

Fifty thousand Inhabitants of this City, under the Standard of Gaunt, have
formerly been formidable to the neighboring States, and their Princes
themselves, in the Reigns of Philip of Valois and Charles VI. Kings of France.
In 1539. they revolted from the Emperor Charles V. and would have put
themselves under the protection of Francis I. King of France, who not only
refused their offer, but gave the Emperor free passage through his Dominions into
the Low Countries. The Emperor having reduced them to obedience, put to Death
30 of the principal Burgesses, and banished a great number; took from them
their Artillery, Arms, and Privileges, and built a Citadel to curb them for
the future.

This City was invested by the French King's orders the first of March 1678. On
the fourth the King in Person came before it. The besieged to no purpose cut
their Dikes, and drowned part of the Country, for the King lodged his Forces,
and pressed so vigorously the Siege, that on the 9th of the same month the Town
and Citadel were both carried. It was restored to the Spaniards about four
Months after by the Treaty of Nimeguen.

II. Bruges.

Bruges or Bruggen Lat. Bruga and Brugae, is situated in a great Plain within
eight or nine miles of the Sea, upon the Canal called Reye, which being divided
into several Navigable Torrents runs in diverse places of the City, and
afterward these join in the same Canal which goes to the Sluice. But this last
belonging to the Hollanders the Inhabitants of Bruges about 40 years ago made a
new Canal which goes to Ostend, that is but about three Leagues from it, and
the Tide mounting above half way, it bears Ships of 400 Tuns to Bruges, which
maintains a standing Trade there. Yet it flourished more in former days, before
Merchants had bethought of retiring to Antwerp. Pope Paul IV. erected Bruges
into a Bishopric suffragant of Malines in 1559, and Peter Curtius was the
first Prelate of it. This is one of the greatest and beautifullest Cities of
Flanders, fortified with good Ditches, great Ramparts, and strong Walls. The
public Buildings are very sumptuous, the Streets large and strait, with
several fine Places, and chiefly that of the Market, whereat six great Streets
begin that lead in a strait line to the six principal Gates of the City. There
are seven Parish Churches. The Cathedral is that of St. Donat or Donatian. The
Provost of this Collegial Church was born President in the Court called St.
Donat and hereditary Chancellor of Flanders, but this dignity has been united
to the Episcopal Title, and the Bishop enjoys the privilege now. Besides St.
Donat there are the Collegial Churches of St. Salvator and Our Lady the Abbeys
of St. Andrew and Audemburg, and about 60 Religious Houses. At the side of the
Cathedral is the Bishops Palace, and over against it is a great Marketplace,
where the Townhouse is, an ancient Building enriched with Figures, and diverse
curious pieces of Sculpture. The Castle also deserves to be seen. Justice is
rendered here by six Magistrates, who all have a particular Jurisdiction, viz.
The City, the Frank, the Provost-ship at present, the Bishopric, the Court for
Feodal Tenures, Zizleele and Mandasche. There is also the Water-house with an
admirable Machin to convey Water into all the quarters of the City. The
Spaniards have a great Trade here in Wool, Silk, Cotton, etc. There are a
great many Tradesmen who make Fustians, Tapestries, Cloths, and Stuffs, of
Silk. They are divided into 68 Professions. This City had a share in the
troubles of the Low Countries during the Civil Wars. The English loosing Calais
in 1558 removed the Staple for Wool to Bruges, and that for some time
preserved it from decaying. Philip I. King of Spain was born here in 1478.
Bruges stands 24 miles N. W. of Ghent 11. E. of Ostend. 34. N. E. of Dunkirk,
40 W. of Antwerp Long. 22 d. 24. m. Lat. 51. d. 17. m.

III. Ostend.

Ostend Lat. Ostenda is a Seaport Town seated in a Marsh, at the Mouth of the
River Guele, and among diverse Channels; but is chiefly environed almost on all
sides by two of the greatest of them, into which Ships of the greatest bulk may
enter with the Tide: it is very well fortified, having a strong Rampart, a deep
Ditch, and eight regular Bastions, its contrived so, that the Sea may be let in
round the Town for a great space, which makes it much more strong and
defensible than before, and as it were impregnable. The Spaniards possess no
other Port in Flanders but this and Newport, and this being the most
considerable, they are making the Haven large, and have made a great Work in
order to the carrying of their Ships over into that Cut which goes from Ostend
to Bruges, out of their Harbor by the means of a very great Lock or receptacle
of Water which communicates with both. The Town stands low, but the streets are
straight, large and uniform; The Haven such, that it can never be blocked up.
This Town was besieged from July 5. 1601. to September 22. 1604. by the
Spaniards, being then in the hands of the Hollanders; and at last was
surrendered upon good Articles, after a Siege of three years, three months,
three weeks, three days, and three hours. Its stout defense against the
Archduke Albert of Austria, and Marquess Ambrosius Spinola may be well
ascribed to the supplies from England, and conduct of Sir Francis Vere. The
Spaniard lost 78124 men before this Place; Though when the Archduke invested it,
they did not expect it should hold out a Fortnight, which made the Duchess
promise she would never shift her Smock until it were taken; the number of
those that were killed, or died in the Town during the Siege amounts to 150000.
Ostend stands about nine miles N. E. of Newport; 11 W. of Bruges, 20 S. W. of
Sluys, and almost 35 W. of Ghent, Long. 22 d. 8 m. Lat. 51 d. 18. m.

IV. Newport.

Newport is a strong Seaport Town. The little River Yperle runs on one side of
it, which though but a mean Channel, yet where it falls into the Sea makes a
considerable long and secure Haven, especially at high Tides. This Town is of
good strength, has broad and straight streets, but the Houses are generally
low, and most part of Timber. The Inhabitants support themselves chiefly by the
Fishing-Trade. It stands nine miles S. W. of Ostend, 16 N. E. of Dunkirk, 19
almost W. of Bruges, and 40 W. of Ghent, Long. 21 d. 55 m. Lat. 51 d. 14. m.
Prince Maurice of Nassaw gave the Spaniards a great defeat near this place in
1600.

V. Oudenard.

Oudenard Lat. Aldenardum is divided by the Scheld in two parts, and secured by
a Castle called Pamele, which is joined to the Town by a Bridge over that
River. This is a rich place and drives a great Trade by the Manufacture of
Tapestry which flourishes here. This Town was taken by the French in 1658.
restored by the Pyraenean Treaty, and retaken by them again in 1667. besieged
without success by the Spaniards in 1674. but by the Peace at Nimeguen restored
to them in 1679. It stands 14 Miles S. of Ghent, and 36 W. of Brussels, Long.
22 d. 48 m. Lat. 51 d. 15 m.

VI. Alost.

Alost, by the Natives Aelst, is the Capital City of the Imperial Flanders, on
the River Dender; it had formerly Counts of its own, and suffered very much in
the last Age: The Spaniards surpised it in 1576. and committed a thousand
disorders. In 1582 the Duke of Anjou made himself master of it; After which the
English who had it in keeping, sold it to the Prince of Parma. In 1667. the
French took it, but now it is again in the hands of the Spaniard unfortified.
The Territory of Alost comprehends about 170 Villages, the County of Waes, and
four Cities which are called Offices, viz. Halst, Axtle, Bouchout and Assenede.
This City stands five miles from Brussels, and 15 from Ghent, Long. 23. d. 18.
m. Lat. 51. d.

VII. Ninove.

Ninove or Nienove is a small inconsiderable Town in the Territory of Alost, on
the River Dender, six miles of Alost, 13 W. of Brussels, and 17 S. E. of Ghent.
Long. 23 d. 14 m. Lat. 50. d. 56 m.

Chief Towns in Flanders belonging to the French.
I. Lille or L'isle.

L'isle Lat. Insula, seated on the River Deulle, took its Name, because in
former Times it was wholly surrounded with Water and Marshes, which now by the
Industry of Men are drained. It was Built by Baldwin IV. the Hairy Count of
Flanders in 1007. And his Son Baldwin V. the Pious, (or, of Lille) who was Born
here, Walled it in 1066. and adorned it with a Magnificent Church, and a fine
Monastery. It is now the Capital City of French-Flanders. Lewis XIV. took it
from the Spaniards in 1667. and it was afterward yielded to him by the Peace
of Aix La Chapelle in 1668. since which he has Built a Citadel to secure it,
flanked with Five great Bastions,, whose double Ditches are filled with the
River Deulle. All these new Fortifications enclose a Suburb, which has greatly
enlarged the City. Neither does the Industry of the Inhabitants less contribute
to its Greatness and Riches, by the many Silk Manufactures made here, so that
it is raised to be the third City in the Low Countries, next to Amsterdam and
Antwerp; and for the convenience of Transporting its Wares, is accommodated
with a Channel derived from the River Lys, which runs not far from this City.
It stands 15 Miles W. of Tournay, 36 S. of Ghent, 37 S. E. of Dunkirk, and 38
almost W. of Mons. Long. 22 d. 10 m. Lat. 50 d. 43 m.

II. Ipres.

Ipres or Ypres Lat. Ipra, Iprae, Ipretum, takes its Name from the Brook Yperle
that runs through it. It is supposed to have been Built by Baldwin III. Son of
Count Arnulphus I. about 960. and that it was not Walled till 1288. by the
Consent of Philip the Fair King of France. It is now a very Rich City, and has
many fair Churches, whereof that of St. Martin is the Cathedral. The Bishopric
established here by Paul IV. in 1559. is under the Archbishop of Mechlin. This
City is the third in Flanders, and has Seven Chattelenys or Jurisdictions, of
which Cassel has 24 smaller Jurisdictions under it. The Country about is
extremely fruitful, and its Situation contributes much to its strength. It is
very well Built, and besides the Churches it has many Sumptuous Buildings and
Palaces: That of the Lordship is great and stately, as also the Draper's Hall.
The City is Famous for its Manufactures, and has several Fairs, whereof that in
Lent is the principal. This City was taken by the French 26 March 1678. and was
yielded to them by the Treaty of Nimeguen. It lies 16 Miles almost N. of Lille,
18 S. of Neuport, 23 almost E. of Dunkirk, and 35 S. W. of Ghent. Long. 22 d. 3
m. Lat. 50 d. 57 m.

III. Tournay.

Tournay Lat. Tornacum, is upon the Scheld with a Bishopric Suffragant of
Cambray, whose first Prelate was St. Prat in 623. It is very Ancient, being
mentioned in Antonin's Itinerary, and in the 11th Epistle of St. Jerome. The
Town is very strong, and defended by a Castle said to have been Built by the
English. The French made themselves Masters of it in 1518. but Charles V.
retook it from them in 1521. Lewis XIV. took it upon the Spaniards in 1667. and
kept it by the Peace of Aix La Chapelle; and has rendered it much stronger than
it was formerly by new Fortifications. The Cathedral of our Lady is very fine;
besides which there are Ten Parish Churches, Two Abbeys, and several Religious
Houses, for the Place is Big, Rich, and of good Traffic, having 72 different
sorts of Trades in it. It is the Capital of a little Country called Tournaisis,
and the Seat of a Sovereign Council, or High Jurisdiction since 1669. It stands
15 Miles E. of Lille, 32 almost W. of Mons, and 30 nigh S. of Ghent, Long. 22
d. 36 m. Lat. 50 d. 43 m.

IV. Dunkirk.

Dunkirk Gall. Dunkerque, Lat. Dunquerca, is a Seaport Town, Built by the Earl
Baldwin III. called the Young. It derives its Name from the Flemish Word Kerk,
that is Church, because the Church Steeple is the first thing seen by Seamen
above the Downs. It was taken in 1558 by the French, who claimed it as Francis
de Bourbon Earl of Vendome's Inheritance, but retaken in 1583 by the Duke of
Parma. The French took it again in 1646. under the Conduct of the Duke of
Enghien; and the Spaniards retook it in 1652. It was taken afterward by the
Marshall of Turenne in 1658. and yielded to the English, of whom Lewis XIV.
King of France bought it in 1662. for 900000 Pounds Sterling. He has Built
there a strong Citadel, and other Fortifications. There is a new Trench cut for
a Mile together through the Splinter Sands, which will upon the Head of the
Tide receive 130 Vessels of 70 Guns apiece; and on the West side of this
Harbor is raised a vast pil'd and plank'd Work, to intercept and lodge the
Sands. It is well Built and populous, and particularly commended for the
neatness and regularity of the Streets. Its Inhabitants are Famous upon the
Sea, and have enriched themselves in these Wars by Piracy. Here is an English
Nunnery, and Franciscans have a Cloister for Persons of both Sexes. At the
Mouth of the Haven stands a Wooden Fort, on which are planted 100 Pieces of
Cannon. This Town lies 54 Miles W. of Ghent, 16 S. W. of Newport, 19 almost of
Calais, and 24 S. W. of Ostend. Long. 21 d. 30 m. Lat. 51 d. 7 m.

V. Graveling.

Graveling or Graveline Lat. Gravelinga and Gravelina, is seated near the Sea
upon the Mouth of the River Aa, which parts France from Flanders. The Normans
ruined it, but it was afterward repaired by Thierry of Alsatia, Count of
Flanders, who died there in 1168. And in the Year 1528. there was a strong
Castle added to it by Charles V. so that it is now one of the most regular and
strongest Places of Europe. It was taken by the French in 1658. and yielded to
them by the Pyrenaean Treaty. As for the Town it self though of great importance,
it is neither large, nor well Built, and is besides but thinly Inhabited. It
lies 9 Miles E. of Calais, 10 almost W. of Dunkirk, and 63 W. of Ghent. Long.
21 d. 18 m. Lat. 51 d. 4 m.

VI. Wynoxberg.

Berg St, Winoch or Winoxberg, Lat. Berga S. Winoci, or Winoci Montium and
Vinoberga; and in Times past Groemberga and Mons Viridis, has the Title of a
Viscounty and Castelanship, and has many Villages under its Jurisdictions. It Is
situated in a most fertile Country. It was taken by the French in 1658. and it
remained to them by the Pyrenaean Treaty in 1659. They have Built there a Royal
Fort. This Town stands on the River Colme, 6 Miles almost S. of Dunkirk, and 12
E. of Graveling. Long. 21 d. 37 m. Lat. 51 d. 2 m.

VII. Courtray.

Courtray or Cortrick, Lat. Corteriacum and Cortracum is seated on the River
Lys; it is thought that in Caesar's time it was under the Jurisdiction of the
Nervians and Tournisians, Philip the Bald Built a Castle in it, and others have
added other Fortifications at different times, The French by their too great
precipitation lost a Battle here in 1302. and because they of Courtray kept an
Anniversary to Celebrate the Memory of that happy Day, it was Plundered and
Burnt in 1382. Some time after it was Rebuilt again, and is now pretty
considerable for its Commerce, good Citadel, and great Territories. The River
Lys divides it in two. The French took it in 1646. and the Spaniards retook it
in the Year after. Lewis XIV. made himself master of it in 1667. and kept it by
the Treaty of Aix La Chapelle in 1668. and Fortified it regularly; but being
afterward given to the Spaniards by the Treaty of Nimeguen in 1678. and
retaken again by the French, they Dismantled it before they restored it to the
Spaniards by the Truce of 1684. The French took it again in (...) It stands 12
Miles N. E. of Lille, 14 N. W. of Tournay, and 180 W. of Paris. Long. 16. d. 45
m. Lat. 49 d. 9 m.

VIII. Douay.

Douay Lat. Duacum on the River Scharpe, was the Chief Town of the Country of
the Catagues mentioned in Caesar's Commentaries, as it is thought. Pbilip II.
King of Spain founded its University in 1563. which is a Seminary for the
English Roman Catholics. It is of considerable strength, and has a Magazine
very well furnished. It is likewise considerable for its extent, ancient
Buildings, and September's Fair. The Fort stands about a Cannon shot below the
Town upon the Scharpe, and judged by its Situation among Marshes, by means of
its Sluices whereby it can drown all the Country about, to be impregnable. The
Chief Trade of this Town consists in fine Woolen Camlets, sent into many Parts.
The French are Masters of it since 1667. It stands 13 Miles almost N. of
Cambray, and 34 W. of Mons. Long. 22 d. 12 m. Lat. 50 d. 24 m.

IX. Furnes.

Furnes which the Flemings call Wernen, is a well Built and pleasant Town, though
but small. The Canals support the Trade of the Town, which consists in Linen
and other Manufactures. The City is dignified with the Title of a Viscountship,
and the Jurisdiction of a Lord Castellain. It was three times taken, and now
Fortified by the French, and at length resigned to that Crown by the Peace of
Aix La Chapelle in 1668. It was taken by the English in 1692. and retaken by
the French in 1693. It stands not far off Sea Five Miles S. W. of Newport, and
12 nigh E. of Dunkirk. Long. 21 d. 50 m. Lat. 51 d. 8 m.

X. Dixmude.

Dixmude or Dixmuyde is situated on the Confluent of the River Ypre, and
another small Stream. It is not very large, but is reckoned a Place of
importance, and Famous for a great Fair in July. It has often changed its
Masters. The English took it and new Fortified it in 1692. The French retook it
the Year after. It stands Nine Miles N. of Ypres, and 20 E. of Dunkirk. Long.
22 d. 8 m. Lat. 51 d. 6 m.

XI. Cassel.

Cassel or Mont-Cassel, Lat. Castellum and Castellum Morinorum, is an ancient
Town situated on a Mountain. It is well Fortified, and has a considerable
Jurisdiction, and two Famous Fairs, one in January, the other in August. King
Philip Augustus took it in 1213. and it was taken and retaken since upon
several occasions. The French are Masters of it since 1677. It stands by the
River Fene 15 Miles S. of Dunkirk. Long. 21 d. 39 m. Lat. 50 d. 57 m.

XII. Orchies.

Orchies is an ancient and considerable Town called by Ptolomy the Capital of
the Atrebatii. It stands between Tournay and Doway 10 Miles off each. Long. 22
d. 26 m. Lat. 50 d. 34 m.

XIII. St. Amand.

St. Amand Lat. Elno, is seated on the River Scharpe, and is Famous for the
Abbey of St. Amand, where died the Saint of that Name, Abbatia Sancti Almandi
Elnonensis. The French have been in Possession of it ever since 1667. The
Forest of St. Amand beginning on the Frontiers of Flanders, and extending it
self in the County of Hainault near to Valenciennes, was cut down by Order of
Lewis XIV. in 1676. after his taking of Conde and Bouchain. St. Amand before
the French dismantled it, was a Place of great strength, the River Scharpe on
which it stands, falls a little lower into the Schelde; the Lands that lie
between the two Rivers are called the Isles of St. Amand. This Town lies 16
Miles N. E. of Doway, and 40 S. of Ghent. Long. 22 d. 42 m. Lat. 50 d. 27 m.

XIV. Armentiers.

Armentiers Lat. Armentariae, stands on the Lys, and is considerable for its
strength, and Linen Manufactory, and Trade. It has been often taken and
retaken in this last Age. The Archduke Governor of the Low Countries in 1647.
took it from the French, who not long after became Masters of it again, and
still are in Possession of it, by the Treaty of Aix La Chapelle. It lies Seven
Miles almost W. of Lille, 32 S. E. of Dunkirk, and 40 S. W. of Ghent. Long. 22
d. 8 m. Lat. 50 d. 45 m.

Chief Towns in Flanders belonging to the Hollanders.
I. Sluys.

SLuys Lat. Slusa or Clusa is a Seaport Town over against the little Island
Cadsant or Guisant. It formerly belonged to the Counts of Nemours descended
from the Counts of Flanders, and then fell into the Possession of the French.
Philip the Bold King of France kept a strong Garrison here to curb those of
Bruges, and Charles VI. Built a Fleet here against England. The Emperor
Maximilian I. took it afterward, in whose Family it remained some time. During
the Wars of the Netherlands, the Prince of Parma took it for the King of Spain,
and the Dutch retook it in 1604. under the Conduct of Prince Maurice, which
they looked upon as a sufficient Compensation for the loss of Ostend, and
thereupon Coined a Medal with this Motto.

Jehova plus dedit quam amisimus. God gave us more than we lost. The Defense of
the Besieged was very memorable, for they held it out for three Months, till
such time that they were out of all hopes of relief, and had eat up all the
Leather, Mice, Rats, etc. which they could find. The Dutch Fortified the Haven
and Town, which they repeopled with the Inhabitants of Ostend, who came thither
after the Surrender of that Place: But on a Treaty of Peace it was afterward
dismantled: It is now very strong, but thinly Inhabited, and nothing near so
Rich as formerly, its Trade being removed first to Bruges, and from thence to
Antwerp. It has still the largest Haven in all Flanders, being capable of 500
good Ships. This Town stands 22 Miles N. W. of Ghent, 10 N. E. of Bruges, and
14 S. W. of Middleburg. Long. 22 d. 34 m. Lat. 51 d. 24 m.

II. Sas-Van-Ghent.

Sas-Van-Ghent is a small place, but so strong by reason of its situation and
fortifications that it is accounted impregnable. Yet the Hollanders took it in
1644. It stands 11 miles N. of Ghent, Long. 23 d. Lat. 51 d. 20 m.

III. Ardenburgh.

Ardenburgh, is also a small place, but very strong in Flanders, subject to the
Hollanders. It stands 20 miles N. W. of Ghent. Long. 22 d. 36 m. Lat. 51 d. 22
m.

Article II. Of the Dukedom of Brabant Lat. Brabantia.
THIS Duchy is in a manner an Island encompassed with Rivers having the Meuse
on the East and the Nort; the Demer on the South; which runs through part of
this Province; and the Schelde on the West, with the Ocean on the side of Breda
and Bergin-Op-Zoom: So that it borders part of the Country of Gelderland,
Bounds.
and the Bishopric of Liege on the East; The Country of Hainault and the
Country of Namur on the South, Flanders and part of Zealand on the West; and
Holland and another part of Gelderland on the North. Its Extent Extent.
South and North is about 70 miles; and about 60 West and East.

Quality.
The Air is generally good and wholesome, the Soil is very Fertile, except some
of the Northern parts which are somewhat sandy and barren; The Cities are very
fine, whereof there are 26 Walled and Strong, Towns.
not mentioning others of less importance, and about 100 Villages. Villages.


History.
The Brabanders are descended from a Colony of Saxons brought from beyond the
Elbe by Charlemaign and planted in this Country in 806. Diverse Authors say that
Anchises or Anchisices Father to Pepin of Haristol was Lord of Brabant,
Charlemaign and his Children were Masters of this Country until such time as
Otho Son to Prince Charles of France, Duke of Lower Lorraine being dead in
1004. without being Married, Brabant became the Portion of Gerbege, second
Daughter to the same Charles of France, and his first Wife Bonne of Ardenne,
Married to Lambert II. Earl of Monts and Louvain, the Founder of the Branch of
the Duke of Brabant and Lothier; at first they took only the Title of Earls,
but 1235 Henry I. took the Title of Duke of Brabant and Lorrain. Philip III.
called the Good, recollected the succession of the Duke of Brabant, which he
left to Charles the Rash his Son, Father to Mary of Burgundy, who carried it
into the House of Austria by her Marriage to Maximilian, afterward Emperor.
This Country has been fruitful in illustrious Men and Learned Writers.

The Rivers Rivers.
here, besides the Meuse and the Scheld, are, Demer, Dommel, Senne, Aa, Dyle,
Gias, Jeckes, Nephte both great and small, and Mert: there is also a great
number of small Lakes and Ponds.

Brabant comprehends the Marquisate of the Holy Empire, whose Capital is
Antwerp; the Lordship of Mechlin; the Duchy of Arschot, the Marquisate of
Bergues, the County of Hooghstraet, the state of Maestricht, formerly that of
Liege; and 19 Baronies. Louvain was in time past Capital of this Province but
now Brussels. Brabant is divided into four parts.

1. Dutch-rBrabant in which the most remarkable Places are, Boisleduc. Bish.
Cap. Breda. Bergen-Op-Zoom. Grave. Ravestein. Helmont. Eyndenhove. Maestricht.
Lillo.


2. Spanish-Brabant properly so called which comprebends.

Brussels. Cap. Louvain. Leuwe. Arschot. Duke Nivelle. Tillemont, or Tienen.
Judoigne. Gemblour: Lire. Die. Vilvoerde. Herentals. Hannuye.
3. The Marquisate of the Holy Empire.

Antwerp. Bish.
4. The Lordship of Malines, which has Malines or Mechlin. Arch.


To keep to my General division I shall give you here the Description of the
Dutch and Spanish Brabant, and reserve that of the M^rquisate, and Lordship of
Malines for the two following Articles.

Chiefs Towns belonging to the Hollanders in Brabant.
I. Boisleduc.

BOisleduc, Bolduc, or Bosleduc, Lat. Boscum-Ducis, Sylva-Ducis, Bolducum, and
in Dutch, Hertogenbosch, the Capital of the Dutch-Brabant, with a Bishopric
Suffragant of Malines, is situated upon the River Domel, which there receives
the Aade, and afterward the Diese, and discharges it self about two Leagues
from thence into the Meuse, at the place where it forms the Isle of Bommel.
Boisleduc is built in a plain, where there was a Hunting Forest belonging to
the Dukes of Brabant. But Duke Henry going to oppose the incursions which those
of Guelder-land made into his Country caused this Wood to be cut down in 1172.
where the Foundations of this City were laid, which Duke Jeffery finished in
1184. Pope Paul IV. erected it into a Bishopric in 1559. and Francis Sonnius
was its first Prelate; The Bishops now are but Titular and make their residence
at Goldorp since Boisleduc is fallen into the hands of the Hollanders. This
City is naturally strong as well by its situation as by its fortifications; It
is environed with Rivers and Meadows covered with Water so that the Avenues to
the Town are upon artificial Causeys, made turning and winding, and commanded
by one or other of the six Forts, built at some distance without the Town. Its
Ditches are filled with the Waters of the said Rivers, which enter into the
City by diverse Channels very commodious to the Inhabitants. They are almost all
Soldiers, though they do not neglect Trade, which occasioneth this saying, That
the Inhabitants of Boisleduc are Warlike Merchants. The City is large, fair,
well built and very populous. The Cathedral Church of St. John is one of the
most sumptuous of the Netherlands, with a very fine Clock. The Marketplace is
environed with fine Buildings where 10 of the greatest Streets do end. The
Hollanders became at last Masters of it in 1629. by the Valor and Conduct of
Frederick Henry Prince of Orange. This City stands 43 miles N. E. of Antwesp,
and 50 almost S. of Amsterdam. Long. 24 d. 30 m. Lat. 51 d. 42 m.

II. Breda.

Breda is seated on the River Mereck, with the Title of Barony, which
comprehends now about Seventeen Villages, but it had more formerly, and
Berg-Op-Zoom did then depend upon it. Breda had anciently particular Lords of
its own, and was sometimes in Possession of the Dukes of Brabant; but John III.
Duke of Brabant sold it again in 1350. to John Polon Lord of Lieck, who left an
only Daughter Johanna, Married in 1404. to Engelbert of Nassau. Henry of Nassau
begun the Castle of Breda, where the Tomb of Renatus of Nassau is to be seen in
the Collegiate Church of St. Peter founded about 1303. This City suffered very
much during the War between the States and the Spaniards. The Prince of Parma
took it from the United Provinces July 18. 1581. Maurice of Nassau became
Master of it against in 1590. by a Boat laden with Turf, under which he hid 60
Soldiers, who rendered themselves Masters of the Castle, and he afterward
took the City by Capitulation. They tell a very remarkable thing of one of
these Soldiers, that was hidden under the Turf, viz. That not being able to
abstain from Coughing, he desired one of his Companions to kill him, for fear
his Cough should discover the Enterprise. Ever since this surprise, it is the
Custom here to search all laden Boats by stabbing them with a Spit. The
Hollanders kept Breda until 1625. That the Marquess of Spinola General of the
Troops of Spain besieged it, Aug. 27. 1625. and took it the 5th of June, 1625.
This Loss afflicted the Hollanders extremely, but they retook it in 1637. and
have kept it ever since. Breda is of a Triangular Figure, at each Angle there
is a Gate Built with Brick, and the Curtins are flanked with Thirteen Bastions,
besides several Cavaleers all mounted with Cannon. Breda however is not very
well Built, yet there is a pretty fair Street in it, the Townhouse and some
other Places indifferent. It is in a Marshy Ground, and often overflown. Its
Fields are plentiful in Pastures, watered by the Rivers of Aade and Mereck,
which being joined enter into the City, and form diverse Channels. The Palace of
the Castle was lately imbellish'd, and the Fortifications repaired, and new
ones made, by the Prince of Orange, now King William III. of Great Britain,
(to whom the City and Barony belongs) so that now it is a large Regular City,
and is both by Nature and Art thought impregnable: Besides the Ramparts which
are all supported by very strong Brick Arches, and raised above the Houses of
the Place, there are a great many Outworks, surrounded with double broad
Ditches full of Water. Breda is 27 Miles N. E. of Antwerp, 20 W. of Boisleduc,
and 52 S. of Amsterdam. Long. 23 d. 57 m. Lat. 51 d. 38 m.

III. Bergen-Op-Zoom.

Bergen-Op-Zoom, (that is, Mountain upon the Zoom) Lat. Bergae ad Zomam, Berga,
or Mons supra Zomam, and Berci Zoma, with the Title of Marquisate, is a small
but strong Town partly situated upon the River Zoom, and partly upon a little
Mountain. The Church of St. Gertruda was Converted there into a Collegial
Church about 1442. Bergen-Op-Zoom has had particular Lords ever since 1212. The
Emperor Charles V. being at Tournay in 1528. (or according to others in 1533.)
erected it into a Marquisate; since that time the Hollanders got it after the
Death of the Marquess De Bergues, whom the Duchess of Parma had sent into
Spain, where he was Arrested, and Died 1567. They have Fortified this Place
well and regularly, with a Channel that goes to the Sea, defended by diverse
Forts: The Buildings of the Town are fair and handsome, and its three
Marketplaces large and capacious. Amongst the Edifices, the Church of St.
Lambert, and the Marquesses Palace deserve Observation. The Commandant of
Requesens was defeated in 1574. near this City, which the Prince of Parma
Besieged in vain, An. 1588. and Marquess Spinola in 1622. It stands 18 Miles N.
of Antwerp, and 18 W. of Breda. Long. 23 d. 32 m. Lat. 51 d. 32 m.

IV. Grave.

Grave Lat. Gravia, is a strong Town, and of great Importance, seated upon the
left side of the Meuse, whose Waters fill the large Moats, which Environ Seven
large Bulwarks with their Half-Moons. John III. Duke of Brabant in 1323. gave
it to Otho Prince of Cuick and Heverle who restored it in 1328. Afterward it
was the occasion of great Wars between the Dukes of Brabant and Holland, who
both pretended a Right to it. It is the Capital City of the Country of
Cuickland, remarkable for its Fertility, and has been a long time in the Hands
of the Hollanders. Only about the Year 1672. the Torrent of French Victory
swept it away into the Power of Lewis XIV. But in the Year 1677. Monsieur
Chamilli Governor for the King of France, surrendered it to the Prince of
Orange, now our King, after it had been for some time Besieged by Mr.
Rabenhauft. It lies in a Marshy Ground 18 Miles almost W. of Boisleduc, 72 N.
E. of Brussels, and 8 S. W. of Nimeguen. Long. 24 d. 56 m. Lat. 51 d. 48 m.

V. Ravestein.

Ravestein stands upon the Meuse a little below Grave. The Dukes of Cleve have
been Lords of Ravestein, where they had a good Citadel; but William Duke of
Cleve and Juliers was obliged to demolish it, by one of the Articles made with
the Emperor Charles V. The Duke of Newburg is Sovereign of Ravestein, but the
Hollanders are in Possession of it. It stands 10 Miles almost W. of Nimeguen.
Long. 24 d. 53 m. Lat. 51 d. 48 m.

VI. Helmont.

Helmont is a little Town and Castle on the River Aade, and the Capital of
Kemperland. It lies 18 Miles S. of Grave, and 60 N. E. of Brussels. Long. 24 d.
42 m. Lat. 51 d. 32 m.

VII. Eyndenhove.

Eyndenhove or Eyndoven is a fine little Town in the Territory of Kemperland,
subject to the Hollanders ever since 1629. It stands on the River Dommel, 10
Miles W. of Helmont. Long. 24 d. 38 m. Lat. 51 d. 30 m.

VIII. Maestricht.

Maestricht Lat. Obtricum, Trajectum ad Mosam, or Trajectum Superius, to
distinguish it from Vtrecht, called Trajectum ad Rhenum, or, Trajectum
Inferius. It stands upon the Western Bank of the Meuse, which has here a
Beautiful Stone Bridge over it, consisting of Nine Arches, from whence the Town
has its Name, signifying the passage over the Maes. On the Eastern Bank lies
the Wick, which is a Suburb to the City. The Bishops of Liege, and the Dukes of
Brabant, heretofore divided the Jurisdiction of this City betwixt them, but it
was in the hands of the latter, and with that Duchy passed to the House of
Austria, who enjoyed it till 1632. when it was taken by the Hollanders, who
kept it by the Treaty of Munster. The French took it, after a sharp Siege, in
1673. The Hollanders endeavored the Reduction of it in 1676. but without
success; they recovered it by the Eighth Article of the Treaty of Nimeguen in
1678. The Private Houses here are generally covered with a black Slate, or
Ardoise, otherwise not very Beautiful. The Townhouse is a very fair structure,
seated in one of the Piazza's, Built of white Stone, and very well Painted in
the inside. In another Piazza, is a Fountain, a row of Trees and a great
Church. This Town is very strong, though its Wall be old, the Outworks being
very considerable. Toward the S. E. lies a Hill, which arises gently, and
overlooks the Town; under this Hill is one of the Noblest Quarries of Stone in
the World. To secure the Town from the disadvantage it might receive from this
Hill, there was formerly a Fort Built upon it, but it has been long since
slighted, and they have cut an Horn-work within Musket Shot of it, and the
Bastion answering to it is made very high to cover the Town: On the other side
of the River stands Wick, very well Fortified also, and rather stronger than
Maestricht, into which they may retire, if the Town should be taken by Storm:
All about the Wick the Country is flat; there are here many Inhabitants, about
20 Monasteries, Three Dutch Churches, One common to the English and French, and
a handsome Glass-house. Maestricht stands 50 Miles E. of Brussels, and 14 N. of
Liege. Long. 25 d. Lat. 50 d. 54 m.

IX. Lillo.

Lillo Lat. Lilloa, is a strong Fort Built by the Hollanders upon the Scheld,
Seven Miles beneath Antwerp to the North, where all the Ships that pass up the
River to Antwerp are, by the Treaty of Munster, to stop, and to pay Toll to the
States of the United Provinces, to whom the Place belongs.

Places in Brabant belonging to the Spaniards.
I. Brussels.

BRussels or Bruxelles, Lat. Bruxellae, one of the greatest, beautifullest, and
best peopled City of the Spanish Netherlands, is the Capital of the Duchy of
Brabant; the Seat of the Chancelery and Court of Brabant, of the Counsels of
State, of the Revenues, and the Ordinary Residence of the Prince or Governor,
whom the King of Spain keeps in the Low Countries; which draws all the Nobility
and Gentry to it. It is situated upon the small River of Sin or Senne, which
discharges it self in the Schelde by a Channel of the length of Five Leagues,
which was made in 1561. Its Avenues are fine, its Circumference about Seven
Miles. It is Built part in the Plain, and part upon a Hill, extremely pleasant,
environed with a double Brick Wall pretty far distant from each other, and
small Ditches. The Town is divided into upper and lower, the latter is much
more agreeable and beautiful than the other, having several Fountains, and the
the two Branches of the great Canal, bordered with great Keys, filled with a
prodigious number of Boats, that come thither from the Sea by the Scheld. The
King's Palace is in the upper Town* it has many Rich Apartments big enough to
Lodge several Kings at once, to which belongs a very fine Mail, a Park full of
Deer, and very curious Gardens near it, with fine Waterworks, Grotto's, and a
square Wilderness. The Townhouse, the Tower of St. Nicholas, which has the
Town-Clock; the Church of the Jesuits, the Prince of Orange's House, deserve to
be seen by Strangers. Among the Churches the Collegial Dedicated to St. Gudulle
is the Chief and the most Ancient, where they pretend to have an Host stabbed
by a Jew, which shed Blood out of the Wound, whereupon, they say, the Jew was
immediately struck with Death. Here you find some Footsteps of the Ancients
Fancy for the Number Seven, for there are Seven Parish Churches, Seven
Principal Streets, about which are Seven stately Houses Rented by the Public,
Seven Gates of Dorick Work, Seven Considerable Families, Seven Sheriffs who
have the Care of Affairs, and Seven Licensed Midwives, etc. Bruxelles is a
Trading Town, and has several Manufactures. There are 52 Trades divided into
Nine Guilds or Companies, called the Nine Nations, among which the Cutlers and
Armour-makers are Chief. Brussels stands 30 Miles S. E. of Ghent, 24 S. of
Antwerp, 96 S. of Amsterdam, 150 N. E. of Paris, and 190 almost E. of London.
Long. 23 d. 36 m. Lat. 50 d. 54 m.

II. Louvain.

Louvain, Lat. Lovanium, and by the Inhabitants Loeven, is a great City
situated upon the River Dele, which runs into the Scheld at Rupelmondel. This
Town is about Four Miles in compass, and is so very Ancient that it is supposed
to have been Built by one Lupus, before the time of Julius Caesar: It was at
first but a Village that was Walled in 1156. and has been much enlarged since:
It is seated in a very fruitful Soil, and has so gentle and pleasant Air, that
Wine is made both within the Walls and without. There are within the Walls of
this City* large Meadows, beautiful Vineyards, and pleasant Gardens and
Orchards, which shows that it is not over-stocked with Inhabitants. It is well
Fortified, and has many fair Churches, the Chief whereof is the Collegiate
Church of St. Peter, besides a great number of Monasteries. The University of
Louvain is very Famous, it was founded in 1426. by John IV. Duke of Brabant,
and endowed with great Privileges by Pope Martin V. and Eugenius IV. and has
20 Colleges, founded by several Persons, for the promoting of Learning. This
Town is encompassed with large deep Ditches, cut in many places through a
flinty Rock, or very hard Gravel. The Walls are strongly Built, being raised
from the very bottom of the Ditch; in the Circuit of these Walls are 53 Towers,
and no less than 16 Draw-bridges, placed conveniently for the better securing
of the Gates, which are in number 11, Built all of curious white Stone. The
Buildings of the City in general are neither well Built, nor well kept, but the
Townhouse is a stately Structure. Louvain stands 15 Miles N. E. of Brussels.
Long. 23 d. 58 m. Lat. 50 d. 57 m.

III. Leeuwe.

Leeuwe is a little strong Town and Castle on the River Get, 16 Miles E. of
Louvain, and 21 W. of Maestricht. Long. 24 d. 26 m. Lat. 50 d. 53 m.

IV. Arschot.

Arschot, Lat. Arscotium, is a small City upon the River Deem, and a Dukedom
belonging to the Dukes de Croy. It lies 8 Miles N. E. of Louvain. Long. 24 d.
10 m. Lat. 51 d. 4 m.

V. Nivelle.

Nivelle is a small, and heretofore a strong Town, but now dismantled. It
stands 12 Miles S. of Brussels. Long. 23 d. 38 m. Lat. 50 d. 39 m.

VI. Tillemont.

Tillemont, Lat. Tena, or Tenacae, or Tillemontium, in Flemish Thienen, is a
considerable Town on the River Gias. It was one of the Four principal Towns of
Brabant, until it was almost ruined, during the Civil Wars between the French
and those of Liege. The Duke of Guelderland plundered it in 1507. but the
Inhabitants of Namur pursued him, and having surpised his Camp in the Night
near St. Hubert in Ardenne, recovered the Booty, and took many Prisoners. This
Town was surrendered to Don John of Austria in 1578. and has a very fine Church
Dedicated to St. Germain Bishop of Paris. It stands 11 Miles almost S. E. of
Louvain, and 23 E. of Brussels. Long. 24 d. 18 m. Lat. 50 d. 52 m.

VII. Judoigne.

Judoigne is a small Town on the River Gias, 12 Miles S. E. of Louvain, and 22
E. of Brussels. Long. 24 d. 16 m. Lat. 50 d. 46 m.

About Four Miles N. E. of this Place, are the Villages of Elixem or Heylesem,
Neerwinden, Battle of Landen.
Dormal, Neerlanden, and the Rivulet Landen, Famous for the Battle that was
Fought there in 1693. which happened in this manner, The Duke of Luxemberg who
Commanded the French Army in Chief, having got Intelligence that King William
of Great Britain his Army was much lessened by the Detachments his Majesty had
sent to the Lines 'twixt Ipres and Courtray, and to Liege, attacked him in his
Camp between Neerwinden and Landen, July 29. with double the Number of Men, but
was received with so much Gallantry, and repulsed so often, that though the Fight
continued from Five in the Morning till near Five in the Afternoon, the French
had perpetually the Disadvantage, till at last having gained a Pass into his
Majesty's Camp, they overpowered him by their Numbers, and some of our Horse
not acting their part, the King perceiving things in disorder, did Valiantly
attempt to renew the Battle, and seeing that it could not be performed,
commanded a Retreat, which was obeyed in very good Order, but the Body being in
a Confusion, sustained a considerable Loss, especially at passing the River
Geete. His Majesty continued so long in the Field that he had much ado to
repass that River, but accomplished it at length, having behaved himself during
the whole Action, with admirable Courage and Conduct, and Exposed himself to a
Thousand Dangers, yet by a particular Providence, he came off without any other
hurt than a small Contusion on the side by a Musket Bullet, and having a piece
of his Scarf shot away. The Elector of Bavaria performed also Wonders during
the Fight: But the Gallantry of most of the English and Scotch is scarce to be
paralleled. The Loss of the French was computed to 18000 Men, and that of the
Confederates about 7000. The Chief of those who fell on our side was Count
Solms, Lieutenant General; and his Grace the Duke of Ormond was Wounded and
Taken, with many other Officers of Note, but since redeemed.

VIII. Gemblours.

Gemblours, Lat. Gemblacum, is upon the River Orne, with the fine Abbey of St.
Benedict, whose Abbot is Spiritual and Temporal Lord of the Town. It is Famous
for a Fight in 1578. and stands by the Borders of Namur, 19 Miles S. of Namur,
and 20 S. E. of Brussels. Long. 24 d. Lat. 50 d. 37 m.

IX. Lire.

Lire or Lier, Lat. Lira, is in the District of Antwerp, between that City and
Mechlin, seated upon the River Nethe, which falls Two Miles farther into the
Ruypel. It is naturally strong by its Situation, and made much more so by Art;
and besides a very fine and pleasant Town, Famous for its Manufactures, and its
Fairs for Cattle. It stands Seven Miles N. of Mechlin, 10 S. E. of Antwerp, and
20 N. of Brussels. Long. 23 d. 50 m. Lat. 51 d. 9 m.

X. Die.

Die is a little Town upon the River Demer, with the Title of Barony, and the
Head of a Territory Subject to our King as Prince of Orange. It is considerable
for its diverse Manufactures of Woollen and Linen Cloth; and for its Two
Collegiate Churches. It stands 14 Miles almost E. of Louvain. Long. 24 d. 24 m.
Lat. 51 d. 3 m.

There are some other small inconsiderable Towns in the Spanish Brabant, such
as Vilvoerde, Herentals, Hannuye, etc.

Article III. Of the Marquisate of the Holy Empire.
THE Marquisate of the Holy Empire, is a very small Province, Bounds.
not being above Seven Miles W. and E. and Four S. and N. yet it is accounted
one of the Four Quarters or Tetrarchies of Brabant, bounded on the West by
Flanders, from which it is separated by the River Scheld, and on all other
sides by Brabant.

The Chief Rivers Rivers.
there are, the Scheld, which washes Antwerp, and the Schynt, which also runs
by Antwerp, and there falls into the Scheld.

This Marquisate belonged formerly to the Emperor, but now to the King of Spain.

The Chief and only Place of Note in the Province is Antwerp.

Antwerp.
Antwerp, Lat. Antuerpia or Andoverpum, and Antwerpen by the Natives, is the
Capital of the Marquisate of the Holy Empire, with a Bishop's See under the
Archbishop of Malines. The derivation some give of its Name is Fabulous. This
City was formerly one of the Richest and most Beautiful of the whole World,
seated in a spacious Plain upon the Right side of the Scheld, where the River
divides the Duchy of Brabant from the County of Flanders. It was enlarged by
John I. John III. and Charles V. It contains 212 Streets, and 22 public
Piazza's. The Houses are all neat and fashionable, and many of them
Magnificent. In a word, all the Structures, both Sacred and Profane,
admirable. Our Lady's Church, the Cathedral, is a piece of of incomparable
Workmanship: it is above 500 Foot long, 240 broad, and 340 high, contains 66
Chapels, embellished with Marble Pillars, all different in shape, and adorned
with curious Pictures, as well as the Body of the Church. The Tower is one of
the highest and fairest of Europe, Built of white Stone, where are 33 large
Bells: The Three Chief Doors are cased with Marble, and gilt with Gold. This
fine Church was almost burnt to the Ground in the Year 1533. and after that
pillaged during the Civil Wars for Religion. It was erected into a Cathedral by
Paul IV. in the Year 1559. There are Four other Parish Churches, viz. St.
George, St. James, St. Andrew, and St. Malburge, besides 25 Colleges, Nunneries
and Religious Houses, amongst which the Jesuits-Church is very Magnificent;
it is paved with Marble on the two lower sides one above another, which are
supported by 56 Marble Columns: The Four Roofs are hung with 38 large Pictures
of Rubens in Gold Frames, and the Wall pierced with 40 cross Windows lined with
Marble. The chief Altar is all of Marble, Jasper, Porphyre, and Gold. The
Jesuits Treasure is valued Two Millions. The Townhouse consists of Four
Apartments, and the Easterlings House, the Exchange, and the Galleries that
surround it, deserve to be seen. The Citadel, one of the strongest and most
regular is of a Pentagon Figure. It encloses two little Hills that give a
Prospect all over the Country. This Citadel was built in 1567. by the Duke of
Alva. The City lies 18 Leagues from the Sea, between Malines, Louvain, Brussels
and Bruges. The Harbor is very lovely, and most convenient, there being no
less than Eight Channels for Ships to come up by to the City, in the chiefest
of which 100 may ride together. There are 74 Bridges upon these Canals, all
which Conveniences brought a great Trade to the Town, but the Neighborhood of
Amsterdam has deprived it of the greatest part. This City suffered much in the
Revolt of the Low Countries from the Spaniards, who plundered it Three days
together, burnt above 600 Houses, and Killed and Drowned 10000 of the
Inhabitants. The Confederates repaired it, but it was after that retaken by the
Prince of Parma, after a Years Siege, memorable for the many Machines and
Devices used in it. Antwerp stands 24 Miles N. of Brussels. Long. 23 d. 36 m.
Lat. 51 d. 16 m.

Article IV. Of the Lordship of Malines.
MAlines or Mechlin is another very small Province, Bounds.
bounded on every side with Brabant, and is nigh the middle of it, and not far
off the Borders of Flanders. Its extent is about Eight Miles West and East,
Extent.
and Five South and North.

It is a distinct Province from the rest, and the Residence of the Parliament
or great Council for these Countries, but has not those Privileges that
Brabant has. And for that reason most Women here when they are ready to Lie-In,
go into Brabant to be brought to Bed, that their Children may enjoy their
Privileges.

In the compass of the Province lies but one City, City.
or Walled Town, and Nine Villages. Villages.


The chief Rivers are, Rivers.
1. The Dele which runs through the middle, and washes Mechlin, and then into
Brabant, and falls into the Scheld. 2. Senne, which here falls into the Dele.

Malines.
Malines or Mechlin, Lat. Mechlinia, and by those of the Country Mackelen or
Meckelen, upon the Dele, is the Capital of the Lordship of that Name. Its
Bigness and Magnificence cause it to be called Malines the Beautiful; as
Antwerp the Rich, Brussels the Noble, Louvain the Wise, Ghent the Great, and
Bruges the Ancient. The situation is very pleasant, and because of the Tide,
the Trade is very good. There is an Archbishoprick's See founded by Paul IV. in
1559. with the Title of Primate of the Low Countries, Cardinal Granville was
the first Archbishop. The Cathedral Church is Consecrated to St. Rombaut.
Malines is the place of the great Royal Council, instituted by Charles Duke of
Burgundy in 1473. There is also the Parliament of the Knights of the Fleece;
and the Prince's Arsenal. Speaking of this Arsenal, I cannot but mention, that
the Thunder having set on Fire several Barrels of Powder in 1546. it broke out
with such fury, that it overturned a Tower, and above 300 Houses, dried up the
Ditch about the Town, and caused extraordinary Damage. In the Suburb is St.
Alexis's Nunnery, where there are 15 or 1600 Nuns, who are allowed to walk
abroad, to pay and receive Visits, and to Marry when they please. The Lordship
of Malines had its own Lords, until 1336. that it became a free Town. After
that time it belonged to the House of Burgundy, till it entered into that of
Austria in 1477. Its Inhabitants are free from all Taxes, for the good Service
performed to Charles the Bold, Earl of Flanders, at the Siege of Nuis upon the
Rhine. Here have been Two Provincial Councils, the first in 1570. and the
second in 1607. The chief Trade of this place consists in Tanning, making of
Linen Cloth, Point and Lace, (which bear the Name of the City) and casting
great Artillery and Guns. It stands 11 Miles N. W. of Louvain, 13 almost N. of
Brussels, 14 S. E. of Antwerp, and 30 E. of Ghent. Long. 23 p. 44 m. Lat. 51 d.
6 m.

Article V. Part of the Dukedom of Gelderland belonging to the Spaniards.
THat part of Gelderland which is Subject to the Spaniards, Bounds.
has on the East and North, Cleves in Germany; on the West Brabant, and on the
South Juliers in Germany. Extent.
Its extent is about 36 Miles North and South, and about 28 East and West.

The Soil is fertile, and yields all sorts of Grains, abounding moreover with
rich Pasture-grounds, Quality.
which fatten great Droves of Cattle, which are sent from many far Places.

The chief Rivers here are,

Rivers.
1. The Meuse which runs through the midst of this part, washing Ruremonde and
Venlo, and so passes on, dividing Brabant from the rest of Guelderland.

2. Niers, which washes Gelders, and runs into Cleves.

The Chief Towns are Gelders Cap. Venlo. Ruremond Bish.


I. Gelders.

The City of Guelders, Lat. Gueldria, which they of the Country call Gelre, is
seated on a Marshy Ground upon the little River of Niers, which environs it
instead of a Moat. The Castle is extremely strong, and said to be impregnable
by reason of its situation. In 1627. the Spaniards labored to have brought the
Rhine to the City of Guelders, and into the Meuse, on purpose to have cut off
the Commerce between Germany and Holland, but failed in their Enterprise. It
stands 26 Miles nigh S. E. of Nimeguen, the Chief of the Province, and 11 Miles
almost N. of Venlo. Long. 25 d. 37 m. Lat. 51 d. 31 m.

II. Venlo.

Venlo is a very strong Town on the River Meuse, by the Borders of Juliers. It
is a Hance-Town, but Subject to the Spaniards, and stands 11 Miles S. W. of
Gelders, and 11 N. of Ruremond. Long. 25 d. 24 m. Lat. 51 d. 27 m.

III. Ruremond.

Ruremond Lat. Ruremonde, is the second City of Gelderland, with a Bishopric
Suffragant of Malines, on the River Meuse, at the Mouth of the Roer or Rura,
from which it takes its Name. Its Collegiate Church was Erected in 1559. into a
Cathedral by Pope Paul IV. William Lindall was the first Prelate of it. The
City is large, fair, and rich, having many stately Monasteries in it, whereof
that of the Carthusians is the most considerable. It stands 11 Miles S. of
Venlo, and 21 S. of Gelders. Long. 25 d. 22 m. Lat. 51 d. 16 m.

Article VI. Of the Dukedom of Limburg, Limburgensis, Ducatus.
LImburg has the Duchy of Juliers to the East and North, Bounds.
the Bishopric of Liege to the West, and part of Luxemburg to the South.

Its Extent South and North is about 35 Miles, and West and East about 26.
Extent.
It had heretofore Dukes of its own, History.
but upon the Death of Walraine III. (whom others call Henry) in 1285. Adolph
sold it to John Duke of Brabant, who pretended a Right to it, as descended from
Margaret Daughter of Henry Duke of Limburg, Married in 1172. to Godfrey Duke of
Brabant. In 1293. Rainold I. Duke of Guelderland, laid claim to it, in the
Kight of Ermengarde his Wife, Daughter of Herman late Duke of Limburg; but he
losing the Battle of Woring near Collen, June 5. 1298. and being taken
Prisoner, was forced to resign his Right to John Duke of Brabant, to regain his
Liberty, and from that time the Dukes of Brabant have enjoyed it.

It has excellent Mines of Iron, and one of Copper. Quality.
The Earth is very fruitful in Wheat, Fruits, and Fuel, but above all in Grass
and Water. The Famous Spaw-Waters are not above Three Leagues S. W. from
Limburg.

The Chief Rivers here are,

Rivers.
1. The Meuse which runs but thorough a little part of this Country.

2. Geul, which washes Valkenburg, and falls into the Meuse.

3. Weser, which waters Limburg, and runs into Liege.

4. Bervine, which washes Dalem. and falls into the Meuse.

This Province has but Five Walled Towns, and about 120 Villages.

The Towns are Limburg. Cap. to the Spaniards. Dalem, to the Hollanders.
Valkenburg, to the Hollanders. Rolduck, to the Hollanders. Remborg. to the
Hollanders.


I. Limburg.

Limburg Lat. Limburgum, is pleasantly seated upon a steep Rock which overlooks
all the Country round about; at the bottom thereof runs the River Weser almost
round it among several shady Woods. It is but a small City, for it chiefly
consists of one broad short Street; neither is it considerable for its beauty,
the Buildings for the most part being of Wood. But it is of no small
consideration for its strength, for it is encompassed with a strong Wall and a
Trench, and the access to it, which is on the North side, is extremely
difficult, lying all along upon the edge of the Rock: From one side thereof to
the other, the Gate of the Town, (over which are the Governors Lodgings)
spreads it self, and quite locks up and commands the whole passage. Here was
before a very strong Castle. The Hollanders took this City in 1632. but the
Spaniards recovered it again. In 1675. the French surprised it, and being
forced to leave it in 1677. they destroyed the Castle which now lies in
Rubbish. Limburg stands 19 Miles almost E. of Liege. Long. 25 d. 30 m. Lat. 50
d. 28 m.

II. Dalem.

Dalem is a small but strong Town and Castle on the River Bervin, with a large
Territory depending upon it. Henry II. Duke of Brabant took this Town, and
United it to his Dominions; it is now subject to the Hollanders, and stands
Seven Miles N. E. of Liege, and 15 N. W. of Limburg. Long. 25 d. 5 m. Lat. 50
d. 45 m.

III. Valkenburg.

Valkenburg or Vauguemont is a strong Town in Limburg, on the River Geul, and
subject to the Hollanders, though said to belong to the Bishop of Liege. It is
large and indifferent neatly built, as well as tollerably fortified: The Castle
stands on a steep Rock, and is inaccessible and impregnable to an Enemy that
brings not Canon along with him. Yet in the year 1672. upon the news of the
French coming, it was immediately quitted. The French took it in 1676. and
restored it in 1679. by the Treaty of Nimeguen. It stands 11 Miles E. of
Maestricht, 17 N. E. of Liege, and 21 N. of Limburg, Long. 25 d. 18 m. Lat. 50
d. 53 m.

IV. Rolduck.

Rolduck is an old little Town and Castle, with the Title of County, subject to
the Hollanders: it stands 13 Miles E. of Valkenburg, Long. 25 d. 34 m. Lrt. 50
d. 52 m.

V. Remborg.

Remborg, is also a little Town, on the borders of Juliers and Territory of
Rolduck, subject to the Hollandes. It stands 12 Miles E. of Valkenburg. Long.
25. d. Lat. 50 d. 57 m.

Article VII. Of the Bishopric of Liege. Leodiensis Ditio.
THIS Country has part of the Duchy of Gelderland and Brabant on the North.
Bounds.
Part of Brabant and the County of Namur on the West. The County of Luxemburg
on the South; And the Dutchies of Limburg and Juliers on the East. It is
extended about 70 Miles South-West and North-East, and about 35 West and East.
Extent.
It is a part of the Circle of Westphalia in Germany though annexed to these
Provinces.

The Air is here very temperate; The Valleys produce plenty of Grass; Quality.
The Plains abound with Corn, the Hills are thick set with Vines, the Mountains
have their Quarries of Marble, and Mines of Lead, Iron and Brimstone, beside
Pit-coal in abundance. The Forests afford great store of Venison.

The Bishop is Lord of the Country and Prince of the Empire, Government.
though as Bishop he be under the Archbishop of Cologne; he has also the Title of
Duke of Bouillon, Marquis of Franchimont, and Count of Loots and Hasbain, which
are all Lordships in this Bishopric. Besides that, Cities.
it contains 52 Baronies, a great number of Abbeys, 24 Walled Towns, and above
1500 Villages. Villages.


The Chief Rivers are,

1. The Meuse which here washes Dinant, Huy, Liege, Maestricht, Stochem, and
Maeseyck, Rivers.
and runs into Gelderland.

2. The Demer, which here washing Bilsen and Haffelt, runs into Brabant.

3. The Jecker which washes Tongres and falls into the Maes at Maestricht.

4. Wesdres, which washes Viviers and falls into the Maes at Maestricht.

Besides these there are eleven small Rivers.

The Chief Cities are, Liege. Bish. Cap. Huy. Chiney. Thuin. Bouillon. Dinant.
Walcourt. Florennes. Horn. Hamont. Brey. Maseick. Herk. St. Truyen. Tongres.


I. Liege.

Liege or Luick Lat. Laodium, Laodicum and sometimes Legia, is situated on the
left side of the Meuse, a little below the place where Ourt runs into it, with
a Bishops See Suffragant of the Archbishop of Cologne. It is a free Imperial
City, built in a pleasant Valley, surrounded with Woods and Hills, amongst
sweet springs which fall down from them, and the little Rivers of Vte, Vese and
Ambluat, which fall into the Maes before it enters this City. The public
buildings, as, the Bishops Palace, the Churches, and Bridges are very sumptuous
and magnificent. There are a great number of Abbeys and Religious Houses, and
eight Collegiate Churches. The Cathedral dedicated to St. Lambert, is famous
for its Chapter; to which no Canon can be admitted except he be noble by Birth,
or by learning; that is except he be a Gentleman or a Doctor. The Bishops See
was first at Tongres from thence removed to Maestricht, and by St. Hubert
successor of St. Lambert the Martyr, settled at Liege. A vast part of the Town
within the Walls is not built, but employed in Vineyards and Orchards, which
are very fruitful. It is supposed by some to have been built by Amborix a
German Prince, mentioned by Julius Caesar. It suffered much from the Normans,
and from one of the Dukes of Brabant, who took it and plundered it in 1212. In
the XVth Century John D. of Burgundy, taking advantage of their disagreement in
the Election of a Bishop, grievously afflicted it in 1409. killing 36000 of
them in a Battle, and entering into the City, caused the Chief of those that had
opposed him to be cast into the Meuse. After this in 1468. Charles Duke of
Burgundy, again took the City, his Soldiers committing intolerable outrages
against the Inhabitants. In this last Age it has been ill treated by its
Bishops, and the French taking it by surprise in 1675. the next year after
ruined the Castle. In 1688. the Baron of Elderen, Great Dean of the Cathedral
was chosen Bishop and Prince of Liege by Plurality of Votes, in opposition to
the Cardinal of Furstemberg, and has repaired the old Fortifications; and added
new ones. Liege stands 30 Miles almost N. E. of Namur, and 54 East of Brussels,
Long. 25 d. Lat. 50 d. 42 m.

II. Huy.

Huy Lat. Hugum and Hugonum, is a Town and Castle on the River Meuse, near the
Place where the River Huy runs into it, which gives the name to the Town. It Is
divided by the Meuse into two parts, and is reputed very ancient. It had
particular Earls, who gave it to the Bishops of Liege. It has suffered much in
the late Wars. In 1692. the French sat before it, but soon left the Enterprise,
the next year they besieged and carried it in a few days. It stands 14 Miles
almost S. W. of Liege, and 17 almost N. E. of Namur, Long. 24 d. 35 m. Lat. 50
d. 36 m.

III. Chiney.

Chiney is a small Town on the Borders of Namur, subject to the French ever
since 1681. It stands 14 Miles S. E. of Namur, Long. 24 d. 26 m. Lat. 50 d. 23
m.

IV. Thuin.

Thuin is a little Town on the River Sambre and in le pays enter Sambre and
Meuse, it is subject to the French who have lately fortified it. It stands by
the borders of Hainault 10 Miles S. W. of Charleroy, and 14 S. E. of Mons,
Long. 23 d. 31 m. Lat. 50 d. 22 m.

V. Bouillon.

Bouillon or Buillon Lat. Bullonium is a fair and beautiful Borough and
Castle, with the Title of a Duchy; This Castle is very strong, situated upon a
craggy Mountain. It gave its name to the illustrious Godfrey of Bouillon King
of Jerusalem who undertaking the famous expedition of the Holy Land, engaged
Bouillon to Obert Bishop of Liege, upon condition that if he came back he
should have the Liberty of Redeeming it. In the XVth Century it passed into the
House of la Mark. It is now Subject to the French, and stands on the River
Semoy, 38 Miles almost W. of Luxemburg Long. 24 d. 34 m. Lat. 49 d. 50 m.

VI. Dinant.

Dinant Lat. Dinantium a rich Town on the River Meuse had formerly a strong
Citadel on a steep Rock, that was ruined by the French in 1554. and has been
restored since. The French are in possession of this Place ever since 1675. it
lies 14 Miles S. of Namur, and 40 almost E. of Liege, Long. 24 d. 10 m. Lat. 50
d. 12 m.

VI. Walcourt.

Walcourt or Valencourt is a small inconsiderable Town in the Bishopric of
Liege, though often reckoned in Namur. It is the Capital of le pays enter Meuse
and Sambre, and famous for an obstinate skirmish betwixt the Dutch and French,
in which the latter sustained a considerable loss in 1689. but made themselves
Masters of the Town. It stands on a Rivulet nine Miles S. of Charleroy, and 17
W. of Dinant, Long. 23 d. 42 m. Lat. 50 d. 18. m.

VIII. Florennes.

Florennes is another small Town in Le Pays enter Sambre and Meuse, subject to
the French. It stands five Miles E. of Walcourt, and 11 W. of Dinant, Long. 24
d. Lat. 50 d. 10 m.

IX. Horn.

Horn is a little Town in Brabant with the Title of Earldom, and a great
Domain. It is situated on the River Meuse, with a good Castle. It is an
Imperial Manor though subordinate to the ancient Earldom of Lootz in the
Dominion of Liege.. It stands six Miles almost W. of Ruremond.

X. Hamont.

Hamont is a little Town in the County of Lootz, and subject to this Prince. In
stands on the Borders of Brabant 17 Miles N. W. of Maesick, Long. 24 d. 50 m.
Lat. 51 d. 18 m.

XI. Brey.

Brey is another small Town in the County of Lootz, subject to that Prince, 11
Miles W. of Maesick, and 15 North of Maestricht, Long. 24 d. 55 m. Lat. 51 d.
10 m.

XII. Maesick.

Maesick is a pretty considerable Town in the County of Lootz, subject to this
Prince. It stands on the River Maes, by the Borders of Brabant and Gelderland,
13 Miles almost N. E. of Maestricht and 27 from Liege, Long. 25 d. 13. m. Lat.
51 d. 7 m.

XIII. Herk.

Herk is a small Town in the same County on the borders of Brabant, and on the
River Demer, 18 Miles E. of Maestricht and 25 N. W. of Liege, Long. 24 d. 28 m.
Lat. 50 d. 58 m.

XIV. St. Truyen.

St. Truyen, or St. Tron, Lat. Fanum Sancti Trudonis, is the Capital of the
County of Hasbain or Haspengo, subject to this Prince. It stands nigh the
Borders of Brabant, 18 Miles W. of Mastricht and 20 almost N. W. of Liege,
Long. 24 d. 21 m. Lat. 50 d. 52 m.

XV. Tongres.

Tongres or Tongeron, Lat. Tungri or Aduacata Tungrorum, is a very ancient Town
upon Jecker, it was first ruined by Attila, and afterward by the Normans. Some
pretend that St. Materne sent by St. Peter preached the Gospel and was first
Bishop of this Place, where he had eight successors, until St. Gervais removed
the seat to Mastricht, whence it was afterward changed to Liege. This Town has
nothing considerable at present but its name, and the Glory of its ancient
splendour. It lies about 13 Miles N. W. of Liege. Long. 24 d. 34 m. Lat. 50 d.
53 m.

Article. VIII. Of the County of Namur.
THIS County borders Brabant on the North; part of Brabant and Hainault on the
West; Bounds.
part of Hainault and Luxemburg on the South; and part of Luxemburg and the
Country of Liege, Extent.
on the East. Its extent North-east and South-West is about 34 Miles, and West
and East about 30.

It is plentifully stored with all Commodities, the Hills clothed with Woods
full of Fowl and Venison, Quality.
and the Valleys fertile in Corn and Pastures. It has also several Mines of
Lead and Iron, Quarries of diverse sorts of fine Marble, and Pits of Stone-Coal,
which they call Houles.

Cities.
There are here four considerable Towns, and about 184 Villages. Villages.


Rivers.
The Chief Rivers are, 1. The Meuse, which runs through the midst of this
Province into the Bishopric of Liege, washing Charlemont, Dinant, Bovines, and
Namur. 2. The Sambre which here washes Charleroy, and falls into the Meuse at
Namur.

This County was formerly under the Spaniards but the French have in this late
War conquered its best places. Government.


The most remarkable places in the County of Namur, are, Namur. Bish. Cap.
Charleroy. Charlemont. Bouvines. Flerus.


I. Namur.

Namur Lat. Namurcum, situated upon the Sambre and near the Maes, lies between
two Mountains and has a very strong Castle. Some derive its name from Novo
Muro, a new Wall built here by the Romans. The Cathedral dedicated to St. Aubin
was built in 1569. and the Bishopric lies under the Archbishop of Cambray;
besides the Cathedral there is also the Collegiate Church of our Lady, and
several other Churches and Monasteries. This City has a large and handsome
Marketplace, a stately Townhouse and abundance of good Stone-Buildings. It is
no less rich than pleasant and strong. The Council Royal of the Province
resided here, from which they did appeal to that of Malines. In 1692. The
strength of the Place being discovered to the French by the Treacherous Baron
de Bresse, who under pretense of being taken did actually desert the Spanish
service, Lewis XIV. with 80000 sat down before it, Luxemburg covering the Siege
with another great Army; The Town was taken after a few days Resistance, a
Parley being beaten by a Drummer, who never discovered who commanded him. While
the French continued to Besiege the Castle King William III. of great Britain,
marched with 90000 Men to its Relief, but the French being advantageously
posted, they declined Battle; His Majesty did notwithstanding drive them from
some of their Posts, and laid Bridges over the River to pass it, but in the
mean time a great Rain happening, swelled the River, carried down the Bridges,
prevented his attacquing them, and gave them the opportunity to take the Castle
also, July 2. 1692. Namur has been since very well Fortified by the French. It
lies 32 Miles S. E. of Brussels, and 50 almost S. of Antwerp, Long. 24 d. 12 m.
Lat. 50 d. 32

II. Charleroy.

Charleroy, Lat. Carolo-Regium, is a Town and Fortress built upon a Mountain
near the Sambre and Pieton; it was but a Borrough called Charnoy until the
Spaniards fortified it in 1666. and called it Charleroy from Charles their
King. The French took it the year after, and kept it by the Peace of Aix la
Chapelle. The Dutch and Spaniards attempted this Town twice in vain, the first
time in 1672. and the second in 1677. But in the year 1678. it was yielded to
the Spaniards by the Treaty of Nimeguen. In 1692. the French Bombarded this
Place. In 1693 they sat down before it with a numerous Army, the Marquess de
Villeroy, carrying on the Siege, and Luxemburg covering him, so that King
William of Great Britain, and the Elector of Bavaria not being strong enough
to attack them, they carried the Town by surrender, after a gallant defense by
the Marquess de Castillo the Governor, who held out against them 27 days open
Trenches, and capitulated on honorable Terms, October 1. 1693. Charleroy
stands 14 Miles W. of Namur, and 26 S. of Brussels, Long. 23 d. 42 m. Lat. 50
d. 28 m.

III. Charlemont.

Charlemont Lat. Carolo-Montium, is a small Town with a good Fortress built by
Charles V. in 1555. upon the Top of a Mountain, with strong Bulwarks and other
regular Fortifications. The Meuse runs at the bottom of this Mountain below
Givet, and affords the Town a great Trade. This Town has been in the Hands of
the French ever since 1680. It lies 20 Miles S. of Namur, Long, 24 d. 10 m.
Lat. 50 d. 12 m.

IV. Bouvines.

Bouvines or Bouvignes, Lat. Bovinae and Boviniacum, was environed with Walls
in 1173. by Henry the Blind Earl of Namur, after which, the Countess Yolande
granted it the Rights and Privileges of a City. In 1154. it was taken by the
French. It was afterward retaken by the Spaniards. But the French are Masters
of it again. It is but a small Town, and of no great strength, and is only
considerable for its being a Pass between Namur and Luxemburg. It stands on the
Meuse about two Miles off Dinant; and 12 S. of Namur, Long. 24 d. 12 m. Lat. 50
d. 18 m.

V. Flerus.

Flerus, is but a Village, yet very remarkable for the famous Battle that was
fought here in 1690. in which the French got the better of the Confederates. It
stands almost six Miles N. E. of Charleroy, and 10 W. of Namur, Long. 23 d. 55
m. Lat. 50 d. 32 m.

Article IX. Of the Dukedom of Luxemburg.
THE Dukedom of Luxemburg is one of the XVII. Provinces, belonging of old to
the Treviri; Bounds.
it has on the East the Bishopric of Triers, from which it is separated by the
Mosel. On the North the Dukedom of Limburg and Liege. On the West the Meuse,
which separates it from Champagne and Namur. And on the South Lorrain. Its
Extent South and North is about 52 Miles, Extent.
and West and East about 60.

The West part of it is barren, but abounds with Game; that toward the East,
abounds in Corn, Quality.
Minerals, Quarries of Stone, and yields Wine in some places.

The Chief Rivers here are,

1. Moselle, which here washes Mazieres, Thionville, Remich, and Warserbillick,
Rivers.
and runs into Germany.

2. Ourt which washes Hofalize, La Rock, Durbuy, and runs into Liege.

3. Sour which washes Dietkick and Ethernack, and falls into the Moselle.

Luxemburg at first had the Title of Earldom only, but was made a Dukedom by an
Emperor of the House of Luxemburg. History.
It has about 20 Walled Towns, Towns.
and 1200 Villages, which are all under the French since 1684. that they took
the Capital. The House of Luxemburg is one of the most Noble Families of
Europe, for it has produced Five Emperors, whereof Three were Kings of Bohemia,
and has been possessed of great Estates in Germany and France. It has also
yielded Six Queens and many Princesses. The most ancient of this House that we
have knowledge of, was Sigefredus, youngest Brother of Godfrey Earl of Verdun,
who by Exchange got the Castle of Luxemburg of Wiker Abbot of St. Maximinus of
Trier, April 17. 963. whence he took his Surname, and the Title of Earl, which
he left to his Posterity. This Family afterward became very considerable about
the XIIIth. and XIVth. Centuries, and was divided into Three Branches, viz.
That of 1. Luxemburg Ligni, of, 2. Luxemburg Brienne S. Paul, and Pinci, (the
Heiress of which Branch the present Marshall of Luxemburg Married; but he
himself is descended of the Earls of Bouteville, though he calls himself Francis
Henry of Montmorency, and has taken the Arms of that House.) The third Branch
is that of Luxemburg Fiennes and Martigues, which is also extinct.

The most remarkable Places here are, Luxemburg. Cap. Thionville. Esche.
Virton. Ivoix. Montmedy. Stenay or Altenay. Damvilliers. Maisiers. Durbuy.
Bastoigne. Vianden. Arlon.


I. Luxemburg.

Luxemburg, Lat. Luxemburgum, or Augusta Romanduorum, or Luciburgum, is
situated upon the River Else, one part of it on a Hill, and the rest in a
Plain; There is a very strong Castle, and several regular Fortifications. It
has a Convent of the Order of St. Francis, in which lies Buried John King of
Bohemia, Father of Charles IVth. Emperor of Germany, slain by the English at
the Battle of Cressy in 1346. This City has suffered much by the Wars between
the French and the Netherlands. In 1529. Charles V. took it from Francis I. of
France. In 1542. it was taken and sacked by the Duke of Orleans, and retaken,
and treated in the same manner the Year following. It is now under the French,
who took it in 1684. and have so much added since to its Fortifications, as to
render it almost impregnable. It stands 18 Miles S. W. of Trier, 31 N. of Metz,
52 S. of Limburg, and 100 S. E. of Brussels. Long. 25 d. 34 m. Lat. 49 d. 41 m.

II. Thionville.

Thionville, Lat. Theodonis Villa, upon the Moselle, is so advantagiously
situated, and so well fortified, that it has passed a long time for
impregnable. The Duke of Guise took it in 1558. but it was afterward delivered
to the Spaniards. The French were beat before it in 1639. but they made
themselves Masters of it in 1643. and kept it by the Pyrenaean Peace. It was in
this Town that Charlemagne generally assembled the Prelates and Barons of his
Kingdoms as in 806. when he divided his Possessions between his three Sons.
This Town stands 13 Miles S. of Luxemburg. Long. 25 d. 32 m. Lat. 49 d. 29 m.

III. Esche.

Esche is but a small inconsiderable Town, 10 Miles S. W. of Luxemburg.

IV. Virton.

Virton is another small Town, about 22 Miles W. of Luxemburg.

V. Yvoix.

Yvoix is a small but pretty strong Town on the River Chier, 33 Miles W. of
Luxemburg.

VI. Montmedy.

Montmedy is a Place of no great bigness, yet it is reckoned a Place of
considerable strength. It is very conveniently situated upon the top of a high
Hill, the foot whereof is watered by the River Chier. It stands 32 Miles almost
W. of Luxemburg.

VII. Stenay.

Stenay, Lat. Stenaeum or Stenacum, is a strong City upon the Meuse, on the
Borders of Champagne and Lorrain. The French took it in 1654. and annexed it to
the Dukedom of Bar in Lorrain. It stands Eight Miles W. of Montmedy.

VIII. Damvilliers.

Damvilliers is a strong little Town in the Dukedom of Luxemburg, but annexed
to the Dukedom of Lorrain. It was taken by the French in 1659, given them since
by the Treaty of the Pyrenees, and dismantled by the same in 1673. It stands 31
Miles W. of Thionville.

IX. Maisiers

Maisiers is a little Town on the Moselle, about 25 Miles S. of Luxemburg.

X. Durbuy.

Durbuy is another small Town, with the Title of a County, on the River Ourt,
nigh the Bishopric of Liege, subject to the French ever since 1681. It stands
20 Miles almost S. of Liege, and 26 almost E. of Namur and Dinant.

XI. Bastoigne.

Bastoigne or Bastonach, Lat. Bactonia and Bactonacum, near the Forest of
Ardenne, is so well Built, and of so great Trading, that the People of the
Country call it Paris in Ardenne. It stands 25 Miles N. W. of Luxemburg.

XII. Vianden.

Vianden is a considerable Town, with the Title of a County on the little River
Vra, and about 21 Miles N. of Luxemburg.

XIII. Arlon.

Arlon, Lat. Arlunum, is a strong little Town on the Borders of Lorrain,
dignified with the Title of a Marquisate in 1103. and seated upon a Hill where
the Ancient Inhabitants were wont to adore the Moon, about 14 Miles W. of
Luxemburg,

Article X. Of the County of Hainault, Lat. Hannonia.
THIS Province is bounded on the North with Brabant and Flanders, Bounds.
on the West with the Scheld, which parts it from Artois, and part of the
French Flanders; on the South with Cambresis, Chumpagne and Picardy, and on the
East with part of Brabant, and the County of Namur. Extent.
Its Extent North and South is about 60 Miles, and about 70 West and East. It
bears the Title of Earldom, Name.
anciently called Saltus Carbonarius, from the abundance of Char-coal made in
the Woods and Forests of it, and now Hainault, from the River Haine, that runs
through it.

The Air is here temperate, and the Soil very fruitful, Quality.
the Country being well watered by Rivers, Lakes, etc. which do much enrich it;
so that the Country abounds, in most places, with fresh Meadows, and sweet
Pastures, good Fruit, and profitable Trees, but especially with great plenty of
Corn. There are also Lead and Iron Mines, and Quarries of excellent Marble.

The Principal Rivers here are,

Rivers.
1. Sambre, which here washes Landrecy, Armiers, Maubeuge, and runs into Namur.

2. Scheld, which washes Bouchain and Valenciennes, and runs into Flanders.

3. Haine, which washes Binch and Mons, and falls into the Scheld near Conde.

4. Dender, which here washes Leuse, Aeth, and Lessines, and runs into Flanders.

This Province is said to contain 24 Walled Towns, Towns, etc.
and 950 Villages, among which there are reckoned, One Principality. 10
Counties, 12 Peerages, 22 Baronies, 26 Abbeys; with One Earl-Marshal, a
Seneschal, a Great Huntsman, a Chamberlain, and diverse other Officers, whose
Places are Hereditary. Rainier I. Surnamed Long-neck, is accounted the first
Earl of Hainault, History.
he had 21 Successors to Charles V. King of Spain, and Emperor of Germany; in
the Possession of whose Successors, to the Crown of Spain, Hainault continued,
till the French got the greatest part of it by force of Arms.

The most Remarkable Places in Hainault are, To the French.
Mons. Cap. Binch. Conde. Valenciennes. Bouchain. Soignes. Roccles. Quesnoy.
Bavay. Maubeuge. Beaumont. Landrecy. Avesnes. Chimay. Marienburg. Philippeville.
To the Spaniards.
Lessines. Aeth. Enghien Halle. Braine-le-Comte. Fountain, or l'Evesque.


Places of Hainault Subject to the French.
I. Mons.

MONS, named Berghen by the Natives, Lat. Montes, or Montes Hannoniae, is
situated on a Hill near the River Trulle. It is large and well fortified with
good Bulwarks, and three Ditches, with Sluices that may drown all the Country
round about, except the Eastern side where the Ground is somewhat higher, and
where they have raised good Bastions. This Town has fine Buildings, and an old
Castle; and is famous for its Trade, good Workmen, and the Abbey of Canonesses
of St. Waltrude. They are Virgins of Quality, who are present at the Morning
Service in Canonical Habit, but wear Secular Clothes the rest of the day, and
are permitted to Marry. The Ancient Earls of Hainault took the Title of Earls
of Mons. This Town is in the Possession of the French who carried it after a
vigorous Siege, and Gallant Defense of the Town in 1691. It stands 27 Miles S.
W. of Brussels, 37 W. of Namur, 39 S. of Ghent, and 48 almost E. of Arras.
Long. 23 d. 12 m. Lat. 50 d. 28 m.

II. Binch.

Binch or Bins, Lat. Binchium, is situated upon a Branch of the River Haine,
within 10 Miles E. of Mons. It is an ancient and pleasant City, in a fertile
Country, abounding in all manner of Game, and the Air is very good; for which
reason Mary Queen of Hungary, Sister to the Emperor Charles V. Built in it a
very fine House, which the French ruined in 1554. after the taking of
Marienburg and Dinant. It has been sincere-built, and called Marimont. The
French are Master of it since 1668. it being yielded unto them by the second
Article of the Peace of Aix la Chapelle, since which they have repaired it, and
added some Fortifications to it.

III. Conde.

Conde, Lat. Condatum or Condate, is situated on the Banks of the Scheld, with
the Title of Principality. The French took it in 1676. and rendered it a very
Important Place. It has given its Name to many of the Royal House of Bourbon,
since Francis of Bourbon Count of Vendome, Married Mary of Luxemburg, Eldest
Daughter, and Chief Heiress of Peter of Luxemburg, second of the Name, Count of
St. Paul, Conversion, Soissons, Viscount of Meaux, Lord of Enghien, Conde, etc.
This Town stands 13 Miles W. of Mons.

IV. Valenciennes.

Valenciennes, Lat. Valentianae, or Valentincanae, is a very ancient, pleasant,
and strong Town upon the Scheld. It Is thought our Ladies Church there was Built
by King Pepin. There are several other considerable Churches and Colleges, a
fine Townhouse. The Inhabitants are noted for Commerce and Riches. This Place
was Besieged in 1656. by the Mareschals of Turenne and La Ferte Senneterre, but
Don John of Austria, backed by the Valor of the Prince of Conde, raised the
Siege, and took Mureschal La Ferte Prisoner. Lewis XIV. having laid Siege to it
in 1677. carried it by Assault, by the favor of one of the Gates, which was
half open; and to save it from Plunder, forced the Inhabitants to be at the
Charge of Building a Citadel. It stands 17 Miles almost W. of Mons, 41 S. W.
of Brussels, and 43 S. of Ghent. Long. 22 d. 44 m. Lat. 50 d. 24 m.

V. Bouchain.

Bouchain, Lat. Bochonium and Buccinium, is situated upon the left Bank of the
Scheld, betwixt Valenciennes and Cambray. It is a small Town, but well
Fortified, and has a very good Castle. It is the Capital of the County of
Ostervand, which in Times past belonged immediately to the Eldest Sons of the
Earls of Hainault; it belongs to the French ever since 1676. and stands 10
Miles S. W. of Valenciennes, and 28 W. of Mons.

VI. Soignes.

Soignes is a small inconsiderable Town, on the River Senne, Eight Miles N. E.
of Mons.

VII. Roccles.

Roccles is also a small open Town, Eight Miles almost N. E. of Mons.

VIII. Quesnoy.

Quesnoy is a small Town, but pretty considerable for its strength, Subject to
the French since 1654. It stands Seven Miles S. E. of Valenciennes, and 18 S.
W. of Mons.

IX. Bavay.

Bavay is a little Town, about Six Miles S. W. of Mons.

X. Maubeuge.

Maubeuge is a strong, rich little Town on the River Sambre, 10 Miles S. of
Mons.

XI. Beaumont.

Beaumont is a little Town Nine Miles E. of Maubeuge, and 15 S. E. of Mons,
Subject to the French, and demolished by them in 1691.

XII. Landrecy.

Landrecy, Lat. Landrecium, seated on the Fountain of the River Sambre, is
small, but strongly Fortified, and Famous for the Sieges it has endured. The
Emperor Charles V. Besieged it in 1542. for Six Months, with 150000 Men, and
retired from it at last without success. By the Pyrenaean Treaty in 1659. it
was left to the French. It stands 15 Miles S. W. of Maubeuge, and 23 S. of Mons.

XIII. Avesnes.

Avesnes is a pleasant and well Fortified Town, upon the River Hepre, in le
pays enter Sambre and Meuse; it was granted to the French by the Pyrenaean
Treaty, and stands 10 Miles S. of Maubeuge, and 30 W. of Cambray.

XIV. Chimay.

Chimay, seated on the River la Blanch, or the White, is at the entrance of
the Forests, Six Leagues from Avesnes; notwithstanding what it has suffered by
the almost continual Wars, it is now very well reestablished, and has a fine
Castle. It stands 21 Miles S. E. of Maubeuge.

XV. Marienburg.

Marienburg stands on the River Blanch; it derives its Name from Mary of
Austria Queen of Hungary, and Governess of the Low Countries, who Built it in
1542. Its situation is so advantageous, that it was looked upon as impregnable.
Yet the French took it, and kept it by the Pyrenaean Treaty, and have since
dismantled it. It lies 29 Miles S. E. of Mons.

XVI. Philippeville.

Philippeville, was Built by the same Queen Mary of Hungary in 1555. and called
by the Name of King Philip. Besides its Situation that is naturally strong, it
was excellently well fortified to oppose the French, who are Masters of it now
according to the Pyrenaean Treaty, in 1659. It stands 11 Miles W. of
Charlemont, 15 S. of Charleroy, 20 S. W. of Namur, and 24 S. E. of Mons.

Places of Hainault belonging to the Spaniards.
I. Lessines.

LEssines, or Lessin, Lat. Lessina, is a small City on the River Dender, famous
for the Manufactory of Linen; it stands 18 Miles N. of Mons, 20 almost W. of
Brussels, and 22 S. of Ghent. Long. 23 d. 8 m. Lat. 50 d. 50 m.

II. Aeth.

Ath, or Aeth, is not very large, but Beautiful, Rich, and well Fortified,
seated upon the River Dender. It was taken by the French in 1667. and confirmed
to them by the Peace of Aix la Chapelle, but restored to the Spaniards in 1678.
by the Treaty of Nimeguen. It stands on the Borders of Flanders, 14 Miles
almost N. W. of Mons.

III. Enghien.

Enghien, or Anguien, is a small place on the Borders of Brabant and Flanders,
noted for its Manufactories of all sorts of Tapestries, and for being the first
Barony of the Provinces, which gives the Title of Baron, to the Princes of the
House of Bourbon. It stands 16 Miles N. of Mons.

Two or three Miles S. of Enghien is the Village Steenkirk by the River Senne,
and Famous for the Battle that was fought there betwixt the Confederates Army
and the French in 1692. The loss of Men was almost equal, but the French
carried the Day.

IV. Halle.

Halle is a small dismantled Town on the River Sennes, plundered by the French
in 1691. It stands 21 Miles almost N. E. of Mons.

V. Braine-le-Comte.

Braine-le-Comte, is another small inconsiderable Town, nigh the Borders of
Brabant, between Brussels and Mons, 13 Miles off the former, and 14 off the
latter.

VI. Fontain, or l'Evesque.

Fontain, or l'Evesque, is also an inconsiderable Town of Hainault on the
Borders of Namur, 16 Miles E. of Mons.

Article XI. Of Cambresis, Lat. Cameracensis Ager.
CAmbresis, is bounded on the North and East with Hainault, on the West with
Artois, Bounds.
and on the South with Picardy. Its Extent South-East and North-West is about
30 Miles, Extent.
and West about 16.

This Country is very fruitful in all things except Wine, Quality.
and has a Castle called Castle Cambresis, where in 1559. there was concluded a
Peace between Spain and France, which last gave 98 considerable Places for St.
Quentin, Ham and Catelet.

The Chief Rivers here are,

1. Scheld, which washes Crevecoeur and Cambray, Rivers.
and runs into Hainault.

2. Selle, which washes Castle or Chateau Cambresis, and runs into Hainault.

3. Sambre, which goes through a little part of this Country, and runs into
Hainault.

The Cities or Walled Towns are but Three in number, viz. Cambray. Archb. Cap.
Crevecoeur. Chateau Cambresis.


Which are all under the French.

I. Cambray.

Cambray, Lat. Cameracum, seated upon the Scheld, is great, fair, well Built,
and one of the strongest Towns of Europe, with Two Cittadels in it. Some
Authors write that Camber King of the Sicambrians was the Founder of it.
Claudion King of France Conquered it in 445. and afterward it fell to Charles
the Bald in 843. and 870. after the Death of Lothaire II. and sometimes after,
it became the Subject of War between the Kings of France, the Emperors of
Germany, and the Counts of Flanders. Baldwin I. Count of Flanders took it, and
gave it to his Son Raoul. The Emperors declared it a free Town, but for all
that the French never quitted their Claim to it. In 1542. Francis I. of France
consented it should be Neuter; but the Emperor Charles V. took it the Year
after, and kept the Inhabitants in awe by a Citadel Built at their own
Expenses. It changed Masters some time after, when the Duke of Alencon Brother
to King Henry III. was made Count of Flanders in 1582. He was also Master of
Cambray, and left it to John Montiu Sieur of Belagny, who soon after joined
himself to the League, and afterward made Peace with Henry IV. who made him
Prince of Cambray, and Marshall of France in 1594. but the Spaniards surprised
this Town, and forced him to deliver them the Citadel, the 9th of October
1595. The Inhabitants acknowledged Philip II. of Spain, but the Archbishop made
such Complaints, and showed such Reasons, that the King was satisfied with
being Master of the Citadel, and Protector of the Country, and left all other
Jurisdiction to that Prelate. The Spaniards Fortified this Town very well, and
kept such a strong Garrison in it, that it was looked upon to be impregnable.
Yet the King of France took it in 1677. The great Citadel is upon a height
which commands all the Town; the Ditch is wrought in a Rock. The Ramparts of
the Town are also Environed with deep Ditches chiefly to the East, defended
with many good Bastions. It reaches to the River, and has another good Fort to
defend it of that side, which lying low, may be soon drowned by drawing the
Sluices. The Chapter of this City is one of the most considerable of the Low
Countries, consisting of 48 Canons, and 95 Ecclesiastics, which Officiate in
our Lady's Church. It Is affirmed, that Diogenes, a Grecian by Nation, was the
first Prelate of Cambray, sent into France by Pope Siricius about 408. Pope
Paul IV. made it an Archbishopric in 1559. upon the Request of King Philip of
Spain; and the Bishoprics of Arras, Tournay, St. Omer and Namur, were given
for Suffragants. The Archbishops take the Title of Dukes of Cambray, Counts of
Cambresis, and Princes of the Empire. The Streets of this Town are wide and
very neat, and the chiefest and richest end in a great Place, where the
Townhouse is Built, and has a very curious Clock. There are also very good
Manufactures, as Cambray, and especially of many sorts of Linen, that bear the
Name of the City. It stands 34 Miles S. W. of Mons, 40 N. E. of Amiens, and 94
almost N. of Paris. Long. 22 d. 24 m. Lat. 50 d. 51 m.

II. Crevecoeur.

Crevocoeur, is a place of no great Moment, on the River Scheld, nigh Four
Miles S. of Cambray.

III. Chateau-Cambresis.

Chateau-Cambresis is another inconsiderable Town of Cambresis, on the River
Selle 15 Miles S. E. of Cambray.

Article II. Of the County of Artois Lat. Artesia.
ARtois borders, Picardy on the South; The Boulonnois on the West; Bounds.
The County of Flanders on the North; and the Cambresis on the East.

Its Extent Extent.
South and North West is about 55 miles, and about 40 West and East.

It is exceeding fertile in all sorts of Corn, but more particularly of Wheat,
Quality.
which it produces in such a measure, that this Province serves as a Granary to
a great part of Flanders and Brabant.

It has in it twelve Cities or Walled Towns, Cities.
850 Villages, Villages, etc.
nine Chattelenies or Castlewards, and several Abbeys and Monasteries.

The Chief Rivers in this Province are,

Rivers,
1. Scharpe which here washes Arras and runs into Flanders nigh Douay.

2. Lys, which here washes Air and St. Venant and runs into Flanders.

3. Aa which here washes Reutly and St. Omers, and runs into Flanders.

4. Canche which washes Hesdin and runs into France.

Artois was subject to the Romans, and afterward to the Kings of Austrasia;
History and Government.
since whose times it has often changed Masters. Lewis the XIth King of France
made himself Master of Arras in 1477. after Charles the Bold or Rash Duke of
Burgundy; but Mary of Burgundy, this Charles's Daughter brought it into the
House of Austria marrying Maximilian the 1st of Austria, Father of Philip I.
and Grandfather of Charles V. and Ferdinand I. Francis the I. of France, was
forced by the Peace of Madrid in 1529. to quit Artois to the Spaniards, which
was afterward possessed by Philip II, and III. But the French re-conquered it
under Philip IV. Son of the last, who yielded it 'em by the 35 Article of the
Pyrenaean Treaty in 1659. reserving to himself, the Towns of Air and St. Omer
since taken by the French, so that they are now Masters of all this Province.

The most remarkable places in Artois are, Arras. Bish. Chapter Cit. St. Omer.
Bish. Bapaume. Hesdin. Bethune. St. Venant. Air. Priory. Therouane. Lens.
Avesne le Comte. Liques. Pernes.


I. Arras.

Arras Lat. Rigiacum or Origiacum is seated on the Scharpe with a Bishopric
Suffragant of Cambray. This is a very ancient City, St. Vast who died in 540.
was its first Bishop. Lewis XI. of France made himself Master of it in 1493.
but restored it afterward to the Emperor Maximilian. The Spaniards fortified it
so as to think they had rendered it impregnable; whereupon they caused the
Emblem of some Rats running after Cats to be carved on the Frontispiece of one
of the Gates of this City with these two boasting verses.

Quand ces Rats prendront ces Chats
Les Francois prendront Arras.
That is, When these Rats shall catch these Cats
Then the French shall take Arras.


This Prophecy proved false, for the Mareschals of Chaune, Chatillon, and La
Meilleraye, laid Siege to, and carried it in 1640 after they had defeated the
Cardinal Infanta that came to relieve the Place. And the French leaving the
said Emblem upon the Gate, did but take away the P, in the word Prendront, of
the second verse, which quite alters the signification of the Motto, as, Quand
ces Rats prendront ces Chats
Les Francois rendront Arras.


That is, When these Rats shall catch these Cats
Then the French shall yield Arras.


The Spaniards sat before it in 1654. but were beat off with great loss, so
that it still belongs to the French, who have made its Fortifications very
strong and regular. It is a place of large circumference, well Peopled, Rich
and Trading. The Streets are broad and fair, adorned with a spacious
Marketplace. Here is also a beautiful Cathedral a very wealthy Abbey and a
strong Castle. This City stands 20 miles almost of Cambray, 30 N. E. of Amiens,
and 92 N. of Paris, Long. 21 d. 55 m. Lat. 50 d. 20 m.

II. St. Omer.

St. Omer in Latin Fanum Sancti Audomari and Vrbs Audomarensis lies on the
River Aa in the Country of the Ancient Morins, with a Bishops See under the
Archbishop of Cambray. St. Omer or Audomarus, Bishop of Therouan built this
City in 660. And Foulques Abbot of St. Bertin began to encompass it with Walls
in 880. which was afterward finished by Baldwin II. Surnamed the Bald Earl of
Flanders in 902. who also joined the Abbey of Sithieu to the City. Afterward
Therouan being demolished in the XVI. Century there were instead of it, founded
two Bishoprics in 1559. viz. that of Bologne and of St. Omer. Near to this
City is a Lake, containing several small floating Islands, Inhabited by certain
Families that never marry but among themselves without going out of these
Islands, which they make to go too and fro at pleasure either with Cords or
Poles. St. Omer is a great and fair City, well fortified, having on the one
side the River and Marshes, and on the other side is defended by a strong
Castle, with good Bastions and deep and broad Ditches. In 1639. the French
besieged it but in vain. About 1596. Philip II. of Spain founded here a College
for English Jesuits endowing it largely: they have since purchased Watton
Cloister, which is within 2 Miles of St. Omer; a very pleasant place and worth
500 pound per annum. The Duke of Orleans the French Kings Brother, took this
Town in April 1677. after the Battle of Cassel, and by the Peace of Nimeguen it
was yielded to the French. It is a Rich Trading City; and remarkable for the
Abbey of St. Bertin, in which it is not lawful for Women to enter during life
nor to be buried after. St. Omer stands 17 miles S. of Dunkirk, 21 E. of
Boulogne and 36 N. W. of Arras, Long. 21 d. 22 m. Lat. 50. d. 52 m.

III. Bapaume.

Bapaume is a very strong little Town, the French took it in 1641. and it was
left to them by the Pyrenaean Treaty in 1659. It stands on the borders of
Picardy 14 miles almost E. of Arras and 15 S. W. of Cambray, Long. 22 d. 5 m.
Lat. 50 d. 9. m.

IV. Hesdin.

Hesdin or Hesdinfert Lat. Hesdina or Hesdinum is a fortified Town on the River
Canche and Frontiers of Picardy, formerly situated a League from the Place
where it stands now, for it was ruined during the Wars between Francis I. and
Charles V. and rebuilt by Emanuel Duke of Savoy, the Emperors General in 1554.
in a place called Mesnil: Therefore called Hesdinfert, alluding to the old
Motto of the House of Savoy. F.E.R.T. It enjoys a very good situation, and is a
very regular Exagon, so well contrived and fortified that it is accounted one
of the strongest Holds of Flanders; yet it was taken by the French and yielded
to them by the Treaty of the Pyrenees. It stands 25 miles South of St. Omer.
Long. 21 d. 20. m. Lat. 50 d. 27 m.

V. Bethune.

Bethune is the chief Town of the County of that Name it stands on the small
River Biette. It is a very good place pretty well fortified, here are two Fairs
which bring it a considerable Trade. The French took it 1645. and it was
yielded to them by the 35th Article of the Treaty of the Pyrenees, Anno 1659.
It has produced several great Men who have been Dukes, Peers and Mareschals of
France, and done their Kings great service in the Wars. It lies 18 miles N. W.
of Arras, Long. 21 d. 46 m. Lat. 50 d. 38. m.

VI. St. Venant.

St. Venant Lat. Fanum Sancti Venantii, is a small Town on the River Lies. It
was taken by the French in 1669. and formerly a place of strength, but now much
neglected. It stands 26 miles S. of Dunkirk, and as many N. of Arras, Long. 21
d. 39 m. Lat. 50 d. 44 m.

VII. Air, or Arien.

Air is a very strong Town, with a good Castle on the Frontiers of Flanders,
within three Leagues of St. Omer. The River Lys runs through it: it has fine
Churches, especially the ancient Collegiate Church called St. Peter's, to which
Baldwin Count of Flanders added 14 Prebendaries in 1604. The French took this
place in 1641. after a memorable Siege, but it was quickly after retaken by the
Spaniard. It was again taken by the French in 1676. under the command of
Marshall D'Humieres. It stands 25 miles S. of Dunkirk, 28 N. W. of Arras and
26 E. of Boulogne; Long. 21 d. 30 m. Lat. 50 d. 41. m.

VIII. Therouan or Terouane.

Therouane, Lat. Teruana or Cicutus Morinorum was the Capital of the Ancient
Morins. It had formerly a Bishops See Suffragant of Rheims. It was looked upon
as an impregnable place; But Pontus de Laillan Lord of Bugnicourt took it in
1553. for Charles V. who ordered it should be demolished; so that now there are
but few Inhabitants, who are subject to the King of France. It stands on the
River Lys five miles W. of Air and nine S. of St. Omers. Long. 21 d. 23 m.
Lat. 50 d. 41 m.

IX. Lens.

Lens Lat. Lentium Nemetacum is a small Town upon the River Souchets formerly
pretty well fortified but some years since slighted and dismantled. The Prince
of Conde gave the Spaniards a great overthrow here in 1648. and afterward took
the Town, which was left to France by the 35th Article of the Pyrenaean Treaty
in 1659. It stands nine Miles N. of Arras, and 15 W. of Doway. Long. 21 d. 57
m. Lat. 50 d. 28 m.

X. Avesnes le Comte.

Avesnes le Comte, is but a small Town on the Frontiers of Picardy, very much
ruined by the Wars. It stands eight Miles S. W. of Arras, Long. 21 d. 40 m.
Lat. 50 d. 14 m.

XI. Liques.

Liques is a small Town on the Borders of Picardy, seven miles W. of St. Omer,
and 12 almost S. of Calais. Long. 21 d. 12 m. Lat. 50 d. 53 m.

XII. Pernes.

Pernes is also a small Town, seven miles W. of Bethune, 9 S. of Air and 20 N.
W. of Arras, Long. 21 d. 33 m. Lat. 50 d. 34 m.

There are some other small inconsiderable Towns in Artois, such as, St. Paul,
Mont St. Eloy, Renty, Dire or Drien, etc.

THE MARTIAL-FIELD OF EUROPE
SECT. II. The Course of the Rhine.
CHAP. I. Description of the River Rhine in general.
THE Rhine, Lat. Rhenus, has its Sources in the Alps in Mount Adula or St.
Gothar, Source.
in the Country of Grisons, or Rhaetia, two or three Leagues from the Fountain
of the Rhone. It springs from two Fountains, the one called Veder Rhyn, or
first Rhine, and the other Hindes Rhyn, or the se- second Rhine, which join
both together.

This River begins to be Navigable, near Chur, in Switzerland, Course.
and entering into the great Lake of Constance, it passes to Schaffouze, and
Basil, from thence it runs into Alsatia, and increasing by the Waters of many
great Rivers, it Waters the Palatinate of the Rhine; The Archbishopricks and
Electorates of Mayence or Mentz, Treves or Triers; and Cologne or Ceulen; then
the succession of Cleves and Juliers: And finally it enters the Low Countries
at the Fort Schenk, where it divides into two Branches, whereof the one called
Vahal runs through Nimeguen, Tiel and Bommel, and joining with the Meuse it
looses its name. The other branch takes its course toward the North, almost as
far as Arnheim, where it separates into two parts, whereof the one called the
Yssel passes to Doesburg and Zutphen and discharges it self into the
Zuyder-zee; The other Arm, which since the year 860 has formmed a new Course by
the overflowing of the Sea, is called Lech; and runs not by Vtrecht and Leyden
as it did then, but to Wyck, Cullemburg, and Newport, and finally, discharges
it self into the Merwe, and from thence into the Ocean.

This River, famed by the Greek and Latin Writers, History.
is without doubt the greatest in Europe, next the Danube, and noted for the
excellent Wine, which grows on its Banks called Rhenish-Wine. The Etymology of
its name is variously discoursed of by Authors; some deriving it from the
German word Reyn, which signifies Flowing hitherward; or Rein, which signifies
clearness and purity, because it was formerly made a Test of Conjugal Chastity;
for as, Hoffman relates, the Ancient Inhabitants about the Rhine, did use to
try the Legitimacy of Children, by throwing them into it, reckoning such as
sunk to be Bastards, but those who swam, were looked upon as lawfully begot;
Hence Claudian, Et quos Nascentes explorat gurgite Rhenus. It was also called,
Aurifer by some because of the Gold found mixed with its Sand.

The Rhine was the Ancient Boundary betwixt France and Germany. Constantine the
Great, begun a Bridge over this River at Cologne, to strike terror into the
French. Charlemaign built a wonderful one of Wood over it at Mentz of 500 paces
long, which was burnt by a casual Fire about a year before his Death.

In the Description I design to make of the Course of the Rhine, I shall
confine my self to that which is most remarkable both in the Treaties of Peace,
and in the present and former Wars between Germany and France. That is from its
entrance into Alsatia down to the Fort Schenk in the Low Countries; which
comprehends six different Territories, viz. 1. Alsatia Strasburg, Bish. 2.
Palatinate of the Rhine Heidelberg. 3. Electorate of Mayence Mayence or Mentz,
Arch. 4. Electorate of Treves Treves or Triers, Arch. 5. Electorate of Cologne
Cologne or Ceulen, Arch. 6. The Succession of Cleves and Juliers. Cleves.
Juliers.

Article I. Of Alsatia Lat. Alsatia, Germ. Elsalsz.
THIS Province has the Rhine on the East; The Palatinate on the North; Bounds.
Lorrain on the West. And Suntgaw or County or Ferrete, with some part of
Franche Comte, and Switzerland, on the South.

Its extent Extent.
South and North is about 100 Miles including Suntgaw, and East and West about
50 including Brisgaw.

It is reputed to have been the seat of the Ancient Tribocchi, or Triboces, who
retained their name till the time of Charlemaign. The Romans were Masters of it
near 500 years, then it was under the Kings of the France till Otho I. By Otho
II. it was erected into a Landgraviat, and the House of Austria enjoyed it till
the Usurpations of the French in the late Wars, made it a Wilderness by their
unheard of Devastations. And afterward it was sold to Lewis XIV. of France,
with Suntgaw, and Brisac by Ferdinand Charles Archduke of Inspruck in 1648. for
the sum of three Millions French Livers: and so the Emperor was forced to
resign it to the French Crown by the Treaty of Munster in the same year, 1648.
The Spaniard resigning his Right also by the Treaty of the Pyrenees in 1659.

This is one of the best watered Parts of all Germany, and most fertile in
Wines, Corn, Quality.
Fruits, Pastures. Its Mountains have several Silver, Brass, and Lead-Mines.
Yet it is ill peopled because a Frontier and the Seat of War. It is in many
places overgrown with Wood, and has abundance of Iron-works which brings Money
into the Country; the Woods being upon the Bank of the Rhine do secure the
Country against the Rapidity of that River.

This Province has 46 Walled Towns; 50 Castles, Cities, etc. Villages.
and a great number of Villages. It is divided into Upper and Lower Alsatia,
and into five Parts, including, Suntgaw, Brisgaw and Ortnaw, of which these
three, Suntgaw, Vpper-Alsatia and Lower-Alsatia, are on the left side of the
Rhine; and Brisgaw and Ortnaw, on the Right.

Alsatia with its dependencies, is divided into five Parts.
1. Lower Alsatia where are, Strasburg. Bish. Cap. To the French. Schelestad.
To the French. Weissenburg. To the French. Landau. To the French. Molsheim. To
the French. Saverne. To the French. Haguenau. To the French. Seltz. To the
French. Ober Ruheim. To the French. Bentheim. To the French. Andlaw. To the
French. Lauterburg. To the French. Inguiller. To the French. Hoksstein, County.
To the French.
2. Vpper-Alsatia where are, Colmas. Cap. To the French. Ensisheim. To the
French. Rufech. To the French. Munster in Gregorienthal. To the French.
Marbach. To the French. Keisersperg. To the French.
3. Suntgaw, Lat. Suntgovia has Upper Alsatia on the N. the Rhine on the E. the
Bishopric of Basil on the S. and Franche Comte on the W. the principal places
in it are, Ferrete. County, Cap. To the French. Alskirk. To the French. Befort.
To the French. Hunningen. To the French. Mulhausem Imp. and Free.
4. Brisgaw or Brisgou, Lat. Brisgovia or Brisgoia, lies between the Rhine on
the W. and the black Forest on the E. The principal Towns in it are. Brisac. To
the French. Fribourg. Cap. To the French. Neweburg, to the Emp.
5. Ortnaw Lat. Ortnavia lies between the Rhine on the W. Brisgaw on the S. the
Duchy of Wurstenberg on the East, and the Palatinate on the South, the most
remarkable places there are, Ofemburg. Cap. Imper. Gengenbach. Imper. Baden.
Marq. Durlach. Marq. Pfortzheim, to the French.

Remarkable Towns of Lower Alsatia.
I. Strasburg.

STrasburg Lat. Argentoratum, or Argentina, or Tribocorum, and Tribocum; and by
some Moderns Strasburgum is the Capital City of Alsatia, and one of the fairest
of Germany. It is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Mentz, and was for many
Ages a Free and Imperial City, seated in the midst of a great Plain, upon the
little River Ill, where it falls into the Breusche about one Mile from the
Rhine, over which it has a Timber Bridge of great length: This is a place of
very great strength and Wealth, and so ancient, that it is said to have been
built Ann. M. 1955. The Arsenal and Townhouse do well deserve the view of
Strangers, and the Cathedral dedicated to the Blessed Virgin their Admiration,
not only for the Magnificence and vastness of the Structure, and its Gates of
Brass, but more particularly for its Steeple called Tower of Mynster, which is
Pyramidal and of a Structure, that lies all open and pervious to the light,
being the most esteemed for its Workmanship of any other steeple in
Christendom. It is 574 Foot high, and has 700 steps; but that which is most of
all admired is the Clock Work, which besides the Hours of the Day, represents
the motions of the Planets. In the year 1440 or thereabouts the Art of Printing
was first invented by one John Guttenburg a Citizen of Strasburg, who removed
about the same time to Mentz, and there mostly used and improved this noble
Art; so that a mighty contest has been managed between Harlem, Strasburg and
Mentz, which of them shall have the honor of this Invention. In 1529. This
City embraced the Protestant Religion, and the year following entered a League
with the Reformed Cantons for her Defense; since that time its Government was
Republican, till September 1681. that the French King having before possessed
himself of all Alsatia, suddenly surprised this important Place in a time of
Peace when no body suspected it: which may be ascribed to the Pride and Folly
of the Town, and their overgreat Love of Liberty, by refusing 500 men the
Emperor offered them for their security. The old Fortifications of this Town
were but a double Wall, and a Fausse-braye so that it was not capable of making
a long resistance, but the French have fortified it very strongly, There is a
Citadel built on that side that goes to the Rhine; and toward the Bridge
there is a Horn-Work that runs a great way. There are also two small Forts at
the two chief Gates, which lead toward Alsatia, so that in case of a Revolt,
they can cut off all Communication with the Country. There are also Forts in
some Islands of the Rhine, and some Redoubts; so that all round this place
there is one of the greatest Fortifications in Europe. The Capitulations made
with the French have not been hitherto well observed; yet there is not above
200 Romish Converts. This City is already sunk in its Trade; and will sink more
when the Fortifications are finished. There is an University founded by the
Senate in 1538. Strasburg stands 55 miles N. of Basil 140 W. of Ausburg, 64 S.
E. of Heidelberg, and 70 E. of Nancy. Long. 27 d. 26 m. Lat. 48 d. 28 m.

II. Selestad.

Selestad or Schlestad, situated on the River Ill, was formerly free and
imperial, and of the Government of Haguenaw, but now belongs to the Crown of
France, left to it by the Peace of Westphalia. Its Fortifications were
demolished in 1673. but new built in 1675. so that it is now a place of
considerable strength. It stands 21 Miles S. of Strasburg.

III. Weissemburg.

Weissemburg, (or Cron Weissemburg, to distinguish it from Weissemburg in
Bavaria) is situate upon the River Luter, in the Territory of Wasgow, toward
the Borders of the Palatinate of the Rhine. Dagobert King of France built here
a celebrated Monastery in 623. which in 1496. was changed into a College. By
the Peace of Munster this Place was granted to France In 1673. it suffered much
by the Germans, but is now rebuilding. It stands 24 Miles N. of Strasburg.

IV. Landaw.

Landaw Lat. Landavia, is situate upon the River Queick, in the Confines of the
Palatinate, and Territory of Wasgow. It was yielded to France by the Peace of
Munster. The French having plundered most Towns of the Palatinate, and a great
part of Schwaben. In 1688. laid the booty up here, where all was burnt by an
accidental Fire, May 1689. This place stands 13 Miles W. of Philipsburg, and 16
S. of Spire, Long. 27 d. 50 m. Lat. 49 d. 3 m.

V. Molsheim.

Molsheim, is a little Town on the River Brenche, eight Miles W. of Strasburg;
the residence of the Prebendary of Strasburg.

VI. Saverne.

Saverne, Lat. Taberna Alsatiae, is seated at the foot of some Mountains near
the Frontiers of Lorrain, upon the River Lor, in the Road that goes to
Strasburg. It is the usual residence of the Bishop of Strasburg, who is Lord of
it. Near this place Anthony Duke of Lorrain, defeated the Lutherans in 1525. It
stands 16 Miles nigh W. of Strasburg.

VII. Haguenaw.

Haguenaw Lat. Hagenoa, is seated on the River Matter, scarce two Leagues from
the Rhine, and about three N. from Strasburg: it was an Imperial City and the
Chief of the lower Alsace before it fell to the French. The Emperor Barbarossa
first Walled it about in 1164. and built a Palace therein. Being seated in a
Sandy unfruitful Soil, the old Landgraves of Alsace, did chiefly resort thither
for the Convenience of Hunting.

The other places of lower Alsace, such as Seltz, Ober Ruheim, etc. are not of
great consideration.

Remarkable Towns of Upper Alsatia.
I. Colmar.

COlmar, Lat. Colmaria, and Columbaria, or according to others Argentuaria; is
an Imperial Town under the French, and the Capital of Upper Alsace, upon the
River Ill. The Duke of Weymar assisted by the Troops of France; made himself
Master of this Town in 1633. but this Duke dying, Colmar was yielded to the
King of France by the Negotiation of the Marshall of Guebriant, and confirmed
upon him by the 47 Article of the Treaty of Westphalia, where it is named
amongst the Imperial Towns of Alsace. Yet afterward during the Wars of 1674.
it was demolished and abandoned. It It stands 13 Miles W. of Brisac 28 N. of
Basil, and 33 almost S. of Strasburg, Long. 27 d. three m. Lat. 48 d.

V. Ensisheim.

Ensisheim is a small Town once Imperial, but now subject to the French, 13
Miles S. of Colmar.

III. Ruffach.

Ruffach Lat. Rubeacum is a small Town upon the River Roltback, in the
Territory of Mundal, once an Imperial and Free City, but taken by the Marshall
of Turenne in 1675. after a great defeat of the Imperialists. It Is one of the
ancientest Towns in Alsatia, and was for the fertility of its Soil, for five
hundred years, the Seat of some of the Roman Nobility. It stands 10 Miles S. of
Colmar.

Munster, Marbach, Keibersperg, etc. are small Towns of little moment.

Remarkable Towns in Suntgaw.
I. Ferrete.

FErrete Lat. Ferreta, which the Germans now call Pfirt, stands 22 Miles W. of
Basil, with the Title of a County, It was resigned to the French by the
Pacifications of Munster, and the Pyrenees.

II. Hunningen.

Hunningen is a Village, a quarter of a League below Basil, situated on the
Rhine which the French have rendered very remarkable for the strong Castle they
have lately erected there, and which gives no little Umbrage and Jealousy to
the Swissers. This Fort is a regular Pentagon with Lodgings for 3 or 4000 Men;
Good Ramparts, a large Ditch, Horn-works, Half-Moons, and other Outworks. Here
is also a Bridge over the Rhine, lodged partly on an Island, which is fortified
with an Horn-Work; so that it is now one of the strongest Places in Europe,
being seated in a great Plain, and commanded by no rising ground.

III. Mulhausen.

Mulhausen, on the River Ill was once an Imperial and Free City, but in 1515.
Leagued with the Swissers, and united to Suntgow. It stands 13 Miles N. W. of
Basil, and 17 S. of Colmar, but heretofore belonged to Alsatia.

Remarkable Towns in Brisgaw.
I. Brisac.

BRisac Lat. Brisacum, or Brisacus Mons, stands on a rising ground, on the
right Bank of the Rhine, which has there a fine Stone Bridge. This place is
esteemed one of the strongest places of Europe, whether its Situation be
considered, or what Art has contributed to render it regular; so that some
Authors call it the Citadel of Alsatia. Gustavus Horn a Suede made an attempt
on this City in 1633. after his great advantages over the Imperialists; but the
Duke of Feria, broke his Measures, and threw succors into the Place. The Duke
of Weymar being sick at Newemburg near Brisac in 1639. the Marquess of
Guebriant possessed himself of this and the other Places, which were left to
the French King by a Treaty the year following; and which have been yielded by
the 47th Article of the Peace of Westphalia, in 1648. and confirmed again by
the 60th Article of the Pyrenaean Treaty. Brisac has given its name to Brisgaw,
and has been in former times its Capital, but since Fribourg has carried it.
Brisgaw belonged formerly to the Dukes of Leringuen; and afterward to the
Earls of Furstemburg. Hugh or Hegon sold it in 1367. to the Dukes of Austria,
to whom the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria, had already Mortgaged Brisac about the
year 1326. Since that time the Country of Brisgaw has always belonged to the
House of Austria, till the French made themselves Masters of the most Part.
Brisac, though a Notable Fortification is but a Miserable Town. It stands 26
Miles N. of Basil, and 30 S. of Strasburg. Long. 27 d. 22 m. Lat. 48 d.

II. Fribourg.

Fribourg, Lat. Friburgum, is the Capital City of Brisgaw, seated upon the
little River of Threseim, at the end of a Fertile Plain, and upon a rising
Ground where the black Mountain begins. Albert VI. Duke of Austria Founded in
it a University, and a Sovereign Chamber; the Jurisdiction of which reached
once a great way, but now not above Four Miles. The Swedes took it three times
in 1632. 1634. and 1638. This Town is Renowned for its Riches and other
Advantages, and for a Famous Battle that the Duke of Anguien, since Lewis
Prince of Conde, won there in 1644. in which General Merci was Killed.
Marshall Crequi took it in 1677. for Lewis XIV. after a Siege of Seven or
Eight Days. It is a large and well peopled City, regularly Fortified with
several Churches and Religious Houses in it. This is also the Residence of the
Chapter of Basil, from which place it stands 26 Miles almost N. and 10 Miles E.
of Brisac. Long. 27 d. 31 m. Lat. 47 d. 58 m.

III. Newenburg.

Newenburg, is a decaying Place, on the Rhine, 14 Miles S. of Brisac, once
Imperial, but now Subject to the Emperor.

Remarkable Places in Ortnaw.
I. Ofemburg.

OFemburg, Lat. Offemburgum, is an Imperial free City, in Schwaben, and the
Capital of Ortnaw, seated upon the River Kintzig, about one League from the
Rhine, and Eight Miles S. E. of Strasburg. Long. 27 d. 37 m. Lat. 48 d. 23 m.
It is under the protection of the House of Austria.

II. Gengenbach.

Gengenbach, is a little Imperial free City on the River Kintzig, 14 Miles S.
E. of Strasburg. It is also protected by the House of Austria.

III. Baden.

Baden, or Bade, Lat. Bada, and Thermae Inferiores, with the Title of
Marquisate, is a small, neat City, Famous for its Baths. This Marquisate is
upon the Rhine, between Brisgaw and the Duchy of Wirsemberg. Its Marquesses
are Princes of the Empire, and are of a very Noble and Ancient Family; of which
there are two Branches, the first is Baden Hocberg, and the other Baden
Durlach; the first is Roman Catholic, and the second Lutheran. These two
Branches act by turns in the Diet of the Empire, and in the Circle of Suabia;
but the Baden Durlach Branch has two Voices, one for Durlach, and the other for
Hocberg. The present Prince Lewis of Baden, who has been General for the
Emperor in Hungary, and has rendered his Name Immortal by the great Victories
he has obtained against the Turks, and who came over into England to Visit
Their Majesty's in 1694. is of the Branch of Hocberg, and the y^ung Prince his
Nephew, that came with him, of that of Durlach. This Town is subject to the
Branch of Durlach, and stands 22 Miles N. E. of Strasburg, 34 almost S. of
Spire, and 40 N. W. of Tubingen. Long. 27 d. 52 m. Lat. 48 d. 38 m.

IV. Durlach.

Durlach, is a Town and very good Castle of the Marquisate of Baden, having
^lso the Title of Marquisate; it give its Name to a Branch of the Family of
Baden, and is named Do^^^cum in Latin. It is Subject to its own Prince, and
stands 16 Miles N. E. of Baden.

V. Pfortzheim.

Pfortzheim, is a small Town in the Marquisate of Baden on the Rivers Entz and
Nagold, 17 Miles nigh S. of Philipsburg, and 27 N. E. of Baden. It was taken by
the French in 1691. left, and taken again in 1692.

Article II. The Palatinate of the Rhine, Lat. Palatinatus Inferior, Germ.
Psaltz auff Rhein, or Nider Pfaltz.
THE Palatinate of the Rhine, or lower Palatinate (to distinguish it from the
upper, Bounds.
which lies on the Danube, and belongs to the Duke of Bavaria, according to the
Treaty of Munster, who formerly enjoyed both) Borders on the North the
Archbishopric of Mentz, on the West Lorrain, and the Archbishopric of Triers,
on the South Alsatia, and on the East Franconia, and Suabia, or Schwaben. Its
Extent Extent.
South and North is about 80 Miles, and almost as many West and East, including
the Bishopric of Spire.

The Air is here good and wholesome, though somewhat Cold: Quality.
The Soil extremely fruitful in delicate Wines, Corn and Pastures. There are
also several Mines of Agath and Jasper; and fine Gold is drawn out of the Sand
of the Rhine, of which they Coin very good Ducats, which bear the Name of that
River.

The Rivers Rivers.
here are the Rhine, and the Neckar, which falls into that at Manheim.

The Country takes its Name from the Office of Count Palatine, Name of
Palatinate.
bestowed by the Emperor on those who Administered Justice in his Name to the
Empire; of which there was two, one on the Rhine who had the Charge of
Franconia, and the Neighboring Countries; and the other in Saxony, History.
and other Countries Subject to the Saxon Law. Hence it is that the Electors of
Saxony, or the Elector Palatine, or Elector of Bavaria, are Vicars of the
Empire in their respective Provinces, when there is an Interregnum by the
Emperors Death, or otherwise. At first the Count Palatine of the Rhine had no
Possessions on that River; but in process of time got them by Marriage,
Purchase, or Imperial Gift, and formed a very considerable Principality; so
that besides several Fiefs betwixt Coblentz, and Andernach, and in Juliers, and
besides the Dutchies of Newburg, Saltzbach and Deuxponts, and other
dependencies on them; it has diverse more Dutchies and Counties: The Family of
the Princes Palatine of the Rhine, is descended from Otho the Illustrious Duke
of Bavaria who died in 1245. leaving two Sons, Lewis II. Count Palatine of the
Rhine, and Elector, and Henry XIII. Duke of Bavaria. The Elector Frederick III.
begun in 1576. to entertain many Protestant Families in his Dominions, who fled
from the Low Countries. His Successors doing the like did thereby mightily
enrich the Country. This Prince made his Revenues very considerable by the
Reformation, Right of Conduct to Strangers, Toll upon Merchandises that passed
his Territories, and the Title he had to the Goods of Strangers, or those who
died without Will in his Dominions. Frederick the IIId. was Succeeded by his
Son Lewis the IVth. who turned Protestant, and was Succeeded by Frederick the
IVth. who also abandoned Popery. He Married Louise, Daughter to the Prince of
Orange, by whom he had Frederick the Vth. who was Chosen King of Bohemia in
1619. but Dethroned after the Battle of Prague in 1620. and his Territories
were given to the Duke of Bavaria, with the Dignity of Elector. He died at
Mentz in 1632. leaving behind him three Sons by Elizabeth Daughter of James the
First of Great Britain, viz. Charles, Robert, and Edward; Robert, commonly
called Prince Robert, and well known in England, was Created Duke of
Cumberland, and Died without Legitimate Issue. Edward Died a Papist at Paris in
1663. leaving three Daughters by Princess Ann of Mantua, one of them, viz. Anne
Married to the Prince of Conde. Charles had part of his Fathers Inheritance
restored to him, by the Peace of Munster in 1648. and a Eighth Electorate was
Created in his behalf, viz. that of the Palatine of the Rhine, and the Upper
Palatinate remained in the Duke of Bavaria's Hands. The Elector Charles Married
Charlotte Daughter to the Landtgrave of Hesse Cassel, by whom he had Charles,
and Elizabeth Charlotte, who was Married to the Duke of Orleans, only Brother
to King Lewis the XIVth. of France. Charles Succeeded his Father in the
Electorate, and in 1671. Married Wiellielmine Ernestine Daughter to Frederick
the IIId. King of Denmark. He died in 1685. without Issue, and was Succeeded by
Philip William Duke of Newburg a Popish Prince. In 1688. and 1689. The French
entered his Territories, and laid most part of them wast, on pretense of the
Allodial Claimed by the Duchess of Orleans, Sister to the late Elector, who
died without Issue.

This Country is divided in two, viz. the Palatinate properly so called, and
the Dominions of several particular Princes adjoining to it.

The Palatinate properly so called, where are, Heidelberg, Cap. Manheim,
Frankendal, Openheim, Caub, Creutznach. Newstat, Keiserslautern, Bacharach,
Simmeren, Earld. Ingelheim.


Places adjoining to the Palatinate, and Subject to several Princes. Spire,
Imper. Bish. Worms, Imper. Bish. Philipsburg, to the French. Darmstat,
Landgraviat. Deux-Ponts, Duchy. Birkenfeld, Earld. Mont-Royal.


Remarkable Towns in the Palatinate of the Rhine.
I. Heidelberg.

HEildelberg, Lat. Heilderberga (which some think to be the Budoris of the
Ancients) is Metropolis of the Palatinate of the Rhine, seated at the foot of
an Hill, on the Neckar, over which it has a Wooden Bridge, it is said to have
formerly belonged to the Bishopric of Worms, but was granted to Lewis Count
Palatine in 1225. It was enlarged by Robert Count Palatine, who was Chosen
Emperor, in 1392. And Rupertus Count Palatine Founded an University here in
1346. This Town is large, fair, well Built, and well Peopled, and the usual
Residence of the Elector, who had a Noble, Magnificent and Strong Castle here,
till the French blew it up in the present War, when they were forced to leave
it, contrary to the Capitulation with the Dauphin in 1688. The Townhouse, and
the Churches of St. Peter, and the Holy Ghost, are stately Buildings. The Wine
of this Place is much esteemed. The Castle is also Famous for a great huge Tun,
commonly called, The Tun of Heilderberg. The University has great Privileges,
one of which is, Power of Life and Death, over all that belong to it, without
Power of Revocation, or Infringement in the Prince himself. This University has
been Famous for many great Men, and had one of the best Libraries in Europe,
which Count Tilly sent to Rome in 1622. after he had taken the Town, which
suffered extremely in the late German Wars. It was taken by the French in 1688.
and a little while after burned and abandoned. In 1693. Heidelberg was Betrayed
to the French King's Troops, under the Command of Marshall De Lorge, the City
laid in Ashes, the Tombs of the Dead Princes and Princesses inhumanely
Destroyed, and their Corpse exposed; the Garrison and Inhabitants Cruelly
Butchered; and the Women after Protection brutishly Ravished: Part of the
Garrison flying to the Castle Capitulated. A little while after, Heidersdorf
the Governor being Condemned to Death by a Council of War at Hailbron, was
Reprieved; but degraded of the Teutonick Order, led about the Imperial Camp in
a Cart, buffetted in a disgraceful manner by the Common Hangman, treated with
the height of Ignominy, then Banished, and Cudgelled to Death by the Peasants,
after he was let go by the Executioner. Heidelberg stands 13 Miles N. E. of
Spire, 22 S. E. of Worms, 18 N. E. of Philipsburg, and 48 almost S. of
Francfort. Long. 28 d. 27 m. Lat. 49 d. 17 m.

II. Manheim.

Manheim is seated on the Confluent of the Rhine and the Neckar. It was taken
and ruined by the Spaniards in the beginning of the XIIIth. Century, but was
Rebuilt and handsomely Fortified by Charles Lewis Elector Palatine. It was
taken, and abandoned by the French in 1689. and since that time they have
entirely ruined it in a most Barbarous manner. It stands 11 Miles almost N. W.
of Heidelberg.

III. Frankendal.

Frankendal, Lat. Franchendalia, formerly no more than an Abbey, afterward a
Place of Refuge for the Belgian Exiles about 1574. now a new City, which was
well Fortified, scarce a League distant from the Rhine; afterward taken by the
Spaniards, and restored to the Elector Palatine, by the Pacification of
Munster; but in the present War most cruelly laid in Ashes by the French. It
stands 18 miles N. W. of Heidelberg.

VI. Oppenheim.

Oppenheim, Lat. Oppenhemium, a small City, Imperial and Free, until it was
granted with its Territory to Rupert Prince Palatine by the Emperor in 1402. It
stands upon a Hill near the Rhine, 11 miles almost S. of Mentz, and 17 N. of
Worms. The French put a Garrison into it in 1688. and have Ruined it since.

V. Caub.

Caub, is a little Town with the Castle of Gudenfelts, on the Rhine, against
which in the middle of the River, is the Castle of Pfaltz, whence some, (but
falsely) would have the Princes Title of Pfaltzgrave derived.

VI. Creutznach.

Creutznach, is a little Town, on the small River Nake, with a strong Castle,
Subject to the French since 1688. It stands 20 Miles almost S. W. of Mentz.

VII. Newstat.

Newstat, is a small Town seated on the River Spirebach, Eight Miles N. of
Landau, and 15 almost W. of Spire and Philipsburg. It is now Subject to the
French.

VIII. Keiserslautern.

Keiserslautern, Lat. Caesaropolis, is upon the River Lauter near the Duchy of
Deuxponts; the French call it Caseloutre; they took it in September 1688. under
the Marquis of Boufflers, after they had been repulsed in two several Storms.
It stands 28 Miles almost S. W. of Worms, 32 W. of Spire, and 40 almost S. of
Mentz.

IX. Bacharach.

Bacharach, is a small Town, on the Rhine, once Free and Imperial, now
belonging to the Elector Palatine. It stands 22 Miles W. of Mentz.

X. Simmeren.

Simmeren, Lat. Simmera, is the Capital City of a little Province of the same
Name, bearing the Title of Earldom. This little Place is adorned and
strengthened with a very considerable Castle. It belongs to the Elector
Palatine, but is now Subject to the French. It stands 24 Miles nigh S. of
Coblentz, and 33 W. of Mentz. Long. 26 d. 52 m. Lat. 49 d. 59 m.

XI. Ingelheim.

Ingelheim, Lat. Ingelhemium and Ingelenhemium, is a small Town on the Rhine,
once Free and Imperial, but now belonging to the Elector Palatine, and Subject
to the French. The Emperor Charlemaign was Born there in 742. and afterward
repaired it. Lewis the Debonair died there in 840. It stands Eight Miles W. of
Mentz, and as many E. of Bingen.

Places adjoining to Palatinate.
I. Spire.

SPire, or Spires, Lat. Spira, or Augusta Nemetum, or Noviomagus, is a great,
rich, populous City, near the Rhine, with a Bishopric under the Arbishoprick
of Mentz. It is an Imperial and Free City, but under the protection of the
Elector Palatine. The Cathedral was Built in 1411. by Conrade the Emperor, in
which are the Sepulchers of the Emperors Henry IV. Philip V. Rudolph I.
Adolphus of Nassau, and Albert I. The Imperial Chamber which was first
Instituted at Francfort in 1495. by Maximilian I. and in the Year 1530. removed
to this City by Charles V. Consists of two Presidents, whereof the one is a
Protestant, the other a Romanist, and of 15 Counselors, whereof Seven are
Protestants, and Eight Romanists. The Government of the City was all Lutheran,
but the Cathedral was in the Hands of the Bishop, a Roman Catholic. There were
several Convents of both Sexes, and a College of Jesuits. The Calvinists had
also a Church here, but their number was not considerable. Though the Town
subsisted chiefly by the Imperial Chamber, yet there was an endless Dispute
between them and the Chamber, concerning their Privileges. For the Government
of the Town pretended that the Judges of the Chamber, as they were private Men,
and out of the Court of Judicature, were subject to them; and in the Year 1685.
they put one of them in Prison; and on the other hand, the Judges said their
Persons were sacred. In the last War in 1672. between the French and the
Emperor, this City enjoyed a Neutrality on the Account of this Chamber, but in
the Year 1638. was taken and Garrisoned by the French, and in 1689. a War
ensuing for the Recovery of the Countries Ravished from the Empire by the
French, they with the utmost Inhumanity burned and destroyed this Ancient and
Venerable City. Hereupon the Imperial Chamber was by the Diet, with the Consent
of the Emperor, removed to Weslar, a City of Hassia. The Ruins of Spire stand
13 Miles S. W. of Heidelberg, and 22 S. of Worms. Long. 28 d. 12 m. Lat. 49 d.
11 m.

II. Worms.

Worms, Lat. Vormacia, or Barbetomagus, or Barbitomagus Vangionum, is a Great,
Famous, Imperial, Free City upon the Rhine, with a Bishopric Suffragant of
Mentz. The Bishop is Lord thereof, as well as of the little Country, whereof it
is Capital. Attila destroyed it in the Fifth Century, and Clovis repaired it
again. It was often taken in the last Wars of Germany. The Town was honored a
considerable time with an Archbishops See, whereof it was deprived about 750.
by Pope Zachary, who removed that Dignity to Mentz, leaving only the Title of
Bishopric to Worms, in Punishment of Gervillon, the last Archbishop his
Treachery, who killed an an Officer, whom he had invited to come to confer with
him out of his Enemies (the Saxons) Camp. Here have been several Councils held,
as in 764, 770. 1078, etc. A Famous Diet was also held here in 1521. in which
Luther defended his Doctrine before the States of the Empire. Worms was burnt
by the French in 1689. and stands 23 Miles N. E. of Heidelberg and Spire, and
33 S. of Francfort. Long. 28 d. Lat. 49 d. 32 m.

III. Philipsburg.

Philipsburg, is a very important Fortress near the Rhine, called formerly
Vdenheim; it took its Modern Name, from Philip Christopher de Saleren, Bishop
of Spire, and Archbishop of Trier. This Prelate caused it to be Built and
Fortified with seven Bastions, where the Bishops Castle, and the Village of
Vdenheim stood, almost upon the Brink of the Rhine, in a Plain surrounded with
Marish Ground. This Place was Consigned to the Bishop of Spire, but still under
the Protection of the Emperor, the Bishop has ever had his Residence in the
Castle, which is a Noble Pile. It fell into the hands of the Imperialists in
(...) through the Cowardliness of the Governor. The Swedes drove them thence
Jan. 15. 1634. and gave it to Lewis XIII. but as the Fortification of it could
not be finished, because of the rigor of the Winter; The Imperialists
surpised it by Night, Jan. 23. 1635. Afterward the Duke of Anguien, having
defeated the Bavarians at Friburg, retook Spire and Philipsburg, Sept. 1644.
The French King caused it to be regularly Fortified, and made it a very
important Place. The Germans and their Allies, who had blocked it up for a long
time, Besieged it, May 16. 1676. and it was surrendered to them upon Articles,
Sept. the 17th. following. In 1688. Sept. the 27th. It was invested by the
French. The 6th. of October the Dauphin of France came thither, and here made
his first Campaign; the first of November it was surrendered, when it might have
holden out much longer. However this Siege gave liberty to the Prince of
Orange, now our King, to come over into England. Philipsburg stands seven Miles
S. of Spire, and 18 S. W. of Heidelberg. Long. 28 d. 10 m. Lat. 49 d. 4 m.

IV. Darmstat.

Darmstat, Lat. Darmstadium, with the Title of Landgraviate, is about Two
Leagues from the Rhine. It belongs to a Prince of the Family of Hesse, and has
a well Fortified Castle. The Castles of Mariemburg on the Rhine and Russelheim
on the Main belong also to that Prince. Darmstat stands on the River of the
same Name 14 Miles S. of Francfort, 23 S. E. of Mentz, 17 N. E. of Worms, and
30 N. of Heidelberg. Long. 28 d. 16 m. Lat. 49 d. 41 m.

V. Deux-Ponts.

Deux-Ponts, Lat. Bipontium, Germ, Zweibruck, is a Town on the River Scwolbe,
with a strong Castle, and the Title of Dukedom. It stands 44 Miles almost W. of
Worms, and about 50 from Strasburg, Mentz and Triers. Long. 26 d. 54 m. Lat. 49
d. 19 m.

This Town gives its Name to a very Ancient and Noble Family, which is a Branch
of that of Bavaria, in this manner; Stephen Duke of Sicmeren, second Son to the
Emperor Robert the Little, had two Sons by his Wife Anne of Veldens, viz.
Frederick and Lewis the Black. Lewis dying in 1489. left Alexander, Surnamed
The Halt, Duke of Deux-Ponts, who died in 1514. and was succeeded by Lewis II.
who embraced the Protestant Religion, and died in 1532. His Son Wolfgand was
his Successor, he added to his Fathers Dominions the Principality of Newburg,
and died in France, in 1569. where he had led Succors out of Palatinate, to
the Protestants of that Kingdom; he left Five Sons, viz. Philip, Lewis, John,
Frederick, and Charles, and two Daughters. John was his Successor, who died in
1604. left by his Wife Magdalen, (Daughter to William Duke of Cleves and
Juliers, who brought along with her the Reversion of her Father's Estates) Four
Sons, viz. Lewis-William who died in 1581. John II. Frederick-Casimir (who
Married in 1614. Amelia Daughter of William Prince of Orange) and John-Casimir,
(who in 1615. Married Catherine Daughter to Charles X. King of Sweden, by which
he had Charles-Gustavus King of Sweden, and Adolph-John;) and two Daughters.
John II. Duke of Deux-Ponts, took the Title of Duke of Cleves and Juliers, etc.
and died in 1635. leaving behind him, by his second Wife ( Louise-Julienne,
Daughter to Frederick IV. Elector Palatine) several Daughters, and one Son
called Frederick, who enjoyed his Fathers Estates by the Treaty of Westphalia
in 1648. and died in 1661. without Issue. His Nephew Frederick-Lewis (Son to
Frederick-Casimir, and Amelia Countess of Orange and Nassau) succeeded him.
This Frederick-Lewis was Married to his Cousin Julienne-Magdalen, Daughter to
John II. by which he had Lewis-William Born in 1648. to whom belongs the Duchy
of Deux-Ponts. Yet upon the Pretense of the King of Sweden's Right to it, the
French made themselves Masters of the Town and Castle of Deux-Ponts in Jan.
1676. which they have kept since, though for the most part Ruined.

VI. Birkenfeld.

Birkenfeld, Lat. Birchofeldia, is a small Town with the Title of Principality
and Dukedom, in the Palatinate of the Rhine, belonging to the Palatinate of
Bavaria, but now Subject to the French. It stands in the small Country of
Hunsruk near the Nab, 24 Miles almost E. of Triers, and 45 almost W. of Mentz.
Long. 26 d. 36 m. Lat. 49 d. 45 m.

VII. Mont-Royal.

Mont-Royal, is a very strong new little Town Built by the French (and subject
to the Same) in the Palatinate of the Rhine, in the Limits of the
Archbishopric of Triers, upon the left side of the River Moselle. It stands 23
Miles N. E. of Triers, and 31 S. W. of Coblentz. Long. 26 d. 30 m. Lat. 50 d.

Article III. The Archbishopric and Electorate of Mayence, or Mentz.
THE Archbishopric and Electorate of Mentz Borders Veteraw on the North,
Bounds.
the Electorate of Triers on the West, the Lower Palatinate on the South, and
Franconia on the East.

It is so strangely scattered, and intermixed with other Provinces, Extent.
that the Dimensions of it cannot well be given.

Its Archbishop is Arch-Chancellor of the Empire, History.
and the first of the Electoral College; in all public Conventions, he sits at
the Right Hand of the Emperor. This Dignity is Elective, and depends upon the
Chapter, which consists of 24 Canons that have Voice, commonly called
Capitularies: There are other Canons, which have neither Voice nor Revenue,
though they have made the usual proofs of Nobility; (for none but Gentlemen are
admitted into this Chapter) but they may fill the Vacancies of the 24. This
Elector has a Marshall and a Chancellor under him, the first for Military
Affairs, and the other for the Administration of Justice: His Dominions consist
of Five and twenty Bailywicks, which in good Times yield the Archbishop about
1800000 Livres per Ann. The greatest part of this Revenue is raised in Mentz,
by the Toll which all the Boats that go through it are obliged to pay.

The Chief River Rivers.
which waters this Electorate, besides the Rhine, is the Main, which falls into
that near Mentz.

The Electorate and Archbishopric of Mentz is scattered in several Provinces.
The Places of Note are, Mentz, Archb. Cap. about the Rhine. Bingen, about the
Rhine. Weisbaden, about the Rhine. Elfelt, about the Rhine. Rudisheim. about
the Rhine. Fredberg, Imp. in Hesse. Fritzlar. in Hesse. Aschaffemburg, in
Franconia. Biscoffsheim, in Franconia. Lor, County. in Franconia. Reineck,
County. in Franconia. Erfort, in Thuringia. Heiligenstat, in Thuringia.
Duderstat. in Thuringia.


I shall give you here a Description of those Places only, which are about the
Rhine, the rest being altogether Foreign to our Design.

I. Mentz.

Mentz, Gall. Mayence, Lat. Moguntia, or Maguntia and Moguntiacum, is situated
upon the left Bank of the Rhine; it deriveth its Name from the River Mein,
which falls into the Rhine over against it, and is the Ancientest City in that
part of Germany, as having been certainly Built before the Birth of our
Savior, and Famous in the Times of Drusus, General of Augustus. In 745. it was
made an Archbishops See, instead of Worms, to which it was Suffragan before. It
was very severely treated by Frederick Aenobarbus the Emperor in 1158. but
rebuilt and restored by Otho IV. In 1462. it was taken by Adolphus of Nassau,
its Archbishop. Its University was opened in 1461. Gustavus Adolphus King of
Sweden entered it in Triumph in 1631. It was retaken from the Swedes in 1635.
but they took it again the next Year after, and kept it till the Peace of
Munster. This is a very strong Place, adorned with Churches, Monasteries, and
other fair Buildings, but the narrowness of its Streets, and many old Houses,
take away from its Beauty. It is most extended toward the River, and that part
excels the other toward the Land, as being more populous and better Built.
This City is famous by the Invention of Printing about 1430. or rather by the
Skill of one John Guttemberg, who first taught the use of it in Europe, which
he had learnt in China, where, it is said, they have had it for above 2000
Years. Mentz received a French Garrison in 1688. but being Besieged by the
Confederate Forces, under the Duke of Lorrain, it was surrendered September 11.
1689. after six or seven Weeks Resistance. It stands 21 Miles almost W. of
Francfort, 28 Miles almost N. of Worms, 48 N. W. of Heidelberg, and 66 E. of
Triers. Long. 27 d. 43 m. Lat. 49 d. 57 m.

II. Bingen.

Bingen, is a fine little Town and Castle upon the Mouth of the little River
Nabe, or Nave, on the Rhine. Ammianus Marcellinus, and the Itinerary of
Antoninus make mention of it. It was once Imperial, but is now Subject to the
Archbishopric of Mayence, and stands 16 Miles W. of that City. Near it is an
Island in the Rhine, with a Castle called Mauszthurn, wherein it is said, that
Hatto second Archbishop of Mayence was eaten alive by Rats: It is now almost
wholly ruined.

Article. IV. The Archbishopric and Electorate of Treves or Triers.
THE Electorate of Triers lies betwixt Weteraw and the Palatinate on the East;
Bounds.
Lorrain on the South; Luxemburg on the West; Lifal, the Archbishopric of
Cologne, and Westrowalt on the North. Its of great extent Extent.
from East to West, but narrow from North to South.

It is Watered both by the Rhine and the Moselle, Rivers. Quality.
and yields most plentifully all things necessary for the life of Man.

The Chapter of Treves has the Privilege of choosing their Archbishops, and
receive no Princes, nor scarcely any Counts in their Prebends or Canonicals;
the Gentlemen reserve them for People of their own rank, as their only means to
come to the Dignity of Elector or Prince of the Empire: but the Canons before
they are received, must give as good proofs of their Noble Birth, both by
Father and Mother, as is required of the Knights of Maltha. The Elector of
Triers is great Chancellor of the Empire in the Gauls, and in the Kingdom of
Arles, but does not exercise the Function of this Charge, because these Places
are not under the German Empire; but has precedence of the Elector of Cologne,
and possesses several other advantages, Votes before all the other Electors in
the Dyets and Assemblies of the Electors, in which he has his particular seat
over against the Emperor, between the two Banks of the other Electors. The King
of France is Master of several Towns and Castles in this Archbishopric all
along the Moselle, which makes it his interest to defend him as Metropolitan of
the Bishoprics of Metz, Toul and Verdun, whereof he is Sovereign, but allows
the Archbishop the Ecclesiastic Privileges and Revenues, which in times of
Peace, amount to 1100000 Livres, per Annum This Archbishopric has 24
Bailywicks.

The Principal Cities and Places in this Electorate are, Treves or Triers.
Arch. Cap. Coblentz. Hermanstein. Sarbrugh. Grimberg. Bopart. Pruim. Abbey.
Vlmen. Oberwesel.


I. Treves.

Treves or Triers, Lat. Augusta Trevirorum is a very ancient City seated on the
Moselle, with an Archbishops See and Electorate of the Empire. It was ruined
four or five times by the Huns, Vandals, Goths and French, but always recovered
with greater luster, which gave the Emperors, that staid any time in the Gauls,
occasion to make it their ordinary Residence, and adorn it with a Cirque and
Capitol. The Archbishop of Treves in that quality is Prince of the Empire, and
Temporal Lord of his Estates, and was formerly Metropolitan of the Bishoprics
of Mayence, Cologne, Liege, Vtrecht, Strasburg, Worms and Spire, all which are
now separated from his Archbishopric; so that he has but three Suffragants,
viz. Metz, Toul and Verdun which are all under the King of France. They pretend
they have our Saviors Tunick at Treves, and that lest it should be stolen away,
they conceal the place it is hidden in; though its like this care is taken the
better to keep the cheat undiscovered. Several Synods have been held here. the
Chief whereof was that in 386. upon the subject of the Priscillianists by order
of the Tyrant Maximus. This City has 4 Collegiate Churches, 5 Parishes, 2
Abbeys and several Religious Houses. It was put into the Hands of the French in
1632. to preserve it as was pretended, from the Swedes; They kept it till 1645.
Marshall Crequi was defeated near Treves, at the Bridge of Consarbick upon
Sarr, August 11. 1675. and afterward retired to this Place, which was
immediately besieged by the Germans, who forced the Garrison to surrender upon
very dishonorable Terms. The French are Masters of it again since 1688. I
stands 28 Miles N. E. of Luxemburg and 60 W. of Mentz, Long. 26 d. Lat. 49 d.
50 m.

II. Coblentz.

Coblentz is a very strong and populous City upon the Confluent or meeting of
the Moselle and Rhine, for which reason it is called in Latin, Confluentes, or
Confluentia. It is a pretty place, with fine Churches and stately Houses, along
the River; The Elector of Treves has a Palace here, where he makes his ordinary
Residence. It stands fifty two Miles N. E. of Trier, and 42 from Cologne to the
South East. Gaspar a Petra much improved its Fortifications by drawing a Line,
from one River to the other, with Fortifications after the most regular modern
way. On the other side the Rhine, is the strong Fortress of Ebrenbeistein
commmonly called Hermanstein. This Castle is situated upon a Rock, has
communication with the Town of Coblentz by a Bridge of Boats over the Rhine.
There is another good Stone Bridge over the Moselle. Coblentz is the most
considerable Place that belongs now to the Archbishop of Treves.

III. Hermanstein.

Hermanstein or Erenbreitstein Lat. Eremberti Lapis, is one of the strongest
Cittadels of Germany, on the Rhine over against Coblentz, and the Mouth of the
River Moselle in the Archbishop of Triers's Dominions. It is situated on a
steep inaccessible Rock, and in the Siege of 1637. it could not be taken but by
Famine. It has a stately Palace belonging to the said Elector under it, eight
Leagues from Mentz and 10 from Cologne Westward.

IV. Sarbrugh.

Sarbrugh or Sarbruken, Lat. Saraepons or Saraeburgum, is on the River Sar
overagainst St. Jean on the Borders of Lorrain, formerly an Imperial Town, but
exempted by the Emperor Rodolphus. I. and belonging to the Electorate of
Treves. It is a fine Town, very ancient and mentioned in the Itinerary of
Antonine, but falling under the Duke of Lorrain, is now in the Hands of the
French. It gives Title to a Prince of the House of Nassau, and has a Castle
which was his usual Residence. It stands 12 Miles W. of Deux Ponts, and 40 E.
of Metz.

V. Grimberg.

Grimberg is a small Town about 15 Miles S. W. of Triers subject to this
Elector.

VI. Boppart.

Boppart Lat. Bopartium and Bodobriga is a small Town upon the Rhine at the
foot of a Hill, anciently Imperial, now subject to the Elector of Treves. It
stands eight Miles S. of Coblentz.

VII. Pruim.

Pruim or Prume is a little Town and Abbey of Benedectine Monks in the Forest
of Ardenne, between the Electorate of Trier and Luxemburg. It is an
Ecclesiastical Principality of the Empire, whereof the Abbot was formerly Lord,
but since 1576. the Elector of Trier has it, and it was confirmed to him by the
Diet of Ratisbonne in 1654. It stands on a little River of the same name, 27
Miles N. E. of Triers.

VIII. Ulmen.

Vlmen is a small Town 27 Miles W. of Coblentz.

IX. Ober-Wesel.

Ober-Wesel, Lat. Ficelia or Vesalia is a Town upon the Rhine, Imperial and
Free, until in 1312. it fell into the Hands of the Elector of Triers. It is
memorable for St. Werner's Death, slain here by the Jews in 1287. The Mother of
Alexander, the Roman Emperor, is also said to have been assassinated here. This
Place stands 20 Miles South of Coblentz.

Article V. The Archbishopric and Electorate of Cologne or Ceulen.
THE Electorate of Cologne borders the Dukedom of Juliers on the North and
West. Bounds.
The Electorate of Triers on the South; and Hesse and part of Westphalia on the
East. Its Extent Extent.
cannot easily be determined, because it is strangely intermixed with other
Provinces.

The Archbishop is great Chancellor of the Empire in Italy, History.
but never exercises the Function of his Office; For Princes that hold any
Principalities of the Empire are its perpetual Vicars, in which quality they
can do in all places in their Jurisdictions what the Emperor could do in common
cases, and in higher points have recourse to the Imperial Court. Wherefore the
Archbishop of Metz, who is great Chancellor of Germany, is Keeper of the
Archives, and the Titles that concern Italy. The Golden-Bull bears, that the
Archbishop of Cologne has the Privilege of Crowning the King of the Romans:
Nevertheless it seems this does not belong to him, but when the Ceremony is
performed in his Diocese, or in the Suffragan Bishoprics; for the Archbishop
of Metz disputes it with him, when it is done elsewhere. This does not hinder
but the Archbishop of Cologne goes before him of Mayence, within the districts
of his Metropolitan, and Chancellorship of Italy, where he puts himself at the
Emperors Right, leaving the Elector of Mayence, who preceeds him in all other
Places, the Left. The Elector of Cologne has also by the Golden-Bull the second
Suffrage in the Electoral College, with Privilege to Vote immediately after the
Archbishop of Treves, and exercise Justice by his Officers in all Criminal
Cases in the Town, though otherwise Free and immediately depending on the Empire.
But the Towns-People do not suffer him to make any long stay with them, nor
come with a great Train, which has been the occasion of several Debates these
many Ages, and is the Reason why that Prelate keeps his residence for the most
part at Bonn. The great Chapter of Cologne is one of the noblest in Europe, It
consists of 60 Canons, all Princes or Counts; for they receive no meaner
Person; quite contrary to that of Treves and Mayence; where they receive
neither Princes nor Counts, unless for some weighty reasons. The twenty four
Elders of the sixty form a particular Chapter for the Election of the
Archbishop, and have their active and passive Votes, having power to choose any
of the Colleagues, or be chosen themselves to the Vacant Dignity. The Annual
Revenues of this Archbishopric in time of Peace amount to 1800000 Livres.

The most remarkable Places in the Electorate of Cologne, are, Cologne, or
Ceulen. Archb. Cap. Bonn. Rhineberg. Keiserswert. Nuis. Andermach.


I. Cologne.

Cologne, or Colon, or Ceulen, Lat. Colonia Vbiorum, and Colonia Agripina, is
seated upon the Rhine; It is an Imperial Free City, and one of the four Capital
Hance Towns, with an University, and Archbishopric, whereof the Prelate is
Prince and Elector of the Empire. This Place is very ancient deriving its
Origin from the Vbiens, who courted Julius Caesar's Alliance, to resist the
Suevi their Mortal Enemies. In Augustus's Reign they put themselves under
Agrippa's Protection, and passing the Rhine they founded on the left Bank the
Town of Cologne, which they then called the Colony of Agrippa. Some say the
Place was built before they came, and that they only enlarged it, about twenty
or twenty four years before our Saviors Birth; and afterward Agrippina
Granddaughter of this Agrippa, and Nero's Mother, to show her power when
Married to the Emperor Claudius, made the Circuit of the City far wider than it
was before, and established a Colony of Veterans in it, about 48 years after
our Saviors Birth. When Vitellius and Vespasian disputed the Empire, Anno Chr.
69. This Town was besieged by Tutor and Sabinus, who had revolted against the
Romans. She obeyed the pressing necessity, received their Garrison, which she
afterward massacred, when Cerealis had beaten the Rebels. King Merouee of
France, beat the Romans hence in the Reign of Valentinian III. and soon after
Attila ruined it. But being rebuilt by the Romans; Childeric Son to Merouee,
took it from them a second time, and gave it to a Prince his Cousin, Father to
Sigebert, called the Lame King of Cologne, and Ribarols, who was killed in 599.
by Cloderic his Son. It was then that Clovis the Great, who for this Murder
put the Executioner to death, united the People of Cologne to the Crown of
France, under which it remained during the Reigns of the Kings of the first
Race. Under those of the second it fell to the Princes of France, Kings of
Germany. In 881. when Charles the Big went to have himself proclaimed Emperor
beyond the Alps, Godfrey and Sigefroy, Kings of the Normans, took and burnt
Cologne with fifteen or twenty of the best Cities in Gallia Belgica. The
Emperor Otho the Great, under whom it was repaired, subjected it to its
Prelates about 950. but succeeding Emperors made it free. Frederick I. allowed
it great Privileges, since which time it increased mightily, especially in
1260. when it entered into the League of the Hance-Towns, and became Capital of
the fourth of their Provinces. After this it was governed by Senators until the
Senate was changed in 1513. by a rising of the People, who Massacred the
Consuls, Treasurers and some other Magistrates, accused to have cheated the
Public. The Senate now is much like that of old Rome. It governs and judges in
civil matters; but for criminals it has only the power to seize and examine
them, without the Authority of acquitting or condemning them. For the Elector
reserves this to himself as the highest degree of Sovereign Authority; and it is
for this reason, that though the Town is free, yet it does him Homage and swears
Allegiance, upon condition that he will preserve the Privileges it enjoys. As
for the rest Cologne is called the Rome of Germany, for its greatness, its
Senate and fine Buildings. For it is certainly one of the finest, strongest,
and biggest of all Germany, environed with strong Walls, that have eighty three
Towers, and a Triple Ditch that surrounds it, in form of a Half Moon. There are
365 Churches. The Metropolitan St. Peter's would be one of the most magnificent
in the whole World, if quite finished. Besides which it has ten Collegiate,
nineteen Parish Churches; thirty seven Monasteries, several Hospitals and
Chapels The University was re-established in 1388. Besides which there is a
Jesuits College built after the Italian fashion, with a very fine Dome. There
are five great squares or principal Places in this Town, where, besides its
bigness the cleanness of the Streets, the magnificence of both its Private and
Public Structures, the sweet humor and civility of the Inhabitants, amongst
whom there is a great number of Learned Men, contribute much to render it
considerable. It has been a Bishopric in former times Suffragan of Treves, but
was erected into an Archbishopric in 755. ten years after Mayence was made one
in favor of Boniface. The first Archbishop was called Adolph. He had for
Suffragants, the Bishoprics of Munster, Liege, Osnabruck, Minden and Vtrecht;
but the two last being become secular, there are but the three first that
depend on it now. The Ancientest Assembly of the Clergy held at Cologne was
that of 346. wherein Euphrates then Bishop of the Town was deposed for siding
with the Arians, and Severinus put in his Place. Charlemaign ordered another
there in the VIII. Century; and there were some others held in the IX, etc. In
1688. Prince Clement of Bavaria was chosen Archbishop of Cologne in opposition
to Cardinal William of Furstemburg, who being supported by the King of France,
entered this Electorate to maintain his pretended Right by force of Arms, and
made himself Master of Bonn, Keiserswert, etc. which were retaken in 1689. by
the Brandenburghers, and restored to the right owner. This contest about the
Election of the Archbishop of Cologne is the more remarkable, that it was the
first sparkle that kindled the War, which has raged these 5 years through most
part of Christendom. Cologne stands 25 Miles E. of Juliers, 68 almost N. of
Triers, 70 S. of Munster and 74 N. W. of Mentz, Long. 26 d. 32 m. Lat. 50 d. 55
m.

II. Bonn.

Bonn, is situate upon the Rhine 14 Miles almost South of Cologne, in a very
fine Country, environed with Hills, and covered with Vines and Wood. Several
Authors think that it was built by the Trojans after the destruction of Troy.
However, it is certainly the Ara Vbiorum of the Ancients, and the (...) of
Ptolomy. Its name was also found in some Medals of Augustus, related by
Goltzius under the name of Colony, Col. Julia Bona. It is a regular
Fortification, the Walls are faced with Brick, and the Ditch which is dry, is
pretty broad; but the Counterscarp is none of the best. As for the Town it
self, it is small and poor, yet remarkable as being the ordinary Residence of
the Elector of Cologne, who has there a very fine Castle, and curious Gardens
in the Neighborhood. The Townhouse is also very well built, with diverse
Paintings, and a Clock with a melodious Chime, after the fashion of the
Country. There are still fine Churches to be seen, the principal of which is
dedicated to the Holy Martyrs, Cassius, Florentius and Malusius. This Town
suffered much in the first Wars of the Low Countries, and was fiercely attackt
partly by the Bavarians, and partly by the Troops of the Duke of Parma, who
carried it at last by Famine, in 1588. In this City Frederick of Austria,
chosen in opposition to Lewis of Bavaria was Crowned Emperor in 1314. It was in
times past an Imperial City, but now it is under the Archbishop of Cologne. In
1673. the Prince of Orange, now King of Great Britain, having taken Naerden
and secured Holland by a part of the Army, he marched with the rest into
Germany, and joined part of the Confederate Troops to Besiege Bonn which had
been put into the French Kings hands, by the Elector of Cologne, and the taking
this Place forced the French to withdraw his Forces out of the united
Netherlands. The French made themselves Masters of it again in the beginning of
this late War, Lewis XIV. having given Troops to Cardinal Furstemburg to
maintain his pretended Right to the Electorate. It was besieged in Summer 1689.
by the Elector of Brandenburg, who after having almost ruined it with Bombs,
took it by Capitulation. At the last Siege of this Town, they found a Vault in
which there was an Iron Chest, that was full of Medals of Gold, to the value of
100000 Crowns the Metal was Ducat-Gold and the Impressions made for Roman, but
very ignorantly, as being not above four or 500 years old, some few of them
that seemed true, were of the latter Greek Emperors.

III. Rhineberg.

Rhineberg or Rheinberg, Lat. Rhenoberga is a little but very strong Town
situated upon the Rhine, in the Borders of the Dukedom of Cleves. It was taken
from the Spaniards by the Hollanders in 1633. and continued under them till
1672. when it was taken by the French, and restored to the Elector of Cologne
the Right Owner. It stands 42 Miles N. W. of Cologne.

IV. Keiserswert.

Keiserswert, Lat. Colonia Traja, Cayserswerda, and Insula Rheni, is a very
mean but well fortified Town, upon the Rhine. It has a broad Ditch, very
regular Fortifications, and high Walls faced with Brick; as is also the
Counterscarp which is in very good condition. This Town was first Mortgaged to
Adolph Duke of Cleves, by Charles IV. Emperor of Germany. Gerard Duke of
Cleves, Brother of Adolph, sold it to the Archbishop of Cologne for 100000.
Florins, about An. 1399. and in 1464. it was finally with Bielstem and
Frederberg, confirmed to him, in exchange for Soest and Santen, by John Duke of
Cleves. The French had possessed themselves of it for Cardinal Furstemberg, but
the Elector of Brandenburg retook it in 1689. It stands six German Miles
beneath Cologne, to the N. W.

V. Nuis.

Nuis or Nuys Lat. Novesium, is seated on the Rhine, where it receives the
River Erpt. It is an ancient strong City, and famous for the resistance it made
against Charles the Rash Duke of Burgundy, who besieged it a whole year. It has
been often taken and retaken during the late Wars of Germany. It stands 22
Miles N. W. of Cologne.

VI. Andernach.

Andernach stands on the Rhine by the Borders of Triers, 15 Miles almost S. E.
of Bonn, it was once Imperial but now subject to the Elector of Cologne.

Article VII. The Dukedoms, or, the Succession of Cleves and Juliers, Lat.
Ducatus Clivensis and Juliacensis.
THE Country of Cleves, Juliers, Berg, Mark, Bounds.
Ravensberg and Ravestein, are about the Rhine, but so strangely dispersed that
it is hard to determine their Bounds. One may say however that they border the
United Provinces on the North; the Catholic Provinces on the West; the
Archbishopric of Triers on the South; and Hesse and Westphalia on the East.

Their extent North and South is about 100 Miles; Extent.
and about 70 East and West: including the Electorate of Cologne, which is
incircled in them.

Quality.
The Air is here pretty cold: The Soil fertile in Corn, Wine in some Places, and
Pastures.

The Principal Rivers Rivers.
here besides the Rhine are Roer and Lipe, which fall both into that, the first
at Duysburg, the other at Wesel: There are also several springs of Hot Waters,
and some Marshes.

The succession of Cleves and Juliers is divided into six Territories, Division.
viz. 1. The Dukedom of Cleves Cleves. 2. The Dukedom of Juliers Juliers. 3.
The Dukedom of Berg Dusseldorp. 4. The County of Mark Dortmond. 5. The County
of Ravensberg Ravensberg. 6. The Lordship of Ravestein Ravestein.


Dukedom of Cleves.
THE Duchy of Cleves lies part on this, and part on the other side the Rhine,
having the Duchy of Berg, County of Mark, and part of Westphalia to the East;
Brabant and part of the Duchy of Gelderland to the West. The Archbishopric of
Cologne and Territory of Aix la Chapelle to the South; Overissel, and the
Provinces of Zutphen to the North. This Country is about 15 Leagues in length
and four or five broad. The soil, though hilly, Extent. Quality.
and much covered with Wood, is very fruitful in all kind of Grain, and abounds
with good Pasture, and great Quantity of Game.

Cleves, is a sovereign Family of Germany extinct by the Death of John William
Duke of Cleves, History.
Juliers, Mons, etc. in 1609. without issue by either of his Wives Jacqueline
of Bade, Daughter of Philibert Marquess of Bade, or Antoinette of Lorrain,
Daughter to Charles II. Duke of Lorrain. This Death was the source of the Civil
Wars of Germany in this manner, Mary Eleanor, the Dukes Eldest Sister (Married
to Albert Frederick of Brandenburg Duke of Prussia) left four Daughters. The
Elder called Ann, was Married to John Sigismond Marquess of Brandenburg, and
Elector of the Empire. This Elector the Duke of Newbourg, the Marquess of
Burgaw, and John George of Saxony, which three last Married the three younger
Sisters, pretended all to the Succession, John II. of Bavaria Duke of
Deux-Ponts Son of John of Bavaria, and of Magdalen of Cleves Sister to Mary
Eleanor laid his claim, and Charles of Gonzague and Cleves Duke of Nevers,
appeared also because he was cousin by the Mothers side, and bore the name too.
In the mean time, the Emperor Rodolphus II. would sequester the Estate
pretending also that it was a Fief, with an intention, perhaps, to appropriate
it to himself. It Is thought, that Henry IV. the Great, King of France, was
about taking the Field to decide the Quarrel, when he was murdered in 1610.
Afterward the Marquess of Brandenburg assisted by the Dutch, and the Duke of
Newburg supported by the Spaniards, disputed the Succession by force of Arms,
which they divided at last; The Duchy of Cleves, the Counties of Mark and
Ravensberg falling to the first; The Dukedoms of Juliers and Berg, and the
Lordship of Ravestein being left to the Duke of Newbourg. The Spaniards under
Spinola made themselves Masters of Juliers in 1622. but it was restored to the
Duke again in 1659.

The Places of Note in the Duchy of Cleves are, Cleves. Cap. Emmerick. Rees.
Wesel. Meurs. County. Genep. Burich. Orsoy. Calcar. Duysbourg. Santen. Fort de
Skenck.


I. Cleves.

Cleves Lat. Clivis or Clivia, because it is built in a Place near the Rhine
where there are three deep Acclivities or Descents. This derivation of Name
from the Latin makes some think that the Town was built by the Romans. However,
it is but little, yet well peopled, and lies upon a little River near the Place
where the Rhine divides it self into two Branches, and where the Fort Schenck
stands. There is a square Tower and other remains of old Buildings seen near
it, which show that it has formerly been far greater than it is now. It stands
12 Miles almost S. E. of Nimeguen and 66 N. W. of Cologne, Long. 25 d. 25 m.
Lat. 51 d. 48 m..

II. Emmerik.

Emmerik vulgo Embric Lat. Emmerica, is a large beautiful and wealthy City,
seated upon the Rhine, between Cleves and the Fort of Schenck, being about
seven Miles N. E. from the first it belongs to the Marquess of Brandenburg, but
was Garrisoned by the Hollanders a long time, who took it from the Spaniards in
1600. The Elector of Brandenburg pawned Emmerick, Orsoy and Wesel to the Dutch,
and by the taking of them, the French began their Conquest of the United
Provinces in 1672. But the year next following they restored them to the
Elector.

III. Rees.

Rees Lat. Reesium, is a small Town upon the Rhine formerly well fortified and
garrisoned by the Hollanders, though it belonged to the Duke of Brandenburg. It
was taken from them by the French in 1672. and restored to that Prince in 1674.
but first dismantled. It stands 12 Miles E. of Cleves.

IV. Wesel.

Wesel is a strong City, seated upon the Rhine, at the Confluence of the Lip.
It was taken from the Spaniards by the Hollanders in 1629. and from the
Hollanders by the French in 1672. who left it to the Elector of Brandenburg in
1674. after they had dismantled it. It has been very well fortified of late by
that Prince. This Place stands 23 Miles S. E. of Cleves.

V. Meurs.

Meurs is a well fortified Town, with the Title of County; some place it in the
Archbishopric of Cologne. It had particular Earls formerly but now belongs to
the House of Orange and Nassau, and so to our King. It stands 28 Miles S. E. of
Cleves.

VI. Genep.

Genep or Gennep Lat. Gennaptum is a small City well fortified, 10 Miles S. W.
of Cleves. It is seated upon the River Mers where it falls into the Meuse, and
kept by a Dutch Garrison, though in the Territories of Brandenburg. It was once
taken by the Spaniards but recovered by the Hollanders in 1641.

VII. Burich.

Burich, or Budrick, Lat. Burichum, and Budrichium, or Burunchium, is a little
Town pleasantly seated on the Rhine, and pretty well fortified. The Hollanders
were formerly Masters of it, and it is one of the Four Cities which the French
King caused to be attacked, at one and the same time at the opening of the
Campaign in 1672. The Marshal Turenne Besieged and carried it. It stands 20
Miles E. of Cleves.

VIII. Orsoy.

Orsoy, Lat. Orsovium, or Orsocum, is a strong Town upon the Rhine (...) Miles
of Cleves. It was taken by the Prince of Orange in 1634. for the Hollanders,
and afterward taken from those by the French in 1672. but abandoned by them in
1674.

IX. Calcar.

Calcar, is situated upon the River of Meine, a League from the Rhine, and two
from Cleves to the S. E. It has a Castle, and is well fortified; the Streets
are narrow, so that there is nothing considerable but the great Place, where
the Townhouse is.

X. Duisbourg.

Duisbourg, Lat. Duisburgum, is seated on the River Roer, belonging to the
Elector of Brandenburg; it was an Imperial Town formerly, but has lost this
Privilege. It is different from Duisbourg the most Ancient Viscounty of
Brabant. And stands 35 Miles S. E. of Cleves.

XI. Santen.

Santen, is a large and ancient Town not far off the Rhine, Nine Miles W. of
Wesel, and 15 S. E. of Cleves. It is under the Elector of Brandenburg, and
noted for the finest Church in all that Duchy, wherein are above 30 Altars,
with the History of the Gospel Carved exquisitely in Timber; they have
abundance of Relics here; and among other things pretend to a Manuscript of
St. Paul's Writing.

XII. Fort de Skenck.

Fort de Skenck, Lat. Arx Skenckia, Germ. Schenkenschans, is a strong Fort on
the Borders of Gelderland, in a place where the Rhine dividing it self into two
Channels, makes the River Wahal, and the other Branch keeps the Name of Rhine.
This Fort takes its Name from the Builder Martin Skenck. The Spaniards took it
by Surprise from the Hollanders in 1635. who retook it the next Year, after a
Siege of Eleven Months. In 1672. it was taken by the French in two Days, and
was by them restored to the Duke of Brandenburg in 1674. and in 1679. Mortgaged
by that Prince to the Hollanders, who are now Masters of it. It stands 3 Miles
N. of Cleves.

Dukedom of Juliers.
THis Duchy lies betwixt the Meuse and the Rhine, the Country of Cleves and
Limburg, Bounds.
the Bishopric of Liege, and the Archbishopric of Cologne. It is about 12
Leagues in length, and 7 in breadth. Extent.


The most considerable Places in it are, Juliers, Cap. Duren, Aix la Chapelle,
Imp. Zulk, or Zulpich. Kerpen, Dolin, Heinsberg, Erkelens Gueld, Bredebent,
Grevembruck, Aldenhoven,


I. Juliers.

Juliers, Lat. Juliacum, Germ. Julick or Gulick, is situated upon the River
Roer, being an Ancient and strong City with a good Citadel. Some Authors
affirm that it was Built by Julius Caesar, though others are of Opinion that it
was Built by Drusus. It was taken in 1622. by the Spaniards, but was restored
to the Duke of Newburg by the Pyrenaean Treaty in 1659. This City is 24 Miles
W. of Cologne, 15 N. E. of Aix la Chapelle, and 34 E. of Maestricht. Long. 25
d. 50 m. Lat. 50 d. 56 m.

II. Duren.

Duren, or Dueren, is a small Town on the River Roer, 8 Miles S. E. of Juliers.
It was once Imperial, but is now subject to the Duke of Newbourg.

III. Aix-la-Chapelle.

Aix-la-Chapelle, Lat. Aquisgranum, Germ. Aken, is an Imperial Town on the
Frontiers of Juliers. It is said to have been Built by Granus the Brother of
Nero, Anno Christi 50. and thence called Aquis Granum; others give a fabulous
Etymology, deriving its Name from Apollo called Granius, because of its
Medicinal Waters and Baths. Charlemaign Riding through the Woods a Hunting, his
Horse's Foot struck into one of those Hot Springs, which occasioned his
observing of the Place, and the Ruins of many Palaces adjoining, the City
having been Ruined by Attila, King of the Huns. He found the Place so
agreeable, that he Built it up again, and chose it for his Residence, conferred
great Privileges upon it, and made it the Seat of the Empire in this side of
the Alps, ordaining that the King of the Romans should be Crowned here with an
iron Crown, as at Milan with one of Silver, and at Rome with one of Gold. He
Built also a Collegiate Church Dedicated to the Virgin, enlarged and fortified
the City, so that it flourished till 882. that it was destroyed by the Normans.
It has suffered much by the Fire diverse times since, and particularly in 1656.
when 20 Churches, and 5000 private Houses were consumed. The Townhouse is well
Built of Freestone, having a Hall of 162 Foot long, and 60 broad, where the
Emperors, at their Coronation, Treat the Electors and other Princes. The Church
of our Lady Built by Charlemaign, is adorned in the inside with Pillars of
white Marble, and Brass gilt Statues, Brass Doors, and much Mosaic Work. In
the middle of the Church where Charlemaign was Buried, hangs a Crown of Silver
and Brass, adorned with 16 little Towers, and 48 Statues of Silver of about a
Foot high, and 32 which are lesser, between which stand 48 Candlesticks to
receive the Lights Burnt there upon Festivals. This was the Gift of the Emperor
Frederick I. who took up again the Body of Charlemaign, and Buried it again in
a Silver Coffin, under his own Tombstone, which is of white Marble, and said
to have been that of Julius Caesar; it has the Figure of Proserpine upon it.
Out of this Tomb were taken a great many Rarities and Relics, which the said
Emperor had got from Aaron King of Persia, the Patriarch of Constantinople and
others. In this Place is also the Tomb of the Emperor Otho, who is said to have
first Constituted the Electors in 1000. Near this City are many Mines, as Lead,
Sulphur, Vitriol, Iron, Coal, and Lapis Calaminaris, with which they make
Brass, or multiply Copper in their Furnaces. This City is also Famous for its
hot Baths, which are very much frequented, and exceeding convenient; three of
them are within the Walls, and very convenient, the principal is called the
Emperors Bath; it has Five Bathing Rooms, in one of which Charlemaign used to
Bath and Swim. These Baths rise so hot, that they let them cool 12 Hours before
they use them. There is also a Fountain of this hot Water, much resorted to,
and drunk of in the Summer. A little from this City on the other side of a
Hill, at a Village called Borsett, are many hot Springs on both sides of a
little Rivulet, which compose 28 Baths, whose Springs are hotter than any of
the City, and are cooled 18 Hours before they be used. This City suffered much
in the late Wars, being taken by the Protestants, and retaken by Spinola in
1614. Several Councils have been held in this City; which is also famous for a
Treaty of Peace concluded there betwixt the French and Spaniards in 1668. It
stands 32 Miles almost W. of Cologne, 26 almost E. of Liege, and 15 almost N.
E. of Limburg. Long. 25 d. 36 m. Lat. 50 d. 48 m.

IV. Zulch, or Zulpich.

Zulch, or Zulpich, Lat. Tolbiacum, stands 10 Miles from Cologne, and is the
same that was formerly called Tolbiac, Famous for the Victory won there in 496.
by Clovis, because it occasioned his Conversion.

The other Towns in Juliers are not very remarkable, except Grevembruk, which
is Famous by the Defeat of the Imperialists in 1648.

Dukedom of Berg, or Mons.
THE Duchy of Berg, or of Mons, Lat. Bergensis, Name. Bounds. Quality.
and Montensis Ducatus, is a small Country upon the Rhine, betwixt the County
of Mark, and the Bishopric of Liege. It abounds with excellent Corn, and
Coal-Mines, and belongs to the Duke of Newbourg.

The Principal Places in it are, Dusseldorp, Cap. Solingen, Lennep, Ratingen,
Hardemberg, Berg, Everveld, Mulheim, Blankenberg, Siegberg, Wieldenberg.


I. Dusseldorp.

Dusseldorp, the Chief Town of the Duchy of Berg, is pretty well fortified
upon the Rhine. It belongs to the Duke of Newburg, and stands 20 Miles N. W. of
Cologne, and 23 N. E. of Juliers. Long. 26 d. 14 m. Lat. 51 d. 13 m.

The other Places are not very considerable.

County of Mark.
THis County lies betwixt the Duchy of Westphalia to the East, Bounds.
the Bishopric of Munster to the North, and the Duchy of Berg, or Mons to the
West and South.

The most Remarkable Places in it are, Dortmund, Cap. Luynen, Vnna, Ham, Essen,
Werden, Zoest, Asten, Kumen.


I. Dortmund.

Dortmund, Lat. Tremonia, is a little, rich, and populous, imperial, and
Hanse-Town, on the River Empser. It belongs now to the Marquess of Brandenburg,
and stands 34 Miles S. of Munster, and 40 almost N. of Cologne. Long. 26 d. 58
m. Lat. 51 d. 28 m.

The other Places here do not deserve a particular Description.

County of Ravensberg.
THis Earldom is a small Territory that lies between the Bishoprics of Minden
and Osnaburgh to the N. and W. that of Munster to the South, and the County of
Lip to the East. The only Place of Note here is Ravensberg, situated upon a
Hill, and Subject to the Elector of Brandenburg. It stands 20 Miles S. E. of
Osnaburgh, and 30 almost E. of Munster. Long. 27 d. 57 m. Lat. 52 d. 11 m.

Lordship of Ravesteyn.
RAvesteyn, is a small Town and Country of Brabant, on the Borders of
Gelderland. The City stands upon the Meuse below Grave, 10 Miles almost W. of
Nimeguen. Long. 24 d. 53 m. Lat. 51 d. 48 m. The Dukes of Cleves have been
Lords of Ravesteyn, where they had a good Citadel, but William Duke of Cleves
and Juliers, was obliged to demolish it, by one of the Articles of the Treaty
made with the Emperor Charles V. It belongs now by Right to the Duke of
Newbourg, but the Hollanders are in Possession of it.

THE MARTIAL-FIELD OF EUROPE
SECT. III. The Duke of Savoy's Dominions.
THE Territories by Right belonging to the Duke of Savoy, Bounds.
are bounded on the East, chiefly by the Dukedom of Milan, on the South by the
Sea, and part of the Commonwealth of Genoa, on the West by Provence, Dauphine,
and Bresse in France; and on the North by the Lake of Geneva and Switzerland.

It is a very irregular, oblong Figure, being in length from Geneva in the
North parts of Savoy to the most South Eastern parts of Montferrat about 190
Miles; Extent.
and in breadth from the most Western parts of the County of Nice, to the most
Eastern parts of Montferrat about 120 Miles.

The Principal Rivers Rivers.
in these parts are,

1. Po, (called Eridanus by the Poets) which here washes Salusses, Carignan,
Turin, Verua, and Casal, and so goes into Milan.

2. Tanare, which here washes Ceve, Quieras, Alba, and Asti, and runs into the
Po in Milan.

3. Doere, or Doria, which washes Aoust and Ivrea, and falls into the Po a
little above Verua.

4. Iser, which washes Moustiers, runs by Montmelian, and goes into France.

Here are two Lakes, Lakes.
besides that of Geneva, viz. 1. That of Bourget, and, 2. That of Anneci.

Here are also the Alps, and the Appennine, the most famous Mountains Mountains.
in Europe.

This Country toward the North is generally barren, Quality.
because of the Mountains; but toward the South it is exceeding fruitful in
all things necessary, as Corn, Wine, Oil, Fruits, Venison, Cattle, Cheese,
Chestnuts, Hemp, Flax, Minerals, and several Quarries of Marble.

Here is considerable Trading Trade.
in many good Commodities as Paper, Fustians, Raw-silks, Hides, Clothes,
Linen, Thread, Iron-work, Fir-Trees for Masts of Ships, etc. yet Money is
pretty scarce in most Places.

The ordinary Revenue Revenue.
of the Duke is said to amount to 1800000 Crowns yearly, yet upon extraordinary
Occasions he can raise much larger Sums. Strength.
The number of Soldiers which he may conveniently raise, is reckoned about
30000.

The Religion Religion.
generally allowed of here is the Roman Catholic; yet the Protestants called
Vaudois have the free exercise of their Belief in some Valleys of Piedmont.

The Language Languge.
here spoken is most commonly the French, or at least a Dialect of it; the
Italian is also very much used.

In this Country are two Archbishopricks, Archbishopricks.
viz. Turin and Moustiers, and thirteen Bishoprics, Bishoprics.
viz. Fossano, Ivrea, Mondovi, and Salusses under Turin; Anneci, Aoust, and
Maurienne under Moustiers; Acqui, Alba, Asti, Casal and Vercelli under the
Archbishop of Milan; and Nice under that of Ambrun in France.

Division.
The Duke of Savoy's Dominions are commonly divided into four parts, viz. 1.
Dukedom of Savoy Chambery. 2. Principality of Piedmont Turin. 3. County of Nice
Nice. 4. Dukedom of Montferrat Casal.


Of these, the French have Nice, part of Montferrat, and the greatest part of
Savoy; the Duke of Mantua has about half of Montferrat; the Prince of Massarano
has a little part of Piedmont; the Prince of Spigno a little of Montferrat; so
that the Duke of Savoy has but the greatest part of Piedmont, and about one
half of Montferrat.

CHAP. I. Savoy, Lat. Sabaudia.
SAvoy, Lat. Sabaudia, or Sapaudia, is one of the finest Sovereign Dutchies in
Europe. Bounds.
It Borders the Lake of Geneva, Swisserland, and the County of Burgundy on the
North; the Province of Dauphine in France, on the West; part of Dauphine and of
Piedmont on the South; and Piedmont and Vallais on the East.

Its Extent Extent.
from the South-East to the North-West is about 110 Miles, and from the East to
the West about 80.

The Air is here Cold, because of the Mountains always covered with Snow;
Quality.
and the Country generally barren; however the Valleys yield Corn and Wine, the
Mountains good Pastures, and all manner of Game, and the Lakes and Rivers store
of good Fish; there are also a great many Walnuts and Chesnut-Trees, and
Forests of other Trees.

The principal Rivers Rivers.
here are the Isere, Arche, and Arve; and the Lakes Lakes.
are two, viz. that of Bourget, and that of Anneci.

The Savoyards are generally good-natured, laborious and hardy, Manners.
but the Wit of the generality is none of the quickest. The Religion publicly
allowed is the Roman Catholic.

This Province was of old possessed by the Alltrobroges, Centrones,
Brannovices, History.
Antuates or Nantuates, Latobrigi and Sabaudi: It was part of Gallia
Narbonensis, and of Celtica or Lugdunensis, and obeyed to the Romans. Upon the
declining of the Roman Empire under Honorius, Savoy was left as a prey to
several Barbarous Nations; since that it made part of the Kingdom of Burgundy,
from whence it came under the Dominion of the Princes that at present are
possessed of it, who derive their Pedigree from one Bertoldus or Beroldus, who in
the Beginning of the XIth. Century was the Rise of this Family. The Learned are
very much at difference about the Birth of this Prince, and his Extraction;
some derive it from Ancharius Marquess of Yvree; others from Hugo King of
Italy, and Duke of Provence; others say, that he was Nephew of Hugo Capet King
of France; and others make him a Descendant of the Counts of Macon. Above
fourscore Historians of several Nations follow Guichenon, who derives his
Genealogy from Wittekindus the Great Duke of Saxony and Angria, Father of
Witibert Duke of Angria; who had two Sons Bruno and Walpert; this last was Duke
of Angria, and Count of Ringelbert, and left Immed Duke of Engern, who by Huine
Countess of Chiren, had Hugo Marquess of Italy, who was Father of this
Beroldus, Earl of Savoy and Maurienne, and had for his Successor Hambert,
Surnamed White-hands. But some French Authors of late ( viz. Chorier and Du
Bouchet) have endeavored to make out, that there was never any such Man as
Beroldus of Saxony, and have found (or rather fancied) that this Humbert was
Grandchild of the Emperor Lewis the Son of Boson, the Son of Benvil Count of
Ardenna, descended from Pharamond, or as others will have it, from Charlemaign.

Beroldus, and some of his Successors were but Counts of Savoy and Maurienne;
several Territories were afterward added to their Dominions: And the Emperor
Sigismund dignified them with the Title of Dukes in 1417. They now call
themselves Dukes of Savoy, Chablais, Aost, and the Canton of Geneva, Princes of
Piedmont, Marquisses of Salusses, Counts of Geneve, Romont, Nice, Aste and
Tend, Barons of Fauligni, Lords of Verceilles, Marquisses of Italy, Kings of
Cyprus; since Lewis of Savoy who Married Charlotte Daughter to John King of
Cyprus; and Vicars of the Empire since Thomas the First.

Chronological Succession of the Forty Counts or Dukes of Savoy and Piedmont.
Earls 24.
Begun in Reigned Y. 1. Beroldus I. Count of Savoy 1000 22 or 23 2. Humbert I.
White-hands 1023 25 3. Ame I. 4. Odo 1048 12 5. Ame or Amedaeus II. 1061 34 6.
Humbert II. the Strong 1095 8 7. Amedaeus III. 1103 46 8. Humbert III. the
Saint 1149 39 9. Thomas I. (made Vicar General of the Empire in Lombardy and
Piedmont. 1188 35 10. Amedaeus IV. 1233 5 11. Boniface, Roland 1238 25 12.
Peter the Little Charlemaign 1263 5 13. Philip I. 1268 17

Interruption. The Four following had but Piedmont only.
14. Philip II. 1282 23 15. James 1326 38 16. Ame 1366 36 17. Lewis 1402 16 18.
Thomas II. 1285 10 19. Thomas III. 1295 15 20. Amedaeus V. the Great, made
Prince of the Empire 1310 13 21. Edward the Liberal 1323 6 22. Aimon the
Pacifick 1329 14 23. Amedaeus VI. the Green 1342 40 24. Amedaeus VII. the Red
1383 9

16 Dukes.
Begun in Reigned Y. 25. Amedaeus VIII. made Duke of Savoy in 1416. and Pope
afterward 1392 43 26. Lewis I. 1434 31 27. Lewis II. King of Cyprus, (having
Married Charlotte Daughter of John, King of Cyprus 1465 17 28. Amedaeus IX. the
Fortunate 1482 7 29. Philibert the Hunter 30. Charles I. the Warrior 31.
Charles-John-Amedaeus 1489 7 32. Philip 1496 1 33. Gilbert the Fair 1497 7 34.
Charles II. the Good 1504 49 35. Emanuel Philibert, Iron-pate 1553 27 36.
Charles Emanuel I. 1580 50 37. Victor Amedaeus 1630 7 38. Francis Hyacinth 1637
1 39. Charles Emanuel II. 1638 37 40. Victor Amedaeus-Francis, the present Duke
of Savoy since 1675

Emanuel Philibert Married Margaret Daughter to Francis I. King of France, and
died in 1580. leaving only one Son Charles Emanuel I. who waged War with France
unsuccessfully; he Married Katherine Daughter of Philip II. King of Spain, and
died in 1630. leaving several Sons and Daughters. He was succeeded by Victor
Amedaeus, who was a great Lover of Peace, but a War breaking out between the
French and Spaniards, he sided with the former, and died of a Fever in 1637.
leaving by his Wife Christina Daughter to Henry IV. of France,
Aloisia-Maria-Christina, Married to his Uncle Maurice Prince of Oneglia.
Francis who died in 1632. Charles-Emanuel. Margaret Married to Rainutius, Duke
of Parma. Adelais Married to Ferdinand Elector of Bavaria. And Katharine who
died in 1637. Charles Emanuel II. succeeded his Father: In 1663. he Married
Magdalen, Daughter to the Duke of Orleans, and after her Death his Kinswoman
Mary, Daughter to the Duke of Nemours, by whom he had the present Duke of
Savoy, Victor Amedaeus-Franciscus, Born in 1666. who Married in 1684. Anna
Maria Daughter to the Duke of Orleans, by whom he has two Daughters. Mary and
--

From Thomas Son to Charles Emanuel I. and Brother to Victor-Amedaeus, are
descended by Mary of Bourbon, Daughter to the Count of Soissons, Aloise Married
to the Marquess of Baden; Emanuel Philibert who Married Mary Catherine of Est;
Eugenius Mauritius who Married Olympia, Niece to Cardinal Mazarin, by whom he
had Lewis Thomas Count of Soissons, who Married Urania, Daughter to the Lord of
Beauvois; Philip Born in 1659. and Franciscus Eugenius, so much talked of in
the present Wars, Born in 1665.

The present Duke of Savoy declared War against France, and fell in with the
Confederates, Jan. 4. 1690. because of the unreasonableness of the French
King's Demands, who sought no less than to Garrison Turin his Capital City; and
had prevailed with him to Persecute his Innocent Protestant Subjects the
Vaudois. The French King being before that time possessed of great part of Savoy,
has seized the whole since; so that the Duke is now confined to Piedmont. But
in Summer 1692. he Marched with 3000 Men into Dauphine, took Ambrun, Gap, etc.
spoiled the Country at pleasure, and would have made further progress, had he
not been taken with the Smallpox, which obliged him to return to Turin.

Savoy is generally divided into Six Parts, viz. On the South 1. Savoy,
properly so called Chambery Cap. 2. The Valley and County of Maurienne
Maurienne Bish. 3. The Valley of Tarentaise Monstiers Archb.
On the North 4. The Barony of Fossigni Bonneville. 5. The Dukedom of Chablais
Thonon. 6. The Dukedom or Territory of Geneva Geneva Free. Annecy.




Savoy Proper.
THE places of Note here,
Chambery. Cap. Montmeillan. Beaufort. Aix. Rumilly. Les Eschelles. Vigne.
Constans. Aiguebele. Miolans. Chatelar. La Rochete.
I. Chambery.

Chambery Lat. Cameriacum, or Camberiacum or Camberium, is the Capital of
Savoy, the ancient Residence of the Duke, and the Seat of a Chamber of
Accounts, of an Office of Finances, of a Bailywick and of a Parliament, which
they called a Senate, because it consisted of Senators and four Presidents.
This Town is situated on the confluence of the small Rivers Laisse and Albane
or Orbanne, in a plain environed with several little Hills. It is great and
well built, with a Castle that commands the Town. There is in the Duke's Palace
the Holy Chapel, which has Canons belonging to it, and depending on the Bishop
of Grenoble in France. The chief Church is that of the Parish of St. Ledger, but
there are several others, which together with the Jesuits College, are a great
Ornament to it. It is also imbelish'd with many fine Fountains which have their
source in the Hill St. Martin, and distribute their Water into the several
parts of the Town; besides this, there are several small Channels of the River
Orbanne. The Houses in many places toward the Street are built on Pillars which
form a Gallery, and are good Places to walk in in Rainy Weather. Chambery to
the East has the Suburb of Monmeillan, to the West that of Machee Vernay, and
on both sides very pleasant Walks, amongst which the Mail is the most resorted
and pleasant. This Town is in the Hands of the French since 1690. It stands 27
Miles N. E. of Grenoble, 44 S. of Geneva, 55 W. of Lions, 100 N. W. of Turin
and 270 S. E. of Paris. Long. 25 d. 24 m. Lat. 45 d. 4 m.

II. Monmeillan.

Monmeillan Lat. Monmelianus is a little Town upon the Iser 18 Miles S. E. of
Chambery. It has a vast strong Castle on the top of a steep Rock, which
commands the narrow passage betwixt the Mountains; There is a Well cut in the
Rock which supplies the Garrison and Inhabitants with Water. The French
besieged it 1691. and took it after it had made a very vigorous resistance.

III. Aix.

Aix which is Dignified with the Title of Marquisate, at the foot of the
Mountains between Chambery, and Anneci, and Rumilly, is an ancient Town, but
small and ill-built: However it is famous for the hot Baths of Allom and
Sulphur adjoining to it, which are very much frequented.

The County of Maurienne.
THE County or Valley of Maurienne reaches from the Alps, to the River Isere on
the one side, and on the other from Tarentais to Dauphine. It is generally
believed to be the Country of the Ancient Brannovices in Caesar, though Samson be
of another Mind. The most considerable Places here are, St. John of Maurienne.
Bish. Cap. La Chamber Marquisate. St. Michael. St. Julian. St. Andrew. Modane.
Vsse. Braman. Lanebourg.


I. St. John of Maurienne.

St. John of Maurienne or Morienne Lat. Mauriana Sancti Joannis, is on the
River Arche, with a Bishopric Suffragan of Vienna in Dauphine. It is an
Unwalled City seated in a Valley on the Frontiers of France, The Cathedral
Church of St. John has many Tombs of the Dukes of Savoy. This City lies 16
Leagues from Grenoble to the East.

The Valley of Tarentaise Lat. Tarentasia.
THIS small Province lies between the Fossigny on the North; the Alps, and the
Duchy of Aost on the East, the Valley of Morienne on the South; and Savoy
Proper on the West.

The remarkable Places here are, Monstiers. Archbp. Cap. St. James. St.
Maurice. Briancon. Constans. Le Bourg.


I. Monstiers.

Monstiers Lat. Monasterium, formerly Tarentasia and Forum Neronis Centronum,
is seated upon the Isere, with an Archbishops See, which has for Suffragans
Sion and Aousle. It has not been Metropolis but since the eighth Age; for
before that time all Ecclesiastic Authors agree, that it was subject to that
of Vienne. It stands 16 Miles E. of St. John de Mauscenne, 28 E. of Monmelian,
and 64 N. W. of Turin, Long. 26 d. 14 m. Lat. 45 d. seven m.

The Barony of Fossigny.
FOssigni, Foucigni, or Faussigny Lat. Fociniacum and Fociniensis Tractus, with
the Title of Barony lies between Genevois and le Valais, in a Mountainous
Country; its ancient Inhabitants were the Focunates or Focuates.

The most remarkable Places here are, Bonneville. Cap. Cluse. St. Gervais.
Taninge. Salanche.


Bonneville.
Bonneville Lat. Bonnopolis is a small Town and Castle on the right Bank of the
River Arva, over which it has a Wooden Bridge, two Leagues from Cluse, five
from Annecy, and about as many from Geneva. Bonneville is at the Foot of the
Mountains, but the Plain on the other side the River Arva belongs to Geneva. It
is not considerable, yet several Noble Families of Savoy, as of St. Alban, de
Millet, de Chales, etc. have had their Original from thence.

The Dukedom of Chablais Lat. Caballicus Ducatus.
THis Province Borders the Lake of Geneva to the North; The Country of Velay to
the East; Fossigny to the South; and the Territories of Geneva to the West. It
comprehends the Bailywicks of Tannier and Galliard, and the Lands of St.
Victor. The Romans kept great studs in this Province, which for that reason
they called Provincia Equestris, and Caballica, from the last word comes the
present Chablais.

The Places of Note here are, Thonon. Ripaille. Evian. Armoy. St. John d' Aux
or of Aost.


Thonon
Thonon or Tonnon Lat. Tunonium is a small inconsiderable Town on the Lake of
Geneva, seven Leagues E. of that Town.

The Genevois Lat. Genevensis Ager.
THis Province has the River Rhine on the West and North; Chablais and Fossigni
on the East, and Savoy Proper on the South.

The remarkable Places here are, Geneve. Bish. Free. Annecy. Cap. Albi. La
Roche. Tonnes. Faverge. Manigo. Talloir. Clairmont. Mount St. Martin.


I. Geneva.

Geneva or Geneve, Lat. Januba, Genabum, Geneva, or Geneventium Civitas is an
ancient City of the Allobroges, upon the Frontiers of Savoy, seated upon the
Rhine, at the extremity of the Lake Leman, (now called Lake of Geneva.) It is a
neat, large, rich City, well fortified, and has an admirable situation; partly
upon a Hill, partly in a Plain which has the Lake on the North. The Rhine
issuing out of the Lake, incompasses the City to the West, and divides it from
that delightful part called St. Gervais. At the end of the City the Rhine
receives the River Arve, which is another Rampart of Geneva to the South, and
besides the defense it draws from those Rivers to the South and West, and from
the Lake to the North, it has very good Fortifications. St. Peter's Church is
built upon a Hill, and was formerly the Cathedral. There are in this City
several Piazza's, a fair Townhouse, with a Pair of Stairs of particular
Workmanship, an Arsenal in good order, vast Walks, and beautiful Streets,
especially along the Lake. The Rivieres or Bank-sides make three different
Streets; for there is in the middle a Passage for Coaches and Horses, with
Shops on both sides, having Porticco's before them, supported with Pillars,
where you walk securely from the Weather. It is a City of great Trade, in a
Soil abounding with Wine. It is very ancient and was very considerable in the
time of the Romans, as several See Spon's Antiquities of Geneva.
Inscriptions testify. After several Revolutions and suffering much by the
Incursions of the Barbarians she had Counts of her own, of which the most
Ancient was Robert or Ratbert in the year 880. After that, this City preserved
her Liberty for many years under the Imperial protection, till being deserted
by the Emperors, engaged in Civil Dissentions, she had recourse to her own
Bishops, then in great Authority, but they embroyling themselves with the Duke
of Savoy, those Discords strangely afflicted her, being already twice consumed
by Fire. So that she was forced to struggle with the succeeding Dukes of Savoy
for her Liberty; which she did with various Fortune, being reduced to great
extremities by Charles Duke of Savoy after a long Siege; And like to have been
seized by Emanuel, which forced her to a strict Alliance with the Cantons of
Berne and Friburg, by whom she was delivered from her Fears, and the Dukes of
Savoy brought to an easy composition, and Renunciation of their Pretensions.
But nothing conduced so much to her Establishment as her embracing the
Reformation, first Preached to her by William Farel her first Minister, to whom
succeeded Calvin and Beza who both died at Geneva; so that after she had
renewed a perpetual League with the Cantons beforementioned, by their support
in 1535. the Council of Geneva abolished the Roman Religion, and forced her
Bishop Peter of la Beaume to remove his See to Annecy. About 350 years ago this
City was twice burnt in seven years time; and the change of Religion having
heightened its Neighbors Rage against it, it suffered a very sharp Siege and
miserable Famine in 1584. But yet prevailed so far by the help of the Canton of
Zurich, that the Duke of Savoy, and the Bishop were forced to renounce all
their pretensions to it. Nor did it reap less glory from its defeating the
Nocturnal Scalado of Charles Emanuel in 1602. In these late years the French
King has several times threatened this City of a Siege, but has been kept from
such a design by the fear of breaking with the Switzers. The Emperor Charles
IV. instituted here an University in 1368. which is still very flourishing
Geneva stands 75 Miles N. E. of Lions 65 S. of Besancon, 50 N. of Chambery, 120
N. W. of Turin, 120 S. W. of Basil, 210 S. E. of Paris, and 450 N. W. of Rome,
Long. 25 d. 38 m. Lat. 46 d. 4 m.

II. Annecy.

Annecy Lat. Annecium is a pretty large Town at the foot of the Mountains of
Saymenoz, and upon a Lake of the same name, The Lake is unfathomably deep, four
Leagues long and half a League broad, and gives rise to the River Tioud, which
Waters Annecy by diverse Channels. This Town is the Residence of the titular
Bishop of Geneve since 1535. has several Churches and Monasteries, and the
Houses are built upon Arches, so that People may walk in its Streets by any
Weather. This City stands 22 miles S. of Geneva, and 26 N. of Chambery, Long.
25 d. 32 m. Lat. 45 d. 37 m.

CHAP. II. Piedmont Lat. Pedemontium.
THE Principality of Piedmont lies betwixt the Milanese and Montferrat to the
East; Bounds.
the Republic of Genoa and the County of Nice to the South; Extent.
Savoy and Dauphine to the West; and Velais to the North. It is in length about
114. Miles, and in breadth 80.

This Country was formerly comprehended in Gallia Sub-alpina, History.
and afterward in Lombardy. The Taurins, Salassians, Segusians, Libicians, and
several other people did heretofore inhabit it. But yet it is not well agreed
upon how it came to be the possession of the Duke of Savoy. The Duke's Eldest
Sons bear the Title of Princes of Piedmont. It is very considerable for its
fertility, good Air and the Wealth of the Inhabitants: it abounds with Corn,
Wine, Fruits, Venison, Cattle, Hemp, Minerals. It contains besides Baronies and
Lordships, 15 Marquisates, 52 Earldoms, and 160 Walled Towns or Castles.

This Province may be divided into ten parts, viz. 1. The Dukedom of Aost Aost.
Bish. 2. The Principality of Masserene Masseran. 3. The Seignory of Verceils
Verceils. Bish. 4. The Marquisate of Ivrea Ivrea. Bish. 5. The County of Asti
Asti. Bish. 6. Proper Piedmont Turin. Archb. Cap. 7. The Marquisate of Susa
Suza. 8. The Marquisate of Salusses Salusses. Bish. 9. The Valleys of the
Vaudois. 10. French Piedmont Pignerol.


Article I. The Dukedom of Aoste Lat. Ducatus Augustanus.
THIS Duchy lies at the foot of the Alps, betwixt Valais on the North; The
Valleys of Sesia and Lordship of Verceil to the East; Canavese and Piedmont
proper to the South; And the County of Tarentaise to the West. It is the
Country of the ancient Salassi, comprehending six large Valleys, besides that
from whence it is named, which the River Doere divides in the middle. It is
thought that this Dukedom was annexed to Savoy by the Marriage of Count Odon
Son to Humbert. I. with Adelais of Susa Widow of Hermannus Duke of Suabia in
1030.

The remarkable Places here are, Aoste. Bish. Cap. La Sale. Morges. Issogne.
Villeneuve. St. Martin. Chatillon.


I. Aoste.

Aoste Lat. Augusta Salassorum, or Augusta Praetoria. is so called in Latin
either as being built by Augustus, or else as being a Roman Colony. It is a
Bishop's see under the Archbishop of Tarentaise, and has a Triumphal Arch
raised by Augustus, remaining almost entire, besides a Colossus and several
other Monuments of Roman Grandeur. This City is 50 Miles E. of Turin, and was
the Birthplace of the famous Saint Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury.

Article II. The Principality of Masseran.
THIS is a small Territory within the Lordship of Verceils; the only place of
Note here is Massesaw subject to its own Prince, who is of the House of
Ferrari, and is Protected by the Pope. The Town stands upon a Hill 18 N. E. of
Ivrea. 22 N. W. of Verceils and 37 almost N. E. of Turin. Long. 27 d. 48 m.
Lat. 45 d. 10 m.

Article III. The Lordship of Verceils.
THIS Lordship lies between Montferrat, Ivree and Milanese, and is exceeding
fertile and well-peopled. The places of Note here, Verceils, Beile, Sautia, etc.

I. Verceil.

Verceil Lat. Vercellae is situate upon the River Sesse with a Bishopric under
the Archbishop of Milan. It has a good Castle, a Citadel and several
Fortifications, fine Churches, and a famous Hospital. This City flourished
under the Romans, but has had several Masters since their time, for it has been
a Commonwealth, afterward under the Dukes of Milan, and since under those of
Savoy. The Spaniards took it from the latter in 1638. but it was restored again
by the Peace of the Pyrenees. It stands 12 Miles N. of Casal, 40 almost N. E.
of Turin and as many West of Milan, Long. 28 d. 17 m. Lat. 44 d. 50 m.

II. Beile.

Beile is a small Town in the Seigniory of Verceil, and the head of a Territory
belonging to the Duke of Savoy. It stands on a Hill 8 Miles W. of Masseran and
32 N. of Turin, Long. 27 d. 43 m. Lat. 45 d. 3 m.

Article IV. Marquisate of Ivrea.
THIS Marquisate lies between the Lordship of Verceil to East, The Dukedom of
Aost to the North, the Marquisate of Suse to the West, and part of Montferrat
to the South. The only place of Note here is,

Ivrea, Bish. Cap.
Ivrea, Lat. Eporedia, is upon the River Doriabalta with a Bishop See under the
Archbishop of Turin, and a Marquisate belonging to the Duke of Savoy. This
City, according to the Opinion of some Authors, was Built two Years before the
Birth of our Savior, in the Country of the Ancient Salassi, and gave its Name
to this Marquisate, which formerly was so famous under Berengarius, who
contended for the Empire with the French, descended from the Kings of Arles.
Anscharius was Marquess of Ivrea, which came under the Dominion of the Duke of
Savoy in 870. This City is of great importance to the Duke of Savoy, having a
good Castle and other Fortifications. It has been an Imperial City, but the
Emperor Frederick II. and William Count of Holland gave it to Thomus II. in
1242. And in 1344. John Marquess of Montferrat yielded to Amadaeus VI. the
Right he had to it. It stands 22 Miles N. of Turin, 29 E. of Susa, and 32 W. of
Verceil. Long. 27d. 33 m. Lat. 44 d. 55 m.

The Canavese.
Between the City of Ivree, and the River Po, is the Country called Canavese,
which was heretofore part of Montferrat, but now belongs to Piedmont, since it
was left to the Duke of Savoy by the Treaty of Querasque in 1631. There are no
considerable Places in it.

Article V. The County of Asti.
THis County is incircled in Montferrat, and has but Two Remarkable Places,
viz. Asti and Verua.

I. Asti.

Asti, or Ast, Lat. Asta, is an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Milan.
This City is seated on the River Tanare, large and well fortified, with a
strong new Castle, and Citadel. The County formerly depended upon the State of
Milan, but in 1531. Charles V. gave it to Charles III. Duke of Savoy. It stands
16 Miles S. W. of Casal, and 26 E. of Turin. Long. 28 d. 2 m. Lat. 44 d. 28 m.

II. Verua.

Verua lies upon an Eminence, and is very well fortified The Spaniards laid
Siege to it, but to little purpose in 1625. It stands upon the Frontiers of
Montferrat, and the Banks of the Po, 16 Miles N. E. of Turin.

Article VI. Proper Piedmont.
Piedmont, properly so called, lies between the Montferrat on the East, the
Republic of Genoa on the South, the Marquisate of Salusses on the West, and
the Marquisate of Suse, and part of Montferrat to the North.

The Principal Towns and Cities here are, Turin, Archb. Cap. Mondovis, Bish.
Ceve, Marq. Fossano, Bish. Rivoli, Carignan, Princip. Vigon, Savillano, Coni,
Quieras, Quiers, Moncalier, Orbassan,


I. Turin.

Turin, Lat. Taurinum, or Augusta Taurinorum, is seated in a vast Plain, having
the River Po on the right, and the Doire on the left. It is the Residence of
the Dukes of Savoy, who have spared nothing to render it one of the pleasantest
and strongest Towns of Italy. It is adorned with a Senate, a Chamber of
Accounts, an Archbishops See, and an University. There is the Old and New City,
with good Bastions, Walls, and Outworks. The Duke's Palace is very Ancient and
Magnificent, especially the Gallery, which is finely Embellished with a great
number of Paintings, Statues, Arms, Manuscripts, and other Rarities. There is
also to be seen the Genealogies of the Dukes of Savoy; the Celestial Signs
very well represented, and 30000 Volumes in the Library. There are also several
other Beautiful Palaces in the Town, with a great number of Noblemen that form
the Duke's Court, which is one of the most Polisht of Europe. The Streets are
fine, the Houses well Built, the Churches very Magnificent: The Cathedral is
that of St. John, which boasts of having many Relics, especially our Savior's
Winding Sheet. There is a strong Citadel, flanked with Five good Bastions, and
Built by the pattern of that of Antwerp. Turin stands 20 Miles nigh E. of
Pignerol, 78 almost W. of Milan, 100 almost E. of Grenoble, and 120 S. E. of
Geneva. Long. 27 d. 26 m. Lat. 44 d. 34 m.

II. Mondovis.

Mondovis, Mondovi or Mondevi, Lat. Mons Vici, or Mons Regalis, is seated at
the foot of Mount Apennin, two Leagues from the River Tanare, with a Bishopric
under the Archbishopric of Turin. It is large, and the best Inhabited of all
Piedmont after Turin. There is an University, and a Citadel Built in 1573. by
Emanuel Philibert Duke of Savoy, on a Hill, which produces fine white Marble.
This City stands 27 Miles S. of Turin.

III. Ceve.

Ceva, is a little Town and Castle, Eight Miles S. E. of Mondovi. It is the
Capital of the Country of the Langhes, and has the Title of a Marquisate. The
Country about is full of Game, especially Pheasants and Partridges.

IV. Fossano.

Fossano, Lat. Fossanum, is seated on the River Stura, with a Bishopric
Suffragan of Turin, erected by Gregory XIII. It stands 24 Miles S. of Turin.

V. Rivoli.

Rivoli, is a small Town on the River Dora, about 7 Miles W. of Turin. It has a
very Sumptuous Castle.

VI. Carignan.

Carignan, is situated upon the Po, over which it has a fine Bridge, with the
Title of Principality: It has a strong Castle, and its Soil abounds with
Mulberry-Trees for the Silkworms. Thomas Francis of Savoy, Fifth Son of
Charles Emanuel, first of that Name Duke of Savoy, and Catharine Michelle of
Austria bore in this Age the Title of Prince of Carignan. He was great Master
of France, and died in 1656. In 1625. he Married Mary of Bourbon, Daughter to
Charles of Bourbon, and begot on her Joseph Emanuel, John who died in 1656.
Eugen Maurice Count of Soissons, Annudeus Ferdinand, Charlotte Christine, both
dead young, and Louise Christine Married to Ferdinand Maximilian. Carignan was
taken by the French in 1691. and retaken in the same Year by the Duke of Savoy.
It stands 8 Miles S. of Turin.

VII. Vigon.

Vigon, is a little but fortified Place by the River Chison, 13 Miles S. W. of
Turin.

VIII. Savillano.

Savillano, or Savigliano, Lat. Savilianum, is a great Town upon the River
Magra, under the Duke of Savoy, between Fossano to the East, and Salusses to
the West, six Miles from either, and 22 S. of Turin. It is the Head of the
Territory that bears its Name, and has a very pleasant and advantageous
Situation, between two Rivers, which renders it capable of being made very
strong; wherefore also Philibert Emanuel Duke of Savoy thought to make it the
Capital of his Dominions.

IX. Coni.

Coni, Lat. Cuneum, is a strong Town and Castle Situated upon a Hill at the
Confluent of two little Rivers, the Stura and Ges. Its Situation renders it
naturally strong. It held out against Francis I. but in 1641. the Count De
Harcourt, under Lewis XIII. made himself Master of it. Lewis the XIVth. was not
so Successful in 1691. for he was forced to raise the Siege. This Town stands
35 Miles S. of Turin.

X. Quieras.

Quieras, is a small but strong City situate upon a Hill by the River Tanare.
It was there that in 1631. a Peace was made between France, the Empire, the
Spaniards, the Duke of Savoy, and that of Modena. This Town stands 30 Miles S.
E. of Turin.

XI. Quiers.

Quiers, or Chieri, is very strong by its Situation. It was formerly a fine
City, and a Republic, but is now Subject to the Duke of Savoy. This Place is
very famous for the Fustians that are made there, and for the Seed its Soil
furnishes the Dyers withal. The Count of Harcourt won a Battle near it from the
Spaniards. It stands Seven Miles almost E. of Turin.

XII. Moncalier.

Moncalier, is a small Town upon the Po, nigh Four Miles S. of Turin.

XIII. Orbassan.

Orbassan, is a little Village Six Miles S. W. of Turin, remarkable by the
Battle fought near it, October. 4. 1693. See Pignerol,

Article VII. The Marquisate of Susa.
THis Duchy Borders the County of Morienne in Savoy to the North; Piedmont
proper to East and South, and Mount Genevre to the West. The only Place of Note
here is,

Suse.
Suse, Lat. Susa, Capital of the Marquisate of the same Name, is upon the River
Doere, at the foot of the Alps Cottiae, now called Mount Cenis, and Mount
Genevre, which separate Piedmont from Dauphine. Some Learned Men take this to
be the place where Augustus Erected his Trophy fourteen years before the Birth
of our Savior; the Inscription being still to be seen on a Triumphal Arch in
this City. But others place it at the foot of the Maritime Alps, near to a
place called Tourbie, by a corruption of the word Trophie, and is confirmed by
a piece of Stone, on which are seen part of the Letters composing these words,
Gentes Alpinae Devictae, with the Names of some other Nations. Some are of
Opinion, that Augustus caused the same Trophy to be Erected in two several
Places, and so endeavor to reconcile both these Opinions. The Sepulcher of
Cottus, whence the Cottian Alps take their Name, was to be seen in this Town.
The adjacent Country abounds with Wine and Honey. The French made themselves
Masters of Suse in 1690. without any resistance. It stands 24 Miles N. W. of
Turin, and 19 Miles N. of Pignerol. Long. 26 d. 50 m. Lat. 44 d. 46 m.

Article VIII. The Marquisate of Salusses.
THis Marquisate lies at the foot of the Alps betwixt Piedmont Proper on the
East, the Valleys of the Vaudois on the North, Dauphine on the West, and the
County of Nice on the South. It was formerly in the Possession of the French
Kings, but Henry IV. gave it to Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy, in exchange for
Bresse, Bugey, and some other places on this side the Alps in 1600. The River
Po takes its rise in this Country from the Mountain Viso, the highest of the
Alps. The Marquisses of Saluces have caused a Vault to be hewed here out a Rock
Four Miles long, for the more commodious conveying of Merchandises from Italy
to France. It is said that the Family of the Marquisses of Salusses had its
beginning from one William an Italian Count who lived in 910. This Marquisate
has above 50 Castles, besides the Towns, of which the most remarkable are,
Salusses, Bish. Cap. Carmagnole, Stafarde, Revel, Droner, Cental,
Roquespaviere, etc.


I. Salusses.

Salusses, or Saluces, Lat. Salutiae, or Augusta Vagicinorum, stands upon a
pleasant Hill, having a very fine and good Castle, and Magnificent Cathedral,
which deserves to be viewed, being a Bishop's See under the Archbishopric of
Turin. This Town was taken by, and retaken from the French in 1691. It stands
not far off the River Po, 12 Miles nigh S. of Pignerol, and 22 S. W. of Turin.
Long 27 d. 8 m. Lat. 44 d. 15 m.

II. Carmagnole.

Carmagnole, is a place of great Importance for its good Fortress. Charles
Emanuel Duke of Savoy made himself Master of it in 1588. during the Civil Wars
of France, and also subjected the Marquisate of Salusses, which was afterward
left him by a Treaty in 1600. This Town was taken by the French in 1691. but
they lost it again the same Year. It stands Two Miles from the River Po, Nine
Miles S. of Turin.

III. Stafarde.

Stafarde, is a small Town Four Miles N. of Salusses, Battle of Stafarde.
remarkable only for the Victory which the French obtained there over the Duke
of Savoy's Army, August 1690. This was the first Battle that his Highness was
present at, wherein he signalized both his great Courage and Conduct; but his
Forces being raw and undisciplined, were over-matched. The Loss of the
Confederates was about 800 Men Killed, and as many Wounded or Taken, that of
the French was not above 500.

Article IX. The Valleys of the Vaudois.
THE Vaudois have made themselves so famous in this late War, by their Vigorous
Sallies upon the French, that it will not be amiss to speak a word of their
Original and Habitation. The Name of Vaudois was given to those poor Men of
Lions, who were the Followers of Peter of Vaud or Valdo, a Rich Merchant of
Lions about 1160. who seeing a Friend of his die at a Feast, began to think
seriously of Eternity, and study the Holy Scriptures. He discovered the Errors
of the Roman Church, and acquainted his Friends and the Poor, (who continually
received the Effects of his Bounty and great Charity) with them, but had no
thoughts of making himself Chief of the Sect, until the Clergy Excommunicating
him, and Persecuting some of his Disciples, they retired into the Valleys of
Piedmont, where they found some Ancient Christians that were also called
Vaudes. Their Opinions little differ from those of the Church of England.

The Valleys of the Vaudois lie betwixt the French Piedmont on the West and
North. Piedmont Proper on the East, and the Marquisate of Salusses on the
South. They are divided into Five Remarkable Valleys, viz.

The Valley of 1. Pragelas or Cluson, 2. Perouse, 3. St. Martin, 4. Angrogne,
5. Lucerne.


In the Year 1688. the Duke of Savoy at the solicitation, and by the help of
the Dragoons of the French King Persecuted the poor Inhabitants of those
Valleys, who having made all the defense they could to preserve their Religion
and Liberties were at last taken Prisoners and cast into a Jayl, where a great
number of them died; the rest, at the solicitation of the Reformed Cantons of
the Switzers, being allowed to go where they listed, most of them retired into
the Marquess of Brandenburg's Territories, who received them with a great deal
of Charity, and gave them Lands to Cultivate. But in 1690. the Duke of Savoy at
his Majesty of Great Brittain's Request recalled these Refugees to their own
Country, and restored them to their Privileges.

Article X. French Piedmont.
THat part of Piedmont which now belongs to the French, lies between Piedmont
Proper, and the Valleys of the Vaudois. The Places of Note here are, Pignerol,
Perouse, Brigueras.


I. Pignerol.

Pignerol, Lat. Pinarolo or Pinarolium, is situated between the Mountains upon
the River of Cluson or Chison. This Town is very well fortified, and has a very
good Citadel Built upon a Rock. It belonged to the Duke of Savoy, and served
as an Appennage to the youngest Sons of that House; but the French have been
Masters of it since the Year 1631. by a secret Treaty held at Queiras by the
cunning fetches of Cardinal Richelieu. The Duchess Dowager of Savoy, who was
of the French Blood, put it into the French King and his Successors Hands, with
all its Appurtenances and Sovereignty, and the King, besides Alba and the
Albesan which he gave up to him, paid also a Sum of Money in pursuance of the
Treaty. This Town stands 20 Miles almost S. W. of Turin, and 43 Miles almost E.
of Ambrun. Long. 27 d. Lat. 44 d. 26 m. There is a Fort called St. Brigide,
which has Communication with the Citadel by a covered Way, and subterraneous
Passages. The Duke of Savoy at the Head of the Confederate Forces, took it in
the Summer in 1693. But instead of going on vigorously with the Siege of the
Town and Citadel, left it blocked up, and went to Fight Catinat the French
General, who lay Encamped with 12 or 14000 Men betwixt the Mountains of
Fenestrelles and Rossa, Seven or Eight Leagues North-west of Pignerol; but when
they were gone so far, they perceived they could not come at him; so that after
much time lost they went back, and opened the Trenches before Pignerol in
September. Catinat by this time having reinforced his Army by the Detachments
that were sent him, from Germany and Catalonia, and coming to the Relief of
Pignerol, the Confederates raised the Siege, and having blown up the Fort St.
Brigide, went to meet him near the Village called Orbassan 10 Miles N. E. of
Pignerol; as many N. W. of Carmagnole, and about Six S. W. of Turin, in the
Plain called Marseillane. The two Armies Engaged on the 4th of October 1693.
Battle of Marseillane.
The Battle was fought on both sides with great courage and resolution, but a
last the left Wing of the Confederates Army being overpowered by the French,
who were much Superior to them in number, his Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy
commanded a Retreat, which was executed in very good order; the Germans
carrying Seven or Eight Pieces of Cannon along with them, and the Spaniards
Five or Six. The French got the Victory, yet was their Loss greater than that
of the Confederates, for their Army which before the Battle consisted of 36000
Men, was by their own Confession reduced to 30000. That of the Duke of Savoy
consisted of 22000, of which they found but 5500 missing, viz. 1500 of the
Emperor's Troops, as many of his Majesty's of Great Britain, and Duke of
Savoy's Forces. and 2500 of the Spaniards. The most considerable Loss of the
Confederates was Duke Schomberg, who having done Wonders at the head of his
Regiment, received a Mortal Wound, of which he died 13 days after.

CHAP. III. The County of Nice.
THis County lies between the State of Genoa, and part of Piedmont on the East;
Bounds.
the Mediterranean Sea, called here Mare di Genoa, or Riviera di Ponente on the
South, Provence in France on the West, and Piedmont on the North.

This Country is for the most part rough and mountainous, Quality.
yet it is so well manured that they have little need of their Neighbors; only
some Places are defective in Wheat, which they are supplied with from Piedmont
and Provence. It is divided into Six parts, viz.

The Vicariates of 1. Nice, Bish. Cap. 2. Barcelonnette, 3. Solpello, 4. Puerin.


The Counties 5. Bueil, 6. Tend.


To which we may add the Principality of Oneglia, incircled in the State of
Genoa, which belongs to the Duke of Savoy, and that of Monaco which belongs to
its own Prince.

The most Remarkable places in the County of Nice, are, Nice, Bish. Cap. Villa
Franca, Monaco, Princip. Oneglia, Princip. Tend, Barcellonette.


I. Nice.

Nice, Lat. Nicia, is seated upon the Shore of the Mediterranean Sea, at the
foot of the Alps, with a capacious Haven, and one of the strongest Castles in
Europe, between the River Vas and Villa Franca. It has the Title of an Earldom
and Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Ambrun, and was Built by those of
Marseilles, and probably took its Name from some Victory they obtained against
the Ligurians. The City at present is great, splendid, and populous; it has a
Cathedral, three Parishes, one College, and several Religious Houses. The
Amphitheatre that is still to be seen here, with the Inscriptions of other
Roman Monuments, are abundant Testimonies of the Antiquity of this City. It
belonged to the Earls of Provence till 1635. when Queen Joan left it to Lewis
II. Duke of Savoy, with the County belonging to it, and has ever since been
Subject to that Family, till the Year 1691. when it was taken by the French. In
1543. Nice was taken by Francis of France, and by the Turks under Barberosse,
who appeared before it with 200 Sail, but neither of them was able to take the
Castle. It stands 68 Miles S. of Pignerol, 78 almost S. of Turin, and 72 S. E.
of Ambrun. Long. 26 d. 52 m. Lat. 43 d. 18 m.

II. Villa Franca.

About three Miles East of Nice is Villa Franca, a Town and strong Castle, now
Subject to the French, who took it in 1691. It has a large Port on the
Mediterranean Sea.

III. Monaco.

Monaco, or Mourges, is a Principality between Nice and Oneglia, composed of
three little places, viz. Monaco, Roccabruna, and Menton. The access to Monaco
is difficult, and the Castle is Built on a steep Rock, washed by the Sea where
the Port is. It is the Monaecium, or Herculis Monoeci Portus of the Latins.
This Principality under the Protection of France belongs to the Family of
Grimaldi. Monaco stands Eight Miles E. of Nice. Long. 27 d. 4 m. Lat. 43 d. 17
m.

IV. Oneglia.

Oneglia, is a Sea-Town and Principality incircled in the State of Genoa, and
belonging to the Duke of Savoy. This Territory consists of a very pleasant
Valley, extremely fruitful in Olive Trees, Wine, and all other sorts of Fruits.
The City was Bombarded by the French in 1692. It stands 42 Miles E. of Nice.
Long. 27 d. 45 m. Lat. 43 d. 28 m.

V. Tenda.

Tenda, is a small Town with a good Castle in the County of Nice, and the Head
of a Territory of that Name. It stands on the River Rodia in the Appennine, 25
Miles N. E. of Nice, and 19 S. of Coni.

VI. Barcelonnette.

Barcelonnette, or Barcelonne, Lat. Barcelona, and Villa Barcelonae, is a Town
and Valley formerly of Provence, but now belonging to the County of Nice. It
was Built in 1231. in the time of Raimundus Berengarius, the Fifth of that
Name, Count of Provence, who called it so in Memory of Barcelona in Catalonia,
whence his Predecessors came into Provence; others say it was Built before, but
being ruined by the Wars, was Rebuilt by Raimundus. It stands 42 N. W. of Nice.

CHAP. IV. Montferrat, Lat. Monsferratus.
MOntferrat lies betwixt Piedmont on the North and West, the State of Genoa on
the South, Bounds. Extent.
and Milan on the East. Its Extent North and South is about 65 Miles, and about
36 East and West.

This Country is Mountainous in most Places, yet it is exceeding fruitful in
all things; Quality.
and comprehends near 200, either Boroughs, Castles, or Towns, with the Title
of Marquisate and Dukedom.

This Province was formerly part of Lombardy. History.
It has had particular Lords since the beginning of the Tenth Century. The
Emperor Charles V. gave it to the Duke of Mantua, notwithstanding the Duke of
Savoy's, and the Marquess of Saluces's Claim to it, which caused the War of
Montferrat begun in 1613. after the Death of Gonzague II. Duke of Mantua.
Diverse Treaties, as, of Verceille in 1614. of Ast in 1615. of Pavia in 1617.
could not end this War, which was like to inflame all Italy; but at last a
Peace was happily thus concluded at Queiras in 1613. Victor Ame Duke of Savoy
had that part of Montferrat, on this side of the River Po, and beyond the
Tever; and the rest of the Province was yielded to the Duke of Mantua, who sold
the Capital City, and Important Place of Casal to the French King in 1681.

Monferrat is divided into four parts, viz.

1. The Territory of Casal -- Casal. Bish. Cap.

2. The Territory of Trino -- Trino.

3. The Territory of Alba -- Alba. Bish.

4. The Territory of Acqui -- Acqui.

Of these the first is under the French, the second and third under the Duke of
Savoy, and the last under the Duke of Mantua.

Article I. French Monferrat.
THE only place under the French in Monferrat is

Casal.
Casal or Cazal of St. Vas Lat. Casale or Bodincomagus, is seated upon the Po
between Turin and Valence, and is one of the strongest Places in Italy. Pope
Sixtus IV. made it a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Milan in 1474. at the
solicitation of William Paleologue Marquess of Montferrat, then it became
Capital of the Country, and the residence of the Marquisses of Monferrat, who
before that resided at Occimian. Its situation upon the Po is very
advantageous, the Land about it very fertile in all manner of things; it is
defended on one side by a good Citadel, on the other, with a strong Castle,
and is environed with Ditches, strong Walls, and many Bastions and Half-Moons.
The Castle has four great Towers, and as many Half-Moons which cover the
Flanks, with a large Ditch, a Counterscarp and a Coridor lined with Bricks;
besides this the Lodgings are very convenient and fine. The Citadel consists
of six Bastions. The Town it self is pleasant enough, and has several fine
Churches. The Spaniards besieged it under Goncales in the beginning of 1629.
but the approach of Lewis XIII's Army made them retire in the Night. The next
year they lay Siege to it under Spinola, but it was vigorously defended by
Marshall Toiras. The Spaniards besieged again under the Marquess of Leganez in
1640. but the Count of Harcourt drove them from before it, took their Colors,
Artillery, and all their Baggage; killed 2000 Men, and made as many Prisoners.
They were more successful during the disorders of France, for they made
themselves Masters of this important Place in 1652. but it was afterward
rendered to the Duke of Mantua, of whom the King of France bought it in 1681.
in this late War the Duke of Savoy blocked it up from March to October 1693.
when he wanted the Troops employed at the Blockade to reinforce his Army after
the Battle of Marseillane. Casal stands 38 Miles E. of Turin, Long. 28 d. 17 m.
Lat. 44 d. 40 m.

Article II. Monferrat Savoyard, or under the Duke of Savoy.
THE Places of Monferrat belonging to the Duke of Savoy are, Albe. Bish. Cap.
Trin. Bianza. Salugia. Verolongo.


I. Albe.

Albe Lat. Alba Pompeia, is upon the River Tanare with a Bishops See Suffragan
of Milan; it has often been fortified, but to little purpose by reason of the
Neighboring Hills that command it, It has under gone many Vicissitudes in
those latter times, and runs daily to decay for want of Inhabitants. It stands
23 Miles S. E. of Turin, Long. 27 d. 52 m. Lat. 44 d. 17 m.

II. Trin.

Trin or Trino is a small Town nigh the River Po, 8 Miles N. W. of Casal and as
many S. W. of Verceil.

Article III. Monferrat belonging to the Duke of Mantua.
The Places of Monferrat belonging to the Duke of Mantua are, Acqui. Bish. Cap.
Ripalta. Occimiano. Balzola.


I. Acqui.

Acqui Lat. Aquae Statellae or Statiellae, is upon the River Bormia near the
Appennine with a Bishopric under the Archbishop of Milan. It is famous for its
hot Baths, frequented in May and September. The Romans made here fine Stairs
and Tables of Freestone. This Town suffered much in the late Wars of
Monferrat, and is now but a miserable place 22 Miles S. E. of Asti, 30 N. W. of
Genoa and 27 S. of Casal Long 28 d. 22 m. Lat. 44 d. 13 m.

The other Places are not remarkable.

THE MARTIAL-FIELD OF EUROPE
SECT. IV. Catalonia Lat. Catalannia.
CAtalonia is a Province of Spain with the Title of Principality; Name.
its thought that this Name is come from the Goths and Alains that lived there.
The Pyrenees, Bounds.
Gascogne and Languedoc two Provinces of France, border it to the North; the
Kingdoms of Arragon and Valence, to the West; and the Mediterranean Sea to the
East and South.

Its Extent North and South is about 120 Miles and about 160 East and West.
Extent.


The Air is here hot in Summer, yet wholesome, mild and agreeable in the other
seasons. Quality.
The Soil is rough and Mountainous; yet fertile in Corn, Wine, Oil, Flax, and
Fruits: There are also Cork-Trees, Chesnut-Trees, and good Timber. There grows
the Plant called Escorzonera of a mavelous Virtue against Venom, and for sore
Eyes. This Province has several Mines of Gold, Silver, Iron, Alum, Vitriol and
Salt. There are also to be found in the Mountains, Amethists, Alabaster, Azur,
Cristal and Jasper; and Coral upon the most Western Coast.

This Country is Rich by reason of the Trade of it is Sea-Towns. Riches.
Religion.
The only Religion suffered there is the Roman Catholic.

The Principal Rivers here are,

1. Ebro Lat. Iberus, which rises in old Castile, Rivers.
crosses Old Castile, part of Navarre, Arragon and Catalonia and here Washes
Flix, Mora, Tortosa and runs into the Mediterranean Sea.

2. Segro, which rises in the most Northern part of this Province, washes
Puicerda, Balaguer, Lerida and falls into the Ebro near Mequinenca.

3. Alagas which on the one side seperates Arragon from Catalonia and falls
into the Ebro a little below the meeting of that River with the Segro.

4. Noguera Kibagorzana, and la Noguera Palloresa which fall both into the
Segro.

5. Lobregat which rises toward the North of this Provinces and discharges it
self into the Sea eight Miles E. of Barcelona.

6. The Ter which rises toward the middle of this Province, washes Girona and
falls into the Sea.

7. Tech which rises in the most South-Western parts of the County of
Roussillon, and there washes Es Bola and Elna, and falls into the Sea.

8. Tet rises in the most Western parts of Roussillon, washes Perpignan and
discharges it self into the Sea.

Catalonia has the Duchy of Cardona and the two Counties of Cerdagna and
Roussillon. Division.
The whole Province is divided into 17 Viguerys or Viguiers Jurisdictions, viz.

The Viguerys of Cities of Note in the Viguerys. To the South, 1. Barcelona
Barcelona. Bish. Cap. 2. Villa Franca de Panades. Villa-Franca de Panades. 3.
Tarragona Terragona. Archbp. To the West, 4. Tortosa Tortosa. Bish. Flix.
5. Balaguer Balaguer. 6. Lerida Lerida. Bish. In the Middle. 7. Monblancq
Monblancq. 8. Tarrega Tarrega. 9. Agramunt Agramunt. 10. Cervera Salsona. Bish.
Cardona. Duchy.
11. Manresa Manresa. Monserrat. Monast.
12. Vich Vich. Bish. 13. Campredon Campredon. To the North, 14. Puicerda
Puicerda. La seu d'Vrgel. Bish.
15. Villa Franca de Conflent. Villa Franca de Conflent. To the East. 16.
Perpignan Perpignan. Elna. Collioure.
17. Girone Girone. Bish. Roses.


Charles Martel King of France assisted the Catalonians against the Moors,
History.
who had established their Empires in Spain. Lewis the Meek took Barcelona from
these Infidels, and Catalonia had its particular Princes until it was united to
Arragon. Some pretend that it was made a County in 873. by Charles the Bald,
and others think Charles the Burley erected it into a County in 884. Godfrey or
Wilfred the Hairy, first Hereditary Count of Catalonia, is a Branch of the
Princes who possessed that Country, as was said before. The Catalonians put
themselves under the French in 1640. Joseph Margaret a Gentleman of that
Country, being a great instrument of the Revolution, in shaking the Spanish
Yoke and submitting to the French Kings, who kept their Viceroys and Governors
there; but this Province became the Theater and Seat of War for almost 20
years, until it was ordered by the 42 and 43 Articles of the Treatise of Peace
concluded between the Crowns of Spain and France in 1659. That the Pyrenean
Mountains should part both the Kingdoms, by which agreement Catalonia and the
greatest part of the County of Cerdagne that are beyond the Mountains were
adjudged to the Spaniards; and the County of Roussillon, a little of that of
Cerdagne, with the whole Conflent, which are of this side, left to the French.

Article I. Description of the Places of Note belonging to the King of Spain in
Catalonia.
I. Barcelona.

BArcelona, the Capital City of Catalonia belonging to the King of Spain, is a
Seaport of the Mediterranean, bears the Title of a County, has a Sovereign
Court and University, a Court of Inquisition, and a Bishopric under the
Archbishop of Taragona. It is a great rich, fair and well fortified City. There
is a great Trade especially in Cloths and Blankets called Castelognes. Some
Authors are of opinion that it was built by Amilcar Barca a Carthaginian
Captain about 300 years before the Birth of our Savior. It is the Town Ptolomy
calls (...); Saint Paulinus, Barcinus; Jornandes, Barcelona; and others,
Barcina and Barcelona; and think it is the place Plinius calls Faventia. It is
situated in a Plain by the Seaside; there is the Old and New Town, parted by a
Wall, and round both is a strong Rampart, with Towers and some Bastions, and a
very deep Ditch. At this time the King of Spain is about raising new
Fortifications to oppose the French in case they should have in this Campaign
any Design upon this City. The Cathedral is a stately Building, as are most of
the other Churches; the Streets are Great and very Clean, and the Key is very
convenient and safe, being sheltered from the Winds of one side by Mount I^i,
and by another lesser Hill on the other side; at the end of the Key is the
Light-House and a little Fort. This City was under the Romans, but in the year
of Christ 412. During the Reign of the Emperor Honorius, it was taken by
Athaulphus King of the Visigoths or West-Goths, the Husband of Placidia
Honorius's Sister, and from thence forward it was the Seat of the Kings of that
Nation, whence comes the Name of Gottalonia, and Cattalonia. In time they
conquered the rest of Spain, and then Toledo became the Royal City till it was
taken by the Saracens. King Athaulphus was murdered at Barcelona in 415. in
the VIIIth. Century: when the Saracens settled themselves in Spain, they became
Masters of Barcelona; the Spaniards endeavored to retake it but in vain. The
French took it in 801. Afterward it was subject to the Princes of Catalonia,
till this Province was annexed to Arragon. Its Governors had the Title of
Counts. It stands 52 Miles E. of Tarragona, 60 N. of the Isle Majorca; 134
almost S. of Narbonne; and 300 E. of Madrid. Long. 20 d. 33 m. Lat. 40 d. 34 m.

II. Villa Franca de Panades.

Villa Franca de Panades is a pretty large Town in Catalonia, the Head of a
Viguery 24 Miles N. W. of Barcelona, and 26 N. E. of Tarragona.

III. Tarragona.

Tarragona Lat. Tarraco is a Sea-Town with an Archbishopric and University. It
was built and fortified by the Scipio's upon the descent of a Hill near the
Sea, where it has a Port fit for no other Vessels but Barks. The Spaniards brag
that it was never taken. The Moors surrounded it with Walls and it has since
their time been very regularly fortified. As for its Trade and Riches they are
nothing near so considerable as formerly. The Province of Tarragona; called
Tarraconensis by the Ancients comprehended the Country of the Celtiberians,
Vascones, Coserani, Lasetani, Indigetes, Cerretani, Castellani, Jaccetani,
Hergetes, Carpentani, Edetani. Now all the Province of Tarragona contains
Murcia, Valencia, Catalonia, Aragon, Navarra, Biscay the Asturies, Galicia, the
Kingdom of Leon, and almost both the Castiles. This City stands 54 Miles W. of
Barcelona, Long. 19 d. 26 m. Lat. 40 d. 36 m.

IV. Tortosa.

Tortosa Lat. Dertosa, or Dertossa or Dertuse, stands near the Mediterranean on
the River Ebro 44 Miles W. of Tarragona and 34 of Barcelona, Long. 18 d. 27 m.
Lat. 40 d. 32 m. It is a small but a strong and ancient City and Castle. The
French took it in 1649. but they lost it again the next year after.

V. Flix.

Flix is a very strong Castle on the River Ebro 26 Miles N. of Tortosa, subject
to the King of Spain.

VI. Balaguer.

Balaguer or Balaguier Lat. Bellagurium, and Valaguaria, and according to some
Bergusia, stands at the foot of a steep Hill on the River Segre, 19 Miles N. E.
of Lerida, and 60 almost N. of Tarragona. Long. 18 d. 52 m. Lat. 41 d. 30 m.
This City was taken by the French under the Command of the Count of Harcourt,
in 1645. after he had defeated the Spanish Army which came to relieve it.

VII. Lerida.

Lerida, or Lelida Lat. Ilerda, in the Roman Times was the Capital of that part
of Spain, they called Tarraconensis. It is a strong place built upon a rising
ground, but declining to the River Segre, taken from the Moors in 1143. and
made a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Tarragona. It is famous for the
many Sieges it has suffered, and the Battles fought under its Walls, during the
Wars between Spain and France. In 1644, 46, and 47. In an Attack the French
made upon it in 1646. they were beaten off and lost all their Canon. Near this
place Julius Caesar gained the Victory over Afranius and Petreius that sided
with Pompey. Here is an University which has been famous heretofore, and where
Pope Calixt III. and St. Vincent Ferrier took their Degrees. This City lies 18
Miles S. W. of Balaguer, 60 almost N. of Tarragona, and 100 N. W. of Barcelona,
Long. 18 d. 36 m. Lat. 41 d. 22 m.

VIII. Monblancq.

Monblancq, is a small Town on the River Francoli, the Head of a Territory of
the same Name, 19 Miles almost N. of Tarragona.

IX. Tarrega.

Tarrega, is another small Town, on the River Cervera, 18 Miles almost N. of
Monblancq, the Head of a Viguary.

X. Agramunt.

Agramunt, is a Borough 45 Miles N. of Tarragona, on the Rivulet Sio, the Head
of a Viguary.

XI. Salsona.

Salsona, or Solsona, is seated at the foot of the Mountains, on the small
River Cardoner, with a Bishopric Suffragan of Tarragona. It is thinly peopled,
but pretty strong, and now under the French. It stands 56 Miles almost N. of
Tarragona, and 68 almost N. of Barcelona. Long. 19 d. 52 m. Lat. 41 d. 30 m.

XII. Cardona.

Cardona, is a small Town with the Title of a Duchy, situated upon a River of
this Name, about two Leagues from Solsona, and seven or eight from Montferrat.
It is Renowned for giving its Name to Lords of the House of Folch, who raised
themselves by their proper Merit, and whereof there have been many Cardinals
and other Prelates, and some who have had very Illustrious Alliances with the
Royal House of Arragon, and with the greatest Families of Spain. It is also
famous for its Salt-Mines, which yield a yearly Revenue of 30000 Pieces of
Eight. The Dukedom of Cardona contains three or four Villages besides the Town:
The Duke being one of the Richest Grandees of Spain, and possessing besides it
three Dukedoms, four Marquisates, and two Earldoms: He lives mostly at Madrid,
but sends hither every three years a new Governor, the King of Spain having
nothing to do with this City. It is the freest in Spain, and besides the Tenth
of the Corn and Wine paid to the Duke, it never pays any Tribute to him or
the King. It is governed by a Council and Four Consuls chosen every Year by
Lot; so that no Man of the Council can serve again till three years are
expired. This Town stands 52 Miles N. E. of Tarragona. Long. 20 d. Lat. 41 d.
22 m.

XIII. Manresa.

Manresa, is a small City upon the River Cardoner, once a Bishopric under the
Archbishop of Tarragona. It stands 42 Miles N. E. of Tarragona.

XIV. Montserrat.

Montserrat, is a Monastery six Miles S. W. from Manresa, famous for the great
number of Pilgrims that come thither out of most parts of the World.

XV. Vich.

Vich, or Vigue, Lat. Aula Nova, Corbio Vicus, and Aquae Voconiae, is a small
City upon the Ter with a Bishopric Suffragan of Tarragona. It stands 26 Miles
almost W. of Girona, and 42 Miles N. of Barcelona.

XVI. Campredon.

Campredon, is a small inconsiderable Place, about 30 Miles almost N. of Vich.

XVI. Puicerda.

Puicerda, or Puy-Cerda, is a small City, the Capital of the County of
Cerdagne, on the River Segra in the Pyrenaean Hills, 48 Miles W. of Perpignan,
and 92 N. of Barcelona. Long: 20 d. 22 m. Lat. 42 d. 3 m.

XVII. La seu de Urgel.

Vrgel, called by the Inhabitants la seu de Vrgel, Lat. Orgelum, Orgia or
Orgella, is seated on the River Segra, with a Bishopric Suffragan of
Tarragona; it had Counts of great Power under the second Line of the Kings of
Arragon. The French made themselves Masters of it in 1691. It stands five
Leagues from the Borders of France, and 96 Miles almost N. of Barcelona. Long.
19 d. 46 m. Lat. 42 d. 3 m.

XVIII. Girona.

Girona, Lat. Gerunda, is a very Ancient City upon the River Ter, with a
Bishopric Suffragan of Tarragona, indifferently well fortified. There is one
broad Street that runs the whole length of the City, with several good Suburbs.
In 1684. the French under the Command of Marshall Bellefond lay Siege to it,
and endeavoring to take it by Storm, were shamefully beaten off with Loss of
6000 Men. Girona stands 20 Miles off the Mediterranean Sea, 50 Miles S. of
Perpignan, and 58 N. E. of Barcelona. Long. 21 d. 20 m. Lat. 41 d. 25 m.

XIX. Roses.

Roses, Lat. Rodopolis, once a City, now only a Castle, and a small Town, with
a large Harbor on the Mediterranean Sea, very strong and regularly fortified.
It stands 30 Miles South of Perpignan, and 90 S. W. of Barcelona. This Place
was first fortified by Charles V. before which it was only a Monastery. Though in
the Time of the Romans it had been one of the most considerable Cities in
Spain, supposed to have been Built by the Rhodians, before the Romans were
Masters of this Kingdom, and from them to have taken its Name. It was taken by
the French in 1645. restored by the Pyrenaean Treaty to Spain, but retaken the
last Year 1693. and now in the Possession of the French.

Article II. Catalonia belonging to the French.
THat part of Catalonia yielded to the French by the Treaty of the Pyrenees, is
Rousillon, and the Territory of Conflent.

Rousillon, is an Earldom in the Pyrenean Mountains, Bounds.
having part of the Higher Languedoc to the North, the Sea to the East, and
Catalonia to the West and South.

Quality.
This Country has good Pastures, and is watered by three considerable Rivers,
viz. Egly, Tet, Tech.

It was formerly united to Spain, and made part of Catalonia. John King of
Arragon sold to Lewis II. of France, and King Charles VIII. gave it up to
Ferdinand upon condition he would grant no Succors to those of Naples; but he
kept not his Promise, and yet detained Rousillon, which was ever since subject
to Spain, till Lewis XIV. has retaken it from the Spaniards, and has reunited
it to France by the Peace of the Pyrenees.

Conflent, Lat. Confluentes, is a small Country on the West of Roussillon,
yielded to France by the same Treaty.

The Principal Places here are,

In Roussillon, Perpignan, Bish. Cap. Canet, Elna, Salses, Colliure.


In Conflent, Villa Franca de Conflent.


I. Perpignan.

Perpignan, Lat. Perpinianum, and Paperianum, stands upon the River Tet, three
Leagues from the Sea, and is the Sea of the Bishop of Elna, under the
Archbishop of Narbone since 1684. It is said to have been Built out of the
Ruins of Roussillon, that was a Roman Colony. The Arragonese took this City
from the French about 1473. but they retook it in 1642. and have since that
time so well fortified it with a Citadel and other Works, that it is accounted
one of the strongest Places in Europe. It lies 35 Miles S. of Narbone, and 104
almost N. of Barcelona. Long. 21 d. 22 m. Lat. 42 d. 14 m.

II. Canet.

Canet, is a small Town on the right side of the River Tet two Miles W. of the
Sea, and about seven E. of Perpignan.

III. Elna.

Elna, is also a small Town on the River Tech, about a League from the
Mediterranean, eight Miles S. E. of Perpignan, formerly a Bishop's See.

IV. Salses.

Salses, or Sauses, Lat. Salsulae, is a little Town with a very strong Castle
Built on a Hill near a Lake of the same Name. It was first Built by the
Spaniards to Bridle the Castle of Leucate, which lies within two Miles of it,
but taken by the French in 1640. and yielded to them by the Treaty of the
Pyrenees, with the County of Roussillon. It is 12 Miles N. of Perpignan, and
six W. of the Sea.

V. Colliure.

Colliure, or Collioure, Lat. Camoliberis is a small Town upon the
Mediterranean Sea, with a very good Port. It stands 15 Miles S. E. of Perpignan.

THE MARTIAL-FIELD OF EUROPE
SECT. V. Hungary.
UNder the Name of Hungary, I comprehend here not the Kingdom of Hungary only,
but also those Provinces and States adjoining to it, which make part of
European Turkey, and which for these many Years have been, and are still, as
well as Hungary, the Theater of War. And therefore the Places I design to
describe in this Section, are the 12 following.

1. Hungary, 2. Transylvania, 3. Podolia, 4. Moldavia, 5. Walachia, 6.
Bulgaria, 7. Servia, 8. Rascia, 9. Bosnia, 10. Sclavonia, 11. Croatia, 12.
Dalmatia.
Article I. Hungary, Lat. Hungaria.
Hungary, is an Elective Kingdom, now partly under the Turks, and partly under
the House of Austria, that has made it almost Hereditary. It lies betwixt the
39 and 47 degrees of Longitude, Situation.
and betwixt the 45 and the 49 degrees of Northern Latitude.

This Kingdom, part of the Ancient Pannonia, is called Magiar by the Turks,
Name.
Wiergieskas by the Sclavonians, Hungarland by the Germans, Onheriae by the
Italians and Spaniards, Hongrie by the French, and Hungary by the English.

It is bounded by Transylvania on the East, by Russia and Poland on the North,
Bounds.
by Moravia, Austria and Styria on the West, and by Servia and Bosnia on the
South. Form.
It is square, and its four Corners front the four parts of the World.

The Air is here unhealthful chiefly to Strangers, Air.
and it breeds abundance of Vermin, so that it is not safe to Encamp in one
Place above a Month. Waters.
The Waters except that of the Danube, are not good; there are some Springs
whose Water is Mortal, increasing and decreasing with the Moon, and is quite
dried up when the Moon is full. There are also some Springs which change Wood
to Stone, and Iron to Mud, whence is afterward made the best Copper; hot in
Winter, frozen in Summer. Others whose Water is sourish and salt. They have
also Baths and Medicinal Waters. In the Country of Zolien there is also a
Gulf, whose Pestilential Vapors kill the very Birds that fly over it. The
Soil is very fruitful, so that it is thought Hungary could supply all Europe
with Corn. Soil.
The Pasture-grounds are wonderfully good; and there is such a plenty of Fowls,
Venison. Fowls. Fish.
Fishes, Venison and Cattle, that Country People live commonly on wild Boars
and Stags, and sometimes feed their Hogs with Fish; a Thousand Carps have been
sold under eight Shillings, Cattle. Horses. Mines.
and more than 80000 Oxen have been driven in one Year out of Hungary to
Vienna. There are also good Warlike Horses, and many Salt, Gold, Silver Copper
and Tin Mines; the richest are in the Mountains betwixt Buda and Strigonia.

The highest Mountains here are Crepach or Carpathian Mountains toward Poland
and Transylvania. Mountains. Earldoms.
There were formerly about 77 Earldoms, which are now reduced to 50. The chief
Rivers are,

1. The Danube, or Danaw, Lat. Danubius, the greatest River of Europe, Rivers.
which rises in Germany, at the foot of a Mountain called Abnuba in the Black
Forest in Suabia. It runs through Suabia, Bavaria, Austria, and Hungary, and
here washes Presburg, Komora, Gran, Buda, Belgrade, Semendria, and some other
places of less note, and so goes into Walachia, Servia, and Bulgaria, and
disburthens it self into the Black Sea, by six or seven great Streams, with so
much rapidity, that its Water continues fresh for 20 Leagues. From the Source
to the Mouth are reckoned above 700 Leagues, and all the way a very fine
Country. The upper part is called Danube, and the lower Ister; which latter
name it is by most Authors said to take, at its Cataracts near Axiopolis, It
receives 60 other Rivers, 30 of which are Navigable. The chief are Inn, Iller,
Leck, Ens, Morau, Vag, Drove, Save, Tibisc or Teiss; the four last are in
Hungary. Though this River rise from a very small Fountain, yet there is none in
Europe comparable to it, for length, breadth, and deepness; of its length we
have heard; it is called broad by way of eminence above all other Rivers; for
its depth, Jornandes writes, that it is 200 Foot deep in many places. Then as
to the quality of the River, it is for the most part colored like Whey, and
very wholesome both to Drink and Bathe in. It has many sorts of excellent
Fishes, and some poisonous. It is very often frozen in the Winter. The number
of its Mouths, which is seven in all, is controverted, because two of them are
dead and marshy, but Five great Streams all agree on, of which two only are
Navigable. This River has had many Naval Fights upon it, between the Turks and
Christians; at one time were 20 Galliots 80 small Pinnaces, and little less
than 100 Ships of Burden employed upon it in a Siege of Buda. At the Siege of
Belgrade, Mahomet the Great brought 200 Ships and Galleys up the Stream; the
Hungarians sent a like number from Buda, which after a sharp Encounter, took
many of the Turkish Ships, and forced the rest on Shore, and burned them. In
this present War also, great Fleets have been fitted out on both sides on the
Danube, some of the Ships carrying 30 Guns.

2. The Drove, or Drau, Lat. Dravus, has its Source in the Alps, runs through
Carinthia, Stiria, and Hungary, and here falls into the Danube.

3. The Save, or Saw, Lat. Sava, has its rise in Germany, in the Upper
Carniola, near to Carinthia, and then running Eastward through both the
Carniola's, and separating Sclavonia from Croatia, Bosnia and Servia, after a
Course of 300 Miles falls into the Danube a little above Belgrade.

4. The Teiss or Tibisk, of which it is commonly said that two parts are Water,
and the third Fish.

The other Rivers here of less note are the Raab which forms an Island of the
same Name. The Marisch, the Vag, the Gran, Lakes.
and the Sarvithze which comes out of the Lake Balaton, besides which there are
also the Lakes of Newdsiler and Beczkerk.

The Hungarians are more inclined to War, than to Arts or Trading, Manners.
they are Cruel, Proud, Revengeful, and so divided among themselves, that it is
no wonder if they be exposed to the Barbarians. They speak several Languages,
and chiefly Latin, which is familiar to them. They eat and drink with excess,
and live very nasty in their Houses; yet the Gentlemen live nobly, and are
great Lovers of Horses, Hunting and Feasting. They are only stately in their
Gardens and Baths, and provided their Palaces be large, they care not how ill
furnished they be. They hate the Germans, though the Nobles seem to stick to
the House of Austria, to save themselves from the Oppressions of the Turks, who
value a Peasant as much as a Gentleman.

The greatest strength of this Kingdom consists in light Horse called Hussars;
Strength.
their Foot Soldiers are called Heiduques.

The Clergy, the Barons, the Nobles, and the Royal and Free Towns, Government.
make Four Bodies or States. The States are to meet once in three Years,
according to the Laws of the Country; and they have Right to Elect the
Palatine, who by the Laws of the Land, is to be a Hungarian, and has the whole
direction of the War, and Judicature. Nevertheless Croatia, dependent of
Hungary, has a Viceroy who has as much Authority as the Palatine.

There are in Hungary two Archbishopricks, viz. Strigonia and Colonitz; and 16
Bishoprics, Archbishopricks. Bishoprics.
five under the Archbishop of Strigonia, eight under that of Colonitz, and
three Suffragan of Spalato in Dalmatia.

The Hungarians were Converted to Christianity by Gisle, St. Henry's Sister,
Religion.
Married to their King Stephen, about the Year 1000. In the XVIth Century, the
generality embraced the Protestant Religion, some the Lutheran; and only a few
Noble Families kept to the Romish, but since the late Conquests of the Emperor
of Germany, the Romish has got the upper Hand, and the Protestants there have
been cruelly persecuted. There is also a mixture of Jews, Mahometans,
Anabaptists, Arrians, and Unitarians or Socinians.

Julius Caesar was the first Roman that attacked Hungary, and Tiberius subdued
it. History.
The Goths afterward took it, and this Kingdom became a prey to the Huns and
Lombards, who were turned out of it by the Hongres, a People of Scythia, who
lived mostly on Blood; those that speak of Hungary, reckon Balamer or Balamber
amongst its Kings. They reckon also Aptar, and the two Brothers Bleda killed in
444, and Attila named the Plague of God, who died in 453. having left many
Vestiges of his Expeditions in the other parts of the World, with his Huns (who
were Scythians mixed with Turks, Tartars, Avares and Alans) as Huningen,
Hunaldstein, and many other places of Germany, beginning with the word Hun.
Attila's Children by their Divisions lost their Father's Conquests. About 744.
the Huns made another Incursion into Pannonia, now Hungary, under one Alme, who
had Arphad for Successor. These gave the Name to Hungary. Zultan descended from
Arphad, is said to have been Toxis's Father, who begot Geiza, Father to St.
Stephen, Crowned in 1000. or 1020. by whom begins the Chronological Succession
of the Kings of Hungary. Since that, they were peaceably governed by their own
Kings, until Lewis the Great's Death, whose Daughter and Heiress Married
Sigismund of Luxemburg Emperor of Germany; but his Government being not liked,
they called in Charles Duras King of Naples, and Stephen Vayvode of
Transylvania, combined with Bajazet I. Emperor of the Turks. Thus Hungary's
Misfortunes began, and since 1394. it has almost all along been the Seat of
War, and became a prey to the Turks chiefly under Amurath and Soliman. But in
this present War the Emperor of Germany has retaken most of those places the
Turks did possess in Hungary. This Elective Kingdom is almost made Hereditary,
since the Death of Lewis the Young killed at the Battle of Mohach's in 1526. at
which time the Turks rifled Buda, and burned the Library of Matthias. John de
Zapol, Earl of Scepus, was saluted King by part of the Hungarians, and
Ferdinand of Austria, by the other part, but the last carried it. Since that
time the Emperor of Germany takes the Title of King of Hungary.

In the Year 1687. Joseph the Emperor's Son, was Crowned King of Hungary; and
in case the House of Austria should fail, the Branch of Spain is to succeed to
the Crown. Ceremonies of Coronation in Hungary.
The most remarkable things at the Coronation, were that Ten Hungarian Lords
went before him, each carrying a Standard representing the Ten Provinces which
depend on that Crown. The Archduke made an open Profession of the Christian
Faith, then was covered with St. Stephen's Royal Cloak, and had the Crown put
on his Head, he taking an Oath to preserve the Privileges of the Kingdom.
Mounting his Horse afterward, he rode full Career to another Theater, where,
taking his Cimiter in his Hand, he made four Crosses therewith, toward the four
Corners of the World, to signify that he would defend the Kingdom of Hungary
against all its Enemies.

Chronological Succession of the Forty Nine Kings of Hungary.
Begun in Reigned Y. 1. St. Stephen 1000 or 1020 died in 1031. 2. Peter the
German Deposed 1038 4 3. Ovon or Aban 1042 2 4. Peter the German Restored 1044
2 5. Andrew I. 1046 15 6. Bela I. 1061 2 7. Solomon 1063 11 8. Geiza or Geycza
I. 1074 3 9. Ladislaus I. 1077 7 10. Coloman or Colan 1095 19 11. Stephen II.
1114 18 12. Bela II. 1132 9 13. Geiza II. 1141 20 14. Stephen III. 1161 11 15.
Ladislaus an Usurper 1172 00 6 M. 16. Stephen IV. 1172 00 5 M. 17. Bela III.
1173 23 18. Emeryck 1195 8 19. Ladislaus II. 1204 00 6 M. 20. Andrew II. the
Hiero-Solimitan 1205 30 21. Bela IV. 1235 25 22. Stephen V. 1260 12 23.
Ladislaus III. 1272 18 24. Andrew III. the Venetian 1290 11 Charles I. Martel.
25. Veneslaus 1301 00 26. Otho 1305 00 27. Charles II. Robert or Charobert 1310
32 28. Lewis I. 1342 40 29. Mary 1382 00 30. Charles III. the Small 1383 3 31.
Sigismund 1387 51 32. Albertus of Austria 1438 2 33. Ladislaus IV. 1440 4 34.
John Corvinus Huniades 1445 8 35. Ladislaus V. 1452 6 36. Matthias Corvinus
1458 2 37. Ladislaus VI. 1460 25 38. Lewis II. the Young 1486 11 Interruption.
39. John of Zapol 1526 00 40. John Stephen or Sigismund 1540 00 41. Ferdinand
I. 1527 37 42. Maximilian I. 1564 12 43. Rodolphus 1576 36 44. Matthias 1612 7
45. Ferdinand II. 1619 18 46. Ferdinand III. 1637 20 47. Ferdinand Francis,
Elected in 1657 00 48. Leopold-Ignatius 1657 now Reigns 49. Joseph his Son
elected in 1687

Hungary is generally divided into two, viz. Upper and Lower Hungary. Division.
The first is beyond the Danube toward Poland and Transylvania, and the other
this side the Danube.

I. Upper Hungary.

The most Remarkable Places here are, Presburg, Cap. Newhausel, Nitracht, Bish.
Tyrnaw, Cassovia, or Caschaw, Agria, Colocza, Archb. Zolnock, Waradin, Bish.
Segedin, Temeswar, Giula, Montgatz, Zatmar, Vngwar, Novigrad, Pest, Esperie,
Scaros or Saros, Tokay, Bodrogh, Chonad, Jeno, Kallo, Zemlin.


II. Lower Hungary.

The Places of Note here are, Buda, Cap. Strigonia, or Gran, Archb. Alba
Regalis, Komorrea, Javarin, or Raab, Bish. Vesprin, Bish. Kanisa, Zygeth,
Ginq-Eglises, Mohach, Astenburg, or Owar, Baboisca, Bataseck, or Bachia, Bish.
Darda, Palota.


Description of the Remarkable Places in Upper Hungary.
I. Presburg.

PResburg, called by those of that Country Poson, Lat. Posonium, or Pisonium
and Flexum, is seated upon the left side of the Danube. It is the Capital of
Upper Hungary, and gives its Name to a Province, which lies between Moravia and
Austria, and the Danube. This was the Place of Convention for the Estates,
since the loss of Strigonium, the Metropolitan. This City is pleasant, the
Castle stately, beautiful and well situate on the top of a Hill, and all built
of white Stone. Herein is kept the so highly esteemed Crown of Hungary,
commonly said to have been brought by an Angel from Heaven to St. Stephen,
their King, and of a different Figure from other Crowns. The Garden of the
Archbishop is very fine, the Walks, the Grotto's, the Figure of Jeronymo, the
Labyrinth, Fish Ponds and Fountains are Noble, and worth taking notice of. In
the Dome or Cathedral Church lies the Body of St. Joannes Eleemosynarius,
Bishop of Alexandria. The Jesuits have a part of the same Church, and a Noble
Apothecaries Shop full of Rarities. The Lutherans have also a Noble Church
here. Presburg stands by the Borders of Austria, 34 Miles N. W. of Raab, 46 E.
of Vienna, and 95 almost N. W. of Buda. Long. 38 d. 14 m. Lat. 48 d. 25 m.

II. Newhausel.

Newhausel, Lat. Neofolium, called Owar by the Hungarians, stands upon the
little River Neutra or Nitrach; it is little but strong, and Capital of a large
Country. It is Built in a Moorish Plain, which is hard at the bottom, so that
it is passable every where; Its Fortifications are in form of a Star, with six
Rays, having at each point a high raised Bastion. The place is surrounded with
a Ditch full of Water, of a Rod and a half deep, and eighteen in breadth. It
has only two Gates, and before each of them there is a Half Moon, without any
other Outworks but a covered Way. The Turks made themselves Masters of this
Place in 1663. And on the ninth of July 1685. Prince Charles of Lorrain, with
the general Officers of his Army having reviewed it, resolved to attack it. On
the 16th of August he defeated the Serasquier that marched to relieve it, took
twenty pieces of Cannon, some Mortars with Bombs, and four Standards; three
days after, the Town was carried by Assault after a Siege of 40 days and all
the Garrison put to the Sword. There were 100 Brass Cannons found in it, with
Plate and other Booty, to above the value of two Millions. This Town lies 36
Miles E. of Presburg 12 N. of Komora, and 64 N. W. of Buda, Long. 39 d. 10 m.
Lat. 48 d. 23 m.

IV. Tyrnaw.

Tyrnaw, or Dyrn, or Tyrn, is upon a River of the same name in the County of
Transchin: The Archbishops of Strigonium used to make here their Residence when
Strigonium was in the possession of the Turks. In 1414. twelve Jews and two
Women exercised in this Town an unheard of Cruelty upon a Christian Child; for
having enticed him into their House, they opened his Veins, and receiving the
Blood, drank some and laid the rest up for some other uses; then cut the Body
in pieces, and buried it in a Cellar. Yet Notwithstanding this precaution they
were discovered, apprehended and condemned to be burned alive. When they were
put to the Torture, they were asked what put them upon such a horrible Cruelty.
They answered, it was because they were taught by their Ancestors, that the
Blood of a Christian was a powerful Remedy to stop the Blood in Circumcision;
Secondly, because it was a Philtre which created Love in those that eat Meat
steeped in it, Thirdly, That it did stop the overflowing of the Months and the
Hemorrhoids; Fourthly, That it was to observe their ancient Custom of offering
the Blood of a Christian to God yearly, adding that the Inhabitants of that
City, were enjoined to perform their Sacrifice about that time. This Town
stands 28 Miles North East of Presburg, and 72 almost N. W. of Newhausel, Long.
38 d. 44 m. Lat. 48 d. 44 m.

V. Cassovia

Cassovia or Casehaw, Lat. Cassovia is seated upon the little River Tareza
which empties it self into the Teys. It is the Capital of the County of
Abamwivar, and is very well fortified; and though one at the Royal Free-Towns,
owns the Emperor as King of Hungary, to whom it was subjected in 1685. It has
the best Arsenal in Hungary, and stands 86 Miles N. E. of Buda, Long. 41 d. 50
m. Lat. 48 d. 40 m.

VI. Agria.

Agria, by the Germans called Eger, by the Hungarians, Eclaw, is seated upon a
River of the same name, which about three Leagues farther falls into the
Tibisc, with a Bishopric Suffragan of Strigonia. This City is small, but so
well fortified that it is accounted one of the strongest Holds of Hungary. It
was besieged by Soliman in 1552. without effect. This Siege is so memorable
that 'twill not be amiss to relate some particulars of it. When Soliman came
before this Place with 70000 Men, it was neither strong by Nature or Art, but
the Courage of the Garrison supplied that defect. There were in it 2000
Hungarians and 60 of the chief Nobility, with all their Wives, Children and
Movables. They bound themselves by Oath to hold to the last extremity, and put
all their Provisions into public Magazines, when the Turks summoned them, they
showed them a Coffin from the Battlements, signifying that they would rather
dye than surrender. The Town was battered 40 days with 50 Pieces of Cannon, and
the Turks making three Assaults in one Day, were repulsed with the loss of 8000
Men. The instances of the Courage of Women during this Siege, are almost
incredible. The Turks being so terrified with such Prodigies of undauntedness
in both Sexes raised the Siege, and the Garrison Sallying out, killed a great
number of them, and took all their Baggage. In 1596. Mahomet III. made himself
Master of this Place, after having defeated the Forces sent to relieve it; and
the Infidels, contrary to the Capitulation, Murdered the Garrison. From that
time Agria continued in the Hands of the Turks, till it was retaken by the
Imperialists in 1687. after a Blockade of three years; during which there died
of Hunger and Diseases above 10000 Turks. When the Garrison was forced to
Capitulate, The Governor fearing lest the Imperialists should retaliate, what
had been done in 1596, would not surrender till the Emperor signed the
Articles. Four thousand Inhabitants went out with the Garrison, 300 staid and
demanded Baptism, and abundance of Christian Slaves were released. They left
150 Canons, seven Mortars, and some Provisions behind them. This City stands 38
Miles N. E. of Buda and 50 S. W. of Cassovia, Long. 41 d. 5 m. Lat. 48 d. 2 m.

VII. Colozsa.

Colozsa, is a declining City on the Danube, the head of the County of Bath,
with an Archbishopric taken from the Turk by the Imperialists in 1686. It
stands 54 Miles S. E. of Buda, and 44 S. W. of Zolnock. Long. 40 d. 50 m. Lat.
46 d. 54 m.

VIII. Zolnock.

Zolnock Lat. Zolnochium is a considerable City of Upper Hungary, situate upon
the Tibisc or Teys, and Capital of a County that bears its own Name. It was
taken by the Turks in 1552. and retaken by the Imperialists in 1685. It stands
44 Miles N. E. of Colocza, between Buda and Great Waradin, 56 Miles of each,
Long. 41 d. 43 m. Lat. 47 d. 25 m.

IX. Waradin.

Waradin or Great Waradin, or Wardin, is situate upon the River Kerez, in the
borders of Transylvania, to which Principality of latter times it belonged. It
is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Colozsa, defended by a strong Castle,
that stands on the East, and good Ramparts, with 5 royal Bastions, and a good
regular Ditch, which may be filled upon occasion, with the River-Water. Within,
there is another enclosure of five Bastions, and an high Wall, which may serve
instead of a Citadel. This City was taken by the Crim-Tartars in 1642. who
left it soon after. In 1290. Ladislaus King of Hungary built here the Cathedral
Church. In 1660. it was taken by the Turks, and recovered by the Imperialists
in 1692. after a memorable Siege and Blockade. Waradin stands 75 Miles almost
N. of Temeswar, 90 Nigh W. of Weissenburg, 114 N. of Belgrade, and as many E.
of Buda, Long. 42 d. 55. m. Lat. 47 d. 15 m.

X. Segedin.

Segedin or Seged Lat. Segodunum, is the Capital of the Country of Bodroch, on
the River Teys or Tibisc, near the Mouth of the River Merish, 55 Miles E. of
Colocza, 64 S. W. of Waradin, and 104 S. E. of Buda, Long. 42 d. Lat. 46 d. 26
m. It was taken by the Turks in 1552. and retaken by the Imperialists in 1686.
without much resistance, after the taking of Buda.

XI. Temeswar.

Temeswar is a large and very strong City upon the River Temes, whence it has
its Name, toward the borders of Transylvania. The Turks took it in 1552. and
have fortified it since to that degree, that they now esteem it impregnable.
Its indeed the strongest place they have. It is the Seat of a Bassa, and the
Capital o^ a Beglerbegtick or Government something like a County, bounded on
the North by Chaunad and Transylvania; on the West by the Tibisc; on the South,
by the Danube; and on the East by Moldavia. This City stands 54 Miles N. E. of
Belgrade. 75 S. of Great Waradin and 160 S. E. of Buda, Long. 43 d. 24 m. Lat.
46 d. 6 m.

XII. Giulia.

Giulia or Gula Lat. Julia is a small but fortified City seated on the Lake
Zarkad by the River Feketekerez, and upon the Frontiers of Transylvania. It was
taken by the Turks in 1566. and by them afterward Mortgaged to the Prince of
Transylvania; from whom they have taken it of late. It stands 28 Miles S. of
Great Waradin, and 52 N. W. of Temeswar.

XIII. Montgatz.

Montgatz or, Munkatz is a Fortress in the Earldom of Pereczas, situated on a
steep Rock with a Borough at the Foot of it, well shut up and surrounded with a
Ditch full of Water. A great Marsh is about this Place, so that it seems Nature
has made it impregnable. The Fortress contains three Castles, the first and
highest commanding the second, and the second above the third; all three
surrounded with a Ditch wrought in the Rock, and the passages from one to
another is over three Bridges. The Princess Ragotski, Count Tekely's Wife,
defended this place against a powerful Army, which was forced to raise the
Siege, but after a Blockade of many years, being not able to pay her Troops,
she Capitulated in 1688. and surrendered the Town to the Emperor, and was
conducted to Vienna with her Children, where she was to live quietly without
corresponding with her Husband. Montgatz stands 126 Miles nigh E. of Buda Long.
43 d. 8 m. Lat. 48 d. 28 m.

XIV. Zatmar.

Zatmar is a little but well Fortified Town in the Mountains of Vpper-Hungary
upon the Frontiers of Transylvania. It is Capital of a Country, lately erected
into a County, and belongs to the Emperor. Teckely made himself Master of it in
1680. but the Emperor has regained it since. This Town stands incircled with
the River Samosch 25 Miles almost S. of Montgatz.

XV. Ungwar.

Vngwar or Vnghuar lies at the foot of Mount Crapach, incircled with the River
Vngh upon the Frontiers of Red-Russia. It is the Capital of a County of the
same name, more considerable for its situation and strength than for any other
advantage. The Hungarian Historians pretend that this Town or River gave its
Name to their Kingdom. Count Teckely was master of this place, and kept there
his treasures, with the best things he had, because he thought it impregnable
by its situation; but in 1685. the Imperialists made themselves Masters of it.
This Town stands 42 Miles N. W. of Zatmar.

XVI. Novigrad.

Novigrad is a small but very strong Town in the County of the same name. It is
defended by a Castle built upon a Rock, and encompassed with a Ditch four and
thirty foot deep, cut in the same Rock, which makes it almost Impregnable. In
1594. the Germans took it from the Turks, who re-took it in 1663. but it is now
again under the Emperor. It stands 16 Miles almost E. of Gran, and 22 N. of
Buda.

XVII.. Pest.

Pest Lat. Pestum is a great and fine Town situate upon the Danube, over
against Buda, from whence it yields a delightful prospect by reason of its
Walls, Towers and Mosques. There is a fine Bridge of Boats of half a Mile long
betwixt them. It has often been taken both by the Turks and Christians, and is
now under the Emperor of Germany, since 1686.

XVIII. Esperie.

Esperie is a strong Town on the River Tarkzal; It is the Capital of the County
of Saros, and is famous for its Fairs and Salt Mines. It is subject to the
Emperor, and stands 14 Miles off the borders of Poland, and 15 N. of Cassovia,
Long. 41 d. 57 m. Lat. 48 d. 54 m.

XIX. Saros or Scaros.

Saros, is a strong Castle, in a County of the same name, subject to the
Emperor. It stands upon a Hill two or three Miles almost N. of Esperie.

XX. Tokay.

Tokay is a very strong Town and Citadel, seated in an Island made by the
River Teys and Bodroch. It is the Capital of the County of Semlin. Count
Teckely made himself Master of it in 1683. but the Emperors Forces retook it in
1685. It stands 66 Miles almost N. of Great Waradin, and 74 E. of Buda.

XXI. Brodrogh.

Bodrogh or Bodroch is seated on the Danube, and was formerly the Capital of a
County of the same name. It is in the possession of the Imperialists since the
Conquest of Buda and Segedin, in 1686. and stands 90 Miles S. E. of the former,
and 30 W. of the latter.

XXII. Chonad.

Chonad Lat. Canadis is situated on the River Mericz, not far from the Place
where it empties it self into the Teys, upon the Frontiers of Transylvania. It
is a Capital of a County of the same name subject heretofore to the Grand
Signior, but in the possession of the Imperialists since 1685. It is a Bishops
See under the Archbishop of Colocza, and stands 15 Miles E. of Segedin.

XXIII. Jeno.

Jeno or Geno, is a strong Castle in the County of Waradin subject to the
Turks. It stands on the River Feketekerez 17 Miles S. of Great Waradin.

XXIV. Kallo.

Kallo is a Town of Vpper-Hungary seated in a kind of a Lake, on the River
Kello. It is subject to the Emperor, and stands 24 Miles S. E. of Tokay, and 48
almost N. of Great Waradin.

XXV. Zemlin.

Zemlin is the Capital of a County of the same name, seated on the River
Bodrach among several Branches, 24 Miles N. E. of Tokay and 32 W. of Mongatz.
It is subject to the Emperor.

Description of the Remarkable Places in Lower-Hungary.
I. Buda.

BVDA or Offen is the Capital City of Hungary, and formerly the ordinary
residence of its Kings, because of its pleasant situation. Sigismund, King of
Hungary, who was Crowned in 1387. and was afterward Emperor, beautified it
with several sumptuous Palaces, and caused the Castle to be built, where
afterward his Successors kept their Court. This City passed for one of the
Beautifullest of the Kingdom, before the Turks had it; but whilst it was in
their possession, they suffered the finest Buildings to fall to ruin. It is
built on the right side of the Danube, upon a Mountain which makes its
situation very advantageous. Pest is on the other side, a little below it, and
there is commonly a Bridge of 60 Boats, which serves for a Communication from
the one to the other. The lower City, called Wasserstadt, or Town of the Jews,
which is like a suburb, reaches from the Upper City to the Danube, on the same
side. The Upper City takes up all the Declivity of the Mountain, and is
Fortified with good Walls, which have Towers at certain distances after the
ancient manner. The Castle is at the extremity of the City Eastward, upon a
Hill which commands the greatest part of it. It is surrounded with a very deep
Ditch, and defended with old fashioned Towers, and some modern Fortifications
which take up all the Hill from the Wall of the Upper City to the Danube. This
City was taken by Soliman. In 1526. Ferdinand the Archduke of Austria, retook
it the next year after. In 1529. Soliman made himself Master of it again, after
the Garrison had stood eleven Assaults, and restored it to the Vayvode of
Transylvania, who had lost it before. Ferdinand in 1540, and 1541. Attack d it
again, when Soliman coming the third time to relieve it, raised the Siege and
made himself master of the Place by Stratagem and Surprise, and so took it from
the Queen, whom he came to assist. Matthias the Archduke besieged it again in
1598. and after in 1601. but with no success. The Duke of Lorrain sat down
before it in 1684. from July 14. to November 1. but was forced to raise the
Siege and leave it. He reinvested it the 15 of June 1686. and made himself
Master of it, after a Siege of two Months and a half. Buda stands 135 almost S.
E. of Vienna 140 S. of Cracovia, 165 N. W. of Belgrade, and 675 almost N. W. of
Constantiplr. Long. 40 d. 15 m. Lat. 47 d. 38 m. The last Siege of this City
has been so famous, not only for the importance of the Place, but also for the
vigorous resistance of the Besieged, and the great Courage of the Imperialists,
and of a vast number of Noble Volunteers, that resorted thither from all parts
of Christian Europe, that I hope, I shall oblige most Readers to give here the
Particulars of it, and as for those that are already acquainted with them, they
may skip this Paragraph if they please.

Relation of the Siege of Buda from June 15. 1686. to September 2. in the same
year.
THE 15th of June the two Bodies of the Imperial Army advanced equally; Prince
Charles of Lorrain with the Cavalry encamped at Dotkamp, and the Elector of
Bavaria at Mohatz, opposite to one another, the Danube lying betwixt them. The
same day the Count of Staremberg arrived at Moratz with the Infantry and part
of the Baggage of the Army. The 16th Prince Charles went to incamp with the
Horse at St. Andrew, the Earl of Staremberg with the Foot at Dostkam, and the
Elector of Bavaria at Wailan, so that the Infidels, from the Ramparts could see
the Christians on both sides the Danube. The 18th all the Infantry having
joined the Army, the whole Army marched, and invested the Place on all sides.
They began the same day to make a Bridge of Boats, as well for the Passage of
the Troops of Bavaria, as for Communication with the other side of the Danube,
and afterward resolved to Attack the Town in four different Places. The first
attack, on the side of the lower Town was commanded by Prince Charles, and
carried on the by the Imperial Troops. The second on the side of the Castle, by
the Elector of Bavaria; The third was carried on by the Troops of Saxony; and
the fourth by those of Brandenburg, under General Schoning. The 19th Prince
Charles caus^d the Army to appro^ch to the Baths, and there fixed the General
Quarter, with some Regiments of Foot, within a quarter of a Mile of the City.
On the 21st the Elector of Bavaria marched his Troops over the Bridge, and came
to incamp at the foot of the Mount St. Gerard. The 22d the Prince of Newburg,
Grand Master of the Teutonick Order, arrived in the Camp with Count Dunevald.
The next day the Christians began to batter the Wasserstadt, and having made a
sufficient breach they entered it, whilst the Infidels retired into the Upper
City. On the 30th the Marquess of Turlac arrived in the Camp with the Troops of
Swedeland, and at the same day arrived also the Auxiliary Troops of Franconia
and Suabia, and two Companies of Passau and Ratisbonne. The 2d of July the
Troops of Brandenburg arrived under the Command of the Marshal General
Schoning. The 13th the Christians mounted and made themselves Masters of the
Breach; but the Turks setting Fire to a Furnace, several Volunteers of great
Note, with a great Number of Soldiers, were killed or wounded. The 23d it was
thought fit to summon the Besieged. The Count of Koningseck, Aid de Camp
General, was sent with an Interpreter and a Drummer to make the Summons. The
Turks came to meet him, and took the Letter which they presented to the
Commander. There was a Truce of two Hours made on both sides. The Turks brought
a Letter wrapped in Scarlet, written by the Governor, in answer to that of
Prince Charles; wherein he declared that he was resolved to make a vigorous
defense. After this answer there was great firing made on both sides. The 27th
the Christians gave a General Assault and became Masters of three Towers, at
the three Quarters of Prince Charles, of the Marshal of Schoning, and of the
Elector of Bavaria. The 1st of August the Besieged sent two Agas, who offered
in the name of the Vizier of Buda, to remit this Place, with all its
Dependencies, and what other two Towns the Emperor should make choice of, if he
would make Peace; but as Prince Charles was informed, that the Emperor would do
nothing but with the consent of his Allies, he dismissed the Agas. On the 14th
the Turks who came to the relief of Buda appeared in Battle Array; Prince
Charles fought them, defeated them, took eight Pieces of Canon, and forty
Standards with the loss of 200 Men. The next day, there were found in the Field
2200 dead Bodies of the Infidels. The 22d the Bavarians seized on one of the
Towers of the Castle. The 29th the Succors of the Turks made another attempt
to enter into the City, but they were repulsed by the Christians. The 31st they
got advice that the Grand Vizier was extremely disatisfied with the two Bassa's
who commanded the Troops which the Christians had defeated the 29th, and that
his Army was but of about 30000 Men. Lastly, The 2d of September was the
General Assault given: The Elector of Bavaria accompanied with the Prince of
Baden began it, attacking the Castle. A little while after, Prince Charles of
Lorrain attended by the Prince of Croy, Newbourg and Commerci, the Generals
Souches, Diepenthal, Scherssemberg, and the chief Volunteers of the Army,
marched to the Assault. After a fierce Combat which lasted an hour, the
Governor being killed upon the breach, the Turks lost Courage, and retired in
disorder to the foot of a Wall of the Castle. The Imperialists being entered
the City made a terrible Slaughter. The Elector of Bavaria found a stronger
resistance at the Castle; for the Turks who were therein their Retrenchments,
not knowing that the City was taken, defended themselves with a great deal of
Courage; at last, being overpowered, they set fire through despair, to several
places of the City. After a great Massacre, the Elector of Bavaria caused
Quarter to be given to near 2000 Men, who were retired into the Castle, whilst
the Earl of Coningseck carried the same orders to the Imperialists from Prince
Charles of Lorrain. This they did, because the Infidels might have defended
themselves yet a great while, for they had at their Head, the Aga of the
Janissaries with the Bassa's Lieutenant, the Mufti, and several other Officers,
who were made Prisoners by the Bavarians. Most of the Women and Children were
also saved. The Infidels being disarmed some were conducted to a Mosque, and
the rest left in the Castle, whilst the Fire they had kindled in the City raged
so far, that the Walls of the Houses hardly escaped its fury. The next Day the
two Generals visited the Place, and found in it above 400 Pieces of Artillery,
four of which of an extraordinary bigness, they call the four Evangelists.
There was Ammunitions also found in it for more than a Month. The Christians
did not lose above 100 Men in this Action, and as they were preparing to go to
attack the Grand Vizier in his Camp, they were informed that he had abandoned
it. A Treasure of 300000 Ducats discovered in the City, was given to the Bassa
to use as he should see occasion. There were also 60000 Sequins found, with
other sums, buried in the Ground in diverse places. The Library of the Ancient
Kings of Hungary, so much augmented by Matthias Corvin, being not in the least
damnified, was transported to Vienna.

II. Strigonia or Gran.

Strigonia or Gran Lat. Strigonium, is seated in a Plain upon the Danube above
Buda, and commanded by a Neighbor Mountain, on the Top of which is a good
Castle. The Archbishop of this City is Primate, Chancellor and President of the
Council of the Kingdom of Hungary; the Cathedral stands in the Castle. Soliman
II. took this City in 1543. The Archduke Matthias besieged it in 1574. with
50000 Men, but was forced to raise the Siege. Count Mansfeld general of the
Imperial Forces besieged it again in 1595. and defeated 14000 Turks, but died
soon after before this City. The Archduke Matthias continued the Siege, and
forced the City to surrender upon Terms, after having been 52 years under the
Dominion of the Turks. After this Mahomet III. besieged it in 1606. and took it
again. The Imperialists retook it in 1683. after having raised the Siege of
Vienna, and after an obstinate Combat maintained by the Turks, against the
Imperialists and Polanders, near the Village Barkan, where the King of Poland
and his Son were in great danger of their Lives. Lastly, in 1685. The Turks,
having again besieged it, the Duke of Lorrain with the Elector of Bavaria
forced them to raise the Siege and totally defeated their Army. Strigonia
stands 28 Miles N. E. of Buda 35 E. of Raab, and 115 E. of Vienna, Long. 39 d.
42 m. Lat. 47 d. 50 m.

III. Alba Regalis.

Alba Regalis, or Stul Weissenburg, by the Sclavonians called Stolni Biograd,
and E^^^eis Feierwa by the Hungarians, is seated upon the River S^^witze near
the Lake Calaton. It has been famous heretofore for the Coronations and
Sepulchers of the Kings of Hungary, and was taken by the Turks in 1543. but
retaken by the Duke of Mercoeur in 1601. but the Infidels took it again the
next Year after, and impaled 40 of the Inhabitants for a design to h^ve
betrayed it again. On the 18th of May 1688. it surrendered to the Imperialists,
and one of the Gates was put into the Hands of the Christians, till the Emperor
Ratified the Treaty under the Great Seal of the Empire, and having spent three
days in providing for their departure, on the 20th of May, they marched out
about 4000 Souls in all, but not above 700 bearing Arms. The Imperialists found
in it 34 Pieces of Cannon, great quantities of small Arms, and an incredible
store of Ammunition, but no Provision. The Germans found it fortified with
three Bastions, and two other Works on one side, the rest of the Town being
covered by the Morass in which it stands, 40 Miles S. W. of Buda, 110 S. E. of
Vienna, and 180 N. W. of Belgrade. Long. 39 d. 24 m. Lat. 47 d. 23 m.

IV. Komorra.

Komorre, or Komare, or Komorra, Lat. Komorra, is a very strong Town, situate
on the S. side of the Isle of Schut, where the Danube reunites into one Stream.
This Town was well fortified by M^tthias Corvinus King of Hungary in 1472. and
it became the Bulwark of Christendo^ against the Turks, after they took
Strigonia in 1543. It is populous, and rich as well as strong. It has a Line
drawn from the Southern to the Northern Branch of the Danube, defended with
four Bastions. The Emperor kept always here a great Garrison. After the taking
of Raab (or Javarin) in 1591. Sinan Bashaw Besieged this Town with 60 Ships,
and a great number of Turks and Tartars, but without success; for his Treachery
and Valor were equally baffled by Baron Braon the Governor, who cut off four
of the five Turks Heads he sent to Suborn him, and sent the fifth back to
acquaint the Bashaw with their Doom, and that there were no more Traitors to be
bought. The chief strength of this impregnable Place is its Fort called the
Tortoise. It stands 12 Miles S. of Newhausel, 15 N. E. of Javarin, 38 almost E.
of Presburg, 54 N. W. of Buda, and 74 almost E. of Vienna. Long. 39 d. 12 m.
Lat. 48 d. 12 m.

V. Javarin or Raab.

Raab or Javarin, is a Town and Fortress at the Confluence of the Rivers Raab
and Danube, with a Bishop's See Suffragan of Gran (or Strigonia) the French,
call it Javarin; the Hungarians, Gewen; the Italians, Giovarin; and the Latin
Authors Jaurinum, Arabo and Narabo. This City is small, but very strong; it was
taken by the Turks in 1591. and retaken by Monsieur de Vaubecourt a Frenchman
in 1606. and has ever since been under the Emperor of Germany. It stands 34
Miles W. of Strigonia, as many S. W. of Presburg, and 62 almost W. of Buda.
Long. 38 d. 52 m. Lat. 48. d. 3 m.

VI. Vesprin.

Vesprin, in High Dutch, Weisbrun, Lat. Vesprinum, is a strong and populous
City, the Capital of a pretty considerable County, to which she has given her
Name, and a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Strigonia. It was taken by the
Turks in 1593. but was retaken since by the Emperor, and is still subject to
him. It stands nigh the River Sarwitza, 13 Miles W. of Alba Regalis, and 53
almost W. of Buda. Long. 39 d. 6 m. Lat. 47 d. 22 m.

VII. Kanisa.

Kanisa, or Kanisca, Lat. Canisia, is seated upon the River Sala, in the Zalad,
between the Lake Balaton and the River Drove, not above one Mile from the
Confines of Stiria, to the East. It is one of the strongest Towns in these
Parts. It was taken by the Turks in 1600. though the Imperialists did all that
was possible to prevent it. The following Year the Archduke of Austria
Besieged it, from the beginning of September, to the end of October, but
without success. In 1604. Count Serini Besieged it, and had infallibly carried
it, if he had been succored in time. In 1688. June 30th the Count de Budiani
blocked it up with a Body of 6000 Hungarians, and 2000 Heydukes, which
continued till April 13. 1690. when in pursuance of a Capitulation that the
Emperor had ratified, the Keys of the Gates, hanging upon a Chain of Gold, were
delivered to the Count de Budiani by a Turk, with these words, I herewith
consign into your Hands the strongest Fortress in the Ottoman Empire. The
Imperialists found in it great store of large Artillery, taken heretofore from
the Christians. This Town stands 68 Miles S. W. of Alba Regalis, 94 almost S.
E. of Vienna, and 106 S. W. of Buda. Long. 37 d. 56 m. Lat. 46 d. 54 m.

VIII. Sigeth.

Sigeth, or Zygeth, Lat. Salinae, is a very strong Town, seated in a Morass
near the River Alme. It has a very good Castle, and is fortified with three
Ditches, and as many Walls. Solomon II. Emperor of the Turks, died at the
Siege, and the Place was taken three days after in 1596. Nicholas Esdrin Count
of Serini, who was Governor of it, being slain in a Sally he made at the Head
of his remaining Forces. The Imperialists retook this City from the Turks in
January 1688. and found therein 85 Pieces of Cannon. It stands 44 Miles S. of
Alba Regalis, 64 E. of Canisa, and 74 S. W. of Buda. Long. 39 d. 24 m. Lat. 46
d. 36 m. There is another Town of the same Name in Transylvania, near the
Fountains of the Tibiscus.

IX. Cinq Eglises, or Quinque Ecclesiae.

Cinq Eglises, Lat. Quinque Ecclesiae, called by the Germans, Funff-kirken, is
a place of no great strength, on the River Keoritz, 12 Miles off the River
Drove, 32 Miles N. E. of Zigeth, and 49 almost N. of Posega. Long. 40 d. 6 m.
Lat. 46 d. 26 m.

X. Mohatz.

Mohatz, is a little Town between Colocza, and the Influx of the Drove into the
Danube four German Miles from either, and 6 N. W. of Esseck. It is memorable
for two great Battles fought near it; the first between Lewis King of Hungary,
and Solomon the Magnificent in 1526. in which this Unfortunate Prince Lewis
with 25000 Men fought 300000 Turks, who killed 22000 of the Christian Army; the
King in his flight over the Brook Curass, fell into a Quagmire, and was
swallowed up. After this, Solomon took and slew 200000 Hungarians, and got such
a footing in this Kingdom that he could never be expelled. The second, in some
part, retrieves the Loss and Infamy of the former. On the 29th of July 1687.
the Prime Vizier having passed the Drove at Esseck, on purpose to Fight the
Christian Army under the Command of the Duke of Lorrain, upon August 12. there
followed a Bloody Battle, in which the Turks lost 100 Pieces of Cannon, 12
Mortars, and all their Ammunition and Baggage, and about 800 Men upon the Place
of Battle, besides those that were Drowned in passing the River. After this
Victory Dunewalt found Esseck deserted by the Enemy, and took possession of it.

XI. Altenburg, or Owar.

Altenburg, or Owar, Lat. Ovaria, is a very strong Town on the Danube, in the
County of Muzon, the best Out-work to Vienna, subject to the Emperor. It stands
18 Miles almost S. of Presburg, and 50 E. of Vienna.

XII. Baboisca.

Baboisca, or Baboliza, called Mansuetinum in Antonin's Itinenary, is a Town
and Castle, on the River Rynnia, in the County of Sigeth, from which it stands
19 Miles to the W.

XIII. Bataseck, or Bachia.

Bataseck, or Bachia, is a small Town of Lower Hungary at the Confluence of the
Danube and Sarwizze, with a Bishop's See under the Archbishopric of Colocza;
it was under the Turks until 1686. but after the taking of Quinque Ecclesiae it
returned to the Obedience of the Emperor. It stands 20 Miles S. of Colocza, and
70 S. E, of Buda.

XIV. Darda.

Darda, is a strong Fort in the County of Caranywar, on the North end of
Esseck's Bridge, about six Miles N. W. of Esseck. It was Built by the Turks in
1686. and taken by the Imperialists in 1687.

XV. Palotta.

Palotta, is a Town of no great Consideration in the County of Alba-Regalis. It
was taken from the Turks by the Imperialists in October 1687. The Bassa that
commanded there immediately desired to Capitulate, and marched out with 250
Men, and as much Baggage as every Soldier could carry. There were found Eight
Pieces of Cannon, diverse Mortars, and great quantity of Powder and Provision,
with three Colors. Palotta stands five Miles almost N. of Alba Regalis.

Article II. Transylvania.
Bounds.
Transylvania is a Principality, and part of the Ancient Dacia having Hungary
to the West; Mount Carpathus to the North; Moravia to the East, and Walachia to
the South. Its length and breadth are four Days Journey each; Extent.
it had its Name from the Romans, Name. History.
by reason of the Forests and Mountains that environed it; the Hungarians
called it Erdely, and the Germans Sibenburgen, a Name derived from the Seven
Towns Built there by the Banished Saxons. Several other Inhabitants settled in
it, but the Saxons who best Cultivated the Country, had the firmest footing.
The Romans afterward under Trajan became Masters of it. It was afterward
united to the Kingdom of Hungary, and now its Princes are subject sometimes to
the Turk, sometimes to the Emperor of Germany.

The Plains are very fruitful in Corn, the Hills covered with Vines, Quality.
and the Mountains well stocked with Gold, Silver and Salt Mines. They have
also Bitumen, whereof they make Torches, whose smoke is good to refresh the
Brain. In their Woods they have great numbers of Deers, Bears, and
extraordinary wild Horses. Their Water is unwholesom, because it passes through
Mines of Alum and Mercury, but there are some that taste like Wine, others that
petrifie, and form a hard Crust, round Wood, or any thing else thrown into them.

This Principality is inhabited by three sorts of Nations, viz. Saxons,
Inhabitants.
Bulgarians and Hungarians; the first possess the Province called the Seven
Towns; the Bulgarians dwell on the Banks of Marise; the Hungarians possess the
Frontiers of Walachia, and follow the Grecian Religion. These are divided into
Counties, pay no Tribute to the Prince of Transylvania, but are obliged to
serve at their own Expenses when he goes to War.

The Doctrine of Calvin and Luther were introduced here in 1561. For George
Brandrata, Religion.
Physician to John Zapol, Count of Scepus, and Vayvode of Transylvania, made
this young Prince embrace the Sentiments of Luther by means of Denis Alexis,
but this Man not Executing his Orders with care enough, he substituted Francis
David in his Place, who of a Lutheran made the Prince a Calvinist, and at last
taught him the Doctrine of Arius. Stephen Bathori Prince of Transylvania in
1571. afterward chosen King of Poland, endeavored to re-establish Popery; and
to that end gave the Government of this Principality to his Brother Christopher
Bathori, who cast David into Prison, where he died Mad. He founded a College of
Jesuits at Colaswar; but dying in 1583. his Son Sigismund who succeeded him, to
comply with the Transilvanians, was forced to dismiss the Jesuits, but recalled
them two years after.

This Principality is now incorporated with the Kingdom of Hungary, Government.
under the protection of the Emperor; for Michael Abafti the 23d Prince from
John Huniades, who succeeded John Kemani in 1661. by a solemn Act given at
Hermanstadt, May 9. 1688. with the full consent of the States of Transylvania,
made an entire submission of this Country to the Emperor and the King of
Hungary to last for ever, and accordingly he received Imperial Garrisons into
all the principal places. The said Prince dying in 1690. the States in a
general Assembly resolved to adhere to the Interests of the Emperor against all
the Pretenses of Count Teckely, or the Ottoman Port, according to the Tenor of
the said Treaty.

The most considerable Places in the Principality of Transylvania are,
Hermanstadt, Bish. Cap. Alba Julia, or Weissemburg, Bish. Brassow, or
Cronstadt, Coloswar, or Clausenburg, Segeswar, Agnetlin, Altenberg, Bestercze,
Newmark.


I. Hermanstadt.

Hermanstadt, Lat. Cibinum or Hermanopolis, called by the Inhabitants Zeben,
the Capital of Transylvania, and Residence of the Prince, is a large, populous,
strong and well built City. It has no Bishop at present, but is reckoned a
Bishop's See Suffragan of the Archbishop of Colocza in Hungary. The Inhabitants
of this City are Saxons, and five Jurisdictions depend upon it. The Prince of
this Country having formerly put himself under the Protection of the Grand
Signior, the late Duke of Lorrain prevailed with the Prince Abafti to put
himself under the Protection of the Emperor, and to receive a Garrison of 3000
Germans in 1687. This City stands in a Plain, on the River Cibin, 160 Miles N.
E. of Belgrade, and 235 almost E. of Buda. Long. 45 d. 48 m. Lat. 46 d. 46 m.

II. Weissemburg.

Weissemburg, Lat. Alba Julia, which the Hungarians call Giula Fejerwar, is
situate upon the River Marise, (which the Inhabitants call Marons, and the
Germans Merisch) with a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Colocka. The
ancient Kings and Princes of this Country made their ordinary residence in this
City, which has been much greater than now it is, as may be seen by its rare
Roman Medals, Coins and Inscriptions, evident signs of Antiquity and Grandeur.
It stands 34 Miles W. of Hermanstadt, 68 N. E. of Temeswar, 90 E. of Waradin
and 196 E. of Buda. Long. 45 d. Lat. 46 d. 46 m.

III. Cronstadt, or Brassaw.

Brassaw, or Cronstadt, Lat. Patrovissa, is a strong City, and a Bishop's See
situated near the Frontiers of Moldavia, and the Carpathian Mountains. Some
take it for the Praetoria Augusta of Ptolomy. and others call it Corona and
Stephanopolis; and pretend that it is one of the Seven Cities Built or Repaired
by the Saxons. It stands 65 Miles almost N. E. of Hermanstadt. Long. 47 d. 20
m. Lat. 47 d. 5 m.

IV. Clausemburg.

Clausemburg, called Coloswar by those of the Country, and Claudiopolis in
Latin, is a great and populous City, with the Title of a Bishopric, and an old
Citadel, situated upon the little Brook Samos at the foot of the Mountains
toward the Frontiers of Hungary, 34 Miles N. W. of Weissemburg, and 64 of
Hermanstadt. Long. 44 d. 25 m. Lat. 47 d. 11 m. The States of Transylvania are
kept in it.

V. Segeswar.

Segeswar, called Schezberg by the Germans, Lat. Segethusa, is seated on the
River Cochel at the foot of the Carpathian Mountains, subject to the Prince of
Transylvania, under the Emperor. It stands 40 Miles N. of Hermanstadt.

VI. Agnetlin, or Agnabat.

Agnetlin, or Agnabat, is one of the Chief Towns in Transylvania, though of no
strength; it is seated on the River Harbach, 25 Miles almost N. of Hermanstadt,
subject to the Prince of Transylvania, and protected by the Emperor.

VII. Altemberg.

Altemberg, is a small City seated upon a Hill, Built out of the Ruins of
Zalnatra, 20 Miles S. W. of Weissemburg, or Alba Julia, and 42 S. of
Clausenburg.

VIII. Bestercze, or Besteriza.

Bestercza, or Besteriza, Lat. Bistricia, is a small but very neat City, which
stands in a very large Plain upon a River of its own Name, 80 Miles N. W. of
Hermanstadt.

IX. Newmark.

Newmark, Lat. Nova Marchia, called Waverhely by the Hungarians, is seated on
the River Merish, at the foot of the Carpathian Mountains, 36 Miles N. E. of
Clausenburg. The States of Transylvania usually meet here.

Article III. Podolia.
Bounds.
POdolia, is a great Province of Poland, in Lithuania between Moldavia to the
S. Black Russia to the W. Volhinia to the N. and the Tartars of Oczakow to the
E.

This Province is very fertile, but has been often wasted by the Inroads of the
Tartars and Cossacks, and is now the Theater of the War between the Poles and
the Turks. It Is usually divided into the Higher Podolia that lies to the West;
wherein are the Cities of Kaminieck and Bar, and into the Lower, which lies to
the East, and has in it the City of Bracklaw.

I. Kaminieck, Bish. Cap.

Kaminieck or Caminieck, Lat. Camenecia, Clepidava, or Camienicum, is a very
strong Town, and the Capital of Podolia. The Poles call it Kaminieck Podeleki.
It is a Bishop's See under the Archbishopric of Lemberg, and stands upon a
Mountain by the River Smortzyck, which a little lower falls into the Niester.
The Turks very often attempted this Place without success; but it having
suffered much by Fire in 1669. and being thereupon Besieged by them in 1672. it
was taken, the Poles being then Engaged in a Civil War amongst themselves, and
the Town in an ill condition of Defense. The Cossacks under Motula blocked it
up in April 1687. and the Polish Army designed to Attack it in September
following, but upon the approach of the Ottoman Forces, they were both of them
forced to retire. The Polish Army kept it in a manner blocked up by their
Incampment in 1688. And in 1689. the Forces of Lithuania and Poland setting
down before it, began a formal Attack, Aug. 20. but crossed with ill success,
raised the Siege in September following. This City stands 72 Miles N. W. of
Soczow, 116 almost S. E. of Lemburg, 280 E. of Cracovia, and 290 S. E. of
Warsovia. Long. 47 d. 46 m. Lat. 48 d. 50 m.

II. Bar.

Bar, is a very strong Town on the River Row, in the Palatinate of Kaminieck,
upon a Hill among Marshes, and now subject to the Turks. It stands 70 Miles N.
E. of Kaminieck, and 54 N. W. of Braclaw. Long. 49 d. 22 m. Lat. 49 d. 14 m.

III. Braclaw.

Braclaw, Lat. Braclovia, is a strong Town in Lower Podolia, situated upon the
River Bog, toward the middle of this Province, and Capital of the Palatinate
of the same Name, it is subject to the King of Poland, but the Country has been
strangely ruined by the Turks since the taking of Kaminieck, off which City it
stands 110 Miles to the E. Long. 50 d. 52 m. Lat. 48 d. 53 m.

Article IV. Moldavia.
MOldavia, is a Principality of Europe, known also under the Name of Great
Walachia, Name.
or Walachia Cisalpina, formerly part of Dacia, and afterward of the Great
Kingdom of Hungary. It has its Modern Name from a River, Bounds.
or from the Borough Moldavia. The Niester divides it from Podotia, on the N.
the Black Sea, and the Danube divide it from Bulgaria on the E. It has the
Rivers Danube and Serethe, or Missovo on the South, and the Mount Hemus divides
it from Walachia and Transylvania on the West. It is about 90 Leagues long from
East to West, Extent.
and 70 from N. to S.

This Country is fruitful in Corn, Pulse, etc. the Air very good. Quality.
There is such plenty of Wax and Honey, that their Tithes are worth above
200000 Crowns to the Prince. History.
The Inhabitants are Christians under the Greek Patriarch, and the Tribute they
paid formerly to the Turks, was formerly about 1400 Pound; but the Port
increases it from time to time, not caring how poor they make them to keep
them obedient. I^ 1686. the Poles overran all this Country, and took their
principal Cities; they therefore since relinquished the Ottoman Interest, and
voluntarily put themselves under the Protection of the Emperor of Germany in
1688.

This Country is divided into Moldavia, properly so called, toward the West,
and Bessarabia toward the East, where the Danube's Mouths are, and belongs to
the Turks.

Bessarabia, is inhabited by the Tartars Drobuces, or of Budziack, and the
Tartars of Oczakow, both great Thieves.

The Places of Note in Moldavia Proper are, Sockzow, or Czukaw, Jassy, or Jazy,
Pudna, Targorod, or Trescort.


In Bessarabia, Tekin, or Tigina, Akierman, or Bialogrod, Oczakow, Kilia nova.


I. Sockzow.

Sockzow, or Czukaw, is a great and strong City, the Capital of the
Principality of Moldavia, and the ordinary Residence of the Prince called
Vayvode. It stands on the River Serethe, 54 Miles N. E. of Cronstad, and 74
almost S. of Kaminieck. Long. 48 d. 30 m. Lat. 47 d. 44 m.

II. Jassy.

Jassy, or Jazy, is a great and populous City on the River Pruth, subject to
its own Prince, under the protection of the Emperor. The Poles took it in 1686.
and soon after left it again. It stands 60 Miles E. of Sockzow.

I. Tekin.

Tekin, or Tigina, is a great City, the Capital of Bessarabia on the River
Niester toward the Borders of Podolia. It stands 100 Miles N. E. of Jazy.
Long. 51 d. 20 m. Lat. 47 d. 30 m.

II. Bialogrod, or Akierman.

Bialogrod, is a strong City upon the Niester near the Pont Euxine, and the
Capital of the Principality of Budziack. It stands 42 Miles S. W. of Oczakow,
and 270 N. of Constantinople. Long. 54 d. 34 m. Lat. 47 d. 32 m.

III. Oczakow.

Oczakow, or Ocziakow, Lat. Axiace, is a strong Town seated at the Fall of the
Borysthenes or Niester into the Euxine Sea. It has a Castle which is Garrisoned
by the Turks, but the Citizens are Precopensian Tartars; it was Built by
Vitolaus Duke of Lithuania, and at first peopled by his Subjects. Near this
City the Poles gave the Tartars a fatal overthrow in 1644. This Place gives
Name to the Neighboring Tartars, who are so troublesome to Podolia, Lithuania,
and Poland, that the King of the latter pays them Tribute to prevent their
Incursions. It stands 44 Miles N. E. of Bialogrod, and 290 N. of
Constantinople. Long. 55 d. 27 m. Lat. 47 d. 52 m.

IV. Kilia Nova.

Kilia Nova, is a strong Town of Bessarabia, subject to the Turks, upon the
Danube 60 Miles S. W. of Bialogrod, and 230 N. of Constantinople. Long. 53 d.
28 m. Lat. 46 d. 44 m.

Article V. Walachia.
WAlachia, or Valaquia, a Principality of Europe, Bounds.
was formerly part of the ancient Kingdom of Hungary. It lies between Moldavia
to the N. E. Transylvania to the N. W. Hungary to the West, and Bulgaria to the
South. It is not very long since it was divided into great Valachia or
Cisalpina, Division
(the present Moldavia) or little Valachia or Transalpina, (the which is now
called Valachia.) It has Mines of Gold, Quality.
Horses the most esteemed in Europe, and a great number of Rivers. The Turks
call it Carabogdana, that is the Land of black Corn. Riches.
This Province is divided into 13 Counties promiscuously Inhabited by Saxons,
Hungarians, and Natives. The Vaivode or Prince has 100000 Crowns by his Tithes
of Honey and Wax, a great Commodity in that Country; and his Customs upon the
Malmsie of Candia, Government.
carried through his Lands into Germany, bring him a great Sum too. He is now
Tributary to the Grand Signior, to whom he generally pays 70000 Ducats, but is
sometimes obliged to pay 100000 to maintain himself in his Principality. He can
raise 10000 Horse, and 1000 Foot. The People here are inconstant, and wild;
Strength Inhabitants.
their Tongue inclines somewhat to the Latin, which makes some think they are
descended from the Romans. In the Ceremonies of their Religion, which is that
of the Greeks, Religion
they make use of the Lingua Franca, used almost over all the Orient.

The places of Note in Walachia are, Tarvis, or Targovisco, Cap. Brascovia,
Buchorist, Margozest.


I. Tarvis, or Targovisco.

This is a great and considerable City, the Metropolis of Walachia, and the
ordinary Residence of the Vaivode. It stands on the River Launiza, 94 Miles S.
E. of Hermanstat, 140 S. W. of Jazy, and 200 E. of Belgrade. Long. 47 d. 38 m.
Lat. 48 d. 54 m.

II. Brascovia.

Brascovia, or Bracslow, or Brasgow, is a City toward the North Parts of
Walachia, with a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Colocza, 47 Miles almost
N. of Tarvis.

Article VI. Bulgaria.
BVlgary, Lat. Bulgaria, a Province of Europe belonging to the Turk, Bounds.
had in times past the Title of Kingdom. It stretches from Servia, which it has
on the W. along the Danube, which parts it from Moldavia and Walachia, unto the
Mouths of this River in the Black Sea, which bounds it on the East; and on the
South a long Chain of Mountains separates it from Macedonia and Romania, the
old Thracia.

Bulgaria, formerly made part of Lower-Moesia, Authors do vary about the
Original and first Seat of its Inhabitants. Inhabitants.
There are several who think that they came from the Asiatick Sarmatia, and
that they took their Name from the River Volga, which discharges it self into
the Sea of Hyrcania, having had their Seat upon its Banks before they passed
into Europe. Others make them descend from the Ancient Getae or Gepids.
However, they have often opposed the Emperors of Constantinople, and made
Incursions into Italy and France, under the Kings of the Second Line.

The most remarkable places in Bulgaria are, Sofia, Cap. Archb. Nicopolis, or
Nigeboli, Archb. Guistandil, Panfalca, Ternovo, Hasgrad, Silistria, Prounda, or
Proslavisa, Tomi, or Trosmi, Mesembria, or Mesevira.


I. Sofia.

Sofia, or Sophia, is called by the Turks Triadizza, and is an Archbishop's
See; it was of old called Sardicca, and belonged then to the Lower Maesia. It
is seated upon the River Ichar, at an equal distance from the Borders of
Thracia E. Macedonia S. and Servia W. being now a great, populous, but unwalled
City, and the Seat of the Bassa or Governor for the Beglerbeglicz of Romelia;
it is supposed to have been Built by the Emperor Justinian in Honor of his
Wife Sophia: It is noted for one of the greatest General Councils in 307. that
ever was held; wherein by the Artifice of Constantius, the Council of Nice was
condemned. Amurat II. took this City, and since that time all the Country of
its dependency has been subject to the Turks. It stands 150 Miles S. of
Targovisco, and 315 W. of Constantinople. Long. 47 d. 12 m. Lat. 43 d. 25 m.

II. Nicopolis.

Nicopolis, or Nigeboli, which the Turks call Sciltaro, is seated upon the
Danube, the Capital of a Sangiak, with an Archbishop's See. It is famous for
the Victory which Bazajet I. won there In 1396. It stands 74 Miles almost N. of
Sofia.

III. Silistria.

Silistria, is a great City, the second of Bulgary (by some reckoned the Chief)
and the Capital of a Sangiac. It stands 18 Miles S. of Nicopolis, and 70 N. of
Sophia. Long. 47 d. 50 m. Lat. 44 d. 25 m.

From Silistria to Tomi or Trosmi, (known in Antiquity by Ovid's Confinement)
are seen the remains of a Wall Built by the Emperors of Constantinople against
the Barbarians.

Article VII. Servia.
SErvia, is a Province of the Turkish Empire, which by the Romans was called
Moesia Superior, Bounds.
and then esteemed a part of Thrace. It is of great Extent, being bounded on
the North by the Danube, which separates it from Hungary and Walachia, on the
West by Bosnia, on the South by Albania and Macedonia, and on the East by
Bulgaria. This Country is very fruitful and rich, Quality.
having several Mines of Gold and Silver. In the Year 1350. Vbsan or Dusan
Reigned, and was the first King of Servia, History.
and called himself also Emperor of Greece. He Conquered Bulgaria, Bosnia, and
several other Nations in those parts. But his Family ended in Stephen in 1371.
The Servians submitted to Amurath I. after the taking of Nissa, but being
provoked by his Cruelty revolted in 1376. and joined with the Despote of
Bosnia. In 1388. Lazarus Despote of Servia fought Amurath I. in the Plains of
Cassovia, in which Battle fell 50000 Men; and Amurath was slain after the Fight
as he was viewing the Field by a wounded Servian, who rose from the Dead
Bodies, and stabbed him to Revenge the Death of Lazarus his Master, who was
slain here too. In 1420. Amurath Sultan of the Turks made an Invasion on George
Despote of Servia, called the Rascian, took Nevomento, Scopia, and Sinderovia,
with two of the Despote's Sons, put out their Eyes, and cut off their Genitals,
and Married their Sister for her great Beauty. In 1427. the Servians were
reduced by the same Prince; in 1454. they were again reduced, and have since
that time been subject to the Ottoman Port.

The Places of Note in Servia are, Belgrade, Cap. Bish. Semendria, Bish. Nissa,
Scopia, Archb.


I. Belgrade.

Belgrade, or Grischish-Weissemburg, Lat. Alba Graeca, and Alba Bulgarica, is
seated a little below the Confluence of the Save and Danube, very considerable
for its greatness, and for its situation upon a Hill, which renders it
extraordinary strong. Some do take it for the old Taurinum, but that was too
far from the Confluent of the Save and Danube, to be the same with Belgrade.
There is more likelihood that the latter being increased by the Ruin of the
other, its Neighborhood made it to be taken for the same City. Belgrade is a
Bishop's See under the Archbishopric of Antivari. Amurath II. lost a
Victorious Army before it in 1439. and Mahomet II. his Son lost another Army of
250000 Men before it in 1456. which the brave Huniades ruined by this
Stratagem; he suffered a Party of the Turks to enter the Town, and whilst they
were plundering, sallied out, and took their Cannon, turned them against
themselves, killed 40000 of them, and forced the rest to an inglorious flight,
leaving all their Baggage and Ammunition behind. In 1521. Soliman the
Magnificent took it after two Months Siege, Lewis King of Hungary being then
but 15 Years of Age, and the other Christian Princes being engaged in a Mutual
War. It was for many Years after neglected by the Turks, but in 1686. they
begun to refortifie it after the loss of Buda. In 1688. the Emperor sent the
Duke of Bavaria against it with a Potent Army, he forced his way over the Save,
Aug. 8. and defeated 6000 of the best of the Turkish Troops, on the Tenth he
Marched toward Belgrade, whereupon the Turks set Fire to the Lower Town, and
abandoned it, though they had 20000 Men Encamped, and a strong Work which reached
from the Town to the Save. An old Bassa was left to Command the upper Town and
Castle. On the 12th. the Christians begun their Approaches, the Turks making a
Vigorous Defense; but Breaches being made, the Imperialists Stormed it thrice
successively at the 6th. of September, and at the third Assault, entered the
Place, putting all to the Sword at first, so that there were about 7000 killed
and thrown into the Save; but the Bassa and about 3000 more obtained Quarter,
having Chained 200 Christian Slaves, whom they set betwixt them and the
Imperialists. There were 70 Pieces of Cannon, with a vast deal of Plunder, though
the Inhabitants had been removing their Effects a long tsme, and a 1000 Boats
went down the River the Day before the lower Town was Burnt. The Christians had
about 4000 killed and wounded in this Siege. In 1690. the Emperor being
Attacked by the French King upon the Rhine, the prime Vizier sat down before
Belgrade, October. 3. with 60000 Men. The Garrison consisted of 6000 Men well
provided, who made a Gallant Defense, and killed abundance of Turks; but on the
8th. a Bomb falling into the Magazine, blew it up, with 1700 Germans going to
Mount the Guard, and set Fire to the other Magazines, blew up part of the
Walls, and filled the Ditches, so that the Enemy entered by whole Squadrons, and
put all to the Sword. The Fire destroyed the Town and Castle, and only the
Governor with 300 of the Garrison escaped. He was afterward brought to his
Trial for not having done his part, but acquitted. Since that time the Turks
have refortified this City. It stands 165 Miles S. E. of Buda, 160 S. W. of
Hermanstadt, 230 N. W. of Sofia, 280 S. E. of Vienna, and 540 almost W. of
Constantinople. Long. 42 d. 24 m. Lat. 45 d. 20 m.

II. Semenbria.

Semenbria, is a City and Bishopric on the Danube, 24 Miles E. of Belgrade.
The Turks took it in 1690. from the Imperialists.

III. Nissa.

Nissa, is a very considerable City upon the River Nichawa It is strong by its
situation, capable of being improved, and has five Mosques. The Country round
it is very fruitful and pleasant. This City is memorable for the defeat of the
Turks by the Imperialists, on the 24th* of September in 1689. under Prince
Lewis of Baden, whereupon all Servia and Albania submitted to the Emperor, as
did also the Town nextday after the Victory; but it was retaken by the Turks in
1690. after a Siege of three Weeks. It stands 140 Miles S. E. of Belgrade.
Long. 45 d. 5 m. Lat. 43 d. 53 m.

IV. Scopia, or Uscopia*

Scopia, or Vscopia, (which Sanson places in Bulgaria) is a large City at the
foot of Mount Orbelus, on the River Veratazar near the Borders of Macedonia,
partly on Hills, partly on Plains, in a pleasant Country. It was at first a
Bishop's See, but is now an Archbishop's, and is a pleasant, populous, and
trading City. There are in it 700 Tanners, many fair Houses, and some handsome
Sepulchral Monuments. The best Houses are richly furnished with Carpets to
tread on, finely painted. This City in the Year 1689. was taken by Picolomini
for the Emperor of Germany, it being deserted by the Bassa and its Inhabitants:
The Germans said it was as big as Prague in Bohemia, and had 60000 Inhabitants,
and 400 Jews, but being open, and only walled, and taken late in the Year, the
Imperialists plundered it, and burnt it down to the Ground. It stands 60 Miles
S. E. of Nissa, 66 almost W. of Sofia, and nigh 200 S. E. of Belgrade. Long. 45
d. 48 m. Lat. 43 d.

Article VIII. Rascia.
SOme Geographers include Rascia in the Kingdom of Hungary, others in Servia,
and others in Sclavonia; I shall follow neither of them, but make it a distinct
Province, according to Sanson's Maps.

Rascia, is a Principality bounded on the N. by the River Drove, that separates
it from the Kingdom of Hungary, on the E. by the Danube, on the S. by the Save,
that divides it from Servia and Bosnia, and on the W. by Sclavonia.

The Places of Note in Rascia are, Peter Waradin, Esseck, Swernick.


I. Peter-Waradin.

Peter-Waradin or Petro-Waradin called by the Inhabitants Petrowar Lat.
Acuminium, or Petro-Varadin, is situate on the Danube between the Save and the
Drove, and has been very famous during the present War. The Turks made it their
common passage into upper Hungary, after the Emperors Forces had made
themselves Masters of Buda, and for that purpose kept a Bridge of Boats over
the Danube here: the Revolt and Mutiny against the prime Vizier, after the
Battle of Mohats, happened here, whereby that General was forced to fly for his
Life to Belgrade, and thence to Constantinople. It has since been taken and
retaken by both Parties. Its Fortifications were blown up by the Imperialists
in 1688. and the Town quite burnt down a little after. But the Emperor in 1691.
begun to refortify it, and intends to make it a place of great strength. It
stands 32 Miles N. W. of Belgrade, and 36 S. E. of Esseck, Long. 41 d. 55 m.
Lat. 45 d. 38 m.

II. Esseck.

Esseck is a Town upon the Drove which has been very famous in the Present Wars
betwixt the Turks and Imperialists; The Town stands low and the Streets are
plank'd with Trees. Upon one side of the Gate, is a part of a Roman Inscription
M. Aelian, etc. on the other a Man's head in Stone. In or near this Place
Constantius defeated Magnentius the Usurper and Murderer of Constantine II. in
359. The Town is great and populous, by reason of the Trade and Commerce, but
not strong; and therefore the Turks have of late bestowed much cost and pains
in fortifying it. But that which is the great wonder is the Wooden Bridge, 8585
Geometrical paces long, and 17. broad; running over the Drove, over a long
Marsh and the River Fenns, from the City to the Fort of Darda, which is on the
other side in the lower Hungary. It was built by Soliman the Magnificent in
1521. as soon as he had taken Belgrade, and has Rails on both sides, with
Towers of Wood at every quarter of a Mile. Count Nicholas Serini burnt part of
it in 1664. which necessitated the Turks to build that part a little nearer the
Danube, because they could not without great charges and difficulty, pluck up
the remainder of the Trees which the Water had preserved from the Fire. By this
Bridge the Turkish Armies used to pass between Hungary and Constantinople. Near
this Place the Unfortunate Lewis King of Hungary, was defeated in 1526. in
attempting to stop Soliman's passage into his Kingdom. Count Lessy burnt this
Bridge a second time in 1685. and possessed himself of the Town of Esseck; but
the Castle holding out he blew up their Magazines, plundered the Town and left
it. In 1686. The Turks began to build it after another manner, by driving rows
of Trees into the Earth, and filling up the space with Earth, that it might not
be subject to be ruined by Fire. But the Duke of Lorrain destroyed it in 1687.
drove the Turks over the Drove, and in a few days entirely ruined, what 8000
men had been many Months a Building. After the taking of Belgrade, the Turks
sat down with an Army of 15000 Men before this place, but retired without
success in 1690. It stands 65 Miles N. W. of Belgrade, and 100 S. E. of Buda,
Long. 41 d. 25 m. Lat. 46 d. 4 m.

III. Swernick.

Swernick is a great City with a considerable Pass on the River Trina, near the
Confines of Bosnia, 28 Miles E. of Sarai^. It was taken by the Imperialists
October. 15. 1688.

Article IX. Bosnia.
BOsnia or Bossina is a Province of Europe formerly a Kingdom. Bounds.
It is situated betwixt the Rivers Vnna, Save and Drina, and took its name from
the River Bosna. It Borders Servia on the East; Dalmatia,
on the South; Croatia on the West, and Sclavonia and Rascia on the North.
History.
This Country was anciently part of Pannonia, conquered since by the Goths, and
at last by the Sclavonians, Tributaries
who becoming Tributaries and subjects to the Hungarians, Bosnia had the same
Fate. It consisted then only of one Province, which has since had Princes of
its own. Mahomet II. seized it in 1463. and Flead Stephen the last King of
Bosnia. In 1688. at the same time that the Duke of Bavaria marched to the Siege
of Belgrade, Prince Lewis of Baden went with a strong Detachment of Germans and
Hungarians to the Conquest of Bosnia. The Croatians having Orders to join with
him, the 14th of August his Army passed the River Vnna, though the Bassa opposed
him with 15000 Men, after which he took Castanovitza, which is a Castle of
three strong Towers, and a Wall according to the ancient way of Fortification,
and seated on the Vnna, between Croatia and Bosnia, which yielded without
resistance. The 15th the Army went toward Gradisca, which was set on fire and
deserted, as was also Debitza and Jassenovitz, and 3000 Turks were intercepted
and cut off near the former. The 25th he marched toward Brod, (the Croats being
sent home) in order to reinforce the Siege of Belgrade, but finding the Bassa
had still a considerable Body of Men he resolved to disperse them before he
went. The Bassa lay then at Terwent five Hungarian Miles from Brod, and the 4th
of September he marched toward him in the Night with a Body of 3000 German
Horse without any Foot. The 5th by break of Day, they fell upon the Enemies
Camp 15000 strong, and defeated their Horse, and of 7000 Foot, which could not
so well shift, 5000 were slain and 2000 taken, with the loss of 150 Christians,
upon which Bagnaluca the last Town yielded to Prince Lewis, and since that the
Germans are become Masters of all the other Places, and have reconquered the
whole Province.

The Principal places of this Province are, Sari or Bosna, Saray Cap.
Iswornick. Ternovitza. Bagnialuck or Bagnaluca. Kretno. Jaickza or Yetze.
Debitza, or Dobicza. Jassenovitz. Tina.


I. Sari.

Sari or Bosna-Saray is seated upon the River Miglazza, and is accounted now
the principal City of Bosnia, (which honor belonged formerly to Jaitza, and
then to Warbosaum,) and stands 50 Miles S. W. of Peter-Waradin, and 175 S. of
Buda, Long. 40 d. 15 m. Lat. 45 d. 10 m.

II. Jaykza.

Jaycza, Gieza or Gaitia, formerly the Capital City of Bosnia, is a mighty
strong City and Castle, seated on the River Plena. This City was recovered by
the King of Hungary in 1463. from the Turks, who endeavored to retake it the
same year, without success; but they took it afterward, and made it the seat
of a Sangiack or Governor. It stands 42 Miles E. of Wihitz, 60 almost N. of
Bagnialuck, 82 Miles N. E. of Zara, and 154 almost S. of Buda. Long. 39 d. 15
m. Lat. 45 d. 22 m.

Article X. Sclavonia.
UNder the name of Sclavonia, the ancients comprehended Hungary, Sclavonia
propria, Croatia, Ancient. Extent.
Dalmatia, Bosnia, Servia, Rascia and Bulgaria, reaching from the River Drove
to the Gulf of Venice. Modern. Bounds.
But by Sclavonia at present is only meant that part of the ancient Pannonia,
which is bounded by the Drove on the North; Rascia, on the East; the Save, on
the South; and Germany, Extent.
on the West. It is 32 German Miles in length, and 12 in breadth.

It is said to have had its name from the Slavi an ancient People who came from
Scythia in the time Name.
of the Emperor Justinian, History.
and having seized Istria and all Grecia, founded the Kingdom of Poland under
Lechus, and that of Moravia, under Zechus, Anno 550. they were beat out of
Greece by Constantine. And in 783. they were kept under by Lewis the Pious. In
807. they embraced Christianity by the Preaching of one Methodius. The Emperor
Lewis II. had War with them, about 858. as also the Emperor Otho in 960. They
infested Canute and Sueno Kings of the Danes in the Xth Century, but Walduner
overcame them in 1161. Anno 1200. Canute the Dane overcame the Marquess of
Brandenburg, who had possessed himself of Sclavonia, and after this the
Sclavonians became Tributaries to the Hungarians. They were most of them of the
Roman Church, Religion. Language.
but performed their Worship in their own Language, which was formerly very
extensive, and spoken in more places than any other living Tongue in Europe,
and is yet, though in different Dialects, from the Adriatic Gulf to the Northern
Ocean, by the Istrians, Dalmatians, Bosnians, Moravians, Bohemians, Lusatians,
Silesians, Poles, Lithuanians, Prussians, Scandinavians and Russians almost as
far as Constantinople, and much used among the Turks.

In 1504. this Country was subdued by Solomon the Magnificent. Government.
in 1687. after the Turks were defeated, at Mohatz, their Army Mutiny'd against
the Grand Vizier, and the Turks deserting it, the whole Country, except
Gradisca, submitted to the Emperor.

This Country is very fruitful, and has many Mines; Quality. Manners.
the People are so enamoured with War, that they often pray they may die with
their Swords in their Hands.

The most remarkable Places here are, Posega. Gradisca. Sopia. Novigrad.
Kopranitz. Warasdin. Brodt.


I. Posega.

Posega, the Capital City of Sclavonia, is a Place of an indifferent strength,
but of great Commerce. It has 400 Villages depending upon it, and consists of
about 1000 Houses. The Country about it is very fruitful, producing fruits of
all sorts of an extraordinary size. It was taken from the Turks by the
Imperialists in 1687. The Bey made at first some resistance, but after having
fired some Cannon, he abandoned the Place; part of the Garrison retired to the
Mountains, and the rest into different places upon the Save. The Germans found
in it a great quantity of Ammunition and Provision, with five Pieces of Cannon.
This City stands on the River Oriana 120 Miles S. of Buda, 126 W. of Belgrade,
and 185 S. E. of Vienna, Long. 39 d. 42 m. Lat. 45 d. 46 m.

II. Gradisca.

Gradiska is a strong Town seated upon the River Save, toward the Frontiers of
Croatia. It was taken from the Turks by the Imperialists under the Command of
the Duke of Croy in 1691. It stands 30 Miles almost W. of Posega, Long. 39 d.
Lat. 45 d. 39 m.

III. Brodt.

Brodt is a small Town 15 Miles S. of Posega famous for a Victory Prince Lewis
of Baden gained over the Turks in 1688.

Article XI. Croatia.
CRoatia has the Title of a Kingdom, and comprehended formerly all between the
Drove and the Sea of Dalmatia, Bounds.
and was divided into three parts, but now that is called Croatia that lies
between Bosnia on the East, the Gulf of Venice, on the South; Germany, on the
West; and Sclavonia on the North; Croatia is called Krabatin by the Germans,
Name. Manners
and Corbavia in Latin. The People of this Province are good Warriors, and take
much after the Germans, Hungarians and Sclavonians for their Customs and
Manners, so that their Gentlemen are said to share with the first in their
Drunkenness; to imitate the second in their Pride; and to be every whit as
importunate as the last. The Croates, especially those called Vscokes, are very
swift, and run up and down Mountains like Bucks, with Shoes made of Cord on
purpose. Croatia is commonly divided into the Austrial and the Ottoman, because
the House of Austria and the Turks are Sovereigns thereof.

To the Emperor.

Segna. Bish. Sangrad.
To the Turks.

Wihitz or Pighiton. Sissaken, or Sisseg. Velay. Castanovitz.
I. Segna or Zeng.

Segna or Zeng, is a strong City on the Bay, anciently called Flanaticum now
Quarnaro or Carnaro, from the Mountain de Carnia, and has over against it the
Island of Veglia. This is the Capital City of the Principality of Morlachia,
and a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Spalatro. It is strong both by Art
and Nature, having vast Woods and Mountains behind it to the Land-ward, so that
an Army can hardly get to it, and the Port is not capable of a great Fleet.
About the year 1539. It was in the possession of the Count de Frangipani, and
was claimed by Solomon, the Grand Seignior as a part of Hungary, which he had
then conquered in great part. This forced Ferdinand the Emperor to take it into
his own hands, after which he entertained the Vschochi a set of Robbers like
our Buccaneers, who had like to have kindled a War betwixt the Turks and the
Venetians. The Coast about this Bay is full of small Islands, Rocks and Creeks,
so that it has ever been a Receptacle for Pirates. Those Pirates in time became
500 or 600 Men, and did great damage to the Turks and to the Christian
Merchants. The Turks provoked by the Injuries of these Buccaneers in the year
1592. began a War against the Austrian Dominions, which lasted till the year
1602. In the year 1613. Fadre Paolo, in his continuation of the History of the
Vschochi tells us, that this City consisted of three sorts of Men, the
Stipendarii or Listed Men, which were 200 under four Captains; the Casalini, or
Citizens, which were then about 100 Families; And the Venturini, who were
Fugitives from Turkey, Dalmatia and Apulia; their whole number not above 2000.
Yet this handful of Men, plagued the State of Venice from 1537, to 1616. The
War I last mentioned lost the Empire of Germany, Agria in 1596. and Canisa in
1602. In the year 1615. the Archduke of Austria declared a War against the
Venetians, on the score of these Pirates, which drew the Dutch to assist them;
and this forced the Archduke the next year to suppress this Nest of Pirates,
so that they were never heard of since. Segna stands 46 Miles nigh S. of
Carolstad, as many N. W. of Zara, and 52 W. of Wihitz. Long. 36 d. 39 m. Lat.
45 d. 1^ m.

II. Wihitz.

Wihitz or Pighiton, is a very strong City, seated on a small Lake by the River
Vnna reckoned the Capital of Croatia. It stands 44 Miles S. E. of Carolstat, 52
almost N. of Zara, and 84 nigh W. of Posega. Long. 37 d. 44 m. Lat. 45 d. 18 m.

III. Castanovitz.

Castanovitz is a good Castle on the River Vnna, near the Borders of Bosnia 34
Miles W. of Gradisca. It belonged to the Turks, but was taken by Prince Lewis
of Baden, and submitted to the Emperor of Germany in 1688.

Article XII. Dalmatia.
DAlmatia, is a Province lying on the Gulf of Venice, Bounds.
part of the ancient Illyria. It was anciently very large, but is now more
contracted. It has Istria, on the West; Croatia and part of Bosnia, on the
North; Servia and Albania, on the East; and the Gulf of Venice on the South.
Their Language is Sclavonick, Language. Religion. Manners.
and their Religion for the most part Popery. The People are Martial, but
ridiculous in their Divertisements.

History.
The Pope at a Council held by two of his Legates, at Salone, erected this
Province into a Kingdom, and invested Demetrius their Duke, with Sword, Scepter
and Crown, Anno 1076. Dioclesian the Persecuting Emperor, was a Native of this
Country; whether he retired after his Abdication. It was added to Hungary in
1310. together with some adjacent Provinces.

Dalmatia is divided into three parts, as follows.

The first belongs to the Venetians and comprehends.

Zara. Archbp. Cap. Nona. Bish. Zemonico. Sebenico. Bish. Traw. Bish. Spalatro.
Archbp. Salone. Clissa.
The second belongs to the Turks, and compreprehends these opposite Places, but
the Venetians have of late conquered most of them.

Scardona. Bish. Narenca or Narenza. Bish. Trebigna. Bish. Castel-Nuovo.
Cattaro. Bish. Budoa. Bish. Antivari. Archbp. Dulcigno. Bish. Scutari.
The third is the Republic of Ragusi, in which are, Ragusi or Dobronika.
Archbp. Stagno.

I. Zara.

Zara Lat. Jadera is a very considerable Town and Port, Capital of Dalmatia,
and an Archbishop's See. It is environed by the Sea, being joined to land only
by a Draw-Bridg: Besides this, it is defended with six strong Bastions,
Ladislaus King of Naples, who also took the quality of King of Hungary, sold it
with the depending Islands to the Venetians in 1409. to whom it belonged
before, for they being assisted by Baldwin Count of Flanders, and other Princes
that were going to the Conquest of the Holy Land, after Saladin's Death, made
themselves Masters of it in 1200. This City stands 116 Miles N. E. of Ancona,
184 almost S. E. of Venice, and 165 N. W. of Ragusa. Long. 37 d. 20 m. Lat. 44
d. 34 m.

II. Nona.

Nona Lat. Aenona is a well-fortified Town and Port of Dalmatia, with a
Bishopric under the Archbishopric of Zara. It stands 35 Miles N. of Zara.

III. Zemonico.

Zemonico was a strong hold of Dalmatia, about seven Miles from Zara. The
Venetians yielded it to the Turks in 1573. but in 1647. The Proveditor Foscoli
observing how the Turks of that Garrison did annoy the Country all about,
resolved to beat them out of it, which he did and then demolished the Fort. In
1682. The Turks designed to establish themselves there, but were cut off by the
Morlaques.

IV. Sebenico.

Sebenico Lat. Sebenicum Sicum, is a small, but strong City upon the Adriatic
Sea, with a Bishopric under the Archbishop of Spalatro. It has been under the
Venetians since the year 1412. before which time it was a Seaport Town of
Croatia. It has a Castle and Fort built upon a Rock, which has four times
baffled the Ottoman Forces, and is situate at the Mouth of the River Kerka, 30
Miles N. W. of Spalatro, and 44 S. E. of Zara, Long. 38 d. 18 m. Lat. 44 d. 16
m.

V. Traw.

Traw is a very strong and populous City, a Seaport and a Bishopric under the
Archbishop of Spalatro. It stands in a small Island of the same name, but
joined to the Continent by a Bridge, it is subject to the Republic of Venice
since 1420. and lies 24 Miles S. E of Sebenico.

VI. Spalatro.

Spalatro Lat. Spalatum, or Palatium Dioclesiani, and Salona Nova, is very
Strong, Rich and Populous, and an Archbishops See. Its name seems to be a
Corruption of Palatium, because it was in former times, the Palace of
Dioclesian, who was born at Salona, about a League from Spalatro. This City is
well-fortified, and about a Musket shot from the East Gate there is a Fort
built upon high Ground, which commands the City. Here is also a very spacious
and convenient Harbor. The Venetians have but a small Garrison there, as
trusting in their Fort of Clissa, there being no passage from Turkey to this
City, but under the Cannon of that Place. The Cathedral of this City was of old
a Temple that stood in the midst of Dioclesian's Palace. Since this Temple was
changed into a Church, they have broken through the Wall to make a Quire to it,
and made several Windows in it, for before it received light only by the Gate
or Door, according to the Custom of the Heathens, who commonly made their
Temples all dark, to render their Mysteries the more venerable, by the borrowed
light of many Torches and Lamps. The Walls of Dioclesian's Palace, which
contain the two thirds of the City, are in a manner whole and entire, and make
an exact square, with a Gate in the midst of each side. The Country round this
Place is very fruitful, and all Provisions very Cheap. It stands 30 Miles S. E.
of Sebenico 74 S. E. of Zara and 92 N. W. of Ragusi. Long. 38 d. 50 m. Lat. 44
d.

VII. Salona.

Salona is a City on the Gulf of Venice, now ruined by the Sclavonians, but
formerly was a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Spalatro, and much
mentioned in ancient Writers, and more particularly famous for the Retreat of
the Emperor Dioclesian. The Venetians have built a Castle, near its ruins,
which stands five Miles N. of Spalatro.

VIII. Clissa.

Clissa is a strong Fort 10 Miles N. E. of Spalatro, and 34 almost W. of
Sebenico.

IX. Scardona.

Scardona is seated upon the River Kerka, in Latin Tilius, which compasses a
great part of it so as to make it a kind of Peninsula. It is about seven Miles
from the Adriatic Sea, with a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Spalatro. It
was formerly a famous City, and the Capital of the Turkish Dalmatia. It is
still considerable. In the year 1683. the Morlacks of Croatia took it from the
Turks, and General Valier put a good Garrison into it for the Venetians, after
that he had put the place into a condition of being a Bulwark against the
Incursions of the Infidels. It is about 30 Miles almost N. of Sebenico.

X. Narenza.

Narenza, or Narenca, Lat. Naro, is seated on the Gulf at Venice, and belongs
to the Turks; it was formerly very considerable, and the Capital of Dalmatia,
but at present it is in a manner wholly ruined. It has a Bishop Suffragan of
Ragusi. The Venetians took it in 987. and the Turks in 1479. It stands 44 Miles
N. of Ragusa.

XI. Trebigni, or Trebigna.

Trebigna, is a small and inconsiderable, but very Ancient City, with a
Bishop's See under the Archbishopric of Ragusa, subject to the Turks. It
stands 20 Miles almost N. of Ragusi. Long. 41 d. 2 m. Lat. 43 d. 10 m.

XII. Castel-Nuovo.

Castel-Nuovo, is a Town of the Duchy of St. Saba, or of the Province of
Herzegovine, seated upon the Canal of Cattaro, three Leagues from its Mouth,
and over against the Eastern Sea. The Castle of Salimanega, which is joined to
the place on the North-side is built upon a very rocky place, and is commanded
by the Mountain of St. Veneranda, whence also the Tower of Fastagick, which is
partly built upon the Rock, and partly upon the joining Ground, can be
battered. This great Tower was used by the Turks as a Magazine for Powder. The
high Fortress called Goringrad is 650. paces from the Town, on the Northern
side, and this may be battered to pieces from the top of Mont-slichi, which is
nigh it. This place was Attacked in 1538. by the Pope, the Emperor's, and
Venetian Army, and taken by them, and Garrisoned with Spaniards, but they put
three Colors into it, one for the Pope, one for the Emperor, and a third for
the Republic. They did not enjoy it long, for the very next Year Barbarossa
came into the Channel with 90 Galleys, and 30 Fustes, and having landed 80
Pieces of Cannon, and some Men, that were joined by the Sangiac of the
Province, he Battered the Place, and carried it by Assault. The Spaniards
sustained a great Loss on this occasion, for there were 4000 of them either
killed, or put to Irons. The Venetians endeavored to retake it in 1572. but
were forced to give over the Enterprise, yet have at last made themselves
Masters of it in 1687. jointly with the Pope's Troops, and those of the Order
of Malta, which fell out thus; Count Herbestein Great Prior of Hungary, and
General of the Galleys of Malta, and Commander of the Pope's Seven Galleys,
received Orders from the Pope to join the Venetian Army in the Morea, commanded
by the Generalissimo Morosini, to undertake some considerable Enterprise in
Dalmatia, which he did upon the 7th of August 1687. and with the General
Cornaro resolved upon the Siege of Castel-Nuovo; this Resolution was put in
Execution the 2d of September; the 29th the Turks quitted the Town, and the
next Morning those of the Castle yielded upon condition, that they might have
with them what they could carry upon their Backs, with Vessels to Transport
them into Albania, all which was executed the 2d of October, the Turks came
out, being 9000 well-arm'd, and about a 1000 Women and Children. Castel-Nuovo
stands 12 Miles W. of Cattaro. Long. 41 d. 26 m. Lat. 42 d. 38 m.

XIII. Cattaro.

Cattaro, or Catarro, called by Latin Authors Catharum, or Cathara, (which Le
Noir takes to be the Ascrivium of Ptolomy and Pliny) is seated upon a Gulf to
which it gives its name, and is defended by a Castle Built upon a Hill, with a
Bishopric Suffragan of Ragusi. This City belongs to the Venetians; the Turks
have often attempted it, but to no purpose. It stands 50 Miles S. E. of Ragusi.
Long. 41 d. 40 m. Lat. 42 d. 36 m.

XIV. Budoa.

Budoa, is situated upon the Sea, betwixt the Gulf of Cattaro, and the City of
Dulcigno. Pliny, Ptolomy, and Stephanus of Byzantium have made mention of it
under the Name of Butua, Bulua, Buthaer. Alexandro Donato having Cowardly
yielded Antivari to the Turks in 1571. Augustine Pasqualigo surrendered Budoa,
whereof he was Governor, but was not blamed because of the weakness of the
Place. Zacharias Salomoni Governor of Cattano, having retook it soon after
with the Land ana Sea Forces, the Republic of Venice took care to fortify it,
so that though it is a small Place, yet it is very Regular. It suffered much in
1667. by an Earthquake, but great care was taken to Repair the Ruins caused by
this Accident. This Town is a Bishop's See Suffragan of Antivari, and stands 8
Miles N. W. of that City. Long. 41 d. 44 m. Lat. 48 d. 54 m.

XV. Antivari.

Antivari, Lat. Antibarum, which some take to be the Ancient Doclea, is seated
upon the Adriatic Sea, or Gulf of Venice; of a Bishopric created into a
Archbishopric by Pope Alexander II. with 10 Suffragans in 1062. It has since
fallen under the Tyranny of the Turks. It stands 60 Miles S. E. of Ragusi.
Long. 41 d. 42 m. Lat. 43 d. 15 m.

XVI. Dolcigna, Scutari.

Dolcigno, or Dulcigno, and Scutari, or Scodra, were formerly reckoned in
Dalmatia, but belong nowadays to the Kingdom of Albania, of which we shall
Treat in the next Section.

Of the Republic of Ragusi.
RAgusi, or Ragusa, is a City and Republic upon the Gulf of Venice, with an
Archbishop's See. Some Authors esteem it to be the same with the Ancient
Epidaurus, but others will have the Ruins of that City to be on the other side,
in a place called Ragusi Vecchio. However it be, this City which the
Selavonians call Dobronich, is very well Built. Its situation is upon a Rock,
so high on one side and craggy, that it is a Covert to it, and on the other side
it stretches along a little Tongue of Land where it is washed by the Sea. Near
this City is the Fort of St. Lawrence, and a Port. It Is Inhabited by many
Merchants, and the best peopled place in Dalmatia. The Government of it is
almost like unto that of the Republic of Venice. It Is true, that the fear of
losing their Liberty is so great, that it obliges them to change their Duke or
Governor every Month, and to continue their Officers in their Posts but for
six Weeks; wherefore Gentlemen cannot wear a Sword, nor lie abroad without
informing the Senate therewith; and in the Night time, Strangers, and
especially Turks, are locked up in their Lodgings by them. Moreover, the Gates
of the City are never open but for three or four Hours by Day in Summer time,
and not above an Hour and a half in Winter. The Ragusians pay Tribute to the
Turks, whom they fear; to the Venetians, whom they hate; to the Pope, Emperor,
and King of Spain, upon consideration. Ragusia, or the Country of Ragusa is but
inconsiderable, comprehending no more than the Town of that Name, Stagno, and
two or three Villages. This City is very much subject to Earthquakes, and had
terrible shocks in 1637. and 1667. The Senate of Ragusa is composed of Sixty
Senators, whereof Forty at least, must meet together when they assemble for
Judgment. Civil Matters, at the Commencement of the Suit, are brought before
Six of the Senate, from whom there is an Appeal to the College of Thirty, who
are no Senators, and if the Decrees be for Sums exceeding 500 Crowns, the
Appeals are finally determined by the Senate. Their Judicial Proceedings are in
Latin, but they plead in Italian, or the Language of the Country. Criminal
Affairs are judged by an Officer, from whom there is an Appeal to a
Jurisdiction composed of Six Senators, and if the Sentence be confirmed there,
the Affair is terminated; but if otherwise, the Senate takes Cognizance
thereof, and Judges it. As to Politic Affairs of lesser Importance, the
Governor with Six of the Senate decides them, and these Six Senators exercise
that Charge a Year. Ragusa stands 82 Miles N. W. of Scutari, 160 S. E. of
Jaicza, 165 S. E. of Zara, and 168 S. W. of Belgrade. Long. 40 d. 40 m. Lat. 43
d. 3 m.

Stagno.
Stagno, Lat. Stagnum, is a small City and Seaport belonging to the
Commonwealth of Ragusa, with a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of that City,
from which it stands 18 Miles almost N. W. Long. 40. d. 40 m. Lat. 43 d. 18 m.

THE MARTIAL-FIELD OF EUROPE
SECT. VI. Greece Lat. Graecia.
THIS Country which the Turks now a days call Rumelia, Name.
derives its ancient Name of Greece from a certain King called Graecus. Another
King whose name was Hellen, gave it the name of Hellas, and its People that of
Hellenes. But the name of Greece is taken variously: for at first it
comprehended only two little Countries, of which the one was called Thessalia;
and the other Hellas, or Greece properly so called. Afterward Epirus, Macedon,
Achaia, the Peloponnesus, as also the Islands round about that extremity of the
Continent, received the name of Greece. Besides that, the name of Great Greece
was given to Sicily, and the lower part of Italy. And lastly, the name spread
it self into the Continent of Neighboring Asia, which was called Asiatick
Greece. Greece, properly so called, which we are now to describe, is bounded on
the North by a long Chain of the Mountains Mariani, Bounds.
which separate it from Romania, Bulgaria and Servia; on the West, by the
Adriatic and Jonian Seas; on the South, by the Mediterranean Sea; and on the
East by the Archipelago or White-Sea, formerly Mare Aegeum. It stretches from
the 42 d. Situation.
30 m. to the 49 d. 30 m. of Longitude and from the 34 d. 40 m. to the 43 d. of
Northern Latitude; Extent.
so that its Extent W. and E. is about 420 Miles; and about 500 S. and N.

Ancient Division.
Greece was formerly divided into six part, viz.

1. Peloponnesus. 2. Epirus. 3. Greece Proper. 4. Thessaly. 5. Macedon. 6. The
Islands.
Greece, properly so called, or Hellas was subdivided into Aetolia, Doris,
Phocis, Attica, Megaria, Baeotia,, and the Country of the Locri.

Modern Division.
Greece at this Day is divided into seven parts, viz. six large Provinces, and
the Islands.

1. Albania on the Adriatic Sea or Gulf of Venice. 2. Epirus, on the Jonian
Sea. 3. Macedon. On the Aegean Sea, or Archipel, or White Sea. 4. Thessaly. On
the Aegean Sea, or Archipel, or White Sea. 5. Achaia. 6. Morea, a Peninsule on
the South of Achaia environed with the Jonian, Cretian (or of Sapienza,) and
Aegean Seas. 7. The Islands.
The six first have preserved their ancient Names, except Morea formerly called
Peloponnesus and Albania, formerly part of Epirus.

The Air is here generally mild, temperate and wholesome. Quality.
The Soil extremely fruitful in all necessaries, as Corn, excellent Wine, and
Fruits the most exquisite in the whole World. There are also very good Pastures
that feed abundance of Cattle; and the Woods are stocked with Fowl and Deer.

The Ancient Greeks had the advantage over all other Nations for Learning,
Ancient Inhabitants. Their Wit.
Bravery and Wisdom. They were the Inventors of Arts and Improvers of Sciences,
and as they were renowned for Learning, so were they no less famed for their
Military Prowess, Courage.
extending their Arms into several Kingdoms of the Universe, so that People
resorted to 'em from most parts of the World, either to be instructed in the
Liberal Sciences, or else to learn the Art of War. The Country was so fertile
in Men of Learning, that the time was once when there were found to be above
three hundred Authors, who had made the Description of one Battle. Wisdom.
The Greeks were also the People, who first of all submitted to Laws, Laws.
and who found out the way to govern themselves and rule others. Their most
famous Lawgivers were Cecrops, Draco and Solon in Athens; Lycurgus in in
Lacedaemon or Sparta; Zeleucus among the Locri; and Minos in Creta or Candy.
Their Laws were so famed throughout all the World that about the year of Rome
303. and of the World 3533. the Decemvirs of Rome sent three of their
Colleagues, Spurius Posthumus, Aulus Manlius, and Publius Sulpitius to copy
them out, from which they framed the Laws of the XII. Tables, so much
celebrated in Roman Antiquity.

As Greece was the School of all other Nations, so was Athens the School of all
Greece; and the Athenians distinguished themselves from the rest by the
Curiosity of their Genius, and the Elegancy of their style. Nevertheless if
they surpassed the rest in Politeness and Delicacy of Wit, yet they were great
admirers of Tales and Fictions. Almost all their Authors were addicted to
Superstition, and their Poets were the Fathers of their false Deities and the
Inventors of the Pagan Theology. Religion.
Nor were the Greek Historians any more addicted to Truth, than their Poets.
Histories.
Their ancient Histories especially those of Herodotus, and Diodorus Siculus
are full of Fables and Romances; and their Modern Historians had recourse to
Visions and extraordinary Adventures to satisfy their Genius's, which is the
reason we have nothing of exact or certain knowledge of what passed toward the
latter end of the Constantinopolitan Empire.

At present the Greeks are so far degenerated from what they anciently were,
Modern Inhabitants.
so cowed by the Turks, both Priests and People so miserably Ignorant, and so
frequently abjure the Christian Religion to embrace Mahumetism for the more
quiet enjoyment of the conveniences of this Life, that were it not for those
Christian Festivals and Fasts which are in such veneration among them, the
Christian Religion would e're this, in all probability have been eradicated out
of the Country. Religion.
But by means of those solemnities wherein their Holy Performances continue
five Hours together, and sometimes seven they still preserve a Face of the
Christian Religion under a Patriach, Bishops and Priests, of which the Learned
Dr. Smith of Magdalen College in Oxford, has given us an exact De Graecae
Ecclesiae hodierno statu Epistola. Printed in 1678.
account. The Greek Priests and Prelates wear their Hair long, like the Layety
of Europe. Their Pontifical and Priestly Habits are different also from those
of the Roman Church. The Patriarch wears a Dalmatic or long Gown with Sleeves
all Embroidered, and upon his Head a Royal Crown instead of a Mitre. The
Bishops wear a certain Cap down to their Ears, like the Hollow of a Hat without
Brims. Nor do they bear crosses in their hands, but only a little crutch of
Ebony, tipped with Ivory or Mother of Pearl. In the Sacrament they make use of
leavened Bread, and administer the Sacrament in both kinds. They admit of no
Images in Base Relief, or embossed work, but only Paintings or Sculptures in
Copper and Silver, nor do they make use of Music in their Churches. Their
Monks or Caloyers, which are generally of the Orders either of St. Basil or St.
Chrysostom lead very austere lives, especially those of Mount Athos.

Greece comprehended formerly several Kingdoms as that of Epirus, Government.
Thessaly, Macedon, etc. there were also many Republics, of which Athens and
Lacedaemon were the most renowned. She fought a long time in defense of her
Liberty, but was at length subjected to the Romans; afterward she buckled to
the Emperors of Constantinople, and now groans under the Yoke of the Turks;
under whose Government all her Cities lie utterly ruined. It Is true Morea and
some Places in the other Provinces seem to breath again under the Protection of
the Venetians, who have of late, wrested them from those Infidels.

CHAP. I. Albania.
ALbania, is a large Province or Kingdom, formerly a part of Epirus, Bounds.
bounded on the North by Dalmatia and Servia, on the East by Macedonia, on the
South by Epirus, and on the West by the Adriatic Sea.

This Country was a Celebrated part of Ancient Greece, History.
it has been subject to the Turks for these 200 Years last past, that is, ever
since Mahomet II. won it from the Successors of the Renowned George Castriote,
alias Scanderbeg, he that beat the Turks in 22 different Battles, but at
present the Inhabitants, (who are about 70000 Souls, for the most part
Christians or Renegado's) seem much disposed to shake off the Turkish Yoke, and
to put themselves der the protection of the Venetians This Province was ever
famous for the Courage, Swiftness and Dexterity of its Cavalry, to whom the
Turks have been beholden for many a Victory.

The most Remarkable Cities and Towns of Albania are, Scutari, Bish. Cap.
Antivari, Archb. Dulcigno, Bish. Ducagini, Bish. Alessio, Croya, Bish. Durazzo,
Archb. Elbassan, Ocrida, Archb. Albanopoli, Pollina, Arch. Vallona.


I. Scutari.

Scutari, Lat. Scodra, was formerly a City of Dalmatia, and the Seat of the
Kings of Illyricum. It is now the Capital of Albania, and a Bishop's See under
the Archbishop of Antivari, and stands upon the River Bocano, 24 Miles from the
Adriatic Sea. The Inhabitants call it Scadar, the Turks Iscodar, and the
Italians Scutari: It was twice Besieged by Mahomet II. without success, and in
1487. resigned by the Venetians for a Peace. This City lies by a Lake, 80 Miles
S. E. of Ragusa, 178 S. of Belgrade, and 210 W. of Thessalonica or Salonichi.
Long. 42 d. 20 m. Lat. 42 d. 26 m.

II.. Antivari.

Antivari, Lat. Doclea, was also formerly a Town of Dalmatia, but is accounted
in Albania since the Turks are Masters of it. Pope Alexander II. of a Bishop's
See erected it into an Archbishopric in 1062. and gave it Ten Suffragans. It
stands on a rising Ground upon the Adriatic Sea, 18 Miles N. W. of Dolcigno,
and 60 S. E. of Ragusi. Long. 41 d, 32 m. Lat. 42 d. 13 m.

III. Dolcigno:

Dolcigno, or Dulcigno, is an Episcopal City under the Archbishop of Antivari,
seated near the Adriatic Sea, 18 Miles S. E. of Antivari, and 27 S. W. of
Scutari.

IV. Ducagini.

Ducagini. or Dagno, is the Head of a Territory of the same Name, with a
Bishopric under the Archbishop of Antivari. It stands on the River Drin, or
Drino, 24 Miles E. of Scuturi.

V. Alessio.

Alessio, or Alesso, or Alesco, Lat. Lissas, is seated upon the River Drin 8
Miles from its Mouth, and 12 S. of Ducagini. It is famous for the Tomb of the
Renowned Scanderbeg, who died there in 1467. and for whose Memory the Turks
have so great a Veneration, that happy are they who can approach his Monument,
and carry away some of the Earth, or a piece of the Sepulcher, which they tie
to their Elbows, as a precious Relick that raises their Courage in Battle.

VI. Croya.

Croya, or Croie, or Crua, is a strong and considerable City on the River
Lizane, reckoned by some the Capital of Albania. Volteran says that it was
called Troy; however, it has been a long time the Residence of the Brave George
Castriot, called Scanderbeg Prince of Albania. But after his Death Mahomet II.
took it in 1477. It was formerly an Episcopal City under the Archbishop of
Durazzo, and stands 52 Miles almost S. of Scutari.

VII. Durazzo.

Durazzo, or Drazzi, is a strong and celebrated Town and Seaport at the Mouth
of the River Argentaro, Built by those of Corfu in the 130th Year of Rome. Its
Ancient Name of Epidamus was changed by the Romans into that of Dirrachium,
which was the Name of the Harbor. In the Year of Rome 315. this City being
Besieged by a Company of Outlaws and Banditto's, the Inhabitants implored the
Assistance of the Corinthians, which were defeated by those of Corfu. The
Athenians Espoused the Party of the latter; and a small Quarrel was the Rise of
the War called Corinthiacum, and as it were the Leaven of the Great
Peloponnesian War, so famous in the Greek History. Durazzo was formerly an
Archbishop's See under the Patriarch of Constantinople. Bajazet took it from
the Venetians in the XVth Century. It has a good Haven, but the insalubrity of
its Air, makes it to be but thinly Inhabited. It stands 58 Miles S. of Scutari,
and 18 S. W. of Croia. 42 d. 26 m. Lat. 41 d. 28 m.

VIII. Pollina.

Pollina, the Ancient Apollonia, is but a small City, with the Title of an
Archbishopric, 46 Miles almost S. E. of Durazzo.

IX. Vallona.

Vallona, is a pretty strong Town, seated on the Sea, 54 Miles S. of Durazzo.
The Venetians took it in 1690. and found in it 130 Pieces of Cannon.

X. Elbassan.

Elbassan, is a small Town on the River Arzenga, 44 Miles S. E. of Croia, and
42 of Durazzo.

XI. Ochrida.

Ochrida, or Lochria, is a great and populous City on the Borders of Macedon,
seated on a high Hill, by the Lake Peltoum, with an Archbishopric. It stands
80 Miles almost S. E. of Durazzo, and 135 W. of Salonichi. Long. 44 d. 8 m.
Lat. 41 d. 4 m.

X.I. Albanopoli.

Albanopoli, is a small Town, yet formerly accounted by some the Capital of
Albania. It stands 60 Miles E. of Durazzo.

Article II. Epirus.
BY Epirus, is meant now that part of Greece which some call Lower-Albany,
bounded on the North by Albany, on the East by Macedon and Thessaly, on the
South by Livadia or Achaia, and on the West by the Jonian Sea.

Epirus comprehended formerly both the Higher or Proper Albany, and the Lower
or the Modern Epirus: The most famous People of this Country were the Molossi,
the Dryopes, Chaonians, Dolopes, etc. It fell under the Power of the Turk in
the XIVth Century, all but the Island of Corfu, which remained in the Hands of
the Venetians; but the latter have reconquered some Places in this late Wars.

The Principal Cities in Ep^rus are, Preveza, Panormo, Larta, ^astia, or
Bastick, Chimera.


I. Preveza.

Preveza, is a Fortress standing at the Mouth of the Gulf of Larta, upon the
Ruins of the Ancient Nicopolis, Built by the Emperor Augustus, to preserve the
Memory of the famous Battle of Actium, won by him from Mark Anthony. Marco
Grimani, Patriarch of Aquileia, General of the Popes Galleys, accompanied with
Andrew Doria, General of the League in 1539. endeavored to surprise this
Place, which was in the Possession of the Turks; but they were constrained to
retire. But Captain General Morosini made himself Master of in 1684. This Place
stands 90 Miles N. W. of Lepanto, and 150 S. W. of Larissa. Long. 44 d. Lat. 38
d. 24 m.

II. Panormo.

Panormo, is but a small Town upon the Sea, which has nothing considerable
besides the Haven.

III. Larta.

Larta, is another small City, on a Bay of the same Name, 24 Miles N. E. of
Preveza. It is still subject to the Turks.

IV. Bastia, or Bastick.

Bastia, is another small Seaport Town, nigh the Isle of Corfu.

V. Chimera.

Chimera, is a very strong City, built upon a Rock by the Seaside, 30 Miles N.
of the Isle of Corfu. It is the Head of a Territory of the same Name, and is
partly free, and partly subject to the Turks.

CHAP. III. Macedon.
MAcedon, Lat. Macedonia, is a vast Province of Greece, Bounds.
bounded on the East by the Archipel or White Sea, on the North by Bulgary, on
the W. by Albania, and on the S. by Thessaly.

It was formerly a Kingdom under which was Thessaly, Epirus, and even Thracia.
History.
According to Titus Livius, it went by the Name of Paeonia, Mygdonia, and
Emonia. Solinus gives it the Name of Edonia, Precia, and Emathia. This Kingdom
is said to have contained 50 several sorts of People in former Times. Caranus
descended from Hercules founded this Monarchy about Anno Mundi 3240. which
endured about 500 Years, became very samous under Philip and Alexander the
Great, his Son, and continued till the Reign of Perseus, whom the Romans
Conquered An. Romans 586. and reduced the Kingdom into a Province 256 Years after
the Death of Alexander the Great, and after the Succession of 41 Kings.

There are in this Province Mines of Gold and Silver, The famous Mount Athos,
now called Monte Santo, that shoots into the Sea, is also to be seen there.

Macedon is divided into three Parts, viz. Macedonia Proper, Jamboli and
Comenolitari. The most remarkable Places there are, Saloniki, Cap. Arch.
Zuchria, or Jeniza, Emboli, or Amphipolis, Siderocapsa, Xilopolis, Contessa,
Lita, or Lissa.


I. Saloniki.

Saloniki, or Salonichi, formerly Thessalonica, is the Capital City of
Macedonia, with an Archbishopric and a fair Haven. It stands at the foot of an
Hill upon a small River, and at the bottom of a Gulf or Bay bearing its own
Name. On the West side of it is the great River Vardar, which is almost half a
League over, and whose Banks are planted with very tall and thick standing
Trees. The Walls are Built after the old Fashion with Turrets or Towers at
certain Intervals, and are about four Leagues in Circuit. It is strengthened
with three Forts, the least of which is the furthest from the Walls of the
City, and stands at the Landing place, mounted with twenty Pieces of Cannon;
the other two are larger, and are joined to the City Wall, the Sea beating upon
them, each of them planted with 40 Pieces of Cannon. To Landwards it has a
Fortress like that of Constantinople, and bears the same Name, viz. the Seven
Towers, which commands all the City, as standing upon an high Hill, at the
bottom whereof there is a great Suburb, which also has its particular
enclosure. The City is well peopled by reason of the Trade of Silk, Wool, all
sorts of Leather, Cotton, Grain, Powder and Iron. The principal Trade of the
City is in the Jews Hands, who are exempt from Tribute, in consideration
whereof they are to furnish the Janisaries of the City with Cloth for their
Clothing. William King of Sicily Conquered this City in 1180. but afterward
the Emperor of Constantinople reduced it to his Obedience again. Andronicus
Palaeologus gave it to the Venetians in 1313. but two Years after the Turks
drove them thence, and have been Masters of it ever since. The Greek Christians
have 30 Churches in this City, the Chiefest whereof is the Archbishop's See,
Dedicated to St. Demetrius. This Church has three Bodies, supported by very
fair Pillars, and was formerly honored with the Preaching of St. Paul. There
are also five Convents of the Order of St. Basilicus, in every one of which are
about an Hundred young Women, who may, if they please, quit the Habit and
Marry. The most Magnificent Turkish Mosques are those Buildings that formerly
were the Churches of St. Sophia, the Blessed Virgin, St. Gabriel, and St.
Demetrius, Mahomet IV. who was Dethroned in 1687. changed the Church of the
Blessed Virgin into a Mosque; on each side of this Building are twelve great
Pillars of Jasper-stone, whose Chapiters or Tops support so many Crosses which
the Turks have not defaced. The Jews also have 36 Synagogues in this City, the
most considerable of which are that of Castille, of Portugal, and of Italy.
They have also two Colleges, which contain above Ten Thousand Scholars, who
come to study there from all parts of the Ottoman Empire. Of all the stately
Pieces of Architecture that were of old in this City, there remains nothing
very remarkable at present, save only a Triumphal Arch of Brick-work, supported
by two Marble Pillars, full of Trophies, and abundance of other Figures, but so
much shattered and defaced by Time, that it cannot well be guest what it was
erected for. The City is Governed by a Mousselin, Justice is Administered by a
Molla, and a Mufti Orders all Matters relating to Religion. This City stands
108 Miles S. of Sophia, 300 S. E. of Belgrade, and 330 W. of Constantinople.
Long. 47 d. Lat. 41 d. 37 m.

II. Zuchria.

Zuchria, or Jeniza, is a small City Built by the Turks out of the Ruins of
Pella, formerly the Capital of Macedonia, and the Birthplace of Alexander the
Great, upon the Bay of Salonichi, between the Rivers Bevola, and Castora, 27
Miles S. W. of Salonichi.

I. Amphipolis, or Emboli.

Amphipolis, is a City of Macedonia, on the Borders of Thracia, with an
Archbishopric under the Patriarch of Constantinople. The Greeks called it
Christopoli since, and its Modern Name is Emboli. It is situated on the River
Strymon, which washes it on every side, 60 Miles almost E. of Salonichi. This
City is very famous in the Ancient History of Greece.

IV. Siderocapsa.

Siderocapsa, is a small Town, only remarkable for the Gold Mines that are
about it; Philip the Father of Alexander the Great, caused a Gold Coin to be
Coined, called Golden-Philips, after that Crenidas had discovered the Gold
Mines there, and wrought them; which Mines afforded King Philip a 1000 Talents
of Gold a Year, and do still yield the Grand Seignior 9 or 10000 Ducats a
Month. There are no less than five or six Hundred Furnaces for the melting of
Gold in the Mountains near this City.

CHAP. IV. Janna, or Thessaly, Lat. Thessalia.
THessaly, is bounded on the East by the Archipel, on the North by Macedon,
Bounds.
on the West by Epirus, and on the South by Achaia.

This Country has had different Names, derived from diverse Princes who have
lived therein, Name.
and was divided into five parts, viz. Thessaly Proper, the Country of the
Pelasgi, Estiosia, Magnesia, and Phtiotide: Its Modern Name is Janna, from a
Town of this Name.

The Air is here very good, the Soil fruitful, producing delicious Figs, Water
Melons, Quality.
Pomegranates, Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, excellent Grapes, Almonds, Olives, and
all sorts of Corn.

The Ancient Inhabitants were well-bred, civil, but somewhat too voluptuous,
Inhabitants.
yet they did not want Courage: They were also noted for Magic and
Drunkenness; were the first that Minted Gold and Silver, tamed Horses, and put
Ships to Sea. They are still Warlike, and are a handsome Race of People, having
black Hair, black Eyes, and their Faces of a Beautiful, Sanguine, Fresh Color,
and are for the most part Christians.

This Country is encompassed with four great Mountains, viz. Olympus, Pindus,
Ossa, and Aeta, Mountains.
famous in the Greek and Latin Poets.

It had for along time its particular Kings, until it was subjected to the
Macedonians, History.
and afterward to the Romans. Deucalion was one of the most Ancient and
Celebrated Kings. He Reigned in the same Age with Cecrops first King of Athens,
349 Years before the Ruin of Troy. Hellen his Son gave Name to a great part of
Greece; Dorus his second Son left his Name to the Dortans near Mount Parnassus.
Xuthus the third was Father of Achaeus, Founder of the Peleponnesian Achaeans.
Ion his second Son, was the Chief of the Inhabitants of Attica. This Country is
very famous for the remarkable Defeat of Pompey by Julius Caesar in the Plains
of Pharsalus. Sultan Amurath Conquered the greatest part of it, and his
Posterity still enjoys it.

The most remarkable Places in Thessaly are, Larissa, Archb. Cap. Armiro, Volo,
Pharsalus, or Farsa, Archb. Scotusa, Bish. Voidenor, Demetriada.


I. Larissa.

Larissa, is the Principal City of Thessalia, (the Country of Achilles) upon
the River Peneus, 25 Miles from the Bay of Salonichi to the West. It is an
Archbishop's See, and one of the most flourishing Cities of Greece, by reason
the late Grand Seignior being disgusted with Constantinople, almost 20 Years
together, kept his Court here. It is pleasantly seated on a Rising Ground, in
the upper part whereof stands the Grand Seignior's Palace, upon the North the
famous Mountain of Olympus, and on the South a Plain Inhabited by Christians,
Turks and Jews. There is a handsome Stone Bridge over the River, consisting of
Nine Arches. This City stands 90 Miles S. of Salonichi, 160 N. W. of Setines,
or Athens, and 380 S. W. of Constantinople. Long. 46 d. 55 m. Lat. 39 d. 45 m.

II. Armiro.

Armiro, Lat. Eretria, is a City and Seaport, mentioned by Thucydides, Strabo,
Livy, and several other Ancient Writers; it lies upon the Sinus Pelasgicus,
which from it now is called the Gulf of Armiro, about 17 Miles from Larissa to
the South. Out of this Gulf the Argonauts loosed when they went to Colchis for
the Golden-Fleece, and in it the Navy of Xerxes was sorely shattered by a
Tempest, which then saved Greece. In the same Bay lies Pagase, in which the
Ship Argo was Built.

III. Volo.

Volo, is a Fortress that gives its Name to a Gulf of Thessaly to the North of
Negrepont. The Ancients called this Town Pagasa, and the Gulf Pagasicus Sinus,
(or Pelasgicus Sinus, and Gulf of Armiro). The Fortress has a good and spacious
Port, and was defended with good Towers, after the Ancient way of
Fortification. It was here the Turks kept the Magazines, which they gathered in
the Neighboring fruitful Provinces. General Morosini resolved in 1683. to pass
to Volo, to possess himself of the Provisions the Turks had laid up there; he
Battered the Place, and then Mounted the Assault. The Bassa that Commanded in
the Place retired to a Corner of the Town, that was pretty well retrenched, but
at last quitted that Post, and Surrendered to the Venetian General. He found
above Four Millions of Pounds weight of Biscuit, with other Provisions, and 27
Pieces of Cannon, which when he had Shipped, he set Fire to the Magazines,
Houses, and Mosques; and before he parted, beat down all the Walls to the
Ground.

II. Pharsalus.

Pharsalus, or Pharsalia, is very famous in the Roman History for the Battle
won by Julius Caesar against Pompey the Great in the Neighboring Plains. It
has since been called Farsa, being a Bishop's See under Larissa, and afterward
an Archbishopric under the Patriarch of Constantinople.

V. Scotusa.

Scotusa, is a small City with a Bishopric under the Archbishop of Larissa,
from which it stands about 18 Miles to the West.

VI. Voidenor.

Voidenor, is another small Town, seated upon the River Atrax, 54 Miles W. of
Larissa.

VII. Demetriada.

Demetriada, is a very Ancient, though inconsiderable City, upon the Gulf of
Armiro, or of Volo.

CHAP. V. Achaia; or Livadia.
A Chaia, formerly called Hellas, and Graecia, now Livadia, Name. Bounds.
and Rumelia, is bounded on the North by Thessaly, on the East by the Aegean
Sea, on the South by the Gulf of Engia, the Isthmus of Corinth, and the Gulf of
Lepanto; and on the West by the Jonian Sea, and part of Epirus. It had formerly
Seven Provinces, viz. Aetolia, Baeotia, Attica, Locris, Doris, Phocis, and
Megaris.

Pliny says, That the Wine of this Country made Women Miscarry; History.
and Pausanias says, That such as washed in one of its Rivers Slemnos forgot
their Amors. The Apostle St. Andrew is thought by many to have suffered in
this Country.

Parnassus and Helicon, two Mountains so famous among the Poets, Mountains.
are in this Country.

Achaia, is sometimes taken for a small part of the Peloponnesus, or Morea, now
called Romania Alta. and Ducatus Clarentiae; and sometimes for the whole
Peleponnesus.

The Principal Places in Achaia, or Livadia are, Setines, or Athens, Archb.
Cap. Stives, or Thebes, Archb. Aulis, Marathon, Livadia, Megara, Delphos,
Lepanto, Archb. The Dardanells of Lepanto.


I. Setines or Athens.

Setines anciently called Athens, was one of the most famous and flourishing
Cities in the World, the Capital of Attica, formerly a Kingdom, and the chief
seat of Learning and Valor, taking its rise An. Mun. 2496. and continuing 487
years, under 17 Kings, the first whereof was Cecrops and the last Codrus Son of
Melanthus. After that they were governed by 10 Archontes, or Rulers, during
life; than by Archontes for 10 years; and at last by annual Praetors. Draco
first gave 'em Laws, which were too severe, then Solon instituted Milder
introducing Democratical Government, 594 years before our Savior. Athens
sustained many great Wars against the Persians, Lacedaemonians, Thebans,
Rhodians and Macedonians. It suffered much under Alexander the Great, and after
his Death yet more under Antipater, Craterus and Cassander. Demetrius made it
free again, but being refused shelter there after his defeat in Phrygia, he
invested and made himself Master of the Town after a years Siege. Sometime
after it shook off the Macedonian yoke, and put it self under the Protection of
Rome, until Ariston making himself Tyrant thereof, irritated the Romans, who
took and plundered it under Sylla 87 years before Christ. After this, Pompey
the Great permitted it the use of its Laws, for which kindness it declared for
him against Caesar, who after the Battle of Pharsale, when he had power to
punish his Enemies, said, Truly the Athenians deserve to be chastis'd, yet in
consideration of the merit of the Dead, I pardon the Living. All was
Magnificent in Athens, and worth the admiration of Posterity. The Areopage, the
Lycaeum, the Academy, Portique, Temple, and other fine Buildings are well
described in the Works of ancient Authors. St. Paul Preached here, and several
Persons of Note embraced Christianism, as Dionysius the Areopagite, and a Noble
Lady called Damaris. After that the Church of Athens became very considerable,
for in the II. Century a great number of the Athenians suffered Martyrdom,
animated by the Example of their Bishop Publius. This happened in 123. under
Adrian, who came to Athens in 126. This City was afterward erected into an
Archbishopric. It is defended by a Citadel called Acropolis, inaccessible on
every side, save the West, seated in the Middle between two Hills; the one
called Musaeum, within Cannon Shot, the other Anchesmus, which has no place to
Mount Great Guns on, being Spired like a Sugar Loaf, and having no more compass
on the top, save that in which St. George's Chapel is built, the place where
formerly the Statue of Jupiter was Worshipped. The City is North of the
Citadel, and so covered by it, that it can hardly be seen on that side next
the Sea, well situated and wealthy, though in a hot Climate, which is tempered by
the North Winds. The Inhabitants are about 10000 Greeks and Turks, the latter
have four Mosques in the City, and one in the Castle. The Citizens are reckoned
Treacherous and Cunning, whence comes the Proverb, From a Jew of Salonica, a
Greek of Athens, and a Turk of Negropont, Good Lord Deliver us. They speak
Greek and Turkish promiscuously, and differ only in Habit, which the Greeks
wear closer on their Bodies. Their Women seldom stir abroad, when they do, they
cover their Heads with a Veil of Calico, and throw over 'em a large Crimson
Velvet or Violet colored Mantle with their Silver Clasps. The Maids never go
abroad till their Wedding Day, being courted by Proxies. Upon their Nuptials
they wear a large Crown of Filigram and Pearls, and are led from Church to the
Bridegrooms House, with Hautboys, Drums and other Musical Instruments playing
before them. The Archbishopric of Athens is not worth above 4000 Crowns a
year; wherefore most of the Jesuits are retired to Negropont. But the Consuls
of France and England keep each of 'em a Chapel here. The Soil about this City
is fruitful in Wine and Olives, especially those called Colymbades, reserved
for the Grand Signior's own eating, being large and well-tasted. The Castle
stands on the North, on a descent from the City, in which is a magnificent,
large white Marble Temple, supported with beautiful Pillars of black Marble,
and Porphyry. On the Frontispiece are the Figures of Horsemen, as big as the
life, prepared for Combat. Round about it are to be seen the noble
Achievements of the ancient Greeks in Basso Relievo, every Figure almost two
Foot and a half high. Close by this Temple is a beautiful White Marble Palace
much decayed. At the Foot of the Castle are 17. Colums 18 Foot in
circumference, and proportionable in height the remainder of 300, which they
say, formerly belonged to the Palace of Theseus. Over the Portal, yet entire,
is this Inscription in Greek.

This ancient City of Athens is certainly the City of Theseus.

And another within thus,

The City of Athens is the City of Adrian and not of Theseus.

Here is also the Fanari or Lantern of Demosthenes, whether he retired to study
in privacy. It is a small Marble Tower, with six Columns round it, and a Lamp
with branches over the Duomo which covers it, whence perhaps it was called the
Lantern supposed to have been dedicated to Hercules by the several Figures set
in the Frises thereof combating in Lions Skins. Here are also the Ruins of the
Areopagus, whose Glacis, or Senate House, 40 paces long, is supported by vast
pieces cut out of the Rock, and pointed like a Diamond. In the midst thereof is
a kind of Speakers Chair cut out of the Rock, with Seats round it for the
Senators. Add to these the Remains of the Temple of Victory, built after the
Jonick Order, where the Turks lay their Powder. The Arsenal of Lycurgus and the
Temple of Minerva, both of the Dorick Order. Setines was taken by Mahomet II.
in 1455. but regained by the Venetians in 1687. It stands nigh the Gulf of
Engia, about 120 Miles almost N. of Misitra, 160 S. E. of Larissa and 420 S. W.
of Constantinople. Long. 48 d. 20 m. Lat. 37 d. 25 m.

II. Stives, or Thebes.

Stives anciently called Thebes, was once one of the most celebrated Cities of
Greece, the Capital of Baeotia the Birth place of Pindar (who calls it
Heptapyle by reason of its seven Gates,) and of the renowned General
Epaminondas. This City sustained great Wars against the Athenians,
Lacedaemonians and Macedonians, it submitted to the last with reluctance, so
that upon the report of Alexander the Great being Dead, they revolted and
solicited their Neighbors to do the same: but the Town being taken a second
time, it was quite destroyed, not one House being left standing, but that of
Pindarus. Cassander, Antipater's Son repaired it 20 years after, and it had
afterward the Title of Archbishopric, but is now an inconsiderable Borough
subject to the Turks. The Venetians took it in 1687. and soon after left it
again, it stands 40 Miles N. W. of Setines or Athens.

III. Aulis.

Aulis is a City of Baeotia upon the Straight of Negropont, famous for the
Harbor that belongs to it, where Agamemnon and all the Grecian Captains
rendezvouz'd before they set Sail for Troy.

IV. Marathon.

Marathon called at this Day Marathona, or Marason, is a small Town in Attica.
It is famous for the Victory which 12000 Athenians under the Command of
Miltiades, obtained over the Persian Army of above 500000 Men Anno Romans 264.
toward the end of September.

V. Livadia.

Livadia is a Town and Castle of Achaia, from which all that Principality is
now called Livadia. It is subject to the Turks, and stands 70 Miles W. of
Athens or Setines.

VI. Megara.

Megara called by the Turks Megra (the Birthplace of Euclides) was anciently a
famous City, built upon two Rocks, but now one is Desolate, and the other has
but about 3 or 400 pitiful Cottages built one story high, and close together,
the Walls of which are but the Ruins of the former Houses, or a few Fagots
covered with Clay. A place at first Capital of a Monarchy, under the Reign of
12 Kings, than a Republic, which maintained diverse Wars with the Athenians and
others, and established a Colony in the Island of Sicily.

VII. Delphos.

Delphos or Delphes is a little Village of Phocis, under Mount Parnassus,
famous in ancient History for the Temple of Apollo, whence he pronounced his
Oracles.

VIII. Lepanto.

Lepanto Lat. Naupactus, is a City of Aetolia, (now Livadia) a Country of
Achaia, called by the Turks, Einebachri, seated near the entrance of the
Western Bay of Corinth, now called the Gulf of Lepanto. This City is built on
the South Side of a Mountain formed like a Sugar Loaf, on the top of which is a
strong Castle, surrounded with four strong Walls set at some distance one above
the other; between which Walls the Inhabitants have their Houses, and by them
the City is divided into four Parts. The Port is very handsome and beautiful,
and may be secured by a Chain. The Mouth of it is so strait, it will hold but a
few Ships, and those cannot go out and in at sometimes neither for want of
Water. The Country round this City is pleasant and full of delightful Gardens.
The Wine of Lepanto is the best of all Greece; but they pitch their Vessels as
they do generally over all Morea, and at Athens, to preserve the Wine (as the
Germans and Hollanders are wont to Sulphurate them for the same purpose) which
renders the Taste, at first, somewhat disagreeable to Strangers. The Turks have
five or six Mosques here, and the Greeks have two Churches, one in each Suburb,
though but very small, and they but few in number, and ill treated, for which
reason their Archbishop kept his residence at Marta. The Jews have three
Synagogues there. The Chiefest Commodities of the Place are, Leather, Oil,
Wheat, Tobacco, Rice and Barley; but the most considerable of all the rest is
Turkey Leather. In 1408. this City was under the Empire of Greece, but Emanuel
then Emperor assigned it to the Venetians who took care to fortify it as it is
now. In 1475. Mahomet the Great, the same that took Constantinople having
gained Corinth, besieged it with an Army of 30000 Men, but was forced to raise
the Siege, but in 1498. Bajazet II. attacked it with an 150000 Men, and took it
by the Treachery of the Venetian Governor, whom he had corrupted with Money.
In 1687. The Venetians having in the foregoing years almost beat the Turks out
of all the Morea, their General Morosini landed near Patras, notwithstanding
all the opposition of the Seraskier, whom he fought and defeated on the 24th of
July, and having taken Patras and the Dardanel Castle on that side; he crossed
to the other to Lepanto, where he found the Turks making haste to empty the
Place for him, whereupon he took possession of it with out striking a blow, and
found in it 120 Pieces of Brass Cannon. Lepanto stands 100 Miles S. E. of
Prevesa 140 W. of Setines, and 480 S. W. of Constantinople, Long. 45 d. 30 m.
Lat. 37 d. 25 m.

IX. Dardanels of Lepanto.

At the Entrance of the Gulf of Lepanto are two Capes, about 13 or 14 Miles S.
W. of Lepanto; that which joins to Morea is called by the Ancients, Anthirium
Promontorium, now adays Cape Antirio, and has a little Fortress called the
Castle of Morea or of Patras; The other that joins to Achaia, is called by
Strabo, Rhium Promontorium, vulgarly Cape Rio, and has also a little Fort
called Castle of Romelia.

These two Castles are also called Dardanels of Lepanto, in allusion to those
of the Hellespont. Their Figure is square, environed with strong Walls, mounted
with good Cannon even with the Water. All the Commodities that go out of the
Gulf of Lepanto, pay here a Toll, which comes to about 3 per Cent.

The Famous Sea Fight of Lepanto in 1571.
It was near the Gulf of Lepanto that a famous Sea Fight was fought against
the Turks, October. 2. 1571. in which they lost above 30000 Men, being the most
bloody defeat they ever met with since the first establishment of their Empire.
Besides the slaughter, the Christians took 5000 Prisoners, amongst whom, were
the two Sons of Haly, General of the Turkish Fleet. They took also 130 Galleys,
stranded, burnt, or sunk 90. and redeemed near 20000 Christian-Slaves. Neither
was the Booty less considerable, for their Fleet pillaged all the Isles
thereabouts, and took many Merchantmen. This Battle was fought in the same
Gulf were Augustus defeated Marck-Anthony: and it is hard to say which of both
was the most Glorious Victory. The Christians lost 8000 Men, the most
considerable whereof was Barbarigo, Commander of the left Wing. The Christian
Commander in chief in this Signal Combat was Don-John of Austria, natural
Brother to Philip II. King of Spain.

CHAP. VI. Morea.
MOrea is a Peninsule (in vulgar English, a Demi-Island) bounded Bounds.
on the North by the Isthmus, or neck of land of Corinth, that joins it to
Achaia, and by the Gulf of Lepanto; and on the other sides by the
Mediterranean Sea, called Mare d' Jonia on the West; Mare de Sapienza or of
Candia on the South; and Mare Egeo on the East.

It lies betwixt the 34 d. 40 m. and the 37 d. 30 m. of Northern Latitude,
Situation.
and betwixt the 44 d. 50 m. and the 48 d. 30 m. of Longitude, being in length
about 170 Miles from Castel-Tornese Tornese.
to the Cape of Schili; about 160 in breadth from Corinth to Cape Matapan; and
in circumference about 550.

This Country has had several Names; Name.
it was anciently called first Argo or Argos from one of its Principal Cities;
afterward Aegialeia from Aegialus a King of the Sicyonians; afterward Apia,
from Apis third King of Argos; Then Peloponnesus, from Pelops Son of Tantalus
King of the Phrygians, and at last Morea. Authors differ much about the
derivation of this name, some think that it is shape like a Mulberry-Trees Leaf
(Lat. Morus and in Greek (...)) made the last Emperors of Constantinople, call
it Morea. Others derive it from the Word Romea, which by a transposition of
Letters was changed into that of Morea; It being certain that as long as
Constantinople was subject to the Roman Emperors, that City was called New
Rome, and those of that Country Romeans, as much to say, Romans. Doglioni is of
another opinion and thinks the Moors gave their name to this Peninsula, when
they made Incursions into it.

There is no Country in Europe, that can be paralleled to this Peninsula.
Quality.
Its Air is clear wholesome, and temperate; It Soil Fertile and abounding with
Corn, Wine, Olives and all manner of Fruits, the most exquisite in the World,
and its Mountains full of Game, and Medicinal Plants. The Inhabitants
Inhabitants.
are accounted Witty and Courageous.

There are in this Peninsula several famous Mountains, Mountains.
viz. Foloe (now Dimizana) Cyllene, Liceus, Parthenius, Meralus, Sepia, Cronia
(now Grevenos) Mintia or Mente, (now Olonos) Neris, Nonacris, Taigetus (now
Orta) Of all these Mountains Cyllene, is accounted the highest, and Taigetus,
the most considerable, as being full of Deer, Bears, Wild-Boars, etc. All these
Mountains have been celebrated by the ancient Greek, and Latin Poets.

The Principal Rivers Rivers.
in this beautiful Country are,

1. The River Carbon (formerly called Orsea, Alpheus, or Alpehius, and
Strimphalus or Nyctymus Fluvius) so much famed for its Virtue of taking away
the spots and blemishes of the Skin, which besides 140 Torrents or Brooks
receives the Rivers Celadon, Erimanthus, and Amarinthe. The Poets feigned that
it ran under the Sea into Sicily, to be joined with the Waters of the Spring
Arethusa, because it goes often under the Ground, and comes out always with
more strength.

2. Vasili Potamos, formerly Eurotas, Iris, Hemerus, and Marthaton) which rises
at the same place where the River Carbon has its Source, and washing Misitra,
discharges it self in the Gulf of Colchine.

3. Planizza, formerly Inachus, Haliaemon, and Cravamor.

4. Spirnazza, (formerly Stomius, Pomylus, and Panysus) discharges it self into
the Gulf of Coron near Calamata.

There are also the Rivers Linceus, Astoria, or Stella, and Erasin, which run
with rapidity all along the Mount Stymphalus. As also the Styx that flows at
the foot of Mount Nonacris, and which the Poets have feigned to be a River of
Hell, because its Water, though clear and agreeable to the sight, is most fatal
to those that drink it.

Peloponnesus, after several Revolutions, fell into the Hands of Emanuel a
Greek Emperor about 1150. who at his Death, having divided his Empire among his
Seven Sons, was thereby the Cause of its Ruin. These Princes were called
Despotes, that is, Lords or Governors; they depended upon the Emperor, both as
to their Government and Election; otherwise they were absolute, and their
Dignity almost Hereditary, for it seldom happened that the Emperor chused any
Successor to the late Despote, but his Son, Brother, or near Relation.
Constantine surnamed Dragares Brother of Theodorus II. was Despote, when Amurat
made an Irruption into Morea. The Greek Emperor stopped his fury by the Promise
of a yearly Tribute. Some time after, Constantine being Crowned Emperor at
Constantinople, divided Morea between his two Brothers Demetrius and Thomas.
The Turks under Mahomet II. under the pretense of assisting Demetrius against
Thomas, took occasion of their Divisions to Invade their Estates, and the
Places the Venetians possessed in Morea, which they accomplished without much
Resistance after the Death of General Bertoldo d'Este, whom the Republic had
sent with a good Army to oppose them. Since that, the Turks kept here a
Governor, with the Title of Sangiac or Morabegi (that is Lord of Morea) under
the Beglerbey of Greece. This Sangiac made his ordinary Residence at Modon.

Morea is now under the Venetians since 1687. General Morosini having
Reconquered the best Places in it, viz. Patras, Lepanto, Castel-Tornese,
Corinth, Misitra, Napoli di Romania, etc. (as you shall see in the particular
Articles of each of those Towns) he caused all the Churches that were Mosques
before, to be reconsecrated; so that many Greek Families have left Achaia, to
settle in Morea, and more than 12000 Inhabitants have resorted thither.

This Peninsule has at different times been variously divided. Division.


In Pausanias's time it had but three Regions, viz. 1. That of the Arcadians.
2. That of the Achaians; and, 3. Lastly, That of the Dorians. After this
Ptolomy and others divided it into Eight Parts, viz.

1. Achaia Proper, 2. Arcadia, 3. Argia, 4. Corinthia, 5. Elis, or Elea, or
Cauconia, 6. Laconia, 7. Messenia, 8. Sicyonis.
Nowadays Morea (according to Baudrand, Moreri, and all Modern Geographers)
is divided into four Provinces, viz.

I. The Duchy of Chiarenza -- Chiarenza, Archb. II. Belvedere -- Modon, Bish.
III. Zaconia, or Braccio di Maina -- Malvasia, Archb. IV. Saccania, or Romania
Minor -- Napoli di Romania, Archb.
Article I. The Duchy of Chiarenza.
THIS Duchy Borders the Gulf of Lepanto on the North, Bounds.
Sacconia on the East, Zaconia and Belvedere on the South, and the Jonian Sea
on the West; it contains the old Achaia Proper, Sicyonis and Corinthia.

The most famous Capes Capes.
here are, 1. Cape Rio. 2. Cape Chiarenza, formerly Araxus Promontorium. 3.
Cape Torneso, formerly Chelonates Promontorium.


The most Remarkable Towns here are, Patras, Archb. Cap. Chiarenza, or
Clarence, Caminitza, Bish. Castel-Torneso.


I. Patras.

Patras, is a very Ancient and Flourishing City, called by the Turks Badra and
Balabutra; it is seated near Cape Rio on the North side of a Mountain, on the
top of which stands a good Fortress, 18 Miles almost S. of Lepanto, and 120 N.
W. of Misitra. Long. 45 d. 40 m. Lat. 37 d. 20 m. It is the Capital of the
Duchy of Chiarenza, and an Archbishopric. Toward the beginning of the Roman
Monarchy, this City had a great number of Inhabitants, by reason both of its
commodious Situation for Trade, and of the Fertility of its Soil. It is about
five Miles distant from the Gulf that bears its Name, where it has a good
Seaport called Panormus, which the Emperor Augustus chused for the Retreat of
his Navy; and for that Reason made the Inhabitants of Patras, Citizens of Rome,
and granted them several Immunities and Privileges, which gave occasion to the
Romans to call this City, Augusta Aroe Patrensis. The Goddess Diana was
worshipped here under the Name of Diana Latria, and had a yearly Sacrifice
offered her of a young Man, and a Maid picked out of the handsomest in all the
City. This Superstitious and Bloody Sacrifice continued till Euripiles came to
Patras, and was made a Christian Convert by the Apostle St. Andrew. Patras is
now very well peopled, especially with Jews, who drive a great Trade there with
the Grecians of the Neighboring Islands, and the English and French Merchants.
Its Air is none of the wholesomest, by reason of the Neighboring Mountains
covered with Snow, almost all the Year round, and of the Waters that surround
it. This City, with the Territory belonging to it, was formerly in the
Possession of the Despotes of Greece, the last of which not being able to keep
it against the Turks, sold it in 1408. to the Republic of Venice. The Turks
took it from the Venetians in 1463. but in 1533. they retook it from the Turks
under the Command of General Doria. The next Year after the Turks expelled the
Venetians, who took it again in 1687. after their General Morosini had given
the Turks a considerable overthrow in its Neighborhood.

II. Chiarenza.

Chiarenza, which is thought to be the Ancient Cyllene, stands on the right
side of the River Inachus, called by Ptolomy, Penaeus Fluvius, upon a Hill near
the Gulf of Patras. It has been a famous City, and the Capital of the Dukedom
of the same Name, under its own Princes. The Venetians made themselves Masters
of it, when it was still in a pretty good condition. But it is now so extremely
changed, that there is scarce any thing to be seen besides its Ditches, and
some miserable Vestiges of what it has been. Its Port which was capable of many
good Ships, is now filled up with Sands. It stands about 25 Miles S. W. of
Patras.

III. Caminitza.

Caminitza, called by Strabo, and Ptolomy, Olenus, and by Pliny, Olenum, stands
three Miles from the Gulf of Patras, on the right Bank of the little River
Pirus, betwixt the Cape of Chiarenza and Patras, at an equal distance from
each. It owes its Foundation to Olenus Son of Vulcan; but though it has been a
great City with a Bishop's See Suffragan of the Archbishopric of Patras; it is
now reduced to a small inconsiderable Borough.

IV. Castel-Tornese.

Castel-Tornese, called by the Turks, Clemontzi is a little Town, near the Cape
of Tornese, in the Duchy of Chiarenza, (or according to others in the Province
of Belvedere) Built upon a height that overlooks a great Country round about,
betwixt the Gulf of Chiarenza, and that of Arcadia, called before Chelonates,
about three Miles from the Sea. After the taking of Patras in 1687. Morosini
summoned this Place, which the Aga delivered presently.

Article II. Belvedere.
THIS Province Borders the River Carbon on the North, Bounds.
which separates it from Chiarenza; Zaconia, or Braccio di Maina on the East,
the Sea of Sapienza on the South, and that of Ionia on the West. It contains
the old Provinces of Elis, and Messenia.

The most famous Capes Capes.
here are, 1. Cape Jardan formerly Ichctus Promontorium. 2. Cape di Sapienza,
or Cape Gallo, anciently Acritas Promontorium.


The Places of Note in this Province are, Modon, Bish. Cap. Coron, Calamata,
Navarin.


I. Modon.

MOdon, called by the Turks, Mutum, anciently Methone, is in that part of
Peloponnesus, formerly called Messenia: It is a strong, rich and trading City,
with a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Patras. Its Seat is very
advantageous, being upon a Cape of the Sea of Sapienza, at the Foot of which is
a fair and good Port. This City was the ordinary Residence of the Sangiac or
Governor of Morea for the Grand Seignior. It has at several times undergone
several Revolutions. The Emperor Trajanus granted it great Privileges, which
were confirmed upon it by Constantine the Great. In 1124. the Venetians made
themselves Masters of it, under the Doge Domenico Michiole, but the Emperor of
Constantinople retook it the next Year after. In 1204. upon the Division of the
Empire it fell again into the Possession of the Venetians, from whom it was
taken by Leo Veteran a famous Pyrate of Genoa. This Usurper did not enjoy it
long, for being taken in the Hellespont, he was brought to Corfu, where he
suffered an Ignominious Death, which so frighted his Party, that the Captains
Dandolo and Promalino made themselves Masters of Modon without any opposition.
In 1498. Bajazet II. laid Siege to it with an Army of 150000 Men, and took it
after a sharp Battle with the Army of the Venetians. which came to relieve it.
In 1659. Morosini the Venetian General took it from the Turks, but they
regained it in the end of the Candian War. In 1686. the Venetian Arms again
prevailed to deliver this noble and strong City out of the Hands of the
Infidels. They found in it 90 Pieces of Cannon. Modon stand 15 Miles S. W. of
Coron, and 70 almost W. of Cape Matapan. Long. 40 d. Lat. 34 d. 58 m.

II. Coron.

Coron, has a strong and commodious situation on the left side of Cape Gallo,
called by Ptolomy, Acritas Promontorium, once a Bishop's See under the
Archbishop of Patras. It was anciently accounted a Colony of the Thebans called
Pedasus by the Poets; Epea by Pausanias, and Corone by Strabo and Pliny. The
Figure of this City is an irregular Triangle. At one of the Angles there is a
great Tower built in 1463. by the Venetians for a Magazine; the two other sides
that are not washed by the Gulf that bears its Name, leave a space wide enough
to go round the Fortress, which is environed with an old Wall, of an unequal
thickness, flanked with great Towers; and a little way further toward the
East, there is a Suburb with 500 Houses. This City has had several Masters.
Baudrand thinks that it was yielded to the Venetians by the Despotes Princes of
Morea; but Verdizzotti assures us that they never had it before the Division of
the Eastern Empire. In 1204. it was surprised by Leo Veteran a Genoese Pyrate;
but after he had been Executed at Corfu, Coron returned to its Lawful Masters
the Venetians, from whom it was taken by the formidable Army of Bajazet II. in
1498. The Spaniards under General Doria took it from the Turks in 1533. and
soon after were forced to leave it. In 1685. General Francisco Morosini made
himself Master of Coron notwithstanding the Vigorous Defense of the Besieged,
and the Succors that came to their Relief. Several Men of Note lost their
Lives during the Siege, which lasted 49 days; and among the others the
Commandeur La Tour, General of the Land Forces of Maltha, the Prince of
Brunswic, the Prince of Savoy, and Captain Ravagnin. All the Turkish Garrison
was put to the Sword. This Town stands 15 Miles N. E. of Modon. Long. 46 d. 20
m. 35 d.

III. Calamata.

Calamata, called by Baudrand, Thelame, Theramme, Thuria, and Abia, is an
unwalled Town of the left side of the River Spirnazza, or Pamissus. It is
seated in an open Country of the Province of Belvedere, is pretty well peopled,
and had a good strong Castle of a Regular Fabric. In 1659. General Morosini
made himself Master of it by a Stratagem, and abandoned it, after he had burned
it, and the Country round it. The same General took this Castle again in 1685.
and soon after caused it to be razed.

IV. Navarin.

Navarin, or Zunchio, Lat. Navarinum, Nelea, Pylus Messeniaca, the Birthplace
of the famous Nestor, is called Javarin by the Turks. It is divided into the
new and old City. The old is built upon a steep Rock, which runs into the Sea,
and makes its situation very strong, besides what Art has done to render it, as
it were, impregnable. On the left side thereof is the new City on the side of a
Hill, fortified with good Walls, and a Citadel with six Bastions, built by the
Turks in 1572. at the bottom whereof is a Haven, the best and most capacious of
all the Morea. The entrance of this Harbor is commanded by the Cannon of the
old Navarin. In 1644. Sultan Ibrahim chose this Haven for the Rendezvous of his
Fleet, consisting of 200 Sail, designed against Candia. In 1498. the Turks
after the Surrender of Modon, took Navarin from the Venetians and kept it till
1686. when General Morosini appearing before old Navarin with 200 Sail,
Commanded by General Coningsmark, forced the Garrison to a Surrender: But the
New Town made a stout Defense, in hopes of being Relieved by the Serasquier of
Morea, then upon his March. General Coningsmark leaving the Management of the
Siege to Chevalier Alcenago, fought and defeated the Serasquier, upon which the
Town Surrendered. It stands 13 Miles N. of Modon, and 28 almost W. of Coron.

Article III. Zaconia, or Braccio Di Maina.
THIS Province is the largest of the four into which Morea is divided: Bounds.
It Borders Chiarenza on the North, Saccania on the East, the Sea of Sapienza,
or of Candia on the South, and Belvedere on the West. It was formerly called
Lelegia, Aebalia, Name.
Argia, and Laconia. There are many huge Rocks, Caves and Precipices, which
render this Country subject to frequent Earthquakes.

The Principal Capes Capes.
here are, 1. Cape Matapan, of which we shall make a particular Description. 2.
Cape Onugato. 3. Cape Maleo, or Ale di san Michiel.


The Places of Note in this Province are, Malvasia, Archb. Cap. Misitra,
Zarnata, Chielefa, Passava, Maina.


I. Malvasia.

Malvasia, or Napoli di Malvasia, anciently called Epidaurus, or Epidaurus
Limera, and sometimes Monembusia, is seated near the farthest South-Eastern
Cape called Cape Maleo, with an Archbishopric under the Patriarch of
Constantinople. Is is built upon a Rock, whence it has a pleasant Prospect,
both into the Sea, and the adjacent Country. It is also surrounded with the
Sea, and joined to the Continent by a Timber-bridge, yet it has Springs of good
fresh Water, sufficient both to serve the City and their Gardens. This City is
of a very great strength, being only approachable on the South side, and there
it is defended by a good Tripple Wall. Next to this Wall there is a Suburb with
a good number of Houses, walled about with a strong Rampart. There is also a
very convenient Harbor defended by the Fortress. Its Soil is very fruitful in
Grapes, of which is made the most exquisite Wine in all Greece, and so much
famed through all the World: It yields also as much Corn as serves to maintain
60 Persons, which considering the natural strength of the Place, are enough for
a Garrison. This City owes its Foundation to a Colony of Argos; and was
anciently famous, and much frequented, on account of Aesculapius's Temple. Though
this place seem impregnable, yet it was taken in 1204. from the Emperor of the
East, by the French and Venetians under the Command of Baldwin Count of
Flanders, (the same that was Crowned Emperor of Constantinople) and retaken
again from William a French Baron, to whom it was given by Baldwin. Whereupon
he resigned his Right to the Venetians, who attacked it with a powerful Fleet,
and kept it till 1537. that they Surrendered it to Soliman to Purchase a Peace.
In the Candian War they took it again by Storm, plundered, burnt it, put most
of the Inhabitants to the Sword, carried away the Cannon, and then left it. The
Turks afterward rebuilded it. In 1689. the Venetians Besieged it again, under
the Command of the Doge Morosini, who being called home by the Senate on
September. 14. left it blocked up by three Forts, and a Squadron of light
Frigates. On the 10th of August 1690. it was Surrendered to the Venetians, being
the last Town in the Morea that withstood them. It stands 50 Miles almost E. of
Misitra, and 100 S. of Setines. Long. 48 d. 5 m. Lat. 35 d. 40 m.

II. Misitra.

This City was first called Sparta, then Lacedaemon, and now Misitra: It is one
of the Antientest of the World, and the most famous of Greece. Authors vary
much about its Foundation; some ascribe it to Spartus, Son to King Amicla,
others to Sparta, Wife to a King of Lacedemon; others to Cecrops, who also
founded Athens; and others assure us, that it was founded by Spartus Son to
Phoroneus King of Argos, in Patriarch Jacob's time, 1763. Years before our
Savior. In Polybius's time it was of a round Figure five or six Miles about,
being Commanded by Mount Taigetus on the West. This City now has but the
Miserable Ruins of its former Greatness: It is divided into four Quarters
separated from each other. The Castle makes one, the Land another, and two
Suburbs, called Melokorion (or the middle Suburb) and Exokorion (or the outward
Suburb). The Exokorion is separated from the other three by the River Vasoli
Potamos, but has Communication with them by a Stone Bridge. The Castle called
To Castron has very good Walls, and is so advantagiously seated on a rising
Ground, that some Historians assure it was never taken by open force, either by
the Turks or Venetians, Nevertheless General Morosini made himself Master of it
in 1687. It stands 120 Miles almost S. of Setines, 150 S. E. of Lepanto, and
526 S. W. of Constantinople. Long. 47 d. 32 m. Lat. 35 d. 26m.

III. Zarnata.

Zarnata, is a Fortress which both Art and Nature have conspired to make
strong, being seated on a very pleasant rising Ground, and defended with Towers
and other Fortifications. In 1685. the Garrison frighted at the approach of the
Venetian Army Surrendered to General Morosini upon Articles. It stands 25 Miles
almost W. of Misitra.

IV. Chielefa.

Chielefa, is a considerable Fortress seated on a steep Rock, of a square
Figure, environed with good Walls, flanked with five huge Towers: It is a Mile
in circumference, and stands about two Miles off the Sea, and 17 N. of Cape
Matapan, near the place where Vitulo a famous trading City stood formerly,
which has given its Name to Port Vitulo, now little frequented, because it is
neither safe nor commodious. In 1685. Chielefa Surrendered to General Morosini.
The next Year after the Turks endeavoring to regain this Place, were routed
and put to flight by the Venetians.

V. Passava.

Passava, is an inconsiderable Fortress in the Province of Maina, near the
Gulf of Colochine, on the Cape Mapatan, over against Chielefa and Port Vitulo;
it is built upon a rising Ground, but very irregular, and of no strength. In
1685. General Morosini took it without any opposition, and caused it to be
razed.

VI. Cape Matapan and Maina.

To the S. of Morea is Cape Matapan, which runs further into the Sea, than any
other Cape of this Peninsula. It was anciently called Promontorium Taenarium,
from the Cave Tenaro, whose vast spacious Gap gave occasion to Poets to feign
it the Mouth of Hell. The Sea round this Cape is very deep, and has there two
good Ports; the first is called the Port of Quails, by reason of the prodigious
number of Quails that fly thither; the other is called the Port of Maina.
Betwixt these two Ports, and upon the Ruins of the Ancient Cersapolis, the
Turks built formerly a Fortress which they called Turcotigi, Oliminias add
Monige, which the Greeks Interpret Castro di Maini. In 1570. the Venetians took
this Fort and razed it.

Article IV. Saccania, or Romania Minor.
THIS Province which comprehends the old Argia, borders the Gulf of Lepanto,
Bounds.
the Isthmus of Corinth, and the Gulf of Engia, on the North. The Mare Egeo on
the East, Zaconia and the Gulf of Napoli di Romania on the South, and Zaconia
and Chiarenza on the West.

The Palus, or Marsh of Lerna, where Hercules is said to have killed the Hydra
with Seven Heads, is in this Province.

The only Cape here is Cape Schili, Lat. Scylaeum or Plethon, Cape.
or Scillium, or Damala, or Sygillo Promontorium.

The Cities of Note here are, Napoli di Romania, Archb. Cap. Argos, Bish.
Corinth, Archb.


I. Napoli di Romania.

Of all those famous Cities which were formerly the Ornament of Argia, called
now Saccania, or Romania Minor, none but Napoli keeps to this day some remains
of its former Beauty and Grandeur. It is called by Ptolomy Nauplia, by
Sophianus Napli, and Anaplia by the Greeks. It is a strong and trading City
Built by Nauplio, Son to Neptunus in the farthest part of the Gulf commonly
called of Napoli anciently Argolicus Simus upon a little Cape that divides
itself into two different parts; that toward the Sea forms a good, safe, and
spacious Haven; the other toward the Land, renders the passage to the Town
almost inaccessible, there being no other but a narrow, stony, steep, way to
come to it, between Mount Palamida and the Seashore. Besides the advantages of
the situation, which render this City one of the strongest in Europe, it is
defended by a Citadel Built on a Rock in the Sea, a hundred Yards off the
City, which consequently cannot be Attacked by Land. Napoli was formerly a
Bishopric Suffragan of Corinth, but now it is an Archbishop's See, and the
ordinary Residence of the Governor of the Province, which is Inhabited by
60000 Greeks, besides a vast number of Strangers of several Nations. It stands
78 Miles S. W. of Athens, and 60 N. of Misitra.

Napoli, as most Cities, has undergone many Changes of Government; in 1205. the
French and Venetians together made themselves Masters of it. In 1388. King
Giovanissa took it by Storm, put all the Garrison to the Sword, and blew up the
City. Napoli came into the Hands of Mary Erigana (or Anguien by corruption)
Widow of Peter Son to Frederick Cornaro Piscopia, who being unable to keep it
against so powerful an Enemy as Bajazet, sold it to the Republic of Venice, to
which it was subject till 1539. when it was yielded to Mahomet II. to procure a
Peace. In 1686. General Morosini ordered General Coningsmark to possess himself
of Mount Palamida, which is within Musket Shot of the Town, and commands it;
and whilst he battered it from this Place, Morosini gave Battle to the
Serasquier that came to relieve it, defeated him, and took Argos, their Fleet
at the same time taking Ternis. Aug. the 29th the Serasquier advanced again
with a 1000 Men, and fell upon the Venetians in their Trenches, where the
Battle was dubious for three Hours, but at last the Turks fled. After the
Battle the Siege was pusht on with vigor, and the Turks Capitulated to
Surrender, on the usual Terms, and were conducted to Tenedos.

II. Argos.

There have been three Cities called by this Name, the first is Argos
Amphilochium in Epirus; the second Argos Pelasgicum in Macedon; and lastly
Argos Peloponnesiacum, of which we are now to Treat. It has been anciently
called Phoronia, Hippobote, Jasia, Diposia, Jappia, and lastly, Argos. It was
formerly the Capital of the famous Province of Argia or Argolis, and one of the
most Celebrated Cities of Peloponnesus. It is seated on the River Planissa,
Lat. Inachus Fluvius 7 Miles almost W. of Napoli di Romania. It was first a
Bishopric under the Archbishop of Corinth, and then erected into a
Metropolitan it self. It has the Mount Cronia on the West, and the Ruins of old
Mycene on the South.

This City has undergone so many Vicissitudes, that it has now but the bare
Name left as a Memorial of its Ancient Greatness and Splendour; the Magnificence
of its Buildings being reduced to some pitiful paltry Houses, and a Citadel.
This City was sold to the Venetians in 1388. by Mary Erigana, or Anguien, in
whose Hands it remained till Mahomet II's time. The Venetians took it from the
Turks in 1463. and lost it again a little while after. But in the Year 1686.
General Morosini recovered it again from the Tarks.

III. Corinth.

The City of Corinth, vulgarly called Coranto; Gerame by the Turks, and Ephyro
by Lauremberg, is seated in the middle of the Isthmus, to which it gives its
Name. It has the Title of an Archbishopric, and stands 85 Miles E. of Patras,
and 54 S. W. of Athens. It is commanded by the famous Fortress called
Acrocorinth, which is near it. Its Situation is so advantageous, that it is
called by some the Eye, and the Bulwark of Peloponnesus. The Romans upon
pretense of an affront offered to their Ambassadors, sent the Consul L. Mamius
who burned and pillaged this City Anno Mundi 3818. but by the Care and
Magnificence of Augustus it recovered its former Beauty and Riches. Since that
time it has often felt the fury of War, especially under Amurath II. and
Mahomet his Son, so that it has now but the miserable ruins of its former
Greatness, and 20 or 30 Houses or rather Cottages, it is subject to the
Venetias since 1687.

The Isthmus of Corinth.
The Isthmus of Corinth, Lat. Isthmus Argolicus and Corinthiacus, is a neck of
land about six or seven Miles broad betwixt the Gulf of Lepanto and that of
Engia which joins Morea to Achaia. It was anciently very famous for the Ludi
Isthmii or Isthmian Games, instituted here by Theseus, as also for its Theater,
Stadium, Neptunes Temple and the Forest of PineTrees, whose Leaves served to
Crown the Combatants. Several Princes as, Alexander the Great, Pitia,
Demetrius, Julius Caesar, Caligula, Nero and Herod the Athenian, either to
advance Navigation and Trade, or merely to raise a Monument to their Fame, have
at different times attempted the digging through of this Isthmus; but whether
interrupted by more important business, or wearied with the tediousness of the
Work, they have all of them left it unfinished. Whence came the Latin Proverb,
Istmum fodere, against those who undertake things beyond their strength.
Afterward on this neck of Land a Wall was built, which was called Hexamilon
because it contained six Miles, which is the whole breadth of the Isthmus. This
Wall was demolished by Amurath II. and being rebuilt and fortified by the
Venetians, was a second time pulled down by Mahomet II. in 1443.

Article V. The Boundaries of Morea.
THE Bounds of this Peninsule, as we have already hinted, are the Isthmus of
Corinth, of which we have already treated, and the Seas of Jonia, Sapienza and
of Candia and Aegeo, in which we shall consider the Gulphs.

I. Gulphs of the Jonian Sea.

There are in this Sea five considerable Gulphs, viz. 1. The Gulf of Lepanto,
called Crisaeus, by the Ancients; Helcyonius, by Strabo; Gulf of Pedras, by
Sophianus; and Corinthiacus Sinus by others its length West and East is about
80 Miles washing on the North the Coasts of Achaia and on the South those of
Morea.

2. The Gulf of Patras so called from a Sea Town of Chiarenza; which being
environed partly by the Continent and partly by the opposite Islands resembles
a spacious Lake, in length about 200 Miles and about as many in breadth.

3. The Gulf of Chiarenza so called from an ancient Sea Town, extends it self
from Cape Chiarenza to Castle Tornese.

4. The Gulf of Arcadia, called Chelonates or Chelonites, Sinus, by Ptolomy,
and Locardian by others; stretches from Cape Tornese to Cape Jordan.

5. The Gulf of Zanchio, called formerly Cyparisius Sinus, reaches from Cape
Jardan to Cape Sapienza.

II. Gulphs of the Sea of Sapienza or of Candia.

Here are but two remarkable Gulphs, viz.

1. The Gulf of Coron, which washes the City, whence it derives its name,
called Meseniacus Sinus, by Ptolomy and Pliny; Messenius, by Strabo; Coroneus
and Asineus Sinus by some, and Gulf of Calamata by others. It is betwixt Cape
Gallo, and Cape Matapan.

2. The Gulf of Colochina or of Castle Rampani or of Fleos, called Laconicus
Sinus by Strabo and Ptolomy, washes Laconia, and extends it self from Cape
Matapan, to Cape Malio

III. Gulphs of the Mare Aegeo, toward Morea.

Here are two remarkable Gulphs, viz.

1. The Gulf of Napoli di Komania, so called from the City of the same name,
and formerly Argolicus Sinus, because it washed old Argia; its extent is from
Cape Angelo to Cape Schilli.

2. The Gulf of Engia is separated from that of Lepanto by the Isthmus of
Corinth, it comprehends a great many little Islands and Rocks. It was formerly
called Saronicus Sinus, from the River Saron; Salaminiacus, by Pliny and
Ptolomy from the Island Salamis; Eleusinus, by Strabo, Hermonicus Sinus, by
some; and lastly Gulf of Egena, from the Island so called which is in the
middle of it.

CHAP. VII. Of the Islands about Greece.
Article I. Islands in the Jonian Sea.
The Islands of Note in this Sea may be reduced to Corfu. Curzolaires Islands.
Santa Maura. Cephalonia. Teacchi. Zante. Strivales Islands.


I. Corfu.

This is one of the most considerable Islands under the Venetians. It has had
several Names some call it Scheria, others Drepano, Ephira, Corintoa, Effiso,
Cassiopea, Argos, Ceraunia, Cercira, and Corcyra, from which lost its present
Name of Corfu is derived. It is 70 Italian Miles long W. and E. and 20 Miles
broad in some Places, 12 in others, and 120 in compass; its Soil is very
fruitful, abounding with Corn, Honey, Wine, and very good Oil. The Air is
serene, mild and temperate, which may be easily believed, if we consider the
Forests of Cedar and Orange Trees, that grow there.

There are 100 Villages or Castles and a Town that bears the name of the
Island, in all which they reckon about 41000 Inhabitants. The City of Corfu is
seated in the middle of the Island with a very strong Fortress, built upon a
steep Rock whose foot is washed by the Sea. It is an Archbishops See, and is
governed by six Nobles, which are sent thieher every other year by the
Republic of Venice, who is in possession of this Island, since 1327. Before
that time it was subject to the Kings of Naples.

II. Curzolaires Islands.

The Curzolaires Islands are five in number, they were known to the Ancients,
under the name of Echinades or Echinae; the greatest of them are Same and
Dulichio, about a Mile from the Continent, and 31 Miles W. of Lepanto.

III. Santa Maura.

The Island of Santa Maura or Lefcade was called by the Ancients Leucus, or
Leucadia. It was formerly a Peninsule, joined to the Continent of Achaia, but
the People of that Country dug it into an Island. It is 70 Italian Miles in
Compass; abounds with Corn, Wine, Oil, Tobacco, and all manner of Fruits. This
Island has 30 Villages, and the City of Santa Maura which is environed by the
Sea, betwixt Lefcade and the Continent, and is joined to this, by several
little Islands, which communicate to one another by Bridges, and by an Aqueduct
supported by 360 Arches. Its Walls are of an Eptogonal irregular figure flanked
with five great Towers: to the East, it has an Harbor called Damata. General
Morosini made himself Master of it in July 1684.

IV. Cefalonia.

The Island of Cesalonia, was formerly called Melena by some, Samo, or Same,
Dulichio, Tilebi, Casso and Chieffali by others. It lies on the S. of Corfu,
and is 170 Italian Miles in compass. It is very fruitful in Corn and Fruits;
The Trees bear twice in the year, and the Wheat they sow in the spring, is
reaped in June. There grow also Lemons of an extraordinary bigness; and great
quantities of Raisins which are transported into England. Besides several
Villages and Boroughs, there is a City that has the same name with the Island,
and the Fortress of Asso.

The CIty of Cephalonia is a Bishop's See, its Cathedral is an Annex of that of
Zanteg, it is the Seat of the Governor who is a Noble Venetian, with the Title
of Proveditor.

The Fortress of Asso was built by the Venetians in 1595. on a very high steep
Rock, surrounded with the Sea, so that it is accounted inaccessible. The
Fortifications are raised according to its Situation which is very Irregular,
this Fortress is joined to the Island of Cefalonia by a Neck of Land about 20
Paces broad.

This Island was freely given to the Venetians in 1224 by one ^ajus its Lord
and Governor.

V. Teacchi.

Teacchi, called Itaca by Strabo and Pliny, Nericia, Val di Compagno, Val di
Compare, Cephalonia Picciola, by others, Tiachi by the Greeks and Phiacchi by
the Turks, lies on the N. E. of Cefalonia, from which it is separated by a
Channel 20 Italian Miles long, and five broad. This Island is famous in
Antiquity for being the Country of Ulysses, and the Residence of the Chaste
Penelope during the Siege of Troy. The Inhabitants are 15000 in number, which
are Governed by one of the Citizens of Cefalonia, sent thither every year with
the Title of Capitan of Teacchi.

VI. Zante.

Zante was called Zacyn thus by the Ancients. The North of this Island is full
of Craggy steep Rocks, but to the South it has fine, delightful Plains covered
with Fruit Trees of all sorts. Besides a great number of Villages, there is a
Town and Castle that bears the name of the Island, with the Title of a
Bishopric, and the ordinary residence of the Governor or Proveditor of the
Island, who is a Noble Venetian. He has two Counselors under him, and the
Place of all three, lasts two years. The Castle is built on a Hill that
commands all the Island; at the foot of the Town, which stretches along the Sea
side the space of two Miles. They make there vast quantities of Raisins, strong
racy Wines, and most excellent Oils, to the value of 50000 Ducats per An.

Most of the Inhabitants are Grecians, who profess the Greek Religion; the
Latins, including the Soldiers, make but an inconfiderable number. There are
about 3000 Jews, who have there three Synagogue, and thrive a very great Trade.
There are also some English Merchants, most of them, Protestant. This Island is
subject to frequent Earthquakes which is the reason, why they built their
Houses generally but one Story high. There are in this Island several Greek
Churches and Religious Houses to the number of 44. under the Government of a
Bishop, who is to be chosen by the Greek Curates of all the Island. None are
admitted to that Dignity, but those who have professed the Monastical Life of St.
Basil, which is the reason, why there are here, so many Houses of that Order.
The Bishop has no Revenue besides the free Gifts of the People, and his Fees
for Ordination both which, amount to a considerable sum of Money.

This Island was sold to the Republic of Venice by Robert Tarente in 1350.
with several other Islands.

VII. Strivales Islands.

The Strivales are two little Islands, called by Seamen Stamfane, and by the
Ancients Strophades, Strivali, Stromphides, and Calydnes. They stand low, and
almost reach to the Water; their Haven is 50 Italian Miles distant from
Cefalonia. They are very small, the greatest of the two not being above four
Miles in Compass: Yet they yield great quantity of Grapes, out of which
extraordinary good Wine is made. There are no other Inhabitants but a sort of
Monks called Caloyers, who have Built their Convent like a Fortress defended
with good Cannon to secure themselves from the Assaults of the Turks. These
Islands are famous in the Ancient Poets, who feigned them to be the
Dewlling Place of the Harpies.

Article II. Islands in the Sea of Sapienza, and Candia.
THere are in these Seas but three little Islands, and two great ones, called
Cerigo and Candia.

The first of the three is called Sphagia, or Sphateria, or Sfragia, vulgarly
of Sapienza.

The second is called Cabrera, or Fuschella, or Teganuse, and Cauriera.

The third is called Venetico. Near these Islands are many Rocks, where the
Pirates of Barbary use to watch the Merchantmen which come out of the Gulf of
Venice, or from Sicily.

I. Cerigo.

Cerigo, is an Island of the Sea of Sapienza in the Gulf of Colochina, about
six Miles distant from the Continent. It was formerly called Cytherea,
Porphyrusa, and Schothera. It is 60 Italian Miles in Compass. The City that
bears the Name of the Island, has the Title of a Bishopric. Both Art and
Nature have contributed to make it strong. It is Built upon a high craggy Rock,
on the Seaside, with good Bastions (though irregular) defended with Cannon. At
the foot of this Fortress there is a Haven not much frequented, because it is
narrow, and exposed to the Winds: But 12 Miles from this Port, there is
another, large, commodious, and safe. This Island abounds with Fowl, but yields
but little Corn, Wine and Oil, so that Provisions are here extraordinary dear.
Here are many Villages, but of little or no consideration. There are also some
Monasteries of Hiero-Monachi, and Caloyers. Amongst the others, there is one
Built upon a very high steep Rock, on the right side, and pretty near the
Fortress, for which the Inhabitants have a great Veneration, by the persuasion
they have, that St. John began there his Book of Revelations. This Island is
also famous in the Fables of the Ancients, for being either the Birthplace, or
the Residence of Venus during her Youth; to whom they had Dedicated a Temple in
the Eastern part of the Island, under the Name of Citherea. This Island is
subject to the Venetians, who send thither every other Year one of their
Nobles, with the Title of Castellain, and Proveditor.

II. Candia.

Candia, anciently called Crete, is an Island and Kingdom situated at the entry
of the Archipelago, Situation.
stretching from East to West one side toward Asia, and the other toward
Africa. Extent.
It Is greatest length is from Cape Solomon to Cape Cornico.

The Country is good and fertile, Quality.
and has diverse small Rivers Rivers.
and Mountains, Mountains Inhabitanta.
whereof Mount Ida (different from Mount-Ida in Phrygia) now called Psiloriti
is the highest, from the top of which both Seas may be seen. It Is assured that
toward the Sources of the Brook called Lene, which is to the North of
Mount-Ida; there is a Grotto wrought into a Rock, which is said to be the
Labyrinth of Minos, made according to Dedalus's Directions. Its Inhabitants of
this Island were the first that made themselves powerful at Sea by Navigation,
and on Land by the use of Arrows. The sides their Experience at Sea, they
taught the way of taming and managing Horses; they first of all invented
Music, and were also the first that recorded their Laws. Yet they have always
had the Repute of being Vicious, Liars, and Pirates.

This Island was very famous for the Labyrinth of Minos, History.
Invented by Dedalus, and for the Ship called the Bull, wherein Europa was
carried away; for the Amors of Pasiphae, and by the Birth of Jupiter to whom
this Island was Consecrated. The Ancients reckoned above 100 Towns in it, and
called it Hecatompolis. The Lacedaemonians took Candia, in Darius's Name, in the
422 Year of Rome; but L. Celius Metellus Consul of Rome made himself Master of
it in 686 of Romans Afterward this Island was Subject to the Emperors of Rome,
and those of Constantinople until 823. that it was taken by the Saracens, who
Built the Town of Candia, that gave its Name to the Island. Nicephorus Phocas
retook it in 962. Boniface, Marquess of Montferrat was Master of it, and after
Constantinople was taken by the French and Venetians, he sold it to the latter
in 1204. The Venetians fortified this Island in some places to curb the
Inhabitants which were very subject to Rebel; for in 1364. they had a mind to
bring in the Genoeses, but they were diverted by the wise Politics of the
Republic. The Turks under pretense of Besieging Maltha in 1645. to be Revenged
for the great Prize that the Knights under the Command of Bois-Baudran had
taken in 1644. with a Sultan and an Ottoman Prince, fell into Candia, where
they continued the War until 1669. They made themselves Masters of Canea in
1645. and then laid Siege to the Town of Candia, which notwithstanding the
endeavors of the French to rescue it from the Hands of the Infidels, after a
desperate War of 24 Years was forced to yield to the Turks, but made honorable
Conditions. After the taking of this Important Place, the Turks made themselves
Masters of the greatest part of the Island, which they have kept ever since.
The Chief Fortresses which were left to the Venetians by their last Treaty with
the Port, are Grabusa, the Suda, and Spina Longa. As for their Religion,
Religion.
the Venetians are Roman Catholics, but the other Inhabitants of the Island
are of the Greek Church.

This Island is now divided into Four Territories, Division.
which bear the Names of so many Principal Towns, which are, 1. Candia, Archb.
Cap. 2. Canea, Bish. 3. Rettimo, Bish. 4. Sittia.
On the Northern Shore.

I.. Candia.

Candia, is situated in the most Northern part and about the middle of the
Island, to which it gives its Name, overagainst the Isle of Standia, with the
Seat of an Archbishop who had Nine Suffragants. It is both by Art and Nature
one of the strongest Places in Europe. Long. 50 d. 25 m. Lat. 34 d. 55 m. The
Turks laid Siege to it in 1645. after the Battle of Carvaca, but were forced to
raise it, after they had lost the best of their Army, but left it Blocked up
very close until 1667. and then they renewed the Siege again in the Month of
May, and took it by Composition in 1669. It is generally thought that the Turks
lost 5 or 600000 Men at that Siege, which exposed their Government to
Rebellions often begun at Constantinople. In 1692. the Venetians endeavored to
regain Candia, but were forced to abandon the Enterprise with considerable loss.

II. Canea.

Canea, was formerly called the Mother of Towns by the Grecians. It is a
Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Candia, and was taken by the Turks in 1645.

III. Rettimo.

Rettimo, is another small City and Bishopric, subject to the Turks.

IV. Sittia.

Sittia, is another City, Capital of a Territory of the same Name in the
Northern Shore of the Island.

Article III. Islands in the Mare Egeo, or Archipelago.
THere are in this Sea a great many Islands, of which there are but three worth
taking notice of, viz. Egena, Culuri, and Negropont.

I. Egena.

Egena, lies about 15 Italian Miles from the Seacoast of Athens, 10 of Culuri,
and 12 of Morea. It is called Egina by Strabo, Aenone by Baudrand, Myrmidonia
by Brietius, and Engi by the Mariners. It is 30 Miles in Compass, but has no
Harbor for Ships. Partridges multiply here to that degree that the Inhabitants
are used to search their Nests, and destroy their Eggs in the Spring, to
prevent the prejudice so great a quantity of Fowl might cause to their Seeds.

There are here two fine Monuments of Antiquity; the first is a Temple of Venus
toward the North of the Island; the second is another Temple Dedicated to
Jupiter by Aeacus first King of this Island.

The Town which bears the Name of the Island, was formerly dignified with the
Title of a Bishopric Suffragan of the Archbishop of Athens, and famous for the
Birth of Paul of Medicis; but it is now reduced to a Miserable Borough joined
to the Fortress, which is only remarkable for the Advantages of its situation,
upon a high craggy Rock, which over-looks several Islands of the Archipelago.

This Island was formerly subject to the Venetians, but since the time that
Frederick Barberossa took it from them, it was become a Receptacle of
Banditto's and Pirates. In 1674. Morosini forced them to Surrender at
Discretion, and having pillaged and demolished the Town, he caused 300 Greeks,
and 40 Turks to be Chained in order to Row upon the Galleys of the Republic of
Venice.

II. Culuri.

This Island was called by the Ancients Salamis, and is known to the Mariners
under the Name of Santa Bursia, and under that of Cychria, Scyrar, and Pityussa
to Baudrand. It has a Village which bears its Name, seated on the most Southern
part of this Island, with about 200 Houses in it, and an Harbor, which
according to Mr. Spon's Travels, is one of the largest in the World, being
Seven Miles long, and Two broad. This Island lies about 10 Italian Miles from
Egena, 2 from Attica, and is about 35 in Compass. It has about a Thousand
Inhabitants; and abounds with Corn, Rosin, Pitcoal, and Spunges, which the
Inhabitants Transport to Athens. Over Against the Coast of Athens, there is a
small Borough of 20 Houses, called Ambelachi, with a little Harbor; four or
five Miles from this Village, was the Ancient City of Salimene, a Bishop's See
under the Archbishop of Athens.

III. Negropont.

Negropont, is an Island of the Archipelago, separated from Achaia by Euripus.
It was of old called Eubaea and Chalcis; the Turks call it Egribos, and the
Inhabitants Egripos. Some Authors tell us, that this Island formerly was part
of Baeotia, a Province of Achaia, from whence it was separated by an
Earthquake. It is 365 Miles in Compass, 90 in length from S. to N. and 40 in
breadth. Its two most noted Capes are Cabo Figera, or Cabo d'Oro, (formerly
called Caphareus) and Cabo Lithar.

This Island is very fruitful, and abounds in all Provisions. There is the
Mountain of Caristo, famous for its excellent Marble, and the Stone Amiantos or
Asbestos, whereof they make a kind of Linen, which is made clean by casting it
into the Fire, as being incombustible. This Island produces Cotton enough to
furnish Sails for a whole Fleet. There are two Rivers in it, Similio and Cereo;
the first of which makes the Fleeces of the Sheep white, and the other makes
them black, if the Poets may be credited.

The Governor of this Isle is now a Captain Bassa, who has the Command also of
Achaia. During the Government of Doge Pietro Ziani, the Emperor of
Constantinople bestowed this Island upon the Republic of Venice, but they lost
it in 1469.

The Capital City has the same Name with the Isle, and is sometimes called
Euripont from Euripus, on whose Banks it is seated, toward the Continent of
Achaia, 45 N. of Setines, 130 almost S. E. of Larissa, and 380 S. W. of
Constantinople. Long. 48 d. 25 m. Lat. 38 d. 20 m. It is joined to Achaia by a
Drawbridge, which leads to a great Tower, formerly Built by the Venetians in
the Euripus, from whence they pass to the Continent by a Stone Bridge of five
little Arches. This City is about two Miles in compass, but the Suburbs, which
are Inhabited by Greek Christians, are more populous than the City, where none
but Turks and Jews dwell. All the Inhabitants are said to amount to the number
of 15000, of which 10000 are Christians. There are four Mosques, one whereof
was formerly the Cathedral Church Dedicated to St. Mark, and was under the
Archbishop of Athens. The Jesuits have a House in the Suburbs where they teach
Youth. The Turks Attacked this Place in June 1469. with a Fleet of 300 Sail,
and an Army of 120000 Men, Mahomet II. being present; the Besieged overpowered
by numbers, were fain to give way after a Gallant Defense. The Proveditor
Erizzo, upon the Turks entering the City, retrenched himself, and did not
Surrender till the Sultan had promised him his Life, but he broke his Promise,
and caused him to be Sawed through in the midst. He had a Daughter called Anne,
who beeause of her Beauty was presented to Mahomet, but she disdaining his
Caresses, incensed him to that degree that he cut off her Head with his own
Hand. Afterward the Turks exercised all manner of Cruelties upon the Garrison,
and the Inhabitants of the City, putting all to the Sword above 20 Years old.
In 1688. the Venetians Besieged this City with 24000 Men, and Stormed it twice,
but without Success.

Of Euripus.
EVripus, is an Arm of the Sea, between Achaia and Negropont, so narrow just
over against the Capital City of the Island, that a single Galley can hardly
pass between the Citadel and Tower of the Venetians: The Ancients called it
Euripus Euboicus, the Natives call it Egripos, and the Italians, Stretto di
Negroponte. This Channel has its Ebbs and Flows, like the Ocean, but still with
some particular Differences. Aristotle was so puzzled to find out the Reason of
the Flux and Reflux of the Euripus, that he is said to have cast himself
headlong into it; though others affirm that he Poisoned himself, and others still
that he died of a Cholick.

AN Alphabetical TABLE OF All the Cities, Towns, Castles, etc. Described in
this Book.
A.
ABarino, or Navarino Page 253 Acqui Page 152 Aelst, or Alost Page 14 Aerschot
Page 39 Agnetlin, or Agnabat Page 194 Agramunt Page 159 Agria Page 175 Air, or
Arien Page 69 Aix Page 127 Aix la Chapelle Page 114 Alba Giulia, or Weissemburg
Page 193 Alba Regalis Page 186 Albe Page 151 Alesco, or Alessio Page 228
Albanopoli Page 230 Alost, or Aelst Page 14 Altemburg Page 194 Altemburg, or
Owar Page 189 St. Amand Page 20 Amphipolis, or Emboli Page 234 Andernach Page
108 Annecy Page 132 Antivari Page 220 and 228 Antwerp Page 35 Aoust, or Aost
Page 134 Ardenburg Page 22 Argos Page 259 Arien, or Air Page 69 Arlon Page 55
Armentiers Page 20 Armiro Page 236 Arras Page 66 Arschot, or Aerschot Page 39
Ast, or Asti Page 137 Ath Page 67 Athens, or Setines Page 239 Avesnes Page 60
Avesnes le Comte Page 70 Aulis Page 242
B.
BAboisca, or Baboliza Page 189 Bacharach Page 90 Baden Page 84 Balaguer Page
158 Bapaume Page 68 Bar Page 195 Barcelona Page 156 Barcelonnete Page 146
Bastia, or Bastick Page 231 Bastoigne Page 55 Bataseck Page 190 Bavay Page 60
Beaumont Page 60 Beila Page 135 Belgrade in Servia Page 203 Bergen-op-Zoom Page
26 Berg St. Winoch Page 17 Bestercze, or Bistricia Page 194 Bethune Page 69
Bialogrod Page 198 Binch Page ^8 Bingen Page 97 Birkenfeld Page 95 Bistricia
Page 194 Boisleduc Page 24 Bonneville Page 129 Bonn Page 106 Boppart Page 101
Bouchain Page 59 Bouillon Page 45 Bovines Page 50 Brain le Comte Page 62
Braclaw Page 196 Brasgow Page 199 Breda Page 25 Brey Page 47 Brisac Page 82
Brodt Page 211 Brodrogh Page 180 Bruges Page 11 Brussels Page 30 Buda, or Offen
Page 181 Budoa Page 219 Burich Page 112
C.
CAlamata Page 253 Calcar Page 112 Caminitza Page 250 Cambray Page 63
Caminieck, or Kaminieck Page 195 Campredon Page 160 Ca^et Page 163 Candia Page
269 Canisa, or Kanisca Page 187 Cardona Page 159 Carignan Page 139 Carmagnola
Page 143 Casal Page 150 Caschaw, or Cassovia Page 175 Caseloutre, or
Keiserslautern Page 90 Cassel Page 19 Castanovitza Page 214 Castel-Nuovo Page
218 Castel-Tornese Page 250 Cattaro Page 219 Caub Page 90 Ceva Page 139
Chambery Page 126 Charlemont Page 50 Charleroy Page 50 Chasteau-Cambresis Page
65 Cefalonia Page 264 Chiarenza Page 249 Chiery, or Quiers Page 140 Chilafa, or
Chielafa Page 256 Chimay Page 60 Chimera Page 232 Chiney Page 45 Chonad Page
180 Cinq. Eglises Page 188 Clausenburg Page 193 Cleves Page 110 Clissa Page 217
Coblentz Page 100 Collioure Page 164 Colmar Page 80 Colocza Page 176 Cologne
Page 103 Conde Page 58 Coni Page 140 Corfu Page 263 Corinth, or Gerame Page 259
Coron Page 252 Courtray Page 18 Crevecoeur Page 65 Creutznach Page 90 Croia
Page 229 Cronstadt, or Brassaw Page 193
D.
DAgno, or Ducagini Page 228 Dalem Page 41 Dampvilliers Page 54 Darda Page 190
Darmstadt Page 93 Demetriada Page 238 Delphos Page 243 Deux-Ponts, or Zweybruck
Page 94 Die Page 34 Dinant Page 46 Dixmude, oa Dixmuyde Page 19 Dolcigno, or
Dulcigno Page 228 Dortmund Page 116 Doway, or Douay Page 18 Dunkirk Page 16
Durazzo Page 229 Durbuy Page 55 Duren, or Dueren Page 114 Durlach Page 84
Dusseldorp Page 116 Duysburg Page 112
E.
ELbassan Page 230 Elna Page 163 Emboli, or Amphipolis Page 234 Emmerick Page
110 Enghien Page 62 Ensisheim Page 81 Esche Page 53 Escluse, or Sluys Page 21
Esperie Page 179 Esseck, or Osseck Page 206 Eyndenhoven Page 28
F.
FArsa, or Pharsalus Fauquemont, or Falkemburg. Page 42 Ferette, or Pfirt Page
81 Flerus Page 51 Flix Page 158 Florennes Page 46 Fountain L'Eveque Page 62
Fort de Schenck Page 113 Fossano Page 139 Franckendal Page 89 Friburg Page 83
Furnes Page 19
G.
GAnd, or Ghent Page 10 Gelders Page 39 Gemblours Page 54 Geneva Page 130
Gengenbach Page 84 Gennep Page 111 Girona Page 161 Giula Page 177 Gradisca Page
211 Gran, or Strigonium Page 185 Grave Page 27 Gravelines Page 17 Grimberg Page
101
H.
HAguenaw Page 80 Halle Page 62 Hamont Page 47 Heilderberg Page 88 Helmont Page
28 Herk Page 47 Hermanstadt Page 192 H^sdin Page 68 Hermanstein Page 100 H^rne
Page 46 Hunningen Page 81 Huy Page 45
I.
IAieza Page 209 Javarin, or Raab Page 187 Jazy, or Jassy Page 197 St. Jean de
Maurienne Page 128 Jeniza, or Zuchria Page 234 Jeno, or Geno Page 180 Ingelheim
Page 91 Ipres, or Ypres Page 15 Judoigne Page 33 Juliers Page 114 Ivrea Page
136
K.
KAllo Page 181 Kaminieck Page 195 Kanisca, or Canisa Page 187 Keisers-Lautern
Page 90 Keiserswerd Page 107 Kilia Nova Page 198 Komare, or Comorra Page 186
L.
Landaw Page 79 Landrechies Page 60 Larissa Page 236 Larta Page 231 Lens Page
70 Lepanto Page 243 Lerida Page 158 Lessines Page 61 Leuwe Page 32 Liege or
Luyck Page 44 Liere Page 34 Lille or l'Isle Page 15 Lillo Page 29 Limburg Page
41 Liques Page 70 Livadia Page 242 Louvain Page 31 Luxemburg Page 52
M.
Maesyck Page 47 Maestricht Page 28 Maina Page 257 Maisiers or Massieres Page
54 Malines or Mechlin Page 37 Malvasia or Nopoli di Malvasia Page 254 Manheim
Page 89 Manresa Page 160 Marathen Page 242 Marienbourg Page 61 Masserano Page
134 Maubeuge Page 60 St. Maura Page 263 Mayence or Mentz Page 97 Megara Page
242 Meurs Page 111 Misitra or Lacedemon Page 255 Modon Page 251 Mohachz Page
189 Molsheim Page 79 Monaco Page 148 Moncalier Page 141 Mondovi Page 138 Mons
Page 57 Monstiers or Moustiers Page 128 Monblancq Page 159 Montgatz Page 178
Montmedy Page 54 Montmelian Page 127 Mont-Royal Page 95 Mulhausen Page 82
N.
Namur Page 49 Napoli de Malvasia Page 254 Narenza or Narenta Page 218 Navarin
Page 253 Negropont Page 271 Newenburg Page 83 Newhausel Page 173 N^^^^^^k Page
194 Newport Page 13 Newstadt Page 90 Nice or Nizza Page 147 Nigepoli or
Nicopolis Page 201 Ninove Page 14 Nissa Page 204 Nivelle Page 32 Nona Page 215
Novigrad in Hungary Page 179 Nuys Page 107
O.
Oberwesel Page 101 Ochrida Page 230 Oczakow Page 198 Offenburg Page 83 St.
Omers Page 67 Oneglia Page 148 Oppenheim Page 80 Orchias Page 20 Ostend Page 13
Orsoy Page 112 Orbassan Page 141 Ostend Page 30 Oudenard Page 14 Owar Page 189
P.
Palota Page 190 Panormo Page 231 Passava Page 257 Patras Page 248 Pernes Page
71 Perpignan Page 163 Pest Page 179 Peter-Waradin Page 206 Pfortzheim Page 85
Pharsalus Page 237 Philipville Page 61 Philipsburg Page 93 Pignerol Page 145
Pollind Page 229 Posega Page 211 Presbourg or Posan Page 173 Prevesa Page 231
Pruym Page 101 Puicerda Page 161
Q.
Quesnoy Page 59 Queyras Page 140 Quiers or Chieri Page 140 Quinque-Ecclesiae,
or Funff-Kirken Page 188
R.
Raab, or Javarin Page 187 Ragusa Page 220 Ravesteyn Page 27 and 118 Rees Page
111 Remborg Page 42 Rhinberg Page 107 Rivoli Page 139 Roccles Page 59 Roermond
or Ruremond Page 39 Rolduc Page 42 Roses Page 161 Ruffach Page 81
S.
Salona Page 217 Salonichi Page 233 Salses Page 163 Salsona Page 159 Saluces or
Saluzzo Page 142 Sarai Page 209 Sarbrugh Page 100 Sas-van-Ghent Page 22 Saverne
Page 80 Savigliano Page 140 Scaros or Saros Page 180 Selestad Page 79 Scardona
Page 217 Scorusa Page 237 Scutari Page 227 Sebenico Page 216 Seged or Segedin
Page 177 Segeswar Page 193 Segna or Zeng Page 212 Semenbria Page 204
Siderocapsa Page 234 Setines or Athens Page 230 La Seu d'Vrgel Page 161 Sigeth
or Zygeth Page 188 Silistria Page 201 Simmeren Page 91 Sluys Page 21 Soczow
Page 197 Sophia or Sofia Page 201 Soignes Page 59 Spalatro Page 216 Spires Page
91 Stafarda Page 143 Stagno Page 222 Steenkirk Page 62 Stenay Page 54 Stives or
Thebes Page 241 Strasburg Page 77 Strigonium or Gran Page 185 Susa Page 141
Swernick Page 207
T.
Targovischo Page 199 Tarragona Page 157 Tarrega Page 159 Tekin Page 197 Teina
Temeswar Page 177 Teina Page 148 Terouanne Page 70 Thienen, or Tillemont Page
32 Thionville Page 53 Thonon Page 130 Thuin Page 45 Tokay Page 180 Tongres Page
48 Tortosa Page 158 Tournay Page 16 Traw Page 216 Trebigni Page 218 Treves or
Triers Page 99 Trino Page 152 St. Truyen Page 47 Turin Page 138 Tyrnaw Page 174
V.
VAlenciennes Page 58 Valkenburg or Fauquemont Page 42 Vallona Page 230 St.
Venant Page 69 Venlo Page 39 Verceil Page 135 Verua Page 137 Vesprin or
Weisbrun Page 187 Vianden Page 55 Vich Page 160 Vigon Page 140 Vihitz or Wihitz
Page 213 Villa Franca Page 148 Villa Franca de Panades Page 157 Villa Franca de
Conflent Page 163 Vynoxberg, or Winoxberge Page 17 Virson Page 53 Vlmen Page 10
Vngwar Page 178 Vnna, R. Page 237 Volo Page 237 Voidenor Page 238 Vscopia or
Scopia Page 205
W.
WAlcourt Page 46 Great-Waradin Page 176 Weissemburg or Alba-Julia Page 193
Weissemburg or Cron Weissemburg Page 79 Wesel Page 111 Wihitz or Vihitz Page
213 Worms Page 92 Wynoxberg Page 17
Y.
YPres Page 15 Yseghem or Isenghien, F. Yvoix Page 54
Z.
ZAbern or Sabern Page 80 Zante Page 265 Zara Page 215 Zatmar Page 178 Zarnata
Page 256 Zemlin Page 181 Zemonico Page 215 Zeng, or Segna Page 212 Zolnock Page
176 Zulch or Zulptch Page 116 Zuchria Page 234
FINIS.
Books newly Printed for Tho. Salusbury, at the Kings Arms near St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet.
AN Essay against Unequal Marriages, in four Chapters, 1. The Introduction. 2.
Against Old Persons Marrying with Young. 3. Against Persons Marrying without
Parents or Friends Consent. 4. Against Persons Marrying without their Consent.
By S. Bufford, Gent. in 12. bound price 1 s.

Eachards Gazetteers, or Newsmans Interpreters, being a Geographical Index of
all Cities, Towns, etc. in Europe, with their distances from each other, and to
what Prince they are now subject; very necessary for the right understanding of
all Foreign and Domestic News Letters and Gazetts. 12. bound, price 2 s.

A most Complete Compendium of Geography, General and Special, describing all
the Empires, Kingdoms and Dominions in the whole World, collected according to
the latest Discoveries, and agreeing with the choicest and newest Maps, 12.
bound, price 1 s. 6 d.

Exact Description of Ireland, Surveying all its Provinces and Counties;
showing the exact state of that Kingdom, and all the principal Things that are
necessary to be known; Illustrated with five Maps, one of the whole Kingdom,
the other of each particular Province, 12. bound, price 1 s. 6 d.

Flanders or the Spanish Netherlands, most accurately described, showing the
several Provinces, their Bounds, Dimensions, Rivers, Riches and Strength; with
an exact description of the Cities, and who they are at present subject to;
very necessary for the understanding the Wars in those Countries, 12. bound, 1
s.

The Duke of Savoy 's Dominions most accurately described, with some adjacent
parts, showing all that is necessary to be known, and very useful for the
understanding of the present War in those parts. Price 3 d. The five last all
done by Laurance Eachard, A. B. of Christ's College in Cambridge.

The Royal Cuckold; or, Great Bastard. Giving an Account of the Birrh and
Pedigree of Lewis Le Grand, the First French King of that Name and Race; A
Tragy-Comedy, as it is Acted by his Imperial Majesty's Servants, at the
Amphitheater in Vienna. Translated out of the German Language, by Paul
Vergerius.


