To all Justices of Peace, or other Magistrates to whom this may come.
Friends,
The Lord God that made Heaven and Earth, has given you a day, and has put
Power into your hands for this very end and purpose, To try you, and to see
whether you will exercise your Power for or against him; Therefore be wise, O
ye Rulers, Come to Gods fear, and that will teach you wisdom, come to his
living witness, and that will give you a sound understanding: For he that is
placed in authority for God, bears not the sword in vain: For the Law was added
because of transgression, and it was made for the lawless, and for the
disobedient, and was to be a Terror to the evil Doer, but a praise to them that
does well: But, O! my friends, is not Justice turned backward, and is not
Equity fallen in your streets? And is not, (or has not) your Prisons and
Dungeons been filled with the innocent people that fear the Lord God, and
tremble at his Word, while the Wicked is at liberty, and the ungodly acting and
exercising themselves in all manner of wickedness, (as Stage Plays and other
filthy abominations) whereby the name of the God that made heaven and earth is
greatly dishonored; and the precious Light of his Son undervalued, and cast
behind their backs: Oh, Will not the Lord visit for these things, surely yea,;
and when he has tried his people to the full, he will then bring an
overflowing scourge upon this Nation. O, England, England, a necessity is laid
upon me to cry in thy ears; And woe be unto me if I keep silence. I am like a
drunken man, or one whom Wine has overcome, because of the Lord, and because
of the Word of his Holiness. O England, thou that persecutes Gods Prophets, and
imprisonest those that in love is sent to call thee to repentance, Will thou
yet remain hardened for all that ever the Lord has done, and is a doing in this
the day of his power? Will neither Mercy allure thee, nor Judgment affright
thee, nor awaken thee out of thy sins? Will not the men of Niniveh rise in
Judgment against thee? They had but one warning, but O England, thou have had
many. Ah my heart is troubled for thee, and my spirit is moved with compassion,
and I am constrained to say as a servant of the Lord said in former days, O
that my head were as waters, and my eyes as a fountain of Tears, that I might
weep day night for the misery that is coming upon thee: What Madness and Folly
has possessed thee? that thou should thus requite the Lord: Could he ever
have done more for a people then he has already done for thee O Nation: First,
he sent his servants, then says he, I will send my beloved Son, they will
reverence him; and now the Son is come, glory to him for ever: yea the Son of
God is come who has brought life and salvation, and we look not for another;
and though the heathen rage, and the people imagine vain things, yet in vain do
they strive, for the Lamb must have the victory: therefore have ye, have ye out
of Babylon, for behold the days come, that Tribulation and Anguish shall be
upon every soul that does evil: so that they shall cry to the rocks and to the
mountain^ fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that fits upon the
Throne, for the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand:

the 27. day of the 11. month 1667. Judith Bowlbie.

Some OBJECTIONS answered.
Object. I. MAY some say, The Quakers are a refactory people, they are not
obedient to the Laws of the Nation.

Answer, To this I answer; The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has
made us free from the Law of sin and death; and as for the outward Law, that
would again bring us into bondage, and would have us to deny the Lord that has
done so great things for us, which we cannot do, but are resolved in the
strength of the Lord to suffer whatsoever the powers of the earth are permitted
to inflict upon us.

Object. II. But may some say, if the Law be of no force unto you, how do you
expect to live in the Nation? Would you be banished from your Country and
Kindred into a foreign Nation amongst a people of a strange language?

Answer. I answer, If it were so, that they should banish us from our nearest
and dearest relations, yet can they not banish us from the presence of our God:
no verily, his presence will go with us; and in his presence there is fullness
of joy, and at his right hand there is rivers of pleasure for evermore.

Object. III. May some say, if it be so, That neither the Law, nor Banishment
can prevail over you, what remains, but even the sentence of death and
condemnation to be passed upon you?

Answer, To this I answer, There is no condemnation to those that are in Christ
Jesus. O death and hell do what ye may: For we do fight the good fight, we have
kept the faith, (and through the Lords strength which has hitherto assisted
us) shall finish our Course, henceforth there is laid up for us a Crown of
righteousness, and not for us only, but for all those that love the Lord Jesus,
and expect his appearance; and though our bodies be laid in the dust of the
earth, yet this birth shall never die, this birth which God has raised up and
brought forth in this Nation, it shall never go into captivity any more:
Therefore ye Rulers of the earth, O cease, cease your persecution; for ye may
as well say to the sea, be thou dried up, or to the Sun in the firmament, stand
thou still at noon day, as to think to hinder the Lords work in this the day of
his power, yea his strange work: Behold ye dispisers, and wonder, for I will
work a work in your days, that ye shall in no wise believe, though one declare
it unto you, and now the work is a working, and God has many witnesses: Glory!
Glory! endless praises, says my soul, be unto him and to the Lamb for ever,
and for ever more.

the 14. day of the 12. month. 1667. Judith Bowlbie.


