(...). THE TRIVMPH OF LEARNING OVER IGNORANCE, AND OF TRUTH over FALSEHOOD.
Being an Answer to four Quaeries. Whether there be any need of Universities?
Who is to be accounted an Haeretick? Whether it be lawful to use Conventicles?
Whether a Layman may Preach?
Which were lately proposed by a Zelot, in the Parish Church at Swacie near
Cambridge, after the second Sermon, October 3. 1652.

Since that enlarged by the Answerer, R.B. B.D. and Fellow of Trin. Col. Camb.

TALMUD. (...) Qui auget Academias, auget Sapientiam and Sapientes.

IGNAT. (...).

ROMANS 16.17. Mark them which cause divisions and avoid them.

ROMANS 10.15. How shall they preach except they be sent?

LONDON, Printed for R. ROYSTON at the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1653.

A CATALOGUE of the most famous ACADEMIES in all Christian CHURCHES, Digested
into the Order of the ALPHABET.
In Latin thus, (as follows) by L. 2. ad. Octavum, de Academiis.
Middendorpius (Vice Chancellor of the Universitie of Colen) and Alstedius. l.
24. c. 13. Encyclop. Scholas.

Anglia 2. Cantabrigiensis. Oxoniensis.
a Cantabro Hispanorum Rege per tumultum ac seditionem a patria pulso (long
ante Oxonium ab Alphredo) fundata. Bohemia 1. Pragensis.
Dania 1. Hafinensis.
Gallia 15. Andegavensis. Avenionensis. Aurelianensis. Bituricensis.
Burdigalensis. Cadurcensis. Dolana. Duacensis. Lugdunensis. Monpeliensis.
Parisiensis. Pictaviensis. Rhemensis. Tholosana. Valentina.
German. 25. Argentinensis. Altorfensis. Basiliensis. Coloniensis. Dilingana.
Erfordiensis. Francofortensis. Francherana. Friburgensis. Gryswaldensis.
Groningensis. Heildebergensis. Helmstadiensis. Ingolstadiensis. Lipsensis.
Lovaniensis. Leidensis. Marpurgiensis. Moguntina. Regiomontana. Rostochiensis.
Treverensis. Tubingensis: Vicimensis. Witebergensis.
Hispania 18. Conimbricensis. (in Lusitania.) In hac Ignatius Loiola, Ecclesiae
and Rerump. pectis, est educatus.
Complutensis. (in regno Castellae.) Compostellana. (in regno Galliciae.)
Eborensis. (in Lusitania.) Gandiana. Granatensis. Hispalensis. Ileridensis.
Majoricana. (Aliter vocata Lulliana.) Onnedensis. Oscana. Ossunensis.
Salmanticensis. Sequensana. Toletana. Valentina. Valiodoletana. Vallisoletana.
Italia 11. Bononiensis. a Theodofio Imperatore fundata. Ann. Dom. 425.
Ferrariensis. Florentina. Mediolanensis. Patavina. (a Carolo magno instituta.)
Papiensis. Perusina. Pisana. Romana. Senensis. Tauriensis.
Polonia 3. Cracoviensis seu Graccoviensis a fundatore urbis Graccho dicta.
Vnde prodiit Catechismus iste nuper ex merito flammis traditus manu Carnificis,
cum sit blasphemiis in Filium and Spiritum S. refertissimus. Cui hoc inscribi
jure poterat, (...). Posnensis. Samosciana.
Scotia 3. Aberdoniensis. Glasquensis. Sanctandreae.

Sic erat in fatis: Postrema est Scotia, nullum
Quae sane ob mores debet habere locum.
Genuinis Musarum Mystis, Legitimis utriusque Academiae filiis, Salutem in Jesus
Christo plurimam. P.A.L.
NE cui fit offendiculo, bilemve moveat, quod Cantabrigiam hic praefixerim
Oxonio: Norint Universi, post replicatos annals temporum, post reserata
monumenta veterum, me (qui veritati, non partibus studeo) pro compertissimo
habuisse, deberi primas, ( antiquitatis ergo) Grandaevae nostrae matri
Academiae. Quin apage has nugas de Antiquitatis titulis, and de inanis umbris
gloriolae; Contentionis nulla incensi facula posthac exardeamus; id solum
operae impendamus aemuli, ut vitae integritate, ut artium and virtutum
instructi choragio, ut Charitate, humilitate, contemplationis studio, and morum
exemplo alii aliis praeluceamus; Non tam anxie curantes quinam priores simus,
quam ne prius pereamus. Hoc tantum apponam, quod vir Doctissimus innuit, ut
amplificentur Scholae, requiri in magistratu paternum erga Scholas affectum and
animum, qui cernitur in amore literatorum, Privilegiorum tutela, and
munificentia erga literarum cultores: Tam benevole affectos magistratus
habuimus, ut porro habeamus usque, apud Deum obnixe precibus contendamus.

Florente Republica literis omnibus honor maximus fuit: nihil in ea urbe majus,
nihil optabilius literis and doctrina extitit.

Blondus de Repub. Romana.
To all sincere and true-hearted Christians, Lovers of Learning, Truth and
Peace.
THe Jews have a saying not more short then ingenuous, that Truth stands upon
two Legs, and a Lie upon one: (...) Talm.
Their meaning is, That as Falsehood and Haeresie fall at the length of
themselves without any contradiction, so, Truth is and ever was firm, stable,
and lasting getting ground growth, and strength by opposition. By this means
many Questions which lay hid, and as it were buried in the grave of silence,
are raised, discussed, and evidenced even to vulgar capacities.

S. Augustine in his 18. l. de Civ. Dei, cap. 51. Treating of Haereticks, and
proving that the Catholic faith is strengthened and confirmed by haereticall
dissentions, says thus of false Teachers, Habentur in exercentibus inimicis,
etc. They are to be put into the file or number of those enemies who exercise
the gifts and graces of Gods servants; who, like the Stars that shine
brightest in the cold nights of Winter, are in times of Opposition more active
then ever in Zeal, more Vigilant and circumspect in their lives, (as those
Dabant operam per inculpatos mores ut illius dogmata non plus valerent. Sozom.
lib. 6. cap. 27.
Religious men were in the days of Apollinaris; who labored to outshine him
in strictness of life, knowing that by this his opinions thrived and
prevailed.) Lastly, more earnest in their devotion and prayers to the Father of
Lights, Jam. 1.17.
that the seduced may be undeceived, and the Seducers convinced of their
errors. This (not to be seen in Print, which is a poor piece of ambitious
pride) is the scope of my pen, and the aim of my unworthy endeavors:
Especially now that Hujus fursuris (ne dicam farinae) est Burtonus iste,
besternae diei homulus, cui doctrinam and pictatem audaciae inauditae parem
optamus.
little birds, scarce fledgd or hatched, flying with their shells upon their
heads, and having only a feather or two of boldness in their faces, shall dare
and that in the bosom of their Nurse or Mother preach or rather prate against
Learning, which they never had, and inveigh against Universities, qua tales,
simply as Universities, of which they never deserved to be Members.

It is an ill bird, etc. Every Englishman knows what follows in the proverb.
There are no such enemies to Learning as the Malicious and Ignorant.

It was my happiness of late to meet with some Adversaries, not perhaps so
knowing, yet more candid then the former, Declamers against Academies, and men
of more Christian Spirits, not (as S. Augustine writes of the Donatists) Ep.
167.
pertinacia insuperabiles, invincible and pertinacious in their opinions, but
such whose minds were tuned to that obedience and meekness, that they after a
long and mild debate yielded, with thankful acknowledgments and protestations
of love, to my reasons. And hereby declared plainly before the Congregation,
that they were free from that whereof they were falsely suspected, i. e.
Haeresie: agreeable to that of the Learned and most profound Augustine. Ep. 162.
Qui sententiam suam quamvis falsam atque perversam nulla pertinaci animositate
defendunt, sed veritatem cauta solicitudine quaerunt, corrigi parati cum
invenerint, nequa quam sunt inter haereticos deputandi. The meaning of which
words in brief is this, that He only is to be counted an Haeretick who
persists with obstinacy in an opinion which is against the word, not He, who
erres, yet is ready to forsake his error and yield to the Truth so soon as he
is convinced of it.

This pious and humble Temper was in those my Antagonists; for whose farther
confirmation; and satisfaction to their modest desires, together with the rest
of that populous Parish of Swacie, I have published the Discourse with some
enlargements, hoping that it will meet with as good success (by Gods blessing
on it) in the conviction of those by whom it shall be perused, whose judgments
perhaps have been formerly perverted by false Teachers; who beguile unstable
Souls, having hearts exercised (or overcome) with covetousness; cursed
Children (they are children for their Ignorance) who forsaking the way of all
righteousness have gone astray, following the way of Balaam that made Israel to
sin. 2 Pet. 2.14.15. Jude ver. 11. Number. 25.2. 31 16.
Such blind guides as these have been the cause of many poor Souls falling
into the ditch of Haeresie, which (if backed with obstinacy) is a bar that
shuts men out of all hope of glory. This hereafter shall be proved in my answer
to the second Doubt.

May the Infinite goodness, (to whose only glory I humbly desire to devote my
self and all my weak endeavors) make them as useful and beneficial in the
confirming and reforming of weak deceived Souls, as they are well meant and
intended to the Churches good, by the unworthiest of his servants: who am
likewise, Christian Reader,

Thine in Christ Jesus, R. BOREMAN.

A SHORT VINDICATION OF THE Use and Necessity of Universities, and other
Schools of Learning; Being An Answer to the first Quere, What need is there of
Universities?
IT is truly observed by a learned Gentillet. exam. Council. Triden. Li. 1.
Sect. 7. 8. Ignorantiam and Romanae sedis autoritate^ simul auctam, etc.
Vicissimque ut bonarum artium and literarum instauratione facessere caepit
ignorantia ita and Pontificis autoritas paulatim imminui and labascere visa est.
Writer that the Pope of Rome, and that Church never flew higher in power,
never sunk deeper into error then when Ignorance prevailed, and Learning was
suppressed. We may as safely, and with as much truth assert, That where the
purity of God's Word is corrupted, and not preserved in it is integrity, that
Kingdom, Church, or State cannot but fall into ruin, and moulder away into
divisions caused by the multiplicity of false Opinions, which being joined with
Schism, do often (as they have now done) engender, and beget a monster, the
subverter of all Government, and the disturber of Peace, the nurse of Religion.
This and Learning we may fitly resemble to the great Luminaries of Heaven, the
Sun and Moon, both for their light and influence. And as for the preserving
the entire luster of the Moon, there is required a continual emanation of
light from the Sun; So Learning borrowes it is true light from Religion,
without which a man having a learned Head and an unsanctified Heart, is the
fittest Agent and best Instrument for the Devil to do mischief with: But now
here is the difference between that lesser Luminarie and Learning, in that
resemblance; The Moon repaies no tribute, conferrs no benefit to the Sun,
but Learning by way of reflection conduces much (if not to the being precisely
taken, at least) to the happy and well being of Religion. These two, like Eros
and Anteros in the Fable of the Poets, are sick and well both at a time. G Naz.
Orat. 3.
Julian the Apostat understood this well when he put down by a poblike Edict
the Schools where the Children of Christians were to be educated; So did Pope
Platin. in vita ejus.
Paulus the second when he absurdly pronounced those Heretics, that did
either in jest or earnest but use the Word Academie in their Tongues or
Writings. The Jesuits and their Factours, men subtle in their Generations,
and active in their mischeivous intentions, they know the same, and therefore
endeavor now to effect, (what of late one vauntingly said in the Ears of a
good Protestant would be done) that is, To destroy the Universities, and with
them the Ministry and Religion.

That the Universities so called as Fab. Soranus in Thesauro.
one explaines the term, because the Circle of all the Arts and Sciences is in
them expounded or taught to young Students and others of all sorts, Degrees and
Callings whatsoever; That these Universities, and other Schools of Learning
(seedplots, and nurceries subordinat to them) are not only profitable to the
Church, but also necessary for the maintenance of Religion so necessary, that
without them, neither the Doctrine of the Gospel can be preserved pure and
uncorrupted, neither the Church, wherein we live, stand sure upon it is
foundation, but will certainly be destroyed; This I shall endeavor to prove by
a familiar climax or gradation, proposed to vulgar capacities by way of
question.

First, by what means can the Church be pure and free from Heresies without
the guidance, and light of the pure Word of God, the holy Scriptures?

2. How can that Word be preserved in it is purity without the Ministry?

3. How can there be a Ministry without able and fit Ministers to explain
and publish that Word purely without corruption? whose Office it is to act the
parts of Truth's Champions, to defend it against seducing Heretics, who (as
Tertul. lib. de praescript. Scripturas obtendunt and hac sua audacia quosdam
movent, etc.
Tertullian well notes, evermore allege Scripture to back and bolster out
their absurd Opinions, and by this their boldness they move some, tire out
those that are strong by their restless disputes, take the weak in their
Nets, and as for those of a middle temper, these they send away full of doubts
and scruples. And whence do Heresies arise, but from this (as St. Aug. Tract.
18 in Evang Joh.
Augustine observes) dum Scripturae bonae intelligantur non been, and quod in
eis non been intelligitur etiam temere and audacter asseritur? etc. i.e. "
Whilst the good Word of God is not well understood, and that which is not well
understood is rashly and boldly asserted for truth, etc. Now in the fourth
place. How can such stout Champions, learned and faithful Pastors, be had
without Schools of learning, the Vnivesitirs?

It will follow then by a necessary Illation or Consequence that without
Universities, out of which such Learned, Wise, Orthodox and pious men may be
called and produced to govern particular Congregations, and to sit at the Helm
of the Church; This cannot be preserved secure and entire from Heresies, but
will be like the Luke 8.23.
Ship wherein our Savior was asleep, i.e. battered with tempests, and beaten
with the waves of contrary Opinions.

For this cause we find in ancient Records, that not only among the people
of God, the ancient Jews and Christians, but also even among the Gentiles
evermore in all ages, great care and diligence was used to ordain and
maintain Schools of learning, and to place in them holy and knowing men, whom
they encouraged with large stipends, by whose pains and parts the liberal
Arts and Sciences, together with the Doctrine of their Religion might be taught
and fastened in the people's Memories.

To omit the Schools of the Gentiles, as of the Egyptians ( Alsted. li. 24.
c. 13. Encycl. Scholast. Heurn. primord. Philosoph.
to whom Learning and Arts were derived from the Jews) likewise those of the
Chaldeans, Babylonians, Persians, Greeks and Romans, all which (to the shame of
Christians in these times) had learned, and men of Wisdom in high estimation,
especially of Professors and assertours of their Religion, such were their
Magi, their Gymnosophists, their Philosophers, their Augures or Sowthsayers;
omitting these, I shall only make a plain discovery of the Schools erected
by the People of God, as well before as after Christ, and then leave it to the
Judgments of discreet and moderate Judges, whether a want of love to Religion,
and the fear of God does not discover it self in the profane practices of
those men, who labor to pull down the Ministry (which is now the Jesuits
maine design) by doing as the Genesis 26.18.
Philistines did by the Wells of Abraham, i. e. by seeking to stop the Springs
and Fountains of Learning, into which they have thrown dirt and stones, by
undeserved slanders, and reproachful infamies.

Colleges and Schools under the old Law.
If we traverse the story of the old Testament, we shall find that there were
(and this not without the prescript or command of God) in the Kingdom of
Israel Schools constituted and opened to public use; in some whereof were
placed Levites, in others Prophets to teach and explicate the Law of God, to
train up Disciples or Scholars, who afterward should teach either in the
Temples or Synagogues, and propagate the Doctrine of the Law to succeeding
Generations. For who were the Sons of the Prophets, of whom there is so often
mention made in the Book of the Kings; but those that were students educated
and brought up in those Schools, whereof the Prophets were heads and
Governors? 1 Kings 20 35. 1 Kings 2.3.7.15.
This was the intent or meaning of the Prophet Amos, when he said, I am not a
Prophet nor the Son of a Prophet, Amos 7.14.
i.e. never brought up in the Schools of the learned Prophets.

What was the reason that the Lord commanded 48 Cities with their Suburbs to be
assigned to the Levites above their Brethren of the other Tribes? Numb. 35.2.
was it not for this, that in the Land of Israel there might be Schools and
Colleges, in the which the Levites might teach and instruct young Novices,
their pupils, in the Law of God, and thereby fit them for the Offices of the
Sanctuary?

Over these Schools or Colleges there were ever placed men renowned for their
Piety, Learning, Prudence, and Gravity of Manners, and those chosen out of the
Prophets and Levites. Thus 1 Samuel 29.28.
Samuel was the Prefect or Governor of the School which was at Naioth in
Mount Ramah; where was a School and Scholars in the Reign of Asa, if we may
believe the Talmudists, who say that he was therefore punished with lamenesse
in his Feet, Vid. Buxtorf in (...) 2 Chr. 16.12.
"because he compelled all the Wisemen or Doctors of that place together with
their Disciples or Scholars, to leave their Studies and to take up Arms for
his aid against Baasha King of Israel. This they collect (how truly I will not
determine) out of the 1 of Kings 15.22. where it is said that Asa made a
proclamation thorowout all Judah (none was exempted) and they took away the
stones of Ramah, etc. i. e. when the Scholars were all warned out by the King's
Edict.

Elias was the Praepositus or Master of the School at Hierico: 2 Kings 2.5.
In his place succeeded his Disciple Elisha, and so others after him in
succeeding ages.

In the second of Chron. 34.22. we read of a College in Jerusalem: It is
called there (...) which is as much as a double House, so called by reason of
it is two Courts.
wherein Huldah the Prophetess dwelt when Hilkiah went unto her with a message
from Josiah. Doubtless she dwelt by her self in one of the Courts remote
from the Prophets and their Sons, who were taught in the other. For Colleges
indeed ought to be (what a Name that is given them by Eusebius does import)
(...), places of gravity and severity, which cannot well stand with a mixture
of both Sexes in one and the same place. But to return from this short
digression;

To this end and purpose it likewise was, (I mean for the maintenance of
Schools) that the Levites under the Law had such large incomes by Gods
appointment; they had well nigh (as has been proved by me in another The
Churches Plea, etc. Sect. 10 p. 23.
Treatise) the fifth part of the Jews Revenues, which large allowance was
given them, that being free from all cares (to which the Ministers of the
Gospel are too sharply exposed) they might, with the less distraction, and
more freedom of Spirit, devote themselves wholly to their studies, and their
Ministerial Functions.

Again, we find that the Jews themselves ever in after Ages endeavored
(even when they were dispersed amongst the Gentiles) to retain their Schools
which are called sometimes Synagogues, although in a strict sense a School and
a Synagogue differs. Philo (as he is cited by Grotius on St. Mat.) Grot. in
Mat. 4.23.
uses the Names promiscuously, and calls those Synagogues (...) for that they
did both Pray and Preach in them, and withal (as they do now where they are)
train up their youth and exercise themselves by disputes and polemicall
Discourses concerning the holy Scriptures: whereby they find out many hidden
Truths. This is the practice of Colleges in the Universities, by which means
the Students learn to whet their Tongues in disputes against the Truth's
adversaries, those of Rome, together with other Heretics.

Colleges and Schools under the Gospel.
In the second place, That there were Colleges, places of public concourse
even under the Gospel in the time of the Apostles at Jerusalem, we may
collect or gather out of the Acts. And there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews
devout men out of every Nation under Heaven. Acts 2.5.


St. Luke records concerning our Lord Christ, that when he went into the
Synagogue, that is, the Luke 4 15.17
(...)
School there was given to him, as to a Doctor, the Book of the Scriptures,
that he should explain a portion or piece of them, which he accordingly did
to the amazement and conviction of those that heard him. The same Apostle
likewise reports, Luke 2.42.46.
that when he was twelve years of age he disputed with the Doctors of the
School with great admiration. There were then Scholars, Colleges and Doctors
in our Saviors time: How then dare any disallow of those which Christ himself
did approve of, so, as to go often into them, which he did surely to
demonstrat and show their necessity and use. They who speak and act, by a bold
opposition, the contrary, by denying their use, to such I may aptly retort,
what S. Augustine did once in aother case to the Donatists, Aug. Ep. 171.
the true Pictures of our Separatists, Christianos vos esse dicitis, and
Christo contradicitis; " you say you are Christians, and contradict Christ in
your Words and Actions, this cannot stand with Christanity, which admits of no
such contradictions.

In the 6 of Luke verse. 9. there is mention of the Synagogue or College of the
Libertines, Cyrenians and Alexandrians, and of them of Cilicia and Asia, who
disputed with the Protomartyr St. Stephen.

The same Apostle tells us how that St. Paul came from Tarsus of Cilicia unto
Jerusalem, Act. 22.3
where he was instructed in the Law of the Lord at the feet of Gamaliel. It
was the fashion or custom then of the Scholars, to sit at the feet of the
Doctors, whence those are called by the Rabbines, (...) Pulverisantes, from
the dust which they received thus sitting below their Teachers. The forenamed
Gamaliel was a Doctor or Teacher of the Law in the Academy of Jerusalem, and
Disciple of that old Simeon, Luke 2.28.29
who took our Savior, being then a Child, in his arms, and then sung his
Nunc Dimittis, etc. his Swan-like Song, Lord now let thou thy servant
depart in peace, for mine Eyes have seen thy salvation, i. e. The Lord Christ,
who is mercy and salvation clothed in flesh.

That School or College of Jerusalem had many famous Doctors one after
another successively in after days, amongst whom was Rab. Hillel, who lived an
hundred years before the Destruction of the Temple by Titus: of which Hillel we
find so many rare and pious sayings in the Pirke Auoth, a Book famous amongst
the Jews for choice Proverbs and grave Counsels.

We read likewise of St. Paul, Acts 18.28
that after his conversion he went often into the Synagogues or Scholars of
the Jews, and mightily convinced them that Jesus was the Messiah (or the
Christ) and persuading the things concerning the Kingdom of God.

There is mention in the Acts of the School of one Tyrannus: Acts 17.8
it was erected by one who was so called by his proper Name, as Beza proves by
many testimonies against Erasmus, and others, and with him in this the Syriack
agrees; which, as Salom. Glassius notes, Glass. Physiol. Sac.
is the fittest to determine any doubt or controversy bordering upon a word of
phrase in the New Testament, as the Caldee paraphrase in the Old.

To omit that famous School in Asia at Ephesus erected by St. John the
Apostle, in which Polycarpus and Ireneus were Scholars, with many other famous
Bishops and Martys for the Truth of Christ.

Likewise that in Palaestina of Caesarea, in which Gregory Bishop of Neocesarea
was brought up.

Also that in Alexandria, the most famous in the whole World, where (as St.
Hierome attests) from the days of St. Mark the Evangelist many and great
Doctors flourished, as, Pataenus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Hieracles,
Dionysius, with many others.

To the forenamed we might add that of Byzantium in Greece, where St. Basil
that Vid. Possouin. in vita Basil.
Demosthenes amongst the Fathers (for his sublime elegancy so called) was
educated, he was Brother to that Learned Nazianzen who (being indeed, a
Magazeen of all kind of Learning) in worthily called, (...), the Divine.

To this of Byzantium might be adjoined that of Tiberias in Galilee by the Lake
of Gennesareth, Vid. Buxtorf in Tiberiad.
so famous for the Masorites, those laborious Textuaries and Cabalists amongst
the Jews.

But omitting the farther discussing and opening of these Schools or
Colleges, (whereby I might farther evince by demonstrative Arguments the
necessity of Learning and Learned men: as so many Pillars to sustain the vast
Fabric of a Church, Kingdom, or State, from crumbling into dust, and
mouldring into ruin) I shall only subjoyn what now follows by way of a
concluding Parenesis, or Exhortation to men of vulgar conceits and m sled
Phansies.

Let them run back in their thoughts, and look upon the Story of our Church
in former Ages. Who were they that gave the Pope and his Factours their deadly
wounds, stabbing them at the Heart with the sharp weapons of their acute
Arguments, who did this glorious work, but first a Jewel, a Bishop? who was
the first that in a Sermon at Paul's Cross made a public Challenge to all the
Papists in the World, Godwin. in vita^ ejus p. 409.
to produce but one clear and evident Testimony out of Scripture, or any
Father, or other famous Writer within six hundred years after Christ, for any
one of the many Articles which the Romanists at this day maintain against us,
and upon good proof of any one such good allegation, he promised to yield
them the Bucklers and reconcile himself to Rome. And although Harding and some
others undertook him and entered into the Lists with Him about the 27
controverted Articles, yet they came off poorly, and Jewel on the contrary
with Triumphant Victory, having so amazed and confounded them with a cloud of
witnesses in every point, that (as Bishop Godwin reports of him, Page 410.
" Dici non potest quantum haec res Pontificiorum apud nos vires fregerit,
existimatione minuerit, ac praesertim postquam Hardingi frigida responsione
errorum ab illi recensitorum novitas patuerit, i.e. It cannot be said how this
thing broke the hearts and weakened the force of the Pontificians, with the
loss of their esteem and credit in these parts, especially when after the
frigid or cold answer of Harding the Jesuit, the novelty of their opinions was
plainly discovered.

This glorious Champion of Truth for his rare and admirable parts and gifts
both natural, and supernatural, did every way correspond to his gracious and
precious name; He was a rich Jewel consisting of many gems, shining as well
in his Life as his incomparable Writings: Lord adorn and enrich thy Church
continually with such Jewels, deck her Cheeks with rows of such Rubies, her
neck with such glorious chains, etc. He was borne in Devonshire, bred up at
Oxford, First in Mert^ afterward in Corpus Christi College.
and if it lay at my mercy, to save or destroy it, I should spare it, because
it bred such a Pillar of Truth, and the scourge of Rome, as the Conqueror
spared Syracusa, because he found in it an Archimedes.

With him we may parallel our famous Whitgift, who was contemporary with him;
For, the former dyed, Anno. 1571. this latter was installed Bishop of
Worcester, Anno. 1577. and afterward Archbishop of Canterbury 1583. He was
borne in Lincolneshire, bred here at Cambridge, first in Pembrook Hall,
afterward fellow of Peterhouse, and not long after, he being of rare and
eminent parts, was made president of Pembrooke Hall, next Master of Trinity
College, in which time he was, first, the Margaret, then the Kings Professor
of Divinity. This matchless pattern of prudence and patience, did stand as
stoutly, as the former, in the defense of the Truth, against our home bred
Innovatours, who (as our learned Camden in his Annalls) trampled on all
Government, and, making Fancy the mistress of their judgment, pride and a
zealous ignorance being their guides, they inveighed against the Elizah.
Queens authority, and herein spoke the Language of Ashdod, acted highly for
the Jesuits, denied uniformity in Divine worship, although established by the
authority of Parliament, severed the Administration of the Sacraments from the
preaching of the Word; Sacramentorum administratione^ a verbi divini
praedicatione se jungebant. Camd.
Novos ritus pro arbitrio in privatis edibus usurpabant, etc. They neglected
and despised the Sacraments (forgetting that God will not save us without the
use of the means.) They refused to go to Church, thus making a dangerous
Schism, and rending the seamlesse coat of Christ, Pontificiis plaudentibus,
multosque in suas parts trahentibus, quasi nulla esset in Ecclesia Anglicana
unitas; Hereby they made our adversaries to rejoice and triumph over us, and
were the cause of many weak ones turning Papists, upon this ground, that there
was no unity in our Church. (I fear our Separatists have now caused the like,
if not worse, mischief, in the revolt of many thousand from us.) Those Chams,
men of hot and fiery Spirits, who inveighed against their Fathers, and
uncovered their Mothers nakedness; Those Scindentes (as Aug. l. de Civit. Dei
16. c. 2 comparat Chamo haereticos li. 4. c. 43.
Irenaeus well calls them) to which he joins elati and superbi, those proud,
high-minded, daring Schismatics, that Reverend, Learned, and most patient
Whitgife quelled and suppressed in a short time by his discreet meekness, and
gentle exhortations to peace; first stopping, by arguments, the mouths of their
Antesignani their Leaders, (as Cartwright and others) this he did by disputes
and mild persuasions to peace, and at last having by a patient courage overcome
many strong oppositions from the Nobles and their adherents, abettours in that
schism, by Gods blessing he restored the Church to unity and concord both in
Doctrine and Discipline. Who but a man of great learning and grace could have
done this, and been the instrument of settling in a distracted Kingdom an
universal Peace?

Let me add to these, one, though of a lower rank in the Church, yet not
much inferior in gifts of nature, and grace, the renowned Whitakers, first
Scholar, and after Fellow of Trinity College, famous for his admirable skill
in the Arts and Tongues: as for his Excellency in the knowledge of Divinity,
his famous works now extant, his confutation of Campian, Sanders, Duraeus,
Rainolds, Stapleton, nay of Bellarmine himself, with whom then living this our
Champion encountered; He confounded the former, proving the Pope to be
Antichrist, and maintaining the authority of the Scriptures above the Church,
and at last singling out the Bellarmine.
Cardinal himself, the Goliath of Rome, he stunned him so with the strength
of prevailing Truth and reason, in his controversies concerning the Church,
Scriptures and counsels, etc. That the Cardinal (it seems, first convinced
by his argumentions) having him in high estimation, procured his Picture, and
hung it in his stu^y among the portraitures of other noted men, and was heard
to say, That though he was an Heretic, yet he was a Learned one. Never any
saying had more of Falsity and Truth in it. When he confessed him to be
learned, it was all one as if he had acknowledged that he was by him confuted.
What firmer testimony then that which falls from the Lips of a professed Enemy?

To these forenamed Worthies, I might add the late Reverend Bishop of
Salisbury, Davenant, the now living, and most knowing Prelates, Armach, and
Morton, true nursing Fathers of the Church, fed with their Doctrine, and
defended by their Pens, which they have with great success dipped in the
Ink of confutation against Jesuits and Heretics. 2 Samuel 23.12.20.
The Lord has done great things by these Benaiahs, and wrought great victories
by means of their painful works against our Adversaries. Could these famous,
useful, and Church-preserving acts, with many hundred more which have been
effected by men of parts, could these mighty things have been done without
Learning; could this have been attained without the help and furtherance of
public Schools and Universities? I suppose no man is so wanting to Truth and
Modesty as to say it. This made Alphonsus King of Arragon, bear an open Book
in his Scutchion, to testify thereby to the World his high esteem of learning,
as being the prop of Religion, and the Pillar of a State and Kingdom.
Middendorp. l. de Academ. 1. p. 104.
And therefore Charles the Great wheresoever he erected a Church, there he
ever annexed a School of Learning unto it. Oh then let not the undermining and
crafty Jesuits (who now swarm amongst us) blow any longer this poison into
your Ears; believe not the voice of these De his vid. Franzii Histor. S. p. 1.
c. 20.
Hyaenas who may speak like Men, nay like Angels, but within are ravening
Wolves and savage Beasts. Their common Trade and Work now is to cry down
Learning, and the Fountains of it, the Universities: They know that their
cause cannot thrive so long as Learning does flourish: These De his vid.
Solinum.
Solifugae hate that confounding light; These Frogs love to croake in the black
Night of Ignorance, They ever dig their Mines in darkness. The Traitor Faux
and his dark Lantern was a true emblem of a Jesuit, who has some light
within which makes him sin against his conscience, yet that light wrapped up
and obscured by malice, which forces him to act in defense of the Catholic
cause, and contrive any bloody wickedness.

And now is his Harvest, who loves to fish in troubled waters, He has put
forth the Sickle of his undermining policy to cut down the Clergy and the
Universities, witness the late Petitions against Tithes, and that other from
some mistaken ones in the County of Bedford, who little dream that they are
now plowing with the Jesuits Judge. 14.18.
Heister, who have closely contrived those Petitions, and incensed the
Contrymen against Churchmen and Scholars. For shame, work not any longer in
this bloody Field; be not Dayes-men to these men of Darkness, what they have
covertly contrived, do not thou attempt openly and in public. Believe it, if
the Pipes be cut from the two Fountains, if the revenews and means which flow
from the Springs of Benefactours for Learning's maintenance, if they be taken
away (which God I hope will prevent by his merciful and overruling
providence) Then (I trust this then will never be) then we shall see (I hope
we shall never see it) Psalm. 8.14. Cant. 2.25. 2 Cor. 10.13.15. Mat. 7.15.
These Wild Bores coming out of Rome's Wood and Wilderness, These Foxes,
deceitful workers, Ministers of Satan, Wolves in Sheep clothing; They will,
when they meet with no opposition, when the walls and watchmen are gone,
break with violence into the Vineyard, destroy it is pleasant branches, devour
it is Grapes, and (like those Wolves in the Fable, when the Dogs at their
persuasion were sent away) They will prey upon the poor sheep, tear their
fleece from their backs, devour their flesh; In a word, when they want their
Guard and watch, i.e. Orthodox Pastors and sound Doctors or Teachers, the one
to instruct the Churches, the other to train up Students in the Schools, Then
will the people be left as a prey to Heretics, 2 Timothy 2.17.
whose Doctrine will eat like a Gangrene, i.e. Speedily, Incurably, Mortally.
They will infect their Souls with poisonous Opinions, and (as they have begun)
with damnable Heresies (to speak in S. Peter's Language) 2 Pet. 2.1.
which S. Paul reckons amongst the fruits of the flesh, Gal. 5.20.
and exclude men from the Heavenly inheritance. Of this Opinion was Ignatius a
Scholar of the Apostles, Ignat. Ep ad Ephesians. (...), etc.
who assures us that both seducing and seduced Heretics shall perish for ever,
and that with as good reason as Theifes amongst men are put to death. Heretics
rob men's Souls of God and the Truth; They shut men out of Heaven, and drive
them into Hell. To prevent all these fatal mischiefs, draine not (but rather
increase with augmentations) the Fountains of Learning and Religion; if these
be once dried up, a drowth of Truth will follow, and a deluge of Miseries, when
Barbarism and Atheism with other horrid impieties shall abound in this Land,
and overthrow the Church, Vid. Midden. dorp. de Academiis. li. 1. c. 4. and 8.
whose welfare is contained (together with the Commonwealth's) in the
preservation of Learning, Arts and Sciences, which I could prove more at large,
did I not fear to load the Press, and tire the Readers patience.

I shall conclude this first Quere with an open confession, that in these
tumultuous, disordered Times, some dirt has gotten into our Fountains, and
mingled it self with our pure streams; but, what was ever in all Ages, we
hope will not with aggravations be charged upon us, as the only fault of ours.
And I trust that those Bedfordians (who clamor against the Universities) will
be laid to sleep, and silenced by higher powers; neither doubt we, but that
those, who have made such loud cries and protestations for Truth, will not now
at length (after so much spilling of blood in the defense of the Gospel as was
pretended) give themselves the stab of a lie, by doing that, which will
overthrow and lay Truth in the dust, and setting up Falsehood with a painted
Face, colored with shows of piety, and pretenses of Godliness. Quod
averruncet Deus. As for my part I shall ever beg of God (and it is a piece of
my daily devotions,) That he would open the Eyes and mollify the hearts of
the seduced, and obdurat Seducers in this Age, That being reduced to the saving
knowledge of the Truth, they may have good wills joined with their great power
to preserve the keriothsepher, the Universities and other Schools, That from
thence may come knowing men of (...), Chrysostom.
sound Opinions and incorrupt lives, whereby they may outshine Heretics, and
be able to refute and stop the mouths of Heresies. Men well learned, of good
Lives and lawfully ordained Ministers, have a special call to so great a
work, they have a blessing promised on their labors; and may such be ever
blessed who are lovers of Peace, and Truths defenders. Mat. 28.20. I am with
you.


The second QUERE, Who is an Heretic, and what is Heresy?
AMongst many convincing Arguments to prove the greatness of the evil and
danger of Heretics, some have been drawn from the great pains, and cost,
which the primitive Church imploid and spent to extinguish the flame or fire of
Heresies, wheresoever and whenever it was unhappily kindled; This is attested
by the learned Ep. 3. ad Armand. Jesuit.
Chamierus in an Epistle to Armandus, Scimus quantis olim sudoribus Episcopi
Catholici Hereticos redarguerint, and quantis sumptibus orthodoxi Imperatores
eos represserint. Thus from the great care and solicitude of the Physician,
from the price and cost of the Physic, or remedies, we may judge of the
grievousnesse and danger of the Disease.

Again, another argument to prove the greatness of this evil may be deduced
from the raging Anger, and impatient wrath, which ever appeared, and brake
forth in those ancient Christians, who were patterns of humility and rare
examples of meekness, yet being falsely accused of Heresies, and branded with
the name of Heretic, could not with any patience hear and endure it. We read
in the Part. 2. de Patient. and humilit.
lives of the Fathers, of one Agatho, whose name speaks him as he was, a good
man and most devout, that having held his peace, in imitation of his meek
Savior, at the proposal of many crimes falsely objected and maliciously laid
to his Charge, yet at the name of Heresy (being called Heretic,) he was very
much moved, and most wrathfully displeased.

This made Ruffinus (as he is cited by Part. 1. c. 6. Defens. Auglic. Eccl.
Bishop Jewel) say, Non est Christianus, qui notam haereseos dissimulat. i. e.
He is no Christian that can endure to be called Heretic. To this purpose is
that of S. Ep. 6. ad Pammach.
Hierome, Nolo in suspicione haereseos quemquam esse patientem. It becomes
every one with the greatest care and industry to avoid the very suspicion of
Heresy.

Thus a mere imagination and false apprehension of being reputed and named
Heretics, exasperated of late the Spirits of some well-meaning Christians, and
moved them to break through all bounds of modesty, by a public demand of me,
before the Congregation, (in Swacie near Cambridge) October. 3d. 1652.
to deliver my thoughts concerning Heresy and Heretics. To whom, (after a
short Preface to our ensuing conference) I thus replied with great affection to
their souls, and (in obedience to the Apostles command, Gal. 6.) Gal. 6.1. Ye
which are spiritual restore, etc.
with as much meekness as I could, lest that in the flame of Passion and heat
of contention Truth should singe her wings (as too often she has done) and
take her flight, leaving the parties wholly unsatisfied.

Who is an Heretic?
First, to avoid all needless questions, and endless disputes, we must
distinguish between these two Things, To be an Heretic, and to embrace an
Heresy, or an Opinion that is erroneous.

For, not every one whose Opinion is heretical, is to be reckoned and listed
in the black role of Heretics, but only he, who, having been baptized into
the Christian Faith, shall stiffly maintain, and obstinatly defend an untruth
against it. By the Christian Faith, we are not to understand in general the
Word of God in it is whole Latitude, viz. The Prophetical and Apostolical
Doctrine contained in the Books of the old and new Testament; For, not every
false Interpretation of any one place in Scripture, nor every Opinion,
resulting from that place so interpreted, falls under the name, and notion of
Heresy (as S. Hierome seems to assert in his comment upon the Galatians) C.
5. v. 20.
but by the Christian Faith, The four Principles of our Faith and Religion.
we mean those four Principles of our Faith, which are the four kinds of
Fundamentalls, the denial and opposing any one whereof with pertinacy entitles
a man to the guilt of Heresy, and the name of Heretic.

The first of those Fundamentalls is placed in the Apostles Creed.

The second, in the Decalogue or ten Commandments.

The third, in the Lords Prayer.

The fourth, in the two Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper.

Thus the Reverend and Learned Bishop Davenant determines the case, in that
most judicious, and Schisme-confounding work of his, entitled, ad Pacem
adhortatio. "So then, he that shall perversely deny an Article of the Creed,
which is, Christianorum fidei and spei formula Veritatis summa ac fundamentum,
(To use the terms of the Tridentine Catechism) The form of a Christian's
Faith and Hope; The Epitome and Foundation of Truth; He that shall likewise
wilfully err in principiis moralibus, in the Principles of manners or good
living; He that shall believe or maintain the contrary to any precept or
moral command, as, that simple Fornication is no sin, which is the Opinion
of the Vid. Kinchi in Psalm.
Jews and Papists, That it is lawful to worship an Image, the work of men's
hands, or the like; He that shall overthrow the Doctrine of the Sacraments,
either denying the exercise or use of the Sacrament of Baptism, or not
Baptizing according to the tenor of Christ's Mat. 28. v. ult.
injunction, In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, or not
celebrating the Eucharist according to our Saviors institution, by denying the
Cup to the People, or the like; Lastly, He or They that err in the
Fundamental Doctrine concerning Prayer, making their addresses to any one, but
to God alone, through the mediation of Christ his Son, by Faith in whom, and
being knit to them in love, we are bold to call God Our Father, etc. He that
shall obstinatly persist both in Opinion and practice against any Precept, or
Doctrine in these four kinds of Fundamentalls, he cannot be exempted from
the number of Heretics, whose names are not registered in the Book of Life,
into which none shall enter that work abomination, or make a lie, Rev. 21.27.
Such workers of mischief are those (...), as Cyril. l. 1. in Ioh. cap. 4.
Cyrill rightly tells them, men that are Leaders and Abettours of an Haeresie.
Such men, whom we may call Daemonice Meridiana (as S. Hieron. Apol. adversus
Ruffin. lib. 2.
Hierome once called Arius) men blown up with pride, and infected with a
Diabolical daring Spirit, you must decline, as you would those that have the
Leprosy or Plague. Haeresie is a catching disease, and hardly to be cured; it
enters into the Soul by the Eye and Ear (when you either read the books, or
hear the Sermons of Haereticks) and entering thus in, it brings Death and
Destruction, as its attendants with it. S. Paul was not ignorant of this, as
appears by his wholesome and seasonable exhortation for these times. Romans 16.
Ver. 17.
I beseech you, brethren, (observe the Apostles earnest supplication, grounded
upon the danger of Heretical infection) mark them which cause divisions and
offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. Ver.
18.
For they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
bellies. They are commonly Covetous and Luxurious persons, given over to their
Appetites. They are dissembling Hypocrites, for, as it follows there, with
fair Speeches and flatteries they deceive the hearts of their simple followers
and Auditors. 2 John 10.
If there come any such unto you and bring not the Doctrine of Christ (but that
which is contrary to it) receive him not into your House, neither bid him God
speed ( i. e. have nothing to do with him, neither show him any sign of
familiarity or respect: lest under the guise or fleece of a Lamb-like Teacher,
you meet (in the conclusion) with devouring Wolfes, proud Anabaptists, or
Soulmurdering Jesuits; Who now, like their great Master, the Prince of
darkness, go about, seeking whom they may destroy with their Antiscripture,
Antichristian, infectious Tenets or Haeresies. None, more then these grand
Impostours, are pleaders for Conventicles, that so they may with more security
open the fardall of their Mass (that So called in the Confutation of the
Papists Catechism, page 29.
maze of Idolatry) amongst themselves, and draw poor deceived Souls from the
love of the Church, and their Ministers. (...), mark with diligence those that
preach this Doctrine, and conclude with your selves, that they are either
immediately sent from Rome that Antichristian Synagogue, or seduced by the
Romish Agents, whose only aim in these times is, to blow the Cole of Division
(using the Doctor Crakanth. in his defense of our Church, does call them fitly,
Flabella Jesuitarum.
Separatists as his bellows for this very purpose) and to draw men's minds
from the love of the Truth and Learning, knowing full well, that the fabric of
their Superstition and Idolatrous worship relyes only upon the rotten pillar
of Ignorance, the only prop too of the Pope's greatness.

For (as that examinatour of the Council, or rather Conventicle, of Trent,
says well) Gentillet.
ut bonarum literarum instauratione facessere caepit ignorantia, etc. So soon
as the cloud of Ignorance was dispelled by the bright beams of Learning, the
Authority of the Pope began presently to fail and suffer a great diminution.
Therefore I exhort you again, (...), to mark those who are sometimes of
Division, who endeavor to disjoyne your hearts from the love of those, whom
God has placed over you to be your Guardians and watchmen, Ezekiel. 53.17,18,19.
such among the Reverend Fathers of the Church are now ( God be blessed for it)
yet living, to the terror and grief of our Adversaries, such likewise yet
breath (though with much discouragements) amongst the inferior Ministers, who
are more famous for the Pulpit and Schools then for the Press, and are able
to weild the Sword of Argumentation to the confutation and confounding of
Rome's factours; who deal by us as the Haereticks of the former age by those
propugnatores fidei, defenders of the faith, Basil, Nazianzen, Ambrose,
Augustine, Hierome, etc. whom (as Praefat. in Panopliam.
Lindanus notes) the other impudently called Haereticks, Haeretici haereticos
appellabant, so they undeservedly and most uncharitably term us. To whom I
shall only reply to the words of S. Augustine to the Pelagians, Aug. contr.
Pelag.
Impetremus, si possumus, a fratribus nostris, ne nos insuper appellent
Haereticos, quod eos talia disputantes nos appellare possumus fortasse, si
vellemus, etc. i. e. We wish that we might obtain this favor of our Brethren,
that they would not call us Haereticks, which we might (if we were so pleased
to break the rule of Charity which loves peace) rightly call them, etc. 1
Cor. 13.7.
As might be evidenced and proved by the former definition of Haeresie, and
description of an Haeretick. To all which I shall subjoyne this, to strengthen
my assertion, That as an error in fundamento in any one of the forenamed
fundamentalls, so, one that is circa fundamentum, about, or bordering upon the
foundation joined with Conviction (after the testimony of the whole Church in
word or writing to the contrary) and that conviction backed by contumacie,
these do constitute an Heretic.

He that comes boldly in a man's face, and cuts his throat, and he that steals
behind his back, and knocks him on the head, are both equally guilty of
murder (and would be found so were they to be tried.) So he that directly and
manifestly destroys a fundamental Truth, and he that obliquely does it,
teaching or obstinately maintaining those things, which, if they be granted, by
a necessary consequence overthrow the Doctrines of Faith, both these
Antiscripturists are to be reckoned amongst Heretics, although the former are
far worse then the latter.

Thus the Heresy of the De his vid. Epiphan. Aug. Philast. de haeresibus.
Marcionites, and Manichees, who destroy the humane nature of Christ, by
allowing him only a Fantastic body, is somewhat worse then that of the Popish
Transubstantiatours, who by consequent do that which is directly intended by
others: Cranmer. A^b. Haeres.
for that with the defense of this their absurd opinion, the Articles of the
Incarnation, Ascension, and Session of our Lord Christ at Gods right hand, all
these will fall to the ground, as the Reverend and most learned Bishops Ep
Mort. contra Missam. l. 8. c. 2. Hall in his Treat. called Rome irreconcil.
White against Fisher Q. 19. Dr. Crakanth. c. 48. number. 23.
Morton, Hall, and White, also the judicious Crakanthorp in his elaborat
Defense of our Church against Spalatensis prove at large.

You may hereby collect what great boldness has seized upon the Tongues and
Pens of the proud Romanists, who dare throw that dirt upon us which covers
their own faces, whilst they with as much audacitie as falsitie, style us
(what they are indeed themselves judged by the learned to be) i.e. Heretics.
Thus the Arrians dealt by the Christians in the Primitive times, as we find in
Salvian, Salv. l. 5. de Guber. Dei.
who complains thus of them, In tantum se Catholicos esse judicant, ut nos
titulo haereticae pravitatis infament, which words would rightly fit our
Tongues in reference to our Romish adversaries, Papists falsely call themselves
Catholics.
who (speaking and writing a mere contradiction) call themselves Catholics,
when as indeed they are not truly so: it is a term proper only to the
Universal Church of Christ, dispersed and scattered over the face of the whole
earth. They are a particular Church, and therefore whilst they style themselves
(indeed it is stilo novo) Catholics, they speak as much or in effect as if a
man should say, a particular Universal, or Universal particular, which is
absurd and against the rule of Logic. Therefore in that they appropriat to
themselves the name of Catholics, they do this as falsely as when they fasten
upon us the name of Heretics, which is a term disgraceful, and odious.

Lord open their eyes that they may see the Truth, and inflame all our hearts
with a greater love of it, that knowing what we believe, and practicing what we
know, we may at the last be crowned amongst those, who with that invincible
Athanasius cont. Mundum. Raimund cont. Athanasium. vid. Ribadin. in vita ejus.
Athanasius have contended earnestly for the Truth, even to the loss of their
lives and liberties. This is enjoined by S. Jude ver. 3. and a clear
description of such heroic Spirit we find Heb. 11.37. It. c. 10.34. which
things were written for our instruction, that we being compassed about with so
great a cloud of witnesses should Heb. 12.1. verse 4.
resist even unto blood, and strive against Heresy and Heretics, men of
corrupt minds, and destitute of the Truth, from such separate your selves, 1 Timothy 6.5. Converse not with such pestilentious persons. This too was the wise
Council of the blessed Martyr Ignatius, who (as we read in Eusebius. l. 3. c. 30.
Eusebius) used to go from house to house: through all the Churches in the
Diocese, admonishing and entreating the Christians to abstain from the
Society of known Heretics, who like Eccl. 13.1.
pitch defile the weak with the least touch of private conference.

Mat. 7.15.
Beware of false Prophets, etc.
The third QUERE. Whether it be lawful ( or allowable by the word) for any to
frequent Conventicles, forsaking the public meetings of Christians in Churches?
AS there is a peevish industry in wickedness, to find or make Associats, So
Si pertinacia insuperabiles vires habere conatur, quantas debet habere
constantia? etc. Aug. Ep. 167. Festo.
it is a commendable and industrious piece of virtue or goodness to oppose the
attempts of wickedness, especially those of Scismaticks, who not contenting
themselves with the bounds of their own impieties, never rest till they have
corrupted others with the poison of their ungodly Tenets. And I cannot but
grieve to see the once brave spirits of our Nation (showed in the subduing the
Genevising Scots) such in with greediness the positions of the new Jesuitising
Englandians, who are infected with the venom of old moth eaten Heresies, which
have lain asleep for a long while, but are now awakened and revived by the
Prince of darkness, and transported into our Church.

The ground (as I humbly conceive) of all the enormities and loose opinions
amongst us, is, the discountenancing and discouraging of the public
ministry, and the crying down of Churches (Vox Diabolum sonat, non Deum
certe) as if there were none other but those that are Spiritual, when as we
find upon record both in the 1 Cor. 14.35.
word and in ancient writers, that there were material Churches, 1 Cor. 11.22.
houses built and set apart for the public worship of God, wherein the
Christians solemnly met at the least once a week; Vid. a full and learned
discourse of this in Mr. Mede's Diatribae.
This was the practice of the Primitive times, even in the days of the
Apostles, and continued from them to us through all ages by uninterrupted
successions.

There is a fable amongst the Mythologists, of a Maiden, and a Lion, who fell
in love with her, and she promised out of fear to yield to his desires, on
condition that she might first knock out his Teeth, which he presently yielded
to, and was by her immediately destroyed.

Thus the only aim of the Devil, and his associats is not only to pluck out
the Teeth of Discipline (the wall) but even the Tongue of sound Doctrine, which
is the Heart of the Church. This he now endeavors by stopping the mouths of
Gods lawful Ministers, and sending out his Jer. 29.24. Jude 8.
Shemaiahs, Nehelamites, his dreaming Chaplains, who dream of a form of
Government never thought of nor intended by Christ, and, having no commission
to preach, thrust themselves into Conventicles, where they vent their dreams,
and propagate their phancies, to the destruction of many poor well-meaning
Christians.

Concerning the unlawfulness of which private meetings (congregated by men who
have no calling to teach, and in opposition to the Unity and Uniformity of our
National Church) I shall now in all love and tenderness to the Souls good of
the unlearned, enlarge my thoughts, and deliver my opinion, which I trust will
be embraced by those who shall peruse this short Treatise without a partial
prejudice; which, like a Curtain drawn before a window, shuts out the light of
Truth, and keeps darkness in, it harbors errors and mistakes which breed
hatred and dissension.

The description of a Conventicle properly so called.
First, take a Conventicle for a meeting of men and women in a private house
upon the Lords day, then when they should join with the people of God in a
Church appointed for Gods public worship and service; thus to convene or meet
(though in times of restraint) without a lawful Minister to head that body,
and by enjoined Prayers and Preaching to sanctify the work, is held utterly
unlawful: which I shall prove both by the word of God, the practice of Christ,
together with the authority of Fathers, and interpreters of the Holy
Scriptures, as also by Arguments drawn from reason, which commonly (if not
perverted) is a sure guide and a good judge.

First then, if we weigh the Truth in the balance of the Sanctuary, if we
look into the Scriptures we shall find a flat prohibition to the contrary, as
Heb. 10.24,25. Let us consider one another to provoke to love and good works,
not forsaking (...), the congregation, as the manner of some is, but let us
exhort one another, etc. upon which place Estius (a moderate and learned
Interpreter) has this gloss, Qui conventibus Ecclesiasticis, etc. Qui
conventibus Ecclesiasticis per fastum and superbiam sese subtrahunt, proximi
sunt graviori ruirae. Est. in loc.
They that withdraw themselves from the public Congregation are in danger of
an unavoidable and fearful ruin; for that thereby they make a Schism in the
Church (the doing whereof is most dangerous and displeasing to God) and
engender Sects (so Estius on the Text) whereby they do worse by Christ then
the persecuting Jews, they devide his seamelesse Coat, and give an occasion
to the Adversary of rejoicing and triumphing over the Church.

Therefore Ignatius in his Epistles Ignat. in Ep ad Ephesians. and Smyrnenses.
exhorts (and that with much earnestness) the Christians to frequent the
Church, to be often present and seldom absent from the Meetings of Gods people
there, lest that by their continued absence they fall at length from the faith,
having first lost their Love to God and his Saints: which Love is commonly
child by the cold breath of Conventicles, where hatred, and malice (against
those of a contrary judgment) with Sedition is commonly hatched and fomented,
as has been found by sad experience in this sinful Nation.

I might here accumulate the Testimonies of other Interpreters upon this place,
to confirm this Truth concerning the unlawfulness of Conventicles.

Cornelius a Lapide writes thus upon this Text, much to our present purpose.
The Apostle (says he) by this word (...), intelligit caetus ecclesiae and
conventus fidelium ad sacram synaxim, and ad verbum Dei precesque publicas,
etc. i. e. He understands the meeting of the Church in public prayer, in
receiving of the Holy Sacrament, and to hear the word. Hos ergo conventus
Apostolus vult frequentari, etc. Therefore the Apostle would have these public
meetings frequented, that so men and women may make a clear and open profession
of their Faith, which is a great means to beget mutual Illi publici cat^ and
mutui congressus mire fovent fidem and charitatem, quae in secessu and
seperatione diuturniori languessit, etc. Cornel. a lap.
love and affections in those, who agree in the same faith with us. By this
open profession we likewise encourage and incite others to profess the same
Faith, to worship the same God in that manner and after that way as it is done
by us, who hereby show our selves to be an example of good works. And examples
we know are more prevalent then words or precepts. They have a greater
influence upon men's practice in a way of conformity and obedience.

Besides the forenamed Ignatius amongst the Fathers, Chrysostom, Theodoret,
Theophylact, and Oecumenius, interpret this Text in the same sense with a
Lapide and Estius; who indeed light their candle at those bright burning
Tapers, whom God did set up for the good of his Church, to enlighten it, and to
direct it in the ways of Truth. And Luke 10.16.
he that despises them (with the rest of the ancient Fathers) despises God
who sent them.

The second Scripture proof against private meetings (as before were defined)
is this. Mat. 24. Mat. 24.26.
Wherefore if they shall say unto you, behold he is in the desert, go not
forth, behold he is in the secret places, (...), Believe it not. Most of the
ancient Fathers (therefore now despised, because they are enemies to Haeresies)
as Origin, Augustine, and others interpret this place of the private corners of
Schismatics and Haereticks, who labor to draw the people's minds from the
love of the public Congregation, and engage them to their private meetings,
whereby they commonly entangle them in their errors and Haeresies. Therefore
if they say (as the Vid. August. Ep. 48.
Donatists once did) that Christ is only amongst them in their Crypts and
Conventicles, believe them not, for they do contrary to the precept and
practice of Christ, He wills or enjoynes us to Luke 12.8.
confess Him and his Truth before men, i. e. to make an open profession of our
Faith, both in times of persecution and peace. He himself ever Joh. 18.19,20.
taught publicly (as he witnessed of himself before Pilat) He Luke 4.15.44
did so to teach us this lesson, That Truth seeks not corners, but loves the
light (therefore it is sometimes called light in the Holy Scriptures. Ephesians. 5.8.
Walk as Children of the Light. Vid. Act. 26.18.) But they that Joh. 3.19. Men
love darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil.
hate the Truth, delight in darkness, dare not say that in an open
Congregation, what they spawn and vent in a Conventicle or private meeting.
Therefore avoid them, join not with them, beware of making a Schism in the
church, or making that rent wider which was first begun of late by the
Presbyterians; Adhere not to Schismatics, whose portion (without a deep
repentance for so great a sin as wounding Christ's Church) shall be after
death in the Land of darkness, because they loved darkness rather then light.
I never read that saying of August. Aug. Ep. 204.
but with horror and dread, when I considered the common guilt. Foris ab
Ecclesia constitutus and separatus a communione unitatis, and vinculo
charitatis, aeterno supplicio punireris, etiamsi pro Christi nomine vivus
comburereris. i. e. He (or She) that out of pride or peevishness separates
himself from the body of the Church (whose members are knit together by the
ligaments of one faith and bond of love) that man shall be punished with
everlasting torments, although he should die, in the flame and be burnt for the
name of Christ. (Such biting Truths as these are the cause why Schismatics and
Heretics love not to read the Fathers, nor vouchsafe so much as to name them
in their Sermons or writings.) Therefore let no man deceive you with vain
words, for, for such things comes the wrath of God upon the children of
Disobedience. Be not then companions with them: for ye were sometimes
darkness, but are now light in the Lord, walk as Children of Light. Ephesians.
5.6,7,8. And conform your selves to the Christi actio nostri debet esse
instrinctio. Aug.
example of our Lord and Master Jesus, who Luke 19.47.
preached in the Synagogues and the Temple, notwithstanding they were places
full of disorder and corruption. He Mat. 21.13.
called the Temple a Den of thieves (and are there not too many in ours?)
Mat. 15.3.
The Doctrine of the Law was then corrupted by the (...) the false glosses of
the Scribes and Pharisees (and is not the Doctrine of the Gospel as much
corrupted by ours?) Besides all this they were loose and wicked in their lives,
witness that charge of our Savior, to his followers and Auditors, against
the Jewish Doctors, Mat. 23.23.
Do not after their works, etc. Notwithstanding all these corruptions and
deformities in the Jewish Church, yet our Savior Christ made no separation
from it, but came and preached in those places of public concourse, where the
Seducers and false Teachers were.

If this example and practice of our Savior will not convince and startle into
fear and obedience the Separatists of our age (both Teachers and Disciples) I
know not what will do it. Area Dominica nondum ventilata est, sine paleis esse
non potest. Nos eremus atque agamus quantum possumus ut palea simus. Aug. Ep.
203.
If Christ should have trodd in their steps, been led by their fond opinion, he
would have made a Separation, and fled from the Society of the Jews, and not
so much as once gone into the Temple or taught in their Synagogues, but he did
otherwise; and from what he did we may conclude, that the practice of those
Phanaticks who separate themselves from all Assemblies, or public places of
Gods service, pretending either a want of gifts or a defect of holiness in the
Ministers, I say the practice of such men does speak them to be those
Antichrists, which the Apostle S. John mentions in his first Epistle, 1 Ep.
Ioh. c 2. v. 18, 19.
Now there are many Antichrists, whereby we may know it is the last time: They
went out from us, etc. i. e. They turned Separatists, and therefore
Antichrists, because they went flat against the practice and precept of Christ,
who commands us by his Apostle, Phil. 1.27.2.2.
to be of one heart and of one mind, to think and speak, and do the same
thing, (in good) to love as Brethren, who forsake not one another company, and
desert not their family, when they discocover any infirmity in their Father or
any deformity in their Mother, but keep close to both in observance and humble
duty. We may have communion or fellowship with men's persons in public worship,
and not partake in the guilt of their Sins. Ille communicate malis qui
consentit factis malorum. Aug. Ep. 171.
He communicates with the wicked that consents to their wickedness; abhor
and forsake his sin, then may thou without fear or danger communicate with
a wicked, man. Si malos odistis, vos ipsi mutamini a Scelere Schismatis. Si
malorum permixtionem timeretis Optatum inter vos in apertissima iniquitate
viventem per tot annos non teneretis. Thus Augustine bespeaks the Donatists;
So may I the men of our times; If you hate the ungodly, show your hatred
toward your selves by repenting and turning from your Schism and Heresies;
And if you fear the mixture or company of the wicked, shun the Society, and
abhor the persons of your Leaders by whom you are seduced and corrupted.

To conventicle on the Lords day a breach of the fourth Commandment.
A third Argument against such meetings in private on the Lords day may be
deduced from the intent and scope of the fourth commandment, whose morality,
in the judgment of all both Fathers and modern writers, consists in this,
that God be worshipped in the Congregation with public service in an open
confession of our Faith and a profession of our love and thankfulness to him
for all his mercies and blessings, those which concern our Souls and those
which respect our bodies, etc. But to wave this and other Arguments which might
be produced to confirm my former Thesis, I proceed to reasons against
Conventicles.

First, Reason suggests this Truth to our Spirits, that our Souls (being, as
it were, so many sparks of the Deity, the Genesis 2.7.
breath of God) are more Mar. 8.37. Mat. 16.26.
precious then our bodies, which are clodds of earth, and by nature cages of
uncleanness; by so much greater ought our care to be toward those then these
mortal bodies. Now no man, that has a Treasure, of Jewels or gold, about him,
will venture alone into a place which is a receptacle of Thieves and Robbers:
None that is found in health will thrust himself boldly without fear or wit
into the company of those who are infected with the plague or some other
noisome disease: Oh then how do they at once betray their Religion and forfeit
their reason, who mingle themselves with Heretics, and resort frequently to
the company of Schismatics, who are Thieves and Robbers, John 10.8.
for that they steal the Truth out of men's hearts, and rob their highborn
Souls of the love of God and goodness: whose opinions likewise are worse then
the plague in the event and consequent; for, as they incurably infect the soul,
So, being embraced and followed, they debar men from ever coming to the
Kingdom of God. Vid. Gal. 5.19. witness likewise that of Ignat. Epist. ad
Philad.
Ignatius, which (did our Saparatists understand his language) they would read
with a trembling in their joints, like that great prince in Daniel c. 5. v. 6.
when he read his doom on the wall. The words of Ignatius in English are these;
(...), etc. Ignat. ibid.
They that join themselves in a faction, and adhere in affection to such who
separate and divide their hearts from the Truth, such men shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God. They who shun not the company of false Teachers, shall be
condemned to everlasting torments. For as with David we must hate the
congregation of the wicked, or evil doers, such are perverse Schismatics, So
must we delight in the company of the Saints, who are such not only in name
but also in practice: being pure in their opinions, holy in their lives, not
carnal, nor sensual; Psalm. 26.4.
They despise not Government, neither speak evil of those who are set in
authority over them by God, Jude ver. 8.
but are Spiritual, Heavenly minded, meek and obedient; these are the (...)
Those that excel in virtue, commended by H. Psalm. 16.3.
David for our choice respect, and company.

Again, in the second place, as reason fetches an argument against them from
the danger of such meetings, where the Devil may seize upon thee, (as he did
once upon that woman in the Theater, as Tertullian records) Tertul. cap. 26.
li. de spectaculis; There he calls Conventicles Diaboli Ecclesias, etc.
so my reason tells me (Thus should every one argue with himself) That it is
a shame and disgrace for a Christian, a brother of Christ to follow such a
Teacher, to make him his Master, who is (...), a servant to his own belly, and
a slave to his lusts; the subserviencie to which has ever been the original
of Heresies, as Theophylact notes well upon that place of the Apostle, Romans
16.18.
They serve not the Lord Jesus but their own bellies. This is spoken of
Schismatics, whose private meetings end commonly in belly-cheere, in luxury
and wantonness: This is too well known to be true in these Truth-denying
times: and this too was confessed of It was on the 1. of April last 1652. on
which day I baptized two of his children, in the open Congregation, one newly
borne, the other of the Age of two years and an half.
late to me by a Taylour here at Whethamstead to be the cause of his revolt
from such private meetings, and coming again to our Church, it was (as he
ingeniously said) their disorder and unseemly carriage in their Conventicles,
that moved him (a man of a tender Spirit) to forsake their wicked company, and
return to God.

Oh therefore be persuaded in time before you meet with destruction to avoid
such Teachers, and their meetings in dark cells and corners: They are nurceries
of sin and corruption. Though Israel play the Halot, let not Judah offend:
Come ye not to Gilgal, neither go up to Bethaven, Hos. 4.15. Give not up your
names to be those men's Disciples, who for ought ye know may be the Popes
Legates, who broach new opinions contrary to those you have received, and
repugnant to the Scriptures; Bern. Non pastores sed Impostores.
such men are not Doctores but Seductores, not Doctors but Seducers, not
Pastors but Imposters: Therefore shun their company, come not into their
private assemblies, lest ye be defiled with their pollutions, corrupted by their
Haeresies, which ever end in Schism; both which break the bones and bruise the
flesh of Christ's Church, his Cant. 4.9,10.
S^ouse. And he that lives and dies in a Schism, cannot hope to be saved,
being severed from that body whereof Christ Jesus is the Head, which body is
quickened by that Spirit, whereby we shall be raised. Romans 8.11.
If the Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, He that
raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, etc. If
then that Spirit dwell not in you, you shall not be glorified: As a member that
is cut off from the body dies, and by no art can be quickened or have life put
into it, being severed from the Influentiall virtue or activity of that Soul
which gives life to the body, whereto whilst it was joined it lived and moved.
I Will conclude this third Quaere with that exhortation of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.3.
Keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, that is, in Love and
Charity. If this heavenly fire burns and glows in your Christian breast, you
will not from that which I have delivered deduce this uncharitable and mistaken
Inference (as some once did, but are now better informed of my intentions) That
I am an enemy to all kinds of meetings of Gods Saints and Servants; I am not,
I exhort them often to meet, but when? Not when they should be at Church; what
to do? Not to take upon them the Ministers office to preach, but to repeat what
they have heard from the mouths of their orthodox Teachers, or to read the
Scriptures to the unlearned, or lastly, to do as David did, i. e. Psalm. 66.18.
Tell what God has done for their Souls, (the manner of their Conversion, the
method and means God used to comfort them in their tribulation, or to pray
together Psalm. 122.6.
for the peace of Jerusalem, for the restoration of the poor distressed
Church, for a blessing upon the persons and labors of their honest Ministers,
let this be the end of your house-meetings, and my Soul shall meet with you in
commendation of your holy practice, and in prayer for a blessing on your pious
exercise; but if you do otherwise, e. i. forsake the Church, the place where
Gods people his servants do congregat, I fear that it will happen to you as it
does to the silly Sheep, that strayes from the flock, which becomes a prey to
the devouring Wolf; or as it did to Dinah the daughter of Leah, Genesis 34.2.
who leaving her Fathers house to see the daughters of the Land, was met with
and ravished by Shechem. So, they that forsake their Ministers, and out of
curiosity resign and devote themselves to be followers of those who are none,
they must expect to be defloured of their faith and manners by such seducers,
who are spiritual Adulterers and Murderers, who corrupt men's Judgments, and
feast it with the Souls of their simple Disciples, whom they grind with the
(...). Cyril. in Hos.
Teeth of error, and poison with that cup which they themselves have drunk of,
a gilded cup of Haeresies, full of abomination and filthiness. The Lord
prevent us with his grace, and preserve us from these Corruptions.

S. Augustine in his fourth book de Doctrina Christiana Rev. 17.4. c. 10.
notes that the word in Latin which signifies a Conventicle or place of private
meeting (it is conventiculum) tantum singulariter dicitur, is only used in the
singular number, improperly in the plural; as if by God's Spirit (the prime
Author of words in the hearts and by the Tongues of men) this was thereby
intended to be employed, that there must not be more places then one, for Gods
people to meet in, in their several parishes, that is each particular Church,
the only place allowed and appointed by God for his public worship and
service. Psalm. 107.31.32.
Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare his
wonderful works before the Sons of men. That they would exalt him in the
Congregation of the people, leaving their Conventicles, wherein God cannot be
so highly praised, nor so much honored as in a place of public concourse, a
Church.

I must for a close of this third Quaere freely vent my thoughts which have
been ever in my breast.

The Classical Presbyters made way for these abuses and corruptions in our
Church by making an unhappy breach in it, when they brought in their Motlie
Directorie into the Church, by which means they drove many out of it into
Conventicles, and, like the Sons of Eli, 1 Samuel 2.17.
by their unjust Usurpation made men to abhor the offering of the Lord, and
caused the people to trespass, ver. 14.

They too by their usurping the power of Ordination, contrary to the rule of
Christ, and the established order of the Church, were the cause that others (in
opposition to them) did and do now preach without Orders.

By this we see, what good friends and Servants, how dutiful Sons the
Presbyters have been to their Mother the Church. All the hurt that I wish them
is this, that they were confined and doomed Scotorum pultibus saginari, to be
fellow-Commoners, live, repent and die amongst their wretched brethren the
Scots, the first fomenters of our divisions, and Authors of our miseries.
Vossius Hist. Pelag. says of Pelagius, that he was Socotorum Pultibus
Saginatus.


Heavenly Father forgive them. They know not what mischief they have done.
The fourth QUERE. Whether it be lawful for a Layman to preach?
I Remember a saying of Isocrates, (...), it is not proper for an Orator, or
any one to spend many words about a business or Theme that is clear and
common. Therefore seeing that the Quaere is not attended with any great
difficulty, and has been so much discussed by the pens of the learned, I shall
not spend many words about it. Only this I shall say for the benefit and
conviction of the Unlearned, to whose capacity I desire to fit my discourse,
and suit my phrase.

If by preaching we understand (as we are to do) the 2 Timothy 2.15.
dividing of the word aright, i. e. The applying of it (according to the
diversity of persons, times, and places) 1 Cor. 7.20.
to the consciences of the Hearers in public; which application of it implies
a reproving of sin in a judicial authoritative way, and a denouncing of
Judgment against sinners, and lastly a laying forth or unfolding of sweet
promises of the Gospel, of pardon and forgiveness to the faithful and
penitent, who renounce their own, and rely upon Christ's merits, To affirm,
that to do this, in a constituted or settled Church, is lawful for a Layman,
is as incongruous, and carries with it as great an absurdity, as to say (which
is impious) that S. Paul was mistaken and did not speak from Christ, when he
enjoined, every one to abide in that calling to which he is called. Art thou
then called to be a Weaver, a Taylour, or a Cobbler? desert not thy calling, and
thrust not thy self into that which belongs to another.
For one to invade the proper duty of a Minister without a special calling
from the Church is altogether unlawful, so says Amesius himself, lib. 4. de
Cas consc. cap. 25.

Secondly, He that can maintain it lawful for a common Soldier, (because he
has good skill at his weapon and in the feats of War) to challenge the place
of a Colonel or chief Commander, without the consent of the superior
Officers; He that can prove it that Korah and his two confederates sinned not
in rising up against Moses and Aaron, and usurping the Priests Office. Number.
16.3.
( Moses I am sure checked their boldness thus, Ver. 17.
ye take too much upon you, etc. it was so much, and so weighty a burden,
their usurpation so great a sin, that the earth could not bear them but
opened and swallowed up them and all their proud associates.)

Thirdly, He that can convince my Judgment that 2 Samuel 6.6.
Vzzah sinned not in touching the Ark; That the men of 1 Samuel 6.19.
Bethshemel did not offend by looking boldly into it; That 1 Samuel 13.11.
Saul and 2 Chr. 26.18.
Vzziah did not commit a great trespass in taking upon them the Priests
Office. 2 Chapter 26.17,18
Thou have done foolishly, so said Samuel to Saul, 1 Samuel 13.13. He lost his
Kingdom by it, as appears Ver. 14. Now the Kingdom shall not continue, etc.
they are the words of the Prophet. Azariah the Priest, and with him fourscore
Priests of the Lord, Valiant men, they withstood Uzziah the King, and said unto
him, It belongs not to thee Uzziah to burn incense unto the Lord, but to the
Priests, the Sons of Aaron, that are consecrated for to offer incense: go
forth of the Sanctuary, for thou have transgressed, and thou shall have none
honor of the Lord thy God. -- You may read ver. 19. How that he was punished
with Leprosy (a soul disease) for his foul fact, and that in the forehead, the
seat of Impudency, he was too bold. His open sin was punished with open shame.
Though his zeal seemed to be good and also his To a lawful act there is
required not only a good end, but also good means. A good intention if the
means be bad will not bring a man to Heaven. Many with this mistake have gone
to Hell. Bonum been is the rule in Divinity.
intention, yet because they were not regulated or guided by Gods word, he did
wickedly, and was therefore both justly resisted [by the Priests] and punished
[by God.] This note you shall find in the Margin of your English Bibles, which
I wish were well observed by our too too forward Zelots, who flatter and
deceive themselves with their good intentions, when the means they use is not
lawful but unrighteous.

Fourthly, He that can prove it by any plausible argument (as I am sure none
can, though he were as powerful in invention and witty in Arguing, as
Persuadebit nobis quicquid volet. ita de Perronio Paulus, sanctus in vita
Perronii Opusculis ejus praefixa.
Perronius once a Cardinal of Rome) That it was lawful under the old law for
any Butcher, because he had skill in killing of a beast, to slay the Sacrifice,
which was only proper to Levit. 1.4. He shall kill the Bullock.
the Levites. And he that shall demonstrate to my understanding that he is not
guilty of great presumption, and much pride, who shall first think himself fit
for that office, which S. Paul so admired, and trembled at, that he brake forth
into a (...), 2 Cor. 2.16.
who is sufficient for it? He that thinks himself so, is most unsufficient;
especially, when he shall want all those gifts which are usually seen and
required in ministers, as, skill in the Languages, Fathers, Counsels,
Schoolmen, Church histories, with other modern writers; together with the Arts
and Sciences.

Fifthly, he that shall clear this point unto me, that the practice of Christ
and his Apostles together with the whole Church for sixteen hundred years and
upwards, is not to be allowed of, especially, when that practice is confirmed
and ratified by praecept in the holy Scriptures, where we find 1 Timothy
4.14.5.22. Tit. 1.5. Act. 14.23. etc.
directions to the then Bishops for the laying on of hands upon those who were
then, and now are to be admitted into holy Orders.

And lastly he that can evince it, that besides the inward Testimony of a man's
own Conscienee (That he is both willing and able to discharge the office of a
Minister.)
there is not upon the former grounds required the outward call or Testimony of
the Church, to whom he is to give trial of his gifts, and then receive the
Churches blessing, with solemn Prayers to God, to prosper the work which he is
going about, i. e. that he may convert Souls, and thereby enlarge the Kingdom
of Christ.

He, that is able (as I am sure none ever was, or will be) to prove all these
particulars, shall subdue my reason, and bring me to a confession, that it is
lawful for a Layman to preach.

Till this be proved (as it never can be expected) I shall with the authority
of Gods word, the consent of all Antiquity, and the practice of all Reformed
Churches, conclude and stand firmly to this position:

That no man ought to take upon him this sacred function, or office, Heb 5.4.
but he that is called as Aaron was. i. e. by God. The voice of the Church is
the voice of God; Ergo, Laymen that call themselves by a bold intrusion, we may
lawfully call Usurpers of the Priests office, of the Stock of Korah, of the
race of Jeroboam's Priests. 1 King. 13.33.
He made of the lowest of the People, Priests of the high places, which thing
became a sin to the House of Jeroboam, even to cut it off and destroy it from
the face of the Earth.

And unless the Divine Justice shall speedily stop the mouths of the
Apron-Rabbies, and Russet-Levites, by some strange judgment, and so cut them
off who have kindled a flame in State and Church (that has blasted all good
order, consumed all Gods Ordinances, and caused a general ebb of Devotion and
Piety amongst us) who also have crept in like thieves into the Church by
back-wayes, have secretly insinuated themselves into the Society of Gods
people, professing themselves to be teachers of the True Faith, but are indeed
the destroyers of it, and Disturbers of our peace, Jude 4.
ungodly men, who were of old (...) ordained, appointed (as if it had been set
down in a book) to this condemnation or to this Judgment, to be flagellum
Ecclesiae, to try, to Id circo doctrinam Catholicam contra dicentium obsidet
impugnatio, ut fides nostra non otio torpescat, sed multis exercitationibus
elimetur. Aug.
exercise and molest the Church by their false Doctrine, and, when they have
done their worst, to receive for a recompense or reward of their impiety and
wickedness, damnation.

Till these Incendiaries be suppressed and silenced, we cannot expect but that
this our now distracted Nation (which was once the scourge of others and the
praise of all the world,) shall become the scorn of all Nations, (whilst (as
the Jews once did) we destroy our selves at home by our multiplied divisions,
and so prevent the mischievous malice of our foraine Enemies: Vid. Joseph. Hist.
which thing will make us a derision to those that are round about us, to the
men of Gath and Askelon, the uncircumcised Philistines, bloody Jesuits, and
Papists. Which God avert, for his mercies sake, and the Merits of his Son
Christ Jesus.

Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, Psalm. 122.6.
ERRATA.
PAge 9. lin. 3. r, existimationem. ibid. l. 4. r. ab illis. p. 11. l. 6. r.
argumentations, p. 15. marg. r. (...).

The Authors Prayer to God, for the suppressing of Haeresie, and happy
composing of our unhappy Divisions.
OH Thou who art one and infinite in power, the center of perfection, and the
God of Love, collect our scattered thoughts from perverse disputes, and worldly
distractions; draw in our hearts from hunting after Vanities; Confine them to
thine Heaven, and to thy self who art the Heaven of that Heaven. Make us to
love thy Truth, which is the brightness of thy everlasting light, the
undefiled mirror of thy Majesty, and the Image of thy Glory. And because there
is but one Heaven, and one way to it, that living way of Faith and Obedience,
Oh let the bright beams of thy grace shine in the hearts of thy people, who are
now turned to the bywayes of Error, and wander in the deserts of Sin and
Haeresie; reduce them good Father, into the way of Truth, that with one heart
and one mind, they may serve thee the only true God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

Trin-uni Deo sit Honos, Laus and gloria.
THE END.

