AN ACCOUNT OF THE CHURCH CATHOLIC: Where it was before the Reformation: AND,
Whether ROME were or be the CHVRCH CATHOLIC.

IN ANSWER to II. LETTERS SENT TO Edward Boughen, D. D.

We write none other things unto you, then what ye read, or acknowledge,

2 COR. 1.13. Evigilate ad salutem, amate pacem, redite ad unitatem,

Aug. ep. 171. LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes, for Richard Reyston at the ANGEL in
Ivie-lane, M.DC.LIII.

To my Reverend friend Mr. Boughen Doctor in Divinity:
These humbly present.
SIR,
BEcause I see in a conference zeal often turns to choler, and because it was
desired I would put my mind in writing, that I might the more distinctly be
understood, and thereby the better receive solution: I have here beneath set
down what I desire to have shown (viz.) the Catholic Church distinct from the
Church of Rome, and those in communion with her, which by your own propositions
below is necessary to be shown to find the Catholic Church. If this you do,
you may win a soul to your Church: If this you cannot do, I hope you will not
accuse me for remaining where I am. I have made bold to trouble Mris. M. at
her convenience to present this to you, and at your convenience crave the
favor of your Answer, and am

SIR, Your Servant to command, T. B.

(...) I. You grant the Catholic Church to be always, (viz.) from the
Apostles time to this time, visible.

II. You say that the Church of Rome and those in communion with her, are not
the Catholic Church, because they have grievously erred, and in one
fundamental at least.

Then by your saying, the Catholic Church must be distinct from the Church of
Rome, and those in her communion.

Wherefore I desire to be shown the Catholic Church distinct from the Church
of Rome, and those in her communion for the last 1100 years; and if it cannot
be shown, it will necessarily follow those were the Catholic Church, or else
the Catholic Church was not always visible.

To Mr. T. B:
SIR,
1. BY Letter you desire to have showed unto you the Catholic Church distinct
from the Church of Rome, and those in communion with her: which was at our
meeting manifested as plainly, as we can distinguish the whole body from a
particular member, or a particular member from the whole body. The body is one
thing, the member another; the body is totum compositum, the whole fabric; the
member but a part of it. And this is the particular Church of Rome to the whole
Catholic. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 12. Homil. 30.
Every member (as St. Chrysostom teaches) has a proper and a common virtue:
it has likewise a peculiar, and a common form or shape. The hand has not the
shape or strength of the whole man; and yet by the mere shape we know, it is a
man's hand. And though we know the Church of Rome by her form, that is, by her
Faith and Government, to be a Church; yet has she not the form or virtue of
the whole Church, be she never so Catholic. If she have, then must the
Catholic borrow her life and being from Rome, and not Rome from the Catholic.
If this particular had the virtue of the whole, then Timothy and Titus might
not have given Orders, or censured Delinquents, or redressed what was amiss at
Ephesus and Crete, but by virtue of a Commission from the Church or Bishop of
Rome. And yet 1 Timothy 1.3.
St. Paul besought Timothy to abide at Ephesus, that he might charge some
(those within his Diocese) that they teach no other doctrine then St. Paul had
delivered. And Tit. 1.5.
for this cause left he Titus at Crete, that he should redress what was
amiss, and ordain Presbyters, as he had appointed him; not as the Church of
Rome directed him. And this was before he had visited that City.

2. But if the Church of Rome be the Catholic Church, Where was the Catholic
Church before she became a Church? Was there one; or was there none? If one,
then was not that the Roman; since there was yet no such Church. If none, what
were Act. 9.31.
those Churches throughout all Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria? This was before
the Apostles parted from one another to teach all Nations: hitherto we find
them in these quarters, and no other. And yet at that time the Catholic Church
was in being, unless the Apostles Creed deceive us. For Ruffin. in Symb. n. 10.
that was framed at Jerusalem, before the Apostles went about their great work.
And for this end was it made, that it might be Hanc credentibus dandam esse
regulam statuunt. lb.
credentibus regula, a rule for believers; whosoever became Christian, he was
to believe the Catholic Church: which he could not believe, if it were not in
being.

3. Secondly, if Rome be the Catholic Church, then if she be Orthodox, the
Catholic Church is Orthodox; if she be Heretical or Schismatic, the whole
Church must be Heretical or Schismatic, as she is. So the Church shall take
denomination from her; with her she shall stand or fall. Great reason then we
should have an eye to Rome, and rely upon her. But this Church has been
miserably Schismatic and Heretical. Schismatic; as is to be seen in
Platina and Onuphrius; when she had sometimes two, sometimes three Bishops
together; a double, a treble-headed, a monstrous Church. Whereas Council. Nic.
can. 8.
in one City there ought to be but one Bishop. That she has been sufficiently
heretical, is confessed by your own men. And as long as she was in this state,
she was no Church; Cypr. Pompeio.
Haeresis enim Christi sponsa non est, Heresy is no Spouse of Christ; Si
Haeretici sunt, Christiani esse non possunt. Tertul. de Praescrip. c. 37.
her members not so much as Christians; if we may believe Tertull. and St.
Cyprian. And St. Austin says Aug. de Deuteronomy. loc. l. 5. c. 10.
Haeretici non pertinent ad Ecclesiam Catholicam; Heretics do not so much as
belong to the Catholic Church. So then they that confess Rome to be
Heretical, grant her to be no Church. And yet who dares say, that the
Catholic Church was Schismatic or Heretical, because Rome was so? This
were to deny, to destroy the Church. For if Schismatic, she is no body, but
shivers. If Heretical in the chief fundamentalls, at least, Where Is the
Church? Unless, as there were 2 Cor. 11.13.
false Apostles, so ye will have false Churches. Such Churches we will have
nothing to do with, unless it be to pray for them, and to advise them to
Apoc. 2.5.
remember, from whence they are fallen, to repent, and to do their first works.

4. Thirdly, if Rome be the Catholic Church, if any thing be amiss in any
particular, the fault is hers, and she ought to mend it. If any man's hand
fester, or foot be lame, if a remedy be not sought, the foot or hand are not
blamed, but the man, because in time they were not looked to. The reason is,
because not the hand or foot, but the man has both discretion and power to
provide a remedy for every member, that is amiss. Thus is it with the Church.
This is enough to give any rational Christian satisfaction, that Rome is not
the Catholic Church. More I should not have written; but that you charge me
with certain Propositions; which, you presume, may stand you in much stead, to
prove the contrary. I shall shall therefore descend to the Propositions, and
your Inferences drawn from thence. The first whereof is this, as you are
pleased to pen them.

You grant the Catholic Church to be always (viz.) from the Apostles time to
this time, The first Proposition.
visible. 5. I do so, both in and from the Apostles time to this present day.
But I do not say, that it was always visible in one and the same place; no,
not at Rome it self, you think so well of. It has been more then once, even
in that very City under a bushel. The Sun it self is so often under a cloud,
that it is not seen in these parts; and yet visible it is in other places.
Quomodo solis multi radii, sedlumen unum? Cypr. de Unit. Eccles.
The Church is likened to the Sun, which has many rays, and yet but one
light. That light is not always in the same place, it removes with the Sun: the
beams may decay, but the Sun it self and the light thereof cannot perish. The
Church has fruitfully increased far and wide into a multitude: but how many of
these have crumbled into nothing? It is much like the Sea, which loses in one
place, and gains in another, and yet continues the same Sea. I^.
Adulterari non potest Sponsa Christi, incorrupta est, and pudica; the Spouse
of Christ cannot be corrupted. Corrupt our selves we may, and depart from her
integrity; but we cannot rob her of her essence, or integrity.

6. The Church of God, I say, is always visible, and yet not to every eye:
sometimes it is invisible not only to ordinary eyes, but even to the best of
men. 3. Reg. 19.10, 14.
Elijah himself complained to the Lord, that he, even he only was left alone
to serve the Lord: whereas all other, in his esteem, were become Idolaters; no
face of a Church left in all Israel. But the Prophet was mistaken, the Lord
assures him, that Ib. v. 18.
there were 7000 in Israel, whose knees had never bowed to Baal. And yet God
tells him not where, nor what their names. A visible Church there was at that
time, though not visible to Elijah. 3. Reg. 18.13.
Visible it was to Obadiah, and to them that met in private Congregations (as
in times of persecution, and with us at this day) these knew one another. And
if that great Prophet could not discern the Church in his own days, and
country; would you have me, who am no such Prophet, to point out, where the
Church was, when the Western parts were overrun with Popish errors? Though I
be not able to show where, yet it is more then probable, that there were in
this very Island 7000 souls, that were not tainted with those errors. It is
enough for us to prove them to be errors, to be against Scripture, and the
received sense of the Ancient Church; and to cleanse our selves from them.

7. Certainly, under the Law God was not without a Church in Judah. Yet show
me, he that can, where the visible Church was, when 2 Chronicles. 12.1.
Rehoboam forsook the Law of the Lord, and all Israel with him. When the
Prophet complained, that 2 Chr. 15 3.
for a long season Israel had been without the true God, without a teaching
Priest, and without the Law. When Ib. c. 28.23. etc. 29.6, 7.
Ahaz shut up the doors of the Temple, and made Altars for false Gods in every
corner of Jerusalem, and in the Cities of Judah. When 4. Reg. 21.4, 5.
in the Courts of the Lords house, Manasseh built Altars for all the host of
heaven: Had God at that time no visible Church, think you? or were those
ignorant, faithless, idolatrous wretches the visible Church? Neither of these
can be; needs therefore must God in those days have a visible Church, though
the Scripture expresses not where, nor who they were. And can we expect, that
man's writings should be more exact then Gods records?

8. But God made a promise to the Apostles, that S. Mat. 28.20.
he would be with them always, and with their successors, to the end of the
world. He did so; and without question he made good this promise, although he
were neither with Liberius, Honorius, nor John 22. I have learned of Gregory
Naz. to Qui candem fidei doctrinam profitentur, ejusdem quoque throni socius
est. Qui autem contrariam sententiam tuetur, adversarius quoque in throno
censeri debet.

Greg. Naz. Orat. 21. n. 7.


distinguish between successors in place, and successors in faith. He will be
with those that succeed in faith and function; not with those that succeed in
function only, and not in faith. Let him sit in what throne he will, he is an
adversary to Christ, if he be not a successor in the Orthodox faith. He that
succeeds St. Peter, or any good Bishop, and is of a contrary Religion, Ibid.
he succeeds them, just as a disease follows health, as darkness follows
light, and frenzy steps into the chair of wisdom.

9. Boast not too much of this promise: the like was made to the former
Priesthood. Number. 25.13.
To Phineas the Lord bequeathed the Covenant of an everlasting Priesthood; that
is, to him and his seed, as long as that law was to endure. And yet we see,
that 2 Chr. 15.3.
for a long season Israel was without the true God, without a teaching Priest,
and without the Law. Where then was the Church? where the Promise? 4. Reg.
16.10, etc.
Vrijah the High Priest built that Altar Damascenum, that abominable Altar,
according to the pattern of that at Damascus. On that he offered, and did many
other things contrary to Gods law. 3. Reg. 1.7.25.
Abiathar was a Traitor; 2 Mac. 4.8.
Jason a Simoniack, and a profane wretch; and Ib. v. 25. etc.
Menelaus one of the veryest beasts that ever lived. Where was then the
Priesthood? where the true Religion? And yet we dare not say, that God failed
of his promise, or wanted a visible true Church in those days. But if it be
inquired in whom, and where; it will be an hard matter for either or both of us
to manifest. Truth it is, God will continue a Church, though bad people and
Priests abuse it. He, and only he, can discern, and distinguish the wheat from
the chafe, and Apoc. 4.3.
those few in Sardis, that had not defiled their garments, from the multitude
that had. Ingemuit totus orbis, and se Arianum esse miratus est. Hieron. cont.
Lucifer. c. Vincent. Lirin. c. 6.
The world groaned, and wondered to see it self all Arian. But God sees not as
man sees; at that time he had a Church; and his eyes beheld it; though it were
very difficult for man to point it out. Visible it was to some, and those not
over many. Thus much for the Visibility of the Church.

10. It is time now to look toward the second proposition, wherewith you charge
me; which is this, You say, the Church of Rome, The second Proposition.
and those in communion with her, are not the Catholic Church, because they
have grievously erred, and in one fundamental at least.

What ever I said, I am sure, I have manifested, that the Church of Rome, and
those particular Churches in her communion, are not, cannot be, the Catholic
Church, no more then some parts of man may be said to be the whole man, or The
Church is called the House of God, 1. Tim. 3.15.
some parts of an house to be the whole house. But as for the reason, which you
impose upon me, I am certain, I never gave it. I never said, these were not the
Catholic Church, because they have grievously erred, and in one fundamental
at least. This reason was not, could not be given for that purpose; neither was
it needful, or useful. For had it never erred, the Catholic it could not be,
a Catholic it might be; a part, but not the whole. If these, you speak of, be
the whole, all other are excluded: and that, your party most uncharitably aims
at. Take Rome at the best, at the highest, Council. Nic. can. 6.
she has her privileges among many; not over all: other Provinces must enjoy
theirs. And diverse Bishops have as large territories, as ever justly had your
Pope of Rome. He that has a desire to know the truth of this, let him consult
the 6 Canon of Nice; the 2 and 3 of Constantinople; the 28 of Chalcedon, with
the 28 and 125 Canons of the African Code: and he shall quickly discern, that
Rome in those days was no such wondrous Church. She, no less then others, had
her bounds, which she might not pass.

11. But, I remember, well, I said, that if there were no other cause, then the
maiming of the Lords Supper, I could not communicate with the Church of Rome.
The reason is, because our Savior ordained it to be given in both kinds; and
ye have most sacrilegiously robbed the Laity of his blood. By this means ye
make the people unfit for martyrdom, if St. Cyprian mistake not. Cyp. l. 1.
ep. 2
Quomodo (says that Father) ad martyrii poculum idoneos facimus, si non eos ad
BIBENDUM prius in Ecclesia POCULUM DOMINI jure communicationis admittimus? How
can we make them fit for the cup of Martyrdom, if first in the Church we do
not by right of communion admit them to DRINK THE CUP OF THE LORD? And again,
How can we shed our blood for Christ who are ashamed to drink the blood of
Christ? Cypr. l. 2. ep. 3.
Quomodo possumus propter Christum sanguinem fundere, qui sanguinem Christi
erubescimus bibere? No, may the people say, we are not ashamed to drink it; but
ye are ashamed to give it us to drink; at least to acknowledge the wrong, that
ye have done us. We have a right to drink it, but ye have barred us from our
right. Thus ye have gone against the sense and practice of the Primitive
Church. Ye have also departed from the Institution of Christ, Ex Christi
institutione Sacramenta virtutem obtinent. Tho 3 q 64.3. c
from which the Sacraments receive their force and virtue. What efficacy then
can your half Sacrament be of?

12. But for your further satisfaction, I add; First, The Church of Rome, and
those in communion with her, are not the Catholic Church exclusive, solely
excluding others; however diverse of that faction appropriate that title to
them. And yet Art. 19.
we grant Rome herself to be a Church, that is, a member of the one Catholic,
though an erroneous member; as a vicious man is a man, or as an ulcerous member
is a part of the body. Though we see her errors, we deny not her essence; but
wish she were cleansed from her corruptions. Secondly, a particular Church
cannot be styled the Universal, and Catholic signifies nothing else; Si
hominem dicas, jam quemvis hominem dixisti. Athan. de Definit. tom. 2. p. 45.
no more then Socrates can be said to be Home in specie, all, or the only man.
Neither can we affirm, that man is the only animal, the only sensitive
creature, though the most excellent. Yet in the third place, though we deny you
to be the Catholic, we acknowledge you to be a Church. Archbishop Lawd.. 20.
n. 3.
For that Church, which receives the Scripture as a Rule of faith, though but
as a partial and imperfect Rule; and both the Sacraments as isntrumental
causes and seals of grace, though they add more, and misuse these; yet cannot
but be a true Church in essence.

13. It is not then every abuse of Scripture and Sacraments; but Haeretici de
Deo falsa sentiendo ipsam fidem violan. Quapropter non pertinent ad Ecclesiam
Catholica^. Aug. de Deuteronomy. locut. l. 6. c. 10.
the razing of the foundation, that ruins a Church, and makes that to be none,
which heretofore was one. Of the essence of the Church, I take to be these two;
Omnes haereses ad utramque formam a nostris Ecclesiis provocatae probent se,
quaqua putant, Apostolicas. Tertul. de Praescrip. c. 32.
the Catholic faith, and the Apostolic government. The former is the soul of
the Church, and gives it life; the other is as the sinews thereof, which knit
the members together firmly into one body. Without the former it is built upon
sand; and without the other it cannot last. Heb. 11.6.
Without the Catholic faith we cannot please God; and without a Bishop the
Sacraments will quickly cease. Yea the very communion of the Church must fail;
since, according to St. Austin's rule, Non possunt communicare nisi iis quos
sedere in sedebus Episcopalibus audiebant. Aug. ep. 163.
we may not so much as hold communion with any, that have not Episcopal Sees.
Since then ye profess the Catholic faith, and continue the Apostolic
government, though mixed with corruptions and encroachments, Archbishop Lawd. 2^
n. 2.
we grant you to be a true, but not Orthodox Church. For Integritatis custodes,
and recta sectantes. Aug. de vera Rel. c. 5.
Orthodox Christians are keepers of integrity, and followers of right things.
Of which the Church of Rome is neither.

14. If then, according to your charge, I did say, that the Roman Church had
grievously erred, and in one fundamental at least; yet as then, so now, I am,
have been, and ever shall be loath, to deny her to be a true Church; since
without the Church, no salvation. If you will make her no Church, or a false
Church, and put your selves out of all hope, I can pity you, but not help it.
Indeed, the pride of that See is such, she will be all, or nothing; either the
Catholic, or no Church. It is not therefore to her content, to yield her to be
a Church, since that implies no more, then that she is a member of the whole.
Alas, the Universal she cannot be; Sicut universa terra ex multis terris, and
unviversa Ecclesia ex multis constat Ecclesiis. Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 13. c. 13.
that consists of many Churches, as the whole earth consists of many lands and
countries: and yet but one Earth, and one Church. Neither of them is couped up,
or confined within the largest Continent. For my part, I profess with St.
Austin, that Aug. contr. Crescon. Gram. l 3. c. 35.
I am in that Church, cujus membra sunt omnes illae Ecclesiae, quas ex
laboribus Apostolorum natas atque firmatas simul in literis canonicis novimus,
the members whereof are all those Churches, which in Scripture we know to have
been planted and confirmed by the Apostles industry. And Earum communionem,
quantum me adjuvat Dominus, sive in Aphrica, sive ubicunque non deseram. Ib.
their communion, with Gods assistance, I shall never forsake, whether in
England, or elsewhere; unless these forsake the truth. I shall never leave the
Universal to side with any particular Church. And I would advise your Masters
to take heed, lest while, with the Dog in the Fable, they catch at too much,
they lose all.

15. Cyprian. de unit. Eccles.
The Church (according to St. Cyprian) is like a Tree, whose boughs are many,
but the body one, firmly rooted. Ab arbore frange ramum, fructus germinare non
poterit; break the best arm from this body, it will bear no fruit for heaven;
the branch it self will wither, and rot, and come to nothing. Has that Church,
you speak of, been heretofore a glorious and happy Church? Glory not too much
in that, To. 11.18.
boast not over the rest of the branches, that have been less successful;
thou bear not the root, but the root thee; thou art but graffed in, as the
rest were: and Ib. v. 17.
with them thou partakest of the root and fatness of the olive tree. Remember
also, though there be many branches, yet there is but one original, one root,
that yields sap, and life, and fruit to every bough, great or small. Suppose
thou be the top-bough, yet rend not, suffer not thy self to be rent, from this
body. Take heed of this, lest thou become fuel for that dreadful fire.

16. That the Church of Rome has grievously and dangerously erred, I need no
witnesses but your own family. Stapleton justifies, that Stapleton. Relect.
cont. 1. q. 5. A. 3.
there is scarce any sin, that can be thought by man (Heresy only excepted)
with which that See has not been foully stained; especially from the 800 years
after Christ. But Stella in luc. 22.31.
Stella, and Almain. l. 3. D. 24. q. 1.
Almain grant freely, that some of the Bishops of Rome did fall into heresy;
and so ceased to be heads of the Church. And though some of that Churches
errors at this day be dangerous to salvation, yet Archbishop Lawd.. 20. n. 23.
that judicious Bishop, I then spoke of, would not venture to set down, what
errors in doctrine may give just cause of separation in this body, or the parts
of it one from another. Neither shall I, by Gods grace, be over-bold in this
point.

17. The points fundamental are contained in the Creed; which is (as the
Council of Trent speaks) Council. Trid. Sess. 3.
Et fundamentum firmum and unicum, not the firm alone, but the only
foundation. And Bellarmine resolves, that Bellar. de Verb. Dei non Scrip. l. 4.
c. 11.
All things simply necessary for all men's salvation, are expressed in the Creed
and Deealogue. If ye have erred in any of these, and grown obstinate in this
error, ye are become an Heretical Church in battering the foundation. And yet
we must take notice, that Archbish. Lawd. 11. n 1.
every thing fundamental is not of a like neernesse to the foundation, nor of
equal primenesse in the faith. For there are The. 2a. 2^. q. 1. Art. 7. c.
quaedam prima credibilia, certain prime principles of faith, in the bosom
whereof all other Articles lie wrapped and folded up. What ever Church denies
or disbeleives any of these, cease to be not only Orthodox, but Catholic,
and so no member of the true Church; since 1. S. Jo. 4.3.
every spirit, that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is
not of God, but is that spirit of Antichrist. Now, if ye have at any time
denied Ib. c. 5.20.
this Jesus Christ to be the true God and eternal life, ye were at that time
no Church, but an Antichristian Synagogue. But this did Marcellinus, and
Liberius, and John 22. (all Bishops of Rome). In those times therefore ye were
no Church, but an Antichristian Synagogue. Cypr. Pomp.
Haeresis enim Christi Sponsa non est, since Heresy is not the Spouse of
Christ.

18. If you doubt of the Minor, Stella makes that good; for he testifies, that
Stella in luc. 22.31.
Marcellinus sacrificed to Idols; that Liberius assented to the Arians; that
is, he denied our Savior to be of one and the same substance with the Father:
and that John 22. affirmed, that God the Son is greater then the Father and the
Holy Ghost. These batter and undermine the foundation; which what ever
Congregation does, it apostatizeth, and is no Church. While then Rome did, and
believed thus, neither she, nor any of those that communicated with her in
these, or any of these heresies, Nulla societas fidei and perfidiae potest
esse. Qui cum Christo non est, adversarius Christi est. Cypr. l. 1. ep. 3.
were so much as a Church, much less the Catholic Church. Especially since
all these are contrary to the Creed and Catholic faith: Athan. Cre.
which faith except every one do keep whole and undefiled, without doubt he
shall perish everlastingly. This Creed our Church appeals to, whether
Catholic, or not Catholic; this is the faith she desires to be saved by. He,
that faithfully beleives this Creed, is a Catholic; but he, that beleives it
not, is no Catholic, neither can he be saved. I am one of Athanasius his
Catholics; and with Gods blessing I shall live and die so.

19. But I know, what you drive at. You were pleased to ask, where our Church
was before the Reformation? It was answered, in the Catholic. Next, you
inquired, whether the Catholic were always visible? The reply was
affirmative; both here, and in other places. But before the Reformation we
communicated with Rome; and since we have not. That Is no fault of ours; ye
will no suffer us to communicate with you, unless we communicate with your
errors. And yet we shall, maugre Satan, communicate with the Catholic Church,
while To. 15.6.
with one mind and one mouth we glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, according to this, the Nicene, and the Apostles Creed. While we pray
for the Church Universal, and for all Bishops, Pastors, and Curates thereof:
While we pray for all Gods people; for all that have erred, and are deceived;
even for our enemies, persecutors, and slanderers: While we continue the
Apostolic government; and while we not only receive, but administer the
Sacraments according to Christ's holy Ordinance, we shall be in the communion of
the Catholic Church.

20. Truth it is, as that judicious Bishop told Mr. Fisher, Archbishop Lawd.
21. n. 1.
the cause of the Schism is yours; for ye thrust us from you, because we
called for Truth, and redress of abuses. What was then to be done? must we
swallow untruths, and wink at abuses, that we may collogue and communicate with
you? It had not wont to be so; every Province had wont to reform it self. And
so she did not transgress the Faith or Canons of the Church Catholic, the
reformation was both legal and commendable. We did so with our Provinces,
following therein the ancient Canons of the Church, which assure us, that
Council. Constantinop. can. 2.
every Provincial Synod is to order all things within the Province. And for
full satisfaction, those Fathers of Constantinople justify this Canon by the
Decrees of the Nicene Council. Indeed sometimes Ib. can. 6.
it may happen, that the business will prove to be of such consequence and
circumspection, that a Provincial Synod is not fit to determine it. What is
then to be done? That very Canon says, Ib.
in such a case we must not make our address to a General Council; but to a
greater Synod of the Bishops of that Diocese, called together for that purpose.
But we must observe, that in the ancient both Civil and Ecclesiastical
acceptance, Dixcesis multas sub se habet provincias. Balsam. in conc. Chalced.
Can. 9.
a Diocese contains in it many Provinces. This Council we ought not to decline,
by molesting the Emperor, or any secular Magistrates, with complaints; as our
late Ministers have done. This is not canonical, and the complaint is not to
be admitted. We are therefore to take notice, that Notit. Imp. l. 2. c. 48.
the three Britains were a Diocese of themselves, and had a Praefectus
Praetorio for Civil, and a Primate for Ecclesiastical affairs. Cantuariae
prima seeds Archiepiscopi habetur, qui est totius Angliae Primas and
Patriarcha. Guil. Malmesbur. in Prologo l. 1. de Gest. Pontif. Angl. p. 195.
The Primate or Patriarch is the Archbishop of Canterbury. So then our
Reformation is not after any new, or lately invented model; it is according to
the ancient course and canons of the Church; and therefore justifiable. If we
had taken any other course in our Reformation, we had done amiss. For
according to the Council of Constantinople, Council. Constantinop. can. 6.
we had run into an high contempt; 1. by slighting all the Bishops of this
Diocese; 2. by injuring the Canons; and 3. by subverting the Ecclesiastical
order and government.

21. In submission to these Canons, the Church did usually reform both in
manners and faith, by Diocesan or Provincial Councels: as is to be seen in the
Code of the Universal Church, in the African-Code, in Balsamon and Zonaras, in
the Councels of Spain, and in the Councels of England, set forth by that pious
and worthy Knight Sir Henry Spelman. Much in this kind is readily presented to
every eye by our learned Archbishop 24. n. 4. Where you may see this course
approved by your own learned men, Alb. Mag. in 1. Did. 11. A. 9.
Albertus Magnus, and that Gerson de Genesis Council. Vnius obedien. part. 1. p.
222.
famous Chancellor of Paris, to be not only lawful, but sometimes necessary.
Indeed to what purpose is it, to justify that to be Perfecta Synodus illa est,
cui interest and Metropolitanus Episcopus. Cod. Eccles. univers. Can. 95.
a full, a perfect Synod, wherein a Metropolitan is present, if it may not upon
just occasion amend, what is amiss within her own precincts? What is it then a
perfect Synod for? Otherwise Israel must not have reformed without Judah, nor
Judah without Israel. Neither must Laodicea have cast off her wicked courses,
unless the rest of the Churches in Asia would have joined in the Reformation.
They, that dare say this, are wiser then God Almighty. For he calls to every
one of these in particular, to repent, and amend with in themselves, what is
faulty. And though Timothy had failed of his duty at Ephesus, it had been no
excuse for Titus to wink at abuses and disorders in Crete. Hos. 4.15.
Though Israel transgress, yet let not Judah sin.

22. Hitherto my Propositions, as you term them; from whence you infer, as a
necessary consequence, thus;

Then by your own saying, The Inference.
the Catholic Church must be distinct from the Church of Rome, and those in
her communion. It must be so, just as a reasonable creature is distinct from
Socrates, the species from the individuum, or particular person. Socrates is a
reasonable creature; but not all, not the only reasonable creature: every
individual person is as much man, as much a reasonable creature, and has as
much of man in him, as Socrates. This will be the more easily discerned, if we
look upon St. Paul's comparison, 1 Cor. 12.
who likens the Church to a body consisting of many members. One member is not
the body, nor the body one member, but many. The body receives not life from
the members, but every member from the body. The body can live without the
hand, or foot, or eye; indeed without all these: but none of these can live,
when severed from the body. The Catholic Church has subsisted without the
Church of Rome, but the Church of Rome cannot subsist without the Catholic.
The Church did stand without Rome, before Rome was a Church. And the Church was
visible in the time of Marcellinus, Liberius, and John 22. when Rome was no
member thereof. Cypr. de unit. Eccles.
Adulterari non potest Sponsa Christi; though Rome defile her self, the Spouse
of Christ is not, cannot be made an Harlot. The tree is sound, though the
leaves fall, and one or more branches be broken off. The fountain flows
comfortably, though a rivulet be cut off. The reason is, because Jer. 2.13.
Christ, and no particular Church, is the fountain of living waters, 8. Jo.
4.14.
that spring up into everlasting life. and they that seek to him for this
water, as they ought, shall be sure to have it. Or, as St. Cyprian speaks, the
Church is Cypr. de unit. Eccles.
luce Domini perfusa, she has her light not from Rome, but from S. Jo. 1.9.
that true light, which enlightens every man, that comes into the world. And we
shall be no longer S. Mat. 5.14.
the light of the world, then we are furnished with this light.

23. So then, since you will needs have it so, the time was when there was a
necessity for the Catholic Church, not only to be distinct, but diverse from
the Church of Rome, and those in her communion; otherwise there had been no
Church. I shall give you a satisfactory instance. When Liberius Bishop of Rome
turned Arian, to recover liberty, and an honorable Bishopric; when all Italy
and Spain sided with him in that heresy, then was the Catholic distinct from
Rome, and those in her communion. For these (if we may believe Haeretici non
pertinent ad Ecclesiam Catholicam. Aug. Locut. de Deuteronomy. l. 5. c. 10.
St. Austin and Si Haeretici sunt, Christiani esse non possunt. Tertul. de
Praescript. c. 37.
Tertullian) had no share in the Church, they were not so much as Christians,
because Heretics. St. Hilary of Poictieurs lamented the infamous lapse of this
Bishop, professing publicly thus, Hilar. Pict. de Synodis. p. 287.
Ex eo intra nos tantum communio Dominica continetur; from that time forward
the Lords communion is continued AMONG US ONLY. Only us? And who are these?
that he clears suddenly after in these words; Ib. p. 288.
Quidam ex vobis firmissima fidei constantia INTRA COMMUNIONEM SE MEAM
CONTINENTES, SEACAETERIS EXTRA GALLIAS ABSTINUERUNT: Some of you, with a most
firm constancy of faith, containing themselves within my communion, abstained
from others without France. Here then was no communion with Rome, unless you
can prove Rome to be in France; and yet, I hope, a Catholic communion. Boast
not then too much of the Roman Church. We see in what state it has been; and
into the same state, without Gods great mercy, it may fall again. And when such
cause is given, it shall be lawful for us in like manner, to hold communion
within our selves, in the three Britains, even in England only. And now, I
think, I have showed you the Catholic Church distinct from the Church of Rome,
and those in her communion; such a one, as would have nothing to do with Rome,
while Heretical.

24. I have done with the Propositions: your desire remains, which requires a
large library, and a younger man; for your words are these;

Wherefore I desire to be shown the Catholic Church distinct from the Church
of Rome, and those in her communion, for the last 1100 years. What? will no
less serve the turn then 1100 years; and those together? what is the meaning of
this? I never undertook any such thing; neither, as I know, has this Church,
or any of the Fathers thereof said any such thing. Art. 19.
Our Articles acknowledge the Church of Rome to be a Church, and call her so.
But withal we say, that Ib.
those of her communion have erred, not only in their living and manner of
ceremonies, but also in matters of faith. And this has been prettily well
proved out of your own men. So a Church it is, though erroneous. We have never
declared her to be no Church; neither have our Articles hitherto charged her
with Heresy; but Art. 22.
with fond doctrines, vainly invented, and founded upon no warranty of
Scripture. Yea, something we blame you with, Art. 29.
that is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture. Four opinions of this kind
my Lord of Canterbury taxes you with; viz. Archbishop Lawd. 33. n. 13
1. Transubstantiation. 2. The administration of the blessed Sacrament to the
Laity in one kind. 3. Invocation of Saints: and, 4. Adoration of Images. Ye
have not hitherto quitted your selves of this Indictment; and while his book
stands unconfuted, I shall believe, that ye are justly charged with these
unsound and uncatholick doctrines.

25. Besides, we acknowledge, that Art. 26.
in the visible Church the evil be ever mingled with the good. That sometime
the evil have chief authority in the ministration of the Word and Sacraments.
These we deny not to be visible members of the Church; but grant, that Ib.
the effect of Christ's Ordinance is not taken away by their wickedness. Though
these be bad in and to themselves, oft-times their calling does good to others,
like S. Mat. 23.2. etc.
the Scribes and Pharisees in Moses chair. We are not then so forward to make
a separation, as ye are taught to believe. Indeed, hardly any but the Church of
Rome, has been so touchy, as to excommunicate whole Churches upon slight
occasions. Eusebius. hist. l. 5. c. 24.
What a stir did Bishop Victor keep about the observation of Easter? He
excommunicated diverse Churches, because they would not stoop to his lure. Ib.
Verum ista caeteris omnibus parum placebant: but this was little pleasing to
the rest of the Bishops, and among them, to that famous Bishop of Lions,
Ireneus. Who with diverse other Victorem gravius and acerbius coarguebant. Ib.
sharply checked and reproved him for it. These considered, that no member can
cut off another without mischief to the whole body, even to it self. And the
hand ought not to do it without a commission from the head. For Neque quisquam
nostrum Episcopum se esse Episcoporu^ constituit: aut tyrannico terrore ad
obsequendi necessitaiem collegas suos adegit. Cypr. in Conc. Cart. ag.
there is no Bishop of Bishops, as ye conceive: neither may any one Bishop
excommunicate another of his own proper authority. Apost. Can. 34. and Cod.
Eccles. Universe. Can. 88.
This is the work of a Synod of Bishops. Whoever does it of his own head,
offends against the practice of the Church, the Canons, and Scripture it self.

26. Thus also Eusebius. hist. l. 7. c. 4.
Bishop Steven, though otherwise a good man, carried himself very high, about
re-baptizing Heretics. Whether zeal, or that vain conceit of St. Peter's Chair
transported him, I know not; but this I am sure of, he excommunicated all
those, that rebaptized Heretics. But what said that great Bishop of
Cappadocia, Firmilianus, Firmilian. apud Cyp. ep. 75.
Teipsum excidisti, noli te fallere, mistake not thy self, thou Bishop of Rome;
while thou go about to cast out others, by this presumption thou have cut
off thy self from the body of Christ, which is his Church. In those days he had
no such power. How he since came by it, is laid open to your and every bodies
eyes, by Archbishop Lawd, 25. n. 12.

27. But why for the last 1100 years? Is it because ye dare not trust to the
former ages? Wherein we find Lira in S. Mat. 16.
Zepherinus to be a Montanist, Marcellinus an Idolater, Liberius an Arian, and
Vigilius an Eutychian. All Bishops of Rome, but no Catholics. Needs therefore
in their times must the Catholic Church be distinct from the Church of Rome.
Or is it because for trial of the truth of Religion, I appealed to the 500.
years next after our Savior? I profess, I did, and do so; because it is
common in these days, even with those that conscientiously pretend to truth,
Tanta est quorundam errandi libido, ut contenti non sint tradita semel and
accepta antiquitus credendi regula; s^d nova ac nova in diem quaerant,
semperque aliquid gestiant religioni addere, mutare, detrahere. Vinc. Lirin. c.
26.
not to be content with the rule of faith, which was once delivered to the
Saints, and received from them by the Primitive Church, and so transmitted to
posterity. But we have an itching after new inventions; and our glory it is,
either to add, or alter, or pare off something from Religion. These courses I
abhor with a perfect hatred, and am taught to do so by Tertullian, and
Vincent. Lirinensis. Yea, some of your own Bishops have resolved, that Ib. c.
9.
Religion admits of no other course but this, ut omnia, qua fide a Patribus
suscepta forent, eadem fide filiis consignarentur; that all things be preserved
for the children with the same faith, wherewith they were received from the
primitive Fathers. And Nosque Religionem, non qua vellemus, ducere, sed potius
qua illa duceret, sequi oportere. Ib.
we must not lead Religion whither we please; but rather we must follow whither
that leads. This was the resolution of Stephen Bishop of Rome, an holy and
prudent man, as Vincentius terms him. Ib. c. 43.
Xistus likewise and Celestinus are of the same mind, they will endure no
innovations, no additions to Antiquity. Oh, that Rome had always kept close to
this rule; then should we have had no such ruptures in the Church, as we now
complain of, and bewail.

28. And reason good we have to appeal to Antiquity, which is not partial
toward you, or us, but indifferent to both. Ib. c. 8.
She never held it meet to maintain the faction, or conspiracy of any one
Province; but Apud ipsam Ecclesiae vetustatem non partis alicujus, sed
universitatis ab iis suscepta est defensio. Ib.
she stood up in defense of the whole Church, and not for any part thereof. And
he can be no good Christian, that does otherwise. St. Cyprian is altogether for
this course; Cypr. Pomp.
if any thing be amiss, he sends us to the spring head, to find out the
fault. The like counsel is given by Ireneus, Iren. l. 5. c. 4.
If difference arise about any small question, nonne oporteret in antiquissimus
recurrere Ecclesias, in quibus Apostoli conversati sunt, and ab iis de
praesenti quaestione sumere, quod certum, and quod liquidum est? ought we not
to have recourse to the most ancient Churches, (not to that in being) wherein
the Apostles themselves conversed; and from those to take that which is certain
and clear about the present question. Observe; from thence we shall have that,
which is certain. Why then shall we content our selves with uncertainties? That
therefore the third General Council might deal clearly, and upon sure grounds
with Nestorius, Vincent. Ligrin. c. 42.
it took this very course; holding it to be Catholicissimum, foelicissimum,
atque optimum factu, most Catholic, most happy, and meetest to be done, to
take into consideration the sentences of those holy Fathers, that were before
them. Those they took to be their Masters, their Counselors, Witnesses and
Judges. Their doctrine they held close to, their counsel they followed, to
their testimony they gave credit, to their judgment they submitted, and
answerably thereto passed sentence upon the difference then in agitation. Blame
not us then, if we appeal to the Fathers, and Vt rite atque solenniter ex eorum
consensu atque docreto antiqui dogmatis Religio confirmaretur, and prophanae
novitatis blasphemia condemnaretur. Ib.
by their unanimous writings judge of Religion, that so we may keep to the old
Rules, and avoid the blasphemies of profane novelty. This was the proper, the
only way then known, and is now, readily to discern, without prejudice,
presumption, or partiality, whether ye or we be in the right; what is Orthodox,
and what not. At this tribunal let us stand, or fall.

29. All this will hardly prevail with you. For (say you) if this cannot be
shown, it will necessarily follow, those were the Catholic Church, or else the
Catholic Church was not always visible.

Sir, if you can distinguish between man in specie and Socr^^^s, you may
quickly distinguish between the Catholic Church and Church of Rome. For as man
is substantially predicated of many differing in number; so is the Church.
Though St. Peter be a man, yet is he not the only man; Judas is a man, as much
as he; they both communicate in the same essence, in the same definition; the
one is as much a reasonable creature as the other. And it will not excuse the
Church of Rome from being erroneous, because it is called a Church, and has
the same definition with other Churches. Good and bad, Orthodox and Erroneous
come not into the definition. The only definition, or description, of the
Catholic Church, that I find in Scripture, is this, 1 Timothy 3.15.
The Church is the pillar and ground of truth. From whence I argue, thus;

That Church, which has erred, is not the pillar and ground of truth.

But the Church of Rome has erred: Ergo,

The Church of Rome is not the pillar and ground of truth.

The Major is undeniable; the Minor I prove thus:

That Church which has professed Montanisme, Arianisme, Eutychianisme, has
erred.

But the Church of Rome has professed all these.

Ergo, The Church of Rome has erred.

The Major is clear; and the Minor is sufficiently proved, 18.27. It follows
therefore necessarily, that the Church of Rome, neither was, nor is the
Catholic Church. And yet the Catholic Church was then visible, when the
Church of Rome fell from the Catholic faith, and ceased to be a Church. Eusebius.
hist. l. 5. c. 15.
Montanus, and his Enthusiasmes, were censured, and condemned by the Bishops of
Asia, in diverse Synods. In those days, when Arianisme prevailed at Rome, the
Catholic Church was visible Theodoret hist. l. 3. c. 4.
at Alexandria, in Sardinia, in France, and other places; all which adhered to
the Nicene Creed. We know, that Evagr. l. 1, c. 9.
Eutyches was condemned at Constantinople, though his heresy were received at
Rome. And those heresies which were broached in your beloved City by John 22.
were at that time detested in most places of Christendom. Thus the Catholic
Church was always visible, when Rome it self failed.

30. I have done with your argument; and now, without offense I shall return it
upon you thus.

I desire to be showed the body of Christ distinct from his hand, or arm. And
if this cannot be showed, it will necessarily follow, that those are the body
of Christ; or else Christ has not always had a body.

This will seem a strange Argument; and yet, what answer you make, the same
shall I requite you with. For Ephesians. 1.23. Colos. 1.24.
the Church is the mystical body of Christ. And 1 Cor. 12.14.
his body is not one member, but many. The whole body is not the hand; nor the
hand the whole body. For Ib. v. 12.
as the body is one, and has many members; and all the members of that one
body, being many, are one body; so also is Christ. And so is his Church, Ib. v.
13.
into which we are baptized. So then (as St. Chrysostom has it) Chrysostom. in
loc.
Et multa unum sunt, and unum est multa; these many are one, and this one is
many; many members, and yet but one body. As they are a body, all these are but
one: but as every one of these are a several part, so they are different. No
part alone by and of it self can make a body: the best member wants the
concurrence of the rest, even skin and hair, to make a complete body. In this
the meanest member bears a part, and the best does no more.

31. The truth is, I may say to you, as St. Paul heretofore to the Corinthians;
1. Cor. 12.27.
Vos estis corpus Christi, and membra ex part, ye are the body of Christ, and
members in part, or members of a member, of the Western Church, and ye are no
more. All Churches throughout the world, and yours among the rest, are members
of the body of Christ; of that body, which is the Church Catholic. And every
one of these must do their parts, that belong unto them, that the body
continue one, and that there be no schism therein. For though St. Paul be
pleased to call the Corinthians the body of Christ, yet as St. Chrysostom
observes, Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 12.
that Church alone was not the whole body; but the Catholic dispersed through
the whole world. He says therefore IN PART, or FOR PART; that so they may
understand themselves to be but pars quaedam, some part of that body, which is
made up of all Churches. That so we may endeavor not only to have peace among
our selves, but with the whole Church throughout the earth; since we are all
members of this Catholic body. God give all of us grace to learn this lesson;
and to remember, that the foot is no less a part, then the eye: and that
neither of these alone, nor yet both in conjunction can make a body, but as
they are conjoined with the rest of the members. Content your selves then, ye
are but membra de membro, members in part, members of a member: ye must be knit
to the other parts, before ye can grow up into a body. Indeed had there been no
other but your selves, the Church had been utterly extinct, when time was, not
so much as a sound member left.

32. Now since you press so for the last 1100 years, give me leave to tell
you, in what state Rome was, for a great part of that time, you call for.
Stapleton. Relect. cont. 1. q. 5. A. 3.
From 800 years after Christ she has been foulely stained with all sins almost
imaginable. Schism was raised there, and maintained with bribery, and blood
enough, if Platina and Onuphrius speak right. Stella in Luc. 22.31.
Stella and Almain. l. 3. D. 24. q. 1.
Almain charge her with heresy. And Lira professes, that Lira in Mat. 16.
many of the chief therein, and the Popes themselves did apostatize from the
faith. Five he names, 1. Zepherinus a Montanist: 2. Marcellinus an Idolater: 3.
Liberius an Arian: 4. Vigilius an Eutychian: and 5. Honorius a Monothelite.
Genebrard. Chron. l. 4. An. 991.
Genebrard tells us, of about 50 Popes, that did so far degenerate from the
virtue of their predecessors, that they were Apostatici potius, quam
Apostolici, Apostaticall rather then Apostolical. And yet this must be the
only Catholic Church.

33. Aven. Annal. Boior. l. 5. p. 447.
Aventinus complains, that for 450 years, the Popes of Rome did so trample all
things under their feet, ut inferos superos in servitutem redegerint, that they
brought heaven and hell to their beck, and made these do, what they pleased.
And P. de Aliaco de Reform. Romans Eccles. tit. de Reform. Reli.
Petrus de Aliaco a Cardinal, that was present in the Council of Constance,
professes, that in those days the Church was come to that pass, ut non sit
digna regi nisi a reprobis, that it was worthy to be governed by none but
reprobates. This he speaks of that Church, you magnify so much. Baro. Annal.
Ann. Christi 908. n. 5. and Ann. 93 1. n. 1.
Baronius confesses, that there was a time, when Marozia and her daughter (a
couple of lewd strumpets) disposed of the Popedom for many years; so that none
possessed that Chair but Boys, Fools, and Knaves: complaining that in those
days, Christ lay asleep in the head of the ship. Where was then the holy
Catholic Church? How think you? was it then at Rome?

34. Alphons. de Cast. c. Haeres. l. 1. c. 4.
Alphonsus de Castro testifies, that diverse Roman Popes were so illiterate,
that they were wholly unacquainted with Grammar. Alvar. Pel. de Planct. Eccle.
l. 2. Ar. 5.
Alvarez Pelagius gives us this account for his time; Hodie in Ecclesia deficit
spiritus prophetiae, that the spirit of Prophecy did so fail, the Church,
that those words were fulfilled, 3. Reg. 22. I will go forth, and I will be a
lying spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets. And yet Baronius professes,
that Plane apparet ex arbitrio dependisse Romani Pontificis, fidei decreta
sancire, and sancita mutare. Baron. An. 373 n. 2^.
it is plainly evident, that it depended upon the Popes pleasure, to enact
Decrees of faith, and to reverse those, that were enacted. Was not here a
Church well governed there while? Quomodo possunt integritati and continentiae
praeesse, si ex ipsis incipiant corruptelae, and vitiorum magisteria proced re?
Cypr. l. 1. ep. 11.
Was it possible, such Bishops should reform abroad, what they practiced, and
countenanced at home? In those drowsy, illiterate, and Apostaticall times,
John 22. broached his damnable heresies. And in those times, in all
probability, were those strange doctrines hatched, and many of those abuses
induced, we now protest against. Somewhere then the Church was visible, when
invisible at Rome. And occasion is given us to presume, that in this very
Island it was visible; since Erasmus professes, that in all his travels he
found learned Bishops in England only. And for many years, we know, the Greek
Church had small correspondence or communion with the Latins; and yet a
visible Church for all this. Neither can I doubt, but in other countries, even
in Italy, there were some learned Bishops, that knew the Canons of the Church,
and full well understood, that Conc. Ephesians. can. 1.
heresy discharges not only the Bishop from his Metropolitan, but Ib. can. 3.
the Clark from subjection to his Bishop. The Church of Rome then must pardon
us, if we withdrew our selves from her Bishops, when they fell into Apostasy,
or heresy. And all good men will acquit us, for reforming abuses at home,
according to our duty. We have good warrant for what we do, even the authority
of the whole Church representative.

Sir, I have done. If you be offended, that I have stirred too much in these
loathsome puddles, consider, I beseech you, that you set me upon this
unpleasing ^ask. What I have done, was at your desire, and according to your
directions Christ knows, I have no private, or by end, in these my writings; it
is your satisfaction and salvation, which I desire, and endeavor. God of his
mercy give a blessing to these my labors, and to you an humble and discerning
spirit, that you may see the truth, and embrace it: So prays

Your unworthy friend Edward Boughen.

Ab adversario mota quaestio, discendi existit occasio. Aug. de Civit. Dei. l.
16. c. 2. Where was our Church before Luther? It was just there, where yours is
now. One and the same Church still, no doubt of that. One in substance; but not
one in condition of state and purity: your part of the same Church remaining in
corruption; and our part of the same Church under reformation. The same Naaman,
and he a Syrian still, but leprous with you, and cleansed with us. The same man
still. Archbishop Lawd. Ep. Ded.. Now one thing.


For Edward Boughen, Doctor in Divinity:
These are.
SIR,
I. YOur papers I received some months since, and for your great pains therein
I humbly thank you. The effect of them is this, (viz.) a Resolution that there
can be no Church showed through the whole world for many hundred years before
Luther, but the Church of Rome, and those in her communion; for if there could,
I presume your learning is such you would have known it, and your charity such
that being desired you would have showed it me.

II. My original doubt was, that since the Catholic Church must be always
visible, and that I could not by my best enquiry find, that a succession of
men professing the doctrine of the Church of England, had been always visible,
that that Church was not the, nor any part of the Catholic Church. To this
doubt at our conference you endeavored my satisfaction, by attempting to prove,
that though the Church of England had not been always visible, (at least not
seen) yet seeing she is but a member of the Catholic Church, of which the
Church of Rome is another; it was sufficient that the Catholic Church had been
always visible in the Church of Rome, and other particular Churches, though not
in the Church of England.

III. That discourse then did give me no satisfaction, because although you
said that the Church of Rome was a member of the Catholic; yet the 19th.
Article of your Church says, That the visible Church of Christ is a
Congregation of faithful men, in the which the pure Word of God is preached,
and the Sacraments be duly administered, according to Christ's ordinance in all
those things that of necessity are requisite to the same: And in diverse other
your Articles your Church condemns the Church of Rome for not preaching the
pure Word of God: As in the 22th. concerning Purgatory, Pardons, Worshipping of
Images and Relics, and Invocation of Saints: And in the 24th. concerning the
Public prayers in the Church, and the ministering of the Sacraments in a tongue
not understood of the people: In the 31th. concerning the Sacrifice of the
Mass for quick and dead, which that your Article calls blasphemous fables, and
dangerous deceits.

IV. And for not duly administering the Sacraments: In the 30th. Article you
say, The Cup of the Lord is not to be denied to Lay People: For both the parts
of the Lords Sacraments by Christ's ordinance and commandment, ought to be
administered to all Christian men alike. So then by the Articles of your Church,
the Church of Rome does neither preach the pure Word of God, nor duly
administer the Sacraments, and that in those things that are of necessity
requisite for the same, as appears by your separation; for your beloved fo.
195. or 7. against F^sher.
Archbish. Lawd says it is not lawful to make a separation for points not
necessary: And if you say you did not make the separation, but the Church of
Rome, then Luther, Tindall, etc. did not go out of the Church of Rome, but the
Church of Rome out of them.

V. Therefore I had reason still, as in my Letter, to demand a Church distinct
from the Church of Rome, and those in her communion, of which no man that reads
your answer, can thereby I think receive satisfaction: For the whole drift and
scope of your papers is either to prove; First, that the Church of Rome and
those in her communion, is not the Catholic Church; or else Secondly, that the
Church of Rome, and those in communion with her, and the Church of England are
but one, that is, several members of one Church.

VI. For the first, that the Church of Rome and those in communion with her,
was not the Catholic Church for that time I required; you show no proof that I
do find, but that some of the Popes have been either Heretics, or
Schismatics; which if admitted (though it is not) to be so in some of them for
that time, yet it does not make that whole Church to be Heretical or
Schismatic: For I believe you will yield that the King of England, or
Archbishop of Canterbury, may be an Heretic or Schismatic, and yet the Church
of England be still part of the Catholic Church. But if it were granted that
the Popes of Rome being Schismatics or Heretics, should annihilate that
Church, yet that could give me no satisfaction, who required not, where is not
the Catholic Church, but where it is, that I might communicate with it.

2. For the second, that the Church of Rome and those in her communion, and the
Church of England, are but several members of the One Catholic Church: That I
conceive cannot be: 1. For the reasons inferred from the Articles of your
Church, as above. 2. For that the Articles of Faith of both Churches are
directly contradictory, as appears by many your negative Articles: And Mr.
Hooker says li. 3. fo. 84. That the Children of the visible Church are signed
with this mark, One Lord, ONE FAITH, One Baptism. 3. Your self Sect. 24.
charges the Church of Rome with errors in matters of Faith, no less then in 4.
points, (viz.) Transubstantiation, Communion in one kind, Invocation of Saints,
and Adoration of Images, and how you do distinguish between errors in matter of
Faith, pertinaciously (as you will say) held, and Heresy, I would willingly
hear, and if guilty of Heresy, then by your sayings out of St. August.
Haeresis enim Sponsa Christi non est: And Haeretici non pertinent ad Ecclesiam
Catholicam; she is no part of the Catholic Church. And in Sect. 11. you charge
the Church of Rome, That she has most sacrilegiously robbed the Laity of
Christ's blood. 4. Christ's mystical body is but one, and although that body is
made up of many members, yet all those members must communicate one with
another, for if a member be separated but by schism, it is like an arm cut off
from the body, or a branch from the vine (your own similies) which makes that
arm or branch no part of the body or vine.

VIII. And that the Church of Rome and England are separated by schism, I
think none will deny, for they do abhor mutual communion in divine worship,
Sacraments, Prayers, and holy Rites; and no Protestant will frequent Catholic
service, especially in the holy Sacrifice of Mass. Moreover, Catholics
excommunicate Protestants every year, and Protestants did frequently Catholics
in England. And by public Statutes and Laws of the Land, any one who should
reconcile one of the Church of England, to the Church of Rome, is guilty of
death; but a Priest that shall celebrate Mass is made guilty of high Treason:
How therefore can One Church, Christ's mystical body, grow up together of such
different members? And your self say Sect. 19. that since the Reformation you
have not communicated with the Church of Rome.

IX. The Church of Rome and England being thus separated, both in Faith and
Communion, and so not one: And the Church of Rome and those in communion with
her, by your saying not being the Catholic Church: my desire (to be showed the
Catholic Church, or the Church of England distinct from the Church of Rome and
those in her communion, for the last 1100 years, or for so long as you please
to say the Church of Rome has so grievously erred, that you dare not
communicate with her) is not, nor by your Papers can be satisfied.

Thus beseeching Almighty God to look favorably into the souls deceived by
devilish deceits, that all heretical impieties removed, the hearts of them
that err may relent, and return to the unity of his truth: I humbly take
leave and rest.

Your most unworthy Servant T. B.

For Mr. T. B. An Answer to his second Letter.
SIR,
I. I Have heretofore manifested, that 2.
there were Churches in Judea, in Galilee and Samaria, before ever there was a
Church at Rome. 2ly. That Ib.
there was a Catholic Church, when the Apostles Creed was compiled and
believed; and yet no Church at Rome. 3ly. After Rome became a Church, she
ceased to be Orthodoxe; in so much, that 23.
in the time of St. Hilary of Poicteurs there was at Rome no Church, no
Communion of Saints. She, and those in communion with her, were Heretical, and
complied with Arius. And yet in France, at that very instant, there was a
Catholic, an Orthodox Church; as also 29.
at Alexandria, and in Sardinia. 4ly. 18.27.29.
No Church at Rome under Zepherinus a Montanist, Marcellinus an Idolater,
Liberius an Arian, Vigilius an Eutychian, and under John the 22. that Monster
of Heretics. And yet in those days the Church was in Asia, Alexandria,
Sardinia, Cappadocia, France, and other places. And all these, I hope, before
Luther, and after Rome had been Catholic. And yet the effect of all this is, a
resolution in you, that n. 1.
there can be no Church showed through the whole world for many hundred years
before Luther, but the Church of Rome, and those in her communion. For some
hundred years then, it seems, there may; and if for some, perchance for more.

2. All this is to imply, as if no Church without Rome; as if all these were no
Churches, because they did not communicate with Rome in her damnable heresies.
If no Church but Rome, and those in her communion, then was there no Church at
all for many hundred years, since Rome was no Church, while Arian, or
Eutychian, or worse. From whence then borrow you these grounds, and take up
this resolution? Because Rome sometimes embraced Montanism, sometimes
Eutychianism, Arianism, Apostatism, therefore no Church but Rome. Or as if
Asia, Alexandria, Sardinia, France, and Cappadocia were no part of the world.
For in those places there were Catholic Churches, when none at Rome. Or else
that Church, because the Roman, was Catholic, though never so heretical.
Thus the Faith shall be tried by Rome, and not Rome by the Faith. Communicate
with Rome, and all is well.

3. Next therefore you scoffingly add; Ib.
for if there could, I presume, your learning is such, you would have known it;
and your charity such, that being desired, you would have showed it me. Sir, my
learning is such, I bless God, that I do know it; and my charity such, that,
upon your desire, I have showed it you. But your eyes and resolution are such,
that you will not see it. Thus with Senec. ep. 51.
Harpaste, Seneca's wives fool, the house is dark, when you are blind, not
casually, but wilfully.

4. In your former Letter your desire was, that I would show you the Catholic
Church distinct from the Church of Rome, and those in communion with her. This
I did in my former Answer, plainly and fully, 1.22, 23, 29. That in this you
might receive satisfaction, I grant, that The Catholic Church was always
visible from the Apostles times to this present day; even then, when there was
no Church at Rome, 5. etc. Next, I have therein proved, that 10.
The Church of Rome, and those in communion with her, are not, cannot be, the
Catholic Church. A member indeed of the Catholic Church sometimes she was,
and sometimes she was not. When Orthodox, she was a member of the Catholic;
but while Heretical or Schismatical, she was no Church, much less the one
Catholic. That the Roman Church has been dangerously Heretical, is
manifested 16, 17, 18, 23. That she has been miserably Schismatic, is
acknowledged by your own men, 3. Thus that Church has grievously erred, and in
more then one fundamental. And yet the Catholic has been always visible,
though oft-times invisible at Rome; unless errors and heresies prove
Catholic, because professed at Rome.

5. All this your Tutors reply not to, nor hardly take notice of; but have
directed you to fall from your former desires upon new questions; tempting me,
as the Pharisees did our Savior; but resolving to receive no answer. Thus you
put me to more trouble, not with a mind to be satisfied, but merely to cavil;
and to slide over those arguments and testimonies, which they are not able to
answer, or disprove. Is not this to speak nothing, lest you should seem to be
silent? Are these things, which I have delivered, true or false? If true; A
qu^cunque verum dicitur, illo inspirante dicitur, qui and ipse veritas est.
Aug. ep. 28.
let truth prevail. If false, disprove them; if impertinent, manifest it.
Otherwise, if you thus seek evasions, you will enforce me to acquaint the world
with your shifts and shufflings, by publishing these papers; that every eye may
discern, what is the weakness of your cause, and what your obstinacy.

6. Your intent being to decline, what you cannot answer, you divert me from
the former business thus; n. 2.
My original doubt was (say you) that since the Catholic Church must be always
visible, and that I could not by my best inquiry find, that a succession of
men, professing the doctrine of the Church of England, had been always visible,
that that Church was not the, nor any part of the Catholic Church. What have I
to do with your original doubt? Your Letter, and the expression of your
desire I looked upon; I endeavored to satisfy your request; and, I presume, a
satisfactory answer was given to your demands, that so I might win a soul, not
so much to our Church, as to the Communion of Saints; and to lead you out of
error into the way of truth. That the Catholic Church is, has been, and must
be always visible, is agreed on both hands. But by your best enquiry you could
not find, that a succession of men, professing the doctrine of the Church of
England, had been always visible. No more could the Pharisees see the
Prophesies, that concerned our Savior, though never so visible. Alas, poor
Gentleman, little Learning are you troubled with; you are not able to search
the Scriptures, Councels, and Fathers, as you ought: and your enquiry has been
of such, as are either ignorant, or wilfully blind, and bent to misguide you.

7. The doctrine of the Church of England is clear in our Book of
Common Prayer: that is the rule for the Laity; and such as the true Catholic
Church has always embraced, and continued. All therein is positive. The Book
of Articles is a rule for the Clergy, to preserve them from error; and much
therein is negative. He, that means sincerely to instruct you so in the right
way, that you may be a guide to others, must give you directions to avoid the
bypath. The positive doctrine of this Church was ever professed, and is
visible in all Catholic writers. But you insist upon no particulars, and guile
lurks under generals. But, I beseech you, before you turned over to the Church
of Rome, why did not you make the like enquiry, to find out a succession of
men professing the doctrine of the Church of Rome, in those particulars,
wherein we dissent from them of that Communion? If thus you had done, you might
easily have discerned, that that Church is not the, nor any part of the
Catholic Church, if we go by your line. For the most skillful of your party
are not able to show such a succession of men, in the first 700 years of
Christianity.

8. But you are pleased to add; that n. 2.
to this doubt, at our conference, I endeavored your satisfaction, by
attempting to prove, that though the Church of England had not been always
visible, (at least not seen) yet seeing she is but a member of the Catholic
Church, of which the Church of Rome is another, it was sufficient that the
Catholic Church had been always visible in the Church of Rome, and other
particular Churches, though not in the Church of England. Good God, what
foreheads have men! Is this, could this possibly be my answer? Who always
justify, that this Church has been visible since the first or second
Conversion; though not always under Reformation. And for Rome, I have
demonstrated, that the Catholic Church was not always visible in that City, or
Diocese, 22, 23, 29. As also what kind of Church ye had for 450 years
together, 33. when hardly the form either of Religion or a Church was there to
be seen. Yet visible it was here, when invisible at Rome. For you can never
show, that this Church was overrun with Montanism, Arianism, or Eutychianism.
Yea, this was a learned and pious Church, when yours was miserably possessed with
ignorance and impiety. Look upon your own Mr. Pits his Catalogue of our
Writers, and this will manifestly appear.

9. However then n. 3.
that discourse, which I sent unto you, gave you no satisfaction, yet it
abundantly clears the questions proposed in your Letter. Neither can I possibly
expect to withdraw you from that faction, who are resolved to receive no
satisfaction, unless we grant, that the Church of Rome, and those in communion
with her, are the only Catholic Church. And yet I never read in Fathers or
Councels, that to communicate with Rome is either a sure, or any token of a
good Catholic. St. Austine assures us, that Aug. quaest. Evangel. secund. Mat.
c. 12.
they are good Catholics, qui and fidem integram sequuntur, and bonos mores;
who hold the undefiled Faith full and whole, and observe good manners: and
those, that endeavor not to do this, are much to blame. While then thus we
do, we are good Catholics. But that Faith, which we have received from the
Apostles, and Councels, and Fathers, we keep whole, and undefiled, without
alteration, addition, or diminution. While they are right, we are so. If they
be out of the way, we are content to err with them. Catholics we are, true,
right Catholics, by Lirinensis rule. Vincent. Lirin. c. 25.
Gods truth, the Church, the body of Christ we love. We prefer no man's, no
Churches authority, no affection, no wit, no eloquence, no philosophy, nothing
whatsoever before Divine Religion, and the Catholic Faith. These things we set
light by, and being fixed, firm in faith, we have determined, by Gods grace,
to hold and believe that, and that only, which we know to have been held by
the Catholic Church universally of old, from the beginning of Christianity.
And whatever new, or unheard of doctrine we shall perceive to have been induced
by any particular man, or Church, besides, or against all the holy men of God,
this we understand to proceed from Temptation, not from Religion.

10. Thus we are Catholics, and our Church will prove so too. We believe the
holy Catholic Church, we profess it is but one. Cypr. l. 4. ep. 2.
A Christo una, (as St. Cyprian speaks) but one of Christ's making, though
divided through all Nations into many members; per totum mundum in multa membra
divisa. Item Episcopatus unus Episcoporum multorum concordi numerositare
diffusus. Ib.
So the Episcopacy is but one, under that great 1. S. Pet. 2.25.
Bishop of our souls, but it is diffused by the numerous consent of many
Bishops. One Church, and one Bisho^rick; and yet many Bishoprics, which are
called Churches: and Council. Nic. Diatyp. 2.
every Bishop is head, as it were, of that Communion or Church, which is
committed to his charge. Tertull. de Praescrip. c. 20.
These many Churches, small or great, una est illa ab Apostolis prima, ex qua
omnes; are that one first Apostolical Church, of whom come all. Sic omnes
primae, and omnes Apostolicae, dum omnes unam probant unitatem. Ib.
Thus they are all prime, all Apostolic, while they all approve one unity. Ib.
c. 32.
This unity is by Tertullian placed in Faith, and Episcopal succession.
Hitherto then we are right; for those Churches, that have this faith, and this
successive government, Ib.
non minus Apostolicae deputantur pro consanguinitate doctrinae, are equally
Apostolic with those very Churches, which were planted by the Apostles. And in
the Council of Ephesus, the appeal is not to the Bishop or Church of Rome, for
trial of doctrine, but to the Vincent. Lirin. c. 42.
consent of the most famous Catholic Bishops, that were before them. If Rome
be judge, the work is short; we shall quickly have one Religion settled, good or
bad. But the old rule is this, Ib. c. 3.
Quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus, that which has been believed in
all places, at all times, by all the Fathers, that is truly Catholic; and
nothing else, for ought I know.

11. This fully manifests, that this National Church is as much Catholic and
Apostolic, as can be desired. And yet I cannot expect, that this should work
upon you, who are obstinately prepossessed against all satisfaction. I
remember, A.C. was not ashamed to publish in print, A.C. p. 54.
that the Lady, whom the two Bishops conferred with, did not ask the Question,
as if she meant to be satisfied with hearing, what either of them said. And was
it not, is it not so with you? Simon Magus will be the old man, say St. Peter,
what he may. And 2. Tim. 3.8.
as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so will your corrupt faction resist the
truth, come what can.

12. But you have reason for what you say; and this it is; n. 3.
Because, although I said, the Church of Rome was a member of the Catholic;
yet the 19. Article of our Church says, that the visible Church of Christ is a
Congregation of faithful men, in the which the pure Word of God is preached,
and the Sacraments be duly administered, according to Christ's Ordinance, in all
those things, that of necessity are requisite to the same. What is here to
displease you? Is not all true? Refute it, if you can: deny it, if you have the
face. Ib.
But in diverse other Articles our Church condemns the Church of Rome, for not
preaching the pure Word of God. And that is it, that offends you. Sir, we
undertake not to judge your Church, but her doctrine; we condemn her errors,
and yet acknowledge her to be a Church. Apoc. 2.13.
God blames the Church of Pergamos, for enduring the seat of Satan within her
Diocese; as also Ib. v. 15.
for holding that odious doctrine of the Nicolaitans: and yet grants her to be
a Church, such a one, as it was. St. Paul calls the Corinthians 1 Cor. 1.2.
a Church, but Ib. v. 11. etc. 3.
he blames their schisms, Ib. c. 5.
their carnality, Ib. c. 11.
their disorders in the Church, Ib v. 20, etc.
their profaning of the Lords Supper, and Ib. c. 15.12.
charges them with the heresy of the Sadduces. Your errors were crept in among
us; and shall not we dare to call them errors, and to teach our Countrymen to
avoid them? Four of these that B. Martyr has charged you with, and proves
them to be blasphemous fables, and dangerous deceits; as I acquainted you, 24.
You read, and turn over, and take no notice of what you read. This it is to be
led by other men's eyes, and to see no further, then your new Masters will give
you leave.

13. Justly we tax you, Art. 30. for maiming the blessed Eucharist, and for
denying the Cup, or Blood of the Lord to Lay men. As if our Savior had not
shed it for them, as much as for us; and had not given it to them, as well as
to us. What is the meaning then of these words, St. Mat. 26.27.
Drink ye all of this? or did not the Church of Christ understand, what they
did, when they gave it to Priest and People? And how can I communicate with
them, that will not suffer me to communicate with Christ, according to his own
Ordinance? who deny me that, which Christ has commanded me to take? In denying
me the Cup, ye admit me by halves; in truth ye forbid me the Lords Table, I
withdraw not my self. I have proved 11. that in the judgment of the Catholic
Church, this Sacrament is to be administered to the Laity in both kinds. I shall
add therefore with you, that n. 4.
the Church of Rome does neither preach the pure Word of God, nor duly
administer the Sacraments, in those things, that are of necessity requisite for
the same. This appears by our departure, or, as you name it, our separation,
not from you, but from your errors. As you are a Church, we communicate with
you; wherein ye are erroneous, we depart from you. And in this we rely not
upon our own judgment, but In ipsa vetustate, omnium, vel certe pene omnium
Sacerdotum pari^er and Magistrorum definitiones sententiasque sectamur.
Vincent. Lirin. c. 3.
submit to the general resolution of the ancient Fathers. The Jews at Gods
command Lev. 13.46.
separated the leprous from the sound, the clean from the unclean: and so do
we. Though Number. 12.14
Miriam were Moses own Sister, yet did he withdraw himself and the whole
Congregation from her, while leprous. But when she was healed of her foul
disease, both he and the rest communicated with her. Cast off your leprous
errors, and we are for your communion.

14. And whereas you add, that n. 4.
Archbishop Lawd says, it is not lawful to make a separation for points not
necessary; I freely subscribe to what he says. But withal he tells us, that
Archbishop Lawd.. 23.
In the Church of Rome there are errors in Doctrine; and some of them such, as
most manifestly endanger salvation: And I hope it is lawful to separate from
these; especially since your most able friends grant; that A. C. p. 56.
Error in the doctrine of Faith is a just cause of Separation. But the same
Bishop has proved, that Archbishop Lawd.. 33. n. 13.
the Church of Rome has erred in the doctrine of Faith, and dangerously too,
in several particulars. In those his words then, which you mention, he touches
not us, but you; not us, who are separated passively; but your Church, which
has actually, actively separated and excommunicated us, for points not
necessary, not to be endured in an Orthodoxe Church. Thus the cause, the fault,
rests upon you, not upon us.

15. Whereas then you tell us, n. 4.
If we say, we did not make the Separation, but the Church of Rome, then
Luther, Tindall, etc. did not go out of the Church of Rome, but the Church of
Rome out of them. What consequence is this? or what is this to us? What Tindall
did, I know not, neither does it concern us. What Luther did, I know, if the
History of the Council of Trent misguide me not. He humbly acquainted you with
your errors and enormities, and desired redress; and for this, ye most
unchristianly thrust him forth of your communion; resolving rather to persevere
in error, then to amend, what was, and is amiss. For my part, I am resolved
not to justify any man, or act against the consent and rules of the ancient
Church. But our Reformation was legal and canonical; as is fully proved,
20.21. We went not out of the Church to make a Reformation; but this we did in
the Church, according to the laudable customs and canons of the ancient
Church. And whoever condemns us for this, he condemns himself of gross
ignorance, or malice. I may justly therefore say with Moses, Number. 16.7.
Ye take too much upon you, ye sons of Levi, Ye men of Rome: ye transgress the
92. and 165. canons of the Catholic Church, by meddling beyond your bounds; as
also by imposing upon us and other Countries the Creed of Pius Quartus; which
is contrary to the 177. Canon of the same Code.

16. Yet, as if no satisfaction were given to your demands, you proceed thus;
n. 5.
Therefore I had reason still, as in my Letter, to demand a Church distinct
from the Church of Rome, and those in her communion; of which no man, that
reads your answer, can thereby, I think, receive satisfaction. So you think,
and some that have read it, think otherwise; and conceive that I have given
full satisfaction to your demands; though you be resolved to turn your ears
another way. For I have demonstrated, that when the Church of Rome, and those
in her communion, were no members of the Catholic Church, there were at that
very time several Orthodoxe Churches in France, 23. in Asia, Sardinia, Egypt,
and at Constantinople. All which at the same instant abhorred those heresies,
which Rome professed; and would have no communion with her, or her heresies.

17. But, say you, Ib.
the whole drift and scope of my Papers is, either to prove, First, that the
Church of Rome, and those in her communion, is not the Catholic Church.
Secondly, that the Church of Rome, and those in communion with her, and the
Church of England are but one, that is, several members of one Church. To
these in their order. For the first you speak truth; The Church of Rome, and
those in her communion, is not the Catholic Church: this is both said and
proved, 12, etc. There my mind may be fully seen; and till that be disproved,
I shall add only thus much; If the Church of Rome be not the Catholic, as I
affirm, and yet the Catholic always visible; then was there a Church distinct
from the Roman Church, when Rome it self was not Catholic. But there was a
time, when Rome was not Catholic, not Orthodoxe; as is proved in my former
Papers, 18, 23, 27, 29.

18. Your reply to that, which I wrote before, is this; n. 6.
For the first, That the Church of Rome, and those in communion with her, was
not the Catholic Church for that time I required, you show no proof, that I
do find, but that some of the Popes have been Heretics or Schismatics.
Proof then is showed for this; and this I take to be proof enough. For if the
head be amiss, the whole body is out of tune. But the Bishop is Council. Nic.
Diatyp. 2.
(...), the head, or as the head of that Church whereto he is preferred, over
which he is placed. For Episcopus est in Ecclesia, and Ecclesia in Episcopo.
Cypr. ep. 69. n. 31.
as the Bishop is in the Church, so is the Church in the Bishop; and such as
the Bishop is, such is the Church presumed to be, till it renounce the Bishops
errors: for (h)
by the Bishop every Church communicates with other Churches. Hence it is, that
at the ordination of a Bishop, the Metropolitan, or other Bishops of that
Province acquaint the Primate therewith, and he the other Bishops within his
Diocese, that so they might know, with and by whom they ought to communicate
with other Churches. This is to be seen in St. Cyprian Cyp. l. 4. ep. 8.
by the ordination of Cornelius; as also Eusebius. hist. l. 7. c. 24.
by the deposition of Paulus Samosatenus, by the ordination of Domnus into the Sea of Antioch. Ib.
This intelligence was given, that so they might know to whom to write, and
from whom to receive Letters of communion.

19. That some, yea diverse, of your Popes were Heretics or Schismatics, is
thoroughly manifested out of your own men, 18, 32, etc. And while Heretics,
Cod. Eccl. Universe. Can. 171.
both themselves, and all that side with them are secluded from Ecclesiastical
communion every way. Ib.
All their Episcopal acts are made void; and Ib. Can. 172.
those Bishops which adhere to them, are to be degraded from their Episcopacy.
While therefore your Bishops were Heretical, your Church was in an ill case:
it could not possibly be Catholic, when all Episcopal acts were void. Is not
this a main evidence against you? 23.
Some proof there is also from St. Hilary; who professes, that (in these
Western parts) there was in his time no Christian communion but in France. This
touches not only the Bishop, but the whole Church of Rome, and all that
adhered to him, or that.

20. For all this, as if it were doubtful whether your Bishops were such, you
adjoin, n. 6.
Which if admitted (though it is not) to be so in some of them for that time,
yet it does not make that whole Church to be Heretical or Schismatic. Sir,
though not admitted by you and your Masters, yet it is acknowledged by your own
learned men, Lyra, Stella, Almain, Platina, Onuphrius, and others, that some of
your Bishops have been Heretical, and some Schismatic. And that not for a
small time, as you seem to imply; but for many generations, Aventin. Annal.
Boior. l. 5. p. 447.
for 450 years together, they were an infamy to their Order, as Aventinus
testifies. God forbid, that I should pass sentence upon every particular
person; but as a City is rebellious, when the Governor and the party prevalent
withstand and affront the Prince, though many loyal subjects be in that City:
so when the Bishop, and the prevailing part with him fall into heresy, that
Church is adjudged Heretical; and the denomination is taken from the more
eminent and potent faction. Thus Socrat. l. 3. c. 29. Sozom. l. 4. c. 10.
Rome it self was accounted Arian, while Bishop Felix communicated with
Arians, and ordained diverse of that persuasion Ministers of that Church. And
yet, blessed be God, Theodoret. l. 2. c. 17.
Rome at that time had many good people, that would not communicate with that
Bishop.

21. But, in the words following, it is little less then confessed, that your
Bishops were such as I have related. n. 6.
For (as your next words speak) I believe, you will yield, that the King of
England, or Archbishop of Canterbury, may be an Heretic, or Schismatic, and
yet the Church of England be still part of the Church Catholic. Sir, we must
distinguish between a professed, and close Heretic. Those, that communicate
with a professed Heretic, are as he is. Hence is it, that Theodoret. l. 2. c.
17. Sozom. l. 4. c. 10.
Felix Bishop of Rome, though inwardly Orthodox, was adjudged Heretical for
holding communion with the Arians. But with a close, a concealed Heretic, we
may communicate, and be guiltless. Thus Act. 8.13.
St. Philip communicated a while with Simon Magus, 1 Timothy 1.20.
St. Paul with Hymeneus; and the rest of the Apostles with Nicolaus, and were
blameless. But this is to persuade us, that your Church was Catholic, when
your Bishop an Heretic. Thus the Popes infallibility is shrunk into heresy;
it is fallen out of the chair into the body of the Church, and the head shall
receive health from the members, not the members from the head. Whereas
anciently the Saints of God judged of the Church by the Bishop, not of the
Bishop by the Church. Yea, Council. Nic. Can. 5.
the communion of the Church is estimated by communicating with the Bishop: and
Cod. Eccles. Univers. can. 169
if any, whether Priest, or other, shall sever themselves from their Canonical
Bishop, and shall call a Congregation against him, or without his directions,
they are censured to be Heretics. The reason is, because Council. Nic. Diatyp.
2.
the Bishop is as it were the head, the life of his Church; and Council. Nic.
Can. 4.
ought not to be ordained without the approbation of all the Bishops of that
Province. And, I know, Liberius was ordained with this circumspection. Thus the
Bishop elected is presumed to be of the same Religion with the rest of the
Province; and the Province with the Metropolitan. Provided therefore it is,
that Cod. Eccles. Univers. Can. 5.99.104.
the Synod of that Province censure him, if he fail of their expectation, and
depart from the Orthodoxe faith. And Ib. Can. 171, 172.
if they do not, they are alike guilty, and all that adhere to him or them.

22. And for the parties instanced, the King of England, and Archbishop of
Canterbury; I believe, that either, or both of them may be Heretics, and this
Church not so; since it is not their being, but our complying that makes us
heretical. But if all our Bishops be of the same Religion with them, this
Church is in an ill case. You, or I, may save our own souls by not
communicating with them, by dissenting from them, and by protesting against
their unsound doctrine. But the Church is not to be judged of by you, or me;
but by those that sit in Moses chair, and are 2. Cor. 2.16.
either the savor of life unto life, or the savor of death unto death. For
St. Mat. 5.13.
if the salt lose its savor, wherewith shall it be salted? how mended? how
recovered? Surely Ib.
it is to be cast forth of the Church, out of the dignity it is in; and
trampled upon as good for nothing. This was spoken to the Apostles, and with
them to their successors. But when the King and Priest join together, it has
a strange influence upon the People for good or bad. 4. Reg. 16.10, etc.
When King Ahaz and Vrijah the Priest professed Idolatry with open face, though
many good men were resident among them, yet was that City and People accounted
Heretical. The power of the sword draws some to sympathize, and too many to
temporize. This is to be seen under the reign of Ista edictorum Imperatoris vi,
quae in parts Occidentis miserat, confecta sunt. Socrat. l. 2. c. 29.
Constantius, Julian, Valens, and others; where we see Religion much depend
upon the Imperial breath. But if Prince and Bishop concur in Religion, they
hardly meet with opposition. Look upon Antioch under Constantius the Emperor,
and Leontius the Bishop; upon Constantinople under Valens, and Bishop Eudoxius,
and you shall see how suddenly they were overrun with heresy. Now, if it
should fall out so unhappily with any or all the Cities of this Kingdom, the
Diocesan or National Church so infected, shall be deemed Heretical. Under K.
Edward VI. and Queen Mary, the Religion of this Church was judged of by the
Governors; and thus shall we deal with Rome.

23. 6.
But if it were granted (say you) that the Popes of Rome being Schismatics or
Heretics, should annihilate that Church, yet that could give me no
satisfaction, who required not, where is not the Catholic Church, but where it
is, that I might communicate with it. And I say, if the Church of Rome be
annihilated by the Popes Heresy, or Apostasy, she shall be no Church, much
less the Catholic. What then shall become of those Churches in her communion?
surely they are all in an ill, in the same case with her. Grant but this, and
the controversy is at an end. You have satisfaction, and I ease. But this will
not serve your turn, who now require not, where is not, but where is the
Catholic Church. Well, if this will give you satisfaction, I shall tell you
this too. The Catholic Church is, where ever the Catholic faith is preserved,
and Apostolic government continued. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. 12.
It has been dispersed through the whole world; though not perchance in all
parts of the habitable world at the same time. 1. Cor. 12.12.
One it is, but many members. As the body is one, and has many members, so is
Christ, Chrysostom. in loc.
Pro Ecclesia posuit Christum; for the Church he sets down Christ; since the
Church is his body, 1. Cor. 12.13.
into which we are all baptized. This body has many members, these members are
diffused from sea to sea, over the whole earth. So the Church is in Greece,
Italy, Spain, France, England, Polonia, and Unus spiritus inesse omnibus
infusus membris, and una anima merito dicitur, quia una in omnibus fides, and
unus ab omnibus colitur Deus, atque ex uno ore hymnos omnes concinunt Deo.
Ruffin. hist. l. 9. c. 10.
wherever the Catholic faith and Apostolical government are continued. Thus
we acknowledge Rome to be a Church, as St. Paul did Corinth, though an
erroneous and superstitious Church. You see now, where you may communicate with
the Catholic: but it is left to your discretion, to choose, whether you will
communicate with a reformed or a superstitious Church.

24. Now to the second, where I say, That the Church of Rome, and those in her
communion, and the Church of England, are but several members of the one
Catholic Church: You reply thus, n. 7.
That, I conceive, cannot be; 1. For the reasons inferred from the Articles of
your Church, as above. 2. For that the Articles of faith of both Churches are
directly contradictory; as appears by many your negative Articles. I look not
upon your conceits, but upon your reasons inferred from the Articles of our
Church; which are already satisfied, 12, 13. And whereas you add, that the
Articles of faith of both Churches are directly contradictory; I hope, it is
not so. If it be, I am certain, one of these is no Church: For then 1. Cor.
3.11.
we build not both upon the same foundation; Colos. 2.19.
we hold not the head, from which all the body receives nourishment, and is
knit, compacted, together by joints and bands. Quid itaque relicto capite
membris adhaeres? Why then do you leave the head, to cleave to the members,
corrupt, putrified members? He, that builds upon the rock, builds upon sure
grounds. Aug. de verb. Domini. Ser. 45. c. 7.
Veni ergo mecum, si vis superpetram; and noli mihi velle esse pro petra: if
then you before the rock, go along with me; and seek not to be the rock to me.
Behold, we build upon the rock; we believe in God the Father, in God the Son,
and God the holy Ghost. I hope, ye do so too. We also believe the Unity in
Trinity, and Trinity in Unity. And do not ye so too? Hitherto we are both upon
the Rock. We believe the We devoutly profess, and in all points follow the
faith, which is contained in the three Creeds, that is to say, of the Apostles,
of the Council of Nice, and of Athanasius. The Protest. of Bishop Scory, etc.
Book of Mart. p. 2119.
three Creeds, and in the same sense the Primitive Church received them; which
ye do not; but give some of the Articles a new, another sense. Here then ye
are beside the Rock.

25. Thus we agree, and yet not agree; we agree in the foundation, not in the
superstruction; in the letter, not in the exposition. And we are sorry to see
you forget your selves so much, as to infringe so memorable, so necessary a
Canon as that of the Council of Ephesus; which decrees, that Conc. Ephesians. Can.
7.
It is not lawful for any one to bring, to write, or compose any other Creed,
besides that which was agreed upon by those holy Fathers assembled in the holy
Ghost at Nice. He that offends in this kind against this Canon, is deeply
censured; If a Bishop, he is to be deprived of his Cure; if a Clergyman, of
his function; but if a Layman, he is to be turned out of the Churches
communion. But ye have imposed a new, another Creed of Pius Quartus upon the
Church; which whosoever will not subscribe to, he is, at least, no good
Catholic with you.

26. Say not, that these are expositions; they are dangerous additions: and
though I cannot say, ye have altered the letter, yet I dare be bold to say, ye
have strangely altered the sense, Tertul. de Praescrip. c. 38.
auferendo proprietates singulorum verborum, and adjiciendo dispositiones non
comparentium rerum, by taking away the proper sense of several words, and by
inserting imaginations of such things as have no footing in holy Writ. Whereas
we, as we ought, take the rule of Faith in the literal sense; Quae nullas
habet apad nos quaesliones, nisi quas haereses inferunt, and quae Haereticos
faciunt. Ib. c. 14.
and that raises no controversies with us, but such as heresies bring in, and
such as make Heretics. Your selves, your own Church ye may charge with
contradictions, this Church ye cannot. This is the plea we stand upon, Ib. c.
21.
Communicamus cum Ecclestis Apostolicis, quod nulla (vel in nullo) doctrina
diversa: hoc est testimonium veritatis: we cannot but communicate with the
Primitive, the Apostolic Churches, whose doctrine is in nothing different from
theirs. This is such a testimony of the truth, that it is above all exception.
And resolved I am, with Gods blessing, to be no longer of this communion, then
I shall be able to make this good.

27. And whereas n. 7.
Mr. Hooker says, That the Children of the visible Church are signed with this
mark, One Lord, ONE FAITH, one Baptism; I presume you make no doubt of this.
Neither can I think, but that you are resolved, whoever denies the Lord of
life, or renounceth the Catholic faith, or is baptized into any other Baptism,
then that one, which our Savior instituted; or is a second time baptized, he
is no child of the visible Church: since that has taught us to believe one
Baptism for the remission of sins. He then that forsakes this faith, forsakes
the Church.

28. Thirdly, you add, that Ib.
I my self charge the Church of Rome with errors in matters of faith, no less
then in four points, viz. Transubstantiation, Communion in one kind,
Invocation of Saints, and Adoration of images. As if I were the first, or the
only man, that charged you with these errors: whereas Art. 22, 28, 30.
this is done by our whole Church; and the Indictment is made good by that
learned Archbishop of B. memory. The Church says, that these doctrines are
Art. 22.
fond things, grounded upon no warranty of Scripture, but rather repugnant to
the Word of God. The Archbishop has charged it home, and you know not how to
shift it off. It would well therefore become a Christian Church to redress
these and your other errors; that we, and others, who protest against these
unwarrantable doctrines, may communicate freely with you.

29. n. 7.
You would therefore willingly hear, how I distinguish between errors in
matters of faith, pertinaciously held, and heresy. What Is this to the point in
hand? This is but only to tempt me into another discourse, nothing to our
purpose. As there is great difference between error and pertinacy, so is there
also between errors in faith, and errors in matters of faith. Errors in faith
are such as are against the Creed: errors in matters of faith, I understand to
be such, as concern the faith in points of lower moment, that deny not the
letter of the text, but give, and impose for by-ends, some unwarrantable
expositions, unknown to antiquity. Such is that, which was Cod. Eccles. Vniver.
can. 177
brought in by Charisius, and such are yours, which the Church of England
nominates. Though these with the former batter not the foundation, yet they
endanger the outworks, and will in time make way to undermine some of the
necessary forts.

30. It Is very true, that an error in faith pertinaciously maintained, is no
less then heresy: but we say not so of errors in matters of faith. Quid
faciat Haereticum, regulari quadam definitione comp ehendi, sicut ego existimo,
aut omnino non pot^st, aut difficillime potest. Aug. Praefat. ad li. de Haeres.
St. Austin was very cautelous in defining an Heretic; and I shall be wary,
how I determine what heresy separates from the Catholic Church. And yet your
Masters cannot deny, but St. Cyprian (not St. Austin, as you mistake) resolves
thus, Cypr. Pompeio. ep.
Haeresis Christi sponsa non est; Heresy is not the spouse of Christ. But
every thing, that is called heresy by you, or error in doctrine with us, will
not separate from the Catholic communion. St. Austin therefore limits it thus,
Aug. de Fide and Symb. c. 10.
Haeretici de Deo falsa sentiendo, ipsam fidem violant. Quapropter non
pertinent ad Ecclesiam Catholicam: every violation of the faith cuts not off
from the Catholic Church, but a false opinion of God does; beware of that;
take heed how you think amiss of the blessed Trinity, or any person therein.
And in this sense is that of Tertullian to be understood, Tertul. de Praescrip.
c 37.
Si Haeretici sunt, Christiani esse non possunt; where an heresy is against
any person of the Trinity, there is no Christianity. That Great Athanasius
therefore tells us that Athan. de Spiritu sancto. p. 202. 203.
this belief in the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, Christ gave to be
settled in the Church, as a foundation to the Church, the foundation of faith,
and the faith of the Catholic Church. And Ib p. 204.
whoever divides the Son from the Father, or reckons the holy Ghost among
creatures, he neither has the Father, nor the Son, sed impius est sine Deo,
and infideli deterior, and quidvis potius quam Christianus; but he is an
impious man without God, worse then an Infidel, and any thing rather then a
Christian. And if no Christian, no member of the Church. Hilar. Pict. ad
Constant. Aug. p. 273.
Catholicus sum, nolo esse Haereticus; Christianus sum, non Arianus. Thus far I
dare go with these Fathers, but no further. But if, as you will have it, every
error in matters of faith pertinaciously held, be an heresy, and separate from
the Catholic Church, Rome has been in an ill case for many years. For those
four errors mentioned, 29. ye have held with pertinacy enough: and yet are
they by the Archbishop strongly proved to be errors; though your stomachs be
too high to retract them.

31. But you would fain have me do, what our Church has never done, that is,
to charge your Church with heresy: for say you, n. 7.
if the Church of Rome be guilty of heresy, she is no part of the Catholic
Church. But I never said, she was guilty of heresy; and till I have just cause
to say so, I shall forbear to say, that she is no part of the Catholic Church.
And I shall be as tender as my betters have been, to set down, Archbishop
Lawd.. 11. n. 1.
what errors in doctrine may give just cause of separation in this bedy, or the
parts of it, one from another. I have satisfied my self, that the Reformation
of this Church was Canonical, and is justifiable; and that she was and is a
very member of the Catholic; in whose communion I have ever lived; wherein
also, by Gods grace, I am resolved to die. And it were wisdom in you to see
your Church justified from those four errors, before you enter into further
controversies, As for that, n. 7.
which you produce out of the 11 Sect. there it is sufficiently proved, that
your Church has most sacrilegiously robbed the Laity of Christ's blood. This is
not denied, I take it therefore for confessed; and hope, your Masters will see
it mended.

32. Well, if we will not declare yours to be no Church, you will prove yours
or ours to be no Church; and upon these grounds, Ib.
4ly. say you, Christ's mystical body is but one; and although that body is
made up of many members, yet all those members must communicate one with
another: for if a member be separated but by schism, it is like an arm cut off
from the body, or a branch from the vine; which make that arm or branch no part
of the body or vine. What though all this be granted, will this make one of the
two, no Church? I believe not. That Christ's mystical body is but one, the
Scripture speaks more then once, 1 Cor. 12.13. Ephesians. 1.23. Col. 1.18. That may
not be denied, or questioned. That this body is made up of many members, is
liwise testified, To. 12.4, 5. 1. Cor. 12.12, etc. And we know, all those
members must communicate one with another, and wherein: 1. Cor. 12.25, 26.
in the same care one for another; in the same sufferings, and rejoycings one
with another. We are not bound to communicate with you in the same ceremonies,
gesture, superstition, or error; no more then the hand is bound to communicate
with the foot in going, the heels with the ears in hearing, or either with the
other in the gout, or any other disease. The difference between you and us, is
this, we love the body, and hate the disease; but you love the body so, that ye
love, and foster the disease; and hate those, that are not visited with the
like contagion. We communicate with you in the necessaries, in Faith, Hope, and
Charity, as also in all things essential to a Church. We believe the
Scriptures, and the three Creeds with you, though not always in the same
sense. Our hopes are the same with yours, though we something differ in the
means: and our charity is manifested by our prayers; as heretofore I acquainted
you, 19. But your charity is so little, that rather then we shall be members of
the Catholic, ye will be none your selves.

33. For n. 7.
(say you) if a member be separated but by schism, it is like an arm cut off
from the body, or a branch from the vine; which make that arm or branch no part
of the body or vine. Very right, it is so; not because it is distant from this
or that member, or unlike either in fashion, or comeliness, or office; but
because it is cut off from the body, by which it receives life and strength
from the head. A Church then must be separated from the mystical body of
Christ, before it can be in direct schism; and this must be done by pride, or
obstinacy in error. If ye shall excommunicate any man or Church causelessly, the
fault is in you, not in them; though they be under Romes Jurisdiction. But ye
have no such power over us; as is sufficiently proved, 25, 26. Say not then,
though your selves be the hand, or the eye, that 1. Cor. 12.15.
because the foot is not the hand, nor Ib. v. 16.
the ear, the eye, it is not therefore of the body. God knows, Ib. v. 14.
the body is not one member, but many: and each of these receive life from the
head, though not every one of these so suddenly, so immediately. Thus Ib. v. 13.
by one spirit we are all baptized into one body, the mystical body of Christ.
Ib. v. 27.
We are therefore the body of Christ, or rather of the body, as Corinth was, Ib.
membra de membro, members in part; not members of Rome, but members of the
Western Church. And though not Romanists, yet are we both Christians and
Catholics. Say not, because we cannot see Transubstantiation and Purgatory,
nor weild St. Peter's sword with you, that we are no members; we can hear the
voice of the shepherd, and Quid relicto capite membris adhaeres? Chrysostom. in
col. 2.19
we shall not forsake the shepherd to be in league with the members.

34. Now we draw near your issue, which follows thus; n. 8.
And that the Church of Rome and England are separated by schism, I think,
none will deny. For they abhor mutual communion in divine Worship, Sacraments,
and holy Rites: and no Protestant will frequent Catholic service, especially
in the holy Sacrifice of Mass. A separation there is indeed between you and
us; and, if you will, a schism, the more the pity. But Archbishop Lawd 21. n.
1.
the cause of the schism is yours; for ye thrust us from you, because we
called for Truth, and redress of abuses. And not only so, but, according to
your own words, n. 8.
Ye excommunicate us every year, all Protestants in general; a course unheard
of, unknown with us. For though some one convicted member of yours be
excommunicated, we use not to excommunicate a whole multitude or Nation. We
condemn doctrines, not persons; or if persons, for the doctrines sake. Care
therefore is taken, that Can.
our Parsons and Curates repair to Recusants houses, to confer with them, and
to convince their errors, that so they may be won to Church. Neither do we
abhor mutual communion with you in divine worship, but in worshipping or
adoration of Images and Relics. We cannot endure, that Latria, ea dicitur
servitus, quae pertinet ad colendum Deum. Aug. de civ. D. l. to. c. 1.
divine worship be given to any other then to the blessed Trinity.

35. We abhor not your Sacraments, but your half Communion; nor any holy
Rites ye have. Of Ceremonies, before the Book of Common Prayer.
The excessive multitude of ceremonies, within our selves, we have pared off.
Ib.
And in these our doings we condemn no other Nation, much less abhor them,
nor prescribe any thing but to our own people only: observe that. Yet Ib.
such ceremonies we have retained, which do serve to a decent order, and godly
Discipline; and such as be apt to stir up the dull mind of man to the
remembrance of his duty to God; as also Ib.
to the reducing of the people to a most perfect and godly living, without
error or superstition. And they, that know any thing, cannot deny, but Socrat.
l. 5. c. 21. Sozom. l. 7. c. 19.
many Rites and observations there were in the East, which were not received in
the West. And in the West they were not alike in all places. Of these St.
Ambrose speaks thus, Ambros. de Sacrament. l. 3. c. 1.
In omnibus cupio sequi Ecclesiam Romanam. Sed tamen and nos homines sensum
habemus. Ideo quod ALIBI RECTIUS SERVATUR, and nos recte custodimus. Desirous I
am, says he, to follow the Church of Rome in all things. And yet we are men of
understanding. What therefore IS MORE RIGHTLY OBSERVED IN OTHER PLACES, that
do we rightly keep. And is it not as lawful for us to do so? Perfection is
not at Rome; some observations may be more convenient, yea better in other
places. And, I remember, St. Austin tells us, that Aug. ep. 118. c. 2.
it was a rule of St. Ambrose, to observe the customs of that Diocese, wherein
we reside; to have an eye upon the Bishop, and to do, as he does. This St.
Austin took to be counsel from heaven, what ever you think. I would to God, we
were so humble, and so flexible, as to submit to this counsel.

36. And whereas you add, that no Protestant will frequent Catholic service;
I must tell you, that we of this Church frequent no other. And our Book of
Divine service is Catholic in all things, but in this, that it is not Roman.
Were it in the Latin tongue, with a prayer for the Pope by name, and your half
Communion, then it would be Catholic enough; though the people went home never
the wiser, never the better. I challenge the most able of your faction, to show
me any one passage in our Common prayer Book, that is not Catholic. I know,
you cannot: I know, it is as agreeable, as possibly may be, to the Catholic
faith. I speak not this at hap-hazard, or out of blind affection; but as St.
Austin, so I, Aug. de Verbis Dom. Ser. 63. c. 2.
Fides nostra, id est, fides vera, fides recta, fides Catholica, non opinione
praesumptionis, sed testimonio lectionis collecta; Our faith, that is, the
true, the right, the Catholic faith, which is not collected out of an opinion
of presumption, but testified unto us by our serious reading the Scriptures,
Councels, and Fathers; Nec haeretica temeritate incerta, sed Apostolica
veritate fundata, hoc insinuat, hoc novimus, hoc credimus. Ib.
neither wavering through heretical rashness, but founded upon Apostolical
truth, insinuates this unto us; thus we know it, thus we believe it. And for
the Sacrifice of the Mass, as ye call it, we acknowledge it to be a
Commemorative Sacrifice. Let us have the Communion in both kinds, press us
not to believe Transubstantiation, or any of your late inventions, and I know
no reason, but we may frequent that, which ye call the Sacrifice of the Mass.
I shall not quarrel the word, when the main matter is agreed upon.

37. Heretofore, whatever you think, so little exception was there to our
Divine Service, Worship, Sacraments, Prayers, and holy Rites, that those two
memorable Bishops Bo. of Mar.
Bonner and Gardener communicated with us in them; and so did most of the
Roman Catholics of this Nation, for ten years under Queen Elizabeth, till
that terrible Bull of Pius Quintus came thundering out. Yea Bishop Gardener
subscribes, that the Common Prayer book is a devout, a godly, a Christian Book
and Order, etc. Ib. p. 1357.
But as it was with the Donatists, so is it much alike with you: Aug. de Verb.
Dom. Ser. 49. c. 10.
they in the height of pride trumpeted it out, Nos sanctificamus, nos
justificamus, nos facimus justos; we are the men, that sanctify; we are the
men, that justify; we make you just. Ecce, quo ascenderunt; Behold, to what an
height they were grown. And are not ye ascended to a strange height, to say,
Nos facimus Catholicos, We are they, that make men Catholics. Side with us,
and ye are Catholics; differ from us in the least point, and ye are Heretics?
St. Paul is of another mind; To. 14.3, 4.
in meats, in matters of indifferency, in such things, that are not of
necessity to be done, we are not to judge one another. Phil. 3.15, 16.
If in these kind of things, and such as tend to perfection of life, we be
otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto us: so that we walk by the
same rule, whereto we have attained. That is Chrysostom. in loc.
so we preserve the same faith, and keep the same commandments. So St.
Chrysostom. These, these are the rule, we must be sure to walk by.

38. From Divine service you descend to the public Statutes and Laws of the
Land, whereby it is enacted, n. 8.
that any one, who should reconcile one of the Church of England, to the Church
of Rome, is guilty of death. And reason good, since ye have so many traitrous
principles against the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, against the honor and
safety of Princes. Indeed what is this reconciling to Rome, which by the Laws
is condemned, but a withdrawing of the people from their obedience, to give
that to the Pope, which is due to their Prince? This is plain by the Statute,
whose words are these, 3. Jac. 4.
That person, who shall put in practice to absolve, persuade, or withdraw any
of his Majesty's Subjects from their natural OBEDIENCE TO HIS MAJESTY, or to
reconcile them to the Pope or Sea of Rome, or to move them, or any of them, to
PROMISE OBEDIENCE TO ANY PRETENDED AUTHORITY OF THE SEA OF ROME, That then
every such person, their Procurers, etc. shall be adjudged Traitors: and being
thereof lawfully convicted, shall have judgment, and suffer as in cases of High
Treason. You see the Law, and the reason of this Law. If this will not
satisfy, the same Statute says moreover, that Ib.
It is found by daily experience, that many his Majesty's Subjects, that adhere
in their hearts to the Popish Religion, by the infection drawn from thence, and
by the wicked and devilish counsel of Jesuits, Seminaries, etc. are so far
PERVERTED IN POINT OF LOYALTY and due allegiance, as they are ready to
entertain and execute any treasonable conspiracies, and practices; as appears
by the Gunpowder-treason. By this time you see the reason of this Act; and
cannot deny it to be just.

39. But (if you speak truth) a Priest, that shall but celebrate Mass, is made
guilty of High Treason. So you say; but upon search I can find no such Statute.
Indeed an Act there is, that 23. Eliz. 1.
Every person that shall say or sing Mass, being thereof lawfully convicted,
shall forfeit the sum of 200 Marks, and be committed to prison till he pay
this sum. And Ib.
Every person, that shall willingly hear Mass, shall forfeit the sum of 100
Marks, and suffer imprisonment for a year. The like penal Laws have been
heretofore set forth by the best Christian Emperors, Socrat. l. 1. c. 6 Sozom.
l. 1. c. 19.
by Constantine the Great against the Arians. But the Donatists were
Schismatic Sectaries; and Aug. ep. 48.
against these he made also a Decree, that so many of those as refused to be
united to the Church, should forfeit their personal estates. Many such Laws
are to be seen in the African Code. And our Saviors command is, that St. Luc.
14.23.
the people be compelled to come into his house. And this care has been taken
for the good of all sorts of Recusants, that so 1. Eliz. 2. and 23. Eliz. 1.
they might be drawn to Church, to serve God with one mind, and one mouth;
which every National Church is bound to do. Care therefore is taken, that Cod.
Eccles. Universe. can. 81
we pray with the people. But how do they pray with the people, who pray in a
tongue, the people understand not? Ib.
Neither ought we, in times of peace, to communicate with such, as meet in
private houses, and frequent not the Church prayers. Ib.
And they, that abhor one Church, are not to be received into another. Ye
therefore, that will not communicate in prayers with your own Mother Church,
ought not to be received by any member of the Catholic. And in doing so, in
receiving such, as you are, Rome offends against the Laws of the Catholic
Church.

40. These Canons are little observed, little thought of: all, that is studied
in these days, is to continue the breach, and to make it wider. Hence is this
exclamation, n. 8.
How therefore can one Church, Christ's mystical hody, grow up together of such
different members? That Christ's mystical body consists, and grows up of
different members, is clear, 1. Cor. 12.12, etc. and all these receive life and
power from the same head; even those very members, that are distorted, or
diseased. The sound hand therefore cannot say to the lame leg, or gouty foot,
Thou art not of the same body: but according to the directions of the head, the
sound hand provides and applies a plaster to the diseased member. Observable
it is, that between the Eastern and Western Churches were many differences,
viz. 1. About the observation of Easter. 2. Rebaptization of Heretics. 3.
Procession of the holy Ghost. 4. The number of Sacraments. 5. The manner of
Ordination. 6. The Canonical Books of the Old Testament, and some other. And
yet for all these, they grew up together comfortably, and continued in the same
body. Seldom or never any, that offered to make a breach, or to censure other
Churches for these or the like different observations and expressions, but two
or three Bishops of Rome. Such were the humility and charity of those glorious
Saints. In those purer days Neminem judicantes, aut a jure communionis
aliquem, si diversum sensevit, amoventes. Cypr. in council. Carthag.
one Bishop was not so forward to censure or excommunicate another Bishop, for
being of a diverse persuasion. No, no, says St. Cyprian, Ib.
Neque quisquam nostrum Episcopum se esse Episcoporum constituit, aut tyrannico
terrore ad obsequendi necessitatem collegas suos adegit, No man in those days
took upon him to be Bishop of Bishops, or to enforce any by tyrannical terror
to subscribe his dictates. Then was it lawful for every one to speak his mind
freely, when reason, not power; weight, and not number, bore the sway.

41. But you object, that n. 8.
I say Sect. 19. that since the Reformation we have not communicated with the
Church of Rome. Very right, I do so. But withal I tell you, that this is no
fault of ours; since ye will not suffer us to communicate with you, unless we
communicate with your errors. Is not this to deal with us, as the Jews did with
the poor man, that was born blind? St. Jo. 9.34.
while he was blind, the Pharisees communicated with him; but when he had
gained sight, they cast him out, they excommunicated him. But Ib. v. 35.
our blessed Savior took pity on him, and received him into his communion.
Thus, while we were blind, and saw not your errors, we were your dear friends:
but when we discerned them, and complained of them, hell was good enough for
us. Yet we doubt not, but 1. St. Jo. 1.3.
we have communion with Christ, since we hold communion with the Apostles by
their successors, not only in function, but in faith and charity. For we
receive the two Testaments, with the three Creeds, in the same sense with the
Primitive Church. We pray for the whole Church; for all Jews, Turks, Infidels,
and Heretics; yea for our enemies, persecutors, and slanderers. We
anathematize not Churches, but errors; nor any persons, but such as are, or
ought to be, members of this Church and Kingdom: we press not beyond our
line. If this be the right way to heaven, surely we are in the right, and ye in
the wrong.

42. Well, n. 9.
the Church of Rome and England being thus separated, both in faith and
communion, and so not one: and the Church of Rome, and those in communion with
her, by your saying not being the Catholic Church. For the separation we must
thank you, for our faith we bless Christ. What that is, the Book of
Common Prayer manifests in plain terms: and I have showed, that the Pope and
his Conclave have incurred Canonical censures, by imposing a new Creed upon us
and others. That we communicate not with you, the fault is yours: and
Catholics we shall be able to prove our selves, when ye will not be found
Orthodoxe. But such is that typhus Romanus, the infinite pride of Rome, that
none shall be Catholics, none in communion of the Church, nor in the way to
heaven, that will not stoop to their lure, that will not err with Pius
Quartus, and the Council of Trent. As if the Romans were the only, at least
had been the first Christians; and that St. Peter's keys were tied to the
Popes girdle, to let in, and to keep out whom he listed. Whereas we know, St.
Jo. 20.22, 23.
the keys were given to all the Apostles alike, to St. John for Ephesus, as
much as to St. Peter for Rome. Yea Hieron.
St. Peter himself provided for Antioch before Rome; for he was first, Bishop
of Antioch. The same keys to all the Apostles for all Nations alike; that so
all might be admitted by the same keys into the same 1. Tim. 3.15.
house of God, which is the Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of
truth. And in this house by Gods grace we shall continue, while Col. 2.19.
we hold the head, and from thence receive nourishment, by those joints and
bands, which Christ has ordained. And, For the judgment of the whole
controversy, we refer unto the most holy Scriptures, and the Catholic Church
of Christ. The Protest. of Bish. Scory, etc. Book of Mart. p. 2120
were your party contented, to be ruled by antiquity, we might be one, as the
house is one.

43. That the Church of Rome, and those in communion with her, are not (as you
would fain have it) the Catholic Church, is fully manifested in my former
answer, 2, etc. 12, 22, 23, 29. And yet there was the Catholic Church at all
times, since it was first constituted. Aug. de Genesis ad lit. imperfect. c. 1.
Matter enim Ecclesia, Catholica dicitur ex eo, quia universaliter perfecta est,
and in nullo claudicat, and per totum orbem diffusa est: the Mother Church is
hence called Catholic, because she is universally perfect, and halts in
nothing, and is diffused through the whole world. She is not Catholic, or
sound, because she communicates with Rome; but Rome is Catholic, if she
communicate with her, and so is every Church. We shall therefore communicate
with this our Mother, that so we may continue Catholic. We are sure, the
Mother halts not, though some of the Daughters may. That Rome has halted
downright in the prime Articles, is too notorious, as has been showed, 18, 27,
32, etc. and then, I am sure, she was not Catholic. Vincent. Lirin. c. 14.
Nemini enim licet, praeter id, quod Ecclesia Catholica usquequaque
evangelizat, accipere: for it is not lawful for her, or any other, to receive,
or broach any other doctrine, then that, which the Catholic Church preaches
every where; much less to enforce it as necessary to salvation. Where then ye
leave the Church Catholic, it is our duty to leave you. Estne aliquis tantae
audaciae, qui praeter id, quod apud Ecclesiam adnunciatum est, adnunciet, vel
tantae levitatis, qui praeter id, quod ab Ecclesia accipit, accipiat? Ib. This
Church he speaks of, is not the Roman but the Catholic Church.
As it is audaciousnesse in you, to induce, or impose any new Article, so were
it levity in us to embrace it.

44. What we have, we have received from our good Mother the Catholic Church:
and though by you, yet not from you; Christ's legacies they are, not yours. If
ye deliver us these legacies in base or counterfeit coin, we shall not accept
of it. Gold ye received from the Testator, and not lead, we know it by his
Will; give us that, which ye received, and not gilded stuff in stead of gold.
If ye tender to us, that, which is unwarrantable, we are resolved Gal. 1.8, 9.
with the vessel of Election, to denounce to you or any other, an Anathema; we
shall not, we must not endure novum dogma, any new Article. If new, it can
never be right. 2 Timothy 3.15.
The Scripture is able to make us wise unto salvation; that we set before us,
and are resolved, by Gods grace, to accept of nothing, but what is deduced from
thence, or proved thereby, according to the interpretation of the ancient
Fathers and Councels. While our Church does thus, in spite of malice she shall
be Catholic. Dediscam been, quod didicerunt non been. Vincent. Lirin. c. 25.
If we chance to learn any thing contrary to this, we are bound in Christianity
to cast it by, though it come from Rome; and to Ib.
betake our selves into the bosom of our Catholic Mother, as into the safest
harbor. There we are sure to find the living waters, and tree of life.

45. Your desire is behind, but differing from the former. Before your desire
was, to be shown the Catholic Church distinct from the Church of Rome, and
those in her communion, for the last 1100 years. To this satisfaction is given,
29, 32, etc. But now n. 9.
your desire is to be showed the Catholic Church, or the Church of England,
distinct from the Church of Rome, and those in her communion, for the last 1100
years, or for so ^^ng, as I please to say, the Church of Rome has so
grievously erred, that we dare not communicate with her. This desire of yours
(according to your own words) is not, nor by my Papers can he satisfied. Is it
not enough to manifest, that your present errors are so gross and grievous,
that we dare not communicate with the Church of Rome, but we must look back to
former centuries? In my former Papers I have done it, but you will not see it.
Other eyes, I presume, will discern this done, 32, 33, 34. in my former answer.
Of these you take little notice, because you are resolved with the
self-conceited Pharisee, to be what you are. And with. 11.
that Lady I spoke of, you ask not this, or any other question, as if you meant
to be satisfied, with what is, or can be said. Surely we did not communicate
with Rome in the time of Zepherinus, Marcellinus, Liberius, Vigilius, Honorius,
and those Genebrard. Chron. l. 4. Ann. 991.
50 Apostaticall Popes, whom Genebrard speaks of. And great reason for it,
since in those days ye separated your selves from the Church Catholic to side
with Heretics, and worse, if worse may be. Then was this Church distinct from
yours, because yours was divided from that Church, 1. Tim. 3.15
which is the pillar and ground of truth. If ye depart from the truth, we
shall, and must depart from you. Hos. 4.15.
Though Israel transgress, yet must not Judah sin. We must not be naught for
company; Exodus 23.2.
neither may we follow a multitude to do evil.

Your Letters are answered, and your desires, I hope, satisfied beyond your
desire. Your conclusion I like so well it shall be mine. With you therefore I
beseech Almighty God to look favorably into the souls deceived by devilish
deceits, that all heretical impieties removed, the hearts of them that err,
may relent, and return to the unity of his truth; and become one fold under one
shepherd Jesus Christ, our Lord; to whom, with the Father and the holy Ghost,
be all honor, and glory, world without end, Amen.

Placet vobis quaestio proposita; Deus adjuvet, ut placeat and soluta. Ecce
quod dico, ut liberet and me, and vos. 1. In una enim fide stamus in nomine
Christi; and 2. in una domo 3. sub uno Domino vivimus; and 4. in uno corpore
membra 5. sub uno capite sumus, and 6. uno spiritu vegetamur.

Aug. de Verb. Domini, Ser. 63. c. 3.
FINIS.

