CAPT. BADILEY'S REPLY TO CERTAIN DECLARATIONS FROM Capt. Seamen, Cap. Ell,
and Cap. Fisher. AS HE Found them divulged abroad in a Fallacious PAMPHLET,
called The Remonstrance of the Fight near Legorn, between the English and the
Dutch.

AS ALSO: Many other Particulars, as they were presented to his Excellency the
Lord General CROMWELL, And the Right Honorable, the Council of State.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, in Aldersgate-streete, 1653.

THE ANSWER TO CAPT. SEAMANS DECLARATION.
FIrst he says, when Captain Cox was sent to know in what a condition they
were in, then he replied, so and so.

To that passage I answer thus, having received about 20 Letters from Legorn,
acquainting me with the stubbornness and averseness of the said Seaman, to do
any service that might have conduced as much to their Employers benefit, and
their own goods, as to the honor of the Nation, and having been sufficiently
advised of the backwardness of the States servants, I sent the aforementioned
Capt. Coxe to put some life into them, by giving them to understand how much it
concerned them, for ends before denoted, to act vigorously, and come away to my
Assistance, but nothing would, fair means, or acts of Civility, work (in the
least) upon the said Seaman, but the production of some such scorn as was
ordinary with him; What, do you think we come hither to convey the States
Ships? Cannot they be gone of themselves, without the help of Merchants Ships?

In the next place he says, As soon as the States Commissioners came, he
rendered obedience unto them; which is a desperate untruth; For being at Legorn
the beginning of Nov. with all the Arguments I could use in a friendly and
persuasive way, I could not prevail with him, and Capt. Roope, and thereby
they hindered Capt. Marsh, who told me he would readily submit to serve the
State, if the rest would embrace the Commissions, and serve.

However a good while afterward (whilst) I was absent at Porto Longone, Mr.
Longland carried the States Commissions on board their Ships, and reading of it
at their Mainmast before Witness, prevailed with them to land their Goods,
and serve the State; whereas, had they readily embraced the Commissions, we
might have been in a far better Capacity then we were.

Next, he tells a piece of ridiculous stuff, that at Legorn in the afternoon
(we may guess when) a Counsel was called, and he was told but so and so.

Here he plays the Weaver, and mingles a great many falsities together: He
says, Mr. Longland and myself told him we must be gone in fifteen days.

To that I answer: Truth is, I did acquaint him the great Duke would thrust us
out of his Port, and in twelve days we must be gone, else for ought I could
perceive, we must be destroyed, more Guns being then brought down, and planted
against the Leopard; and he well knows, I went on board the Sampson, as well
as on board other Ships, and caused all his Officers and Mariners to be called
together, and being assembled, I made a Speech among them to this effect, Our
condition is much like the Leapers we read of, or like to those that have had
enemies before and behind them; and the rise I took from thence, to desire they
might quit themselves like English men, when ever they came to it, is not
unknown to him, except he stopped his ears all the time I was speaking.

But in the next place, after he had showed himself liker a Mouse then a Man
that flood up for the Honor of his own Nation, he turns Champion for the
Great Duke, and as one that had con'd his Letter at that Court, said, that he
heard we might have stayed ten days, and ten days after that, etc.

But to that passage I answer, the more unworthy person he, that he should
never acquaint me with any such thing; for I understood neither directly, nor
indirectly, but that we must have been destroyed in the Great Dukes Port, if we
had stayed longer then our limited time.

The next thing that concerns me to Answer, is, that Cap. Vpcher told him they
were near the Lantern in the night, but in the morning we were two or three
leagues off. Indeed we were near the Lantern within four or five miles
thereof, about midnight, and if then he had not lain like a Lurdaine upon the
Bed or Couch, but had vigorously endeavored to have put my Order in execution,
when I sent for him among others, I believ'st he had saved his Ship, and the
State had saved their Repute they lost in some measure, by employing as
instruments, such Paltry Drones.

But says he, In the morning we were three or four leagues off: For Answer, I
leave it to understanding Seamen to judge (how far we were off) having all the
night long not above fourteen or fifteen fathom water, and since we saw not
the Malora before night, we could not tell assuredly whether we were to the
southward, or to the eastward of him, until it grew the lighter for day, and
then we hastened in as the wind gave leave, with all the sail we could make.

Next, he tells you, That my Lieutenant was sent in to them to call them out,
and that upon their lives, before I was too much engaged. Mark now, if the
Question were asked this impudent person, being it was on your lives, what will
become of your life now? since it can be proved notwithstanding that Order, you
lay like a Drone four or five hours after, and did nothing at all as to going
out.

If he Object, We were to be engaged first; (I know that was agreed on, if the
Ships did not come out in the night) but since he staid while it was day, why
staid he not until we were engaged? himself says, They should come out
before we were too much engaged, Ergo, They should have stayed in the day time
until we had been Engaged.

But to mend the matter, He thought I would not Engage. This is pretty stuff;
but if it opens not a gap for every inferior Officer to take hold of his
Commanders Throat, I shall remain satisfied to lie under that indignity for
the present.

In the next place, he tells us that Mr. Longland and others ordered them to
go out next morning.

For Answer, pray let every one judge, who is like to speak truth. Mr. Longland
writes in sundry Letters to several men, and to my self, that when he heard
they were gone out before I had engaged, he shut himself into his Chamber, and
in his thoughts gave all for lost.

In the next place, Here Is Oath made by a credible witness, that Capt. John
Wood, who lost both his ship and life in the business, confessed when he was
going out of the world, that their destruction was of themselves by going out
too soon in the morning, it being against the result of their own deliberate
Counsel of War, and diametrically cross to what was concluded among our part
of the Fleet, as may be seen among the Copies of the Orders, dated the 1 or 11
of March, in the close there was this concluded on; That if the Enemy come out,
and the wind were Easterly, we should toil them off by standing a little to
the southward. Compare that with my Letter of the 3 or 13 of March at 4 a Clock
in the morning, and there I told told them (as I remember) (and Capt. Appleton
confesses as much by his Letter of that days date, at four in the
afternoon) I was very loath to hazard that Squadron, being somewhat the less,
wherefore I would not have them venture before they saw me engaged: or words to
that purpose.

Next he says, That when I saw them out of the Mould, I tackt about. To which
I answer, for ends before denoted, as also in regard it was the opinion of Mr.
and Pilots, that we could not weather the Malora, we did tack off for half an
hour, the head-most of the Flemish Fleet then bearing away directly with us,
and had been with us in half an hour, if our Ships in the Mould had not
impudently come out as they did: And I appeal unto all understanding Seaman in
England (that knows what Legorn-Road is) whether it be not most hazardous to
engage with such Ships of Charge, as we had in that Auger-hole: And whether we
were not as gallantly to pass as any men in the world could be, to go jameing
off with our Main-saile haled up, (as well to clear our Ordnance in the
Capstain Way, as otherwise) since the Malora did now bear N. N. E. about a
mile off; for (if they had staid a little longer in the Mould) we had Searoom
enough: and as I said to them that were next to me, Now if haife a dozen of
these fellows of Van Gallens Crew comes on board, the Parragons side will hold
them, and by that time every one has had his share, and that we are all hot
at our business, and then the Ships in the Mould will out, and coming fresh on
the Enemy, I doubt not but by Gods assistance we shall have the day.

Yet as soon as we saw the ships in the Mould coming out, and that the Enemy
tacked upon them, we set our Mainsaile, and top-gallant-sailes, and stood in
with all the Sail we could make, and as the wind gave leave: This is proved
by sundry Witnesses upon oath, and I dare presume to find as many score, as
there are particular persons to attest so much, that I lost no time in coming
in, and sent Captain Mings to tell the Commander of the Frigots, I would have
them hasten in with all the Sail they could make, to help them that stood most
in need of Assistance: But before I came within shot, the Sampson after half
an hours dispute, or less, not having men on the upper Deck to trim Sails,
was all on a light fire. Concerning the manner of the calling off the Fleet, I
have spoken elsewhere, and being chased by the eight ships, I shall speak to
it, when I come to answer Ell, and Fisher.

But in the Close he says, If I had been a Pentioner to the State of Holland,
I could not have done them better service then I did.

This is an Expression, that shows the man (as we use to say of a picture that
is drawn to the life) I can hardly think there is ever an Enemy I have in
England, but must needs confess it is pure malice.

But now considering what I have declared in Answer to C. Appletons
Remonstrance, and the Affidavits that are annexed, and Letters, let the world
judge who was likeliest to be the State of Hollands Pentioner, he or I.

In a complete number of Particulars, every syllable whereof is, or will be
proved upon Oath.
FIrst, if not by the open defiance he made to the State of England, as our
Letters from Legorn can testify; yet by the great stubbornness, and
perverseness that was in him to assist in my first Engagement (proved at large)
in humane reason occasioned all the ruin befell us near that place, and was
the cause why the Merchants goods are not in England; he would not help us, and
therefore God orders it out, that we should not be able to help him.

Secondly, His backwardness above all men to go out to Sea, and do service,
when he was the States servant, saying, To go out upon nine or ten of the
Enemies inferior ships (when we had six such gallant ships to have engaged
them, and so break our way through) was to lose three or four good ships in
his opinion.

Thirdly, If his Prayer would help on his Ruin, then I am sure he wanted not
to wish, with as much earnestness as a man could do (even in my presence)
that the Sampson were of a light fire, and that it grieved him to look on her
(in regard he had received some discontent from his men) whereupon as one
astonished, considering how lately he had lost a ship by fire, I replied, Hold,
hold, Captain Seaman, oftentimes God annexes his Amen to such passionate
expressions. Add to that his running ashore very few days before his disaster,
at a time he knows he ought to be better employed, viz. the Lords day (for men
that were but civil could not choose but cry shame on it) to see his servants
all that day act the parts of Effeminates in women's apparel. I say (let the
world think what they will) I judge it occasioned God to leave him to
effeminatenesse of spirit, at the time when he should have showed more
manhood, and therein he did the Dutch as good service as if he had been their
Pentioner; and he well knows, I told him then, I feared a hand of God was not
far from him.

Fourthly, When as I sent my Lieutenant to wish them to act vigorously, by
cutting their Fasts immediately, and come out, the wind blowing afresh off
shore, and we being near the Lanthorn to receive them, according as my
Lieutenant makes Oath (as if indeed he had been Pentioner to the Dutch) he
would not rise off his Pallat to the Captains Consultation, but there lay like
a Cow, when a business was to be transacted of so high concernment to the
honor of the Nation, the saving of men's lives, and benefit of all our Nations
Merchants in point of Trade.

Fifthly, His giving consent to come out so soon in the morning, before we had
wrought in our Ships and Frigots near the Mould-head to receive them, or were
engaged with the Enemy.

Sixthly, That contrary to all reason and order being out, as if he had indented
beforehand to be a means of the Sampsons destruction, runs with all his men
under Hatches (as says our Letters from Legorn:) Whereas if some persons had
been kept on the upper Deck to have trimmed her Foresaile, doubtless she had
come away clear of young Trumpe, and the Fireship also.

Seventhly, After Mr. Longland had showed favor to him and other Captains in
time of their imprisonment, by his writing on their behalf into England, that
they might be remembered in point of Exchanges, and afterward had engaged
himself in some thousands of crowns, that he the said Seaman and others should
render themselves true Prisoners in Holland. I say, when that Gentleman came to
visitehim, after many acts of Civility showed to him (as if he had received a
Pension from the Dutch) he would have knocked out his brains with stones he
heaved at him, since he was the State of Englands Public Minister, and a man
of such worth, as if this insolent malicious man's conscience would but speak
out, it must needs confess; That although the State may have many faithful
Servants, it is impossible they should have any in such an employment (as he is
in) more studious and industrious to promote their Honor and Interest.

Richard Badiley.

Here follows an Answer to C. Ell's Declaration.
FIrst, he says, that soon after Capt. Appletons Squadron came out of the
Mould, the Dutch tacked on them, and then Cap. Badileys Squadron might have
come at them.

I have not the spirit of Divination, to know what he means by that Passage:
It Is truth, we might have come at them, and we did come at them at last: but if
his meaning be, we might have come at them sooner then we did; Then thus; As
soon as ever I saw our Ships coming out of the Mould, and what the Flemings
were minded to do, I sent Cap. Mings on board the Frigots, to order the
Commanders of them to hasten in with all the Sail they could pack to the
assistance of that Squadron; and he being of the Reer-Admirals Squadron, the
Phoenix wearing that Flagge, he ought to have followed her with all the Sail he
could make; but if he neglected the doing of his Duty, I believe it is not yet
too late to call him to account, and do justice on him for such an Omission.

If he means, I neglected, or lost time, or did not hasten in as the wind
gave leave. I have showed the contrary to that by the Attestation of at least
half a score of very sufficient Officers, as Captains, Lieutenants, Masters,
and Masters-Mates; and I suppose it will not be very difficult, now the Fleet's
come in, to find ten score Witnesses to prove, that I could do no more then I
did in hastening in, if it had been to save the Commonwealth.

In the next place he tells us two of the Enemies ships were on board the
Leopard on the Larboard side, and they all three lay with their heads to the
Westward.

This passes as smoothly with them that knows not Star-board from Port, as
that passage in Cap. Appletons Remonstrance; wherein he expresses, that when
there was no Wind at all, he towed the Leopard through the Dutch Fleet, yea,
and he towed her again through them, at which we need not say to all Seamen,
pray laugh (since he had no help, but of two small Boats) for all such men know
that a Land Commander might have been as soon believed in saying, A Mouse with
a string in my Nose led me and my Troop through a Regiment of the Dutch; and so
valorous it made us, that it pulled us through them again: For those Dutch
Ships Stemmes and Bow-sprits lay directly over the Leopards Broadside, and
consequently their heads could not lie all one way; the Leopards head lay to
the Southward, and the Flemings heads lay over her broad side to the
Westward, and so with their two Topsails and fore-sails they kept full before
the Wind, and pog'd her directly toward the sand that lies from the Malora
all along to the Main.

And although I am ready to tear my paper, and throw all away, rather then
spend my time in answering such horrid lies, as all these Declarations are
stuffed withal, yet I see there is a necessity of my Patience in proceeding.

He says in the next place, that all my Squadron was to Wind-ward, and shot at
a great distance; but some went nearer, as himself for one: Oh valorous man!
Whilst he was at Civita Vechia, a month or two before he had the States
Comimssion; for then according to what the Boateswains Mate of the Hector (that
was in the Ship with him) is ready to make Oath, he out-pass'd all others, for
he drank the Confusion of the State of England (says he) with such
heartinesse, that he heaved his Hat overboard, and would not let them fetch it
again, being on such a score But it is proved by sundry Witnesses (and if
occasion be, it will be proved by the Oaths of ten times as many knowing men,
who observed what passed) that those who did least service among all the Ships,
did as much as the Lewis, and as I have denoted elsewhere: But for not going
on board the Leopard, or coming near me when our ship would not work, that I
might have commanded him to go upon that service, his Cowardice or negligence
therein, must needs have caused him to be brought under a most severe sentence,
and if I had brought him home in chains to have been tried for his life, for
that and other misdemeanors, all knowing men must confess I had done but
Justice: however if lenity have imboldned him to be so audacious, I suppose it
is not yet too late for authority to call him to an account, and perform that
part that I omitted.

But he proceeds, and tells us, that when he was getting the wind of the
Leopard, although he had a man's head shot off, and another shot through the
back, and some wounded, he was intended to relieve the aforementioned Ship;
but when I saw him lean to Lea-ward, then I called him after me.

This is a pretty story to come from a Saylor in Breeches; I hope his man's head
that was shot off did not make his ship lean to Lee-ward?

I answer; when I saw that he and others who were near the Leopard (being
nimble ships) did not execute my orders in going on board to relieve her, when
our Ship the Parragon would not bear up to do it, if it were to save a
Nation, as it is proved upon oath by sundry witnesses, and can be proved by as
many score if occasion require. Yet afterward, when about a dozen of my chief
Officers (I suppose as able men as any were in the Fleet) gave me in their
opinion, as they would answer it upon their lives, it was no way likely, since
the Leopard was drove so near the sand, that we could dis-intangle her from the
other ships until all of us were aground, or be destroyed together, I did
withdraw, and call off the Squadron: and I had been worthy of the repute of a
madman, if I had not done it as I did, all things considered.

I follows next, That having the Fireship near me, I might have engaged the
Dutch Admiral.

Let all men judge, whether this be not an impudent, brazen-faced person; and
whether he were not under Hatches, whereas he should have been looking
abroad, when about two hundred and fifty men and boys that were in the
Parragon can, and I am confident will (when ever they are called to it) make
oath that we did engage the Dutch Admiral within Musket Shot, and there
discharged a volley of small shot, and about 30. piece of Ordnance into him at
no further distance, leaving him by the Lee: And had we grappl'd, how could the
Fireship have done her execution which I ordered her to do, and yet have saved
our own ship; and if an honest stout person had been there to have made all
the sail he could for the effecting thereof: But such a bundle of words, and
good for little else, a proud, prating Consort (like unto them that put out
these Declarations) I believe the Dutch Admiral might have been fired, and the
day have been turned by it.

In the last place he says, The wind was at S. S. E. all day, and with nine
ships I steered away, although was chased but with eight, and if we had tackt,
it would have given a good wipe to our cowardice (including my self and all
others with the cowardly K. himself) he having received the most damage, and
that he saw the Leopards Flag four hours after he came out. All these are such
a company of long -- that deserves neither time, nor paper to be spent in
answering them: Patience.

1. Whereas he says, he received greater damage then the rest, I think his
consort Fisher will quarrel with him about that point: But although the
Parragon and others might receive three times as many shot as he, and lost men
as well as he; if she and others had received a thousand great shot in the
Hull, Masts, Sails, and Rigging (as the Parragon received little less not
many months before) and although of the men were lost, yet the Commander ought
to follow the service they were upon, so long as there was any hopes; and if
this had been considered by him, he would not now bring in a lame excuse about
his damage, in hopes to acquit himself from what he deserves, in not complying
with the Order he received at the Council of War the day before, which was;
That when the Commander in Chief of any squadron was removed, those of that
squadron should attend the Commands of the Admiral; and the Rear-Admirall
being aground, he should have attended near me to know on what service I would
have put him.

2. Whereas he says, the wind was at S.S. E. when I called off the Squadron;
Because I find him before mentioning his Journall (as now he does in the
Close) I thought him a greater Proficient in the Art of Navigation (then those
that have judged he could not say his Compass) but now it does not appear.

For diverse understanding Seamen have made oath, the wind was about the E. S.
E. most part of the day, and my self, and hundreds besides can freeely make
oath, the ship lay South, and from the S. by E. to the S. and by W. with the
Stem, when we left Legorn-Road, and all the Afternoon after, until we bore
away Laskin, so that we weathered the Gorgana about 3 or 4 Leagues, and then
let all Seamen judge where the wind was.

And whereas he says, When but eight Dutch ships came after us nine, I would
not tacke upon them to wipe away our Cowardice:

What if but two Frigots of the Dutch had followed us, (the rest being under
the shore ready to come off to them) would it have been any wisdom to have
tacked upon them, since the Parragon was a foul ship that had been off the
ground about two years, and all the Dutch clean ships? the nearest was three
leagues astern from the time they first stood after us: And pray mark the
disproportionablenesse that was between us, and you will give some estimate at
the malice that is in this man's heart.

The Dutch were 26 Sail in the morning when they weighed; but by a hand of God
we were reduced to nine, at withdrawing, and we saw no damage any of them had
received, except one ship sunck, and their Fireship burnt, for which they had
taken two of ours, and it may be the Tiller of the Admirals Rudder shot in
pieces, which could not be long a mending, and one of those on board the Leopard
was ready to sink as we thought, so that however they were three to one: But
besides, there was the Reer-Admiralls Squadron, six great Ships, from 46. to
30. piece of Ordnance expected to the Enemies assistance from Messina every
moment, and there was a great ship looked for from the Westward, with 60.
piece of Ordnance, and 3 or 400. men, which had in her Ammunition, and all
manner of Accoutrements for that Fleet, and two other great ships from Tolloon,
all which ships arrived next day, or within 2 or 3 days after as I have heard,
but none could be expected to our relief. Besides, the Commander of the
Constant Warwick and Elizabeth, told me their Main-masts were so cut with shot
from the Enemy, that they were fearful they would fall by the board, ere they
could fish them so, as to strengthen them to carry their ships through the Sea.
The Commander of the Phoenix told me his fore-yard was in pieces, and he must
have a little time to mend that ere he could do service: The little trust to be
given the greatest part of my own Company may be guessed at, by the trick they
served me at my first Engagement, the other four or five Merchants ships (all
but one) little better manned, then if they were to carry Salt, or Corn: So
that all things being considered, I have cause to believe, that there is never
an understanding man in England, but must have judged (the Enemy being above
four to one odds) now whether it had been then any prudence to have engaged
further, I leave it to old Soldiers to judge, who were wont to say, Bring a new
or young Soldier into the Field, and when once their back is turned upon the
Enemy, you shall never get him (at that time) to stand for doing any
considerable service.

But now, if Cap. Ell shall yet defend himself but from three or four men as
well Armed as himself, where there is no Wall, Hedge, or Tree to lean his
back against, I Will forgive him, and be content to sit down under the aspertion
he has laid upon me: But if not (although Justice shall sleep) I hope it
will be no offense in me to desire the insolency of this person in Arragning
and Condemning his Commander as a Coward before Trial (who has been known to
manage a Dispute by Sea, before he well knew how to tie up his Trusles) may
open no gapp for other proud, vapouring Sirs to fly in the face, and bespatter
eminent, and gallant Commanders on whom (in some sense) I am not worthy to wait.

Whereas he says he saw the Leopards Flag four hours after we came away, and
she was shooting so long. By the oaths of very sufficient witnesses (that stood
and looked on as they were prisoners on board the Flemings) it is proved, we
could not be gone little above an hour before the English Colors were down,
and the Dutch Colors were flying upon the aforenamed Ship.

Here follows an Answer to C. Fisher's Declaration.
FIrst, he says, That word was sent from me that very morning before they
came out of the Mould, that I would not have Captain Appleton come forth
until I came near the Lantern.

If that be granted, then what mad men were they to come forth before my
self, and the Frigots came there to receive them; or at least before they saw
me engaged with the Enemy, since it was contrary to their deliberate Council
of War that morning, when as Mr. Longland was among them, and advises as much
by several Letters.

Secondly, he says, I sent two Messengers to order their coming out, although
one was sent before to order them not to budge; but seeing me so wavering, they
concluded so and so.

I see he and others would feign stammer out something to excuse themselves,
although it is not a little troublesome to me, I must comply with part of solemn
Council, by answering some persons according to their folly, lest they be not
only wise in their own Conceits, but judged by other so honest, as to speak
something of truth.

First then, that men may judge whether I was wavering or no: The 3, or 13. at
four a Clock in the morning, I sent my Feluca in with a Letter to Cap.
Appleton, the Contents of which was to this effect: Your squadron being the
least, I am loath to hazard it, and therefore I would not have you stir
before I come close on board the Mould-head to receive you, or be engaged with
the Dutch.

His Answer at four a Clock in the afternonn runs thus; I thankefully
acknowledge your care of this squadrons preservation, but if we have a fine
gale of wind off shore in the night (with your approbation) I will come out.

In the beginning of that night, that those in the Moved might not be terrified
about thoughts of the enemies Fireship, Cap. Vpcher and Whiting went in while
it was calm, to tell them they were ordered to attend within Musket Shot of the
Mould-head in the morning, and that the later was manned for a Man of War, as
well as a Fire-ship, to the end she might clap the Enemies Fire-ship abord, and
surprise her in the first of our Dispute, in which service the Constant Warwick
was to attend her.

About midnight, seeing a most gallant fresh gale of wind off shore all
Easterly, I called my Lieut. to me saying, take the Feluca, and go with all
speed on board C. Appleton, and tell him, although I shall not send a warrant
positively to require him to com away at this instant, because I know not how
the wind may shift before you come there; yet if the gale continues, let him
know I effectually recommend it to him, to cut his Fasts, and come away: He
went accordingly to that Squadron, and then I supposed my self by the light of
the Lanthorn (if I were not mistaken) to be about 3 or 4 miles off in the fair
way. It seems my Lieut. arrived on board the Leopard about two a Clock the 4th
in the morning, and having delivered his Message, all the Commanders were called
to come and consult with Cap. Appleton what was best to be done; the word was
passed from ship to ship, to the Commanders of the Sampson, Perigrine, and
Levant Merchant, they came: But although they called diverse times, Ho the Mary,
ho the Mary, the Admiral has sent for us to come away; wherefore the
Vice Admiral desires the Captain of that ship to come and consult with them
about the Business, or words to that purpose. But the Gentleman could not be
made wake in near two hours after, which is not to be admired at (by those who
know what disease he is troubled with all) In the mean time (while he was
absent) the rest had showed enough of their waveringnesse.

Sometimes the greatest part of them agreed upon cutting and breaking loose to
go out; but then one more, a Drone, and duller then the rest, he puts in his
verdict to stop their intention, so that all was laid by before this Fisher
came, which made the Masters Mate of the Leopard, one Master Wrightington say
in a passion, The Captains were cursed people, and bewitched to that Mould; Why
could they not go out with that gallant fresh gale of wind, now that their
Admiral sent for them? And I dare presume, never did men lose a fairer
opportunity: For as if God had reached out a hand from heaven, and pointed it
out to them, the Eclipse of the Moon was just at that time: But says he the
Flemings were in a Half Moon within Musket Shot of the Mould-head with their
topsailesheats hawl'd home, and most of their Fore-sails in the Brailes.

My Lieutenant that went in with the Feluca, and saw all the Dutch ships how
they lay, makes Oath that he saw them all very plain by Moone-light, and could
not perceive that any one of them had the least part of a sail loose; and
besides, he makes oath, that by his best judgment, none could be nearer then
about 2 mile off the Mould-head, with the ships heads that way, directly to
Lee-ward of the Mould, as much in a Halfe-square as a Halfe-moon for ought he
could see. Now let all men choose whom they will believe, a person that was in a
Boat near them, or a person that lay fast asleep and could not be awaked by any
means.

The next thing he says, is, That they expected me near the Lantern when it
was day, yet then I was as far distant as over night; and by some of our own
Squadrons relation, we lay muzled four Glasses, when we might have been by this
shore in the morning, and so have saved their squadron, etc.

For Answer; when as I expected them out, we did lie muzled with lights fore,
and aft, and all men ready by the Ordnance to which they were assigned; that if
any had essaulted them in their way coming out, we would have filled our
sails, and stood in to have engaged them.

Now the Reasons for lying short with our Sail are chiefly these.
FIrst, in regard we saw not the Malora before night, and that we might be
mistaken by taking a light on the Hills for the light of the Lanthorn as some
have done, and have run ashore in the night (as I have heard) by that means,
even so might we, by laboring to get into Legorn-Road at that time with such a
Ship of Charge as the Parragon is, it being a true saying, Night has no eyes.
If it be yet replied, it was a moone-light night? I answer; When as I have been
bound for the abovementioned Road, even in a Moonlight night in company of C.
Moyer, and others, that had I believe as able men on board as any was in our
Fleet; and yet in regard we saw not the Malora before night, although the ships
in point of Charge were no way proportionable to the Parragon, yet we durst not
venture into that Road, but have layn short all night about the Gorgona, until
daylight appeared. Besides, all the latter part of the night we had an Eclipse
of the Moon that made it wondrous dark, that we could not discern the shore,
but they in the Mould might have come off the shore at their pleasure; and the
darker it was, the more for their advantage.

Secondly, As I always judged it a most dangerous thing to engage with such
Ships of Charge as we had, in Legorne Road, so I had spent sundry hours in
hammering out a way to draw our Enemies from thence to fight us in the Sea, by
sending Propositions as I did to the Great Duke, and otherwise; and I could not
imagine, but that the abovenamed Prince would endeavor to open a door or
passage for those Ships in Legorn-mould (he commanded forth) to go out of the
reach of his cannons before the Dutch should have had the liberty to assault
them: and consequently they must have come out, if they had an intent to fight
us; wherefore I judged my self as well to pass without the Malora, as within,
when day light appeared.

Thirdly, I could not imagine our Ships in the Mould would have come out in the
morning before I was engaged, because they had the Copy of our Orders agreed on
at a Council of War the first of March, wherein they might see it was
resolved, that when we came near Legorn, and the wind Easterly, we should then
make a board off, by standing a little to the Southward, purposely to tole or
entice the Enemy out, that if it were possible, our engagement might be
without, and not within the Malora. And according to what was endeavored to
bring about, and have effected for our advantage, it pleased God to put into
the hearts of the Dutch to come out upon us: And when the head-most of them
were bearing with us, and that we laid our ships head to the Offing, distant
from the Malora, as is before expressed, I appeal to all understanding Seamen
that know that place, whether we had not been as gallantly to pass as any men
in the world could be, in regard that when the Enemy had bore to Lee-ward
whereby to engage us, they could not have tacked back upon our friends in the
Mould, but in all probability we might have had the advantage of the wind to
have gone back as fast as they, thereby to have met that Squadron: But now
they imprudently come out before the Enemy was come to Lee-ward upon us, and
engaged us, contrary to reason, and my Advice given them in my Letter, dated
the day before at four a Clock in the morning, contrary to their own
deliberate Consultation, while Mr. Longland was with them that morning, whereby
they lost such a second Advantage, which can be far more easier discerned, then
it was felt, by many that lost their lives, or were wounded in Body, Estate,
Reputation, and Peace, which otherwise they might have enjoyed, had it not been
for that omission.

Fourthly, Could I have imagined they would have come out so indiscreetly,
since (as they acknowledge) they were advised that the Constant Warwick, and our
Fireship should be at the Mould-head to receive them before they came out.

But to proceed a little further; Fisher says, when he was near me, he
brought his ship to the other tacke, and went firing into the Fleet before me.

Were we not then at a fine pass, that a Gallant, who was the other day a
Masters Mate in a fourth rate ship, should as soon as he takes Command, presume
to turn Leader to his Admiral? But here he tells a story, that all men amongst
us must needs acknowledge to be a miracle: If he bore in among a Fleet of ships,
they were invisible to us; for there was only two of the Enemies on board the
Leopard, and the Dutch Admiral that was bearing away to the Northward, all
the rest of the Dutch Fleet were to Lee-ward of the Sampson then burning, and I
do verily believe the aforesaid Fleet was without shot of him, when as he came
by the Julius Caesar's stern, as other men did, discharging some Guns upon her.

Yet it was not a greater miracle then was told me concerning him in the
Downs, when as there was a Mutiny on board the Mary, some of that Ships
Company told me, the Cap. was such a sottish person the men could not be
contented to remain under his Command, I replied, how is this? what is the
Captain such a Sot, as that the ordinary Mariners cannot live with him? this
is a miracle indeed?

But whereas this Fisher was so valarous as to turn Leader to me; what can he
say for himself, in that he was backward to do his duty in the time of the
Engagement, which the Laws Martial says is death. Now for to take away all
Excuses, I sent him a Copy of these Orders that was agreed on at a Council of
War the day before, wherein it was resolved, that if any Ship of the Admirals,
Vice Admiral, or Reer-Admirals Squadron were laid on board, the others of that
Squadron that were nearest to such an one, should immediately lay the Enemy on
board again on the other side; or how he could, that had borded his friend of
the same Squadron.

But this Fisher, notwithstanding he had a nimble clean ship, and had not lost
above a man or two in coming out: and although he saw (or might have seen) the
Parragon would not bear up to go on board those ships that lay on board the
Leopard, had it been to have saved a Commonwealth: And howbeit he was one of
the Vice-Admirals Squadron, he went not on board to save her, contrary to the
express rule given him for his better government.

The next thing that concerns me to answer (that is not sufficiently answered
before;) He says in his opinion, had I stood in again, then I had saved the
Leopard, Perigreen, and Levant Merchant, which I left in a sad condition.

Where this malicions man's eyes were I cannot tell, but there are diverse men
that can make Oath, as some men have done already, that the Perrigreen was
surrendered before I came in so far as to discharge my first Broadside on
those two ships on board the Leopard, which the Cap. of her was thoroughly
sensible of; and therefore at his going out of the world, declared to Mr.
Longland, and another Witness, who has now made oath thereof, they could not
now blame me in any thing; and added, for not having respect to order, their
loss was brought about, Oh their destruction was of themselves, their
destruction was of themselves, or words to that purpose. And as for the Levant
Merchant, she was surrendered (as we thought) by that time I got first in, for
the Guns ceased between her and the Flemings on board her: and if any of the
Perrigreens men be questioned with it, they will tell tell you that it was
noys'd fore, and aft their Ship, that the Levant Merchant was possessed by the
enemy an hour before that ship was surrendered.

There is one passage more of this vapouring person that I am yet to answer,
and it is this; he says, That when he was the sternmost ship, I went away
with all Sail: For reasons before signified in my answer to Seaman and Ell's
Declaration, all hopes being past, I did order all Sail to be made, in regard
now they might take notice I called them away, and withal that we might weather
the Rock of the Malora, which was little more then Musket Shot from us, and at
that time we had no more but four fathom and a half water; but whereas he
says, he was left in some hazard by reason of those of the Enemies ships that
followed him, sufficient witness has, or will make Affidavit, that those
Dutchmen of War that followed us, must have run about six miles, before they
could have come at the Mary, if she had been at Anchor, and consequently he
could be in no danger; but although I supposed she could fetch me up when she
would, yet being clear of the Malora, I shortened sail (in a special manner) to
know how it was with this Ship, and either sent a Boat abord of them, or else
bid my Lieutenant call to the Cap. on the Poop, and tell him, that although I
kept close by a wind while it was daylight, that the enemy might be somewhat
amused, and not be able to know which way I determined to go, either to the
Eastward to meet their Messina Fleet, or to the Westward, to hunt after their
ships with Ammunition and Provisions which were coming that way; yet after it
was dark, I would steer such a course, of which there is sufficient witness
upon oath.

Now having done answering the Declarations, give me leave to add briefly,
THe Laws Martial for keeping good Discipline in the Fleet, by it is 11th
Article, says, First, It shall be death to be backward in doing service in the
time of Engagement.

2. By it is 13th Article it says, Whosoever shall utter words of sedition, or
tending to the making a mutiny, shall be liable to a sentence of death, which
needs be understood by the severest punishment. Well then, it is be very
sufficiently proved, Cap. Fisher was backward in doing his duty in the time of
Engagment, in that he was of the Vice-Admirals Squadron, and yet laid not those
ships on board that was on board the Leopard, a piece of negligence absolutely
contrary to his duty. Again, By testimony on oath it appears, that he
absolutely refused to render Conformity or Obedience to the command, or warrant
I sent him under my hand in the Bay of Logo^.

Further, it does as clearly appear, that C. Ell did disobey my order at Genoa,
in not going to Naples, or Messina, although he excused it by putting it on his
men.

2. It is sufficiently proved, that he did not act according to his Duty in
time of our engagement, in that he came not, or at least kept not near me to
know my pleasure, when his Leader, the Phaenix Frigot, was aground upon the
Rocks.

3. In that according to the Testimony given in on oath, at my first departure
from Legorn, seeing me shorten sail, to stay for one of the Frigots, I sent in
to land a man at Cercigo, He calls to Cap. Godolphin, Commander of the William,
and Thomas, with these words in his mouth, The Admiral looses time, he has a
mind to Porto Longone, or elsewhere until he sells us into the hands of the
Dutch, they are like to be at the Streights mouth before us, and therefore let
us Merchantmen be gone, and leave the Admiral to shift for himself, or words
to that purpose. By which it appears, that although (it may be) Robert Lendall
that stirred up the Mariners to resist the commands of that Gentleman, who was
Vice Admiral in 1648 and so to mutiny only on board that one ship, this man
would have several ships to commit such unsufferable disorder.

4. It Is proved by sufficient Witness upon oath, that the aforementioned Ell
did contemptuously contrary to all his friends advice, disobey my Warrant, and
the lawful Command I sent him under my hand in the Bay of Logos.

Fifthly, It will appear by witness enough, at our last coming into the
Downs, that although I gave him leave to be wanting from his ship about ten
hours, he staid above ten days, which doubtless occasioned his men to mutiny
as they did, when by Authority they were commanded forth to Sea.

So that now if the high disorders and contempts of these two men (at least) be
adjudg'd of according to our Laws Martial, without dipping my pen in Gall, or
any kind of passion, or bitterness, if I should ask the question of the most
moderad'st man that understands any thing of Martial Discipline by Sea or
Land, and say, Pray what do you think could be done less, in case I had been
invested with the power (that undoubtedly belongs to one in my Command, at so
great a distance) and had disengaged persons about me at their Trial, then to
have given a sentence of death either at the yard Arm, or else how, would it
not be answered in the Affirmative? And if so, here we have the old Proverb as
rightly fulfilled as may be; Save a Thief from the Gallows, and he will hang
thee if he can, these men having now struck at my life (as we use to say) with
a witness.

I have yet one word more; the great Jehovah that knows all men's actions, and
the end they drive at, at whose Judgment seat we must all one day appear, can
witness for me the truth of what I am now about to say, which I am also ready
to make Oath of when ever I am called to it; some of these persons that appear
now against me in Print, as one that were either a Traitor, a Coward, or at
least a negligent person in the management of that business at Legorn.

In our home-ward way, seeing me walk more reserved, and melancholy (as they
thought) then I was usually wont to do, they have come to me with these words
in their mouths sundry times, Good Sir, be not discontented, nor melancholy
about what has fallen out, no man in the world could do more then you have
done; and had you engaged further (without all peradventure) we had lost all
the Fleet; or words to that purpose.

Wherefore I think, to reasonable men it must needs appear we have a sort of
naughty malicious people in England, that have incited some of these persons to
what originally they intended not, and consequently it may stir us up to desire
that the work which (according to the hope of many) has been upon the wheel
for almost twice seven years, may be carried on to a greater perfection.

And I suppose it may be easily gathered from what has been before denoted,
there are a sort of people that would imitate some house Carpenters, who being
desirous to make quick work for plucking down a Fabric erected, first
endeavors to strike away the small Rafters, that at the great Supporters, or
Beams, they may fctch a blow (as we use to say) to the purpose.

In fine, it is well for some they have in their hearts a very ready answer to
that notable question of the Wise man:

But who is able to stand before envy, Prove. 27.4.

For some can boldly say, etc.

Your Honors very humble Servant, Rich. Badiley.

Legorn, Sept. 19. 1653. CAPT. BADILEY; SJR,
I Have not had any from you: I was told by some of our Nation, that Appleton
and Seaman play the Devils at home against you (in these very words) and that
they had carried home many Writings and Certificates against you; it is the
first word I heard of it, however I believe it may be true; for neither of them
want malice against any that are truly affected to the Commonwealth: they
cannot want such here as will give their hands against the State themselves;
and I am confident there is not a man, but such a one, that would subscribe any
writing against you. I know such were their intimate friends, as daily drank
Healths to the States Confusion; and if such hands should pass against their
faithful Servants, I shall take my leave of their service. It Is a vile
disposition in man, that when God sends Affliction, instead of humbling of
himself under that hand, he flies upon his fellow servants, and imputes the
fault to them; It Is just the case of Wadsworth, whose Letters writ me from
Porto Longone, I herewith send you, which you may show to whom it concerns.
The Dutch are all gone westward toward Cales, except a Ships, who lie here in
Port; they say likewise that the Boar is to go home, when Young Trump comes
up to him. I rest,

Your Servant,

Although I never thought to come in Print again, a few weeks since; yet being
constrained to it at this time, receiving this Letter by the French Post, just
upon finishing, I have thought fit to insert it; and if any doubt of the truth
of it, I shall not only show the Original, but make Oath it came unexpectedly
to my hand, this 3 of October. 1653.

Ri: Badiley.

FINIS.

