HEROD and PILATE reconciled.
A New Dialogue betwixt a Malignant and an Independent.
M. YOur Servant, Brother. What Is the news since we
Did last confer? Does Independency
Thrive, and grow pregnant? Does it now increase
Ith Associate Counties? shall we have peace?
Speak, brother, all amort? strange alteration,
Come you late from some new Congregation?
Me thinks you seem distracted: what not well?
Do our Designs miscarry? Brother, tell
Your dear companion; come, the worst of all
Will not discourage us: we cannot fall
Lower then now we are: brother if we
Shall ever rise, thank Independency.

I. O my dear brother, it is those fatal Votes
Lately 'ith House, which makes us change our Notes;
We must disband our Army: and to see
Our godly party in such agony,
Will move a heart of stone; a day of doom,
Of gloomy sadness: amongst us those that come
Newly from Colechester, will tell you more
Of this sad news, then ere you heard before.

M. I smell a plot from Scotland, some such thing
I heard a wisper of; but whilst the King
Is safe at Homeby: what need you to fear
Cannot your conquering Army fetch him there,
And guard him to the City: soon you will see
An alteration with Presbytery.

I. But brother, there is more; the Militia's put
Into the Common Councels hands: we are shut
Quite out of all: and this new Tyranny
More odious to us far than Prelacy,
Must now command us: we will not endure
Such base affronts from them.

M. No brother, sure
Disband not.

I. We the preservers, to be
So slighted, not regarded; and to see
Skippon and Massy both preferred: and these
The City Favorites.

M. Sad progedies.
We have been active, brother, but of late
Our combs are cut; we most unfortunate.
But what will Skippon go their Fabius,
Their man, so wise, so solid, and Religious?
In Cornwall, brother, we must needs confess
His valiant service in their great distress.
And maugre all, the Sectaries must yield
That he deserved best at Naseby Field.

I. Brother, had he been but Independent,
S^rigg should have made his actions more transcendent.

M But shall their Fabius and Marcellus
Be joined together?

I. O this does quell us.
Brother, these must command, and it is not we
With all our plots, designs, and policy,
Can now prevent their choice: except there be
In our disbanding some grand mutiny.

M. Is there no hope of that? me thinks your zeal
Might animate the Soldiers to appeal
To all the Countries: and it is Lilborns sense,
You may complain of the House for this offense.

I. O but the City, brother, and these Scots
Are cunning, subtle, to prevent our plots.
They have a major part in the House; and then
Advise, how to oppose these crafty men.

M. Send frantic Peter's down, and let him there
Belch out his surious raptures; twill go near
To work an alteration: we must lend
Our best assistance now: some Notes from us
May do you service.

I Help from Aulicus,
Or any other; our necessity
Makes us not scrupulous of Malignity.

M. Let Lilly raise new spirits; let there be
A Combination, brother, suddenly.
A Junto gathered of Erastians,
To wrangle out these Presbyterians.
Let Turn coats be advanced, and let none have
Preferment now, but such as will turn knave.

I. Brother, it is good advice, I am glad to see
Herod and Pilate both so well agree.

M. But is it likewise true, shall Massy he
Be honored now: that in necessity
Kept Gloucester safe: and afterward did take
So many Garrisons, and made us quake?
Shall he that did such service in the West
Be looked on now, brother, who can digest
Such Votes.

I Nay more, Cromwell, Hammond, Ireton
Are laid aside: Massy, Jones, and Skippon,
They must command in Ireland: M. then I fear
Small crumbs of Comfort ever will appear
To help our dying cause, sure soon must we
Give up the ghost with Independency.
Except, my brother, we can find some way
Some fine design or other, to delay
Skippon and Massy, that they be not sent
To Ireland; lest too late we do repent.
Yet if you send them over; clog them there
With such Commissioners: that you need not fear.
Let Davise buy provisions; let there be
To him but granted a Monopoly.
Let such command the bag: who will not give
Any Account, dear brother, whilst they live.
Me thinks your H^ckney, Penny Pamphleteers
May raise some scandals against them, some odd jears.
Every weeks Diurnall, may do some feats.
Peck is your Mercenary: and such cheats.
To undeceive the people would do well,
Let Dillinghan be sent for, he can swell
His sheet and half to countenance your Tribe,
Stitch a Conceit or two, your Moderate Scribe,
You must confer with him; and Walker too.

I. Brother, they all are Knaves, and will undoo
Our god^y party; stay, observe a while,
You Will see them turn-coats, and their friends beguil.
Lilborn I like not, brother, you will see
That man prove false to Independency.

M. Admit he do; yet Davy Jenkins late
Defends your Cause.

I. A man unfortunate.

M. But be not yet discouraged; some more plots
The King is working; let us not be sorts.
But active, vigilant, we may recall
These Votes amongst our friends; if this be all.

I. No brother, there is more, the House did send
To the City I rely to desire them lend
Two hundred thousand pound, and told them there
We should disband, Skippon and Massy were
The men for Ireland: told them they should see
The House would grant them all security.
Newcastle, brother, they will have; if we
Had but kept that for our fraternity,
We might have curbed proud London, and have seen
The Presbyterian bend for all then spleen.
Yet more, to add unto our misery,
Of Goldsmiths Hall they have the moity.
Besides I fear, my brother, you will find
An Answer shortly to the Cities mind
About their cursed Remonstrance; they have chose
A new Militia; that will us oppose.

M. Would not the Gibeonites, your friends, once speak
Some long-breathed speech or other: but to break
This horrid Combination: they used to make
Some Remora heretofore, which did take
Amongst the vulgar.

I O but now of late
Their speeches, brother, are unfortunate.
Dull was their Oratory to persuade
The City a Garrison to be made.
O had that plot but taken, brother, we
Had raised them Trophies to posterity.
Our friends had then commanded. Who durst be
In opposition to us?

M. Prelacy
Might then had hopes, my brother, to have seen
A blessed toleration; and have been
A special help to Independency,
In all assaults against Presbytery.

I. I know it brother.

M. And it is most true,
We have a Presbyter as much as you
I grieve to see you sad, and pensive.

I. And when
Shall we be merry?

M. Sure those men
Might have been more active, when they did see
Such dangerous plotting by Presbytery.

I. The men were cunning, but yet all their guile
Could not insinuate to delay a while
This new Committee: that we might but pawse
And send a Post to the Army: our Cause
Lies bleeding, brother: O the time is come
That Prophet Sedgwick tells the day of Doom,
I shake, and faint, brother, except there be
Some comfort left for Independency.

M. I Will help you brother, there is such swarms of late
Of strange prodigious Sects teemed in this State,
Who all will join with you; and so shall we
To overthrow this vile Presbytery.

I These are some hopes of Comfort; will the King
Join, and combine with us, if that we bring
His Majesty to London: a toleration
Will he subscribe for us o'th Separation?

M. Be confident, my Brother, there is come
A Dispensation from the Queen, at Rome,
And Italy, they pray, and long to see
The good success of Independency.

I. And is this true?

M. Most true, the King of late
Will join with any, he is so desperate.
No plot will take in Scotland, nor no new
Designs in France, or Ireland.

I. Is this true?
Then we have hopes the King will join with us,
So shall we make our selves victorious.

M. I will advise you, brother, let there be
Some more Petitions for Indemnity
By the Royal assent: that phrase did well
To please the King and us: let Saltmarsh, Dell
Hint on that Text more often; it will raise
A Faction; we Royalists now do praise
The Independent party: you do see
How we do hug your last Apology.
Your Vindication, brother, we admire,
And swear all is just and honest you desire.
Nothing we fear so much but Skippon, he
Will so prevail; suppress the mutiny,
Which we rejoice to hear.

I. Brother, it is late,
I thank you kindly for this good debate.
We shall be sure we never will agree
Before we pull down the Presbytery.

M. Adeu, dear brother, until next we meet
To prostrate our selves at His Sacred feet.

FINIS.

