Florus Anglicus: OR AN EXACT HISTORY OF England, FROM THE REIGN OF William the
Conqueror to the Death of the Late KING.

By Lambert Wood Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Simon Miller at the Star in St Paul's Churchyard. 1657.6

The History of England.

TO THE READER.
FRIENDLY READER,
THou have here a short Compendium of the Affairs of England, yet written with
so much Care and Diligence, that there is nothing almost that is wanting in it,
but circumstances, or things not useful. By this means, I suppose I have
spared the Reader both labor and time. For, what will it profit a man to spend
his Age in searching out of that, which he may have represented to him at an
instant? You may with one glance of your Eye run over all the Writings and
Pains taken by many Authors. And that nothing might be wanting, I have drawn
forth the History from the very Infancy of it, even unto the Death of CHARLES
the First, not following my own Advice, but directed by the Testimony of them,
who, setting aside all Envy, were Real and Eyewitnesses of this Tragedy. I
have offered no Violence to the Truth, by siding with any part. If I loved the
one, I did not hate the other. And if perhaps any Man (which in Novelties is
much desired) by his future Experience, shall bring forth the hidden Causes of
things to the clearer Light, I will not refuse to give Credit to it, so far
is it from me from believing my own Report before the Relation of other Men.
That which pleased me, I think shall not be distastefull unto thee. And I hope
to reap the fruit of my Labors in it, your kind Acceptance, which if I may
obtain. I aim at nothing else. Judge moderately of the Style, and censure it
courteously. It will not cause your Admiration shining forth in a Scholastic
Brightness, it will not retard curious Eyes, with the Elegancie of words, and
glorying in the witty choice of Sentences. What can I say more? It must be
excused. The desire of Praise could not carry me aloft, who want Wings for it.
Moderate things please me, when I can reach no higher. Only I abhor the envy
of Detractors, and the quarrelling of carping Momus. Having premised thus much,
I shall remain

A true Friend to my Country Lambert Wood.

Courteous Reader, These Books following are printed and sold by Simon Miller
at the Star in St Paul's Churchyard, near the West end.

Folio.
The Civil Wars of Spain in the Reign of Charles the fifth Emperor of
Germany, and King of that Nation, wherein our late unhappy Differences are
paralleled in many particulars. The History of this Iron-Age, with the Original
and Causes of all Wars and Commotions that have happened throughout Europe
from the Year 1500 to this present.
Quarto.
Abraham's Faith, or the good old Religion, proving the Doctrine of the Church
of England to be the only true Faith of Gods Elect, by J. Nicholson Minister of
the Gospel. Mr Boltons Directions. The Anatomy of Mortality, by George Strode.
Mr Ainsworth on the Canticles. Mr Paul Baynes Diocesans Trial. The Supreme
Power of Christian States Vindicated from the Insolent Pretenses of Gulielmus
Apollonii, by E. Gralle. Politic and Military Observations of Civil and
Military Governments. The Birth, Increase, Decay of Monarchies, the Carriage of
Princes, Magistrates, Commanders and Favorites, by D.P. Esquire Mr Pinchin his
meritorious Price of Christ's Redemption. Astrology Theologized, showing what
Nature and Influence the Stars and Planets have over men, and how the same
may be diverted and avoided.
Octavo.
The Reconciler of the Bible. A View of the Jewish Religion, with their Rites,
Customs and Ceremonies. Edward Waterhouse Esquire, his Discourse of Piety and
Charity. A short View and Defense of the Reformation of the Church of England
by King Edward and Queen Elizabeth, wherein her Doctrine, Liturgy and
Discipline are considered and preferred before all others. Mr Peter du Moulin,
His Antidote against Popery, published on purpose to prevent the delusions of
the Priests and Jesuits, being seasonable for these times. Herberts Devotions,
or a Companion for a Christian, containing Meditations and Prayers, useful
upon all occasions. Mr Knowls, His Rudiments of the Hebrew Tongue. A Book of
Schemes or Figures of Heaven, ready set for every four Minutes of time. The
Poor man's Physician and Chyrurgeon. Florus Anglicus, or an exact History of
England, from the beginning to the death of the Late King.
Duodecimo.
Dr Smiths Practice of Physic. Grammar War. Posselius Apothegms. Fuciculus
Florum. Crashaws Visions. Robinsons Essays. The Christian Soldier, his
Combat with the three Arch-enemies of Mankind, the World, the Flesh and the
Devil, together with his Conquest and Crown.
Vicessimo quarto.
The New Testament. The third Part of the Bible.
Plays.
The Ball. The Conspiracy. The Tragedy of Chamlet. Example. Gamester. Dukes
Mistress.
THE CONTENTS.
COncerning the first Kings of the Britans, 1 Of the first Norman King. 9
William the Second. 16 Henry the First. 20 Stephen King of England. 25 Henry
the Second. 33 Richard the First. 38 John the First. 45 Henry the Third. 53
Edward the First. 64 Edward the Second. 71 Edward the Third. 85 Richard the
Second. 100 Henry the Fourth. 115 Henry the Fifth. 122 Henry the Sixth. 131
Edward the Fourth. 149 Edward the Fifth and Richard the Third. 161 Henry the
Seventh. 172 Henry the Eighth. 182 Edward the Sixth. 200 Queen Mary. 206 Queen
Elizabeth. 214 King James. 223 King Charles the First. 230
AN Exact History OF ENGLAND.
Concerning the first Kings of the Britans.
BRitany of old, was subject, not to one, but to diverse Kings. The Names of
four of them are called by Caesar, Cingelarix, Carvilius, Taximagalus, and
Segonax; whereupon the Conquest of the Romans over them was more sure, though
it were longer in doing; for whilst they fought all severally, they are
generally overcome: Yet the Britans did ever now and then make some resistance,
hardly submitting their necks to another Government: Amongst whom, for her
Noble enterprise, Vaodicia the Queen was most remarkable; who, with her two
daughters, Virgins, having formerly been forced by the Roman Soldiery, in
revenge for her chastity abused, raised a mighty Army, and over-threw the Enemy
with a great slaughter; yet the fortune of the War changing afterward, she
escaped bondage provided for her, by drinking poison. This Island was subject
to the Roman Government five hundred years: but discord creeping in at home,
they left this place of their own accord, which they had won with so much
labor; yet they took such Britans along with them, which they thought most fit
for War, part whereof were slain in the War, part were consumed with hunger
and want, and part of them transported themselves into that place in France for
their safety, which from them is called Britany.

The Picts and Scots they strive to enter upon the Country thus forsaken; whom
to resist, they chose Vortigernus Earl of Cornwall for their King, and implored
the help of the Saxons or Anglo Saxons, a Warlick Nation in Germany, who were
promiscuously called by that Name: These with Hengist and Horsus their Leaders,
made have into England with an Army of 9000 men; by whose Valor, the Scotch
and Picts were overcome in a pitched Battle. From hence arose so great an
opinion of the Saxons, that they were held for Angels, as it were, sent from
heaven; and they were received into society, by granting part of this Island
unto them.

Also Vortigernus being taken with the beauty of Rovena the Daughter of
Hengist, easily obtained her for his Wife. Hengist, not a little elevated by
this success, forgetting his own Country, supposed himself to be King of
Britany; calling therefore not a few of his Countrymen out of Saxony, he
attempted to gain the Land by force. But the Nobility of the Land foreseeing
these undertakings, they thrust Vortigernus, an Uxorious King, from his Throne,
and they create his son Vortimer King. He suddenly picking up what Soldiers
he could, went against the Enemy, near Alesfort, where in a single fight, on
one side Caligarnus Brother of Vortimer, on the other side Horsus Brother to
Hengist were slain. The Saxons were compelled to forsake all Britany, or else a
Territory was granted to them in Tennet, where they found no quiet. Vortimer,
to whom Britany now was indebted for her liberty, having reigned four years,
was poisoned by Rovena, the Wife of Vortigernus; and the Nobility are persuaded
by a crafty woman to recall their former King Vortigernus. This being done,
Hengist growing more bold by the favor of his Son in Law, levies a new Army,
and again attempts to invade Britany, cunningly pretending that he came not to
wage War with the Britans, but to fetch Rovena, and to make a continual
League with them. The false Name of League displeased not, the Britans came
unarmed to the place appointed, but the Saxons came armed with short skeens
under their garments; by this fraud these unprepared people were overcome
without great contest, 300 of the Nobility were slain, the King himself was
taken, and obtained his liberty by the Provinces of Kent, Suffolk, Sussex, and
Norfolk, but he himself fled into Wales In the mean while an infinite number of
Saxons arrived in Britany, and they over flow the whole Island like a sudden
Deluge: until such time as Aurelius Ambrosius a Roman born, yet very
affectionate to the Britans, landed in Britany with a great multitude of
people; and at first, he sets upon King Vortigernus suddenly, who was doubtless
the cause of all these troubles; and besieging him in a certain Castle, he put
fire to it, and consumed him with the Fort. After this he holds the Saxons play
enough, not in one Battle alone; but at length he is miserably destroyed by a
Saxon, that was suborned to give him poison to drink, when he had been Ruler
over the Affairs of Britany 32 years.

Vter succeeded him in the Kingdom, or as some will have it, Pendragon the
Britan, so called, because he was wont to wear the Dragons Head of Gold in his
Banner, which is at this day an Ensign of honor to the English. He also
overthrew the pride of the Saxons in diverse Battles, until the eighteenth year
of his Reign, poison being cast into a Well (the water whereof he daily drank
of) he was killed also.

Arthur succeeded him, who was born of a fair and Noble Woman, which was Wife
to the Duke of Cornwall. This Arthur being of wonderful force, killed 800
Saxons with his own hand, and did many other admirable things; he also set up
the order of the round Table, but afterward being wounded in Battle, he died
in the twenty sixth year of his Reign.

Constantirus succeeded him, and Aurelius Conanus Nephew to Arthur followed
him, Vortiporus followed Conanus, then Malgo Conanus, afterward Carelicus,
Cadvanus succeeded Carelicus, and after him Cadwallus, and Cad^alladar, who was
the last of the British Kings; for leaving his Grandfathers Kingdom of his own
accord, he sailed into Britany in France, by whose absence the courage of the
Saxons grew so great, that coming in with great multitudes, they vanquished the
Britans, that were now without a King, and they easily brought the whole Island
under their Jurisdiction. Cadwalladar striving to stand against their violence,
was admonished (as it is supposed) from heaven, to go to Rome, and to betake
himself to a spiritual life, where he died a Monk. The Saxons being now Masters
of all, divide this vast Island into seven Kingdoms, and as many Kings; yet he
that was most powerful was called King of England, so that it is apparent
enough that in this Heptarchy there was a Monarchy. And now the Christian
Religion had taken no small root, (the clouds of Heathenish Errors being
dispersed) by Dr Austin, the English Apostle, as they called him; And this
light was received by the English men with so great zeal, that they strove to
enter their Names, built Churches, and performed Divine duties.

The Saxon Government flourished exceedingly under this Heptarchy for a long
time; until that intestine War rose amongst them, and brought all things
under the power of the West Saxons. For Egbert, King of the West Saxons, when
he had by Arms subdued four Kingdoms, and was in hope to overcome the other
two; in memory of his Country, after the Name of Britans and Saxons, he
commanded that all the Inhabitants should be called English men, and the
Country England.

Now the affairs of the English seemed to be at the height, when they were next
to their ruin; so false is the appearance of all humane things, that when they
glitter most, they may be supposed to be in the declining. For the Danes
playing the Pirates about the English Coasts for a long time, at last by force
they enter the Land, Angarus and Hubo being their Captains, and they wasted the
Country miserably, sparing neither sacred nor common, which is apparent by a
most famous example of the holy Virgins of Coldingham, who to preserve their
purity, dismembered their bodies. For foreseeing the violence of the mad
soldiers every where, they cut off their own nostrils and their upper lips,
that being like to Monsters, they might mitigate the dishonest lasciviousness
of an unbeleeving Nation. The Kings of the Mercians and Eastern English were
killed by them; and their Kingdoms were possessed with no small part of
Northumberland: at last to repress the insolency of these Danes, a great
Tribute was laid upon the people, which was commonly called Dan or Dans gelt.
At length they were valiantly repulsed by Alfred King of the West Saxons, and
are driven out of all Mercia. Upon his Victories Edward his Son succeeding,
subdued the East part of England, driving out the Danes. But Adelstan this
Kings Bastard Son, cast such a fear upon them, that they yielded not only
Northumberland, but also all England unto him; and some of them became his
subjects willingly. But Ethelrede a weak and sluggish King reigning, taking
heart again, they once more invade the Land, spoil and wast it miserably,
whereby the English were provoked to conspire together, and so in one night
they killed all the Danes, through the whole Island, and quenched so great a
fire with the blood of the Authors of it. Swain King of Denmark, being urged
with this great slaughter of his subjects, invades England with a mighty Army.
He puts Ethelrede to flight, and brought the whole Land under his obedience,
and by his death he passed it over to his Son Canatus, who fought with
Ethelrede (who came back again with his Son Edmundus) upon a changeable
fortune, and left his two Sons to succeed him, Harald his bastard, and Canutus
the Bold; but when they were dead, the Kingdom returned again unto the English,
who shook off the Danish Yoke: and Edward Son to Ethelred was made King. Now
it was that England began to take breath; but as it commonly falls out, idleness
became the ruin of many: The lazy Priests, for the most part, being at ease,
took care of all things but their Office. The people being more dissolute with
Luxury, grew contemptible by sluggish dullness; Learning decayed, the
Commonwealth wasted with diverse Vices, Pride and Negligence had made a ready
path for their Ruin.

Of the first Norman King WILLIAM the Conqueror.
Anno 1067.
EDward the Confessor last dead, whilst he lived in Normandy, had promised
after his decease, the Kingdom of England to William Duke of Normandy, as he
was his Kinsman and near of Blood, yet that William was a bastard Son of
Robert King of Normandy, begot on a Country Maid. But Harold the Son of
Godwin Earl of Kent, a bold man and a good Soldier, possessed himself, by
force, of the Kingdom, during the Interregnum, not waiting for the consent of
the Nobility, though his Brother Tosto strove against him all he could, and
made War with him; but at York he lost his life in a pitched Battle. In the
mean while, William Duke of Normandy, depending on his right, raising an Army,
came for England to the South Saxons: Harold hearing of his arrival, though
his Soldiers were tired with a late fight, sets up his Standard against his
new guest William. Not far from Hastings they fought a sore Battle; but
fortune turning against the English, Harold driven forward with a Warlike fury,
riding into the midst of the Enemies, and fighting valiantly, was slain, and a
great number of his men were slain with him. William the Conqueror presently
brings his Conquering Banners to London, and is proclaimed King by the people
that remained, having got a Kingdom by a lawful Victory, which (as he said)
was given him by God. This King (which is the use for Conquerours to do)
abolishing forthwith all the Customs of the English Nation, and the greatest
part of their Laws, brought in immediately his own Country fashions, and
commanded that all Causes whatsoever should be pleaded in French: And excluding
all the English that had born Arms against him out of their Patrimonies, he
disposed of all their Demeans, Lands, Fields, and the rest of their Goods
amongst his Soldiers for a reward of their Victory; but reserving to himself
the direct Principality and Homage, held to Himself and his Heirs, as a tenure
from the Crown; so that none but the King should be the right and true Lord of
any thing. Also he caused a seal to be made for himself, wherein was engraved,
By this acknowledge William of Normandy to be your Patron: but on the other
side was engraven, By this seal you must know that the same is King of England.
Having thus subdued the power of the Laity, he turns himself to the Clergy, and
made an Edict, that no English Monk should be capable of any secular Dignity,
disdaining the facilness of Canutus, who was formerly King, who had continued
the honors entire to the people whom he had subdued; by which lenity the
inhabitants growing bold, after his death easily expelled foreigners, and
recovered their former Liberty.

Then he appeased the approaching War of the Danes, by giving them money,
that he might enjoy it peaceably upon any rate. And hence it was that the
English were in no fear at all of the Danes that formerly so much infested
them: yet they were not so free from troubles, but that here or there, there
were some tumults amongst the people, that were hardly suppressed and overcome,
but the windy faction was soon dispersed.

The greatest matter was the Rebellion of his Son Robert in Normandy, because
it was most against Nature. This Son at the instigation of Philip King of
France, demanded this Dukedom of his Father as his proper right; and without
more words enters upon Normandy by force of Arms. It is true his Father had
promised him this Territory, but the Son was weary of delay, nor would he
longer forbear from the Government he hoped for. The King hearing of his Sons
Enterprise, suddenly goes against him with a gallant Army; They meet in Battle,
the Son unhorses his Father, and wounds him in the Arm. But when he knew his
Fathers voice, alighting from his own horse, he raised his Father from the
ground, and kneeling down before him, craved pardon for his boldness, which he
obtained presently, his Father embracing him in his Arms. However he seemed
thus to have appeased his Fathers wrath, yet God never suffering such faults to
go unpunished, he had no good luck ever after. William, by such clemency, was
miraculously eminent, in other cases, raising not a few of his adversaries, (a
rare example) to the greatest Dignities, as if he endeavored by his gentleness
to mitigate their fierce spirits, and to calm their rebellious minds, that
they might be eminent in their duty to their Benefactor, as he was in bestowing
benefits on his enemies, and should blush to deny obedience unto him, whom they
had offended, without danger. Having conquered therefore the Rebels, partly by
good turns, partly by the Sword, he at length endeavors to enlarge his
Kingdom, bringing Wal^s under his command, and causing Malcom King of Scots to
do him Homage, and so adding new Countries, he rewarded England for the Crown
they granted to him. Yet least the frowardness of his newly conquered subjects
should grow insolent, he laid upon them Taxes and Tributes that were not very
light, and for the honor of his own Country, he made the Laws to be debated in
the French tongue, and be bridled the haughtiness of the Monks. Only the men of
Kent held their old Customs: For the King upon a certain time journying toward
Dover, was handsomely circumvented by the Inhabitants of Kent, carrying boughs
cut down from the trees, and they would not let him depart until he had
granted them the enjoyment of their Ancient Customs. Also he was indulgent to
the Londoners, to let them enjoy the privileges they had in the time of Edward
the Confessor; but he forbad the Nobility from hunting of Deer, reserving those
sports for himself only.

He disposed no less of Church affairs, composing a difference between the
Archbishops of Canterbury and York, for that this was subject to that; and ever
after the Archbishop of York was called Primate of England, and the Archbishop
of Canterbury, Primate of all England. Also he made the Churches of Scotland to
be under the Primate of York, as the Churches of England were under Canterbury.

Though he seemed to curb the insolency of the Clergy, he had them yet in great
esteem: For Aldred Archbishop of York being angry because he could not obtain
what he asked, and offering to go away in a fury, the King not enduring the
hatred of that Prelate, fell down at his knees, and humbly asked forgiveness of
him. The Bishop being admonished to raise up the King, answered, No, but said,
He shall feel what it is to offend St Peter. By the largeness of his Benefits
he showed forth the love he bare unto Church men, building innumerable Churches
for the service of God, with Monasteries and other sacred Houses.

About the end of his life and Kingdom he placed his two Sons Robert and Henry,
almost in equal power over Normandy. There arose on a day a quarrel between
Henry, and Lewis the Dolphin of France, playing at Tables, which was the cause
of a great contention between the French and the Normans: The Dolphin drawing
Robert on his side, enters Normandy with an Army. William forthwith having his
Navy ready, sails into Normandy, and with no difficulty, reducing his Son
Robert to his former obedience, he marched to Roan, that he might find the
French men work; when he was weary with toyling, being very fat, he made an
halt a while: The French derided William because he was sick, and by reason of
his fat belly, speaking scoffingly, That he was with child and ready to be
delivered. When this jeer was told to William, he answered, If please God that
I ever recover of this childbirth. I will burn a thousand lights to God in
token of my thankfulness. Nor was it long before he entered the Territories of
France, and wasted all with fire and sword. Yet shortly after, falling into a
relapse of the same weakness, he died at Roan: His followers not only forsook
him being dead, but spoiled him of what he had. And his Body unfortunately,
being thrice forsaken, at last, was let down into his own Monument, but not
entire.

WILLIAM the second King of England.
Anno 1088.
WIlliam whose surname was Rufus, the third Son, succeeded the Conqueror. The
beginning of his Reign was unquiet and troublesome, his Brother Robert being
offended with him, for taking the succession from him; the Nobility being
divided, and conspiring his destruction. But he freed himself of all this
danger, partly by force, partly by rewards, and partly by Arms, so that he
pacified them all.

But the greater Tempest was threatened from Scotland, now ready to arise, for
Malcom King of the Scots, though he ought homage to the English, conjecturing,
amongst so many troubles, that he had now a fit opportunity to be prosperous in
his business, with great force entered Northumberland, and with fire and sword
he consumed all he met with; and loaded with spoils, he returned into his
Country. But William having provided an Army, invaded Scotland, and subduing
Malcom, brought him at last to his obedience, and made him give Hostages for
security.

Robert the Kings Brother, once more proclaims War against him, because he
paid him not the money they were agreed upon; and the King of France taking his
part, he took some Towns by force from his Brother, which of right belonged to
him. But William bribed the French King, and so depriving his Brother of all
help, easily compelled him to crave pardon for his Retractayners.

But that all things might take their turns, Malcom, taking occasion of raising
Arms from the contempt of the English, provoked William by a new injury,
spoiling his Country: But when, being laden with the spoil, he thought to
return home, by chance being intercepted by Ambush, he lost both his life, and
the Prize he had got. But yet this put not an end to the Troubles, for the
Welsh setting upon the King already encumbered, depopulated his Territories in
the way, whom at last William overcame in a successful Battle.

In the mean while Robert Mowbray, by whose valor Malcom was subdued,
supposing himself to be despised, or not so much honored as he deserved,
procuring some other Noble men to join with him, rises up against his
Sovereign; but the King suddenly falling upon the small number of the
Conspirators, easily put an end to this tumultuous War, taking Mowbray
prisoner. Yet least the Welsh should rise again afresh, however their
stubborness was beaten down, and should occasion greater danger, William now
endeavors wholly to Conquer them, invading their Kingdom, and building of
Bulwarks; but when this War proved to be tedious, the business being
recommended to Hugh Earl of Shropshire, and to the Earl of Chester, the King
left them: They cruelly handled the Wolsh, cutting off their nostrils and their
ears, until such time as the Earl of Shropshire being slain, Hugh Count of
Chester killing the King of Wales, obtained a full Victory over them.

Whilst Lanfranc Archbishop of Canterbury lived, he was ruled as with a bridle,
but after he was dead, being, as it were, freed from all bands, the state of
the Church being oppressed, he began to rage with immoderate Tributes, and hard
Laws: Now was the first time that all Ecclesiastical preferments were set to
sale, and any thing was lawful for money. Yet the Tyranny of this King was not
wholly void of doing good, for he gave freely to a poor Monk a Benefice, for
which two others contended violently, beating the bargain with great sums of
money.

However all these vices were made good by his great Magnanimity, for hearing
of the siege of the Town of Mantium, breaking through a Wall, that he might the
sooner enter, none following him but such as were courageous like himself, and
despising the danger of the turbulent Sea, he came unexpected, and freed the
place, putting the enemy to flight, and taking their Captain prisoner, who was
Helias Earl of Flescia. That Earl when he saw himself captivated, imputed this
his misfortune to the unlooked for arrival of the King, threatening great
matters against the King if he were once at liberty, whereupon he was set free
to do what he could.

Also he showed a wonderful example of notable courage at a Fort called St
Michaels Mount, for he was suddenly set upon by three Cavaliers, and although
he was already unhorsed, he defended himself valiantly with his Saddle for a
Target, and his drawn Sword, until such time as he was rescued by his
followers. When as those that accompanied him found fault with his too great
care for his Saddle, Yes, says he, I would rather have lost my life, than have
left that to the scorn of the Enemy.

He was faithful in his promise; betwixt both in continence, he neither
despised nor yet adored Religion, but he was extreme covetous. This was the
first King of England that would look into the faults of the Clergy, and
reserved to himself the punishing of them, neglecting the Bishop of Rome.

Last of all, being much given to hunting, he was unhappily slain by an arrow
that rebounded from the back of a Stag. The foreshewing signs of his unhappy
end being foreseen, but not regarded.

HENRY the first, King of England.
Anno 1101.
HEnry the first succeeded his Brother, born of William in England, not a Duke
but a King. Who in the absence of his elder Brother Robert, either invaded the
Kingdom, or procured it with money, or obtained it by the favor of the people;
for he was more Learned than all his Brothers, and was so much the more dear to
the people. He made good the Kingdom he had got with fraud, by good deeds,
gentleness, and just punishments: He every where preferred Learned men for
places in the Church; he removed such as were unlearned and unworthy from their
places: He mitigated the more severe Laws, and abolished hard Customs. He
granted the Nobility free leave to Hunt; and with his bounty he so won the
hearts of all. And because he knew that the Scotch were his ill-willers, he
made peace with them, and to bind the League the faster, he took Maud the
sister of King Edgar to be his Wife. That which happened to his Father and to his
Brothers, happened to him, to have the first success of War from his own
kindred. Namely the Bishop of Durrham being the first mover of it, (whom he had
cast into prison for exacting too great Tributes) who had escaped his Keepers
by reason of their neglect, his Brother Robert Duke of Normandy is stirred up
to wage War with Henry, and to recover his right. Robert was now ready in
England with an Army, and the day for the Battle was appointed, when as the
Heralds were sent up and down, at last peace is agreed upon, 20000 Franks being
granted yearly to Robert, and hopes of succession, should he out live his
Brother Henry.

This danger scarce dispelled, another falls upon the neck of it: For Robert
Bellamy Earl of Shrewsbury, for no other cause but envy, inviting the Welsh to
his aid, makes War against the King: But this stopped him not, for raising an
Army suddenly, he put the Welsh to flight, he intercepted Robert, and
confiscating all his Goods, sent him into banishment: For to punish Traitors
with death was not yet the fashion.

The third tempest arose from William Earl of Mortane and of Cornwall, the
Kings Uncle, he being angry with his Cosen for denying him the County of Kent,
endeavors by treachery to draw the Shire unto himself; but his Treason being
discovered, for one County that he thought to win he lost two.

Henry that was hitherto on the defensive part, now takes up Arms willingly
against his Brother Robert, being offended at some scoff of his, and levying an
Army he entered Normandy, and became Master of it all, scarce leaving so much as
Roan to his Brother, and so he retreated for England. Robert had made trial of
his severity, and was resolved to make proof of his levity, whereupon he
follows after his Brother into England, and very submissive desires pardon for
his sawciness. But Henry, either offended with the now fresh injury of his
Brother, or else affecting the Dukedom of Normandy, neglected the prayers of
his Brother. Robert being impatient of this scorn returns for Normandy, and
once more raising an Army, attempts a War against his Brother; but he coming
successfully upon Robert with a sufficient force, providently suppressed the
mischief in the birth, but not without blood; and he carried his Brother
Captive into England, and putting out his eyes, he held him prisoner to the day
of his death.

By this success he grew Magnificent, whence arose envy against him: For Fulck
Duke of Aniou, Baldwin Earl of Flanders, and Lewis surnamed the Gross, King of
France, entering a League, with joint forces, they endeavor to restore to
William the Son of Robert the Land of his Grandfather. Henry presently
transports his Forces into Normandy, and encountering the Battle, put the French
to flight, and after that he had diversely made trial of fortune, in fine Peace
is confirmed between the Duke of Aniou and Henry, which is confirmed by
Marriage between William the Kings Son, and the said Dukes Daughter. After this
Peace followed between both these Kings, the Dukedom of Normandy being granted
to William the Son of Henry, doing Homage for it. And thus by continuance of
time all the firstborn Sons of the Kings of England are styled Dukes of
Normandy. But Charles Earl of Flanders, being wickedly slain at Brussels,
leaving no other Heir, William the Son of Robert, who was the next right Heir
to it (for that he was from the blood of Maud Daughter to Baldwin, and Wife to
William the Conqueror) was elevated to this Dignity, who growing insolent with
this prosperity, endeavors to recover Normandy his Patrimony by his
Grandfather; which he brought to pass with no great difficulty, by assistance
of the French King; but receiving a wound in one of his hands, which was very
small, and afterward rankling, he lost both his life and Patrimony by it.

Peace being confirmed abroad, yet Henry was tossed at home with civil
commotions, Wales being entered into a Conspiracy, whereupon he pursuing the
Rebels, erring in his passage, he fell into a straight place, and redeemed, yet
not without danger, a thousand sheep and oxen from them. And these were the
Wars he had both at home and abroad.

He seldom or never Taxed the Land: He made none but good Laws: He was the
first that ordained the convening of the several Orders, which is now called a
Parliament. He punished Thieves, and false Coiners with severe justice: He
diminished the power of the Pope in his Dominions, and such suits as were
decided in England, he forbad to be called back to Rome without his cognizance
thereof, the Pope not speaking any thing against it. But a greater Controversy
arose concerning Ecclesiastical Promotions, both of them standing stoutly for
his own Interest: But the King not regarding the Pope, held in his own hands
the power of disposing and confirming Offices.

If he were over luxunious, yet he was noble in his choice, not loving every
one in extremes.

He had no lawfully begotten Sons, but he had many bastards, whereupon he
endeavored by all means to establish the Government in Maude and her
Daughters, but all in vain; Stephen succeeding, who was born from Adela,
Daughter to William the Conqueror, excluding Maude his Wife and Daughter,
which first married Henry the fourth the Roman Emperor, and he being dead, she
was married to Jeffrey Plantagenet, the Son of Fulc the Duke of Aniou.

At last, by reason of some quarrel with the Duke of Aniou he fell into grief
of mind, whence followed a great weakness of his body, by overeating of Eels,
and thence he fell into a burning Fever, and so died after he had reigned 35
years, being the last of the Norman Kings.

STEPHEN King of England.
Anno 1136.
HEnry being dead, Stephen upon a doubtful Title, and his elder Brothers
delaying, first possessing, succeeded. He won the English partly by promises,
partly by benevolence, to which was added his Title of Inheritance. Having laid
hold on the Kingdom by promises, he endeavors to make it good by courtesy. He
took off the heaviest Taxes, and granted his own right to the Clergy, which the
former Kings kept to themselves. Also he would that Churchmen should be free
from yielding obedience to the temporal Magistrate: Thus he won the people and
the Churchmen, and the Nobility, by granting them free leave to Hunt, and
liberty to build Castles. His Brother Theobald, who by his Birthright was next
to the Crown, he pacified by a yearly Pension.

Moreover, to win the good will of strangers, he obtained for his Son
Eustachius, Constance the Daughter of Lewis King of France: yet he did not more
by that Marriage, than by Treasures strengthen himself in the Kingdom of King
Henry, which he spent not luxuriously, but to leavy Soldiers, and to wage
War with.

He was scarce Crowned, before he was forced to fall to his Arms; for David
King of Scotland, striving to assert the Interest of Maud the Empress,
proclaimed War against Stephen, and possessed himself of the Towns of Carlisle
and New Castle. Stephen marched against him with a great Army, and granting
Cumberland to David, and the County of Huntington to his Son, he put by a
Tempest that was coming on, without any bloodshed at all.

Not long after he was shaken with Civil Commotions, greater than before, for
when he was sickly, he was reported by some to be dead; whereupon the Nobles,
abusing their Castles to the Kings ruin, conspired together, and endeavor to
get the Kingdom into their own power. Stephen, least by delay the danger should
get strength, partly by his Captains, partly with his own hand, he subdued the
boldness of the Rebels. He marched against Baldwin the ringleader of the
Conspirators, and driving him out of Oxford, he pursues him as far as the
Isle of Wight, and forcing him from thence, he enjoined him perpetual
banishment. He was scarce quiet at home, but a War from abroad puts him to
further trouble. For Jeffrey Plantagenet, relying on the Title of Maud his
Wife, invades Normandy with offensive Arms, and strives to possess himself of
his Grandfathers Territories. Stephen quickly levying an Army hastens thither,
they having fought in diverse small skirmishes, come to an agreement, namely,
that Jeffrey should abstain from all Title and Right, Stephen paying to him an
annuity of 35000 Franks: When he returned, he found the Kingdom full of War
and Tumults; for the Nobility enter upon a Conspiracy, because the King kept
not his promises, and every one of them makes War in his own Dominions. Also
David King of Scotland, forgetful of his Covenant, enters upon Northumberland,
and miserably made havoc of all by fire and sword, he neither spared women nor
innocent children, he kills the Priests before the Altars, the sacred Virgins
are ravished in the Churches.

The King to oppose himself against the greatest danger, first bends his forces
against the Scots. But the War during long, giving command to Thurstin
Archbishop of York to wage War with the Scots, he returned home that he might
tame the rest of the Rebels, which by force of Arms, by Promises, and by his
Benevolence, he at last reclaimed. Thurstin in the mean time, joining Battle,
subdued the Scots, and slew them with a great slaughter, for eleven thousand
Scots were slain in the fight, besides those that ran away and were killed in
the pursuit. The King being made more bold by this success, enters now with
Arms upon Scotland, and afflicted David with a sore loss, and compelled him to
beg for peace, which at last he yielded to; Stephen taking Henry the Son to
David for Hostage. Stephen returning laid siege to Ludlow, the receptacle for
the Conspirators, and with his own hand he freed Henry whom he had taken for a
pledge.

The most cruel tempest followed this fortune, for Maude requiring her Right,
arrived in England: Stephen hearing this, lays siege to Arundel Castle, where
by chance she harbored her self; but in this desperate siege, water being all
spent, Maude delivers up the Castle, having leave given her to retire toward
Bristol.

In the mean while he quickly removes to Lincoln, taken by Randulph, Son to
Robert Earl of Gloucester, and environs it with a siege: The Earls of Chester
and Gloucester, endeavoring to free the City, fight with Stephen hand to hand,
in which fight, Stephen is taken prisoner, after that he had given wonderful
arguments of his prowess; and he is brought before Maud, who sent him toward
Bristol to be imprisoned, and she in the mean while possesses the Kingdom,
entering London as Conqueror in Triumph.

But Maude or Mathilde, the wife of Stephen, hearing of the Kings misfortune,
humbly entreated Maud, that she being of a long time weary of the Government,
might have liberty to live with her Husband a private life. Also the Londoners,
they require their ancient Laws which they enjoyed under Edward the Confessor;
but Maud would grant neither. Maud not enduring the high stomach of Mathilde,
and detesting ignoble servitude, calls for Eustachius her Son, with a select
company of Soldiers out of Kent to London, who joining with the Londoners,
that were wonderfully offended that their suits were denied them, also
fortifying himself with the help of the Bishop of Winchester, they fall upon
the Army of Mathilde, which fled privately to Oxford, and asked not help in
vain of David King of Scotland, by whose assistance her Army being increased,
she besieged Winchester: But the Queen with her Son Eustachius, falling on
her fortress, overcame Mathilde in a pitched Battle, and took Robert Son to
Mathilde, but Mathilde her self escaped luckily. A Treaty for Peace followed
this fortune, whereby Robert on the one hand, Stephen on the other are set at
liberty; but there was no other condition agreed upon, wherefore the Trumpet
sounds again to War, and Stephen being now free, besieges Mathilde at Oxford,
but she despising danger, passed through his Army in the night. Yet she was so
frighted with the present danger, that she ever after forbear to make War
with him, leaving the charge of the whole business to her Son Henry.

In the mean while the City of Lincoln was valiantly defended against the King.
But at last the Earl willingly yielded to the King, desiring reconciliation;
yet Stephen entertained him not so courteously, but spoiled the miserable Earl
of all his Estate; by which perjury he did not a little alienate the minds of
his subjects.

Henry by the death of his Father Jeffrey, having got the Dukedom of Aniou and
of Aquitan, and with his Wife Eleonar the County of Poicteirs, by a fresh
attempt, but with a few Soldiers sails for England, hoping at last to regain
his Grandfathers Kingdom. He was no sooner landed, but his friends came
flocking to him every way, and being fortified with new helps, he lays siege
to Malmesbury, but the King coming upon him with more forces, overcame the
sewer forces of the Enemy.

Here is a thing to be rightly wondered at, amongst drawn swords Peace began to
show her self, Stephen procured rest by granting, which he could not obtain by
Victories; and Henry obtained that Kingdom peaceably, which he sought for by
War: For whilst here and there, with equal endeavors they wage War,
Eustachius suddenly died, and Stephen being deprived of an Heir to succeed him,
being overcome with mourning, he willingly entered conditions of Peace with
Henry and Mathilde, whereby he assigned his Enemy to be his Successor, and
adopted him for his Son, being he had none nearer of blood unto him; so
little faith or constancy is there in humane affairs, they that but now fought
with all their might, do now embrace one the other, and Stephen recovers his
lost Son, by adopting his Enemy. So Henry seeking so great a Kingdom by
War, found both the Kingdom and a Father in Peace.

The affairs of England were too troublesome for Stephen to exact Tribute from
his subjects, yet he abundantly recompensed this loss, by storing the Exchequer
with the goods of the Rebels. He made no Laws, when as by reason of a
continual War, he seemed more ready to receive than to give: Yet he had no
greater Victory than over the Clergy, whose obstinacy and pride he regulated,
and made them good subjects. He that had lived in War and contention, ought
not to die without trouble and neglect; for he had scarce made Peace with
Henry, but he was afresh seized on by his old disease of the Emrods and the
Cholick, having not been free from War one year, he died at Dover.

HENRY the second, King of England.
Anno 1155.
STephen being now dead, Henry Duke of Aniou succeeded him in the Throne, as he
and King Stephen had agreed. He behaved himself wisely when he began to Reign,
choosing the wisest men for his Counselors, expelling strangers that came in
hopes of rapine, especially those of Flanders, demolishing the Casties that the
Nobility had built, at the connivance of King Stephen, which they had often
abused to sedition. The Laws also that were faulty during the time of War, he
reduced to their former integrity, and he banished some of the Nobility for
perjury. The Demeans which were bestowed upon those that were unworthy of them,
by License from King Stephen, he took to himself, and so he spared his subjects
from Tributes, thinking it safer to offend a few than many. He had yet no
Competitors, and so was safer from Incursions and Rebellions. The Welsh made
some rude commotion, who were no sooner up, but he subdued them. He made
offensive War against Malcom King of Scots, and drove him out by force from
Northumberland, the City of Carlisle and New Castle, which King Stephen had
granted him.

He left him Huntington to do him homage for it, for David King of Scots sake,
who was dead. He took by force from his Brother Jeffrey, after his Fathers
death, the Dukedom of Anion which his Father had granted him upon entreaty,
having the Popes indulgence to break his Oath.

Then he attempts to take to himself, from Raymundus Earl of a place
consecrated to Saint Aegidius, the Dukedom of Toulouse, which of right belonged
unto him, and when Lewis the King of France would help Raymund, he wages War
with them both. Now the Armies were ready for battle, but at the mediation of
friends peace is at last concluded, and the County of Toulouse is granted to
Raymund for a time, a Marriage being made between Henry King of Englands Son,
and Margaret Daughter to King Lewis.

If he managed all things wisely hitherto, now he does order his matters as
foolishly, taking his Son Henry into the Government with him. For Lewis
scorning the pusillanimity of his Son in Law, that he would permit his Father
to be equal with him in the Kingdom, and would himself be a titular King only,
he easily inflamed his youthful mind that was ready to take fire with
unlawful desires. This envy had now broke forth into open hate, and the Son
began to cavil at all the Father either did or said. Nor was the Sons
ingratitude unknown to the Father; wherefore messengers being sent to Lewis, he
endeavored to oppress and extinguish those beginnings of discord. But Lewis
laughed at the words of the Ambassadors, asking scornfully why they called him
their Master, who had freely delivered up his right to his Son, and so
dismissed them without any other answer. To this there was joined the malice of
Queen Eleoner that she bare him, by reason that he loved whores, whereby she
instigated her other two Sons, Richard and Jeffrey, that they should assist the
Son against the Father.

They fled to Henry into Normandy, and conspire jointly against their Father.
Also William King of Scotland, Hugh Earl of Chester, Roger Mowbray, Hugh Bigot
and others fell from him, Henry with this augmentation grew more bold, and now
provides open War against his Father: Fortune was changeable in diverse
Battles, both courage and fraud being employed in the Wars. But Richard who
had fallen off from his Father, repenting of his error, came to him, and
craved pardon, which he easily obtained; at last some of the Rebels being
taken, and the Scotch vanquished, Peace is confirmed between the Father and the
Son, at the Mediation of Richard, Adela the Daughter of Lewis being married
to Richard. And so Henry returned into England with his Sons, where Henry his
eldest Son died, and his Relict is sent home again into France to her Father,
and afterward she was married to the King of Hungary.

But Richard taking it ill that his Marriage was so long deferred (for the
Father by his unlawful lust was supposed to keep Adela for himself,
continually putting off the Matrimony) fell again into the same Rebellion which
he had renounced by Oath. And being confederate with his Brother John, and with
Philip then King of France, he makes War with his Father, and at Ments he
besieged the old King, who slipped away in the night, and thought, though in
vain, to raise the siege, at last the Town is delivered into the enemies hands,
to his greater loss, because King Henry was born in that Town: Wherefore,
either by reason of his power broken, or by the loss of his native City, his
Majesty being eclipsed, he that had hitherto given Laws, was now forced to take
Laws from the enemy. And these are the Wars that he waged.

This King subdued Ireland without spilling blood, Pope Hadrian an English man
commanding it, and he built a magnificent Palace at Dublin for the use of his
Posterity.

He augmented his Treasure more by Confiscations and Parsimony, than by
Tributes and Imposts. Because he was too sparing toward his children, it is
supposed that gave them occasion to revolt, but he left an infinite Treasure
when he died, and recompensed abundantly the want they had sustained.

In the beginning of his Reign he cut off something from the severity of the
Laws, and he erected new Tribunals for the use of his subjects, and he first
commanded the Lions to be kept alive in the Tower of London, which custom is
continued to this day.

He brought the Clergy under the Magistrate, though Thomas Becket stood stiffly
against it, who for that was banished, and received into favor again by the
Intercession of the Pope and the King of France, but when he would not yield to
the Kings pleasure, he was miserably butcherd by four Soldiers of horse, but
after his death he was consecrated for a Saint. Henry also being wrapped up with
the love of luxury and of whores, had his Wife always his enemy, which he at
last imprisoned, because she had suborned her Sons to Rebel.

The French King sent him a Catalogue of all those Rebels that conspired his
death; and when first of all he saw the Name of his younger son John, he sunk
down half dead with grief, and the affliction increasing he died of it, being
above threescore years old, and had ruled the Kingdom of England thirty five
years.

RICHARD the first, King of England.
Anno 1189.
THis King was Crowned at Westminster, the 3d of September. Ano 1189. namely on
that day which was notable for an accidental slaughter of the Jews, whose
insolence he abundantly restrained by giving license to weed out that odious
kind of men. He was famous for benefits toward his Mother and Brother,
receiving her as it were into society of the Government with him, and
augmenting the other with six Counties at once. He sent Adela that was long
before betrothed to him, yet as his Fathers Concubine, back again into her
Country, but not without a reward of her Virginity, and in her place, that he
might not with an incestuous Wedlock defile his Fathers Bed, he took to Wife
Berengaria the Daughter of Garsias King of Navar.

Now at last he resolved to perform his expedition, long intended for the holy
Land: Collecting every way great Treasures, and selling Privileges, Demeans,
Immunities, and Cities, London it self being scarce left out of the sale. For
the time of his absence, he trusted the Kingdom of England to Hugh Baldulph
Bishop of Durrham, and to William Prunellus, and William Long Scampius
Chancellor of the Kingdom, dividing to each his part: He set Robert Earl of
Leicester, a man of Integrity, over Normandy and Aquitan. Yet to prevent the
Ambition of his Brother John, he was minded to send him away for Normandy, but
his Mother interceding for him, and becoming surety for his fidelity, he was
left in England. Lastly, appointing Arthur his Brother Jeffreys Son to be his
successor, in case he should die in this Expedition, he entered upon his Voyage.

Richard thus armed with five thousand Horse, and thirty thousand Foot, goes
forward on his Journey. He went by Land through France to Marseilles, with some
choice Soldiers to wait in that City for his Fleet, and to Embarque himself
there, but the wind being long troublesome it came too late; wherefore being
impatient of delays, he hired Ships, and takes his Passage for Messana,
whither Philip King of France was gone with his Navy before. At last also
arrived the English Fleet; They are received by Tancred King of Sicily, with a
great show of courtesy, but he by reason of some old quarrel was not friends
with Richard, and laid snares for Richard, and for all the English, and by a
confederacy of the Citizens, shut him and all the English Soldiers out of the
Town: Richard offended with this affront, drew up his Soldiers against the
City, and easily became Master of it, and had made a great slaughter on the
King and the Citizens, had he not pacified Richard by paying the Dowry which he
had unjustly detained from Joan, Richard his Sister, who was married to William
King of Sicily deceased, and had also espoused his Daughter to Arthur, Nephew
to Richard. Philip King of France first set sail, and came to Prole mais, which
City the Christians had a long time besieged, with those he adjoined himself
and his Forces. Richard after that wayed Anchor with a 190 Ships and 50
Galleys. But by a contrary wind he is driven into Cyprus, which Island, when
he was kept from landing by the Inhabitants, he invaded by force of Arms, and
became Master of it, and leaving Richard Canvil and Robert Turnham in it with a
sufficient Garrison, he also sailed toward Ptolemais; which City, after it had
been besieged two years, was delivered up to the Christians by Saladin.

Other Cities also he became Master of, all which he neglected, only Joppa he
made a Garrison of. In the mean while Guido Lusinianus invades Tire, and with
it he takes upon him the Title of King of Jerusalem, which he afterward
changed for the Kingdom of Cyprus. And hence it was that the Kings of England
for a long time, were called Kings of Jerusalem. But Philip envying this Glory
of Richard, and emulating him, because he could not equal his virtue, forsaking
the War, sailed back for France; leaving the business to Odo Duke of
Burgundy, to wage War with Saladine in his absence. Yet Richard would not let
him depart, till he had taken his Oath to attempt nothing against the Dominions
of Richard in his absence. But he was no sooner got home, but against right and
equity he invaded Normandy; with which injury Richard being offended, and much
weakened by the departure of Odo with his Forces, Richard resolves homewards,
making Peace with Saladine upon unjust Terms. His Navy sailing homewards, he
went by Land, through Dalmatia and Germany, at last he came to Vienna, where
being unknown he desired to be concealed; at last being discovered by Leopoldus
Archduke of Austria, who was angry with the English for the injury was done him
in the taking of Ptolemais, he was cast into Prison, and was sent to the
Emperor, who demanded him, and after a hard Captivity, he was forced to Redeem
his Liberty with a mighty Ransom, which injury afterward cost the Emperor his
Life, and Leopoldus, first the breaking, and lastly the losing his Leg. But he
after four years returned to his Kingdom.

He found his Kingdom full of troubles and contentions, for William
Longoscampius Bishop of Ely, who in the Kings absence managed, as it were, the
whole Government, being unaccustomed with so great an Office, (though he had
otherwise enough to do of his own business) grew insolent and over-proud: Hence
arose a Controversy between him and Duke John the Kings Brother; the King took
his Brothers part; whereupon he was put out of his Authority, the Archbishop of
Roan being put in his place. When therefore he could no louger make resistance
in the Kingdom, he bethought himself to make an escape beyond Sea, disguised in
woman's apparel, but being discovered, the Women did punish him sufficiently by
deriding him for counterfeiting his Sex, and so being much disgraced he fled
into Normandy to complain to King Richard; and when he had complained of the
injury done him, he sought in vain for his lost dignity.

Also Philip King of France invaded Normandy with an Army as he had promised.
He sought to draw John the Kings Brother to his side, but could not, his Mother
Eleoner dissuading him. But though he openly did nothing to his Brothers
prejudice, yet privately, a false rumor being spread of the Kings death
through England, he endeavors to wrest the Kingdom from him, whereby
afterward he lost all the favor he had with his Brother, together with his
Honor. The King after this goes against King Philip with a great Navy, and
first he freed the City Vernowle, and afterward Vandosme from his Leauger so
hastily, that the French man leaving for fear all his Baggage, ran away. At
last a Peace being made between both, they are forced to abstain from War,
though against their wills.

In the mean while his Kingdom was tossed with various commotions. First, by
Thieves, the chief whereof being killed, that faction was easily suppressed.
Secondly, by a greater commotion from the Jews, arising from one that had
forsworn the superstition of his Ancestors; for the rest of the Jews being
offended at it, who continued in their error, could hardly tolerate their
converted Brother, they meet him in the highway, and fine him sorely, whence
first grew a Faction, then a Tumult, and slaughter of the Jews every where. Nor
was this rage shut up in one Town, but passing the bounds, it went first to
Stamfort, then to Lincoln, then to York, where the Jews flying into a Castle,
killing first their Wives and Children most barbarously, and casting their dead
bodies out of the windows on the enemies heads; putting fire to Gunpowder,
they were almost all blown up, a cruel example of their stubbornness.

Lastly, It is a question whether the King were more angry with the commotion,
or with the punishment of Covetousness, whereby he found an end for all his
troubles. A certain Soldier who received wages from King Richard had found a
mighty Treasure, and fearing least the King should demand it, he went to
Lemosin, and hid it in the Town of Calacum, when the Towns men prolonged to let
the King come in, he laid siege to it, whereby receiving a wound in his Arm, he
died shortly after of it, having won the City, but not found the Treasure.

He was of a reasonable Stature, of a pleasant and graceful countenance, he
was commendable in manners, famous more for his Virtues than Vices, sparing of
Tribute, but very cunning to raise Money. He was the first that subjected the
City of London to Aldermen and Sheriffs, blotting out the Name of Potent Earls.

JOHN the first, King of England.

Anno 1201.

RIchard being dead, John invades the Kingdom by right of Anticipation,
shutting out his Cousin Arthur, to whom the succession was due by right of
Inheritance, and also by the prerogative of his age, for Arthur was not yet
over thirteen years old. Also trusting to his Bribes (for he had robbed those
Treasures his Brother had compiled) he entered the Government of his own accord,
(not caring any thing for the envy of his subjects) his friends in England not
a little helping him.

The first Tempest was depending from his Cousin Arthur, whose Kingdom he had
not only taken from him, but also had drawn the Dukedom of Normandy to himself,
leaving only the Dukedom of Anion to the child. Also his Mother Constance
finding her self too weak for the English, flies to the French King, and craves
aid of him, who promised not only to restore all Normandy, but all England also
to Arthur, and received the young man into his protection: Wherefore Philip
listing an Army, first made good the Duchy of Aniou to Arthur, and then he
invaded Normandy.

But John sailing into Normandy, upbraids Philip with his perfidiousness,
because he had foully broken the Peace he had made with his Brother Richard:
Yet they went not to Arms, for while they discourse and each defends his right,
they agreed on fifty days cessation of Arms, Baldwin Earl of Flanders being
against it, who therefore forsaking Philip, made his Peace with the English,
and takes Counsel by what means, when the Truce was ended they should wage
War with the French. But when John was free from the care of War, he
strikes hand with Philip upon unjust terms, and Baldwin hating his
sluggishness, joined with the French once more, and restored the War of
Jerusalem. The English man was glad, and returns for his Country, yet was very
ill received by the Nobility, which hated those base conditions. John now free
from War, turns all his care to Pole his subjects and to follow his
pleasures. Also he deprived his Brother Jeffrey Archbishop of York of all his
fortune, because he dehorted him from such injury. Then going into Normandy, he
Divorced his Wife Avis, and married Isabell, Daughter and Heir to the Earl of
Engolesme. She was Crowned at Canterbury. But the oppression and violence of
King John prevailed so far, also his base luxury, not without murder and
manslaughter (for he destroyed Matilda, a beautiful Maid) causing her to
drink poison, because she would not yield to his entreaty to be corrupted by
him, and William Brause with his Wife for speaking something freely, he killed
with famine, taking all their Estate from them. But when he asked Subsidy, all
the Nobility as one man, denied to follow him forth to Wars, unless he would
remove the heavy Imposts, and free them from those cursed injuries. Yet he went
afterward into Normandy, and then to Paris, with his Wife, where they are to
outward appearance friendly received by King Philip.

But Hugh Earl of Marsh, to whom Isabella the Kings Wife was first betrothed,
being angry with the King for taking his Wife from him, joined with Arthur, and
make a new War. Philip took their part, and so jointly those of Tours first,
then they of Aniou invade, and they take the Town Mirabellum, with Eleoner the
Grandmother to Arthur, who had fled thither for security, which was
notwithstanding received by Arthur with great piety and obedience.

John reproves King Philip for his falseness, and began to think seriously of
revenge, and coming suddenly and unlooked for upon the Forces of the Enemy,
destroyed them with a great slaughter, taking those Captive which could not run
away, amongst whom was Arthur, who shortly after died in prison of hunger, on
going to make an escape was drowned in the River, or as it is vulgarly thought,
he died of grief and sorrow. His Sister Eleoner died the same way shortly after.

All Commotions are not extinguished with Arthur, but War springing out from
War, now here, now there arise new causes of disagreement: For Constance
Mother to Arthur, complaining to Philip of her Son Arthurs death, she easily
instigated him to a just revenge, who was of his own accord the greatest enemy
to John. He presently sends his Heralds to John, and sets him a day of hearing
to appear before him, as one that ought him Homage: But John refusing, he
entered his Territories by Arms, and in short time he subdued all Normandy, as
it were in the face of John, who stayed sluggishly at Roan, and afterward
doing nothing, he returned into England, the Nobility gnashing their teeth at
it in vain. To this may be added the second and third loss, for Eleconer, the
Kings Mother died, who did the Kingdom as much good by her virtues, as the King
did mischief by his vices. Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury followed her, who
was another Ornament of the Kingdom.

And now John seemed to be in possibility to recover his loss, so his subjects
would bring Subsidies to help him to wage War, which they strove who should
do it most: So he marches toward Portsmouth, and suddenly set sail, not
waiting for the Noblemen that came after him; but he had no sooner left the
shore, but he presently returned, and upbraiding the Nobility (because they
followed him not) with sluggishness and disobedience, he fined them with a vast
sum of money, and so being the richer by his double Usury, neglecting the
War, he returned home.

Philip in the mean while, that he might expel all the English out of his
Kingdom, takes Chinon by force, and he had quickly put an end to the War,
unless Guido the Husband of Constance, falling off from Philip, had joined with
John, by whose help he levied a new Army, whereby he took Mountalbans, a Town
otherwise impregnable, with wonderful celerity, in fifteen days, and after
that storming Aniou he gave the Plunder to his Soldiers, rasing the Walls of
the Town, but he repented it afterward, and perchance because he was born in
that City, he built it again more firm and beautiful than it was. And now
Philip and John were in Arms, now on this side, now on that, the Army expected
the word to fall on, and nothing but blood and slaughter was to be expected,
but at the Intercession of friends, a Cessation was granted for two years.

John therefore returns for England, but upon his return he enters the borders
of the Scotch, and kills multitudes of them, and brought King Alexander to his
obedience, and those Irish that he found to have revolted, he sailed with his
Fleet thither, and easily brought them under; So he made the Rebel Welsh upon
his return, become Subjects, taking eight and twenty Noble-mens children for
pledges, which when the Welsh rose again, he commanded to kill them all. So
much prevails unadvised desire of wrong, though sometimes it may oppose good
examples to unsatisfied cruelty, and so John was more cruel and valiant against
none than toward his own Subjects. He returned afterward into France, that (as
we said) he might repair the walls of Aniou, when those of Poictou revolted to
him. But Lewis the son of Philip mustering an Army presently, not only
mastered and punished the Rebels, but also put all John's Army to flight, and
destroyed them, taking the chief Nobility, by which loss, he was brought to
desperation, yet making peace, he returned for England to vex his Subjects, and
to pour forth all his malice on the innocent.

In the mean time the Nobility of England, because they could obtain from the
King no release of their burdens, conspiring together, wage war against him.
The King when he was too weak, for them, attempted to proceed by subtilty, and
calling the Nobility together, granted them their requests. But afterward
being discharged by the Pope from his promises, he takes up arms against them,
and spoiling almost all England, he threw down the Castles and Forts of all the
Conspirators every where. There was a Bull sent from the Pope against all the
Nobility that disobeyed his Commands. The Nobility being too weak for the King
in Arms, they commit an unjust and heinous wickedness, calling in the son of
the French King to their assistance, and promising obedience to him, as to
their King: He stayed not, but sailed for England with a Navy of six hundred
ships. The conspired Nobility joined with him, and so joining their forces they
came for London, where Lewis with a fair speech wone the Citizens to his side.
Also the Scotch entered England with a mighty Army, destroying all things in the
way, whereby Lewis, as also by the other Forces being strengthened, overruns all
England with ease. John in the mean time, least he should seem to do nothing,
gathering together a great many vagabonds, spoils miserably the Lands of his
Subjects, at last in the passing of some Rivers, not a few of his followers
being drowned, and being overweakned for want of help, falling thereby into
grief of mind, and so into a Fever, he died within a few days.

Great controversies arose between the King and the Pope during his Reign in
Church Matters, about the choice of some Bishops: The Pope got the upper-hand,
and made the King do him homage, after that the business of the Church had
stood still six years, and three months.

He was immoderate in blasphemies and execrations; Also he is thought to have
sought aid from Mirammula King of Africa, whilst he was in his troubles,
promising to him the Kingdom of England, if he conquered, and to renounce the
Christian Faith. He was sad and dark of countenance, he was tall and fat,
sluggish and idle of Nature, he seldom conquered the enemy, but by force,
being inconstant, in adverse fortune he was easily dejected. He was false in
his promises, burdensome to his Subjects, troublesome to his neighbors, and
hated of all.

HENRY the third, King of England.
Anno 1517.
AFter John's decease his first born son Henry, not yet passed nine years old,
obtained the Kingdom, not without some controversy of the Nobles: Some of the
Nobility falling off to him, who a little before had made a defection, and
swear to King Lewis, yet Lewis with those that followed him from London, with
an Army of twenty thousand men, wone many Towns, till at last he came to the
Castle at Lincoln, which a certain noble woman did manly defend, and caused him
to stop, and an Army of the English coming on in the mean time, he was repulsed
and conquered. Many of the English Nobility being taken that stood with him,
besides the Count of Perch, who preferred an honorable death before a
dishonorable life, yet he did not despair, but sent for new forces out of
France, which were all almost destroyed in a fight at Sea. By these misfortunes
he was forced to take Conditions, whereby there were granted to King Lewis in
respect of his charge he had been at, a hundred and five thousand franks, he
renouncing all Right to the Kingdom of England, and promising faithfully to
prevail with his Father to restore all the Provinces in France that belonged to
the English. But the King restored to the Rebel Nobility all the Lands that
belonged unto them, and so Lewis leaving England set sail at Dover for France,
having waged war unhappily in another Land.

The union and rest of the Kingdom being thus established for a time, suddenly
there arose a new faction of the Conspirators. It was known to all what the
intention was, but what hopes they had was unknown to none, because it was
fortified but with small forces, and was unprosperously suppressed, those being
punished that refused to submit. At last all care is converted to the
recovering of those Provinces in France, that belonged to the English, large
Tributes and Imposts being granted to the King. For though the French had
promised restitution of them, yet he would not yield them up, but by force of
arms, yet it was deferred until the King being of riper years, should stand
upon his own Right, and should govern the whole matter himself. In the mean
while, those fields that were fenced in for Parks by his Ancestors, he laid
them open, and restored them for husbandry, and to the common good. But when he
was grown up, he recalled again those grants, and what he gratified the people
with in his minority, he revoked, turning those fields for his pleasure into
Parks again. And not content with this injury, he alienated the hearts of his
Subjects from him by many more unlawful acts. He abolished the old Seal, and
made a new one, and so extorted a great sum of money from his Subjects; Also
he greatly drained them under a pretense of a war with France, and managing
the matter slothfully, he returned without a victory, bringing with him out of
France many of Poictou, that what reward they had not desired in France, he
might pay them in England, whereby the best men were discharged of their
Offices, and these vagabonds and strangers were possessed of them. The King
being now of ripe years took to wife Eleonor the daughter of Raymound Earl of
Province, whereby there grew no profit to his affairs, but rather by reason of
a thredbare and beggarly Family, and her Kindred coming from all parts, as
Crows to the prey, he suffered great detriment, which yet were highly esteemed
by him, the people much murmuring at it.

But whilst the King thus goes about to overthrow his Subjects Rights, which
they labor to preserve, all the Nobility being offended at the promotion of
strangers, they enter into a conspiracy; The Ringleader whereof was Richard
Marshall, who durst freely tell the King of his injustice, and required
satisfaction. But the King to punish their arrogance, mustered a great Army of
strangers, and withal calls a Parliament, which is an Assembly of several
Orders. The Nobility refuse to be present, unless he would command the Bishop
of Winchester Peter de Rupibus of Poictou, and all his gang to forsake the
Court, threatening withal, that unless satisfaction were made unto them, they
would depose the King, and all strangers that were his Adherents, and would
choose another King, the King therefore commands all that were upon Knights
service, and the Nobility to be present to fight for him, which they all refuse
to do, whereupon he confiscated all their goods, and distributed them amongst
those of Poictou, and their persons to be banished, wheresoever they could be
found. By which threats they being frighted or corrupted by rewards, the chief
of them fall off, whereby the rest were weakened, and fly into Wales, to the
Prince of that Country Lionel, drawn to hold part with them, to whom Hugh
Burgies came, escaping out of a Castle where he was unjustly imprisoned. The
King follows those fugitives into Wales, but came back with disgrace doing
nothing. But Richard Marshall when he would not return into the Kings favor,
being drawn cunningly into Ireland, to look to his Estate, and there being
accused of Treason, was killed, though the King strove to remove the envy of
that deed from himself.

A Parliament being called, some men that had care of the Commonwealth, were
those that persuaded the King to leave off war, and to make Peace with his
Nobility, the King hearkened to their council, and recalling the Nobles out of
Wales, he treats with them, whereby they are restored to their former
dignities, and strangers that possessed their places, were removed from all
places, and a great penalty laid upon them, yet some of them (as Fortune is
inconstant) were readmitted into the Kings favor.

The King then feigning that all favor was for his own Subjects, extorted a
great Sum of money from them; which yet he distributed amongst the poor
kindred of the Queen, and her Father a poor Prince: And having promised before
to exclude all strangers from favor, (and always to take counsel of his
Subjects) he began now to esteem them more; with which indignity the Nobility
offended, enter upon a new conspiracy, to which, as the Leader and Chief,
Richard the Kings brother had given his Name, who being so bold as to tell the
King of his faults to his teeth, does forcibly dehort him from such fallacies.
The King was much incensed with this, and seeing the inclination of the
Londoners toward the Conspiratours, calling a Parliament, and publishing the
Conditions, he treats with them for Peace. But before it was come so far, the
Earl of Cornwall the Kings brother was drawn off to the contrary part, whereby
the Nobility urged their matters more faintly, and so the Treaty could come to
no conclusion. The King now free from all impediments, tyrannizeth more over
the Nobles, the chief of the Conspiratours were banished, or turned out of
their places. Nor did he less oppress the Clergy, putting strangers into
Church-Offices, at the Popes request, dispossessing the Nations, and laying
heavy Taxes upon them, so that all hated him.

Henry purposing to make a new expedition for France, asks Subsidies from his
Parliament, which being denied, he was forced to borrow otherwhere; Nor yet did
he spend it successefully, after a years delay, and having done nothing well,
concluding a disgraceful peace with the French.

But returning for England, he tyrannized over the Jews, and wrested a great
Sum of money from them, which he yet consumed with unseasonable gifts very
indiscreetly; And so his Exchequer being consumed, and Subsidies denied him
from the Parliament, gave him occasion of new oppressions, and so drawing the
means of the Church to himself, was a cause of great differences between him
and the Pope. But the King being inconstant laid down the Bucklers, and yielded
to the Pope, who recovering his goods in England, did again pole the poor
people of the Kingdom with continual sucking.

To this may be added, that there was a daily conflux out of France, and other
parts into England of this new Family, having some relation to the King, this
or that way, whose wants must be magnificently supplied to the great detriment
of the Commonwealth. The King grew still poorer by it, and so applied himself
to rapines and extortions, and sold such furniture as belonged to the Crown,
wresting all the moneys he could to pay those he stood indebted to.

Then when he could no longer do it by such inconvenient ways, he obtained a
small Sum of money from the Londoners, by threats and violence. And then
turning to the Nobility, he asked a Subsidy of them in vain, and he found his
Churchmen as backward, with whom he could do little or nothing.

Then enterprizing an Expedition to the holy Land to free the King of France,
he called an Assembly of his Bishops and Peers, from whom when he could not
obtain one mite of money, being like a mad man, he drove them all out of the
Chamber; The Bishop of Ely for that injury was excepted against by him. At last
some help was afforded him, whereupon he was forced to confirm solemnly Magna
Charta, but that money which he had appointed for the holy War was quickly
wasted, partly by gifts, partly by banqueting, and other frauds invented for
his own destruction. Also he had upon a vain hope redeemed the Kingdoms of
Sicily for his son Edmund, paying a great sum of money to the Pope.

In the interim, the Welsh vexed with great injuries, fall away from the
Prince, and to suppress these, and reduce them to obedience, he stood in need
of a new supply of money, which at last by neat devices and inventions he wrung
from them.

In the mean while Richard Earl of Cornwall the Kings brother, at the suit of
the Princes of Germany, is chosen King of the Romans, but shortly when he grew
insolent with importunate oppressions and revenges, he was put out of the
place, and returned for England a poor Emperor, who went out a rich Earl.

But Henry that he might make up that money which the Pope had wiped him of, by
a vain boast of the Kingdom of Sicily, he asks once more a Subsidy from his
Nobles, who refusing stiffly, and the King pressing for it, they fall to odds,
afterward calling a new Parliament, which the Lords had procured for the
safety of the Kingdom, he was compelled by Oath, and his Son also to confirm
it. At which time it was Enacted that the Kings Brother, with the men of
Poictiers that remained in England should presently depart the Kingdom. But a
contagious pestilence arising, either naturally, or by some venom these
strangers scattered when they departed. Many of the Nobility died, whereupon
many were put to death out of bare suspicion, some are cast into prison, and
some are banished. Nor did less evils for this afflict the English, for they
that had the charge of correcting the errors of others, did with all cruelty
weed up the miserable English, that now so many Lords as there were, so many
Tyrants there were, and the servants were grown like their Masters. And that
they might stir up the envy of the subjects against the King, they cast all
the fault upon him, which he endeavored to free himself from by his public
Writ, but all in vain, when he was compelled in a solemn Parliament to give
that power he had given to twenty four chosen men before, to the Earls
Montfort, and of Gloucester, and to Spencer, taking an Oath to confirm it unto
them.

In the mean while, Richard King of the Romans being landed in England, Henry
growing bolder by the return of his Brother, though he were poor, first demands
a discharge of his Oath from the Pope; then he opposed himself against the
insolency of the Nobility: He flies to help from the French King, who is chosen
Umpire between Henry and his Nobles, to end the controversy, but when he did
nothing they break forth on all sides into open War. The Count of Leicester
drives forth the Earl of Gloucester and storms his Castle, and laid a great fine
upon the Citizens. Then he took the Fort at Worcester, and afterward the Isle
of Ely, and the Castle of Windsor. But the King fearing least he should come so
far as London, thought it concerned him to make peace with him. They agreed
at last on these conditions, That all the Castles should be delivered up to the
Lords, and all strangers at a day appointed, should forthwith depart the
Kingdom, only those excepted who had a License given them to stay.

But the King calling a new Parliament, he drew some of the Nobility,
especially his own sons to his party, to whom John Comminus, Bailey, Robert
Bruise, and others from Scotland joined themselves: with these being not a
little confirmed, he denounces War against the Earls of Leicester and
Gloucester, who did not at all excuse themselves: who seeing the King daily
increase in Forces, levying a sudden but far less Army, oppose the King; and
here fraud supplied the parts of virtue, for setting their Banners behind
without Soldiers, they made a show of a greater Army than they had. And
fortune helped a good cause, for the Kings Forces being dispersed, the greatest
part of them was oppressed and slain, the rest saved themselves by flight: But
the King, the Prince and Earl of Cornwall, and his Son Henry, and all the
Scotch Nobility fell into the enemies hands.

There had been an end of the King and his fortune, least a contention arising
between the Earls of Leicester and Gloucester, had given cause to a hot contest,
and afterward to a sharp War, where Leicester being too weak, yet fell
valiantly with wonderful glory.

By the same fortune, Simon and Guide Montforts, the Sons of the Earl of
Leicester, were banished one into Italy, the other into France, where
afterward they gave their name to most illustrious families. Also their Mother
a gallant woman, being gone a little before into France, ended her life in a
Nunnery.

A new contention being risen amongst the Nobles, they sound the Trumpet to
Battle again; also the Welsh who had helped Earl Monifort, are remanded to be
slain. But peace being confirmed on all sides, this trouble abated without
blood.

Rest now obtained at home, Edward Prince of Wales, at the request of the
French King, goes forth toward the War in Palestina: but Richard once King of
the Romans died in the mean time, whom Henry himself followed shortly after,
whilst he studied to repair the losses he sustained by War.

EDWARD the first, King of England.
Anno 1272.
WHen Henry died, Edward stayed in Palestina, being intent about the holy
War, where he underwent a grievous danger, having received three wounds from
his adversary with a poisoned weapon. But he was cured by the wonderful piety
of his wife, who with her mouth in time sucked out the venom from the wounds.
In his way, being made more certain of his Fathers death, he came at last
over-land into his Country, and was inaugurated King.

At the beginning of his Reign he used the Nobility well; but he to abate the
insolence of the Clergy, commanded their wealth to be brought into his
Exchequer, and he afflicted them by other means, and so drew upon him their
envy. The Welsh, whose custom it was on all occasions to make new Commotions,
now afresh under their Leader Lionel, rise up against Edward, and rage with
wonderful pride, but this tempest soon vanished, for Eleoner the Daughter of
Simon Monifort espoused to Lionel, whilst she came out of France by Sea to her
Husband, was taken in the way, whom he was forced to redeem at a great ransom,
promising also to Edward continual Homage, and granting his Brother David to
the English, who was highly esteemed by Edward. But Lionels obedience lasted
not above three years, for his Wife Eleoner being dead, he breaks forth into
new rebellions. Also David forgetting the great love of King Edward to him,
fell off presently to his Brother, and so with joint Forces they enter England,
and did some mischief to Edward; both wonderfully inflamed by a false Prophecy
of Merlin, whereby the Crown of Brutus was promised to Lionel; But the Battle
being set, Lionel was killed by a private Soldier, and his Head was brought to
the King, who caused it to be fastened on a pole, and to be Crowned with joy,
and set up on the Tower of London. The lot of David was like to his Brothers,
who being taken in Wales, was drawn with a Horse to the place of execution, and
there beheaded, and his Head set by his Brothers, and his four quarters were
sent to the four principal Cities of England. So Edward revenged the Rebellion
of the Welsh, and the death of Alphonsus his first born, who was killed in the
same Battle.

But a greater cloud hung over his head from Scotland. For Alexander the third,
King of Scotland, whilst he rode the Great Horse, fell with him, and so died,
leaving his Daughter Margaret to inherit; but she, shortly after her Father,
died also, leaving the Kingdom to ten Corrivals who strove for it. Edward was
chosen Umpire by them all to search their Titles: but he reduced all their
pretenses to two especially, namely John Bailey and Robert Bruise, who with equal
right affected the Kingdom; whilst the matter sticks between them, Edward sets
on Bruise, promising to him the Kingdom of Scotland for ever, so he would do him
Homage for it: But Bruise refused it, preferring his Countries Liberty before
his own Honor; but Baily yielded to those conditions, and so gained the
Kingdom of Scotland, but the ill will of all his Country men. Envy against him
increased for refusing justice upon the death of the Earl of Fife, who was
slain, for Baily exempted Albermeth that slew him from punishment; whereupon
Baily was cited to appear before Edwards Tribunal, was forced to plead his
cause. He was angry for this disgrace, and returns to his Kingdom, and
afterward denied Homage to Edward, and proclaimed War, making a Covenant
with the French King. Hence arose the cause of a most bloody War between the
two Nations, which lasted for 300 years, only some feigned cessations passing
between.

Armies are Mustered on both sides, and the English giving the first onset on
the Scotch, slew abundance of them, and won many Cities and Castles; by which
loss Brusius was constrained to beg for Peace, which was granted, but he
himself was carried Captive into England, and being afterward set at liberty,
he ended his days in France, expecting in vain the restitution of his goods.
And so Edward returned for England, leaving after him John Varamius Earl of
Sussex his Ambassador, and Hugh Chrysingamius his Treasurer, to take care of
the Scotch business. But a little after this, the Scotch, when the King was
gone into France, making head against the Kings Ministers, having William Valla
for their Captain, they killed Hugh Chrysingamius, and with him 6000 English.
But the King came back for England, commanded that his Court should be held at
York; and presently levying an Army, he assaulted the Scotch afresh at Fonkirk,
and though he himself were dismounted from his Horse, that was frighted with
the hollow of the enemy, and was dangerously wounded, two ribs being broken in
his body, yet he made a great slaughter amongst them, 40000 Horse and Foot of
them being slain: Only Vallas with a small handful of men escaped by flight
from the fury of the enemy. All the Noble men's goods are made forfeit to the
English, and they were all made Tributaries, and to swear the third time to be
true to King Edward.

But the false Scot kept his word but a very short time, for Brusius the Son of
Robert being made King in a Turbulent manner, new commotions arise, for he
fearing the power of John Cuminus, caused him wickedly to be murdered in the
Temple of Dumfrise. When Edward heard this, he was wonderfully incensed:
Presently having raised a gallant Army he marches into Scotland, not meaning
to cease, till he had brought down the usurper of that Kingdom. The Earl of
Pembreke, who was marched before with his Brigade, lighting suddenly on Bruise,
destroyed all his men, from whose hands the King himself hardly escaped, he led
a dishonorable llfe in Caves, Dens, and Crags of Mountains, seeking his
fortune in other matters. His Brothers falling into the power of the enemy,
were put to extreme tortures as Traitors.

The King fierce with the madness of Revenge, spared no man's life, but slew all
he met withal. The Earl of Athol also, though he were of the Kings blood, was
sent to London and hanged there: so and by such like ways were the followers
of Bruise punished. Yet Bruise, though he wanted almost any to follow him, did
not give out, but collecting a handful of soldiers, he sets upon the Earl of
Pembroke suddenly, and put him to the worst with great loss and slaughter, and
he drove the Earl of Gloucester into the Castle of Ayrs, and besieged him there,
until Edward coming to his relief, he was forced to fly to his old sculking
holes.

In the mean time a new War breaks forth with the French King Philip the
Fair, by a controversy between the subjects of either King, and arising from
pretended injury; for Kings that envy one the other do easily break into open
hatred. The King of England also was justly angry, and sought all occasions of
wrong greedily, by reason that Henry his Cousin, Son to Richard the Emperor,
was killed by the Earl Montfrots Son, at which wickedness the French connived.
In a fight at Sea first a great destruction was brought upon the French at the
entrance of the River Sion and elsewhere. And Edward when a day was appointed
for him as a stipendiary to plead his cause before King Philip, he refused to
appear, and the Homage he did willingly before, he now refused to do: whereupon
a great Army being raised, Philip enters upon the Territories of Edward in
France by force of Arms. The King of England, by the assistance of neighbor
Princes, the Earl of Flanders, the Duke of Brabant, and others, to which was
joined ^he help that came from Adolphus of Nassaw the Roman Emperor, who had
promised it, presently marched against the King of France, but finding the
French divided into parts, and defrauded of the assistance promised them by the
Emperor, when he had held his Winter Quarters at Gaunt, not without murmuring
of the Citizens, and great want amongst his Soldiers; at the beginning of the
Spring, truce being made with the French for three years, the King took
Margaret the Dukes sister to Wife, (for Leoner died in the former expedition
against the Scot) and the Daughter of Philip being betrothed to King Edwards
Son, he retreated for England.

Lastly making his incursion into Scotland, when he held his Winter Quarters at
Carlisle, where being taken with a dysentery in the way, and the disease
increasing, he died at Burgh upon sands, when he had reigned thirty four years.

He was taller then all the rest, of a sorrowful countenance, for chastity
like to his Father, but in fortitude far before him; he was excellent for
Judgment and Continence.

EDWARD the second, King of England.
Anno 1308.
EDward surnamed Carnarvan, by succession came to the Throne when his Father
was dead. But he at the very beginning showed what his future Tyranny would be,
especially in turning upside down what his Father had left in command by his
Will; and calling Gavestone from banishment, a young man of a most base life,
who for his insolency was exiled by his Fathers order, and in his last words
forbad him not to recall him, who afterward gave cause of great dissentions;
for when the King bestowed, immoderate gifts upon him, he made the Nobility
envious against him, and himself poor. But his Father being yet not interred,
he endeavored to conclude the Matrimony with King Philip's Daughter, that was
contracted when King Edward lived, which is performed with great preparation of
the Nobles, and especially of Gavestone, four Kings being present, and three
Queens except the Bride. The Dowry was the Dukedom of Aquitan, which the French
King had possessed himself of. But he being returned into England, the Nobles
were offended by reason of the too great power of Gavestone, they deny the
solemnity of the Coronation, unless he would banish this insolent odious man
from his Court and Kingdom. The King seemed to hearken to it, and so is
inaugurated with his Queen in the Kingdom by the consent of all. But whenas he
should banish Gavestone, he highly promoted him, the Nobility not a little
murmuring at it.

In the mean while the chief power was in Gavestone, the Nobles had no
authority; and that he might precede the rest in glory, a Tilting was
appointed, where he obtained the greatest praise. His valor was worthy of
reward, but that the insolent man turned all to the contempt of the Nobility.
In the mean while a Parliament was called, wherein, amongst the rest, it was
Enacted, That the Decrees of Magna Charta should be observed; Strangers should
be put out of their Offices, and that all things should be done in a solemn
sitting of the Senate, nor should the King go out of the Land, the Parliament
being ignorant of it or against it, nor should make War against any, and that
Gavestone should be banished.

Whereupon he is sent away for Ireland, not as a banished man, but as President
of the Island, where also behaving himself well he had deserved commendation
and reward. But the King by preposterous counsel, a contract being made for
him with the sister of the Earl of Glocister, being impatient of his absence,
called him back from his banishment, and presently settled him in his former
grace and favor. But he to give the King thanks, by cunning flattery, sucked
the King of all he had, that he left him scarce sufficient for his necessity.
The Nobles in the mean while hating his insolency, threaten a general revolt
from the King, unless he would send away his proud subject. But Gaveston, when
he had wandered some time in France and Flanders, returns privately into
England, being generally hated, being the more confident by reason of the Kings
and his Father in Law the Earl of Glecesters favor. The King received him most
friendly, and that his arrival might be concealed from the Nobles, the King
takes a journey with him toward York. The Nobility that had knowledge of it
enter a Conspiracy, to which all subscribed but the Earl of Gloucester: And they
make Thomas Earl of Lancaster the head of the faction; and so they laid a
necessity on the King, either to deliver up Gaveston into the hands of the
Lords, or else to send him out of the Land. But Edward being blind with
foolish favor, would not hearken to the Lords, but shut him up in a strong
Castle, that so he might escape the envy of the Nobility. But they being sworn
together, besiege the place, and compel him to surrender miserably, and having
taken him they cut off his head. Three things were left in charge to Edward by
his dying Father, and were commanded in his Will, namely, That he should carry
his Fathers bones along with him, till he had conquered Scotland: That he
should expend 30000lb upon the holy War: And that he should not recall
Gaveston. He obeyed not the two later, for that money decreed for the Holy
War he bestowed on Gaveston when he was come back, for the third we shall see
what he did. The King of Scots Brusius, who had long since intelligence of King
Edwards slothfulness, would not pass over such an opportunity of well managing
his business, levying an Army, presently reduced all Scotland into his power.
And not therewith content, he enters the borders of England and destroys all by
fire and sword. Edward to repulse force by force, raised an Army of an hundred
thousand Soldiers, better fitted with furniture than valor, which was easily
vanquished by the Scotch, that were scarce 30000, joining craft and valor
together. The chief of the Nobility in this fight were either slain or taken
Captives. The Earl of Gloucester himself, when he had given sufficient tokens of
his fortitude, fighting valiantly in the head of the Army, was killed, the rest
saved themselves by flight. This made the hearts of the English to fail, and a
great part of the Nobles and Commons revolted to the Conquerours, by a fearful
example of perjury punished. Bruise following his Victories, enters upon Ireland
with an Army, a great part of it he over-runne, and depopulated it very far:
Also he was saluted King of the same Island, the inhabitants falling to him
abundantly. And he ruled three years, until the Primate of Armath, and
Berningam the chief Judge in Ireland, raising a great Army, set upon the
Conqueror, and take him with a great slaughter of his men, and cut off his
Head. The Scots almost mad with the death of their King, waste the Borders of
England so far as York with sword and fire. To moderate their Insolence, a
great Army was raised of the English, who marched toward York. But discord
growing between the Commanders, before they saw the Enemy, they either slipped
away, or returned home. Then Barwick by the Treason of Peter Spalding was
delivered up to the Enemies hands, which Edward presently laid siege to. But
the Earl of Lancaster falling away with his men, by reason of a quarrel, the
Scotch in the mean time making havoc of all, and conquering diverse Cities and
Castles, he was forward to retreat. To this it fell out that the Yorkshire men
raising a great power of the common people, and setting upon the Scots, were
unhappily beaten and killed by them. The King removing his siege from Barwick,
following the Scots that were laden with the prey and the spoil, but he was
frustrated of his end, they having marched another way. The next year entering
Scotland, because the Enemy had wasted all before his coming, by reason of
hunger and want, was compelled to return back again. But the Scotch following
him, and coming suddenly upon him, he suffered a great loss, and hardly
escaped himself, and so finding himself too weak for the Enemy, he begged a
Truce for two years. But he was vexed with far greater troubles than these at
home; For Gaveston being dead, the younger Spencer succeeded in the Kings Grace
and Favor, who after he had obtained the Government of the Commonwealth in as
high a manner as Gaveston had, he could not choose but fall under the same
malice of the Nobility. But the cover of this envy was too unjust that it could
be hid by a public contest, some other occasion must be sought for. They all
with one consent ask of the King, that he would keep entire the Conditions
formerly granted, threatening him with a revolt, and so they raise great Forces
for War, but the Prelates interposing, they made Peace on both parts.

But shortly after a Parliament being called, the King complains openly of the
wrong they had done him, and of Gavestons death; But the Nobility say they had
committed no sin in so doing, but growing remorse by the admonitions of the
Queen, and the Earl of Gloucester, they ask pardon of the King upon their knees;
They easily obtained it, which was granted to them under the Kings Broad-Seal.

Now all the dissension seemed to be laid asleep, but as fire raked up in
ashes, is kindled by any little wind, sometimes into a great flame, so there
needed but a small blast to produce the former troubles. The first occasion of
defection was given, because the wife of the Earl of Leicester, with which he
had a long time lived quietly, was taken from him with the Counties of Lincoln
and Salisbury, by Richard Sanmartin a very deformed man, who said he had
conjugal custom with her before, which thing she openly confessed when she was
demanded concerning it. Another occasion was given, when at Whitsontide a
certain woman riding ridiculously on horsback in fools habit, did go into the
Court and upbraid the King with his ingratitude toward his faithful Ministers.
A third, when a certain Knight that had a packet of the Kings was intercepted,
wherein was written a desire to the King of Scots to cut off the Earl of
Lancaster, whereupon not a few fell from the King to that Earl. A fourth, when
a certain mad man John Poudras counterfeiting himself to be King Edward, and
feared not to say, that Edward they mistook for their King was falsely supposed
to be so, which madness he paid dearly for by the torture he was put to. But
the greatest of all was, that a certain Baron, William Brevisius, who had spent
the greatest part of his Estate in riot and whoring, would needs sell the rest
by Port-sale, which Humphrey Bobun gaping after, asking leave of the King, did
transact with William. for them. Also both the Roger Mortimers being ignorant
of other Competitours, cheapned the Bargain, and Spencer had obtained immediate
leave from the King to buy them, and was preferred before any other. It is a
wonder what hatred he drew upon himself by this matter. Now all the Nobility
came together, and entered a conspiracy, crying out, that the Spencers both
Father and Son were Traitors, Corrupters of the King, and Plagues to the
Commonwealth, and at last they fell to their Arms. They come in haste to London
with their Army, and with leave granted, they enter the City, and make their
complaints to the King, which he yielded to by the Intercession of many.
Lastly, The Spencers were banished, but shortly after, when the Archbishop of
Canterbury contended in a Common Counsel of a London Senate, that that
banishment was unjust, the Spencers are called home again, the King being no
ways unwilling to it. This drove the Nobility on, but another mischief moved
the King. For the Queen taking her Progress toward Canterbury, whenas she
would have diverted toward the Lord of Baldesmire, she was dishonourably shut
out, and was forced to turn away to some other place. Of which matter she
complained to the King, and it made him extreme angry, who now does think of
nothing but revenge for that injury, collecting suddenly a Band of Soldiers,
he assaulted that Castle, which when he had overcome, the Governor of it
Thomas Culpeper, was hanged, and Baldesmire with his wife and children was cast
into Prison, and all his goods Confiscate. And the Kings Blood being now hot,
he proceeded farther, and resolved to make War upon the Nobles, but they
finding that his Army increased, part returned to their Obedience, and part
fell to their Arms; But their Army being either slipped away or vanquished, some
were killed in the fight, the rest were taken, amongst whom was the Earl of
Lancaster, who was beheaded before his own Castle, the rest were either hanged
or beheaded, that England was never more sorrowfully wet with Noble Blood.

Now the last and worst mischief of all hanged over his head, for the King of
France for the Possessions that Edward had in France, required Homage from him
for them, but Edward refusing, he entered his Provinces with an Army. At length
Queen Isabella, Edwards wife was sent to entreat him not to waste his Country:
she went willingly, partly to perform the Kings Commands, partly to complain
to her Brother. For Edward by the Instigation of Spencer was no little
estranged from her, and had offended her with great contempt. Roger Mortimer
went with her, with whom the Queen held unlawful Familiarity, which when the
King understood, he sent to the French King some that should desire him to send
home the Queen with the Prince her Son. But she not returning is banished out
of all the Kings Dominions and Garrisons made to drive her off, if she came
against the Kings Will. But she flying to the Earl of Hannonia, Matrimony being
contracted between Prince Edward, and the Earls Son, she procured a good Army
from him, John the Earls Brother being General; Setting sail they land about
Harwich, to whom immediately Henry Earl of Lancaster, and other Nobles joined
themselves. The King receiving news of it, was wonderfully frighted, he left
London without stay, the City being addicted to the Queen, and purposing to
fly into Lundy Island, by a Tempest he was driven into Wales. In the mean
while the Londoners, that they might show their loves to the Queen, cut off the
Heads of Gualter Stapleton Treasurer of England most cruelly, because he was
addicted to the King, and some others also. Nor did the Queen do less at
Bristol, killing Hugh Father to Spencer, who was ninety years old, causing him
to be dragged to Execution, pulling his heart out alive. Then she sent part of
her Army to find out the King, Henry Earl of Lancaster being the chief, and
Rice Paulinus a Welshman, who because he knew every passage of the Country
exactly, he lead the Earl to the Monastery of Neth, where the King hid himself,
where presently both he, with Spencer, Robert Baldoch, and Simon Redyng, is
delivered into the hands of his Enemies, and is left to the Custody of the Earl
of Leicester, who entertained him with all respect, as it was fit a captive
King should be. But Edmund Earl of Arundel, John Daniel and Thomas Micheldem,
are beheaded at the request of Mortimer. But Spencer who was now Earl of
Gloucester, is now with Simon Redyng drawn to Execution, and being first hanged,
they were afterward beheaded and quartered, and their Heads set up on London
Bridge, the quarters were sent to the chief Cities, but Baldoch was famished to
death in prison. Then a Parliament is called, wherein they consulted to depose
the King, and to Crown the Prince his Son Edward. But he being far more
Religious than his Mother, would not accept the Crown, unless his Father would
resign it willingly. Some are sent to persuade this miserable King, and the
unhappy man did yield easily to it. A day is set for the delivering up his
Title, and Edward clothed in black, comes into the Chamber, where they were
gathered together that should receive his Abdication, but he scarce saw the
provision made for his renunciation, but he sunk down half dead in a swound,
and with much ado being refreshed by the Earl of Leicester, and the Bishop of
Winchester, he came to himself. But when he heard the cause of the Assembly, he
answered, That as it was displeasing to him that his Subjects were so much
offended at him, so he was well pleased that they had made his Son Edward King
in his stead; and so the Solemnities being rightly performed, the business was
at last accomplished. Then an allowance being granted to Edward, he remained in
the Custody of the Earl of Leicester, and was well used. Also so great a
stipend was granted to the Queen Mother, that there was scarce any thing left
for the King and Queen. Nor was the furious woman yet pleased, but went about
to infringe the Liberty her Husband enjoyed with the Earl of Leicester, and by
the counsel of Adam Torleton Bishop of Hereford, power is granted to two
Knights Thomas Gorney and John Matrevers to carry the King to some other place.
They hewed him filthily, cutting his hair most ridiculously, and his heard
also, that he might not be known, at last they brought him to Barclay-Castle.

After he had lost his Kingdom, they consult concerning his Life. First, They
thought by unwholesome food to destroy him, then by filthy stinks of carcases,
and lastly by poison, but neither prevailed. Then the Letters of the Bishop of
Hereford the most wicked Counselor, were sent to his Keepers, by which he
checks them heavily for dealing so well with him that was not fit to be so
kindly used, adding in the end, Do not fear to kill Edward, it is good; which
was interpreted by them, as they pleased, who thereupon fell upon the miserable
King in his Bed, and strive with the Blankets to strangle him. Nor were they
content with this, but they thrust a hot Iron into his Fundament, and so burned
his Bowels (a most hideous Example of Cruelty) and destroyed him in a doleful
manner. But these Parricides when they looked for a Reward for their Villainy,
they received a just Reward of it; For being called in question for their
Lives, they were banished. Afterward Gorney lost his Head, Matrevers after a
long banishment at last died miserably.

This King was of an excellent Stature of Body, wonderful strong, but too much
given to drunkenness, and so not secret of his Counsels, he was immoderate
toward those he loved; For Love, if it be with Moderation is a most noble
affection of the soul, and if that be wanting, it is the worst passion of all
the rest. He was more unhappy than unfortunate. He exceeded all in Chastity,
for he left no Bastards behind him; In Moderation, for he used no unjust ways
to pole his Subjects of their Moneys. As his Subjects hated him in his life
time, so his memory was dear unto them after his Death.

EDWARD the third, King of England and France.
Anno 1328.
HIs Father being deposed, Edward was saluted King, surnamed Windsor, not yet
having passed his fifteenth year, and therefore he had Governors that should
Rule the Kingdom in his Name. But the chief Power remained in the Queen and
Mortimer, either the Nobility winking at it, or allowing it. The first care was
to fall upon the Scotch, for Robert Bruise despising the young King, entered the
Borders of England with his Army, whereupon an Army is raised, joining those of
the hanse Towns, which the Queen brought with her. But when diverse people
hardly could be held together in respect of the diversity of their Manners,
there grew in a short time a great discord between both Nations; so nothing
succeeding well, they came back again, and afterward the English consented to
base Conditions of Peace, A Marriage being contracted between David Prince of
Scotland, and Joan Sister to Edward. Also Edward Married his Wife that was
promised him, Philippa the Earl of Hannonia's Daughter, being yet in their
Nonage. Then the Soldiers of Hannonia, who caused the Discord, are sent home.
And Edmund Earl of Kent accused of Treason, because he had endeavored to
restore the Kingdom to his Brother Edward, was condemned, and lost his Head.
But the great Revenues of the Queen, which she had drawn to her self by a Grant
of Parliament were restrained to a thousand per annum, and she was imprisoned
in a Castle, and Mortimer being convicted of Adultery with her, and being taken
in the act, was presently hanged: In the mean while Philip the Fair King of
France died, and the Kingdom was devolved to his Sons, Henry, Lewis, and
Charles the Fair, who all reigned in their turns, but Charles dying without an
Heir-male, lawful Succession failed in him. Edward who was of kin by the
Sister of Charles, who was the Daughter to Philip the Fair, supposing that the
Kingdom fell by descent to him, found Philip Valesius, Brother to Philip the
Fair to be his enemy, for women by the common rule of France are excluded by
the Salique Law. Wherefore Philip was preferred before Edward, and the King of
England was forced to do him Homage for the Lands he possessed in France. But
these things gave cause afterward for a grievous War and a sharp Contention.

In the mean time Edward Baily Son to John, affecting the Kingdom of Scotland,
descending from his Ancestors, Robert Bruise being now dead, made War upon the
Scots, and by a successful fight, (or else helped by the Forces of Edward)
brought almost the whole Nation under him (whilst David a young King trifled
the time away in France) and so doing Homage to the King of England, he held it
as from him in Chief.

In the said time the Isle of Man is Conquered by William Montacute Earl of
Salisbury, who therefore was honored with the Title of King of Man.

Edward now come to age, by the Instigation of Robert Atrebas, who was fled out
of France into England, intends a War with France, making a Confederacy with
the Dukes and Earls of Gelderland, Gulic, Cleave, and the Hanse Towns, and of
Brabant. The French also foreseeing this Tempest, made friendship with the
Bishop of Liege, John King of Bobemia, the Earl of Lutzenburg, the Palatine
Albertus, Otho of the House of Austrich, and Amesius Earl of Genoa.

Wherefore Edward sailed into Flanders, bearing the Title of the King of
France, (those of Flanders being the cause of it) and then he entered the
Borders of France. Philip also invaded Aquitan, and though the Armies of both
Kings were in sight one of the other, and ready to fall on, yet they both
departed without fighting. Edward in the mean while to see to his business at
home, returned for England, leaving William Montacute, and the Earl of Suffolk
to take care of the War, both of them behaved themselves valiantly, yet were
taken and brought to Paris.

But Edward supposing it was in vain to stay at the report of this news,
provided for his return for France, and finding a strong Navy of King Philips
in the Haven of Sluse, he collecting a great Fleet set upon the French, and
utterly destroyed their Navy, killing then 30000 French with those that were
drowned and came to their ends other ways.

Then he laid siege to Tourney, which Town was so well defended by the Duke of
Burgundy, and the Earl of Armeniac, that his whole Army being dispersed, he
lost about 4000 men; Edward was much enraged with this loss, and challenged
Philip to fight a Duel with him, but the business came not so far, because it
was taken up.

Yet the befieging of Turney was no whit neglected, and Philip did what he
could to free the City, but Robert King of Sicily interceding, and especially
Joan Valois, Philips sister, there is a cessation made for two years.

In the interim the Scots that were enemies to Bayly's Government, calling
their King David out of France, they make War upon Edward, and invading
Northumberland with a strong Army, they miserably destroy all by fire and
sword, sparing no sex nor condition. But at the sudden approach of William
Montaente, they are afflicted with some loss, and being frighted at the coming
of Edward, sounding a retreat, they returned for Scotland, but Edward following
their Armies overtook them, and wearying them with some light skirmishes, he
forced them to a cessation for two years.

John Earl Montfort, whilst he strives to make good his Title to Britany, is
taken by King Philip; but his Wife seeking help from King Edward, easily
procured it, ( Mary the Kings Daughter being espoused to the Earls Son) the
care of that expedition was first committed to Gualter Mani a valiant
Gentleman, and then to Robert Atrebas. In the mean time Baily being driven out
of his Kingdom of Scotland, and by Edward made Governor of Barwick, tells
Edward that the Scots had not kept their Covenants; whereupon Edward moves
suddenly with an Army against the Scots, but there was nothing done but the
cessation of Arms renewed.

In the interim, Robert Atrebas, with Gualter Mani, and some other Nobles,
after a great tempest, and Sea Fight, arrived at a Town of Britain (which is
commonly called Vannes) and going on Land, set on the City that was a Garrison
in a Hostile manner, and suddenly became Masters of it; but by the desperate
violence of some of the Nobility, the French wan it again, and wounded Robert,
whereof he died shortly after in England. But Edward himself moving into
Britany, laid a new siege to the Vannes; and John Duke of Normandy coming
suddenly, they both make themselves ready for Battle, but by the intercession
of Pope Clement the sixth, Truce was made for some few months, yet it lasted
not, who was the cause of it is uncertain; they again prepare for their Arms,
by which means Henry of Lancaster subdued many Towns in Guyan, and in other
Provinces, and then he removed to Bordeaux for his Winter Quarters.

Philip that he might not lose his Country by sloth, levying a great Army,
regained Miremontium a Franc Town, and Engolesm. But when Lancaster was too
weak for the great Army of Philip, Edward came to his assistance with more
Forces, bringing with him his Son Prince of Wales, that was yet in his Nonage
(for he was scarce 15 years old) that he might be trained up in the Wars, who
presently took many Towns, and then he marched toward Picardy and Pontium, and
he either vanquished or destroyed all places in the way. Then he passed over
Somes, a wonderful example of his Valor, the enemy looking on, and he
discomfited Gondemar more by fear than force.

In the mean time Philip stayed with his Army at the Temple of St Germans, and
being enraged with so great a loss of his men, sets Edward a day to sight with
him in Battle; he had pitched his Camp at Cressen, expecting with his Ensigns
Philip his enemy: The Armies both meet, and the Trumpets sound to Battle,
wherein appeared the wonderful courage of Edwards both Father and Son, that
day the English got the Victory, and the French were routed and ruined, the
King hardly escaped himself, and there were found slain about 30000 men, the
chief whereof were John King of Bohemia, Charles Alencon, and other chief
Nobles 1500. Another loss fell after this Victory, upon the Archbishop of Roan,
who lost about 7000 Soldiers.

Nor was this the end of their Victories, for it went successively in England
against the Scots in the Kings absence, their King David with the greatest
Noble men were taken prisoners, and 15000 Soldiers were slain in the fight,
and the rest were dispersed.

Nor did the General Thomas Dagovort fight with less good fortune in Britanie,
for the Countess of Montfort, the principal of the French Nobility being taken
and killed.

Edward being more high by so many and great Victories, neglecting Amiens and
the Town of Abbas, he laid siege to Calais, that was of great moment, and most
convenient for the English affairs, whilst Lancaster overran all Guyan,
vanquished those of Xanton and Poictiers, and being loaded with the spoil, he
returned to Bordeaux. In the mean while Philip going about to relieve those of
Calais, drew near with his Forces, and when he had in vain provoked Edward to
Battle, having done nothing, he returns toward Paris: So they of Calais being
out of hopes of relief, began to treat for Conditions, and it was agreed upon
on both sides, that six of the principal Citizens, should come with nothing on
but their shirts, with Halters about their necks, and submit themselves to King
Edward, all the rest to have free pardon. These, though they did most humbly
upon their knees crave for pardon, yet were condemned to be hanged, but at the
Queens request they were set at liberty, and sent away with money to defray
their charges as they went.

The King and Queen enter the City in Triumph, they command the old inhabitants
to leave the City, and kept the place stocked with English families.

The French strive to regain by craft what they had lost by Valor, for Godfry
Charnus the Governor of St Odomar, had corrupted with money Almeric Papiensis,
which Edward had made Captain of Calais, to deliver up the City, but the matter
being disclosed, Almeric is called for into England, who coming, and confessing
his fault, at last he obtained pardon, but upon that condition that he should
deceive the French of their expectation, and deliver them up to the hands of
the English. At the time appointed came Charnus, and brought the Gold with him
he had promised, but he was circumvented by Edwards Forces; yet he stoutly
defended himself, and made work enough for Edward and his Son both, that were
present until all were slain that he brought with him, and he (with a Cavalier
of Ribomantium, who had twice dismounted Edward, but at last was vanquished by
him) was taken prisoner.

But the business succeeded more happily, for the English got the Castle of
Gnyan by bribing the Governor, and so played the French the same trick.

Philip the French King now died, leaving his Son John Heir of the Kingdom,
also Humbert Prince of Dauphine died, who left the same successor, and from
that time the first born of the French King is called the Dolphine.

But when the Treaties of Peace began, succeeded not, Edward Prince of Wales is
sent again into France, who overrunning Aquitan, Septimania, Tolonse, Narbon,
Bourges; heavy with the spoil came back to Bourdeaux. Edward no less on the
other part vexed France with new Forces, also he set Lancaster to assist the
King of Navarre, who also Conquered many Castles and Cities, wherefore the
French man raising what force he could, first lays hold on Normandy, and
recovered many Towns there, and had won all the Province, unless he had been
diverted by the insolency of Edward Prince of Wales, who came against him, but
when Edward was too weak for the French Army, he soon retreated to Bourdeaux.
The French followed him, and forced him to fight, not willing to forbear the
hopes he had of the Victory, although Legates came from the Pope, and
submissively desired peace. But the Prince of Wales scorning the base
conditions sent him by the French (namely, That he should yield himself and his
Army to the mercy of the French) made himself ready to fight, and making choice
of some places that were Vineyards, and overgrown with briars, that he might
avoid the violence of the Horse, there he planted his Bow-men, who easily
troubled the Horsemen that came improvidently to offend them, and so began the
Battle, and following their success, they dispersed and routed all the French
Army presently; King John himself, with his younger Son Philip, and an
innumerable Nobility of France were taken prisoners; seven thousand were slain,
amongst whom were many chief Noble men. The rest with three Sons of the King
escaped by flight. The King of France though he were captivated, was used with
all respect by Prince Edward, and when he had wintred with him at Bourdeaux, at
the beginning of the spring he is brought into England, and is entertained
richly by King Edward; who being content with one Captive King, he released
David King of Scotland, at the request of Queen Joan, sister to Edward, when he
had lived in England eleven years, first paying his Ransom that he had
promised. But by the intercession of some Cardinals, there was a Treaty of
Peace between both Kings. And John being now weary of his stay in England,
easily yielded to those conditions which Edward propounded. But his eldest
Son the Dolphin Prince, and the Counsel of France, were not content with
them, saying they were heavy and unjust. Whereupon Edward impatient of delays,
attempts to make good by Arms, that he could not obtain in Peace. He leaving
the charge of the Kingdom to his younger Son Thomas, with 1100 Ships, and the
Flowr of the Nobility of England, sails to Calais, where he divided his Army
into three parts: The first Body he trusted with the Prince of Wales, the
second to Lancaster, the third he kept for himself. Then overrunning Picardy,
he wan many Towns, till he sat down with his Army before the Walls of Paris,
waiting in vain for the coming of the Dolphin, wherefore he retreated toward
Lions. But in the way he was overtaken with so great a tempest, in the year
1360, that being mightily frighted, he made a vow to make peace with the
French, and not long after it was confirmed at Lions: In which conditions the
French King was also included with his Son, and is released from his
Captivity, and great part of France, with a vast sum of Money is granted to
Edward, but the French King the next year, (the cause why is not certain) came
for England, and after he had languished long, he died there.

Edward about this time instituted the Order of Knights of the Garter, with
great solemnity.

The fame of the Prince of Wales was now spread through the world, wherefore if
any were oppressed with injury, or wronged by their enemies, they fled to him
for to be their Protector, and to revenge their wrongs: Amongst the rest, Peter
King of Castile was restored again to his Kingdom, who returned him very small
thanks for his labor, for Peter refused to pay the Soldiers their wages they
deserved. The Prince got nothing by it, but grief of mind and body, (if you
set aside the fame and glory he acquired of his great virtue.) The Soldiers in
the interim, being enraged for lack of their Pay, that they might not want
necessary provision, overrun all the Territories round about, and commit
rapine in all places where they came; whereupon the inhabitants complain to the
King of France, therefore the French King sets the Prince a day to give an
account of this insolence: He denied to come unless he came armed with 60000
Soldiers; so this controversy brake forth into open War, and they on both
sides take by force many Towns, and abundance of men are slain, the English for
the most part having the best of it, conquering the Towns of Bordeaux and
Belloperch, where they took the Mother of the Duke of Borbon, and the Queen of
France.

About this time Philippa Queen of England died, yet her death put no stop to
the English proceedings in France.

For the Earl of Pembroke falling upon the people of Aniou, wan many Towns, and
when he endeavored to take and spoil the French Navy, by the industry of the
Earl of Sant-Paul, he was frustrated, and so he returned for Callis, plundering
all in the way. In the mean time the men of Angiers and Bourges wasted the
borders of the Prince of Wales, which when he endeavored to oppose, receiving
news of Lemoges taken, making have thither, he wan it again, killing all every
where, but observing the Valor of three Centurions, who by their Gallantry
checked his Conquering sword, for their sakes he spared the City, and the Lives
of all the inhabitants that were left. David King of Scots died in the mean
time, leaving no heir, besides his Cousin Robert Stuart, who succeeded him, and
was Crowned at Scone. Robert Canolns was now sent into France with a great
Army, behaved himself more boldly than fortunately, for he was circumvented by
Bertrand Gesquinus, and lost the greatest part of his men.

Edward Prince of Wales, the most famous for his Valor and Chivalry, died at
Bordeaux about this time, and Gualter Mani a valiant Captain, died at London.
Also the Earl of Pembroke who had married his Daughter, being now Governor of
Guyan, when he was going to his charge of Government, was taken by the
Spaniards and carried into Spain. All those possessions which the Prince of
Wales had won followed, and were recovered again by Charles the fifth, King of
France, so that the chance of War now began manifestly to alter. Edward
indeed went thither with mighty forces, but by a contrary Tempest he lost his
labor, and Lancaster was careful of his business but did nothing prevail.

Edward when he had lost, (together with his hopes he conceived of his Son
Edward,) all the fruits almost of his travel in France, fell into so great
grief of mind and body, that he died about ten months after the Prince of
Wales, when he had reigned fifty years. He was the most valiant of all the
Kings, a comely person, excellent for the gifts of his body and mind, living
as one may say after his death, having had a Wife and a Son that were
incomparable.

RICHARD the second, King of England and France.
Anno 1378.
RIchard surnamed of Bordeaux, the Son of Edward the Black Prince of Wales,
appointed to succeed by Edward his Grandfather, came to the Crown after his
death, not yet being past eleven years of age. Wherefore he had Governors
assigned to him, John Duke of Lancaster, and Edmund Earl of Cambridge, his
Uncles by his Fathers side. The Scotch and French taking occasion to win from
him by reason of his Nonage, provide Armies for invasion. The French Conquer
the City Rye, and being encouraged by their success they fall upon the Isle of
Wight, and spoil all with fire and sword, wresting from the Inhabitants great
sums of Money, and so spoiling all the Frontiers of England, they are
enriched with a vast prey. The Scotch take the Castle of Barwick, but by the
Valor of the people of Northumberland and Nottingham the Fort is recovered,
and all the Scots killed. Also Hugh Calverley Governor of Callis burned 26
Ships of France in the Harbor of Bononia, casting fire amongst them. So John
Philpot Citizen of London, preparing a Fleet at his own charge, took all the
Ships of Mercerus a notable Rover, who played the Pirate on the borders of
England, and robbed all the English Merchants Ships. When he returned, in stead
of a reward, he is accused of high Treason, because he had fitted his Navy
without the Kings knowledge, he defended his cause so well, that he not only
excused what he did, but is famous for it unto this day. The King said, That
public actions may be privately traduced, yet they may not be publicly
examined, since Authority would in such a case commit a fault, and in place of
an error raise a tumult, and since the loss is general and common, every one
affords weapons for revenge, and though it were against reason to exceed the
Commission, yet it cannot be held a criminal matter, to engage for it with
hazard of ones life. With good and bad fortune they labored much on both
sides. The Scotch waste with fire Rupisburg, but the Earl of Northumberland
entering Scotland, spoiled the Territories of Merchia with sword and flame
likewise. The Northern English attempting to invade Scotland also are unhappily
slain. And afterward the Duke of Lancaster, with Buckingham, Warwick, Stafford
and others, the chief of the Nobility, arrive in Britain with a great Fleet,
thinking to lay siege to St Malos, but finding the Garrison too strong, they
return home again. The Scotch in the mean while setting scaling ladders to the
Castle of Barwick, overcame it in the night, and killed Robert Baynton
Governor of it. But the Earl of Northumberland coming suddenly with an Army,
regained the Castle after he had beleaguerd it two days. William Montacute the
Kings Ambassador at Callis, was successful in his business both by Sea and
Land. But John Clark was as unfortunate, though he behaved himself valiantly,
being conquered and taken by the enemy, both he and his Ships. And so here and
elsewhere they strove with doubtful fortune.

In the mean while Thomas Cartonius is accused for Treason by John Ansler, that
he had for money given up to the French the Castle of St Savior. Cartonius
denying the fact, is challenged by Ansler to fight a Duel with him, wherein
Carton, though he were far stronger in Limbs and force than Ansler, is killed
by him; At the beginning of the fourth year of King Richard's Reign, the Earl
of Buckingham was sent with others, and a small Army into France, to assist the
Duke of Britain, but the French King dying about that time, Peace was
confirmed between the new King and the Duke. But the Spanish and the French
Galleys did wonderfully spoil the Sea-Towns of England at that time, and many
Towns were either plundered or consumed by fire, so laden with the prey they
returned home.

The Kentish men by reason of the deadly burden of Tributes, grew mad, and are
enraged with an implacable hatred against the Nobility, taking all occasions
they could find, for the basest dregs of men commonly being incapable of
honor themselves, which they cannot sustain, are envious against those that
are. They report that Wat Tyler was the Author of it, who killed the Collector
of Tribute that behaved himself arrogantly with his own staff, that he took
from him. To whom other seditious fellows, and whole Provinces joined
themselves. This tumultuary Faction increased mightily, came to London with his
Army, and kills first of all Richard Lion a London Doctor with an Ax. And
putting his Head on the top of his Spear carries it for a Trophie of his
valor. Then all of them the next day run to Lancaster-Hall, and set it on
fire, they take away the rich Hangings, and throw them into the Thames,
carefully looking to it that no man should keep any thing for himself, and when
one covetous fellow had hid a silver Cup in his bosom, they take the man and
threw him into the fire alive, with the Cup. Part of them got into the
Wine-cellar, who being half oppressed with the House falling down, lived seven
days after the great downfall, imploring no succor to help them. After this
manner, plundering up and down, they run madding to every place; At last they
hasten to the Kings Court, and to the Tower of London, and they quickly
overcome the Tower, the King not daring to make opposition against them, where
the Queen Mother, suffering an affront by a certain insolent fellow that
offered her a bone, fell down half dead, Simon Bishop of Canterbury, being
haled out of the Tower, had his Head cut off at Tower Hill by them, Robert
Hallius endured the same death, and so did many others; They neither regarded
Churches nor public places, they destroy all in their fury like mad men. The
King thinking what remedy he should use to suppress these tumults, granting a
Pardon for what they had done, endeavors to pacific the Rabble. The
Inhabitants of the County of Essex are obedient, and return home. But the
Kentish men persist in their stubbornness, Tyler being their Leader: To whom,
in the Kings Name John Newton was sent, that he might by entreaty reduce these
insolent people to their Duty, or else should enquire what they would have; He
coming riding on Horsback, was commanded by Tylor to alight, and to deliver his
Message on foot (so much Authority did he arrogate to himself in this fury) the
Knight refused to come from his Horse, whereupon Tyler comes at him with his
Sword: The King loath to have the Knight endangered, entreats him to alight,
the Knight refusing it, and Tyler urging him, at last came William Walworth the
Mayor of the City, and with the staff he had in his hand he gave Tyler a
grievous wound on the Head, and according to his Office bid him submit to the
King; Whilst he stood reeling with this blow, he was killed by the Kings
followers with innumerable wounds. The Captain being flain, the maimed faction
seemed to prepare for to be revenged; But the King, though he were yet under
fifteen years of age, passed on to them with a ready mind, promising that he
would be their Commander, and bad them follow him, and all should be as they
desired. In the mean while Walworth had gathered together about a thousand
Citizens, the Captain whereof was Robert Conolus, and coming upon them as they
were in a Tumult, he put them in such a fright, that they cast away their Arms,
and were glad to submit. The Citizens had fallen upon the Rebels, but the King
would not suffer them, least they should kill the Innocent with the offenders:
That the tumult might be wholly ended, he gave each man leave to return home to
his habitation. But elsewhere the same quiet was not procured; For in Suffolk
they ran madding up and down unmeasurably, and pulled down some Judges houses,
and so at Cambridge and in other places, killing, cutting off the Heads, and
otherwise miserably massacring the Nobility; Their Captain was John Littester
a Diar, who was grown so lofty that he behaved himself like a King. But he with
all his followers was suppressed by Henry Spencer Bishop of Norwich an
industrious and valiant man, who took him prisoner, and brought him to
Execution. At London also, and elsewhere they proceeded against the guilty,
where John Straw, and others are put to death, and so all this Tumult was
ended. Lancaster in the mean while was sent against the Scotch, that he might
perpetually observe them, if they should attempt any thing upon the occasion of
these disorders. But he so wisely managed the matter, that before they had any
rumor of his March thitherward, there was a Cessation granted for two or three
years. In the interim, Anna the Sister of Wenceslaus the Emperor came to
London to be married to the King, where the Marriage was solemnized with a
wonderful pomp.

Henry Spencer about that time had obtained an Army from the King, which he led
against the French, and chiefly for Pope Urban against Clement the Antipope;
And first coming into Flanders, he besieged Iper, but by a greater force
marching out of France, he was constrained to raise the Siege, and when they
came beside Graveling, he writ to the King, that there was now a fit occasion
to defeat the Enemy, but Lancaster who had the command, making delays, it fell
to nothing; so Spencer having done no business returns home again, and shortly
after Truce was made between the French and the English.

In the mean while the Scotch entering the Borders of England, consumed many
Towns and Castles with fire and sword: But Lancaster with Buckingham going
against them, when they could not force the Scots to fight, for revenge of the
wrong they had done, set fire to some of their Cities and Villages, and so
retreat for England.

But Richard to suppress their Insolence, to whom also the French had sent aid,
he with his Army marched into Scotland, and finding Edinburgh without a
Garrison, he set that on fire; The Scots to divert the English Forces, fall into
Cumberland, and lay siege to Carlisle, but hearing of Richards approach, they
giving warning to their fellows, return for Scotland.

Lancaster at that time with a choice number of Soldiers makes a Voyage into
Spain, King Richard bestowing on him the Title of the King of Spain, where he
did conquer some Towns, and married his Daughter to the King of Portugal, but
the English being impatient of that Country, and the heat of the Air, fell
into all kind of diseases, and so made a Truce, which a Peace followed shortly
after.

On the Coasts of France, the Earls of Arundel and Nottingham being the
Leaders, an hundred French Vessels laden with wine were overcome, and Breast
freed from a siege. But a grievous Controversy grew at this time in England
between the King and the Nobility, the Duke of Gloucester, the Earl of Arundel
and others; the Duke of Ireland, the Earl of Suffolk and many other malicious
men setting them on. They fell to their Arms, but by the milder counsel of
others they grew friends again. The Duke of Ireland leaving the Court of his
own accord fell amongst the Forces of the Earl of Darby, and not daring to
fight, swimming the River with his horse, he landed at Bauvais, where like a
banished man he lived some years at Lovane. And the rest who were Authors of
the War against the King at a famous sitting in Parliament, were commanded to
forsake the Court and Kingdom, and some were put to extreme tortures.

In the 15th year of Richards Government, the Londoners fell to Mutiny, for a
very light cause, and the King being wonderfully offended at them for a small
sum of Money they had refused him, he punished them with the loss of their
chief Privileges, and with the payment of a great sum of money. This is the
effect of offending Kings.

After this in a solemn meeting of the Kings, peace was ratified between
England and France, Isabella the Daughter of the French King, a Maid of eight
years old, being betrothed to King Richard. For Anna his former Wife was
deceased. The Duke of Gloucester by an importune word blaming the Kings
negligence, fell into his displeasure, and fearing some ill issue of it, with
his Brothers, forsook the Court, and entering into a Conspiracy with some
friends he attempted to change the state of the Kingdom. But the King
under-feeling it, with his Brother the Earl of Huntington, took a progress to
the Castle of the Duke of Gloucester his Fathers Brother, when he came there at
night he found the Duke rising out of his Bed, and presently going to meet him,
he was taken by the Earl Marshall, and carried Prisoner to Callis, and there
was hanged miserably. Also the Earl of Arundel the chief Conspiratour, and some
principal Noblemen, are east into Prison. And he afterward in a Parliament
being questioned for his life, had his head cut off, the rest being condemned
either to be banished, or to perpetual Imprisonment; And thus Richard by the
blood of the Nobility thought to make good his Kingdom.

The Dukes of Norfolk and Hereford without any other witness, appeaching one
the other of Treason, are admitted to fight a Duel, but when they were both
ready to fight, they were commanded to forbear, and so to spare blood, they
were both sent away to diverse places into Banishment. Norfolk went first for
Germany, then to Venice, where he died of mere sorrow and grief. But Hereford
who had sailed into France, and there being instigated by the Counsel of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, who was banished for the same Conspiracy, returned
privately home, under a pretense of his Patrimony to be redeemed (which the
King had brought into the Exchequer after his Fathers death against all Right
and Equity) but indeed, that joining with the Nobility he might order the Kings
Insolence. He was scarce landed, but the Nobility came from all parts to him,
and he waxed very strong. And having now a sufficient Army, he took some
Cities, and beheaded the Kings chiefest Counselors Richard in the interim was
in Ireland, and did his best to subdue the Irish; When a Messenger came to him
of the Commotions in England, he was troubled at it, yet made no haste,
according as the danger required. At length the Earl of Salisbury was sent into
England, before him, that he might levy what Forces he could, the King
promising in six days to be with him. As soon as the Earl set foot in England,
he raised with ease a mighty Army of Welsh, but the King not appearing, a
rumor was given that he was dead, so part of his Forces went one way, some
another, but a few stood to their Colors; The King at last, so soon as
contrary winds would let him, came to them. But when he found so much of the
Country to be fallen to Hereford, and the Duke of Lancaster also by the death
of his Father, he quite fainted in his mind, and bad all those men that came
to help him to go whither they pleased, yet they continuing their fidelity, he
with the Earl of Exeter, and some others, fled to the Castle of Conve, where he
found the Earl of Salisbury. Here the Duke of Worcester, who was Governor of
the Kings House, breaking his white Staff, a sign of his Office, and so
renouncing his fidelity, fell off from the King to the Lords Conspiratours.
Then the Earl of Northumberland is sent to the King, who from that Castle
conveyed him to another place, saying also that he came to treat with the King
for Conditions of Peace, which the King did not refuse. But in the way the Earl
of Rutland coming upon him, he is forced to go to Flint-Castle, whether shortly
after Henry the Duke of Lancaster came, who was guilty, and friendly received
by the King, and then he related the cause of his coming, which was, that he
might receive his Rights and Goods. The King granted, and ratified all, so they
went to drink together, and afterward mounting on Horsback, they ride toward
London in a continued voyage, in so great haste, that the King had no leisure
given him to change his clothes. Then was the King put into the Tower, the
Castle for the Nobility, and was diligently watched there. And a Parliament was
called by the Command of Lancaster, though it were falsely given out in the
Kings Name, wherein Richard was accused of diverse crimes, Namely, That he had
wasted the goods of the Kingdom. That he had borrowed a vast sum of Money,
and not yet repaid it. That he had made all the Laws Arbitrary, as he pleased.
That he had changed the Members of Parliament when he would. That he had
Tyrannically taken Power to himself over the Subjects Estates. That he had
corrupted the Judges. That he had caused his Uncle Earl of Gloucester to be
barbarously murdered at Callis. That he had imprisoned the Members of
Parliament. That beyond Right and Equity he had put the Earl of Arundel to
extreme Terture. That be had depopulated his own Kingdom. That be had pawned
the Ornaments of the Kingdom and Kings out of the Kingdom, and so forward. For
which faults they thought fit to deprive him of all his Honors and Title of
King; But he that he might seem to desire what he would have avoided, willingly
resigned all his Right to the Kingdom, and freely gave it to Henry of
Lancaster, whom he nominated to succeed him, which was ratified and confirmed
by the Great Seal. Then Richard being brought to Pomfret-Castle, was discharged
of his Crown.

Henry having thus got the Kingdom, and not enduring any Competitour, one day
lamenting, was heard to cry out, Is there any man will free me from that
hateful man? And presently one Peter Exton a Knight, that he might win the
Kings favor with such a wickedness, went with eight more unto Richard, whom
he set upon to kill him, being at Dinner, but Richard rising hastily, wresting
the Ax out of the hands of one of his Executioners, killed four of them, and at
last by this Peter Exton he was knocked down dead himself, by an unhappy blow
on the Head, which the Parricides lamented when it was too late.

Thus the unhappiest and most well-favoured of the Kings of England, ended his
life and Kingdom.

HENRY the fourth, King of England and France.
Anno 1399.
HENRY of Lancaster, who was nominated to succeed, was crowned King, but that
he might not be thought to usurp that Kingdom which he had by Election, he
endeavored to be established in his own Right, vaunting that he was the next
Heir, being directly descended from Henry the third, but that was false and
counterfeit, for Roger Mortimer Earl of Marsh, deriving his Pedigree from the
eldest Son of Henry the third, had a better Title. To this he added, his
Right of Force, whereby he made good the Succession he could not have done by
Inheritance; Be it what it will be, he maintained it by his Sword. He gave good
example when his Right held but weakly, for he made it up by good turns,
granting a General Pardon of all the wrongs had been done unto him, but those
that were guilty of the death of the Duke of Gloucester, he brought to a
shameful end, abhorring so great wickedness.

But after that the Fame of Richard being deposed, was divulged in France; King
Charles was purposed to revenge his Son in Laws wrongs, and to re-establish
him in the Throne. But when it was certainly understood that he was dead, all
that business came to nothing.

Also those of Aquitan and other places rising about the rumor of the death of
their Duke, were pacified by Messengers sent to them in time. When he had got
the Kingdom by troubles, it could not be but that he must hold it with troubles
also. For John Earl of Exceter with John Montacnte, Thomas Earl of Kent his
Nephew, Hugh Spencer and others conspired to invite Henry to Oxford under
pretense of Running a Tilt, thinking to kill him treacherously at this
exercise. But the matter was discovered and became void. Thee what by fraud
they could not do, they attempt to do by open War, carrying about with them a
certain counterfeit Richard (for he was not yet slain) and they labor to
restore him, as one that was miserably wronged, but their Forces running from
them, either by fear or distrust, the Authors of it were taken, and cruelly
put to death. The Welsh also about that time, as their custom was, make new
Commations, but the King came opportunely with his Army, and easily dispersed
them, punishing the chief of them. Whilst these things were in motion George
Dumbar fled into England to the Earl of Northumberland, craving assistance
against David the Son of the King of Scotland; for he had Divorced the
Daughter of this George, that was betrothed to him, and had married another
Wife, not restoring the Dowry of the former. Wherefore both of them making a
Sally into Scotland, fought first on equal terms with the Adversaries, but at
last they routed them, and came back loaded with great spoil.

In the mean while Thomas Earl of Worcester, knowing that the King was taken up
with the Commotions in Wales, joining to himself Henry Earl of Stafford, his
Cousin by his Brothers side, with an Army, and the Scotch to boot, who
naturally hated the English, beyond measure, makes War against the King; But
the King, least by delays the mischief might increase, leaving Wales came in
time to oppose them. When both Armies were now ready, they fell to it fiercely,
and fought long on equal terms, until such time as the perfidious Welsh came
to assist Thomas, and began the Battle afresh; Yet Henry, Father and Son,
gave wonderful testimony of their invincible Courages, running Thomas of
Worcester through with a Lance, and killing him, whereupon they vanquished the
Enemy that was now in such fair hopes, and glorying of the Victory. Henry
Piercy the King took Prisoner, and causes his Head to be cut off, Anno 1401.

Also the Earl of Northumberland who was one of the partakers, to save his
Life, fled to George of Dumbar Earl of Marsh, who was now restored to his
Estate in Scotland. After this Conquest Prince Henry makes an inrode against
the perfidious Welsh, and easily put an end to a mutinous War, subduing the
Rebels, banishing Owen the Ringleader, a very valiant man, but seditious, who
was so brought to great want, and ended his life miserably.

In the mean while the French came to help the Rebel Welsh with thirty Ships,
their Leader was James Borbon Earl of Marsh, they set Sail, but by a Tempest
were brought upon some other Coast of England, and they got into Cornwall, upon
which occasion they posfessed themselves of Plymouth Haven, and coming on Land,
they ruin all places they meet, with fire and Sword; But storms suddenly
arising, twelve of their Ships were drowned, so they began to think how to
return back, and hastily giving warning to the rest, laden with their prey they
came again to France. But Thomas the Son of King Henry, with his Navy brought
together, depopulated the Frontiers of France, and taking many Merchantsmen,
sufficiently requited this Injury. But the Kings of France and England, being
full of troubles at home, and so thinking less of revenge, made a Truce for
some Months. The King until that time being a Batchelour, took to Wife Joan
that was formerly married to Duke Montfort, and espoused her Daughter Blanch to
the Son of the Duke of Bavaria.

At that time William Plunton, a valiant warlike Knight, conspired against the
King, with the Friends of Mowbray, who (as we said lived banished at Venice) To
these the men of Northumberland, and lastly the Scotch united themselves. The
King being certain of this matter, comes presently with an Army, and easily
defeated them: Plunton and some of his Followers, with Richard Scroop
Archbishop of York, who was said to have had a finger in this Rebellion, was
taken prisoner. Plunton by the general vote lost his Head for his insolence,
and afterward the rest were put to death, being convicted of this wickedness.

The King to extinguish Rebellion quite, sent his Son Henry Prince of Wales
against the Scots, who were coming on to assist Plunton, but they, when they
had heard that the Conspiracy was detected, and the Authors of it executed,
were not come from their places. But Henry that he might not lose his labor,
enters Scotland, and wastes it miserably with fire and Sword, and struck a
wonderful terror upon the Scots, so loading himself with the spoil and booty,
he returns back to his Father to London, who was vexed to the purpose with new
Commotions daily rising one out of another upon every occasion. And now again
some body had raised a Rumor amongst the People, that Richard was yet alive,
whereupon the common people, that always gape after novelties, being moved,
had made dangerous troubles, if their faction had not been wisely and timely
suppressed. Also the Earl of Northumberland making a Covenant with George Earl
of Marsh, and raising some thousands of Scotch and English, he entered the
Borders of England, and prey's in an hostile manner on the Territories of
Yorkshire; The King went against them, and overthrew all their Forces, routing
them in a tumultuary battle. Some of the principal who fell into the Kings
power were brought to York and executed there.

In the mean while Edmund Earl of Kent, to suppress the French Pirates, was set
to Sea with a gallant Navy, but not lighting upon the Pirates, being hot with
desire to fight, he sought for them in the very Haven, at the Temple of Brio^;
and when he could not fight at Sea, he entered the City by Land, but the Earl
himself was killed by an unhappy blow with a stone; yet his soldiers took the
Town, rifled it and burnt it, and killing most of the inhabitants, they
returned again for England. Also the English at the same time, the Earl of
Arundel being in chief, did do their business prosperously for the Duke of
Burgundy, and being highly rewarded, they went back for their Country, the
War being as then not ended between the Burgundian and the Duke of Orleans.
But he, knowing that the hearts of the English were therefore set against him,
requesting their assistance, obtained it from King Henry, but when there was a
scattered report that they were both agreed, the auxilliary English staying by
the Loyre, expected their wages, which when they could not obtain, they being
incensed, plundered a Town that was hard by, called Bellilocum, and the
Monastery; and after that being called away by the Duke of Clarence, they march
toward Gasconye for the Duke of Orleans, and plunden all as they go along, and
when the Duke of Orleans had paid them their wages, they were pacified, and
returned for England.

But Henry now for a good while having ended his Civil War, and intending an
expedition for Palestina, preparing a Fleet for that purpose, died very
suddenly at Westminster, when he had reigned about 14 years. About the time of
his death, James Stuart, the eldest Son of Robert (for David was dead) whilst
he was taking a voyage into France, was taken by the English, and was brought
to London, being exceedingly entertained by the King, but his Father supposing
his Son was now lost, died for mere grief and sorrow shortly after; whom his
Brother Robert succeeded in the Throne.

HENRY the fifth, King of England and France.
Anno 1413.
THis King was inaugurated with a wonderful applause and desire of the Lords
and Commons; and he not willing to disappoint his subjects of the hope they
conceived of him, gave presently a sign of his excellent Government, sending
away from him those ministers of lascivious youth, amongst whom he had been
formerly bred; and least by sluggishness his valiant heart should languish, he
sets his whole care how to recover his right in France, having narrowly looked
into it. First he sent Heralds, and demanded his Kingdom from King Charles,
promising to Marry his Daughter, and threatening also, that if Charles would not
do it, he would come with an Army and take his Patrimony by force. Charles
laughed at his Ambassadors, whereby he so enraged the mind of Henry, that he
presently mustering a mighty Army, with about 1200 Ships, he sails into France;
first he besieged Harflet, and in a few days compelled it to yield: Then
passing to Somma, at the Temple of Maxentius, the enemy met him, wherefore he
pitched his Tents: But when he saw the enemy not very greedy to fight, he
skirmished lightly, and so passed on to Callis. The French man in the mean
time, when it came into his mind, sent Heralds to Henry to challenge him to
fight, who was not unwilling to accept it, he dismissed them with rewards, and
passing over a River, presently news came that the enemy was at hand, wherefore
he hastily makes himself ready for the Battle, though he were far inferior
in forces; they presently fall on, but Henry joining industry to his virtue,
giving such a violent charge, that after a terrible fight on both sides, he put
the French at last to their heels. He himself being in the midst of the enemies
forces, dismounted the Duke of Alenson, who was presently slain by the English
soldiers; they had so many prisoners, that they far exceeded the
Conquerours, wherefore he commanded to kill them all, least they should rise
against them that had subdued them. There was a wonderful multitude of Dukes,
Earls and Lords that were destroyed, and not above 600 of the English wanting,
amongst which, one was the Duke of York. This Battle was fought at Dagincourt,
which gave a good omen to great Victories afterward. Henry by this Victory
cast such a terror on the French, that Lewis the Dolphin, taking grief of
mind died shortly after. Such was the constancy of Henry's heart, that he
forbad his soldiers on pain of death to sing any scurrilous songs in
derogation of the French, but rather to sing Psalms and Hymns to the glory of
God.

In that time Sigismund the Emperor came to England to treat of Peace between
the French and the English, nor was Henry slow in the business; but when the
French in the interim besieged Harflet, he was so angry, that no man afterward
durst mention peace, and presently sending the Duke of Bedford to raife the
siege, with the Earl of Marsh, Oxford, and other Earls, and 200 Ships, he
fought a bloody Battle at Sea at Harflet Haven, with Borbon the French
Admiral, wherein the English wan the day, sinking 500 Ships of the French, and
so freed the Town. But Caesar finding the perfidiousness of the French, did not
only forbear ever after to make mention of any peace, but made a firm League
with the English against all opposers, and so returned back into Germany. The
French in the mean time, not to be idle, hired some great Ships of Genoa, and
besieging the Haven of Harflet, endeavored to hinder all relief from the Town.
But the Earl of Huntington coming suddenly upon them, after a fierce fight
dispersed them, and vanquished the rest. He took the Duke of Borbon a Bastard,
and so returned Conqueror for England. Then the King with his chief Nobility
sailed into Normandy, and Conquered the Fort Tucha, whilst the Earl of
Salisbury wan Albervill, which place the King gave freely to him and his heirs.
After that he wan Caen, which City when the Towns men defended with great
obstinacy, he made mines secretly, through which the most forward of the
soldiery entered the City, the Duke of Clarence leading them on, and setting on
the Guard, put them all to flight, and so the whole Army found entrance, some
of the principal for their perverseness were put to death, and the plunder of
the City was given to the Soldiers. The Governor had not yet yielded the
Fort, but when the King swear he would spare none if they continued resolute,
at last he gave it up. The French in the mean while being in Civil broils, all
things went with the English as they pleased. He sent the Duke of Clarence to
besiege the Town of Bayon, which he quickly wan, whilst he staid at Caen, he
restored to the people of Lions a mighty mass of Treasure, that was found in
the Castle, which the frighted people had brought thither, upon condition that
they should be constant in their obedience for the future: This was a pattern
of his wonderful piety. Then he removed to Corfen, and in three days won the
Town. Then he subdued Argentanians, after that Alencon, then Falesia, and so
returned Victor to Caen. He had almost the like success at Sea, vanquishing
many Ships of the enemy; but his own Fleet was tossed long in a tempest whilst
he strove to sail to Southhampton, yet he lost but two Ships. In the mean while
the Earl of Warwick and Talbot conquer the Castle of Dumfrise, and Clarentius
mastered Curton and many other Towns. Then the King lays siege to Roan, and at
last by famine he forced the obstinate Citizens to submit, which Town being the
chief was an example for the rest to follow, so that shortly he wan all
Normandy, which was lost by the carelessness of his Predecessors. The Duke of
Burgundy finding all the English desired to succeed, thought it concerned him
to procure peace between both Kings, and at last he obtained a meeting between
Henry and the French Queen, (for the King was fallen into his usual doting)
yet there was nothing enacted. The Queen had brought her most beautiful
Daughter Katharine that she might ensnare the Kings mind with her allurements,
nor was it in vain, for Henry when he saw her was wonderfully taken with her;
and when they departed doing nothing, the King laid a charge on the Duke of
Burgundy, that unless all he asked, together with the Kings Daughter, were
granted him, he would by force take from the Duke his Dukedom, and from the
King his Kingdom. They were so frighted with these threats, that they fell to a
new Parley. But the Dolphin, by reason of this newly conceived hatred, and
burning with former envy, commanded the Duke of Burgundy to be killed basely,
not long after, though he begged his life from him on his knees, and so the
slaughter of the Duke of Orleance, committed before by Burgundy was expiated.
Nor is peace yet concluded, until the French were forced to it by a further
loss. A meeting was appointed at Trecas, and there was Katherine betrothed to
Henry, and the right of succession was confirmed to him after the death of
Charles; whereupon all the Nobility of France swear to be Loyal to him, and so
the Salique Law in France was broken. The Dolphin who had not consented to
these conditions, is made War against by the Kings of France and England, and
diverse Towns that took part with him are conquered, and when as he came not
upon his citation to appear at Paris before the Marble Table (as they call it)
upon the day appointed, he was banished. Henry also using his Authority,
commanded Money to be coined with the Arms of France and England, which he
called the Sovereign. Then leaving the Duke of Clarence Governor of France and
Normandy, he returned for England. But Clarence making an expedition against
Aniou, and spoiling them, as he came back laden with the prey, he was betrayed
in his passage by one Andrew Fogosus, and though he fought valiantly, yet was
he slain by the Duke of Alenson, with the chief Nobility, and 2000 English men.
The Earls of Sommerset and of Suffolk, and other Lords were taken prisoners.
The King to revenge his Brothers death, lands in France with a mighty Army, and
freed Chartres from a siege of the Dolphin, for when he heard of the Kings
approach, he retreated to Towrs, whilst the Scotch King with the Duke of
Gloucester conquer Drocas, Henry pursues the Dolphin from place to place, yet
could not overtake him, though he took all Towns in his way, so that he joined
in a short time all the Island of France to the rest.

In the interim the Queen was delivered of a Son at Windsor, who was
Christened Henry, of whom King Henry spoke as a Prophet, Good God, says he, I
Henry of Monmouth shall have but a short Reign, and shall prevail much, but
Henry of Windsor shall Reign long, and shall lose all, but the will of God be
done.

About that time the Dolphin had besieged those of Narbon, Henry marches
quickly thither to free them, and making too much haste, he took a Fever by
over-heating himself, wherefore he was forced to stay, but the Duke of Bedford
was dispatched, who not only freed them of Narbon, but also drove the Dolphin
toward Aquitan, who from thence in mockery was called King of Aquitan. But a
flux of the belly coming upon Henry's disease, which increased every day, he
was carried to Boy de Vincennois, where within a few days he died Christianly,
Anno 1421. first giving to his Brother the Duke of Bedford the Title of Regent
of Normandy and France, and his other Brother the Duke of Gloucester he made
Governor of England. He was not yet over 36 years old, and so he died in the
top and flower of his age and honor, having reigned nine years and five
months: The most famous Conqueror of all the Kings, and best beloved of his
subjects, that he was so lamented of them, which is not usual, that they could
not forbear to weep for him. The Doctrine of Wytcliff was eminent in this Kings
reign, for which John Huss and Hierom of Prague, were at Casars command
afterward burnt alive.

HENRY the sixth, King of England and of France.
Anno 1422.
HEnry of Windsor the sole Heir of Henry the fifth, obtained the Kingdom after
his Fathers death, being nine months old, who when he came to years, was not
like to his Father, either for Virtue or Fortune. He was proclaimed King at
Paris, by the Authority of the Duke of Bedford, all the Lords of the Kingdom
swearing fidelity to him. But King Charles the sixth dying a little after
Henry, his Son Charlis the seventh hoped to regain by Valor and Industry,
what the French had lost by cowardice. First he wan the Pont Malanus, which
City by Montacute his virtue was again won from him. Then they fought with a
doubtful success at Crepan, where about 2000 French were slain, amongst whom
were many Nobles, and the Town was taken. But Charles overcame many of the
English, driving a great Herd of Cattle toward Normandy, and took the prey
from them, and freed the Temple of St Michel from a siege. Then the chance of
War being altered, he is again put to the worst at Vernols. But the fidelity
of the men of Orleans was notable, who levelling their Suburbs with the ground,
held play with the Earl of Salisbury a most valiant Commander, who had
beleaguerd them, and when they were almost famished, and were ready to yield
themselves to the Duke of Burgundy, Salisbury disdaining the honor should be
taken from him, refused the conditions, but he whilst he was not wary enough in
viewing the sci^uation of the City, was slain with a bullet from the Walls.

In the interim the Duke of Gloucester, did not a little stain his Honor,
marrying Jacoba the Countess of Holland, which had formerly married to John
Duke of Brabant; but she being surprised by craft, was brought back to her
Husband, but again disguising her self in man's apparel she escaped into
Holland, and there she waged War against her Husband, and when she was too
weak for him, and the Pope would not grant her a Divorce, the Duke of Gloucester
rejected her, and she afterward married to Francus Borsely a Dutch Knight, but
he being cast into prison by the Duke of Burgundy, she afterward led a
miserable life. In the mean time the English were often fortunate in Battle
against the French, and recovered diverse Towns; but those of Orleans having
help as it were from God brought to them, did not little strengthen the French
proceedings; for Joan a Country Maid, which had spent her youth in keeping
Sheep, desiring to free the Kingdom of their enemies the English, was brought
to the King, who admired the Maids courage, when he saw that she was a Maid
indeed: She putting on men's Armor, brought provision into Orleance with the
Forces she had received from the King, and with many assaults at length she
raised the siege. Then she wonderfully weakened the English with many though
less Battles; three thousand English were slain in Belsia: Nor was Charles
wanting to his own affairs, but the Maid being Leader he went to Rhemes, and
recovered the Ensigns of the Kingdom. Then he marched to Paris, whilst Bedford
was careful enough, and suffered no occasion to slip to manage his business as
he ought. The Maid at the siege of Compienna, thinking to relieve the place,
received a wound in the leg, and so was fain to retreat. Yet this Warlike Maid
broke into the City, and sallying forth again upon the Enemy, she was taken
prisoner, and being convicted (as they report) of Art Magic, she was burnt
alive. Yet Compienna was freed from the siege, and Melun Corvolium and other
places were recovered. But the English to gain honor to their side, calling
King Henry to Paris, now but twelve years old, they Crown him King of France,
the Lords of that Kingdom who were present, swearing fealty unto him. In the
mean while Charles by the craft of a certain Carter, giving fish to the watch,
recovers Lions, and so he followed the success he had. But the Kingdom all this
time was wonderfully ruinated, there was nothing left in the field, and a
miserable lamentation was made every where. At last both the Leaders of the
War having their full, began to Treat of Agreement, at Artoys they meet, the
English being baited with the sweetness of the Kingdom of France, could not be
pacified, but Burgundy, Matiscan, the Temple of Gingon, Altissidore, and other
Towns being yielded to him, they were content. Then the English took high
indignation, deeply resenting that the Duke of Burgundy their faithful
companion in the War was fallen away from them. Their anger thus incensed
would have been the ruin of the Frenck, but being laid down it was their
safety, for in a short time they shook off that heavy yoke: For the Parisians
suddenly took courage and drove out the English from Paris; and on the other
side Burgundy with the same earnestness he helped the English before, now
assists the French: To this there happened the death of the Duke of Bedford the
Governor of France, which did a little damnifie the English: Then other places
taking example by Paris, fell off to Charles, and the Normans scarce continued
their fidelity, but by the slaughter of five thousand of them, they were either
frighted or pacified. The English affairs thus declining in France, they did
not assault Cities and fenced places as formerly, but Castles and poor Forts.
Also Burgundy waged offensive War with the Duke of York who succeeded
Bedford, and besieged Callis, but he retreated in time, for the Duke of
Gloucester arrived the next day with a great Army, who finding the enemy gone,
ruined all with fire and sword. In the interim the Scotch laid siege to the
Castle of Rapesburg, but being certified of the return of the Duke of York and
the coming of the Earl of Northumberland, he quickly raised his siege.

In the mean while Harflet was delivered up to the French at a price, the
Garrison soldiers being corrupted with money. But the Duke of Sommerset and
Talbot, besieging the City afresh by Sea and Land, regained it once more, the
Duke of Orleans with his Army being come only to look on. In the mean time
James King of Scotland, after he had been prisoner ten years in England, was
restored to his liberty, placed with a rich Matron, but being at length
ungrateful, he was treacherously slain in his chamber; the authors of the
fact were severally executed. All this while the business went diversely in
France on both sides; and what by Valor, what by Policy, many Towns were won
and recovered again. In England a contest fell out between the Duke of
Gloucester and a Cardinal his Uncle, the Wife of the Duke of Gloucester was
accused by the Cardinal for Witchcraft, as if by Magic Arts she went about to
take away the Kings life: She was forced publicly to satisfy for that
wickedness she had not attempted, though others that were guilty in their very
sufferings excused the Duchess of it. Now by the intercession of Christian
Princes they began to treat of Peace between the French and the English; Peace
was not ratified, but a cessation was granted for eighteen months. In the mean
time the Earl of Suffolk, by his own Authority contracted a Marriage between
King Henry, and Margaret the Daughter of the Duke of Angiers, boasting much of
the Maids Beauty and Doury; at last he persuaded the King, though passed his
word to the Daughter of the Earl of Britain. This Matrimony Contracted gave
but small help to the English affairs, when for commutation great part of
Normandy was yielded to the French: Also the Duke of Britain revenging the
wrong done to his Daughter, drove all the English out of Aquitan.

Now the hatred that had long grown between the Duke of Sommerset and York,
began to bud again. He by fraud and injustice deposed this York from his
Authority of Viceroy, though he had behaved himself gallantly in France, and
made himself Viceroy in his place; York being not a little offended at it. For
the King did nothing less, than taking care of his Kingdom, all the Authority
was between Queen Margaret and the Marquess of Suffolk. Also by the contriving
of his adversaries, the Duke of Gloucester, who was so well esteemed of by all
the people, that they pointed at him by the name of the good Duke, was put out
of his place, and unknown to the King, a Parliament being called privately,
they question him for his life, he was cast into Prison, where the next day
(how it is not known) he was miserably murdered.

By a stratagem the City of Fulger was taken by the English, and the Town
Larcha by the French, so they break out into War again. The French despising
Sommerset for his negligence, who (as we said) had now all the power, wan many
Towns, and in Guyan diverse willingly fell off to the French, amongst which was
Roan, following the example of the rest, and more mischief befell the English.
Also the Cities of Harflet and Caer, though they were valiantly defended, yet
by the carelessness of Sommerset the Governor, were delivered up to the
French, who so almost with no pains wan all Normandy, and made good all France
for themselves, except Callis. The Duke of York who should now help the English
in France, was fain to go to still the Irish that were up, he quickly pacified
them, whereby he wan the peoples hearts very much, and much augmented his own
affairs.

But when all things went not as they should do in France, and Sommerset was
held to be the cause of all, and after him Suffolk. Many complaints by consent
of the Lower House of Parliament were alleged against him, whereof he was
found guilty, and cast into Prison, but he is suddenly set at liberty: But a
new sitting being summoned at the instance of the Lower House he was banished
for five years, but whilst he sailed into France, he was intercepted by the
English, and his Head cut off, leaving his Body disgracefully on the shore, and
so the death of the Duke of Gloucester was paid for. Richard Duke of York in the
mean time having won the Irish hearts, gave the first step to end the
differences between the White Rose and the Red, and for a beginning of his own
Right to the Crown, for he descended from Lyonel Duke of Clarence, the third
Son to the third Edward. Nor was it difficult to change the state of the
Kingdom, when so many abuses and errors that were so well known to the common
people, were crept in. And King Henry wholly unfit for the Government, as the
people would say, by whose foolish negligence, France and Normandy were lost.
The men of Kent by the persuasion of York, gave their Votes to John Mortimer,
and with a great and well-appointed Army they march toward London, Mortimer
himself commanding them. The Army made a stay between Eltham and Greenwich, and
then they sent up their Complaints to the King and Parliament, concerning the
present state of the Kingdom, and amongst the rest they petition That the Dukes
of York, Buckingham and Exceter may be restored to their places, and former
favor, there was no answer given, but a crying out to their Arms. But the men
of Kent, when they were come to the Battle, killing both the Staffords, who
commanded the Army, they put the Kings Forces to flight, whereupon the greatest
part of the Kings men fell off, for they came running by companies to Mortimer,
whose Forces thus increased wonderfully; wherefore the King fled to
Killingworth Castle in the County of Warwick, expecting the issue. By his
departure Mortimer grew more bold, and came to the Suburbs of London, and then
possessing himself of the Bridge, he came into London, doing no wrong to any
man, for his Army was very well disciplined, to keep down the violence of the
Soldiers, whereby he won the affections of many, but afterward the Men of
Kent, being sharpened with hope of the prey, fell upon some of the richer
Citizens, which was very ill resented by all. Mortimer was now Master of
London, and he cut off the Heads of some of those that were the Ministers of
those Errors, as John Say Chief-Treasurer of England, and his Son in Laws,
and some others. But the Londoners detesting his haughtiness, arm themselves,
and craving help from Scales the Lord Lieutenant of the Tower, with such Forces
as they had collected, Matthew Gogthus being their Captain, in the night they
fall upon Mortimers Army, that were in the Suburbs of St Georges on the other
side of the Thames; But the Kentish men repulse them with such violence that
the Londoners were forced to give ground, and to leave the Bridge to the
Conquerours; who hereupon being enraged, fell to cast in fire to burn the
Houses upon the Bridge, and so put a great fright upon the City, and made a
great slaughter. At last their heat began to remit, and these men of Kent began
to detest the wickedness Mortimer had done, and desired to return home again,
which when the King understood, he sent his Seal for their Pardon, and for all
his men being gone from him, Mortimer was left without a Guard, who thinking to
escape by flight, was taken and slain.

This Tumult was appeased, but a far greater arose shortly after, for York
depending upon his Right comes to London, under pretense of Complaints against
his Adversaries, and especially against Sommerset (who had lost France, and was
now come home) but the truth was to make a Party, he obtained the help of
Norfolk, and the Earls of Sarisbury and Devorshire to assist him, and so
marching into Wales, he quickly raised an Army. The King hearing this, prepares
his Forces also, and collecting Forces he made haste thither with the Duke of
Sommerset; Both the Armies meet at last, and the King sending messengers, asked
York, What should be the cause of so great a Tumult? Who cast all the fault on
the Kings evil Counselors, and chiefly upon Sommerset, promising that if he
were cast into Prison, until such time as he might be tried, that then he
would disband all his Army.

Hereupon Sommerset is cast into Prison under a color, and York gave his
Passe-port, which being done, the King went toward London with York; But
Sommerset who before was cast into prison, being now set at liberty;
accompanied the King, and in his stead York was brought like a Prisoner before
the King. At last they come to London, and there grew a hot dispute between
these two Dukes, before the Kings Council, the one accusing the other of
Treason, the matter came at last to this head, That York should take a solemn
Oath to be true to the King, and should go toward his Castle Wigmore, for the
report was that Edward Earl of Marsh, Son and Heir to York, was now drawing
up with an Army. And in the mean time a Messenger came from Bordeaux, craving
help against the French, John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury is sent thither, who
after he had behaved himself gallantly, was slain with a Gun. The French by his
death recover all they had lost except Bordeaux.

In the mean while the Duke of York did his best to allure the minds of the
Subjects, and then gaining the Nobility to his side, who were all offended with
Sommerset, and joining the Earls of Sarisbury and Warwick with him, he
prevailed so far that Sommerset in the Kings absence was sent to the Tower.
But Henry when he heard that, though he were sick, and returning to London, he
not only sets him at Liberty, he makes him Governor of Callis, and of all the
other places in France, which thing so provoked York, that he and his
Assistants March to London with a great Army. The King with Sommerset,
Buckingham, and his Son Humphrey, the Earl of Northumberland, and a
sufficient Army goes against them. At St Albans the Armies came in sight one of
the other. York sent Letters in the Morning to the King, requiring Sommerset to
be delivered up to him, that he might be tried, the King refusing this, he
makes the first Onset, Sommerset, and with him the Earl of Northumberland and
Humphrey Earl of Stafford fell in the Battle, and five thousand men with them.
Many were wounded and taken: The King himself, who had fled into a
Countrey-mans house for fear of the weapons, was taken by the Conspiratours;
This Battle fell on May the 23th, and the 13th year of his Reign. But York,
when his Adversary was dead, commands his Followers to abstain from fighting,
and goes with the King to London. Then a Parliament was called, and he is freed
from all fault, and made Protector of the King and Kingdom. The Earl of
Sarisbury was made Chancellor, and Warwick Governor of Callis. For procuring
which places, every one was very watchful. But the Queen not enduring the
Authority of York, she never left urging Buckingham with the Death of his Son,
and young Sommerset with the Death of his Father; and when she had sufficiently
incensed them, she goes to Greenwich, and there she holds a Council, commanding
York and his Confederates to renounce their Places; But they refused to do it.
Then with subtilty mingled with flattery she intercepts them, and did all the
mischief she could, but all in vain, yet they, least they might give cause of
greater troubles, retire themselves, some to one place, some to another. But
sending Messengers one to another, they came all to London with their Forces
provided, and by the Mediation of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and others,
there was an Act of Oblivion granted for all that had been done, and Peace was
concluded on both sides, and all is confirmed with a solemn Show of Religion;
Yet they held not long, for occasion being taken from a quarrel that happened
between one of the Kings, and of the Earl of Warwicks Servants, they
endeavored to lay hold on Warwick, but he foreseeing the danger, with
Post-horse, makes haste to York to the Duke, and to his Father Earl of
Sarisbury, whom he acquainted with the business, but he going on board the Navy
that was ready by the shore (for he was Admiral of the Sea) made haste to
Callis.

In the mean time Sarisbbury goes to the King with 5000 soldiers, that he
might acquaint him with the injury done to his Son, and of the inveterate
hatred of the Queen which was now apparent. But Audley, who at the command of
the Queen and of the Duke of Buckingham, had raised an Army of 10000 men, went
against him, and was beaten, 2400 were slain, the rest fled to save themselves.

York supposing it was in vain to dally any longer, raising an Army, with the
Earls of Sarisbury and of Warwick, he provides for War, but a Treaty being
had between both sides, and a pardon granted by the King for all faults, many
forsook the Dukes, and all the Counsels of the Conspirators were detected, with
which York was brought to desparation, and fled with his younger Son Earl of
Rutland first into Wales, then into Ireland. When the private soldiers had
procured pardon, the Earls of Marsh, Sarisbury and Warwick took their voyage
for Callis, but some of the principal were put to death, and a Parliament
being called, they were all convinced and condemned for Treason. Also Sommerset
at the Queens intercession was made Governor of Callis, but when he thought to
enter upon his Government, he was shot at from the Town, and was forced to
betake himself to some other place. The Queen hearing this began to rage, and
commanded all the Ships that were in Sandwich-Haven to be fitted for Callis:
But John Dynham for the Earl of Marsh his sake, took them all, and with
Riverius their Admiral brought them to Callis.

The Earl of Warwick also sailed into Ireland to York, and consulting with him,
returned safe for Callis. Simon Montfort was Warden of the Cinque Ports, and
guarded all the Inrodes that Warwick might not come into England, but he being
admonished of it by the Spies he had, fastening upon his Navy not yet ready, he
plundered Sandwich, and brought Simon with a great booty to Callis. And when he
understood that the Kentish men desired his presence, he came the second time
to Sandwich, where the Lord Cobham with a great multitude of the Nobility
joined with him; Wherefore being appointed with an Army of 25000 Men, be
marched presently to London, and possessed himself of the Tower, whereby he
afterward did the Londoners a great deal of mischief. But hearing that his
Father the Earl of Sarisbury was coming on, he passed over the Thames and
joined with him.

The King with the Dukes of Buckingham and Sommerset, and a well appointed
Army, marches against them, at Northampton he came in sight of the Enemy. The
Battle began on both sides, and they fought vehemently, Humphrey Duke of
Buckingham, with John Talbot, the Earl of Shrewsbury, Thomas Lord Egremont,
John Bellomont, and others were slain, and on one and the other side ten
thousand men. This was in the year 1460. The Queen escaped with the Duke of
Sommerset and his Son, but the King more mindful of his prayers than of the
Battle, was taken and brought prisoner to London. Warwick presently got
possession of the Tower, and Scales the Lieutenant, whilst he thought to get
away crossing the Thames in a disguise, was discovered, taken and beheaded. The
Duke of York receiving Message of this Success, leaving Ireland, came Post for
London, where at a solemn meeting, he lays open his Right to the Crown of
England, deriving his Pedigree from Lyonel the third, Son of Edward the third,
the elder brother of John of Gaunt, the Father of Henry the fourth the Usurper.
But he desired not the Kingdom, unless his Right were made clear to all men;
Wherefore a Council being held, the Title of a King is granted to King Henry so
long as he lived, and York is named to succeed him. The Queen all this while
mustering an Army in Scotland, invades England daily; York with his younger
Son of Rutland, and with the Earl of Sarisbury went against her, leaving for
a Guard to King Henry the Earls of Warwick and Norfolk, but he being
circumvented by treachery, was slain, and 3000 of his Soldiers with him; nor
did she spare the Earl of Rutland a child of twelve years old, though he
begged for his life with tears. Sarisbury, who was taken alive, and as many as
were taken with him, were by the fury of a Woman, all beheaded. This was the
end of Richard Plantaganet Duke of York.

The Earl of Marsh hearing of his Fathers death, managed his business with more
vehemence now than before, raising an Army of 23000 Men, he overcame the Earls
of Pembroke and Ormont alive, he took Owen Tewdor alive, who had married
Katharine, Mother to Henry the sixth, and chopped off his Head. But the Queen
insulting at the death of the Duke of York, marched toward London with her
Forces, and was met by the Duke of Norfolk and the Earl of Warwick, who durst
have given her Battle, but by the treachery of their followers that forsook
them, they were forced to fly for to save themselves. King Henry by that
Victory came again into the Queens Power; But in the mean time Edward Earl of
Marsh by the general Vote of all Orders was crowned King, according as it was
enacted in Parliament, and gathering a great Army at Tanton, he met the King
and the Queen, and joining Battle with them, he overcame their Forces, the most
valiant fell in the fight, the rest fled to save their lives. The King and
Queen escaped into Scotland, leaving the Kingdom to Edward the fourth of that
Name.

EDWARD the fourth, King of England and France.
Anno 1461.
EDWARD having got the Crown at last, could not peaceably enjoy it; For Henry
that had fled into Scotland, by the assistance of the Scots, makes a new War
upon him; Edward meets him with equal Forces, and fought him at Exham, putting
Henry and his Soldiers to their heels, thirty thousand men were slain on both
sides, Edward giving the Command to spare none. The Duke of Sommerset who
formerly had fallen from Henry to Edward, despairing of the success, presently
changed his mind at the report of so great an Army, and revolted to Henry, was
taken and beheaded. Henry again retires for Scotland waiting for another
opportunity for his business; But afterward returning for England in a
disguise, he was taken by the English, and delivered up to Edward, and by him,
that the state of the Kingdom might be the more quiet, he was cast into prison.

In the mean time Edward took care of his household affairs, and he married his
Sister Margaret to Philip Duke of Burgundies Son Charles, the Earl of Warwick
being not a little mad at it, who hated Burgundy worse than the plague, whence
and from other causes a grievous quarrel rose between them. For Warwick hating
the King, drew to his faction his Brothers the Archbishop of York, and the
Marquess Montacute, by a set speech, and after that George Duke of Clarence the
Kings Brother, marrying his Sister to him, and with the Duke he takes his
voyage toward Callis, for he was yet Governor of the City, giving order to his
Brothers in his absence to raise Tumults in Yorkshire. They carefully observed
what they had in charge, and quickly causing a Tumult, the common people, as it
usually happens, in a blind rage, though they be raised against the innocent,
march to London armed, that there they might seek for remedy of mischiefs, they
knew not what. Edward hearing of this sedition, sends William Herbert Earl of
Pembroke, hoping to subdue the people, who was no sooner come, but they put him
to flight. In the mean while Warwick upon this rumor, with the Duke of
Clarence arrived in England from Callis, and so with joint Forces they provide
for another Battle. Edward no way dismayed with the first loss, sends Pembroke
again with a new Army to fight them. But when they fought his Army was beaten,
and he was taken prisoner, and he was beheaded at Warwick with the other
Nobility that fell into their hands. Then there was a Treaty of Peace, and
Messengers being sent on both parts, the King being animated with hopes of
Agreement, dealt the more securely, which Warwick was not ignorant of, and
therefore falling upon the Kings Tents at night, killing the Guard, he takes
the King prisoner, who never dreamt of it, and sends him first to Warwick, then
into Yorkshire to Middleham Castle to be secured. But the King flattering the
Keepers, and bribing them with money, by their connivance shortly came to York,
where the Citizens received him lovingly, and so raising an Army by the
assistance of Hastings, he came safe to London. Then there began a Treaty at
London for Peace, whither Warwick and the Duke of Clarence were come, but this
had no effect. For they being stomackfull, and very furious, the matter could
not come so far as Peace, wherefore all being left undone, they depart, and
Warwick musters new Forces, of which he makes Robert Wells son to Richard,
Commander in Chief. But the King when he found he must engage again in Battle,
besides his expectation, sent for Roberts Father Richard, and his Kinsman
Thomas Dimoke Knight to come to him, who came upon the Kings promise of free
Conduct; The King commanded them to call off Robert from taking Arms, and
mustering Forces suddenly, he goes against them with Thomas and Richard, and
when they were come to the Enemy, and found that Robert would not hearken to
his Fathers admonitions, but held up his Arms still, he contrary to his promise
(a most wicked example) causes both the Father and Kinsman to lose their
Heads. They fell to fighting, and Roberts Forces were discomfited, he himself
was taken alive, and immediately was beheaded. Warwick at the news hereof, with
the Duke, not knowing what course to steer^, presently sailed into France to
King Lewis, who entertained him magnificently, Queen Margaret, Wife to Henry
came also presently with Prince Edward, who took counsel together and made a
Covenant between the King, the Earl and the Queen ( Edward in vain dehorting
from it) and Warwicks Daughter was betrothed to Edward, and promise made on
both sides, that they would never cease until the Kingdom should be restored
either to Henry, or to Edward his Son. A mighty Army is raised, and a vast
Fleet rode at Anchor in the mouth of the Sienna. Warwick invited by Letters
from his friends, with part of his Army, and a Navy prepared, with the Earls of
Oxford and Pembroke came safe to Dartmouth. (The Queen, who was not yet ready,
was to follow when she heard good news) though the Duke of Burgundy observed
his motion. So soon as he was landed, and it was published that he was arrived,
it is wonderful what multitudes of people ran to him, with which being
fortified, he presently moves toward London. But Edward not expecting an Enemy,
and leaving the care of raising Forces till another time, with his Brother
Richard Duke of Gloucester, took shipping at Lyn a Sea Town, and sailed into
Flanders to Charles of Burgundy, to his own great disadvantage. Queen Elizaboth
being near to her travel, fled to Westminster, and made that her Asylum, where
she was deliverd of her Son Edward. Warwick in the interim without any
opposition came to London, and marching to the Tower, set King Henry at
liberty; and clothing him in his Kingly Ornaments, attending him through the
midst of London to St Paul's Church, after thanks given to God, he sets him in
his Throne. Then a Parliament was called, and all King Henry had Enacted was
ratified, and the Acts of King Edward were maid void: Edward with his followers
was banished as an enemy of the Kingdom.

Edward in the mean time nothing dismayed at this change, raising an Army (by
the help of Charles) of 12000 Men, and with 18 Ships, landed in Yorkshire. His
Army was so small, that he durst attempt nothing, only sent to persuade the
people there, but all in vain, for they either by fear or for respect to
Warwick, would not falsify their promise; but when he gave out that he was
come not for the Kingdom, but to recover his Patrimony the Dukedom of York,
many running to him, he grew somewhat stronger, and so goes to York. But the
Towns men being warned by Letters from Warwick, would not let Edward come in.
He spoke fairly to the Citizens, and desired them that they would help their
Lord, not to get the Kingdom, but his ancient Inheritance, and so taking a
solemn Oath that he would attempt nothing against King Henry toward getting the
Crown, he was admitted to enter within their Walls. But shortly after it
appeared more clearly what his intention was; for great ones use to pretend
Religion to serve their turns, which they make light of, that with the greatest
perjury they may compass what they desire. He presently put a Garrison to
secure the Town for himself, and then hearing that the enemy made no great
haste, he marches to Nottingham, to whom many Noble men came, when they saw him
fortified with a strong Army. The very Duke of Clarence distrusting Henry's
side, under a pretense of a Parley with his Brother, came willingly to join
with him.

Warwick also was solicited to fall off, but he stuck fast to King Henry. Then
Edward in full confidence of his Army came up to London. The Citizens were all
frighted, hearing that the Duke of Clarence was revolted, and the people
presently ran to meet Edward, and with a great applause saluted him for their
King. Sommerset and the rest that followed Henry shift for themselves by
flight, leaving Henry in a Bishops Palace, who was presently taken by Edward
and committed to his former custody. Then giving a general pardon, he won all
the peoples hearts.

Warwick in the mean while mustering a gallant Army, leads them to London, and
finding that Henry was cast into prison, he stopped at St Albons. Edward
presently goes against him with a mighty power of men, which augmented daily by
the coming of more forces; when both Armies came in sight, at the break of day
the Trumpets sound to Battle. They fight stoutly on both sides, Edward with
more men, Henry with more virtue, yet Valor is vanquished by Force; Warwick
when he despaired of the Victory, rid into the midst of the enemy, and died
gallantly with his Brother the Marquess, ten thousand are slain, Sommerset with
Oxford flies into Wales.

The Earl of Exceter takes asylum at Westminster. Edward like a Conqueror,
with King Henry (for he brought him along with him) enters London.

In the mean while the fame was that Queen Margaret was landed in England with
a great Army, and was corroborated for War by the Earl of Sommerset,
Devonshire, Pembroke and others that joined with her. Wherefore Edward being
sure to meet the enemy every where, removes to Oxford with his Army. At length
he pursues Margaret, whilst she thought to march into Wales, and she by the
unexpected coming of Pembroke, which was very material, taking counsel with
Sommerset what to do, gave him Battle; the fight was fought at Teucksbury, and
the dispute was long and doubtful, at last Edward prevailed, and all Margarets
men almost were killed. The Earl of Devonshire, and Sommerset's Brother, and
many Nobles were slain; Margaret, Prince Edward, the Duke of Sommerset, and
others, about twenty Knights were taken, and all of them except the Queen and
Prince Edward, were beheaded in two days. But Edward when he was brought to
confer with the King, and he answered more boldly than was convenient, he was
most cruelly slain by the standers by, George Duke of Clarence, Richard Duke of
Glecester, Thomas Gray Marquess of Dorset, and William Hastings. The Queen
afterward was set free for a Ransom, and sailed into France, and lived always
a sorrowful and languishing life. Edward having thus got the Victory, comes in
Triumph to London.

In the interim Faulconbridge Son to the Earl of Kent, who was made Admiral
of the Sea by Warwick, when he had long played the Pirate, coming into Kent,
raised a great force of Kentish men, and entered into Londou: But the Mayor of
the City raising an Army, fell suddenly upon him, and took all his booty from
him, chasing him away, and killing many of his men. Faulconbridge was taken
afterward and his head cut off. Pembroke when he saw all was lost, shifting
away from the snares that were laid for his life, and being more at ease by the
death of Wagham, who lay in wait for him with Henry his Nephew by his Brother
Earl of Richmond, and some few of his new friends arrived in France. Edward,
that all things for the future might be more calm, tamed the audacionsness of
the Kentish men, who had last taken up Arms against him, partly by punishment,
partly by threats. Also King Henry that he might give no occasion to new
risings, was killed in the Tower by the Duke of Gloucester; his Body was buried
with no pomp, but the Parricides, and the Authors of his death, (as it shall be
rehearsed) were afterward punished for murdering him.

He had reigned thirty eight years and six months, he had an honest mind, a
comely personage, and was more like a Saint than a King.

Edward to blot out all the footsteps of Rebellion, cast George Archbishop of
York into prison, who was afterward set at liberty, yet died of grief of
mind. Also he cast the Earl of Oxford into prison, where he kept him twelve
years. Others in other places were either captivated or put to death. Then that
the Rebels might not fly away to neighbor Nations, he made Truce with James
King of Scotland for twenty years. The Earls of Pembroke and Richmond escaped
into France, where they were courteously entertained by the Duke of Britain.
But afterward, when as Edward required that they should be delivered up to
him, and could not prevail, they were kept more carefully by the Duke. Then a
Parliament being called, Henry's Decrees were nulled, and Edwards confirmed,
and those that were banished their Country for his sake, as enemies, are called
home again; and the Kings Exchequer being extremely wasted, Subsidies are
requested. In the interim War burning between Lewis the King of France, and
the Duke of Burgundy (to whom many Princes of France joined themselves)
abhorring the manners of Lewis that were grievous to them; Edward himself, that
he might not be wanting to assist his friend that he was bound unto for so many
courtesies, provided an Army and a Fleet and sailed to Callis. Charles was
presently with him, and congratulates his Victory over the Rebels, and invites
him that was willing to enter upon a new War: But Lewis being mightily afraid
of two such potent enemies, sent Ambassadors to Edward. The two Kings held a
large Conference, who met at Pictuigny, where a League was made for many
years, 70000 Duccats being paid to Edward for his charges, and 50000 to be
paid yearly, and Elizabeth Daughter to Edward was married to Charles Son to
Lewis: And so Peace being agreed upon, Charles and Luxenburg that joined with
him in the War, being not a little vexed at it, Edward came first to Callis,
and from thence to England. Luxenburg was afterward taken in fight and lost
his Head at Paris. Edward though he had settled Peace at home and abroad, yet
thinking nothing safe enough for him, whilst Henry Earl of Richmond was alive,
whose right to the Crown he much feared; wherefore sending messengers to the
Duke of Britain, what by gifts, what by promises, he prevailed to have the
Earl delivered: But the Duke repenting what he had yielded to, called back the
gallant young man that was now gone on his journey to be put to death, and
preserved him from it, sending Edwards Ambassadors without their prey home
again. Edward who was bountiful to all, showed himself cruel to none but his
Brother the Duke of Clarence, whom he suffered to be drowned in a Pipe of
Malmsey. The War began again with the Scots, the Duke of Albany the brother
of King James being the cause of it. Richard Duke of Gloucester was sent into
Scotland, but the Scot not trusting to his small forces, sued for peace. The
Duke of Albany, who was the Author of the War, and knew that he was hated by
his Brother for it, fled into France, and was killed there in a fight on
Horsback. Now it remained that Edward should make War with the French, who
had not kept the Articles of agreement, but he was conquered by another enemy
which he foresaw not, for falling into a new disease not understood by the
Physicians, he died in a few days, in the 50 year of his age, and of his Reign
the 23, In the year of our Lord 1483.

EDWARD the fifth, and RICHARD the third, King of England and France.
Anno 1483.
EDward the fourth being dead, his eldest Son Edward succeeded; but he in his
Reign was under Governors, Antony Riverius his Uncle, Thomas Wagham
Chamberlain, and Richard Gray, Knights, who being sent for by the Queens
Letters, came in haste to London with the Prince. Also Richard Duke of
Gloucester, who after his Brothers death had the chief power, was at York, but
hearing of the Kings death, he came to London with a small Army: For he by
order from his Brother Edward was to govern the Prince in his Nonage. So soon
as his Brother was dead, he was minded to usurp the Kingdom: He coming to
London overtook this young King Edward on the way, whom he presently took into
his charge, and sent his Tutours, Riverius, Wagham, and Gray, to Pomfret Castle
to be kept safe, which thing being known at London, the Queen, who well knew
the perverse mind of Richard, with her other Son Richard and her Daughters,
fled to Westminster for refuge, that she might be the more secure from Richards
violence.

Richard in the mean time came to London with Edward, and went to the Bishop of
Londons honse to reside. But he not content with Edwards being in his power,
that he might the more safely look to his bufiness, endeavors to get the other
Brother that was fled to Sanctuary with his Mother, under a color of
comforting the Kings sorrowful mind; and drawing the Lords to be of the same
opinion, he sent thither, amongst others, Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, who
with fair speeches mingled with threats, brings the innocent child from his
Mothers arms.

Richard now having got what he aimed at, sent him to the Tower in great pomp,
but with great lamentation. He in the mean time, what by rewards, what by
Religious dissimulation, and an affected proneness of his own mind, labored
to knit unto himself the minds of the Lords and Commons, to cover the great
desire he had of the Crown deeply rooted in his heart, so that no man could
tell whither his purposes tended. But Hastings, a man of an honest heart, did
daily press that due Honor should be given to the King; whom Richard, either
because he was troublesome to him, or else saw too far into the business,
labors to dispatch above all the rest, and so crastily charging him of that he
was no way guilty of, he commanded the soldiers that were ready for such
service, to kill him presently, he being neither questioned nor found guilty.
The fault was laid on this worthy man, that he had committed adultery with one
Joan King Edward the fourth's Concubine, whom Richard accused purposely, as
though with the Queen Mother he had made the King impotent by Magic Art. Also
he cast into prison the Prelates of York and Ely, with Stanley: but this man
was shortly released. He sent others away to other places, that they might not
obstruct his rising to the Crown. Then by Letters he gave warning to the Keeper
of Pomfret Castle, that he should behead Riverius, Gray, and Wagham, who was
over-obedient to the command. Also he secured himself with a strong Guard, (as
the manner is for Tyrants to be afraid of every thing) and to deceive the
credulous people, he had a consultation with one Ralph Shaw, a very famous
Divine, whom the people much admired, stoutly boasting that he was the true
Son of his Father Richard, but that his Brother Edward was a Bastard, and he
farther desired him that he would say so much in the Pulpit concerning his
right, unto the people; and that he was a Man, Edward but a Child, unfit for
Government, and by his imbecility the Commonwealth might be ruined, and so
forth. Ralph whether for fear or madness, easily yields to him, and having made
a Sermon from a Text fit for the purpose, he began to speak freely to the
people, threatening great unhappiness to those men who should prefer a bastard
before lawful succession. The people deceived by the Authority of the
Preacher, and frighted by threats, did wonderfully waver this way and that way,
and began to prefer Richard a Man, before Edward a Child, to wish for a change
of the Governor, to forespeak all the worst, to accuse the innocent Mother for
a Whore. But Ralph being admonished of this thing by his friends, and returning
to a better mind, was so much ashamed of it, that afterward he lived privately
and died of grief. Also the Duke of Buckingham a little after making a speech
to the Londoners in Counsel, did not spare to exhort them, and to admonish
them of their duty, boasting moreover highly of Richards goodness and mildness
of mind; to him a great part consented, part followed their leaders, not
daring to resist, part thought it necessary to obey the time and the reason of
things, and so all swore fidelity to Richard. In the year 1483. Presently they
go to Richard, and acquaint him what was done, he began to refuse it, and to
exhort them to continue faithful unto Edward their young King, to detest such
a damnable wickedness, but at last, as it were, against his will, he received
the Ensigns of the Kingdom, and with his Wife Anne was Crowned King.

He labors to make that power good by force which he got by craft, for being
compassed with a choice number of Soldiers for his Guard, he thought himself
safe enough from all injury. Yet he feared the multitude of the Londoners, for
Tyrants think themselves safe in no place, wherefore he resolves to go to York,
having settled the business at London. But in the way (when he hoped for no
quiet whilst his Nephews were alive) he writ Letters to the Lieutenant of the
Tower, Robert Brakenbury, that so soon as he could, by any means, he should
destroy the young King Edward and his Brother in the Tower, when he refused and
delayed, he gave that charge to James Tyrel, who coming to London in great
poverty, he stifled the young children, cafting pillars upon them. The
childrens death was divulged, Richard not being against it, it is wonderful
how great amazement seized on the minds of all men, every one lamented the
unhappiness of the children, and pitied them, and they began to speak what
hopes they had of him, who spared not his own near kindred, but shed their
blood, to say nothing of the Mother and her Daughters. Certainly immortal God,
who will not suffer great sins to go unpunished, revenged on the innocent
Children the perjury of their Father committed at York, and the death of the
Duke of Clarence, whom he wickedly murdered.

But the Duke of Buckingham, who had taken such pains for Richard, began now to
detest his horrid wickedness, and sell away from him, took counsel with the
Bishop of Ely, who was committed to his custody, how to restore Henry Earl of
Richmond (to whom the Kingdom of right belonged next unto, for that he
descended from John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, his great Grandfather) and to
root out Richard a monster of men: These therefore disclosed their business to
others, they presently send away Hugh Conway, and Thomas Ranmey into Brittany,
who should acquaint the Earl of the combination, and he should impart it to the
Duke of Brittany.

The Duke, though he were much importuned by Richards Letters to keep Henry in
prison, promised assistance.

Richard in the mean time who had notice of the consultations of Buckingham,
sent for him again and again to come unto him, but when he refused to come,
they fall to their Arms on both sides. The Duke mustering presently some Welsh
forces and others, came to Gloucester over the River to meet Richard that had a
mighty Army with him. But the soldiers which he had procured voluntarily,
rather than for their pay, were not very firm, but ran from him before he came
in sight of the enemy. The Duke was now almost left all alone, only his Lacky
remained with him, who was forced to fly to shift for himself, and went to
Humphrey Baunisters, he unmindfull of all former favors, delivered him
afterward to Richard, who cut off his Head. When this was commonly reported,
all the Conspiratours ran one one way, and another another way, some to places
of refuge, some to the Duke of Brittany to the Earl.

Richard had heard in the mean time, that the Duke did not only not hurt the
Earl, but had resolved to assist him, wherefore he presently provides a Fleet,
that if perhaps the Earl should come, he might repulse him every where from the
English coasts.

Henry in the mean time with 40 Ships, and 5000 Britains sailed for England;
but a tempest arose and scattered his Ships, and he almost was quit of all his
Forces, and was driven to Cornwall, where coming on Land, when he saw a great
Army he retreated to his Shipping again, weighed Anchor and saild to Sea. And
being very pensive when he heard of Buckinghams death, void of all counsel, he
returned again to Brittany in France. But by the coming of the Nobility he took
heart once more, and promised before the Altar, to marry Elizabeth, Edwards
Daughter, if the business should succeed to his mind, and so afresh an Oath of
fidelity was taken by them all.

Richard in the mean time did rage fiercely against all those that followed the
Earl, wheresoever he could lay hold on them. Thomas Earl of Dorset, who had
fled to him, was banished both by Sea and Land.

Also he made a Covenant with the Scotch King, and confirmed it, giving his
Sister Anne to the Scotch Kings Son. Richard in the interim lays new traps
for Earl Henry, by corrupting the Dukes Treasurer with money. But he escaped
them, the matter being detected by Bishop Morton. When the fraud was known to
the Duke himself, he was so enraged against the Treasurer, that he caused this
wicked man, for that and other wicked deeds to be hanged. The Earl Henry was
now come into France, where the Earl of Oxford escaped from his imprisonment,
came and joined with him, and promised his faithful endeavor in all affairs:
To whom some Noble men, that studied at Paris, came to assist, willingly
offering their aid, amongst whom was Richard Fox the famousest Scholar in those
days, whom the Earl took to be of his Privy-Counsell, and when he had gaind
the Kingdom afterward, he made him Bishop of Winchester.

But Richard to hinder Earl Henry's Marriage with Elizabeth, partly by
flattery, partly by fear, partly by promises, he prevailed so far with Queen
Elizabeth, that she should entrust her Daughters with him, and should write her
Letters to her Son the Marquess of Dorset, who was near to Earl Henry,
whereby she should command him to return home without delay, leaving the Earls
society. That all things were now pacified, and that her family was received
into the Kings favor. Richard all this while having gotten the Queens
Daughters, that he might totally destroy the intention of Henry, he thought
himself to marry Elizabeth his Brothers Daughter, his former Wife also was yet
alive: But she also when other projects would not suit, was taken privately
away by poison. In the mean while he tries all means to win Elizabeth to affect
him, and if he could not obtain her, he was resolved to join violence to his
prayers. But he was so much urged with care and foreign fear, that he had no
time for lust to show it self. In the interim Stanley had a command to Muster
an Army, but he must not go forth, before he had given unto Richard for a pawn
and pledge of his fidelity, his eldest Son the Lord Strange. A fame was also
spread on purpose that Henry had implored help from the French in vain, and
that there was no fear of his coming. Richard dealt something carelessly and
unwisely, discharging the Navy he had sent to scour the English Coasts.

Henry was advertised how things stood, and arrived in England with but 2000
soldiers in pay. Presently Rice Thomas and John Savage, two the most Potent
men in Wales, having collected some Forces, came to join with Henry. Pembroke
with some others did the like. Stanley though he wished well, yet fearing least
his Son should be miserably tortured by the King, delayed his intention
until some other opportunity.

Richard all this time was wonderful sluggish and careless, but when he heard
of the revolt of his subjects, he raised what men he could scrape up, and went
against Henry.

He pitched his Tent at Bosworth field, when he saw the enemy intended to
fight, he also made ready his men: At last they fall on, and fought a sharp
Battle on both sides. But Stanl^y who came later, in the heat of the Battle,
brought fresh Forces and joined with Henry, whereby he was not a little
animated, for otherwise he was far inferior to Richard in men, and so takes
heart again. The King himself at last entered the fight, who after he had given
wonderful tokens of his Valor, had killed Henry's Standard Bearer, put Henry
himself in danger, he was surrounded by multitudes of soldiers, and fighting
valiantly, was slain. Henry got the Victory by Richards death, for the Earl of
Northumberland, who brought up the tear of Richards Army, as he came against
his will, so he refused to fight any longer. Not above 1000 were slain of the
Kings side, and of Henry's side, hardly 100. The Nobility that yielded were
pardoned, and Henry had forthwith the Crown set on his Head, which they had
taken from Richards Head, and he is saluted ^ing by all with a general
acclamation. Richards body was found amongst the dead, and was buried with no
Honor at Leicester.

HENRY the seventh, King of England and France.
Anno 1486.
HENRY came to the Kingdom both by Right and Valor, and was Crowned at
Westminster, Anno 1486, the day before the Calends of November.

Then calling a Parliament he is discharged of the Treason Richard laid to him,
and he gave Rewards and Honors to some that were grieved.

He married Elizabeth the Daughter to Edward the fourth, and by that Marriage
the old quarrel between the White Rose and the Red was ended. At his first
entrance he kept a strong Guard about him, either for his power or Majesty;
which custom is continued to our days. The English Sweat was rife about this
time, a disease never known before, it destroyed abundance of men, but the
sharper the disease was, the shorter time it lasted. Then new troubles arose in
the North of England, which were easily vanquished by Lovels flight, and
Staffords death.

But a new tumult that grew from mere opinion and persuasion, gave cause for
new cares, for one Simon a Priest reports falsely that a Scholar of his, who was
very like, (which made the Priest the bolder to give it out) was the Son to
Edward Duke of Clarence (which was cast into prison a little before by Henry)
and he said with him into Ireland, and prevailed so much amongst the Peers
there, that the youth was saluted King at Dublin. Then obtaining help from
Margaret wife to Burgundy, he comes in^o England, to whom those Lords that
favored the cause of Plantagenet joined themselves, though they knew the
fraud, yet they hoped to bring on the design. But Henry went against them in
time, and after a most eager fight he slew the Earl of Lincoln, and other of
the chief men that followed him. But he spared Lambert this counterfeit Earl,
by reason of his youth and innocence, and he was made the Kings servant;
Simondus escaped because he was a Priest.

Then sending Ambassadors into Scotland, he treated for peace, but when he
could not procure it, in regard of the malice of the subjects, a Truce was made
for seven years. But a difference rifing between Charles King of France, and
Francis Duke of Brittany, Henry that he might displease neither side, being
engaged to both, made himself Umpire to end the quarrel between them, but when
he could do nothing by his Ambassadors, they fell to Arms.

Edward Lord Vdevill the Queens Uncle, without the knowledge of the King,
assisted the Duke of Brittany with 400 choice men, but the French afterward
getting the Victory, the Duke and they were all slain. The Duke being dead the
contest ended. In the mean time in Yorkshire troubles arose, because of Tribute
required, one John Chambers was the Author of them. Henry Earl of
Northumberland, Governor of that Country, was basely slain by one of the
factions multitude, then they came on by Troops, John Egrimont Knight being
their Leader. But the King fell on them presently, and easily dissipated the
tumultuous rabble, punishing severely the Authors of it: But Egrimont fled to
Margaret into Burgundy, which was the common place of refuge for the Rebels;
yet there was nothing abated of the Tribute to be paid.

A great Tumult about that time fell in Scotland, the subects rising against
James King of Scotland, and they forced his Son James to take part with them.
Henry King of England, Charles King of France, and the Pope, could not
reconcile this quarrel, and when the subjects gave a harsh answer, the Battle
began at Strevelin, where the subjects got the Victory, and the King himself,
though his Son was against it, was cruelly slain in a Mill. Then a jarring
arose between Frederick the Emperor, and some Cities in Flanders; the French
came to assist the Emperor: But Henry not enduring the French so near to
Callis, sent the Lord Morley with a supply of a thousand men, who with two
thousand of his soldiers vanquished eight thousand of the enemies, but he
himself was slain. The French to revenge this loss, had almost won Newport, but
being frighted at the coming of the English, they lost the Victory. Maximilian
the Emperor, when he endeavored to marry Anne Daughter to Francis Duke of
Brittany, which he had betrothed by Ambassadors, he is hindered by the French
King, to whom he had espoused his Daughter Margaret, for he divorcing Margaret,
gaping after the Dukedom of Brittany, by force got Anne into his power, and
solemnly made her his Wife. Henry was wonderfully offended at this fraud, and
asked Subsidies from his Parliament, taking counsel to make a War upon the
French King. At length he landed at Callis with a small Army, and besieged
Bononia, but finding Maximilian unprepared, for whose sake he had undertaken
this War, he easily yielded to make Peace, (obtaining from the French a great
sum of money, and a yearly revenue) and so returned for England. Margaret
Wife to the Duke of Burgundy always studied mischief against the English, for
she bred up for some months in her Court, a tertain young man who was called
Peterkin, or Perkin Warbech, and obtruded him upon the English Nation, for
Richard the Son of Edward the fourth, who, was said, to have been stifled.
Many of the Nobility of England, either deceived by the appearance, or because
they desired innovation, join with that supposed Richard; amongst whom was
William Stanley, who helped Peter with money, Stanley was taken, convicted, and
lost his Head, though he were the principal cause whereby Henry came to the
Crown.

Peter in the mean time having got a tumultuous number of men, landed in Kent,
where there were taken of his men 160, amongst whom were five Captains, who
first landed, they were hanged at London and other places. Peter, when he
little prevailed there, sails into Ireland, where he was magnificently
entertained by the Inhabitants, who much honored the name of the Plantagenets.
But when he could expect little help thence from a poor weak people, he makes
haste into Scotland. The Scot had him in high esteem, and being deceived by his
presence or courtly Carriage, which Margaret had bred him to sufficiently in
her Palace, he gives him in Marriage, Katharine the Daughter of the Earl of
Huntley, and sent him toward the Borders of England with a great Army to do
what he could, in hopes to attain some of the Subjects to him, either by fear
or affection, but all proved in vain.

Henry being wonderfully offended by reason of the Scots invasion, musters an
Army, and marches against the Scots under the Command of Danby, but he was
called back again to suppress a Rebellion that rose in Cornwall by reason of
Tribute to be paid. The Cornish, the Lord Lieutenant Audley being their Leader,
march for London, but when they came thither, they were vanquished and
scattered by the Royalists, two thousand of them being slain, and many taken,
the greatest part of them were pardoned, except the Ringleaders, for Audley
was ignominiously drawn to Execution, and lost his head; and others that put
the people forward, as Thomas Flammok, Michael Son to Joseph a Blacksmith
were hanged up.

The Scot takes occasion hereby during these Tumults to go forward on his
enterprise, and spoils the Frontiers of England again, and then besieged the
Castle of Durrham, but the Earl of Surrey, collecting an Army of 20000 Men, and
with a great Navy, not only raised the siege, but pursued the Enemies into
Scotland, ruined many of their Forts and Castles, and when they would not stand
to fight with him, he returned to Barwick.

By the Mediation of the King of Spain truce was made between England and
Scotland for some years, but on this condition that Perkin Warbech must leave
Scotland. He when he was gone from thence, hearing that new Tumults were up in
Cornwall, came thither with a few Soldiers out of Ireland, whether he had
transported himself and his Family, and what by fair words, what by pretenses,
he drew some of the Inhabitants to his side, and so mustering about three
thousand Soldiers, he beleaguered Exceter; but when he heard of the Kings
March, he forsook his Army, and fled to the Altar; The King in the mean time
being now certain of his flight, caused diligent search to be made for him, his
Wife Katharine a very beautiful woman, and of a most noble Family, was taken
and delivered up to the King, who by reason of her Beauty and Descent, assigned
to her a yearly Revenue. Then Henry punished the Rebels, but he laid only a
small Penance on them, and so set them at liberty. Peter when he had long staid
in Sanctuary, and found no place of safety, at last yielded up himself
voluntarily, and was sent Prisoner to the Tower.

In the interim, Sebastian Gabat a Citizen of Genoa, but born at Bristow,
procuring from Henry one or two Ships, sailed to new Countries in the West, and
after two years returned again into England. Peter who (we said) was cast into
Prison, made his escape shortly after, and went to Richmond, he was taken
again, and made a public shame, and once more imprisoned in the Tower, but
when he began a new Conspiracy with the Earl of Warwick, whose name Lambert had
taken, and with some other familiar Friends of the Lieutenant of the Tower, he
was drawn to Execution, and was hanged, together with two of the Lieutenants
Servants. Also Warwick that he might give no more cause for new troubles, was
beheaded after a short time. This was the eldest Son of the Duke of Clarence,
and the last male offspring of the Family of the Plautaganets, who was put in
prison from his very childehood, a thing beyond the knowledge and memory of
man. Hence arose a new sedition, and of the same kind; For Patrick an Augustine
Friar, counterfeiting a new Earl of Warwick of one of his Scholars, stirred up
the people to Rebellion in his Pulpit, but he and his Scholar were taken. The
young man was hanged, Patrick was cast into perpetual imprisonment, such was
the reverence they gave at that time to holy Orders, that they would never put
to death any of them, though they were guilty of high Treason. Marriages were
made about this time between Katharin the King of Spains Daughter, and Arthur
Prince of Wales, and between Henry's Daughter, and James King of Scotland. From
this last Marriage proceeded at length Mary Stuart, Mother to King James, who
was Father to Charles, and the Kingdoms were united. Arthur five months after
his Marriage died in Wales. But Henry that he might not be defrauded of the
Dowry and Friendship of the King of Spain, married Katharin (by the Popes
Indulgence) to Henry his second Son, who was unwilling to it.

Edmund Pool Earl of Suffolk, Son to Elizabeth Sister to Edward the fourth,
being offended with the King at that time for some private injury, conspired
against him in Flanders; The matter being discovered, and the Conspiratours
taken, he only escaped to Philip Arch duke of Austria. But Philip by the death
of Ferdinand King of Spain, having got the Kingdom (in the name of his Wife
Joan, who was the Kings Daughter, Sister to Katharine, which (as was said) was
married to Arthur Prince of Wales) took his journey thither, and by a contrary
Tempest was brought into England. King Henry went to meet him with all honor,
and obtained from him the Earl of Suffolk upon the Condition that no violence
should be offered to his Life. Henry cast him into Prison, and spared his Life,
but after he lost his Head in the Reign of Henry the eighth.

Henry being now in the height of his glory, had procured his Subjects
fidelity, and respect from his Neighbors. He was very happy, had he not about
the end of his Reign and Life been so greedy after the goods and wealth of his
Subjects.

He was long sick of the Gout, and afterward he fell into an Asthma also, in
the 52 year of his Life, and the 23 year of his Reign, he died in the year 1508.

HENRY the eighth, King of England France and Ireland.
Anno 1508.
HENRY the Eighth having got the Kingdom, at the beginning he behaved himself
with great Obedience, Prudence and Justice. Marrying Katharine his Brothers
Wife, which his Father had betrothed; He chose the wisest Counselors, and he
executed the cursed Ministers of his Fathers exaction. He spent then the first
year of his Reign in Tilting and other Recreations. But at the request of the
King of Spain the Queens Father, an expedition was undertaken into Spain
against the Moors, but before the English came, there was a Peace made with the
Moors, and so it was but lost labor, and nothing being done, only the Captain
receiving honors from the King, returned again for England.

Edward Poining a Knight was sent with 1500 Bowmen to Charles Prince of Spain to
assist him against the Duke of Gelderland, he succeeded prosperously, and
loaded with rewards he came back again.

In the mean time a Scotch pirate one Barton, who was wonderful bold and
valiant, did great mischief about the Coasts of England, the Admiral of the Sea
was sent out after him, after a doubtful and a notable fight, he was conquered
and slain, but his followers were pardoned; A great Example of the Kings Mercy.

In the mean time War grew between the French King and the Pope; Henry
admonished the French man to desist, and when he could not prevail with him, he
proclaimed War against him, and made a Confederacy with Maximilian the
Emperor, and with Ferdinand King of Spain. The Spaniard had entreated Henry to
send an Army into Biscay, and joining his Forces with his, that he should make
the French work from that part; Whereupon presently Thomas Gray Marquess of
Dorset is sent thither with other Nobility, and 10000 Soldiers, he, when he
came thither, did not long wait for the Spaniards assistance; For the Duke of
Alba took in the mean time by Force the Kingdom of Navarre from the French,
endeavoring the profit of his own King. But the English that they might not
seem to do nothing in Guyan, subduing some Towns that were not considerable,
fell into that necessity of provision (the Spaniard affording them none) that
many of them died miserably for hunger, contracting also diseases by such
unusual diet, and the rest break forth into open Rebellion. The Lord Howard,
who had the disposing of all affairs, whilst the Marquess was sick, hardly
escaped from being slain; Wherefore he was forced to provide Ships, and to
bring these sactious people home again.

Edward Howard Admiral at Sea, did wonderfully depopulate Britanny by fire and
sword, and vanquished the Forces of the Britans in Battle, though they far
exceeded those he had, and so with his Ships laden with the spoil, he sailed
toward the Isle of Wight, whilst Henry at London recreated himself with
Tiltings and other courtly delights.

In the mean time in France in the British Sea, there was almost an equal
fight for loss between the English and the French Ships, and the Victory was
doubtful. After this the English set upon the French Ships very indiscreetly
in the very Haven, with a great loss to themselves and their Admiral, whereby
they were forced to sound a retreat and be gone. Whereupon the French began to
wax more insolent, to do mischief on the Coasts of England, and to burn some
Cities, until by the vigilance of Howard, who was put into the others place,
they were kept in.

Henry was resolved to make a War indeed with France, and sent George Talbot
before with the principal Nobility, and 8000 Soldiers only to Callis, then he
sent Charles Sommerset, and other Lords with 6000 Soldiers, he himself being
to come after them. When the Admirals met they fell upon Tarvenne with joint
Forces. Henry shortly after came to them with 9000 Soldiers, and with a great
number of Pioneers. Also Maximilian the Emperor, which was a rare example,
took Pay under King Henry. Yet though he served under the English, he was
received as an Emperor should be, and for the honor of his Majesty. Then the
French Horse purposing to relieve the City with provision, were repulsed by the
English, the Duke of Longovil being taken, and 240 more, whereupon a wonderful
fear and despair fell upon the Townsmen; so the English pressing them sore,
they were forced to surrender. The Soldiers had leave to depart with their
Arms, the Walls were laid level with the ground, the City, excepting the chief
Church, and the Palace, were consumed with fire. Then he marched to Tourney,
and beleaguered the City, they refusing to yield, he quickly became Master of
it, causing the Citizens to take an Oath of fidelity. And when he provoked the
French to fight, and could not make them accept of it, because the Winter was
now hard by, he made Poyning Governor of it, and returned himself for England.

In the mean while the Scotch at the instigation of the French fell upon the
English Frontiers. Their General was the Lord Humes, who with seven or eight
thousand men wasted the Borders. But Edward Bulmer suddenly came upon him, and
took all the booty from him, he himself hardly escaped, six hundred of his men
being slain, and four hundred taken. But James with an Army of sixty thousand
men, entered the skirts of England, who was met by the Earl of Surrey, Henry his
Deputy in those parts, at Bramston with six and twenty thousand men, and
joining Battle, the English wan the day by their great valor, and the Scots
lost it by their great confidence, James himself with two Earls, three Bishops,
and eight thousand Soldiers was slain, no fewer was taken; nor was this
Victory wan by the English without loss of blood, it was fought in the year
1513.

Henry coming out of France, made the Earl of Surrey, because he had so well
managed his business Duke of Norfolk, and other Lords who had done good
service, received Honors as they deserved. He gave also to Thomas Wolsey the
Bishopric of Lincoln. This man to be often named by us, came from a poor
parentage to great Honor, and at last was made a Cardinal, and governed the
Commonwealth of England very wisely.

Pope Julius the second at this time gave to H^^ry great Honor, sending unto
him a Cap of Maintenance, a Sword, and the Title Of the most Christian King,
which Grace Henry received with Tiltings, and other pompous Shows, wherein he
himself did always bear the principal part.

In the interim Mary the Kings Sister was espoused to the Prince of Spain, but
because the Ambassadors of Spain made delays, she was betrothed to the
French, desiring it, and having had their fill of War. But before the matter
was published, John the Admiral of the French first ruined one Village in
England, and John Wallop in revenge of this injury burnt one and twenty in
France; But at last a League was made, and they ceased from War. The French
man lived not above three months after his Marriage, and the lascivious old
man being dead, Mary (by Henry's consent) was married to the Duke of Suffolk.
Wolsey about this time was honored with a Cardinals-Cap, and is created by the
King Chancellor of England. And Cardinal Campeius was sent to Henry to desire
assistance to make War against the Turk, but he lost his labor, for that
cheat of raising money was grown stale. But Matthias the Cardinal being sent by
the Emperor Maximilian for the same purpose, prevailed at the request of
Wolsey.

At that time Henry was in great danger of his life. For as he went a Hawking,
the Pole broke that he leaped over the Ditches withal, and he was almost
smoothered in mire and dirt, but his L^ckey drew him out in time, and saved his
life. In the mean while a Sedition grew at London between the Citizens and
strangers, not without bloodshed, which was qualified by the death of the
Ringleaders, and pardon to the rest.

Tourney at this time, upon Conditions, and under color of Matrimony between
the Dolphin and Mary King Henry's Daughter, is delivered up to the French, and
Hostages being given, a League is confirmed between them. Maximilian being
dead, the Empire descended to Charles King of Castile the fifth of that Name.

Henry in the mean while was idle for lack of War, spending his time in
Tiltings, Dancings, Pleasures, and other Courtly Delights. Then that Peace
might not be without its Glory, a solemn Meeting was appointed between the two
Kings of England and France. For that purpose a magnificent Palace of Wood was
built in France. At last they met in wonderful start, they applied themselves
to Turn^ments, running at the Ring, and other such Recreations, and an
Agreement was renewed between the Emperor, and the Kings of England and France.

Wolsey in the interim did what he pleased, he found no hinderance in his
attempts whatsoever. He charged the Duke of Buckingham of high Treason, whether
it were to, or out of envy is uncertain, but the Duke lost his Head for it.

A new cause is given for a War between the Emperor and the King of France,
wherefore Wolsey is sent Umpire between both, who did not behave himself so
prudently as loftily, whereby he incurred the French Kings displeasure. Hugh of
Moncada besieged Tourney, and though the French did his best to relieve it, yet
he became Master of it.

Henry in the mean while, because he had written a Book against Luther, had the
Title given him, to be Defender of the Faith, which has passed to all his
Successors.

At that time cause was given of a War between the French and the Scotch
King, by occasion of the Duke of Albany, and by reason the French had not paid
the Money which he promised to Mary Henry's Sister, so the Covenant being
broken, they fell to War. William the son of William a Knight, the
Admiral-Lieutenant, with eight and twenty Ships, spoiled the Coasts of
Scotland, burnt their shipping, and so returned home.

Charles the Emperor in the mean time came to London, where he was received in
great State and Honor, and with a solemn Ceremony was graced with the Order of
the Garter. Then under pretense of conducting the Emperor into Spain by
shipping, the Earl of Surrey the Kings Admiral sets upon Brittany, and conquers
Morleys, who also was again sent into France with a great Army, and he ruined
many Towns and Castles, and consumed them by fire, but he attempted the Fort
Heding in vain, having left his great Gu^s at home, and so could make no
Battery; but having behaved himself honorably, he retreated to Callis. Also
the Marquess of Dorset destroyed by fire and Sword an innumerable company of
Villages and Forts in Scotland, but could not come to join Battle with them.
Sands sallied out of Callis, and skirmishing with the Enemy, after he had
ruined many of their Castles, he came back to the City.

When therefore King Henry understood, that the Duke of Albany, who commanded
all in Scotland, had a choice Army in France, he sent William Son to William
with a Navy, that he should set upon him in his coming back again, but when he
had scouted up and down at Sea in vain, he at last set his men on Land, and
with a handful of his, he overthrew a great Army of the French, and obtained
thereby both the Victory and the Prey, and burning the Suburbs of Triport, he
returned for England.

Henry now thinks seriously again of a War with France, and sends Suffolk,
and many principal Nobility with a great Army into France, who at first assault
overcame Bell-Castle, and made William Scevington the Governor of the Garrison.
In the mean time the Duke of Burbon, Constable of France, revolted to the
English King with ten thousand French, who being strengthened by these new
Forces, enter upon Picardy, and conquers many Towns and Castles; but Winter
coming on, and scarcity of provision, and the Soldiers murmuring, not waiting
for the supply that Henry sent, he was necessitated to retreat to Callis, yet
he had done a great mischief to the Enemy.

The Scotch in the mean while supposing the English to be over-busied with the
French Wars, lift up their Heads again, and assaulting the Borders of
England, they win diverse Towns.

But the Earl of Surrey entering into Scotland with six thousand Soldiers, wan
diverse Forts, and joining a light Battle with the Scotch, he returned
Conqueror, not without great loss to the Enemy, besides the Castle of
Judworth, and the Town that he burnt up.

So with uncertain Fortune the business being acted in those parts, there was a
conclusion for a Cessation of Arms, that so they might have time to treat of
Peace.

Francis the first, King of France, at that time was conquered by the Emperor
Charles the fifth at Papion, and was taken Prisoner, which was no small
happiness for the English affairs, but a sad loss for the French. Then Peace
was ratified between the Emperor and the French, and the English agreed with
them also. But the Emperor and the French shortly fell to a new War.

Peace being confirmed abroad, England began to be in an uproar with greater
Troubles in Civil Dissentions; For Henry who had lived twenty years peaceably
with his Wife Katharine had a scruple of Conscience put upon him, whether he
could without Incest live with his Brothers Wife? (for as we said, she was
first married to his Brother Arthur) Judges were chosen to end this Question.
But Cardinal Wolsey, who had not prudently dealt for Henry, had all his
Authority taken from him, and his Estate was Confiscate. But at last other new
Dignities being granted to him, his great loss was somewhat repaired. Then a
Parliament was called, and he was charged with many faults, and amongst the
rest, that he was wont to write in his Letters, I and my King, and had caused
the Cardinals Hat to be stamped on the Kings Coin. He was convicted of all
these things, and deprived of all his Estate; which shows a wonderful example
of the inconstancy of all humane affairs, for he that but lately ruled all and
the King too, as he pleased, made Laws, and swaied Courts of Justice, rooted
out the Nobles at his pleasure, burdned the subjects with great Taxes, deprived
both Clergy and Laity of their goods, he is now cast down from his high
Pinnacle of Honor, hated by all, and made no way like himself. Afterward when
he was sent for to the Court to answer his charge, he died of grief by the way.
In the mean time the business for a Divorce was transmitted to Clement the Pope
of Rome, at the suit of Queen Katharine. But the Pope fearing to displease King
Henry, who had lately the Title of Defender of the Faith given him by Leo the
tenth, nor did he think it safe to provoke the Emperor who ruled in Italy,
spun out the business with delays by his Legate Campeius; who at length with a
great disgust to the English, after many hastings and procrastinations,
departed from England, leaving the business uneffected. The King in the interim
burning with new flames of love, and so admitting no delay, Warham being dead,
created Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, who stood for a Divorce of
Queen Katharine. The Pope in the mean time gave his Judgment for Katharine.
But Henry, who had now Divorced Katharine (by the Authority of many Divines,
and of those at Paris, who were as it is supposed corrupted by money) married
Anne of Boloyne privately, and being thereupon angry with the Pope, he
abolished all his Power over the English Church, making it high Treason for any
man, to prefer the Popes Authority before the Kings, or should pay Tribute to
him, which he had no right unto, and caused them to be denied unto him for the
future, and made it a penalty for their life, if any man should maintain the
Pope to be the supreme Head. Then he made all the Churches of England and
Ireland take an Oath to him, that they should acknowledge him to be Head of the
Church next under Christ. The Discipline was thus changed, but nothing in the
Doctrine, which he confirmed by a Synod called at London. For he put to death
many of those that followed Luther and Swinglius. So Henry behaved himself in
the rest of his life, that had the Popes not been unjust against him, he would
willingly have submitted himself under their power. The Pope being offended
that he had lost his Authority, sending out his Writings or Bull as they called
it, he Excommunicated Henry King of England, but when it was known that it was
procured by Queen Katharine, it was the less regarded, and she shortly after
being deprived of friends, lost her life for her contumacy. In the mean time
Sir Thomas More, once Chancellor of England, and John Fisher Bishop of
Rochester, who both refused to take the Oath of the Kings Supremacy, lost their
Heads. Henry now using his own Authority, invaded the goods of the Church, and
expelled the Monks out of their Monasteries: Nor was he content with that, but
he cut off the Heads of his second Wife Anne of Boloyne, Daughter to Thomas
Bolen Earl of Wilshire, accusing her for Incest and Adultery, together with the
Lord Rochsfort her Brother, and others that were of the Kings Bedchamber.

Then he married Jane Semare, who died afterward in Childe-birth of Edward the
sixth of that name, who succeeded King. Then he Divorced from him Anne of
Cleve, newly married, and for her sake he beheaded Thomas Cromwell, who made
the match, who was risen from a mean estate to a vast power by the success of
Fortune. Also Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk had his Head chopped off, being
charged of Treason, because he had privily married Margaret Daughter to the
King of Scots, and Henry's Niece. Margaret was first detained, then she was set
free, after that she was married to Matthew Earl of Leven, King James his
Grandfather. In the mean time seditions arose in the North parts of England,
here and there by reason of the change made of Church Ceremonies; some were
punished for it, some were sent home, and some were subdued by force of Arms;
the troubles were happily assuaged, yet not without some danger: for it was a
matter of great concernment to keep all quiet under new customs.

Henry now married his fifth Wife Katharine Howard, but her he beheaded shortly
after, with the Lord of Rochsfort, condemning her for Lasciviousness.

At that time Henry had the Title of King of Ireland, when as before he was
called only Lord of it. In the interim Arthur Plantagenet, bastard to Edward
the fourth, is accused of Treason, but when he was proved not guilty, he was
received into the Kings favor, but Arthur took so much joy at it, that he died
the next night of mere rejoicing.

The Scotch now entering the Frontiers of England, and spoiling them, compel
Henry to take Arms, who sent the Duke of Norfolk with an Army into Scotland,
who ruined many Villages and Houses, and not seeing any enemy, he returned to
Barwick. The Scot would not suffer this violence to be unrevenged, but musters
an Army suddenly and falls into England, but his men being scattered and killed,
the Scot fell into such grief of mind, and then into a Fever, that he quickly
died of it, leaving Mary Stewart his Daughter but eight days old, Heir of the
Kingdom. Henry to put an end to so great dissentions, by the union of these two
Nations, dealt with the captive Lords to Espouse this Inheritrix of Scotland to
his Son Edward, who were set at liberty to press the business.

But by the mediation of the Cardinal of St Andrews, this Treaty was made void,
the Daughter being married to the Dolphin. Henry was enraged at this, and sent
a valiant Army into Scotland, and burnt Leeth, which pacified his wrath. Then
he made peace with Charles the fifth, the Emperor, and he married his sixth
Wife Katharine, Latimers Widow, who was brought in danger of her life upon
suspicion of the change of her Religion, but by her prudence and humility she
escaped. Now Henry by his Covenant with the Emperor proclaims War against
the French King, and sent an Army unto Callis, under the command of John
Wallop, which joining with the Forces of Charles, besieged the City Landreice.
But the French making show of a Battle, called the Emperor off from the
siege, and when he had brought provision into the City, he retreated, having
deluded Charles. Then Henry mustering a mighty force sails himself into France,
and besieging Bononia won the place.

In the mean time the English Ships which they had taken from the French, are
filled with provision at London: but the English had bad success in their fight
in Scotland, and Henry's men were vanquished, by which Victory, and new forces
they had recruited themselves with from France, the Scots grew insolent and
invade England: But the English by the good success of the Earl of Hereford,
destroyed an innumerable company of Villages in Scotland, and returned home
Conquerours, though otherwise they sustained a mighty loss by the Scots.

The Admiral of England with a Fleet did mischief on the coasts of Normandy,
and destroyed a multitude of the enemy; but shortly after there was a Treaty
made between the French and the English, and the conditions of agreement were,
that the French should redeem Bononia with eight hundred thousand Crowns.

In the mean time Thomas Duke of Norfolk, and Henry Earl of Surrey, his Son,
are accused of Treason, because they had engraven something in their Coats of
Arms that seemed to be peculiar to the King, and though they did defend their
Titles very abundantly, yet the Earl lost his Head. But the Duke was kept in
prison till the Reign of Queen Mary. Henry died about this time, in the year
1547, when he had reigned 38 years, and was 56 years old. He was a Prince
adorned with all gifts of Nature, and in whom, had he not too much loved his
pleasure, there was no defect. He was a great favourer of Learning.

EDWARD the sixth, King of England, France and Ireland.
Anno 1547.
HENRY dying, left his Son Edward born of Seymer, by his Will to succeed him
in the first place, and next to him Mary, Katharines Daughter, and last of all
Elizabeth, which he begat of Anne of Boloyn. Young Edward was Crowned at nine
years of age, in the year 1547. Because he was young he had sixteen Overseers
appointed for him, the chief was the Duke of Sommerset, Brother to Jane
Seymere, a man of great integrity. The death of Henry being heard of by Francis
King of France, did exceedingly grieve the old man, who being about the same
age, did presage his own death to be near. He kept a Funeral solemnity for
him, as the manner is for Kings, and not long after that he followed him that
was gone before him.

Henry at his death, had commanded his Council before all things, that they
should press a Marriage for his Son Edward with the Queen of Scotland.
Messengers are therefore sent to treat of conditions, and to obtain their
consent; but when the faction of the Papists prevailed for the Dolphin, a great
Army was presently raised, and sent into Scotland, under the conduct of the
Viceroy Sommerset. The Scots also came to meet him with a powerful hand, they
joined Battle at Muskelburg, but they were beaten down and put to flight, the
chief of their Nobility being slain or taken prisoners. After this Victory many
Cities yielded, and the Nobles fell off from them in greater numbers: But that
there might be an end made of this War and difference, they send the Maiden
Queen by advice of the Peers, to be Educated and Espoused in France. In the
mean time there was a great change of the old customs in the Churches of
England. Images were cast out of the Churches, by the Authority of Sommerset,
who was addicted to the Reformed Religion; The Sacrament was exhibited under
both kinds, and the other old Ceremonies were abolished, all that made
opposition were either cast into prison or lost their places. Upon this ground
a wonderful sedition arose in diverse Countries of England, though the Rebels
had several intentions, some came to pillage, others under pretense of Religion
set forward other designs; the smallest number made it any matter of
conscience. There was a Proclamation made whereby all were pardoned if they
would lay down their Arms; but the more mildly they were dealt withal, the
more did this mad rabble increase. They besieged Exceter, but the Citizens did
resist them with wonderful Valor, enduring great famine and scarcity. At
length Gray coming with an Army, after some small Bickerings, raised the siege.
The Rebels recollecting their Forces, began a new fight, but they were put to
flight, or taken presently and hanged. When this sedition was quelled, another
as great rose in Norfolk; for Robert Ket a base fellow, had drawn twenty
thousand men to his party, who guarded him that he might deliver up some
complaints to the King. The King, though he disdained to treat with Rebels,
answered them that their Petitions should be granted at the next Parliament.
They were not content with this, but they laid siege to the City of Norwich and
wan it. The Earl of Northampton went against them with a small Army, and was
worsted by the factious rabble, and the Lord Sheffeld and others were killed.
But being strengthened with new forces, he went once more against them, and
holding forth to them the Kings pardon, they threw away their Arms and left
their Colors, returning every man to his place. Ket and the rest of the
Ringleaders suffered for it. Another tumult rose about the same time, which
fell of it self, only the Ringleaders were executed.

The French in the mean while breaking their League, proclaimed War with
England; and providing a Fleet when they had assaulted Garnsey, Jersey, and
Bononia in vain with an Army, they left off of their own accord. In the mean
time the Viceroy of England being deceived, beheaded the Admiral his Brother,
being circumvented by the femine fraud of his Wife, and condemned him for
nothing that was laid to his charge; upon which occasion both he and his
Authority committed an egregious fault: For they that favored the Admiral
were offended with the Viceroy, and they that did honor him, would trust him
but a little, so they all fell from him at once, though upon diverse ends. Also
the Viceroy was taken up with building a stately Palace, (which is to this day
called Sommerset House.) And he had demolished diverse Temples, Towers, and
sacred places, by which injury he had alienated from him not a little the
minds of all men. Warwick who was of his own inclination the Viceroy his
greatest enemy, made use of this occasion, and procured some Lords to stand
with him, and they conspired together against the Viceroy, and sending
messengers to the King, who sojourned at Windsor, to certify him of the good
intention of the Lords, they desired his consent to cast the Viceroy into
Prison. But the Viceroy, when he would not or could not answer the crimes
objected against him, he submitted himself to the Kings will and pleasure, by
which humility he obtained pardon, and was received into grace. Also the Dukes
Daughter (to make the friendship lasting by Marriage) was betrothed to Warwicks
Son, and Warwick was made Admiral of the Sea.

Then Peace being ratified between the English and the French, Bononia was
delivered up to the French King, 400000 Crowns being paid to the English.

The Emperor in the mean time, because the profession of the Romish Religion
was not allowed to his sister, denounced War against England, but he was
pacified by such an Answer as was seasonable to that time.

Also there was a Treaty for a Marriage between Elizabeth the Kings sister, and
the King of Denmarks Son, but Elizabeth could not be persuaded to be married
to any man.

A speech there was further concerning a Marriage between Edward and the French
Kings Daughter, which was ratified, and the Dowry agreed upon.

In the mean time the Earl of Northumberland, that he might bring to pass what
he intended, endeavors by all means to root out the Duke of Sommerset. But he
to prevent his snares, came one day into his Chamber armed, and found him naked
in his Bed, and whether he were pacified by his false or friendly show of Love
and Humanity, he spared him, and departed doing nothing to him. But afterward
Sommerset was accused by him for high Treason, and lost his Head for it, being
a forerunner of the Accusers destiny. Northumberland, when as thus far all
things had succeeded as he desired, was resolved to follow the success, and
persuaded the King at length, that if he would have the Reformed Religion, that
was then generally received in England, to be confirmed, he should pass over
his sister Mary, who was so strongly addicted to the Church of R^me, and should
nominate Joan Gray for his successor, Wife to his Son Gilford Dudley, who
was next of blood after his Sisters. The King who was resolved by all means to
preserve the Reformed Religion, easily yielded to this, some others in vain
opposing it. The King died shortly after of a Consumption, by whose death the
Duke of Northumberland being now made partaker of his desire, took to himself
the Rule of the Kingdom, and commanded his Daughter Joan to be publicly
proclaimed Queen by King Edwards Testament.

MARY Queen of England, France and Ireland.
Anno 1553.
MARY, so soon as the fame was spread of her Brothers death, came with
Posthorse from Hovesdon, where she than resided, into Suffolk, to whom
presently came diverse Lords, who had first compacted to preserve the Reformed
Religion. Then she sent by her Letters to the Senate of London, that they
should proclaim her for Queen. But the Lords in the Name of all the people made
Answer, that by the Testament of King Edward, Joan was to succeed, and they
asserted that Mary's Mother was Divorced; whereupon they fly to Arms. The Earl
of Northumberland with a small Army went against Mary, but as he proceeded but
slowly, Mary's Forces increased mightily: Also Edward Hastings, who was set
with four thousand soldiers and six Ships, to prevent that Mary might no ways
escape, revolted to her, by which loss the Londoners and Lords were not a
little dismayed, and grew at odds one with another. The London Counsel, when
they did not hold fast together, was commanded openly to proclaim Mary Queen,
and the same was done in all other places. Northumberland when he was certain
that his companions had fallen from him, that he might not run the hazard
alone, called a Counsel at Cambridge, and he for want of a Herald proclaimed
Mary Queen of England, casting his Cap up in token of joy. But that did not at
all help his cause; for the Earl of Arundel, who a little before did not
decline to venture his life for Joan, coming to Cambridge, in Mary's Name takes
the Duke, who in vain entreated for his life, and casts him into prison. Joan,
at the command of her Father Duke of Suffolk, when the case was altered, laid
down the Ensigns of the Kingdom with more cheerfulness than she had taken them
up.

The Queen coming to London, met her Sister Elizabeth with a thousand Horse,
and Thomas of Norfolk, Edward Contener, Stephen Gardner Bishop of Winchester,
and Sommersets Wife, which she received into grace, giving them her hand to
kiss. Then entering upon the Church affairs, she abolished those Bishops and
Ceremonies that Edward had confirmed, setting up others in their room (the
people were not a little enraged at it) and then she punished severely all
those that were enemies to the Church of Rome.

In the interim the Duke of Northumberland, the Earls of Northampton and
Warwick, are Endited of high Treason, she spared Northampton, but
Northumberland was beheaded, abjuring the Religion he professed before in hope
of pardon. His Body was buried by the Duke of Sommerset his Capital enemy,
between Anne of Boloyne, and Katharine, who all suffered the same death. The
rest persisted and did not renounce the Faith they had professed.

Joan afterward with her Husband Dudley, Ambrose and Henry Sons to
Northumberland, was condemned to lose her Head, but she was reprieved for a
time.

Then a Marriage was Contracted between the Queen, and Philip Son to Charles
the fifth, who was afterward King of Spain, which matter was very ill liked by
some, who did foresee from hence a dangerous consequence to the Kingdom of
England: Amongst whom was Thomas Wiat, who took up Arms to Rebel by the advice
of Suffolk Father to Joan Gray, drawing some of the Nobility to side with him.
Also Bres who was sent against him with five thousand men, revolted to him, by
which success he grew more bold, and marched toward London, and put the
Citizens into great fear, so that the Lawyers pleaded in their Armor.

In the mean while the Earl of Suffolk had an Army raised in the County of
Warwick, but the Earl of Huntington was sent out against him, who terrified the
feeble Duke, that he was forced to fl^e in haste, and to shelter himself in
Woods and by-places. At last he was discovered by his Host, and sent with a
strong guard to London, and cast into prison. Wiat in the mean time coming to
London, was shut out of the City, but he passed over the Thames at Kingston,
and provided to offer violence to the Citizens. After some light skirmishing
with the Queens Forces, he was overborn by the power of his Enemy, and when he
had yielded, he was sent to prison, his Soldiers being scattered or taken. The
Queen being enraged with that boldness of the Subjects, began seriously to
consider how to punish the guilty; Gilford Husband to Joan was first beheaded,
then Joan her self, within the Walls of the Tower of London, with a wonderful
Courage, Piety and Constancy, had her Head chop^ off. She was a Princess for
her Learning and Wisdom, worthy of immortal praise. It is reported also that
Morgan, who had given sentence of Death against Joan, fell into madness
shortly after her Death, and died mad, always crying out, That they should
take Joan Gray away from him. Then Suffolk was beheaded, and the same day Wiat,
the cause of all these mischiefs (for Joan had been pardoned, had not he with a
furious Tumult enraged the Queen.) Those that followed him, some were punished
in other places, and at several times, amongst whom was Thomas Gray, and some
were pardoned. Also Elizabeth was cast into Prison by the malice of Gardner
Bishop of Winchester. Without doubt her Life was at stake, had she not wisely
answered Questions propounded to her concerning her Faith; They did severely at
that time punish all those that were Enemies to the Religion of the Church of
Rome, amongst whom was Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, Nicholas Ridley
Bishop of London, and Hugh Latimer Bishop of Worcester, these refusing to
abjure their Faith, were burnt to ashes.

The Queens Marriage with Philip was now solemnized, and Cardinal Pool being
sent from the Pope, all the Errors of the English are purged, as it were, and
all confessing their sins are received under the Popes Tuition.

The fame was at this time, that the Queen was with Child, she was so glad of
it, that she commanded to let loose many who were prisoners in the Towr;
Amongst which were the sons of the Duke of Northumberland, who were before
condemned to lose their Heads. But all this hope vanished, when the Queens
Conception proved to be but a Tympany.

That there might not lack Examples of Piety, the Queen restored to the Church
all the Goods she possessed belonging to the Church, and when she was told,
That by so great bounty the Crown Lands would be much wasted: She answered
piously and prudently, That she preferred her souls health before all the
worlds good.

Philip in the interim went to Brussels to his Father Charles, and obtained
from him the Kingdom of Spain, and his other Dominions before his Death, then
he returned for England; Then again he went to Callis, to wage War with the
Frenchman, and he staid upon that business above eighteen Months, the English
murmuring, and the Queen lamenting for his absence.

Thomas Stafford at that time was instigated by the French to make War
against the Queen, and landing in England with an Army, he wan the Castle of
York, but he was soon conquered, and taken by the Earl of Westmerland, he was
then beheaded at London, and his followers were hanged.

The Queen, though it were against the Articles agreed upon, put her finger in
to assist her Husband, and sent an Army, under the Command of Pembroke, to
assist him to beleaguer St Quintius. The French attempting to relieve the place
with victuals, were forced to fight, and they were beaten, and the chief of
their Nobility were taken, amongst whom were the Dukes of Momorancy, Mompensier
and Longovill, John Borbon Duke of Anion was killed, whereupon the City
yielded. This Victory was imputed chiefly to the English, but it was
recompensed with a greater loss, for Callis having more Forces drawn out of it,
then could be spared, was assaulted by the Duke of Guise, who would not let
such an opportunity slip, and being repulsed, he came valiantly on again, so
long, until it was forced to yield, after this City had been in the hands of
the English two hundred years; Guyna followed this, though it were gallantly
maintained by the besieged, and so the English were thrust forth of all France.
The Queen was wonderful grieved for the loss of Callis, she sent a great
Fleet, and burnt some Villages, but had small comfort for her great loss. Peace
then was confirmed between both Crowns, but Mary sought not for it, who took
such grief of mind for the loss of Callis, and was so weak of body by reason
of her Dropsy, that she ended her days, in the year of our Lord, 1558. the
fifth year of her Reign, and the three and fourtieth year of her Life.

ELIZABETH, Queen of England, France and Ireland.
Anno 1558.
ELIZABETH Daughter to Henry the eight by Anne of Bullen, succeeded her Sister
Mary, being raised to the Throne from the Prison; By her Coronation the Papal
Authority fell again the second time. All the Ceremonies Mary had brought in
she abolished, and Reformed all according to the Rule of her Brother Edward

Being she was of a flourishing age, and had a most flourishing Kingdom, it
could not be but she should be sought unto by many Lovers, that were at
emulation for her. For at once, Maximilian the Emperor, the Kings of Spain and
Sweden, the Archduke of Austria, and the Duke of Angirrs, sent to woo here,
but they were all put by; First, because the Queen would not marry, for at her
Inauguration, the Condition was, That she should marry no stranger, whereby
there was hopes left to the Natives for so great a Match.

The French and Scotch they hoped to prevail much by reason of her tender
years, being also she was a woman, whereupon they invade and spoil the English
Frontiers, for Mary Stuart Daughter to James the fifth, had married to Francis
the second, King of France, and the French King pleaded his Right thereupon to
the Crown of England, because his Wife was allied to Henry the seventh, and
Elizabeth was born by a second venture; Henry the eighth his first Wife being
alive, and so was accounted as a bastard by her Enemies. But Elizabeth to win
the Love of her Neighbors, lent help to the Subjects of Scotland, who by the
malice of the Guisians were extremely afflicted, and the business was drawn to
this head, that Peace was ratified between Elizabeth, the Scotch and the
French, and all the Roman Catholics that nesled in Scotland were commanded to
be gone, and the English Colors that the Frenchman had taken up wrongfully,
were wrested from him. Mary when Francis was dead returned for Scotland, and
made a firm Agreement with Elizabeth, until such time as Envy and Ambition
growing up, the Agreement was violated by the ruin of one of them, and their
Sister-like Concord was dissolved. For Mary her second Husband she was married
to, was Henry Darley, Kinsman to the Stuarts, and one that was the most
beautiful amongst Princes, who being afterward slain, as it is supposed, by
Feminine fraud, she fell into the hatred of all her Subjects, and when after
that in spite of the Nobility she made Bothwill partaker of her bed, and for
his cause made War upon her Subjects, she fell into all misery, and being
captivated, she was kept so a long time, but at length she made her escape, and
fled into England to Elizabeth who received this miserable woman in her Arms.
She was at first liberally entertained, but after, when she began to move
Dissension in England, where she was entertained, being a most bitter enemy to
those of the Reformed Religion, she was kept more narrowly. For eighteen years
she was held in prison, sometimes with more, sometimes less liberty, until
such time as she grew fierce by reason of her Captivity, and to riot in hopes
of the Kingdom, laying snares for the Queens Life, for that cause, at the
request of the several Orders of England, she was beheaded. Also the Duke of
Suffolk, who had secretly gone about to obtain Mary for his Wife, was put to
the same death before her. Elizabeth in the mean while sent assistance to those
of the reformed Religion in France that were in trouble, and for a pledge the
strongest City in France, Haver de Grace, was delivered up to her; but when she
refused to quit it again, the French King laid siege to it, and wan it from her.

At that time a sharp Dissension sprang up between Philip the second, and the
Low Countries, which grew to a War; and Elizabeth led by the affinity of the
Religion, and the nearness of those Countries, assisted the United Provinces
with Men and Money. For Leicester was sent with Forces into Holland, but when
he exceeded his Commission, and arrogated too much power to himself, and by
fraud attempted to make himself Master of the principal Towns, he lost the
States good will, and returned without honor into England. The Queen for this
assistance was hated by the Spaniard, who had privately before laid snaret for
her life, but now he breaks forth into open War. For he raised a mighty Fleet
both in Spain, and in the Low Countries, it being the best Navy for provision
of men and munition that ever the Ocean bare, and carried the presumptuous
Title of Invincible, it consisted of one hundred and thirty Ships, in which
were nineteen thousand two hundred and ninety Soldiers, eight thousand three
and fifty Mariners, two thousand and eighty Gally-slaves, two thousand six
hundred and thirty great Ordnance, and the 19th of July 1588. they came within
sight of England, and was in hopes to devour it. But by the valor of the
English and the Dutch, the Fleet was partly hindered, partly worsted, but
especially by a Tempest that rose against it, the Spaniard was disappointed of
his hopes. From that time they break forth on both sides into a fiery War,
especially by Sea, and in the West Indies and Portugal, the English did
mischief to the Spaniard, and received the like.

The Queen, when those Clouds of a Tempest at hand were dispersed, caused a
public Thanksgiving to be made unto God, who had delivered her, and in
Triumphant manner she rid through London.

She was not for all this free from Troubles, but by the Queens Wisdom and
Masculine Valor, they were even strangled in the birth; and England was made
the receptacle of persecuted and afflicted men, who fled by companies out of
France and Holland by reason of the Wars there.

In the mean while Sir Francis Drake was sent toward Hispaniola, who made the
Spaniard work enough in those parts, taking Cape Verde, wasting Hispaniela, and
he skirmished in diverse small fights, with the Spanish Forces. But when there
was no occasion for a fight on the continent, he returned home with the spoil
and honor. The next year also, the said Sir Francis Drake, burnt and took six
and thirty Spanish Ships laden with great riches that lay in the Haven at
Callis, and brought them for England.

With the same Success almost the Earl of Essex, with a vast Fleet of English
and Dutch, wasted the Coasts of Spain, and landing his men wan Gades, and
plundering the City, and burning thirty Ships that rode in the Harbor, he came
back for England laden with the spoil. After that the English Fleet, watching
the Spanish Navy that came fraught with rich Merchandise that came from the
West Indies, was disappointed by their flying into the Isle Tercera.

France being involved in troubles, the Queen was pleased to assist the King of
France with men and money.

The King of France having reduced his Subjects to their Obedience, endeavors
to mediate a Peace betwixt the Spaniards and the Queen, the Queen to satisfy
the French Kings desires, sent an Ambassador into France to consult about it;
But the States of Holland sent Ambassadors to Queen Elizabeth to dehort her
from the Peace.

In the year 1598. Philip King of Spain died, in the seventieth year of his
age: He aimed at great matters, but was unfortunate in most of them, whereupon
it came to pass, that the three Keys of the Spanish Empire (which his Father
so called, and willed him above all things to keep diligently) to wit, 1. Gulet
in Africa, Flushing in Holland, and Cadez in Spain, were neglected; The first
taken in by the Turks, the second by the Confederates of the United Provinces,
the third much impaired in its strength, and impoverished by the English, which
his Father foreseeing in his life time, admonished to make Peace with the
English, and the United Provinces.

Anno 1599. died that Reverend and famous Divine Mr Richard Hooker, a man
moderate, temperate, meek and virtuous, even to the best imitation, and left
behind him a living monument of his real worth, his Book entitled
Ecclesiastical Polity.

Then Peace was confirmed between the Spaniard and the French? but the English
and the United Provinces refused to be comprehended in it, because they held it
disadvantagious to their business, but making a Covenant, with joint Forces
they invade Spain. The Spaniard stirs up the Earl of Tyrone, who made a great
rebellion in Ireland. Essex was sent thither to subdue the Rebels, and to make
them conformable, but he scurvily neglected an opportunity of conquering the
Enemy, and beyond his Commassion treats with the Rebels concerning Peace. He
was therefore called home, and commanded to answer for his fault, by his
submission he found the Queens favor. Afterward prompted on, either by shame,
or his ambition of the Kingdom, he raised an Army, and entered London, and when
he purposed to have forced the Queen, his Forces ran away from him, and he was
taken prisoner, accused of High Treason, and lost his Head for it.

Charles Blunt was sent in his place, who in diverse fights wonderfully subdued
the Forces of the Rebels, though the Spaniard had sent many supplies to relieve
them; In a set Battle he overthrew Tyrone, and the Auxiliary Spaniards, and
then made Conditions, driving them out of Ireland. Tyrone afterward when he
tried all ways, submitted, and humbly entreated the Queens Pardon. In the mean
time Richard Levison and William Monson, with eight great Ships, and some small
ones, went and spoiled the Spanish Coasts, and meeting the Spaniards Fleet
coming from America with abundance of wealth, he set upon them, but was too
weak for them, for he was disappointed. After that he mastered a very great
rich Ship riding at Anchor in Portugal, and burning some lesser Ships, he
returned for England with her.

At that time the Seminaries of the Church of Rome, and chiefly the Jesuits
were banished out of England, because they caused croubles, and could not live
quietly.

At last the Queen being feeble with age and hot disease, she died in the year
1602. and she departed a very good Christian, having named King James of
Scotland Son to Mary Stuart to be her Successor, when she had reigned forty
four years and four Months, A Queen that was most endowed with all the
Benefits of Nature, a comely Person, for her Body, but more comely in her Soul,
she was an excellent Scholar, to be commended for her Goodness and Justice,
She was a Mother to her Subjects, and a Subject to the Laws.

JAMES, King of Great-Brittany, France and Ireland.
Anno 1602.
THe loss that England sustained by the death of Elizabeth, was abundantly
recompensed by her Successor King James, and the union of the two Kingdoms
England and Scotland. He was inferior to her, neither for Religion, nor any
thing else, and by new rejoycings he extinguished that grief the Subjects had
conceived. He was a King the more happy, because he obtained a Kingdom by
lawful succession, that was no ways embroyled with Wars and Tumults, but
settled in exceeding great Peace. But as in the calmest weather ofttimes clouds
rise suddenly, and it falls to thundering and lightning, so the affairs of
Brittany, though most peaceably, were endangered by the malice and conspiracy
of some. The Ringleaders were Henry Cobham and George his Brother, Thomas Gray
of Wiltshire, Walter Raleigh, and others. Their purpose was to kill the King
but newly crowned, to change Religion, to raise Tumults, to let in Forrainers:
A terrible design. But this flame vanished into smoke, the principal being
either put to death, or condemned to perpetual imprisonment, or having their
pardons granted to them. But least Peace should be disturbed by new Wars, he
made Peace with the King of Spain, who was a sworn Enemy to the English Nation,
it was solemnly confirmed on both sides.

Though Peace were settled abroad, yet there was occasion for new Troubles at
home; For when the King had called a Parliament, a very horrible Conspiracy was
detected, the chief Author of it was one Catesby a Roman Catholic; He having
hampered some other men in the same business, endeavored at one stroke to root
out all the English Nation, as it were by Lightning from Heaven. For hiring a
Cellar under the Parliament House, be laid in a vast deal of Gun-pouder, which
he purposed to set fire to, and so to blow up at once all the Parliament House,
together with the King, the Prince and all the Nobility; but the matter was
discovered by the importunate care of the Conspirators, who gave warning of the
danger to the Lord Mounteagle, Son to the Lord Morlay, a Member of the
Parliament, and one that they loved very well. In this Vault there were found
terrible Instruments of this damned wickedness, that a man would wonder at,
which were presently taken away. Then the Conspirators were executed, Catesbey
with his companions, John and Christopher Wright, and Thomas Pierce flying to
his Arms was killed with a shot, others were taken and executed: Amongst whom
was Everard Digbey, who was unwillingly drawn into this Conspiracy, for
otherwise he was a man of excellent parts. And thus that heinous wickedness
that had troubled the devils themselves, was purged away.

In Northampton and Warwickshire new tumults arose, first by Fines, then by
John Reignold that led them, but this faction was soon allayed, and the Authors
were punished.

In the mean time Frederick Count Elector Palatine, came to London to marry
Elizabeth King James his Daughter. The Marriage was solemnized with wonderful
pomp; but all these joys were over-shadowed with clouds of sorrow, for on the
sixth day of November 1612, Prince Henry departed this life. Various reports
were spread abroad by the vulgar, as if indirect means had been used, but his
Physicians gave it under their hands, that he died of a violent, malignant
Fever. Charles the Kings second Son succeeds him in the Principality of Wales.

About this time that Gallant and Noble Spirit. Sr Walter Rawlrigh, after
fourteen years imprisonment, made addresses to the King to get leave to visit
the New-found-World in America, to which he gave him liberty and a Commission
under the great Seal to set forth Ships and Men for that Service; his
Reputation and Merit caused many Gentlemen of quality to venture their Estates
and Persons on the Design: Many considerable adventures were performed, though
with great difficulty, but more especially that of the taking and burning St
Thomes. Information being sent to Gendimer who was Ambassador here in England,
never rested assaulting the King with importunity for reparation. Rawleigh no
sooner comes a shore at Plymouth, but he had secret information, and did
endeavor to get from thence in a Bark for Rotchell, but being apprehended by
Sr Lewis Stukly, he is brought to London, and committed to the Tower. Gondimer
that looked upon him as a man that had not only high abilities, but animosity
to do his Master mischief, being one of those scourges that Queen Elizabeth had
made use of to afflict the Spaniards. Having now gotten him in the Trap he laid
his B^its about the King: In October he was brought to the Kings Bench-barre at
Westminster before the Lord Chief Justice, where the Records of his arraignment
at Winchester were opened, and he demanded why the judgment should not be put
in execution: Ralwrigh. replied that Judgment was void by the King^ Commission
for his late expedition; The Lord Chief Justice replied, the opinion of the
Court was to the contrary: He required time to prepare for death, but it was
answered, the appointed time was the next morning. Accordingly on the morrow he
lost his Head on a Scafford in the Palace-yard.

The Earl of Buckingham, as great in Title as favor, was now grown a Marquess,
and lying in the Kings bosom, every man paid tribute to his smile: Worcester
and Nottingham are taken off, for him to be Master of the Horse, and Admiral
of England.

Queen Anne about that time fell sick and died. She was a Queen to be had in
everlasting memory for her Noble Virtues. The King also fell sick, but by Gods
affistance he recovered.

The Palsegrave in the mean time, who had married Elizabeth, by the prompting
forward of some of the German Princes, was chosen King of Bohemia. The Emperor
was wonderfully enraged at this Election, and proclaimed War against him,
driving him first out of Bohemia, and afterward out of all Germany, who in
Holland, the common refuge for all wretched people, found a bountiful and safe
entertainment. But James, that he might help his Son in Law, made a motion
for a Marriage of his Son Charles, and the Spaniards Daughter.

Charles is sent into Spain through France by Land, where he saw upon his
journey, Mary Daughter to Henry the fourth. He was received in Spain, in
outward appearance, magnificently, but a dissension arising between the Duke of
Buckingham and Count Olivares, the principal Don of the Spanish Court, the
Treaty for the Marriage was drawn out at langth, but Charles being impatient of
delays, was called home again by his Father, and arrived safe in England, and
afterward he married Mary, whom he had affectionately beheld in France.

What remains to be spoken of King James, is either scarce worth recording, or
not so consonant to the truth. He died at last of a disease of the Spleen,
though there were false reports spread abroad that he was poisoned, when he had
reigned twenty two years, and was fifty nine years of age, in the year 1625. He
was a true Platonic Prince, a Husband worthy of his Wife, an honest Father to
his Children, a good King to his Subjects, because he was a Prince he was the
Most Learned, and he was the Best Prince by reason of his Learning.

When this King reigned, the English Plantations were settled in the Indies, as
in Virginy, which Country Sr Walter Rawleigh first discovered, and in the
Barmudoes, whither an infinite multitude of inhabitants presently resorted,
building public and private houses, and made a Commonwealth. The same was done
by others in New England, to the great comfort of such as were distressed and
fled thither.

CHARLES the first, King of Great-Brittany, France and Ireland.
Anno 1625.
CHARLES the first succeeded his Father, being twenty five years of age. The
first design he had was to marry Henrietta Mary, Daughter to Henry the fourth
King of France, as he purposed before, who landed in England the 22 day of
April, and was received magnificently.

Then a Navy was prepared against the Spaniard, (for all friendship was grown
stale between these two Kings, by reason of the breach of the Marriage, and the
business of the Palatinate) he joined with the Ships of Holland, and sent away
toward Spain, and first assaulting Cades and not prevailing, they set up sail
to Sea, and spoiling all the Spanish Vessels they met, they return for England.

Now a Covenant was made between the English and the United Provinces, and they
resolved with joint Forces to tire out the Spaxiard, but Charles, whose
Exchequer was empted by reason of his great Expense of his Spanish Voyage, and
setting forth of his Navy, was forced to call a Parliament, but Buckingham the
Kings chief Minister of State, and most dear unto him, had yet given no answer
to his Charge, whereupon they denied to supply the King with Subsidies,
wherefore he was forced to find out some other ways to raise moneys,
wherewith he provided a mighty Fleet once more, wherewith, assisted by the
Flemish Ships, he spoiled all the Spanish Ships they met, either coming from
Spain, or sailing thither, and did wonderfully annoy the very Spanish Coasts;
but when the French were not spared, a stop was made in France of some English
Vessels, and the Merchants Goods were Confiscate. The Ministers of the Church
of Rome had heightened the indignation, those that came into England with the
Queen, and these did what they could privately to trouble the English affairs.
They were commanded to leave the Land, but they were sent away with good gifts
and rewards. The French offended at this as an injury, sent Monsier Bassempeir
Extraordinary Ambassador into England, who prevailed so far that some were
recalled.

The French was not satisfied with this, but forbad all Commerce with the
English subjects, and Charles did the like. Envy increasing, Lewis oppressed
the Rochellers; Charles sent relief to the besieged, though he prevailed but
little, some men's hearts flagging, who returned for England, and for their
sluggishness, they were cast into prison. But chiefly sharp complaints were
charged by the Parliament against Buckingham, who was the Commander of this
Expedition: That he had delivered some Sea Towns to the Custody of some
Soldiers that received no pay from the English, and had made strangers
Commanders of them in Chief. That to the great detriment and hazard of the
Kingdom, he had brought German Soldiers into England. That by his persuasion
one Parliament was called after another and nothing done. That he had put many
worthy Noble man from their places undeservedly, and put men less deserving
into their places. That Warlick Expeditions undertaken imprudently had always
an ill end, as was fresh in memory by the Rochell business. That Merchandise
failed by this means. That he had turned another way such preparations as were
made for War, and had destroyed a multitude of Shipping by his ill managing
of business, etc.

Charles to stop all farther proceedings against Buckingham, presently
dissolved the Parliament, and being overcome with the continual prayers of the
besieged, he raised new Forces to send to assist the Rochellers, under the
command of the Duke of Buckingham, but when he was ready to Embarque himself,
he was stabbed with a Knife by Felton an English man (who by this act did
sacrifice himself for his Country) but he was taken when he had done it, and
was hanged for his pains.

Then a new Parliament was summoned; the King complained that Tunnage was
denied him, the answer was made that such supplies were never granted to the
Kings but upon urgent necessity, and therefore it were better that he should
look to prevent the wrongs that were every where crept in, whereupon the
Parliament was once more Dissolved.

Then there was a supersedeas to all business, for if any man did not pay that
Custom he Incurred the Kings displeasure, and if any did pay, then he incurred
the displeasure of the Parliament, and hereupon grew cause enough for following
mischiefs. The King offended at the mallepartness of the Parliament, cast Sr
John Eliot and some other Members of Parliament into prison, and appointed
Judges to take cognizance of their Fact, they supposing themselves chosen
besides the custom, deferred to meddle with the business, being doubtful what
to do, the King pressed them on one hand, and the people on the other. The
Kings Officers sent messengers to the Merchants, whom they call usually
Adventurers, exhorting them that they would set their Merchandise to sale, as
they were wont, saying the King would take care of all, only let them pay their
Custom, which thing they refused to do, without consent of Parliament.

The other Merchants did the same, for it was fresh in their memories, that
about an hundred years before, the Merchants had a penalty set upon them, who
paid their Custom, the Parliament being against it, in memorial whereof, that
posterity might not plead ignorance, a Chapel was built, which at this day is
called Alderman-Bury; and a stranger Merchant, who paying the Custom, had set
his Merchandise to sale, was excluded from all Commerce. And for this reason
there was cause given for both sides to be displeased. In the interim Peace was
ratified with France, and the Queen was brought a Bed of her firstborn
Charles. The Spaniard also was hampred with diverse Wars, and want of moneys,
and therefore he thought it better to make Peace with Charles, than to be
brought to a final desparation, yet the King and his subjects were never the
better agreed.

New and greater causes of dissension arose: The King had taken care that the
Book of Common Prayer should b^ reprinted, that such as had not the same gift
of mind, might have something for their imitation, and by a set form should be
stirred up to more attentiveness. This form was read in Churches and Houses at
that time through all England. But the Scotch, a scrupulous people in their
opinion, who are more afraid of the, name of yielding, than resisting, and
would sooner offend against Religion than the Ceremonies of it, did publicly
refuse it, but they especially, who held forth affected purity, were called
Puritans.

Charles to regulate the obstinate, presently musters an Army to invade
Scotland. James Hamilton was the cause of it, who was sent into Scotland to
allay the peoples minds before it should come to a War, but he dealt
deceitfully, for having a desire to the Crown of Scotland, he endeavored to
raise dissentions, and hoped to fish best in troubled waters. The Scotch on the
other part, that they might not idly wait for their own destruction, meet the
King with their Forces, but their Banners and Ensigns were not displaied, and
in token of humility they laid their Arms down before him on the ground. But
when both Armies stood now ready, the English, that they might not strive with
their Brethren, refused to fight, wherefore he was forced to make peace with
the Scots upon no good conditions, which being ratified, he came back to London.

He was scarce returned, but some factious fellows, and such as by troubles and
War hoped to make their own advantage, speak against the Kings sluggishness,
and stirred him up; who was already prone enough to make a new War against
the Scots; whereupon he goes once more with an Army into Scotland, and by the
same contumacy of his soldiers, as before, he was frustrate of his intentions.

The Scotch also made a nearer agreement amongst themselves against the King,
which they called their [Covenant.] The King therefore when he was distressed
for want, calls a Parliament, and asks Subsidies of them, but it was in vain,
wherefore he was forced to fly to other Artifices. The Queen that was pressed
with the same care the King was, dealt with the Earl Charles Rosset, and with
other Ministers of the Barbarians, Pansanius and Cunaus, to procure a supply
out of the Popes Treasury (yet it is supposed that the King knew nothing of it)
promising if she prevailed, that the Catholics in Ireland should have greater
liberty in their Religion. But Rosset denied that any such assistance could be
granted to any, unless to a Catholic Prince, (as they term it) but if the King
would abjure the Reformed Religion, and cleave to the Church of Rome, he
promised all assistance; but he hating such a sacrilege, nothing was done.

Rosset for this business was in great danger; for the English, who after they
had renounced the Roman Religion, hated his name more than the Plague, or death
it self, when they saw that his followers had more freedom, and were not
ignorant of Rosset, who was the Author of it, they make a tumultuous head
against him, that they might tear in pieces this hurtful instrument of so
hateful superstition; but he hardly escaping in disguised apparel, hid
himself amongst the friends of the Queen Mother, Mary de Medicis, who at that
time was in England, and afterward he escaped all danger, by the assistance of
John Justinian the Venetian Ambassador, and Embarking himself he sailed into
Flanders; but when he came to Rome, Pope Urban the eighth rewarded his good
service with a Cardinals Cap.

The Irish in the interim were broke forth into a new Rebellion, and the
Parliament used all means to find a remedy for such a mischief. And the King
being not at quiet, caused the Liturgy to be new printed, which he imposed upon
all the Churches in England, and forbad all Ceremonies to be used otherwise
than they were in Queen Elizabeth's days. In the mean while, that no new cause
of divisions might be wanting, seven Romish Priests are cast into prison, and
are condemned by the Parliament to suffer death; but the French Ambassador
pitied their miserable condition, and sued to the King for their pardon, the
King answered he could grant nothing in that business, without consent from his
Parliament. Then it was motioned to the Parliament who presently yielded to it.
The King when he knew this, thought by an importunate anticipation to gain the
thanks of that business to himself, and of his own accord commands the Priests
to be freed from the prison. The Parliament was angry at the Kings
over-forwardness, and changed their former Decree of freedom into a Sentence of
condemnation: The King he began to urge their discharge, and to stand upon it,
resolving never to leave the business until the Parliament were met in a full
number, and should give their final determination. They of their own accord
cause one or two of these Monks to be put to death. It is wonderful how great
good will of the people they procured to themselves by this deed, especially
when by their public Writings they began to infringe the Kings Authority,
using such sweet words to the people, that might win their good liking of it.
The King in the House of Peers complains of the insolence of the Lower House,
and by a sharp Speech inveighed against their stubborness, saying that he
neither could nor would wink at so great affronts. Others again complain
against the Kings too great Power, and desire remedies.

The King in the mean time strove to put out some from their places of public
employment, and to put in others; amongst the rest, he put out Montjoy from his
Lieutenants place of the Tower, and put in another that stood fast to his part.
The Lower House interprets this business, as if the King strove to draw all the
power of Government to himself, and accused this new Lieutenant before the
Upper House, for a factious person, and who was before condemned by the Judges
to dye, and therefore a man unfit for so weighty an employment. They added
farther that this matter could not be without danger, for he having the command
of the Tower might destroy all the City of London. The Upper House answered,
That unless they would put their sickle into another man's Corn, it were
wickedness in them to hinder the King in that matter, for it was an ancient and
received prerogative of the Kings, openly refusing their consent.

Nor was it long ere a multitude of Servants (which they call Apprentices) and
a rabble of other people, came to the Hall door, crying out and thundering, that
unless they would remove out of that place the Lieutenant of the Tower, who was
a Papist, a factious, a wicked and unworthy man, they would turn all upside
down; and they prevailed by this means so far, that both the King and the Lords
were forced to consent.

Nor was this furious multitude of the people content with this, but they made
a fresh onset to abolish the Government of Bishops, and would have them all to
be forwarnd the Parliament House, for that they were addicted (as they
pretended) to the Church of Rome, and to force them to it, they run like
furies into Westminster Abbey, that was venerable for it is Antiquity, and they
fall in their rage upon the sacred Garments, Organs, Sepulchers, and spoil all
that was either comely for its Ancientness, precious for cost, or to be valued
for curious Workmanship; they hardly spared the Bones and Ashes of the dead,
their impure purity had hurried them so far. Then they run to the Kings
Court, crying, urging and thundering out the same things. The King had them all
go about their business, threatening them with severe punishment that refused,
and least the next day they should terrify him with greater multitudes, he
fortified himself with a stronger Guard. The Parliament either fearing
themselves (or because they would not be inferior to the King) require a
strong Guard of Soldiers to defend them, the Earl of Essex might be the
Captain of it. The King neither granted nor denied it. Then they attempted a
new business, and that was not usual, appointing an extraordinary Assembly in
the City, that should manage all weighty and great occurrences, and this they
did, without the Kings leave or knowledge. And to weaken his Majesty the more,
or rather to satisfy the insolence of the people, they cast twelve Bishops
into prison, because they went about to maintain their privilege by the
public Charter. That business much troubled the King, and all those that loved
the public quiet above all things, but they that hoped to find some good for
themselves out of these tossings and tumults, did laugh in their sleeves,
fomenting the troubles, and turning every stone, until such time as the Earl
of Bristol, and his son were involved in the same danger ( Strafford the year
before lost his Head to satisfy the people, who was a man of a commendable and
most approved understanding) William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, and Primate
of England followed him. But now they touched his bowels, for they began to
accuse the Queens Majesty, as if she had privately caused the troubles in
Ireland, and had secretly moved that people (that are of themselves inconstant
enough) to rebel. The King moved with this, accused five of the Lower House,
and one of the Upper House of High Treason. Their Names were, the Lord Viscount
Mandevill, Mr Pym, Mr Hambden, Sir Arthur Haselrig, Mr Hollis, and Mr Strowd,
clearly demonstrating that they were the men, that had given occasion for these
Tumults and Dissentions.

The Articles of their accusation were these:

That they endeavored to overthrow the Fundamental Laws, and the Kings
Authority.

That they strove to alienate the hearts of the Subject from him.

That by the same Artifice they had solicited the Kings soldiers to revolt.

That they had procured strangers to help them to possess the Kingdom.

That they attempted to cast down the Parliament and the Privileges of it.

That they contrived to bring both Houses to themselves, and to their Opinions,
and therefore they caused that concourse and commotion of the People.

Lastly, That they had blown up this fire of War against Majesty.

These Articles being read to the Lower House, the King required that some
should be sent to seize presently on their Writings, but some were sent to the
King to dissuade him from it, and in the name of the Parliament, they would be
Surety for the fidelity of the Members accused. But the King answered, That he
required Obedience from his Subjects without enquiring into his Reasons. Others
again urged, That the King by this Act had overthrown the Privileges of
Parliament, and noted this Accusation to be a famous Libel.

The King was resolved to oppose Force against Force, he requires assistance
from the Soldiery, and hasteneth to the Hall with five hundred armed men after
him, and commanding them all to wait at the door, he only entered into the
House with an angry Countenance, and when he saw none of those that were
accused, he seriously relates his good Intentions to the Parliament, and to the
Laws and Privileges thereof, requiring that those Memcers he accused might be
delivered up to him, and so he went back to his Palace the same way as he came,
and sent a Herald once more to find out those he had charged. Then he goes
again himself to the House, where the rest of the Members late, and did renew
his discourse, whereby he expressed his good Inclination, and labored to
remove the envy from himself, that lay upon him, saying, That he would change
nothing, nor do otherwise than what was done in Queen Elizabeth's days; Then he
went to Dinner to one of the Sheriffs houses, and was in some danger by reason
of the enraged multitude. But the Lower House taking Counsel with the Upper,
resolved by all means to revenge this rigor of the King that he had used
against their Privileges, they presently put the City in Arms, caused them to
shut up their Shops, and the sitting was adjourned for five days. Also the
Parliament for bad the Citizens, that no man should help the King to find out
those that were accused, rendering the King as hateful to the People as they
could, and shaking his Authority. The King, when he might have made use of this
Division between the two Houses to overthrow the attempts of the People, breaks
forth into violent anger, sets a. Guard upon the Tower of London, and once more
declares the accused to be guilty of High Treason, forbidding all men either to
conceal them, or to convey them away, promising their Estates to any that
should discover them, either alive or dead. But men were so far from obeying
the King, that the accused Members, guarded with a multitude of Citizens, took
their places again, as before in Parliament, yet this was not sufficient, for
the Parliament published through the City, That the King intended to ruin the
Citizens, That his Forces were now ready to do it, which did not a little
exasperate the minds of the Citizens. But the Aldermen of the City took a
better course, and humbly certified the King, That the Communalty were too much
incensed already, and therefore he should let pass bitter counsel, and find
out some way to compose the matter. The King answered them with the greatest
moderation, greatly complaining that his Authority was violated.

But the Parliament, when they had brought the business so far, thought not
fit to give it over, but on the 16th day of January, in the Year 1642. raised a
vast multitude of Citizens, and others, as it was pretended, to defend the
Houses, that they might assemble freely, and Latters were forthwith sent to
other neighboring Counties, whereby they were commanded to draw up in Arms all
the Forces they could, under color to defend the Laws and Liberties: Upon this
occasion there came together a mighty Army, so that at least 20000 were ready
at a beck.

The King having timely notice of it, leaving the City, makes haste to Hampton
Court, commanding his Counselors to follow him, especially the Earls of Essex
and Holland, but they refused, wherefore the King with a small company, took
his journey like one that fled, so that for haste, being he had no Purveyors,
to provide room for him sufficiently, He, his Wife and Children the first
night, were constrained to tumble all in one Bed.

He being now escaped from out of their hands, by Proclamations endeavored to
maintain his own Cause before the whole world, but he wanted help.

It was otherwise with the Parliament, for all London now stood against the
King, ready in Arms. The Streets and crosse-wayes were stopped with Chains, and
Bars, and Cannon mounted; Also the Parliaments Forces were augmented by an
addition of four thousand Horse Soldiers that came to them. The Boats and
Barks were fitted for the War, and most of the Citizens servants and
Apprentices, were at a call to join with the Parliament, and being armed what
with Clubs, what with Sticks, what with Swords, and other Weapons, they came
and guarded the Parliament House, at Halberd-men; And from that time the
meeting was not at Westminster, as before, but in the City, that they might the
better win the minds of the Citizens to themselves, and be nearer to their
business. Though the King being asked his opinion thereof by Essex, did flatly
deny it, wherefore they are resolved to set upon the Kings stubborn mind (as
they said.) They commanded the Governors of Sea-Towns, not to obey the Kings
Orders, unless they were confirmed by the Authority and Seal of the Parliament,
at one blow almost cutting off all the Kings Authority. This might have been
prevented, had he by good counsel taken possession of those Towns, and put in
Soldiers to keep them for him.

The King, when he saw they provided Force, and that he was not safe at Hampton
Court, rides presently to Windsor, thither came the French Ambassador to him,
who offered to be Umpire between the King and his Subjects, but when neither
King nor Queen would give any great credit to his words, he did prevail but
little. But now the King first saw that he was deceived of his hopes, when he
imagined that Wales and Yorkshire were revolted from him, at the Report of what
was past, and for fear of them his counsel was troubled.

But the Parliament (which the King in his straights was not ignorant of)
thought fit to proceed, and did prescribe Conditions to the King, namely, That
the English should be governed the same way as the Scotch were, and to that
they might call a Parliament as often as they pleased, and assign Offices to
whom they thought fit, That the Bishops should be ejected out of the
Parliament, whom they found more addicted to the Kings side, and many such like
Propositions.

In the mean time, the Houses take into their Power the Towns of greatest
concernment, amongst which Hull was one; The King had sent the Earl of
New Castle thither before to demand it for himself, but the Townsmen, who had
first received order from the Parliament, being doubtful what to do, were
between hope and fear, but then being confirmed with a farther order from the
Parliament, they excluded the King. Wherefore being defrauded of his hope, he
resolves upon more mild counsels, and sent Letters to the two Houses, desiring
them not to proceed so harshly, to leave off their violence, protesting his
Innocence and sincere intention before God and man. But the Parliament little
moved by these words, take care in the mean time for the business of Ireland,
giving License to Martin Tromp the Admiral of Holland to search all Dunkirk
ships, even in they very English Havens. Also Digby and Lunsford that were
addicted to the King, are accused of High Treason, the one was taken, the other
escaped into Holland. Then they send Messengers to the King, and gave him
thanks for his Letters, desiring his Majesty to return to London. The King,
though he were pleased with their gratitude, yet refused to come to the
Parliament, least the people by their Insolence should again put him in danger.
The Parliament was much displeased with this refusal of the King, because the
traffic did not proceed well, and because they could not press their designs
as they would. Whereupon the Lower House drew up an Humble Remonstrance,
Whereby they desired Power to bestow all Places of Government both by Sea and
Land, upon whom they thought fit, and to fortify Towns with Ammunition and
Provision necessary, as they pleased. And proceeding yet farther, They asked
that the old Servants of the Queen, both English and French, and such as were
her Priests might be banished, and the Bishops and Lords addicted to the Popish
Religion, might be excluded from the Parliament House. That a Synod of fifty
Ministers might be called. That the Princes and Lords should be forbidden to go
out of the Land, or to make any Covenant with foreign Princes or Commonwealths,
without the Parliaments consent. Lastly, They desired that the King should take
an Oath to hold no counsel with the Queen in Church or State affairs.

The Lords of the Upper House were not well pleased with these Propositions,
for that the Kings Authority was palpably infringed by them. The Lower House
was angry at that, and fell to their former Artifice, and threatened to raise
the people, and incite them against the Nobility, as Enemies to the
Commonwealth, and addicted to the Kings side. The Lords regarded not their
threats, until they saw the Commons uniting themselves by counsel from the
Lower House, and (which is to be admired) they found the Commissioners of
Scotland, to join with them against the profit of their own Country. At last
they were terrified with these things, and foreseeing greater dangers, they
consent, though it were against their wills. Twenty chosen men therefore are
sent to the King with these Conditions, which when the King beheld, he
undertook to ask Counsel thereupon, and to deliver his mind in writing. But
when he was pressed with straights on all sides, he yielded to these
Conditions, namely, That the Parliament should store the Cities of the Kingdom
with provision, upon this ground that the King should first be made acquainted
what provision they would make, and to bestow the Offices, so that of three men
chosen, the King might choose one. As for the Bishops and the rest, as being
matters of great moment, he would advise farther. The Kings Consent was
received by the Parliament with great applause, though they could have desired
the terms of his Grant had been larger, for by this Authority they increased in
power as much as the King decreased. They brought the business so far, that
the power should be in their hands so long as the Parliament sat, which they
meant for ever: For the King by a dangerous Indulgence, had granted them leave
before to sit so long as they pleased, they being not to be dissolved without
their own Consent. And that this power granted to them might not prove
unfruitful, they presently put out some Governors, and put in others. Nor are
they content with this, but being higher by the Kings Grants, they petition
that the six Members should be cleared from all guilt, and to be freed from
attainder, the King was resolved to yield to all, and did grant what they asked.

The Kings courage was so far weakened, that he lifted up the Power of his
Adversaries, and pulled down the hopes of his friends, who trusting but little
to his over great lenity, thought it best to avoid the strokes or misfortune
now hanging over their heads, Part of them forsaking the Parliament, went home
to their houses; Part of them preferring voluntary banishment before continual
fear, went out of the Land, for they had now got the power of all into their
hands, and did what they pleased, no man daring to whisper against it.

And now that plenty of Parliament-members was so diminished, that in the Upper
House there were left not above five and twenty, in the Lower House scarce
fourscore, the Kings friends still falling off, that at last there were hardly
sixteen in the House of Lords. In the mean time they raged fiercely against
those that were addicted to the Romish Religion, and they provide a Fleet with
the Kings Treasure, to defend the Mediterranean Sea upon all occasions, whereby
his Power was diminished, and his Authority broken. The Queen also was so tired
out with so many calumnies and aspersions, that she resolved to sail into
Holland, and to accompany her Daughter to her Husband the Prince of Orange to
whom she was espoused. And the Parliament to leave the King naked of that
succor easily yielded to it. The King that he might clearly demonstrate that
he by his presence had been no cause of any of those evils, before his
departure had consented to the Petition of the Parliament, to exclude the
Bishops out of the House, (which was not the least of his failings) And to
discover his mind plainly toward the Reformed Religion, he caused a severe
Statute to be published against the Papists, and banished all their Priests out
of the Kingdom. It Is mavelous with how great joy the people accepted that,
Bonfires were made in triumph at London, and in other places, it may be it was
done, because the Kings Power was now ended.

The Queen in the mean time imbarqued at Dover, and with true tears took her
last farewell, foreseeing that this departure of hers was an omen of a most
sad Divorce.

The Parliament in the interim asked the Kings consent upon some Governors of
the Kingdom they had chosen. But the King who was now sensible of his errors,
began to draw back, and to delay the business. They impatient of all delays,
send Commissioners to him, to let him understand, That the Parliament must fly
to their Arms, and defend their Authority by force, unless the King would
presently grant their just Petitions, (as they said.) And when the King
resolved to remove farther from London, they entreated him not to do it, but
rather if he would not, he should let his Son live at London. The King not
wondering a little at this Petition, answered, That he was by these Propositions
much amazed, but what to answer he knew not. He would have them lay their hands
on their hearts, and would search whether of the two gave the cause now of
mischiefs that would arise from a Civil War. As for his Son, he would as a
Father provide for him, and that neither of them would go from London, unless
they were afraid of the Insolency of some people there. And that he desired to
procure Peace by all means, not caring who took up Arms, for he would rest on
Gods providence. So their Messengers were dismissed.

But the Parliament, supposing they were not now to demur, command all the
Lieutenants of the Counties by their Edicts, to fly to their Arms, and to
compel all their Subjects that were fit to bear Arms to repair to their
Colors. And forthwith they unpoured all those Officers the King had made, and
made new ones by their own Authority. The most excellent and the wisest men
were of opinion, that all that provision of the Parliament would dissolve into
smoke The London Counsel also thought themselves wronged by this unusual and
unheard of boldness in the Parliament, for by this means they were stripped of
all their Authority. They complain of it to the King, but what should he do,
whose hands were already bound, and he did not strive to unbinde them. Then
they put up their humble Petitions to the Parliament, to which the principal
Citizens of London subscribed their hands.

But when they waited for an Answer, as it was requisite, the principal of the
Subscribers were punished. So all things grew worse and worse. The King in the
mean time, who was not ignorant of the Parliament Attempts, called all his
Nobility to him, that he might put a stop to the Parliament proceedings; The
Parliament to lull the King asleep with fair words, used all devices, and when
this would not do, they overweigh him with complaints and crimes, As that he
had hearkened to a change in Religion, and given cause for the uprears in
Ireland, especially they that were most powerful with him, secretly bespotting
the Queen.

They added, That the Instruments of the Pope, of the Kings of Spain and
France, were resolved to restore the King to his former Authority, and other
things that served to justify their own proceedings, and to make the King
faulty.

The King published his Declarations, laboring to remove these aspersions from
him, and to decline the hatred of them, yet prevailed nothing, for the
Parliament by a new Declararation, did both support and augmented the former
Articles, complaining that the greatest injury was done to themselves by the
Kings forsaking them.

The King in the mean time takes his journey for York, together with the
Prince, the Palsgrave, the Duke of Richmond, and some other of the Nobility,
being resolved to be deluded no farther, but to oppose Force against Force, and
the Right he could not maintain by yielding, to maintain by Arms.

The Parliament did not sit still, but fortified the chief Towns with
Ammunition and Soldiers, especially Hull, a City of greatest concernment.

Also the Earl of Warwick was sent with thirty men of War, to guard the
English Coasts, and they call Vice Admiral Pennington back again by speedy
Messengers, who had transported the Queen into Holland, and under pretense of
subduing Rebellion, they gather a mighty mass of money.

Charles in the mean time to overthrow their Commands, prohibits what they
would have by Edicts to the contrary; but they disobeying the King, did their
work by frighting him with threats, which was a great grief to moderate men.

The King when he was come to York, was received with the highest affection of
his Subjects, and before them all he removes all that envy of Popery that was
charged upon him.

But the Parliament, who were not well pleased with the Yorkshire men for this,
sent Letters to the King, inserting fair speeches, to pacify his anger. They
write a counterfeit Letter in the name of Elizabeth Countess Palatine, as
written by her, wherein they did foully defame the States of Holland for her
ill entertainment amongst them. To avoid the hatred of this business,
Joachimus, the States Ambassador, complained to the Parliament of the falsity
of that report, because his Masters Honors were much shadowed by it, whose
splendour and benevolence toward strangers, was sufficiently known to all the
world; and he prevailed so far that these counterfeit Letters were publicly
burnt.

A Rumor also as false as the former was scattered abroad, that a great Fleet
was made ready for King Charles in the Denmark Havens, and thus each on both
sides strive to draw reputation and authority to their party. They had long
enough banded in words, they must now come to blows. Ere long they break forth
into open War. The King calls all the Knights of the Garter, and all others
that by the band of Nobility held from the Crown, to come to him to York. The
Parliament contrarily made it death for any of them to go to the King, yet of
the Lower House twenty Members revolt to the King, making more reckoning of the
Kings commands than of the Parliaments.

In the mean time there followed an humble Petition of the men of Kent, to the
Parliament, wherein they humbly desired,

That nothing should be done without the Kings consent.

That the Liturgy might not be altered.

That the Bishops might be restored.

That they would not suffer the Fundamental Laws of the Land to be antiquated
without the Kings permission, nor Arms to be raised without his command.

That some good means might be found out to make an agreement, etc.

But the Parliament not only denied to answer them, but they severely punish
him that brought the Petition, and the Earl of Bristol that received it,
casting both of them into Prison, to cut off for the future all way for such
requests, their fellows not a little raging at it, and saying openly that that
liberty was unjustly taken away, whenas they had listened to other Petitions
that were far more unequal than that was.

The Parliament in the mean time, when they found nothing done by the
Commissioners they had sent to the King, resolve to execute their former
commands, they command the Lieutenants of Counties to perform what they
formerly had enjoined them, and presently to raise such an Army, who willingly
went about it, hoping from troubles to find occasion to do their business, yet
some looking deeper into it, refused to raise Arms without the Kings Order.

Also the Houses purposed to remove Pennington that was come back again,
because they found him more inclined to the King than to the Parliament, but he
denied to yield to them unless the King should force him to it. The King
trusting to his fidelity, refused to discharge him, and to receive Warwick whom
they would substitute. But the Lower House (the Upper House being against it,
who held it unfit to proceed without the Kings consent) pressed the business,
and confirmed the first Election, and being exasperated by the Kings
inclination, resolved seriously for to make a War of it. All the provision of
Hull or other Garrisons, they commanded to be brought to London, fearing least
the King should at some time possess himself of the Town and Ammunition: But
they to whose trust these things were committed, would not deliver them without
command from the King. They valued not all their threats and commands to have
the Governor of the Town delivered up unto them.

In the mean time the Sommersetshire men detesting the obstinacy of the
Parliament, by example of the Men of Kent, presented an humble Petition to the
Parliament; but they offended with their boldness, command it to be burned by
the Hangman, to deter the Sommersetshire men from profering any more such
Petitions, who were charged to come in no greater multitudes than was requisite.

The King also desired to sail into Ireland with a sufficient Army to tame the
Rebels. But the Houses fearing least he should allure the Rebels to join with
him, and being strengthened with their Forces, should return for England,
denied him his request, and preferred their own fears before the relief of so
many miserable men. He in the mean time deposed the Earl of Essex from being
Chamberlain, and Leicester from being Deputy of Ireland, and the Earl of
Holland, for their disobedience. But the Houses on the contrary forbid all of
them to do any such thing without their prohibition, on penalty of their lives;
also they confirmed Warwicks Authority. And that they might fortify the minds
of all men the more, and exasperate them against the King, they spread a
report, that there was a great provision made by him for War against the
Commonwealth and the Laws, saying that all the subjects were therefore freed
from their Oaths. The King holds forth the contrary in his Declarations: And
when some Lincolnshire men came to him in Troops, and offered to defend the
Kings Cause, he forbad them stiffly; and to manifest to all his love of Peace,
he commanded them all to go home again, upon the condition that they should
return to assist him when they were called. He detained only 500 Foot, and 50
Horse for his Lifeguard. Many of the Nobility were drawn by this lenity of the
King to revolt to him. The Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, that had done him so
many injuries, asking pardon of the King, was friendly received by him. This
was the cause that many others fell away, so that in the Upper House there
remained not above fifteen, and they the most bitter against him. These with
new representations concerning the Education of his Children, the Offices of
the Kingdom, and such like questions wearied the Kings mind. But they
prevailed nothing, for those Captains and Soldiers that were mustered against
the Rebels in Ireland, leaving their Colors freely, fled to the King at York:
Whereupon the King augmented his Lifeguard to 1200 Foot, and 200 Horse, all
descended of Noble Families, and for the greater Honor to them, he made the
Prince of Wales their Captain. These being required to manifest their fidelity,
did all swear unanimously to defend the Kings Cause, but all the Nobility
offered willingly to rais^ severally 200 Foot in Arms, if occas(...) By which
constancy of the subject, and by a small sum of money he received out of
Holland, the King began to be cheered with new hopes.

Then he appointed the Yorkshire men to meet him at a certain place, on the
13th day of June, not far from York, who accordingly came with about 60000.
The King with his Son, some Lords, 600 Horse, and a considerable party of
Foot, met them there, and with a premeditated Speech, he declared his good
intention toward Religion, the Parliament, and to defend his own Rights and
Kingly Dignity. Also he made an Apology for the good of his Soldiers that were
present; then he showed unto them the Acts of Parliament. Lastly he promised
good pay, if any man would assist him, because he desired to use the help of
his subjects rather than strangers. This Speech was received by some with great
applause, others made their humble Petition that the King would hold a good
correspondency with his Parliament, and desired that he would send those Lords
back to the Parliament who had revolted from them. But the Earl of Lindsey the
Kings Chamberlane, and Lovel foreseeing the dissension might rise from this
Petition, suppressed this faction at the beginning. Where(...) they were
displeased, and diverse men went away from the King. But the King accompanied
with twenty thousand men came to York, and commanded them all to return to
their houses.

The Parliament was not ignorant of this business, they accuse the said Lords
of Treason, because they had hindered the subjects from Petitioning freely for
relief of their grievances, not remembering what example they had given by
refusing the Petitions of the Men of Kent and Sommersetshire, and not only so,
but had severely punished them for offering their Petitions.

Then they raised an Army of 10000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, and send them toward
York, hoping they would increase by others coming to them: And they borrowed a
sufficient sum of Money from the Londoners, who strove who should bring most
of their silver and guilt Plate, and whatsoever precious things they had,
hoping of great advantage they should receive by it. But the Kings misfortune
began, when 20000 pounds were detained by the Exchange, being published at
London, which the Queen had borrowed with the Crown Jewels laid to pawn; this
was a mighty stop to the Kings proceedings. The Houses increased the more, who
(some in vain being angry at it) endeavored to raise a great Army. The King
also, who had with advice made delays, and spun out the time, could no longer
wink at these preparations for War, but by Letters, by Policy, by open War,
he did press the business uncessantly, and with great impatience. And he
politiquely attempts to take Hull, having obtained the consent of some of the
Garrison. But Hotham who commanded the Garrison, refusing to let him in, though
many Soldiers ran away, yet by a fresh supply of the Scots, he was
disappointed. Because this succeeded not, he turns about to make conditions for
Peace, and he offered the Houses to come presently to them, and to punish
severely the Authors of disagreement, so they would leave London that seditious
City, and chose some other place, as Oxford, Winchester, Cambridge, York,
Bristol, Nottingham, for to assmble at. But the Houses would name no other
place, least the City of London should be displeased at it, for they had more
need of the Londoners than of any others. The King, when that would not take,
proclaims all men guilty of Treason, who should assist the Houses with Money,
or any other supplies; and he threatens the Londoners that if they did it, they
should lose all their privileges (as they have very great ones.) The Houses on
the other side set as good a gloss upon their Cause as they were able to do.
Men's minds and inclinations were distracted by these means. The people who are
easily led by blind error, and outward appearances, stuck fast to the
Parliaments cause. Others who were of a higher rank, by reason of their
Families, paid Tribute freely, least the Houses should send men to strain on
their Shops, under a color of necessity: All the Nobles almost held with the
King.

The King in the mean while fortifies Newcastle and Barwick with Garrisons of
English, wherein doubtless he hurt himself, and alienated the hearts of the
Scots from him. For it was agreed upon before to have them kept by the Scotch
soldiers, and not by the English. But when help came from other parts, and the
Scots were undervalued, they studied to advantage themselves only, and though
by holding forth Peace, he had won many men's hearts, yet being driven by
despair, he attempts by force to gain Hull, which he could not do by Policy.
First he possessed himself of their Falls of Waters, and then of their public
Ways, that the Towns men might want necessaries, but by their Courage and
Valor he lost his labor. The Houses now Proclaimed openly Wars; and they
made the Earl of Essex General of the Foot, Bedford of the Horse. The King
makes the Earl of Cumberland, a very Noble man, and faithful to his Sovereign,
General of his Horse, and in the mean time set forth his Declarations to the
world, and requiring Hull to be delivered up to him, that he might punish the
insolence of the Governor, but nothing prevailed. But that War Proclaimed
might not want its solemnities, the King set up his Standard first at
Nottingham. But when he saw a smaller concourse of men than he believed would
have been, he again turns about to make conditions. He sent Messengers to the
Houses to excuse the fact, and to desire Articles of Peace. But the Houses, who
knew that this proceeded more from his necessity than love, made use of all
advantages, causing the Kings Commissioners to be brought as Delinquents before
the Parliament, overthrowing by this means the Law of Nations.

Then they send to the King that unless he came speedily to London, and sent
away those Nobles to the Parliament that were fled from them, that they might
be tried for their Lives, and their Estates might be confiscate to maintain
their Army, they would never lay down their Arms. A very hard condition, and no
ways to be answered but by the sword. Some there were that counseled the King
to yield to this, but he had yet courage remaining. After so many great
preambles, at length War is denounced.

But we shall pull in our sails, unfolding the causes of these dissentions
briefly and succinctly as we resolved at first, and so hasten to a conclusion,
least entering afresh into a large field, we should tire both our selves and the
Reader. Pardon therefore this long digression, and I shall proceed.

It was now come to open War, and the Victory was doubtful, sometimes
falling on this side, sometimes on that, with no small loss of blood on both
sides. All the particulars are set down at large in Books written to this
purpose, whither I remit the Reader that desires further knowledge of it.

Essex was General of the Parliament Forces, Fairfax he succeeded in his
place. Diverse Battles were fought here and there, many Towns vanquished: For
the greatest part the King had the worst of it, who was afterward also
besieged at Oxford by Fairfax, and was constrained to fly away in a disguised
habit, and he came to the Scots that were at Newarke, hoping to be received
with great humanity by such good subjects as they boasted themselves to be.

But when both Fortune and Fidelity failed, and there was no care taken for him
in his affliction. They when they could not be good, would not be bad, and to
keep their hands clear, they delivered the King to the English, under those
conditions (as they say) that no violence should be offered to his Majesty.

The English being now Masters of their desires, carry the King to Holnbey
Castle, from thence to Hampton Court, whither he had fled before for Refuge,
now a Prison. Which place seeming not safe enough for him, he went away to the
Isle of Wight, to be guarded by the Waters and Colonel Hammon: using a crafty
excuse, for a certain Letter was left on the Table, whereby the King was
advertised, that there were some that laid wait for his life, whereby he was
frighted, and fled to a safe place in the Isle of Wight.

The people, though before they were enraged against the King, now pitying his
case, and seeing their errors, resolved to plead his Cause: They offer their
humble Petitions to the Houses, that they would not refuse to condescend to
make peace with the King, and they prevailed so far, that at last the
business came to a Treaty, with a great deal of seeming satisfaction on both
sides with great applause, both of the King, the Houses and the People; but
afterward there was an humble Petition exhibited to the Parliament, wherein
they desired that the King might be tried by the Laws and Justice, and all
further Treaties with him to be laid aside, to which they denied to give an
Answer.

The Army and some of the Parliament not being satisfied, they march partly
toward Newport, to the King, who now was a Prisoner at large, and conveyed him
into Hurst Castle; Then marching toward London again, they possessed themselves
of the City, and cast some of the Houses into Prison, whilst the rest who
foresaw this Tempest, saved themselves by flight. Here we may see an example of
Gods judgment, for they that before had ill treated their Master, are now
compelled to suffer.

All that consented to the non-addresses, are restored to their Honors and
Places. Then the King, in the year 1648. was taken as a Prisoner of War, and
carried to Windsor. The remainder of the Parliament with others, erect a new
and unheard of Tribunal, to take cognizance of the Kings case. Judges were
chosen, whose Names are generally known.

This was done in the year 1649. in January. The King was brought before the
High-Court of Justice, and was accused of these Crimes:

That he gave the cause of the cruel bloodshed in England and Ireland.

That he had born Arms against the Parliament.

That he had given Commissions to his Son and others to wage War, that he
might exalt his own Authority, with the high detriment of the Commonwealth,
whence they concluded, that he was guilty of Treason, and so he was a Traitor,
a Tyrant, and an Enemy to the Commonwealth.

The King smiled at all these things, and gave no answer: being further urged,
he refused to give any answer.

Whereupon they proceed to Sentence, That he was fallen from all his Dignities,
was guilty of High Treason, and therefore was to lose his Head for being a
Tyrant, a Robber, and an Enemy to the Commonwealth. Some making a great shout.

The Sentence given, they proceed to execution, though the Holland
Ambassadors, Adrian Paw, and Albertus Joachimus, with the Scots, did their
best to hinder the proceedings. He obtained leave for Dr Juxton Bishop of
London, and two of his Children to be with him, these for his bodies, him for
the comfort of his soul. At length he sent away his Children with Gifts and
Tears: only he kept the Minister by him, to the last moment of his life. The
Prince Palatine and the Duke of Richmond came to bid the King their last
farewell, but the King refused it, least they should interrupt the present joys
of his soul with new lamenting. At last the 30 day of January was appointed for
his execution: And the King ascended the Scaffold erected before his
Banqueting House; from whence he made his last Speech to the People there
present, and when as now he had sufficiently professed his Innocence, he then
prepared himself for death, and laying his neck on the Block, his Head was cut
off by a disguised Executioner, and he changed a troublesome life for a quiet
death: In the Year 1649.

FINIS.

