AN EXPOSITION OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE Catholic Church IN MATTERS OF
Controversy.

By the Right Reverend JAMES BENIGN BOSSUET, Counselor to the King, Bishop of
Meaux, formerly of Condom, and Preceptor to the Dauphin; First Almoner to the
Dauphiness.

Done into English from the Fifth Edition in French.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1685.

The Approbation of the Right Reverend, the Archbishops and Bishops.
WE have read the Treatise entitled, An Exposition of the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church in Matters of Controversy, Composed by the Right Reverend
James Benignus Bossuet, Bishop and Lord of Condom, Preceptor to his Royal
Highness, the Dauphin. And we declare, That after having examined it, with as
much application as the importance of the matter required, we have found the
Doctrine contained in it to be conformable to the Catholic Apostolic and Roman
Faith. And therefore we think our selves obliged to propose it, as such, to
those whom God has committed to our charge. We are certain, the Faithful will
be edified by it, and we hope those of the Pretended Reformed Religion, who
will read this Work with attention, will receive from it so right an
understanding as may conduce to put them into the way of Salvation,

CHARLES MAURICE LE TELLIER, Archbishop and Duke of Reims. CHAPTER de ROSMADEC,
Bishop of Tours. FELIX, Bishop and Earl of Chalons. De GRIGNAN, Bishop of Usez.
D. DE LIGNY, Bishop of Meaux. NICHOLAS, Bishop of Auxerre. GABRIEL, Bishop of
Autun. MARC, Bishop of Tarbe. ARMAND JOHN, Bishop of Beziers. STEPHEN, Bishop
and Prince of Grenoble. JULIUS, Bishop of Tule.


A Table of Articles contained in this Treatise.
I. DEsign of this Treatise. Page 1 II. Those of the Pretended Reformed
Religion acknowledge, That the Catholic Church embraces all the Fundamental
Articles of the Christian Religion. Page 2 III. Religious Worship is terminated
only in God. Page 4 IV. Invocation of Saints. Page 6 V. Images and Relics.
Page 9 VI. Justification. Page 12 VII. Merits of Good Works. Page 13 VIII.
Satisfactions, Purgatory, and Indulgences. Page 16 IX. Sacraments. Page 19
Baptism. Page 20 Confirmation. Ibid. Penance and Sacramental Confession. Ibid.
Exream Unction. Page 21 Marriage. Ibid. Holy Orders. Page 22
X. Doctrine of the Church touching the real Presence of the Body and Blood of
JESUS CHRIST in the Eucharist, and how the Church understands these Words, This
is my Body. Ibid. XI. Explication of these Words, Do this in remembrance of me.
Page 25 XII. Explication of the Doctrine of the Calvinists, concerning the real
Presence. Page 27 XIII. Of Transubstantiation, and Adoration, and in what sense
the Eucharist is a Sign. Page 33 XIV. Sacrifice of the Mass. Page 34 XV.
Epistle to the Hebrews. Page 37 XVI. Reflections upon the precedent Doctrine.
Page 39 XVII. Communion under both Species. Page 41 XVIII. The Written, and
unwritten Word. Page 43 XIX. The Authority of the Church. Page 44 XX. The
Opinions of the Pretended Reformed upon the Authority of of the Church. Page 46
XXI. Authority of the Holy See, and of Episcopacy. Page 50 XXII. Conclusion of
this Treatise. Ibid.
An Advertisement upon Account of this Present Edition.
ONE would have thought those of the pretended Reformed Religion, in reading
this Treatise, should at least have granted that the Doctrine of the Church was
faithfully Expounded in it. The least they could have allowed a Bishop, was to
have understood his own Religion, and to have spoke without disguise, in a
matter, where to dissemble would be a crime. But nevertheless it has fallen out
otherwise. This Treatise, whilst a Manuscript, was made use of to instruct
several particular persons, and many Copies of it were dispersed. Upon which
the sincerer part of the pretendedly Reformed were almost every where heard to
say, That if it were approved, it would in reality take away great
difficulties; But that the Author durst never publish it, and if he should, he
would not escape the censure of all those of his Communion, not particularly of
Rome, which would not frame it self to his Maxims. After some time
nevertheless, this Book, thus condemned to a perpetual obscurity, appeared
ushered in with the Approbation of several Bishops; And the Author, who knew
very well he had only expressed in it the mind of the Council of Trent,
apprehended not those censures threatened by the Reformers.

It was not certainly probable that the Catholic Faith should be betrayed,
instead of being expounded, by a Bishop; who, after having preached the Gospel
all his life time, without the least suspicion of his Doctrine, had been newly
called to instruct a Prince, whom the greatest King in the World, and the most
zealous Defender of the Religion of his Ancestors, causes to be Educated in
such a manner, that he may be one day one of its principal supports. But these
Gentlemen of the pretended Reformation ceased not to persevere in their first
Opinion. They expected every moment when Catholics should oppose this Book,
and Rome it self condemn it.

The occasion of this their imagination was, that the major part, who know
nothing of our Doctrine, but as represented to them by their Ministers under
the most hideous Ideas, know it not again when shown in its natural dress. So
that it was no hard task to represent to them the Author of the Exposition, as
one who mollified the Sentiments of his Religion; and sought out proper and
qualifying moderations to content all Parties.

There has appeared two Answers to this Treatise. The Author of the first would
not discover his name, M. Claude, de Langle, Daille, and Alix.
and till he himself be pleased to declare it, we will not reveal the secret.
It is enough to us that this work was approved by the Ministers of Charenton,
and sent to the Author of the Exposition by the late M. Conrart, one endowed
with all that Catholics could desire in a Man, An. p. 3. 112, 113, 124.137,
etc.
excepting a better Religion. The other Answer was written by M. Noguier a
Minister, who is amongst them of great repute, and has the esteem of an able
Divine. Nog. p. 63, 94, 95, 109, 110. An. p. 10. Nog. p. 40. Nog. p. 20, 27.
They both pretended the Exposition was contrary to the decisions of the
Council of Trent. They both affirm the very design it self of expounding the
Doctrine of the Council, to be prohibited by the Pope: And they both take care
to say, that M. de Condom does only mince and extenuate the Doctrine of his
Religion. As they represent him, one would think that he relents, An. Avert. p.
24.
that he is coming over to them, that he abandons the Sentiments of his own
Church, Rep. p. 3. An. p. 137. Nog. p. 94. An Avert. p. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29.
and embraces those of the Pretended Reformed. In fine, his Treatise agrees not
with that Profession of Faith, which the Roman Church proposes to all those who
are of her Communion, and they represent him at defiance with every Article.

If we believe the Anonymus, this Prelate is come to a fair composition about
Transubstantiation. He is willing to content himself with such a reality of the
Body of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament as the Pretended Reformed themselves
believe. An. Avert. p. 27.
When he treats of the Invocation of Saints, He endeavors to mitigate and
extenuate this worship of the Roman Church, An. p. 24.
both as to her Tenets and Practice. Together with the Veneration of Saints, he
softens that of Images, An. p. 24. An. p. 65.
as also the Articles of Satisfaction, Sacrifice of the Mass, and the Popes
Authority. As for Images, he is ashamed of the Excess to which the Doctrine as
well as Practice has been carried. The Anonymus, who represents him as if he
had changed the Council of Trents expression in the Article of Satisfaction, p.
110.
will needs have it, that this change in the Expression proceeds from an
alteration which he introduces in the Doctrine. In fine, he represents him as
one who is going over to the Sentiments of the new Reformation; or, to use his
own Expression, like the Dove which returns to the Ark, not finding where to
rest his foot.

An. p. 104, 368.
He not only lays to his charge particular Opinions about the Merits of Good
Works, and the Authority of the Pope; but seems ready, if we would conform our
selves to the Doctrine of the Exposition, to admit of those two Articles which
so much perplex those of his Communion.

There is nothing generally more frequently repeated in his Book, An. Avert. p.
23, 26. Rep. p, 3. etc.
than the reproaches he casts upon the Author of the Exposition for deserting
the Communion of the Church of Rome. He wishes all those of M. de Condoms
Communion would reduce themselves to the moderations in this Book, An. Avert.
p. 30.
and write conformably to its sense. This would (says he a little after) be a
happy beginning of a Reformation which might have much more happy consequences.

Nay more, he takes an advantage from these pretended allievations. These
Softnings of M. de Condom (says he) are so far from giving us an ill opinion of
our Reformation, An. p. 85.
they confirm us that good and moderate Person; themselves condemn (at least a
great deal) that we do, and by consequence in some measure acknowledge a
Reformation to be useful and necessary.

He should have concluded quite otherwise. For a Reformation, such as theirs
is, which tends to a change in Doctrine, ought not to regard those things which
are condemned already by a common consent. But the pretended Reformed are
willing to persuade themselves, that the Honest and moderate Persons in
Communion with Rome, amongst which number they allow M. de Condom a place, in
many things abandon the Sentiments of their Church, and come over as much as
they can to the new Reformation.

Thus you see what they are made to believe by this strange manner of
mis-representing the Catholic Doctrine. Being accustomed to that hideous and
terrible form in which their Ministers represent it in their Pulpits, they
imagine those Catholics who lay it open in its natural Purity, disguise and
alter it: The more justly we represent it as it is, the less are they
acquainted with it, and they imagine we are going over to them, when we only
disabuse them of their false preocupations.

It Is true, they say not always the same thing. The Anonymus, who accuses M. de
Condom of making such considerable alterations in the Doctrine of the Church, p
61, 6
tells us this Exposition has nothing new in it, but a dextrous and delicate
turn, and in fine nothing but apparent qualifying, which consisting only in
some expressions or in things of small consequence, gives no body any
Satisfaction, and only raises new difficulties, instead of resolving old.

So that he seems to be sorry for having represented the Exposition as a Book,
which made an alteration in the Faith of the Church in all its principal
points, not only in the Expressions but in the Doctrine.

Let him take it which way he pleases. If he continue to think a Book, so truly
Catholic as the Exposition, contrary to so many important points of the Roman
Faith, he shows himself never to have had any thing but false Ideas of its
Doctrine. And if it be true, that by sweetning only the expressions, or
retrenching, as he says, matters of small consequence, the Catholic Doctrine
seems to him so much more tractable, he will in the end find the grounds of it
were better then he imagined.

But the truth of the matter is, M. de Condom has not betrayed his trust, nor
dissembled the Faith of the Church, in which the Holy Ghost has placed him a
Bishop; And the pretended Reformed could not persuade themselves that a
Doctrine which already appears less strange by the sole exposition of it, and
that an Exposition so plain, so easy, and so (...), should be that Doctrine
which their Ministers represented to them full of Blasphemy and Idolatrous.

We ought, no doubt, to give God thanks for such a disposition, because
although it show in them a strange prejudice against us, yet it gives us hopes
they will look upon our Tenets with a more equal temper, when once they are
satisfied that the Doctrine of this Treatise, which seems to them already more
pleasing, is the pure Doctrine of the Church. So that we are so far from being
angry at them for making so great a difficulty to to believe us when we propose
our Faith to them, that we are obliged in Charity to give them Lights so clear
and evident, that they may not hereafter doubt but it was faithfully expounded
to them. The thing shows it self, and we need but tell them, that this Treatise
of the Exposition, which they believe is contrary not only to the Common Tenets
of the Doctors of the Roman Church, but also to the words and Doctrine of the
Council, is approved by the whole Church; and that after having received diverse
Testimonies of Approbation from Rome, as well as from other places, it has at
last been approved by the Pope himself in the most express and most Authentic
manner that could be expected.

This Book had no sooner appeared in public, but the good repute it had
throughout France was testified to the Author by Letters from all sorts of
People, from Lay Persons, Ecclesiastics, Religious, and Doctors, but
especially from the most Learned Prelates of the Church, whose Testimonies he
could even then have produced, had the Subject been ever so little dubious or
new.

But because the Pretended Reformed are apt to believe us in France to have
particular thoughts and Tenets which approach nearer unto theirs in matters of
Faith than the rest of the Church, and particularly than Rome: it is convenient
we should let them see how matters there were carried on.

As soon as this Treatise was come forth, Cardinal Bouillon sent it to Cardinal
Bona, desiring him to examine it with the utmost Rigor. Letters could no
sooner return from Rome to Paris, but there came also from this Learned and
Holy Cardinal, whose memory will be perpetuated in the Church with eternal
Benediction, that honorable approbation of his, which you will find in the
sequel among the rest that we shall speak of.

The Book was Printed the first time about the end of the year 1671. And this
Cardinals answer is dated the 26. January, 1672.

Cardinal Sigismond, whose death the whole Church does still regret, writ no
less favorably concerning it, to M. l' Abbe de Dungeau. He tells us expressly,
that M. de Condom has spoken very well of the Popes Authority; and whereas this
Abbot had written him word, that some scrupulous persons here apprehended lest
this Exposition should be looked upon at Rome, as one of those Explications of
the Council prohibited by Pope Pius IV, he shows how ill grounded this scruple
is. He adds, that he found the Master of the Sacred Palace, the Secretary, and
the Consulters of the Congregation dell' Indice, all the Cardinals that compose
it, and in particular the Learned Cardinal Braneas President of it, of the same
opinion, and that they did all of them highly applaud this Treatise of the
Exposition. This Letter bears date the 5th of April, 1672.

The Master of the Sacred Palace was at time the Reverend Father Hyacinth
Libelli a famous Divine, whose merits and great Learning, raised him shortly
after to the Dignity of Archbishop of Avignon. His Letter of the 26th of April,
1672 written to his E. the Cardinal Sigismond, shows what esteem he had of this
Book; for he tells him, there is not so much as the shadow of a fault in it,
and that if the Author desire it should be Printed at Rome, he will give all
the necessary permissions, without altering the least tittle in it.

In effect M. l' Abbe Nazari, famous for the Journal des Scavans which he
writes with so much elegance and exactness, was at that time about an Italian
Version of it, which his E. the Cardinal d' Estrees caused to be reviewed; and
did himself peruse some of the principal parts, that it might be entirely
conformable to the Original.

The Book had been already done into English by the late Abbot Montaigue, whose
zeal and virtue is known to the whole World, and there wanted not many
Testimonies to show that his Version was well received by all the Catholics of
England. This Translation was Printed in the Year, 1672; And in the Year 1675
it was put into Irish, and Printed at Rome by the Printers of the Congregation
de Propaganda Fide.

The Author of this Version, the Reverend Father, Porter of the Holy order of
St. Francis, and Superior of the Convent of St. Isidorus, had some time before
ordered a book called Securis Evangelica to be Printed at Rome it self, in
which a great part of this Treatise of the Exposition was inserted, to prove
the tenets of the Church, when faithfully expounded, to be so far from ruining
the Foundations of Faith, that they do establish them.

In the mean time the Italian Version went on with an exactness which became a
Subject of that importance, where one word ill rendered, would spoil the whole
work; and the Reverend Father Capisucchi, Master of the Sacred Palace,
Licensed it to be Printed in the Year 1675 as appears by his answer of the 27th
of June following to M. de Condoms Letter of thanks for it.

This Prelate after having heard from several parts of Germany that this
Treatise had been well approved of there, received a more ample Testimony of it
in a Letter of the 27th of April, 1673 from the Bishop and Prince of Paderho^n,
then Coadjutor, and at present Bishop of Munster; in which that Prelate, whose
name bears with it his Elogium, says, that he took care that this work should
be turned into Latin, that it might be made Common every where, and especially
in Germany: but the succeeding Wars, or some other occupations having hindered
the performance of it, the Bishop of Castory Apostolical Vicar in the United
Provinces was desirous that a Latin Version, which the Author himself had
examined, might be made public, and accordingly it was Printed at Antwerp in
the Year 1678.

Not long after in the same year, by the same Bishops order, this Treatise was
again Printed at Antwerp in Dutch, with the Approbation of the Ordinary, and
the Doctors in those parts, so much did this Prelate, who composes such
excellent things himself, judge this to be profitable for the instruction of
his People.

The Bishop of Strasbourgh, who notwithstanding the miscries of War, was no
less careful of his Flock, resolved, about the same time, to procure that this
Book might be turned into High Dutch, and published with a Pastoral Letter to
all those of his Diocese; and having advertised the Pope of his design, his
Holiness caused him to be informed, that he knew the Book long before; and that
as he had heard from all parts it was the occasion of many Conversions, so the
translation of it could not but be advantageous to his People.

About this time the Italian Version was finished with all the exactness and
elegancy possible. Monsieur l' Abbe Nazari dedicated it to the Cardinals of the
Congregation de propaganda side, by whose order it was printed the same Year
1678. by the Printers belonging to that Congregation.

In the front of this Version was placed the Cardinal Bona's Letter, the Copy
of which was fou^^ at Rome, in the Hands of his Secretary, as also the
Approbations of M. l' Abbe Ricci, Consultor of the Holy Office; of the Reverend
Father M. Laurence Brancati de Laurea, Religious of the Order of St. Francis,
Consultor and Qualificator of the Holy Office, and Bibliothecarian of the
Vatican; and of M. L' Abbe Gradi Consultor of the Congregation Dell' Indice,
and Bibliothecarian of the Vatican: that is, by the chief men in Rome for Piety
and Learning.

This Book was presented to the Pope, as the Latin Translation had been before.
And he had the goodness to order M. l' Abbe de St. Luke to write to the Author,
and to let him know that he was satisfied with it; which he also repeated
several times to the French Ambassador.

The Author, who thought he had nothing more to wish for after such an
Approbation, gave, with a profound respect, his most humble thanks to the Pope,
in a Letter dated Nov. 22. 1678. In answer to which, he received a Breve from
his Holiness of the Fourth of Jan. 1679, which contains such an express
approbation of this Book, that it cannot be hereafter doubted, but it maintains
the pure Doctrine of the Church, and of the Apostolic See.

After this approbation, I needed not to have mentioned any others; but I was
willing to show how this Book, which was threatened by the Ministers with such
opposition in the Church, and which they imagined was so contrary to her common
Doctrine, has naturally (as I may say) passed through all the degrees of
Approbation, till it came to that of the Pope himself, which confirms all the
rest.

Those of the Pretended Reformed Religion, may at present see how they were
imposed upon, An. Avert. p. 23.
when they were told, The Person was known, and that a Catholic too, who writ
against this Exposition of M. de Condom. It would certainly be a strange thing,
this good Catholic, unknown to all others of that Religion, should make the
Enemies of the Church his only Confidents in a Work which he designed against a
Bishop of his own Communion. But this Imaginary Writer makes the World stay too
long, and the Pretended Reformed are too credulous, if they suffer themselves
hereafter to be amused by such like Promises.

Thus one of the necessary Questions to be answered in vindication of the
Exposition is entirely dispatched. We need not now go about to refute those
Ministers who held the Doctrine of the Exposition not to be that of the Church.
Time and Truth have so refuted their allegations, that no room is left for a
reply.

M. Nog^ier would first hear the Oracle of Rome speak, before he would admit M.
de Condom to have rightly explicated the Catholock Faith. p. 41.
I give no credit (says he) to those Approbations which these Bishops give in
Writing. Other Doctors want not the like Approbations, and after all, the
Oracle of Rome must speak in matters of Faith. The Anonymus was of the same
mind, and both of them supposed nothing more could be said in this matter
against M. de Condom, if once this Oracle had but spoken. This Oracle has now
spoken, this Oracle, I say, which the whole Catholic Church hearkened to with
so much respect in the very origin of Christianity; and the answer it has
given, has shown what this Prelate had said, has nothing new, or to be
suspected in it, nothing in a word, which is not received throughout the whole
Church.

Nay, this Question being answered, all the others are in a manner insensibly
dispatched.

Mr. de Condom held, the Catholic Doctrine was never rightly understood by the
pretended Reformed; and that the Authors of their Separation had magnified the
Objects to render them odious. What he said, appears now most certain, seeing
it is manifest on the one side, the Exposition proposes to them the Catholic
Faith, in its Purity; and on the other, that it appeared less strange to them
than they thought it was.

But if they find their Pretended Reformers, to the end they might animate them
against that Church, in which their Ancestors served God, and in which they
themselves received Baptism, were forced to fly to those Calumnies which we see
now are not maintainable, how can they dispense with themselves if they search
not a new? And why are they not afraid to persist in a Schism, which is
manifestly founded upon false Principles, in even the most principal points?

They believed for example, they had good grounds to separate from the Church,
under pretense, that whilst she taught the merit of good Works, she destroyed
Free Justification, Gratuite.
and that Confidence which a Christian ought to have in JESUS CHRIST only.

Their breach was principally founded upon this Article. An. p. 86.
The Anonymus thinks it enough to say, The Article concerning Justification is
one of the chief, that gave occasion to the Reformation. But M. Noguiers speaks
more plainly. Nog. p. 83.
Those (says he) who were the Authors of our Reformation had reason to propose
the Article of Justification, as the most principal of the rest, and the most
Essential Foundation of their separating. At present then, seeing M. de Condom
tells them, together with the whole Church, Expos. p. 14, 15.
That she believes we cannot have Life, but in Jesus Christ, in whom alone she
puts all her Hope: That she asks all things, hopes all things, and gives thanks
for all things, through our Lord JESUS CHRIST: and in fine, that she places all
the hopes of Salvation on him: What would they have more.

The Church tells us, Expos. p. 15.
That all our Sins ars pardoned by pure Mercy through JESUS CHRIST, That we owe
that Justice which is in us, by the Holy Ghost, to his free undeserved
liberality; and that all our good Works which we do, are so many gifts of his
Grace. The Author of this Exposition, who teaches this Doctrine, does not teach
it as his own; God forbid. Ibid. p. 15.
He teaches it as the clear and manifest Doctrine of the Council of Trent; and
the Pope approves his Book. After this shall it be again said, That the Council
of Trent, and the Roman Church overthrow Free Justification, and that trust
which the Faithful ought to repose in Jesus Christ alone. Is not this
unsufferable? And if we should hold our Tongues would not the Stones cry aloud,
and proclaim us injured?

It must be also granted, as it was taken notice of in the Exposition, Ex. p,
15.
that those Disputes which the Pretended Reformed have raised upon so capital a
Point, are almost brought to nothing, not to say wholly refuted. No body will
doubt of it, if they consider what the Anonymus has writ concerning the merit
of Good Works with the approbation of four Ministers of Charenton. We
acknowledge (says he) as in Justice we must M. de Condom, and those of the
Roman Church, An. p. 104.
who hold the most Orthodox Opinions concerning Grace, express themselves
almost in all things as we do. We agree with them in the main. But since he
promised us so much Justice, he ought to have acknowledged, that M. de Condom,
whom he makes here to be of a particular Sect, has not said one word concerning
the merit of Good Works, which is not taken from the Council. Expos. p. 13, 14,
15.
He said, Eternal Life ought to be proposed to the Children of God, both as a
Grace which is mercifully promised to them by the means of our Savior Jesus
Christ, and as a Recompense which is faithfully rendered to their good Works,
and to their merits, in virtue of that Promise. He said, That Merits are the
gifts of God. He said, We can do nothing of our selves, but that we can do all
things with him who strengthens us, and that our whole confidence is in JESUS
CHRIST. And the rest, which you may see in their proper place. By this means it
is he has satisfied the Pretended Reformed, and made them say, they agree with
him in the main. Seeing therefore these Propositions are taken word by word
from the Council, they cannot hereafter but acknowledge the Principal Subject
of their complaints to be taken away, by the sole proposing the Decrees and
proper Terms of a Council so much hated and blamed amongst them.

What is it offends them most in the Satisfactions which the Church exacts from
the Faithful, but only that they think Catholics looks upon those of JESUS
CHRIST as unsufficient? Will they deny their Catechisms, and Confessions of
Faith are not grounded upon this foundation? What will they now say, when the
Author of the Exposition tells them, with the whole Church. That JESUS CHRIST,
Expos. p. 16. and seq.
God and Man was solely capable by the infinite Dignity of his Person, to offer
up to God a sufficient Satisfaction for our Sins: That this Satisfaction is
infinite; That our Savior has paid the entire Price of our Redemption; That
nothing is wanting to this Price, seeing it is infinite; and that the
Punishments reserved, suffered in Penance, come not from any defect in the
Payment, but from a certain Order, which he has established to restrain us, by
just fears, and by a saving Discipline? These and all those other Expressions
which make the Anonymus say, this Author extenuates the Doctrine of
Satisfaction, and returns like the Dove to the Ark, are the pure Doctrines of
the Church, and of the Council of Trent, acknowledged for such by the Pope
himself. Why therefore will they make People believe the Church looks upon that
as an aid to the Satisfactions of Jesus Christ, which she proposes as a means
only to apply it? And with what security of Conscience could the Pretended
Reformed, upon such false suppositions, violate that Holy unity, which JESUS
CHRIST has so much recommended to his Church.

They look upon our Sacrifice of the Altar with Horror, as if JESUS CHRIST
were again put to Death upon it. Epos. p. 25.
What has the Author of the Exposition done to diminish this horror so unjust,
but only represented the Doctrine of the Church faithfully. He has told them
this Sacrifice is of such a nature, that it admits only a mystical and
Spiritual Death of our adorable Victim, who remains always impassible and
immortal; and is so far from diminishing the infinite Perfection of the
Sacrifice of the Cross, It is established only to celebrate the remembrance of
it, and to apply the Virtue. The Anonymus assures us upon this account, that M.
de Condom, minces the Doctrine of the Catholic Church: And M. Noguier also
assures us, he has not exposed the Truth. Nog. p. 286. Exp. p. 36. An. p. 61.
An. p. 24.
And yet he has only followed the Doctrine of the Council, whose proper Terms
he has made use of; and the whole Church approves his Exposition. Who does not
therefore perceive how this Doctrine appears to the Pretended Reformed more
moderate and agreeable, only because they do not find those Monsters in it,
which they imagine to themselves?

The Anonymus himself tells us, Rep. p. 24, 35.
The Article of Invocation of Saints is one of the most Essential in Religion.
It is also one of those, wherein M. de Condom seems to him chiefly to soften
the Doctrine of his Church; for he accuses him of it no less than three times.
But what has M. de Condom said? the same that the Catechism of the Council of
Trent said, the same that the Council it self, and the Confession of Faith
drawn from it has said, and the same which all Catholics say: Epos. p. 6. sequ.
That the Saints offer their Prayers for us. This is what the Confession of
Faith says, that they offer them by JESUS CHRIST; this is what the Council
says, in a word, That we pray to them with the same Mind we pray to our
Brethren, who are upon Earth with us, Expos. p. ^.
that is, to Pray with us, and for us, to our common Master, in the name of our
common Mediator, who is JESUS CHRIST. Behold what Mide Condom has extracted out
of the Council, out of the Catechism, and out of all the public acts of the
Church, the reason his Doctrine has been so much approved.

This answer is sufficient to ruin the very Grounds of that horror, which the
Pretended Reformed have conceived against our Doctrine.

Their Catechism accuses us of Idolatry, because by that recourse we have to
Saints, Catech. dim. 34.
we place one part of our Trust in them, and give to them what God has reserved
to himself.

But on the contrary, it appears, when we pray to Saints, we Pray to them only
to pray for us; a kind of Prayer, which by its own Nature, is so far from being
reserved by an independent Being to himself, it can never be addressed to him.

And if this form of Prayer, Pray for us, diminished the trust we have in God,
it would be no less Condemnable to use it to the living, than to the dead; 1
These. 5.25.2, 3.1.
and St. Paul would not have said so often. Brethren pray for us. The whole
Scripture is full of Prayers of this Nature. Heb. 13.18.


But (says their Confession of Faith) this is to overthrow the Mediation of J.
C. Who commands us to retire our selves in private, Conf. Art. 24.
and to pray to his Father in his Name. How can any one imagine this, seeing
the Saints, who are in Heaven, no more than the Faithful upon Earth, make
intercessions by, and through themselves, or in their own Names; Ep. p. 6.
but in the Name of JESUS CHRIST, as all Catholics teach with the Council?

Thus the Catholic Church has only to declare, as she does, her intention
never was to demand any thing of the Saints, but their humble Prayers in the
name of JESUS CHRIST, of Nature with those the Faithful offer up for one
another upon Earth, these few Words will convince for ever the pretendedly
Reformed, that they have born to her a hatred most unjust.

But M: Noguier declares, Let M. de Candom say what he will, Nog. p. 54.
he will never be persuaded, the Roman Church has no other Intention (when she
tells us, it is prositable to invocate the Saints) but that we should ask them
the assistance of their Prayers; as we do those of the Faithful, who live
amongst us. But what will he say, now he sees the Roman Church so visibly
approve what M. de Condom had in effect only gathered from the universal belief
of those in Communion with her? But why then, adds M. Noguier, Nog. p. 57.
Do Catholics ask not only the Prayers, but the Aid, Protection, and Succor
of the blessed Virgin, and of the Saints? As if that were not a kind of Aid,
Succor, and Protection, to recommend the miserable to him, who alone can
comfort them. Such is the Protection we may receive from the blessed Virgin and
from the Saints. It is not a small Succor to be aided by their Prayers, seeing
they are at the same time so humble, so pleasing, and so efficatious. But why
should we argue about words, where the thing is so evident? The Exposition
produces to these Ministers most certain Testimonies, by which it is manifest,
Expos. p. 7.
that in what Terms soever the Prayers we offer to the Saints be Couched, the
Intention of the Church, and of the Faithful; always reduces them to this Form,
PRAY FOR US. No matter for that, the Ministers will never believe it. They must
then raise out of their Catechism, and their Confession of Faith, these
accusations of Idolatry, with which they are filled; they must retrench in
their Sermons, so many bloody Invectives, which have no other Grounds, and this
they cannot resolve of; and let us make what Declarations we can of our Minds,
they will neither believe the Council, not its Catechism, nor our Confession of
Faith, nor the Bishops, nor the Pope himself.

It is not necessary to repeat here what is said in the Exposition as to other
objections, Exp. p. 8.
and principally as to that where they accuse the Church of attributing to
Saints a divine Knowledge and Power, whilst she teaches, they can neither know,
nor do any thing of themselves.

But the accusation of Idolatry has another Foundation, which they accuse M. de
Condom to have palliated as well as the others. And it is the Article
concerning Images, An. Av. p. 24.
where nevertheless he has searched no other Palliations, but to expose
faithfully the meaning of the Church. Rep. p. 65.


There needs no more than this to make the very Suspicion of Idolatry to
vanish, according to the Principles of the Pretended Reformed; and they need
only in this compare the Doctrine of their own Catechism with that of the
Council of Trent, represented in the Exposition.

Their Catechism upon this Commandment. Dim. 23.
Thou shall not make to thy self any Graven Image, Asks whether God forbids the
making of any Image? And the answer is, No, but that God forbids only the
making of any Image whereby to represent God or to adore it. Behold the two
things which they think forbidden in this Precept of the Decalogue.

It may be they will do us the Justice to believe we do not pretend to
represent God, and that if they see in some Pictures God the Father Painted in
that form which he was pleased so often to appear in to his Prophets, we
pretend no more to derogate from his Invisibile and Spiritual Nature, than he
himself when he exhibited himself under that form. The Council explicates
sufficiently to them upon this account, Sess. 25.
that we pretend not thereby to represent or express the Divinity, or to give
it any Colors; and I think I should do them an injury in proceeding to a
clearer Proof.

Let us pass to the second part of their Doctrine, and let us learn from their
Catechisms what form of Adoration is condemned. To Prostrate ones self, says
the Answer, before an Image, to pray to it, to how the Knee before it, or show
some other sign of reverence, as if God exhibited himself there to us. This is
in effect the Error of the Gentiles, and the proper Character of Idolatry. But
they who believe, Expos. p. 9, 10, 11.
with the Council, That Images have neither Divinity nor Virtue in them, for
which they ought to be reverenced, and who place all the benefit, in their
recalling the Originals to our remembrance, do not believe that God in them
exhibits himself to them. It is not therefore Idolatry, by the consent of the
Pretended Reformed, and according to the proper Definition of their Catechism.

The Anonymus seems to have been sensible of this Truth in that place, where
objecting this Commandment of the Decalogue he says, P. 67.
that God forbids to make Images, and to worship them. He is in the right. The
words of the Precept are express, and the Images there spoken of are those
which are forbidden to to be made as well as to be worshipped: That is to say,
according to the explication of his Catechism, those which are made to
represent God, and those which are made to show him present, and which are
worshipped with the same intention as full of his Divinity We neither make nor
suffer any of this nature. We do not worship Images; God forbid: but we make
use of Images, to put us in mind of the Originals. Our Council, so odious to
the pretended Reformed Church, teaches us no other use of them: Is this then
enough to make them say, as that Church does in her own Confession of Faith,
that all sorts of Idolatry are in vogue in the Roman Church? Art. 28.
Is it for this that her Discipline calls us Idolaters, and our Religion
Idolatry? Disc. art. 11.13. Art. 5.2.
Without doubt they represent to themselves other things than our Doctrine,
when they give us the name of Gentiles: They believe we follow their abominable
Errors, and that we believe as they did, that God shows himself to us in those
Images.

Had it not been for these mortal Prejudices, had it not been for Ideas which
they frame to themselves of the sentiments of the Church, Christians could
never have imagined it so detestable a crime to kiss the Cross in remembrance
of him who bore our Iniquities upon the wood, nor that so simple and natural a
demonstration of those sentiments of tenderness, which that Pious Object
excites in our hearts ought to make us regarded as if we Adored Baal, or the
Golden Galves of Samaria.

During this strange preocupation of the Pretended Reformed, this Treatise of
the Exposition might well appear to them (which really in effect it did) a Book
full of Artifice, which did nothing but extenuate the Sentiments of Catholics.
But now when they see clearly: all the Artifice of this Book is to separate the
Doctrines which they have imputed to the Church, from those which she
professes, that all the mitigations he makes in Doctrine, is that he has taken
off that hidious Masque which the Ministers had put upon it: let them confess
this Church was not worthy of so much horror, as they had for her, and that at
least she deserves to be heard.

Neither the Pope, nor the Sea Apostolic ought to be hereafter accused of
diminshing that adoration which is due to God, nor that confidence which a
Christian ought to establish in his sole goodness through our Lord Jesus
Christ, since they see, without further search, this Treatise of the
Exposition, which is made only to explicate these two Truths, has received at
Rome and from the Pope himself so Authentic an Approbation.

After this they will certainly be ashamed of that Title which they give the
Pope. No one can think on it without horror, nor hear without astonishment,
that the Pretended Reformed, who boast to follow Scripture word for word, when
the Apostle St. John, who has alone named Antichrist, tells us three or four
times that Antichrist is he who denies that JESUS CHRIST is come in flesh, 2.
Joh. 1.7. 1 John 2.22.4.3.
dare so much as think that he, who teaches so fully the Mystery of JESUS
CHRIST, that is to say, his Divinity, his Incarnation, the superbundance of his
Merits, the necessity of his Grace, and that absolute confidence we must have
in it, should nevertheless be that Antichrist described by the Apostle.

But it is objected against the Popes, 2. These. 2.3.4.
that they are: that wicked Person, that man of Iniquity who has seated himself
in the Temple of God; and makes himself adored as God; They who confess
themselves not only mortal men, but sinners, who pray every day with the rest
of the Faithful, forgive us our offenses, and who never approach the Altar
without Confessing of their sins, and without saying in the most essential part
of the Holy Sacrifice, they hope for eternal life, not by their own Merits, but
through the Bounty of God in the name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

It Is true they maintain that Primacy which JESUS CHRIST has given them in the
Person of St. Peter; but it is by That they advance the Work of JESUS CHRIST
himself, the Work of Charity and Concord, which would never have been perfectly
accomplished, if the Universal Church and all the Episcopal Order had not one
head of Ecclesiastical Gover meant upon Earth, to make the Members act in
concurrence, and accomplish in the whole Body the Mystery of Unity so much
recommended by the Son of God. It is just as much as nothing to answer, that
the Church has her true Head in Heaven, who Unites her by animating her with
his Holy Spirit: who doubts of it! But who does not know this Holy Spirit, who
disposes all things with as much sweetness as efficacy, knows also how to
prepare exterior means proportionable to his designs? The Holy Ghost both
teaches and governs us interiourly: therefore he establishes Pastors and
Teachers to Act exterourly. The Holy Ghost Unites the Body of the Church and
the Ecclesiastical Government: therefore it is he places at the head a common
Father, and a principal disposer who may Govern the whole Family of JESUS
CHRIST. We will call to witness the Consciences of those of the Pretended
Reformed Religion, In this unfortunate age when so many wicked Sects endeavor
by little and little to undermine the Foundations of Christianity, and believe
it enough only to name JESUS CHRIST to introduce indifferency in Religion, and
manifest impiety into the bosom of the Church, Who sees not the necessity of a
Pastor, who may watch over his flock, and, authorized from above, encite all
others whose vigilance might slacken? Let them in reality tell us, if it be not
the Seconians, the Anabaptists, the Independants, those who under the name of
Christian Liberty would establish indifferency in Religions, and so many other
pernicious Sects, which they condemn as well as we, who fly with the greatest
impetuosity against St. Peter's Chair, and cry loudest that his Authority is
Tyrannical? I do not wonder at it: those who would divide the Church, or
surprise her, fear nothing more than to see her march against them like a well
ranged Army under one head. Let us not raise a quarrel with any, let us only
reflect whence come those Books, wherein these dangerous Licenses, and
Antichristian Doctrines are taught: at least none can deny but the Sea of Rome,
by the very Constitution of it, is incompatible with these Novelties; and if we
could not know by the Gospel that the Primacy of this See is necessary for us,
Experience it self would convince us of it. Moreover, We must not be astonished
if this Author of the Exposition, who places the essential Authority of this
See in those things wherein all Catholic Schools agree, has been approved
without difficulty. The Chair of St. Peter stands in need of no disputing; what
all Catholics acknowledge without contestation, suffices to maintain that Power
which was given to it for edification, and not for destruction. The Pretended
Reformed should hereafter give way no more to those vain Phantoms with which
they are frighted. What does it profit them to search in Histories for the
Vices of Popes? when, if what they meet with there should be true, does the
Vices of men destroy the institution of JESUS CHRIST, and the Privilege of St.
Peter? shall the Church rise in Rebellion against a Power which maintains her
Unity, under pretense that some have abused it? Christians are accustomed to
reason upon higher and more true Principles, and know that God is able to
maintain his works in the midst of all the evils which accompany humane frailty.

We do then Conjure these of the Pretended Reformed Religion, by that Charity,
which is God himself, by the name of Christian, which is common to us both, not
to judge of the Doctrine of our Church, by what they hear in their Sermons or
read in their Books, where many times the heat of dispute, and Prevention (not
to mention any other) make things frequently otherwise represented then they
are; but to hearken to this Exposition of the Catholic Doctrine. It is a work
in reality, which consists not so much in disputing, as in explicating clearly
our belief; In which to see how plainly the Author has proceeded, we need only
consider his design.

He promised in the very beginning, 1. To propose the true Tenets of the
Catholic Church, Exp. p. 2.
and to distinguish them from those which are falsely imputed to her 2. To the
end no one should doubt but that he faithfully proposed the true Sentiments of
the Church, Exp. p. 2.
he promised to take them from the Council of Trent, where the Church has
spoken decisively upon the things in question. 3. He promised to propose to the
Pretended Reformed not all points in general, Exp. p. 2.
but those which caused the greatest separation betwixt them and us, and, to
speak properly, those which they made the occasions of their breach. 4. He
promised that what he said to make the decisions of the Council more
intelligible, Exp. p. 2.
should be approved of in the Church, and manifestly conformable to the
Doctrine of the same Council.


All this is plain and just. And, in the first place, no body can think it
strange we should distinguish the Churches Tenets from those which are falsely
imputed to her. When Persons are animated beyond measure, for want of a right
understanding, and when strange prejudices move great disputes, there is
nothing more natural, nothing more charitable, then to explicate matters
clearly. The Holy Fathers practiced a way fraudless and calm like this, to set
men right again. Whilst the Arians and Semi-Arians decryed the Symbol of Nice,
and the Consubstantiality of the Son, by the false Ideas they fixed upon them,
St. Athanasius and St. Hilarious, the two most illustrious defenders of the
Nicene Faith, represented to them the true sense of the Councils: and St.
Hilarious said to them: S. Hill. lib. de syn.
Let us both together condemn false Interpretations, but not destroy the
certainty of Faith -- The Word Consubstantial may be mis-understood: let us
resolve how we may rightly understand it -- We may lay down the true state of
Faith betwixt us, if we do not overthrow what has been rightly established, but
remover misunderstanding.

It is Charity it self which dictates such words, and suggests such means to
reunite our minds. We may say the same to these of the Pretended Reformed
Religion: If the Merit of Good Works, if Prayers addressed to Saints, if the
Eucharist, if the humble satisfactions of Penitents, who endeavor to appease
the wrath of God in voluntarily revenging upon themselves by Laborious
Exercises his offended Justice, if the Terms we use of a Tradition which claims
its Origin from the first Ages, for want of being rightly understood offend
you; The Author of the Exposition offers himself to give you the plain and
natural explication of them, which the Church has always faithfully conserved.
He says nothing of his own, he alleges not particular Authors; and to the end
he may not be suspected of changing the Tenets of the Church, he uses the
proper Terms of the Council of Trent, where she has explicated her self upon
these matters in question: what can there be more rational?

This was the second thing he promised, and he has in this only followed the
Example of the Pretended Reformed. They complain as well as we, their Doctrines
are not rightly understood; and the means they propose to come to a true
knowledge of them, is not different from that which M. de Condom makes use of.
Their Synod of Dort requires that none judge of the Faith of their Churches
from Calumnies picked up here and there, Conclusio Synodi Dordrac. in Syntag.
Confess. Fidei edit. Genev. p. 2.
or passages of particular Authors, which are often falsely cited, or wrested
to a sense contrary to their Intentions; but from the Confessions of Faith of
their Churches, and from the Declaration of their Orthodox Doctrine unanimously
made in this Synod.

The Faith then of a Church must be learnt from its public Definitions, and
not from Private Authors, who may be falsely quoted, mis-understood, and may
also themselves mis-explicate the Sentiments of their Religion. Upon which
account it will be only necessary, that, to expound ours to the Pretended
Reformed, we produce the Decisions of the Council of Trent.

I know the very name of this Council offends, those of the Reformation, and
the Anonymus often shows his ill humor against it. But what do his Invectives
avail him? We go not here about to justify the Council: It suffices for this
Author of the Exposition, that the Doctrine of this Council is universally
received, without Contestation, through the whole Catholic Church, and that she
admits of no other Decisions, in these matters of controversy, but of this
Council.

The Pretended Reformed have always endeavored to have these Decisions thought
ambiguous, and the Anonymus reproaches us also with their being capable of a
double or triple sense. Those who have not read this Council, An. p. 11.12.
unless it were in the Invectives of their Ministers, and in the History of Fa.
Paul, the declared Enemy of it, believe them such: but one word will satisfy
them. It is very true, there was some Points the Council would not decide, and
they were those concerning which there was no settled Tradition, and which were
disputed of in the Schools; It was but reasonable they should be left
undecided: but for those it has decided, it has spoken so precisely, that
amongst so many Decrees of this Council produced in the Exposition, the
Anonymus could not find so much as one, in which there was this double or
triple sense he objects against us.

In effect, It is but reading them, and one shall see they have not any
ambiguity, and that it is impossible for men to explicate themselves more
clearly.

We may put the Exposition it self to the same Test, and judge by that, whether
the Anonymus had reason to upbraid the Author of this Exposition with those
rambling and general Terms in which (says he) he entanglingly wraps up the most
difficult matters. Avert. p. 25.
Rep. p. 12.


The third thing the Author of the Exposition promised, was to treat of those
matters which gave occasion to the Separation. This is precisely what ought to
be done. There is no one who knows not that in disputes there are always some
certain principal points upon which men's minds are fixed. It is to these a
Person must apply himself who would make it his business to end or appease
those contests. Thus did the Author of the Exposition, who immediately declared
to the Pretended Reformed, that he would expound to them those points from
which they took the Subject of their separation. And to the end there should be
no surprise, Exp. p. 2.
he again declares the same at the end, that to keep himself fixed to what is
principal, Exp. p. 50.
he omitted some questions which they of the Pretended Reformed Religion did
not look upon as a lawful Subject of separation.

He has kept his word most faithfully, and the Titles alone of the Exposition
will make it appear, he has not omitted any one of those principal Articles.

So that the Anonymus should not have said that M. de Condom has some select
Terms to avoid the difficulties which give him the most trouble, Avert. p. 22.
that he leaves many questions untouched, and makes have to that of the
Eucharist, where he thought he could enlarge himself with less disadvantage.
Repl. p. 168.


What an Idea would he give us of this Book of the Exposition! but it destroys
it self. Every one sees it was M. de Condom's business to enlarge himself upon
that point of the Eucharist, not because he thought he could do it with less
disadvantage, but because this point is in reality the most difficult, and full
of great questions. So that it will appear he has treated these matters with
less or greater scope, according as they appeared less or more embroiling, not
to him, but to those, for whom he writes. And if it be true that he lays aside
those difficulties which give him the most trouble, it must be allowed, those
which give him the least, are in reality those which are the most essential,
and those in which the Pretended Reformed always thought themselves the most
secure. He has treated of the worship due to God, of Prayers to Saints, of the
honor we render to them, as also to their Images and Relics. He has spoken
of justifying Grace, of the Merit of Good Works, of the necessity of Works, of
Satisfaction, of Purgatory, of Indulgences, of Sacramental Confession and
Absolution, of the Real Presence of the Body and Blood of our Savior in the
Eucharist, of that Adoration which is therein due to him, of
Transubstantiation, and the Sacrifice of the Altar, of Communion under one
Species, of the Authority of Tradition and that of the Church, of the Divine
Institution of the Popes Primacy, where he has in one word explained what is to
be believed of Episcopacy. He has expounded all these difficulties, and there
needs only a little honesty to grant that he has been so far from avoiding
difficulties, as the Anonymus would have it thought, that he has principally
applied himself to those which the Pretended Reformed find the greatest. The
Anonymus himself tells us the Invocation of Saints is one of the most essential
Articles of Religion; and at the same time he adds, P. 61.
this is one of those upon which M. de Condom has been most prolix. What points
are more exactly treated in the Exposition than those of the Eucharist and the
Sacrifice, that of Images, of Merit, of Good works, of Satisfaction? And is it
not in these the Pretended Reformed find the greatest difficulties? In fine, we
will ask even themselves, whether it be not true, that if they were satisfied
in all those points treated of in the Exposition, they would no longer hesitate
to embrace the Faith of the Church? It is therefore certain, the Author has
treated all those Capital points upon which both of us agree the greatest
difficulties move. Nay more, he has always fixed himself to the principal knot
of the difficulty, seeing he applies himself chiefly, according to his first
promise, to those parts where the Catholic Doctrine is accused to strike at the
Foundations of Faith and Christian Piety. It is not therefore to avoid
difficulties, he has left some questions untouched which are but Consequences
and fuller Explications of those which he has handled; or at least, are such as
disturb no body. But, on the contrary, he has done it to the end he might apply
himself with less distraction to the chief difficulties upon which depend the
Decision of our Controversies.

The Author of the Exposition has been no less Faithful in performance of his
fourth promise, which was to affirm nothing to make the Council to be better
understood, which was not manifestly conformable to it, and approved of in the
Church.

The Anonymus looks upon these words, Exp. p. 2.
and all the design of the Exposition, as a Testimony which shows the Doctrine
of the Roman Church ( though explained so clearly, and decided in the Council
of Trent) not yet so clear, An. rep. p. 11.
but that it needs an explication.

M. Noguier seems also to draw the same Consequence, Nog. p. 39.40.
and they have both of them looked upon the Exposition as an explication which
the obscurity of the Council stood in need of.

But we know how the obscurity of a Decision, especially in matters of Faith,
is not always that which makes it to be taken in a wrong sense: it is a
preoccupation of mind, the ardour of dispute, the heat of Persons engaged,
which make them not understand one another, and often attribute to an adversary
what he believes the least. So that when the Author of the Exposition proposes
the Decisions of the Council of Trent to the Pretended Reformed, and adds what
may be useful to remove those Impressions which hinder them from understanding
them aright, they ought not to conclude from thence that the Decisions are
Ambiguous, but only that nothing is so well digested, nor so clear but may be
understood amiss, when prejudice and passion interpose.

To what purpose then do M. Noguier and the Anonymus object to the Author of
the Exposition the Bull of Pope Pius IV. An. p. 10. Nog. p. 40.
The design of the Exposition has nothing of those Glosses and Commentaries
which with great reason this Pope Condemned. For what did those Commentators
and Glossars, especially those who have writ Glosses upon the Laws? what did
they for the most part but fill the margents with their own imaginations, which
most commonly serve only to confound the Text, and which notwithstanding they
give for the Text it self? Let us add, that, for the conservation of Unity,
this Pope was obliged not to permit every Doctor to propose Decisions upon
doubts which succeeding time and vain subtilties might give birth to. Nor has
any thing of this nature been done in the Exposition. It is one thing to
interpret what is obscure and doubtful, another to propose what is clear, and
to make use of it to remove false impressions. The last is what the Author of
the Exposition has endeavored precisely. And if he have added some of his own
Reflections to the Decisions of this Council, to make them more intelligible to
those people who would never look upon them without prejudice, it is because
their preocupation had need of such an assistance.

But why should we speak any more of a thing which is clear nough? We have in
few words given a certain method to enlighten the understandings of those who
are the most zealous to maintain this ambiguity of the Council. They need only
read in this Exposition its Decrees which are there produced, and convince
themselves by their own eyes.

What is here the most important, is, that the Author of the Exposition was not
deceived when he promised what he should say, for the better understanding of
this Council, should be manifestly of the same Spirit, and approved of in the
Church. The matter is in it self clear, and the following Approbations will
make it apparent. It must not therefore be supposed henceforwards that the
Sentiments explained in this work, are the qualifying or the extenuating
thoughts of one man; but the Common Doctrine which we see is, for this reason,
universally approved. It will not therefore avail M. Noguires nor the Anonymus
any thing after this, An. p. 2. etc. Nog. 38, etc.
either to object to us those Practices which they call general, or the
particular opinion of Doctors. For without examining these unnecessary things,
it suffices in one word to say, those Practices and Opinions, be they what they
will, which are not found to be conformable to the intent and Decisions of the
Council, are nothing to Religion, nor to the body of the Catholic Church, Exp.
p. 2. Daille Apol. c. 6. page 8.
nor ought by consequence, as the Pretended Reformed do themselves avouch, give
the least pretense to separate from us, because no one is obliged either to
approve or follow them.

But, say they, those abuses ought to be suppressed: as if one of the ways to
suppress them were not to show the truth in its purity without prejudice to the
other means, with which Prudence and Zeal may inspire the Bishops. As for the
remedy of Schism practiced by the pretended Reformers, if it were not
detestable in it self, the miseries which it has caused, and does at present
cause throughout Christendom, would give us a horror of it.

I will not here reproach the Pretended Reformed with the abuses which are
amongst them. This work of Charity does not permit such like Recriminations. It
suffices I advertise them that to attaque us in reality, they must combat, not
those abuses which we Condemn as well as they, but the Doctrines which we
maintain. But if in examining them more narrowly they find, they give not scope
enough to their invectives, they ought at last to acknowledge we have reason to
tell them the Faith which we profess is less worthy of blame than they believed
it was.

It remains at present, that we beg of God to grant they may read a Work
without bitterness, which is published only to instruct them. The Success is in
his hands who can alone touch the heart. He knows the limits he has fixed to the
Progress of Error, and the miseries of his afflicted Church, by the loss of so
great a number of her Children. But we cannot hinder our selves from hoping
some great effects toward the reunion of Christians, under a Pope, who
exercises so piously and with so perfect a zeal, free from interest, the most
holy Function in the World, and under a King who prefers before all the
Conquests that have enlarged his Kingdom, those that might gain him his own
Subjects to the Church.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE CHURCH IN MATTERS of CONTROVERSY.
SECT. I. The Design of this Treatise.
AFter a Contestation, for above an Age, with those of the Pretended Reformed
Religion; Matters from whence they took the ground of their Separation ought to
be sufficiently cleared, and their minds disposed to a right conception of the
Sentiments of the Catholic Church. So that to me nothing seems more proper,
then to propose her Tenets plainly, and simply, and to distinguish them right
from those which have been falsely imputed to her. In effect, I have, upon
several occasions, taken notice, that the aversion which these Gentlemen have
to most of our Sentiments, is grounded upon some false Ideas, which they have
formed to themselves, concerning them; or else upon some certain words, which
are so offensive to them, that they immediately stop there, and never come so
far as to consider the grounds of things. Upon which account, I thought nothing
could be more beneficial, than to explicate to them what the Church has defined
in the Council of Trent concerning those points, which keep them at farthest
distant from us; without meddling with that which they are accustomed to object
either against particular Doctors, or against those Tenets which are neither
necessarily, nor universally received. For all Parties agree, and M. Daille
himself is of that Opinion, Apol. c. 6.
that it is a very unreasonable thing to attribute the Sentiments of particular
Persons to a whole body; and he adds, that no separation ought to be but upon
the account of Articles authenticly established, to the belief and observance
of which all Persons are obliged. I will not meddle then with any thing but the
Decrees of the Council of Trent; because in them the Church has given her
Decision upon these matters now in agitation: and what I shall say for the
better understanding of those Decisions, shall be what is approved of in the
Church, and shall manifestly appear conformable to the Doctrine of this Council.

This Exposition of our Doctrine will produce two good effects. The first, that
many disputes will wholly vanish, because it will appear thev are only grounded
upon some erroneous explications of our belief. The second that those disputes,
which remain, will not appear, according to the Principles of the Pretended
Reformed, so Capital, as at the first they endeavored to represent them; and
that, according to the same Principles, they contain nothing any ways injurious
to the grounds of Faith.

SECT. II. Those of the Pretended Reformed Religion acknowledge, That the
Catholic Church embraces all the Fundamental Articles of the Christian Religion.
ANd to begin with the fundamental and principal Articles of Faith; these
Gentlemen of the Pretended Reformed Religion must of necessity acknowledge they
are believed and professed in the Catholic Church.

If they will have them to consist in believing that we must adore one only
God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and that we must put our trust in God
alone, through his Son, who became man, was Crucified, and rose again for us;
they know in their Consciences that we profess this Doctrine: and if they add
those other Articles which are comprehended in the Apostles Creed; they do not
doubt also but that we receive them all without exception, and that we have a
pure and true knowledge of them.

M. Daille has writ a Treatise, entitled Faith founded upon the Scriptures, in
which after having exposed all the Articles of Faith held by the Pretended
Reformed Churches, he tells us, they are beyond all contestation; Part 3. ^. 1.
that the Roman Church professes to believe them; that in reality they do not
hold all our Opinions, but that we hold all their Articles of Faith.

This Minister then cannot, unless he destroy his own Faith, deny but that we
believe all the principal Articles of the Christian Religion.

But though M. Daille had not granted thus much, the thing is manifest in it
self, and all the world knows, that we believe all those Articles which
Protestants call Fundamental; so that sincerity it self demands they should
without dispute grant, that we have not really rejected any of them.

The Pretended Reformed, who see the advantages we may draw from this
acknowledgment, are desirous to deprive us of them, by saying that we destroy
those Articles, by interposing others contrary to them. This is what they
endeavor to persuade by Consequences drawn from our Doctrine; but the same M.
Daille (whose authority I allege once more, not so much to convince them by
the Testimony of one of their most Learned Ministers, as because what he says
is in it self evident) tells them what they ought to think of such kind of
Consequences, supposing ill ones might be drawn from our Doctrine. See what he
writes in his Letter to M. Monglat, upon account of his Apology. Although the
Opinion of the Lutherans as well as that of Rome does, according to us, infer
the destruction of the Humanity of JESUS CHRIST, yet this Consequence cannot be
attributed to them without Calumny, seeing they do formally reject it.

There is nothing more essential to the Christian Religion, then the reality of
the Human Nature in JESUS CHRIST: and yet though the Lutherans hold a Doctrine,
from whence is inferred the destruction of this Capital verity, by
Consequences, which the Pretended Reformed judge to be evident; yet they have
not scrupled to offer to Communicate with them; because their Opinion has no
poison in it, Chap. 7.
as M. Daille tells us in his Apology; And their National Synod, held at
Charenton 1631, admits them to the Holy Table, upon this ground, that they
agree in the principal and Fundamental points of Religion. It is then a certain
Maxim established amongst them, that they must not in these cases look upon the
Consequences, which may be drawn from a Doctrine, but purely upon what he
proposes and acknowledges, who teaches it.

So that when they infer by Consequences, which they pretend to draw from our
Doctrine, that we do not sufficiently acknowledge that Sovereign Glory which is
due to God, nor the quality of Savior and Mediator in JESUS CHRIST, nor the
infinite value of his Sacrifice, nor the superabundant Plenitude of his Merits:
we may defend our selves without difficulty from such Consequences, by this
short answer of M. Daille, and tell them that the Catholic Church disavowing
them, they cannot be imputed to her without Calumny.

But I will go yet further, and show these Gentlemen of the Pretended Reformed
Religion, by the sole Exposition of our Doctrine, that the Catholic Church is
so far from ruining the Fundamental Articles of Faith, either directly or
indirectly; that on the contrary she establishes them after so solid and
evident a manner, that no one can question her right understanding of them
without great injustice.

SECT. III. Religious Worship is terminated in God alone.
TO begin with that Adoration which is due to God alone; the Catholic Church
teaches us, that it consists principally, in believing he is the Creator and
Lord of all things, and in adhering to him with all the Powers of our Soul, by
Faith, Hope and Charity, as to him alone who can render us happy by the
Communication of an infinite Good, which is himself.

This interior Adoration, which we render to God in Spirit and in Truth, has
its exterior marks; of which the principal is Sacrifice, which cannot be
offered to any but to God; because a Sacrifice is established to make a public
acknowledgment, and a solemn protestation of Gods Soveraignity, and our
absolute dependence.

The same Church teaches us, that all Religious worship ought to terminate in
God as its necessary end; and that if the honor which she renders to the
Blessed Virgin, and to the Saints may, in some sense, be called Religious, it
is for its necessary Relation to God.

But before we explicate any further in what this honor consists, it will not
be unuseful to take notice, how those of the Pretended Reformation (obliged by
the strength of truth) begin to acknowledge that the custom of praying to
Saints, and honoring their Relics was established even in the fourth age of
the Church. Monsieur Daille grants thus much, in that book he published against
the Tradition of the Latin Church about the object of Religious worship, and
accuses St. Basil, St. Ambrose, St. Hierome, St. John, Chrysostom, St.
Augustine, and many more of those famous Lights of Antiquity who lived in that
Age, and above all St. Gregory Nazianzen, who is called the Divine by
excellence, of having altered, in this point, the Doctrine of the three
foregoing ages. But it will not appear very likely, that M. Daille should
understand the Sentiments of the Fathers of the first three Ages, better then
those who gathered, as I may say, the succession of their Doctrine after their
deaths; and this will be so much the less credible, because the Fathers of the
fourth Age were so far from perceiving that they introduced any novelty in that
worship, that this Minister, on the contrary, has quoted several express Texts,
by which he shows clearly, that they pretended in Praying to Saints, to follow
the example of their Predecessors. But without any further examination what
might be the Sentiments of the Fathers of the three first ages, I will content
my self with what M. Daille is pleased to grant, who allows us so many great
men who taught the Church in the fourth age. For though he has taken upon him,
twelve hundred years after their deaths, to give them in derision the name of a
kind of Sect, calling them Reliquarists, that is to say, Relic honourers; yet
I hope those of his Communion will have more respect for these great men. They
dare not at least accuse them of falling into Idolatry, by praying to Saints,
or of destroying that trust which Christians ought to put in JESUS CHRIST: and
it is to behoped henceforwards they will not reproach these things to us, when
they consider they cannot do it without accusing at the same time these
excellent men, whose sanctity and learning they profess a reverence for, as
well as we. But seeing our design is here to expound our belief, rather then to
show who were the defenders of it, we must continue our explication.

SECT. IV. Invocation of Saints.
THe Church in teaching us, that it is profitable to pray to Saints, teaches us
to pray to them in the same Spirit of Charity, and according to the same order
of fraternal society, which moves us to demand assistance of our brethren
living upon Earth; and the Catechism of the Council of Trent concludes from
this Doctrine, that if the quality of Mediator, Cat. Romans part 3. tit. De Cultu
and Invoc. Sanct.
which the Scripture gives to JESUS CHRIST, received any prejudice from the
Intercession made to the Saints, who Reign with God, it would receive no less
from the Intercession made to the faithful who live with us.

This Catechism shows us clearly the extreme difference betwixt our manner of
imploring God's assistance, and that of imploring the aid of Saints: For (says
it) we pray to God, either to give us good things, Part 4. tit. Quis orandus
sit.
or to deliver us from evil; but because the Saints are more acceptable to him
than we are, we beg of them to undertake our cause, and to obtain for us those
things we stand in need of. From whence it comes to pass, that we use two very
different forms of Prayer; for to God the proper manner of speaking is to say,
HAVE PITY ON US, HEAR OUR PRAYER; whereas we only desire the Saints TO PRAY FOR
US. From whence we ought to understand, that in what Terms soever those
prayers, which we address to Saints, are couched, the intention of the Church,
and of her faithful, reduces them always to this form, as the Catechism
presently after confirms. Ibid.


But it is good to consider the words of the Council it self, which prescribing
to Bishops how they ought to speak of the Invocation of Saints, Sess. 25. Dec.
de Invoc. etc.
obliges them to teach, that the Saints who reign with JESUS CHRIST, offer up
to God their prayers for men; that it is good and profitable to invocate them
after an humble manner, and to have recourse to their prayers, aid and
assistance to obtain of God his Benefits through our Lord JESUS CHRIST his Son,
who is our sole Savior and Redeemer. After which the Council condemns those
who teach a contrary Doctrine. We see then, to invocate the Saints, according
to the sense of this Council, is to have recourse to their prayers for
obtaining benefits from God through JESUS CHRIST. So that in reality we do not
obtain those benefits, which we receive by the intercession of the Saints,
otherwise then through JESUS CHRIST and in his name; seeing these Saints
themselves pray in no other manner than through JESUS CHRIST, and are not heard
but in his name. This is the Faith of the Church, which the Council of Trent
has clearly explicated in few words. After which we cannot imagine that any one
should accuse us of forsaking JESUS CHRIST, when we beseech his members, who
are also ours, his Children, who are our Brethren, and his Saints, who are our
first fruits, to pray with us, and for us to our common Master, in the name of
our common Mediator.

The same Council explicates clearly and in few words, what is the intention of
the Church, when she offers up to God the dreadful sacrifice to honor the
memory of his Saints. This honor which we render them in Sacrificing, consists
in naming them in the prayers we offer up to God, as his faithful servants; and
in rendering him thanks for the victories which they have gained, and in humbly
beseeching him that he would vouchsafe to favor us by their intercession. St.
Augustine has told us twelve hundred years ago, 8. de Civ, c. 27.
that we ought not to think any sacrifices were offered to the Holy Martyrs,
although the practice of the universal Church in that time was to offer Sacrifice
upon their holy bodies, and at their Memories; that is to say, before those
places where their precious relics were conserved. This Father has moreover
added, Tract 84. in Joh. Sermon. 17, in verb. Apost.
that they made a commemoration of the Martyrs at the Holy Altar, in the
Celebration of the Sacrifice, not to pray for them as they do for other persons
who are dead; but rather, that they might pray for us. I relate the sentiments
of this Holy Bishop, because the Council of Trent makes use of his very words
almost to teach the Faithful, that the Church does not offer Sacrifice to the
Saint, Conc. Trid. Sess. 22. c. 3.
but to God alone, who has crowned them; that the Priest also does not address
himself to St. Peter and St. Paul, saying, I OFFER UP TO YOU THIS SACRIFICE;
but rendering thanks to God for their victories, he demands their assistance, to
the end those whose memory we celebrate upon earth, would vouchsafe to pray for
us in Heaven. It is after this manner we honor the Saints, that we may obtain
the Graces of God by their Intercession; and the Principal of those Graces we
hope to obtain, is that of imitating them: to which we are excited by the
consideration of their admirable Examples, and by the honor which we render in
the presence of God to their happy memories.

Those who will rightly consider the Doctrine we have proposed, will be obliged
to grant us, that as we do not rob God of any of those perfections peculiar to
his infinite essence: so we do not attribute to Creatures any of those
qualities, or operations proper to God alone: which distinguishes us so fully
from Idolaters, we cannot comprehend why that Title should be given us.

And when these Gentlemen of the pretended Reformation object to us, that by
addressing our Prayers to the Saints, and honoring them all the world over as
present, we attribute to them a certain kind of Immensity, or at least the
knowledge of the Secrets of hearts, which God has nevertheless reserved to
himself, as it appears by so many testimonies of Scripture; they do not
sufficiently reflect upon our doctrine. For, in fine, without examining what
grounds may be had to attribute to the Saints some certain degree of knowledge
as to those things which are acted amongst us, or also of our secret thoughts,
it is manifest that to say a Creature may have the knowledge of these things,
by a light communicated to him by God, is not to elevate a creature above his
condition. The Example of the Prophets justify this clearly, God having not
disdained to discover future things to them, tho they appear much more
particularly reserved to his own knowledge.

Moreover, never any Catholic yet thought the Saints knew our necessities by
their own Power, no nor the desires which move us to address our secret Prayers
to them. The Church contents herself to teach with all antiquity these Prayers
to be very profitable to such who make them, whether it be the Saints know them
by the ministry and communication of Angels, who, according to the testimony of
Scripture, know what passes amongst us, being established by Gods order, as
administering Spirits, to cooperate with us in the work of our Salvation;
whether it be that God himself makes known to them our desires by a particular
Revelation; or lastly whether it be that he discovers the secret to them in his
divine Essence in which all truth is comprised. So that the Church has not
decided any thing about these different methods, which God might be pleased to
make use of for that end.

But let these means be what they will, it is always certain the Church does
not attribute to the Creature any of the divine perfections, as the Idolaters
did; seeing she permits us not to acknowledge even in the greatest Saints, any
degree of Excellency which does not proceed from God; nor any acceptableness in
his sight, but by their virtues; nor any virtue, which is not a gift of his
Grace; nor any knowledge of human affairs, but what is communicated to them;
nor any power to assist us, but by their prayers; nor, in fine, any felicity,
but by a submission and a perfect conformity to his divine will.

It is therefore true, that by examining what are our interior sentiments
concerning the Saints, it will be found we do not raise them above the
condition of Creatures; and from thence one ought to judge of what nature that
exterior honor is, which we render them, exterior veneration being
established to testify the interior sentiments of the mind.

But because this honor, which the Church renders to the Saints, appears
principally before their Images and holy Relics, it will be proper to
explicate her belief concerning them.

SECT. V. Images and Relics.
AS for Images, Conc. Trid. Sess. 25. Dec. de Invoc. etc.
the Council of Trent forbids us expressly to believe any divinity or virtue in
them, for which they ought to be reverenced; to demand any favor of them, or
to put any trust in them, and ordains that all the honor which is given to
them should be referred to the Saints themselves which are represented by them.

All these words of the Council are like so many characters to distinguish us
from Idolaters, seeing we are so far from believing with them any divinity
annexed to the Images; that we do not attribute to them any other virtue but
that of exciting in us the remembrance of those they represent.

Upon this it is the honor we render Images is grounded. No man, for example,
can deny but that when we look upon the figure of JESUS CHRIST crucified, it
excites in us a more lively remembrance of him, who loved us so as to deliver
himself up to death for us. While this Image, being present before our eyes,
Gal. 2.
causes so precious a remembrance in our souls, we are moved to testify by some
exterior signs how far our gratitude bears us; and by humbling our selves
before the Image, we show what is our submission to our Savior. So that to
speak precisely, and according to the Ecclesiastical Style, when we honor the
Image of an Apostle or a Martyr, our intention is not so much to honor the
Image, Pont. Com. de Bened. Imag. Sess. 25. Dec. de Inv. etc.
as to honor the Apostle or the Martyr in presence of the Image. Thus the
Roman Pontifical tells us, and the Council of Trent expresses the same thing
when it say, the honor we render to Images has such a reference to those they
represent; that by the means of those Images which we kiss, and before which we
kneel, we adore JESUS CHRIST, and honor the Saints whose Types they are.

In fine, one may know with what intention the Church honors Images, by that
honor which she renders to the Cross and to the Bible. All the world sees very
well, that before the Cross she adores him who bore our Iniquities upon the
wood; and that if her children bow the head before the Bible, 1 Pet. 2.
if they rise up out of respect, when it is carried before them, and if they
kiss it reverently, all this honor is referred to the eternal Verity which it
proposes to us.

They must have but little Justice who treat with the term of Idolatry that
Religious Sentiment, which moves us to uncover our heads, and bow them before
the Image of the Cross, in remembrance of him who was crucified for the love of
us; and it would be too much blindness not to perceive the excessive difference
betwixt those, who put their trust in Idols, out of an opinion that some
divinity, or some virtue was, as I may say, tied to them, and those who
declare, as we do, that they will not make use of Images, but to raise their
minds toward heaven, to the end they may there honor JESUS CHRIST or his
Saints, and in the Saints God himself, who is the Author of all Sanctity and
Grace.

After the same manner we ought to understand that honor which we pay to
Relics, after the example of the Primitive Church; and if our Adversaries
would but consider that we look upon the bodies of Saints, as having been
Victimes offered up to God either by Martyrdom or by Penance, they would not
think the honor which we pay them upon this account could alienate us from
that which we render to God himself.

We may say in general, that if they would but consider how the affections
which we bear to any one propagates it self, without being divided, to his
children, to his friends, and after that, by several degrees, to the
representation of him, to any remains of him, and to any thing which renews in
us his remembrance; If they did but conceive that honor has the like
progression, seeing honor is nothing else but Love mixed with respect and
Fear; in fine, If they would but consider, that all the exterior worship of
the Catholic Church has its source in God himself, and returns back again to
him: they would never believe that this worship which he himself alone
animates, could excite his Jealousy. They would on the contrary see, that if
God, as Jealous as he is of the love of men, does not look upon us as dividing
our selves betwixt him and Creatures, when we love our neighbor for the love
of him; the same God, tho Jealous of the honor which his faithful pay him,
cannot look upon, them as dividing that worship which is due to him alone,
when, out of respect to him, they honor those whom he had honored.

It is true nevertheless, that seeing the sensible marks of reverence are not
all of them absolutely necessary; the Church might without the least alteration
in her doctrine, extend these exterior practices more or less according to the
different exigences of times, places or occurrences, being desirous that her
Children should not be slavishly subject to sensible things, but only excited,
and, as it were, advertised by their means to fly to God, and to offer up to
him in Spirit and in the truth that rational service, which he expects from his
creatures.

One may see by this doctrine how truly I affirmed, that a great part of our
Controversies would vanish by the sole understanding of the Terms, if these
points were but discussed with charity; and if our adversaries would but with
moderation consider the foregoing Explications, which comprehend the express
doctrine of the Council of Trent, they would cease to accuse us of injuring the
mediation of JESUS CHRIST, of Invocating the Saints, and adoring Images after a
manner which is peculiar to God alone. It is true, that seeing, in one sense,
Adoration, Invocation, and the name of Mediator are only proper to God and
JESUS CHRIST, it is no hard matter to misapply these terms, whereby to render
our doctrine odious. But if they be strictly kept to that sense in which we use
them, these objections and accusations will lose their force; and if any other
less important difficulties remain to these gentlemen of the pretended Reformed
Religion, sincerity will oblige them to acknowledge they are satisfied as to the
principal subject of their complaints.

Furthermore, there is nothing so unjust as to accuse the Church of placing all
her piety in these devotions to the Saints, seeing, as we have already
observed, Sess. 25. Dec. de Inv. etc.
the Council of Trent contents it self to teach the Faithful, that this
practice is good and beneficial, without saying any more of it. So that the
intention of the Church is only to condemn those, who reject this practice,
either out of disrespect or Error. She is obliged to condemn them, because She
is obliged not to suffer any practice which is beneficial to salvation to be
despised, nor a doctrine authorized by antiquity to be condemned by novellists.

SECT. VI. Justification.
THE doctrine of Justification will show yet more clearly how many difficulties
may be ended by a plain exposition of our sentiments.

Those who are never so little versed in the history of the pretended
Reformation, are not ignorant that the first Authors proposed this Article to
all the world as the principal of all the rest, and as the most essential cause
of their separation; So this is the most necessary to be well understood.

We believe in the first place that Our sins are freely forgiven us by the
divine mercy, Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 9.
for JESUS CHRIST's sake. These are the express terms of the Council of Trent,
which adds, that we are said to be justified gratis, Ibid. c. 8.
because none of those acts which precede Justification, whether they be Faith
or good works, can merit this Grace.

Seeing the Scripture explicates the remission of sins, by sometimes telling us
that God covers them, and sometimes that he takes them away, Tit. 3.5, 6, 7.
and blots them out by the Grace of his Holy Spirit which makes us new
creatures, we believe that, to form a perfect Idea of the Justification of a
sinner, we must join together both these Expressions. For which reason we
believe our sins not only to be covered, but also entirely washed away by the
Blood of JESUS CHRIST, and by the grace of regeneration; which is so far from
obscuring or lessening that Idea which we ought to have of the merit of this
Blood, on the contrary it heightens and augments it.

So that the Justice of JESUS CHRIST is not only imputed, but actually
communicated to the faithful, by the operation of the Holy Spirit; in so much
that they are not only reputed, but rendered just by his grace.

If that Righteousness which is in us were only such in the eyes of men, it
would not be the work of the holy Ghost: It is then a righteousness and that
before God, seeing it is God himself who produces it in us, by pouring forth
his charity in our hearts.

Nevertheless it is too true, that the flesh rebels against the Spirit, Gal.
5.17.
and the Spirit against the flesh, and that we all offend in many things. Jam.
3.2.
So that, tho our Justice be truly such, by the infusion of his Charity, yet it
is not perfect Justice; because of the combat of Concupiscence: In so much that
the continual sighings of a soul, penitent for her offenses, is the most
necessary duty of a Christian righteousness, which obliges us to confess humbly
with St. Augustine, that our Justice in this life consists rather in the
remission of sin, than in the perfection of Virtues.

SECT. VII. Merits of Good Works.
AS to the merit of Good works, Sess. 6. c. 16.
the Catholic Church teaches us, that eternal life ought to be proposed to the
children of God, both as a Grace, which is mercifully promised to them by the
mediation of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and as a recompense which is faithfully
rendered to their good works, and merits, in virtue of this promise. These are
the proper terms of the Council of Trent. But least human pride should flatter
it self with an opinion of a presumptuous merit, the same Council teaches us,
that all the price and value of a Christians works proceeds from the
sanctifying grace which is given us gratis in the name of JESUS CHRIST, Ibid.
and that it is an effect of the continual influence of this divine Head upon
its Members.

Really the Precepts, Exhortations, Promises, Threatenings and Reproaches of the
Gospel show clearly enough, we must work out our salvation by the cooperation
of our wills together with the grace of God assisting us: But it is one of our
first Principles, that the free will can act nothing conducing to eternal
happiness, but as it is moved and elevated by the Holy Ghost.

So that the Church knowing it is this divine Spirit which works in us by his
Graces all the good we do; she is obliged to believe the good works of the
Faithful very acceptable to God, and of great consideration before him: and it
is just she should make use of the word Merit with all Christian antiquity,
whereby she may principally denote the value, the price and the dignity of
those works which we perform through grace. But seeing all their Sanctity comes
from God, who produces them in us, the same Church has in the Council of Trent
received these words of St. Augustine, as a doctrine of Catholic Faith, that God
crowns his own gifts in crowning the merits of his Servants.

We beg of those who love Truth and Peace, that they would be pleased here to
read a little more at length the words of this Council, to the end they may
once for all disabuse themselves of those false inpressions which has been
given them concerning our doctrine. Although we see, Sess. 6. c. 16.
say the Fathers in this Council, that holy writ esteems Good works so much;
That JESUS CHRIST himself promises that a glass of cold water given to the poor
shall not want its reward; and that the Apostle testifies how a moment of light
pain endured in this world shall produce an eternal weight of Glory:
nevertheless God forbid a Christian should glory in himself, and not in our
Lord, whose bounty is so great to all men, that he will have those gifts which
he bestows upon them to be their merits.

This doctrine is dispersed throughout the whole Council, which teaches us in
another Session, Sess. 14. c. 8.
that we, who can do nothing of our selves, can do all things with him who
strengthens us, in such sort that man has nothing of which he may glory, nor
for which he may confide in himself; but all his confidence, and all his glory
is in JESUS CHRIST, in whom we live, in whom we merit, in whom we satisfy,
bringing forth fruits worthy of repentance, which draw their virtue from him,
and by him are offered to his Father, and accepted of by his Father through
him. Wherefore we ask all things, we hope all things, we render thanks for all
things, through our Lord JESUS CHRIST. We confess aloud we are not acceptable
to God but in and by him, and we cannot comprehend why any other thought should
be attributed to us. We so place all the hopes of our salvation in him, that we
daily make use of these words to God in the Sacrifice: Vouchsafe O God to grant
to us sinners, thy servants, who hope in the multitude of thy mercies, some
part and society with the Blessed Apostles and Martyers -- into whose number we
beseech thee to be pleased to receive us, not looking upon our merits, but
graciously pardoning us in the name of JESUS CHRIST our Lord.

Will the Church never be able to persuade her Children, now become her
adversaries, neither by the Exposition of her Faith, nor by the Decisions of
her Councils, nor by the Prayers in her Sacrifice, that her belief is, that she
can have no life but in JESUS CHRIST, and that she has no hope but in him? This
hope is so firm, it makes the Children of God who walk faithfully in his ways,
to find a peace which surpasses all understanding, as the Apostle tells us.
Phil. 4.7.
But tho this hope be stronger than the promises and menaces of the world, and
sufficient to calm the troubles of our Conciences; yet it does not wholly
extinguish Fear: for tho we be assured God will never abandon us of his own
accord, yet we are never certain we shall not lose him by our own fault, in
rejecting his inspirations. He has been pleased by this saving fear to mitigate
that confidence which he has infused into his children, because, as St.
Augustine tells us, such is our infirmity in this place of Temptations and
dangers, that an absolute security would produce tepidity and pride in us,
whereas this fear, which, according to the Apostles command, makes us work out
our salvation with trembling, Phil. 2.12.
renders us more vigilant, and makes us rely with a more humble dependence upon
him, who works in us by his Grace both to will, and to do, according to his
good pleasure, as the same St. Paul expresses it.

Thus you have seen what is most necessary in the Doctrine of Justification;
Ibid. 13.
and our Adversaries would be very unreasonable, if they should not confess
that this Doctrine suffices to teach Christians they ought to refer all the
glory of their Salvation to God through JESUS CHRIST.

If the Ministers after this should go about to move questions about subtilties
it is good to advertise them, that it becomes them not now to be so scrupulous
in our behalfs, after having granted what they have done to the Lutherans, and
their own brethren concerning Predestination and Grace. This their conduct
toward them, ought to have taught them in this matter to reduce themselves to
what is absolutely necessary for the establishment of the foundations of
Christian piety.

But if they could but once resolve to prefix these limits to themselves, they
would be presently satisfied, and they would cease to accuse us of annulling
the Grace of God, by attributing all to our good works; seeing we have shown
them, in such clear terms of the Council of Trent, these 3 points, so decisive
as to this matter: That our sins are pardoned us out of pure mercy, for the
sake of JESUS CHRIST; That we are indebted for that Justice which is in us by
the holy Ghost to a liberality gratis bestowed upon us; and that all the good
works we do are but so many gifts of his Grace.

And indeed we must acknowledge, that the learned of their Party do not contend
so much of late about this Subject, as they did formerly, and there are but few
who do not now confess, there ought not to have been a breach upon this point.
But if this important difficulty about Justification, upon which their first
Authors laid all their stress, be not looked upon now as essential by the
wisest persons amongst them, we leave them to think what they ought to Judge of
their separation, and what hopes there would be of an union, if they would but
overcome their prejudice, and quit the Spirit of contention.

SECT. VIII. Satisfactions, Purgatory, and Indulgences.
WE must farther explicate after what manner we believe we can make
satisfaction to God through his grace, to the end we may not leave any doubt
upon this matter uncleared.

Catholics unanimously teach, that JESUS CHRIST, God and Man, was solely
capable through the infinite dignity of his Person, to offer up to God a
sufficient satisfaction for our Sins. But having satisfied superabundantly, he
could apply this infinite satisfaction after two manners: either by an entire
remission, without reserving any punishment: or else by changing a greater
punishment into a less, that is, an eternal pain into a temporal. This first
manner being more complete and more comformable to his goodness, he makes use
of it immediately in Baptism: but we believe that he makes use of the second in
the pardon he grants to those who fall after Baptism, being carried in some
manner to it by the ingratitude of those who have abused his first gifts; so as
they are to suffer some temporal pain tho the eternal be remitted.

It must not be hence concluded that JESUS CHRIST has not fully satisfied for
us, but on the contrary, that having obtained an obsolute dominion over us, by
the infinite price which he has given for our salvation, he grants us pardon,
upon what condition, what law, or with what restriction it pleases him.

We should be injurious and ungrateful to our Savior, should we dare to deny
the infinite value of his merits, under pretense that when he pardons us the
sin of Adam, he does not at the same time free us from all the consequences of
it, but leaves us still subject to death, and so many other corporal and
spiritual infirmities, which this sin brought upon us. If suffices that JESUS
CHRIST, has once paid the price by which we shall be one day entirely freed
from the evils which overwhelme us; it is our parts to embrace with humility
and thanksgiving every part of his benefits, by considering by what progress it
pleases him to procure our deliverance, according to that order which his
wisdom has established for our good, and for a more clear manifestation of his
bounty and Justice.

Upon the like account we ought not to think it strange, that he who has shown
us so great mercy in Baptism, should be more severe toward us, after our
having violated our holy promises. It is just, yes and beneficial to our
salvation, that God in remitting our sin, together with the eternal pain which
we deserved for it, should exact of us some temporal pain to retain us in our
duties; lest if we should be too speedily freed from the Bonds of Justice, we
should abandon our selves to a temerarious Confidence, abusing the facility of
the Pardon.

It is then to satisfy this Obligation, we are subjected to some painful works
which we must accomplish in the Spirit of Humility and Penance; and it was the
necessity of these satisfactory works which obliged the primitive Church to
impose upon Penitents those pains called Canonical.

When therefore she imposes upon Sinners painful and laborious works, and they
undergo them with humility, this is called Satisfaction; and when, regarding
the fervor of the Penitents, or some other good works which she has prescribed
them, she pardons some part of that pain which is due to them, this is called
Indulgence.

The Council of Trent proposes nothing else to be believed concerning
Indulgences, Contin. sest. 25. Dec. d. Indulg.
but that the powe to grant them has been given to the Church by JESUS CHRIST,
and that the use of them is beneficial to salvation; to which this Council
adds, That this power ought to be retained, yet nevertheless used with
moderation, lest Ecclesiastical discipline should be weakened by an over great
facility: which shows the manner of granting Indulgences to regard discipline.

Those who depart this life in Grace and Charity, but nevertheless indebted to
the divine Justice some pains which it reserved, are to suffer them in the
other life. This is what obliged all the Primitive Christians to offer up
Prayers, Alms deeds and Sacrifices, for the faithful who departed in peace and
communion of the Church, Sess. 25. de Purgator.
with a certain faith that they may be assisted by these means. This is what
the Council of Trent proposes to us to believe touching the Souls detained in
Purgatory, without determining in what their pains consist, or many other such
like things, concerning which this Holy Council demands great moderation,
blaming those who divulge what is uncertain or suspected.

Such is the innocent and holy Doctrine of the Catholic Church touching
Satisfactions, which has been imputed to her as so great a crime. If after this
Explication, those of the pretended Reformed Religion accuse us of injuring the
satisfactions of JESUS CHRIST, they must have forgotten what we told them, that
our Blessed Savior paid the full price of our Redemption; that nothing is
wanting in this price, because it is infinite and how these remaining pains, of
which we have spoken, come not from any defect in the payment, but from a
certain order which he has established to retain us in a saving discipline by
just apprehensions.

But if they also tell us, we believe we can of our own selves satisfy for some
part of the pain due to our sins, we can with confidence assure them, the
contrary appears by the maxims we have established. Which maxims make it
clearly appear, that our Salvation is no other but a work of Mercy and Grace;
that what we do by the Grace of God is no less his work, then what he dos alone
by his absolute power; and lastly, that what we give to him, appertains no less
to him, that what he gives to us. To which we must add, that what we call
Satisfaction, following the Example of the primitive Church, is after all
nothing but the application of the infinite satisfaction of JESUS CHRIST.

This very consideration ought to appease those who are offended when we tell
them, that God is so well pleased with fraternal charity and the communion of
Saints, that he frequently also accepts of those Satisfactions which we offer
up one for another. It seems these men do not conceive how much all we are
belongs to God, nor how all the favors, which his Goodness makes him have for
the faithful, the members of JESUS CHRIST, are necessarily referred to this
divine head. But certainly those who have read and considered how God himself
inspires his servants with a desire to afflict themselves with fasting,
hair-cloth and ashes, not only for their own sins, but also for the sins of all
the people, will not be astonished if we say, that being touched with the
delight he has to gratify his friends, he mercifully accepts of the humble
sacrifice of their voluntary mortifications, in abatement of those
chastisements which he prepared for his people: which shows that being
satisfied by these, he renders himself more mild toward the others, by this
means honoring his Son JESUS CHRIST in the communion of his members, and in
the holy society of his mystical body.

SECT. IX. The Sacraments.
THE Order of Doctrine requires that we now speak of the Sacraments, by which
the merits of JESUS CHRIST are applied to us. Seeing the disputes we have
concerning them, if we except the Eucharist, are not so hot as the others, we
will in the first place clear in short the chiefest difficuties which are
raised concerning the other, and reserve the Eucharist, which is the most
important of all the rest, till the last.

The Sacraments of the new Covenant are not sacred signs only, which represent
Grace, nor seals which confirm it to us; but the Instruments of the Holy Ghost,
which serve to apply it to us, and which confer it upon us by virtue of the
words which are pronounced, and the exterior action which is performed, upon
condition that we put not not any Impediment by our not being rightly disposed.

Whilst God annexes so great Grace to exterior signs, which have not of their
own nature any proportion with so admirable an effect, he shows us clearly,
that besides all we can do interiourly of our solves by our good dispositions,
there must necessarily intervene, before we can be justified, a special
operation of the Holy Ghost, and a peculiar application of the merit of our
Savior, which is exhibited to us by the Sacraments. So that this Doctrine
cannot be rejected without injuring the merits of JESUS CHRIST, and the
operation of his divine power in our regeneration.

We acknowledge seven sacred signs or Ceremonies established by JESUS CHRIST, as
the ordinary means for the Sanctification and perfection of the new man. Their
divine institution appears in the holy Scripture, either by the express words
of JESUS CHRIST, who established them, or by the Grace which, according to the
same Scripture, is annexed to them, and necessarily shows a divine institution.

Baptism.
Seeing little Children cannot supply the want of Baptism by acts of Faith,
Hope and Charity, nor by the vow to receive this Sacrament; we believe that, if
they do not really receive it, they do not in any manner partake of the Grace
of redemption; and therefore dying in Adam, they have not any part in JESUS
CHRIST.

It is good to observe here, that the Lutherans believe with the Catholic
Church the absolute necessity of Baptism, and are astonished with her that such
a truth should be denied, which never any one before Calvin durst openly call
in question, it was so firmly rooted in the minds of all the faithful.

Nevertheless, the Pretended Reformed are not apprehensive voluntarily to let
their Children dye like the Children of Infidels, without bearing any mark of
Christianity, and without receiving any grace, if their deaths should chance to
prevent the day of their assembly.

Confirmation.
The Imposition of hands practiced by the Holy Apostles, to confirm the
Faithful against Persecutions, having its principal effect in the interior
descent of the Holy Ghost, Act. 8.15.17.
and the infusion of his gifts, it ought not to have been rejected by our
adversaries, under pretense that the Holy Ghost descends now no more visibly
upon us. Thus all Christian Churches since the Apostles times have religiously
retained it, making use also of Holy Chrism, to show the virtue of this
Sacrament by a more express representation of the interior unction of the Holy
Ghost.

Penance, and Sacramental Confession.
We believe that JESUS CHRIST has been pleased, those, who have submitted
themselves to the Authority of the Church by Baptism, and who have since
violated the laws of the Gospel, should come and submit themselves to the
Judgment of the same Church in the Tribunal of Penance, Math. 18.18. John 20.23.
where she exercises the power which is given her of remitting and retaining
sins.

The terms of that commission which is given to the Ministers of the Church to
absolve from sin, are so general, they cannot without temerity be restrained to
public sins; and seeing when they pronounce that absolution in the name of
JESUS CHRIST, they only follow the express terms of this Commission, the
sentence is looked upon as rendered by JESUS CHRIST himself, by whom they are
established Judges. It is this invisible High Priest who interiourly absolves
the Penitent, whilst the Priest exteriourly exercises the function.

This Penitential Court of Judicature being so necessary a curb to liberty; a
source so fruitful of wise admonitions; so sensible a consolation for souls
afflicted for their Sins, when their absolution is not only declared in general
terms, as it is practiced by the Ministers, but when they are in reality
absolved by the authority of JESUS CHRIST, after a particular examination, and
knowledge of the Case: we cannot believe that our adversaries can look upon so
many benefits without regretting their loss, and without being somewhat ashamed
of a Reformation which has cast off so saving and so holy a practice.

Extreme Unction.
The Holy Ghost having, according to the testimony of St. James, annexed an
express promise of remission of sins, 1 Jac. 14.55.
and comfort of the sick, to Extreme Unction, nothing is wanting to make this
sacred ceremony a true Sacrament. It is only to be remaked, that according to
the Doctrine of the Council of Trent, Sess. 14. c 2. de Sac. Extr. unc.
the sick are more relieved in respect of the soul than of the body; and that
as the spiritual profit is always the principal object of the new law, so it is
that also which we ought absolutely to expect from this holy unction, if we be
rightly disposed for it; whereas the ease in sickness is only granted with a
respect to our eternal salvation, according to the secret dispositions of the
divine Providence, and the different degrees of preparation and faith which is
found in the Faithful.

Marriage.
When we consider that JESUS CHRIST has given a new form to Marriage, Math.
19.5.
reducing this holy society to two persons immutably and indissolubly united;
and when we see this inseparable union, Ephesians. 5.32.
the sign of his eternal union with his Church: we shall not have my:
difficulty to comprehend that the marriage of the Faithful is accompanied by the
Holy Ghost, and by Grace; and we shall praise the divine bounty for having been
thus pleased to consecrate the origin of our birth.

Orders.
The Imposition of Hands, which the Administrators of sacred things receive, 1 Timothy 4. 2 Timothy 2.
being accompained with so apparent a virtue of the Holy Ghost, and so full an
infusion of his Grace, it ought to be placed amongst the number of the
Sacraments. And indeed we must acknowledge our adversaries do not absolutely
exclude the consecration of Ministers, Conf. de Foy, Art. 35.
but that they only exclude it from the number of the Sacraments which are
common to the whole Church.

SECT. X. Doctrine of the Church touching the real presence of the Body and
Blood of JESUS CHRIST in the Eucharist, and the manner how the Church
understand these words, This is my Body.
WE are come, you see, at the last to the Question of the Eucharist, where it
will be necessary that we explicate our Doctrine more fully, however without
exceeding too much the bounds we have prescribed our selves.

The real presence of the Body and Blood of our Savior is solidly established
by the words of the Institution, which we understand literally; and there is no
more reason to ask us, why we fix our selves to the proper and literal sense,
then there is to ask a Traveller why he follows the high Road. It is their
parts, who have recourse to the figurative sense, and who take bypath, to
give a reason for what they do. As for us, who find nothing in the words which
JESUS CHRIST makes use of for the institution of this mystery, obliging us to
take them in a figurative sense, we think that to be a sufficient reason to
determine us to the literal. But we are yet more powerfully engaged, when we
come to consider in this Mystery the intention of the Son of God, which I will
explicate after the plainest manner I am able, and that by Principles which I
think our adversaries themselves cannot deny.

I say then, These words of our Savior Take eat, Math. 16. Luc. 22.
this is my body given for you, show us, that as the ancient Jews did not in
Spirit only unite themselves to the Immolation of the Victim which was offered
for them, but that in reality they eat the sacrifised flesh, which was to them
a mark of their partaking of that oblation: So JESUS CHRIST becoming himself
our Victim, would have us really eat of the flesh of his Sacrifice, to the end
the actual communication of this adorable flesh might be a perpetual testimony
to every one of us in particular, that it was for us he took it, and for us he
immolated it.

God had forbidden the Jews to eat of the sin-offering, to teach them the true
expiation of their crimes was not to be accomplished in the Law, nor by the
blood of Beasts: all the people lay, Levit. 6.30.
as it were, under an interdiction by this prohibition, without being able to
have any actual participation of the remission of Sins. By a contrary reason it
was necessary the Body of our Blessed Savior, the true Host immolated for sin,
should be eaten by the Faithful, to show them by this eating that the remission
of sin was accomplished in the new Testament.

God also forbid the Children of Israel to eat Blood; Levit. 17.11.
and one of the reasons for this Prohibition was, because the Blood was given
us for the Expiation of our Souls. But on the contrary, our Blessed Savior
gives us his Blood to drink, Math. 26.28.
because it is shed for the remission of Sins.

So that the eating of the Body and Blood of the Son of God is as real at the
Holy Table, as the Grace, the expiation of Sins, and the participation of the
Sacrifice of JESUS CHRIST is actual and real in the new Covenant.

Nevertheless, seeing he desired to exercise our Faith in this Mystery, and at
the same time, to free us from the horror of eating flesh, and drinking Blood
in their proper Species, it was convenient he should give us them clothed
under another Species. But if these Considerations have obliged him to make us
partake of the flesh of our Victim after another manner than the Jews, he was
not for that obliged to deprive us in the least of the reality of his Substance.

It appears then, to accomplish the ancient Figures, and to put us in actual
Possession of the Victim offered for our Sins, that JESUS CHRIST had intention
to give us really his Body and Blood. Which is so evident, that our Adversaries
themselves would have us to believe they are in this of the same opinion with
us, perpetually repeating how they deny not the actual Presence, nor the real
Participation of the Body and Blood in the Eucharist. This we will examine
hereafter, where we think it necessary to represent their Sentiments, after we
have finished the Explication of those of the Church. But in the mean time we
will conclude, that if the plainness of our Saviors words has forced them to
acknowledge, his express Intention was to give us in reality his Flesh, when he
said, This is my Body, they ought not to be astonished, if we cannot consent to
understand these words only in Figure.

In reality, the Son of God, who was so careful to explicate to his Apostles
what he taught them under Parables and Figures, having said nothing here to
explicate himself, it appears he left these words in their natural
Signification. I know these Gentlemen pretend the Nature of the thing explains
it self sufficiently, because we see very well, say they, what he presents us
is nothing but Bread and Wine; but this reason vanishes, when we consider, he
who speaks has an Authority which overrules the Senses, and a Power which has
Dominion over universal Nature.

The Son of God has no more difficulty to render his Body present in the
Eucharist, by saying, This is my Body, than to Cure a Woman of her Infirmity,
Luc. 13.12.
by saying, Woman thou art freed from thy Infirmity; or to preserve the Life of
a young Man, by saying to his Father, John 4.50.
Thy Son lives; or to forgive the Sins of the Man sick of the Palsy, Mat. 9.2.
by saying to him, Thy Sins are forgiven thee.

So that, not troubling our selves how he will execute what he has said, we
rest precisely upon his words. He who does what he will, by speaking does what
he pleases; and it was more easy for the Son of God to force the Laws of Nature
to verify his word, than it is for us to accommodate our Understandings to
these kind of violent Interpretations, which break the Laws of common Discourse.

These Laws of Discourse teach us, that a sign which represents a thing
naturally, receives often the name of the thing represented, being as it were
its nature to bring the Idea of the thing into the Mind. The same also happens,
tho with some restriction, to instituted Signs, when they are received, and
Persons accustomed to them. But that, in establishing a Sign, which has no
relation to the thing, as for example, a Morsel of Bread to signify the Body of
a Man, the name of the thing signified should be given to it with out any
Explication, and before any agreement, as JESUS CHRIST has done in his last
Supper, is a thing unheard of, and of which we find no example in holy Writ,
not to say in any Language. Neither do the Gentlemen of the Pretended Reformed
Religion so fix themselves to the figurative Sense, which they would give to
these words of JESUS CHRIST, but that they do at the same time acknowledge, he
had intention in pronouncing them to give us in reality his Body and Blood.

SECT. XI. Explication of these Words, Do this in remembrance of me.
AFter having proposed the Sentiments of the Church, touching these words, This
is my Body, we must explicate what she thinks of those others, which JESUS
CHRIST added, Do this in remembrance of me. It is manifest, the intention of
the Son of God is to oblige us by these words, Luc. 22.19.
to remember the Death which he has endured for our Salvation, 1 Cor. 1^.24.
and St. Paul concludes from these same words, that we declare the Death of our
Savior in this Mystery. But they must not persuade themselves, 2 Cor. 11.26.
that remembrance of our Saviors Death, excludes the real Presence of his
Body: on the contrary, if they consider what we have lately explicated, they
will clearly understand this Commemoration to be grounded upon the real
Presence. For as the Jews in eating of the Peace Offerings remembered they had
been immolated for them; in the same manner in eating of the flesh of JESUS
CHRIST, our Victim, we ought to remember he died for us. This very flesh then,
eaten by the Faithful, not only renews in us the memory of his immolation, but
confirms also to us the reality of it. And we are so far from having reason to
say, that this solemn Commemoration, which JESUS CHRIST ordains us to make,
excludes the Presence of his Body, that, on the contrary, we see this tender
remembrance which he would have us to make at the Holy Table of him, as
immolated for us, is grounded upon this; that this very flesh ought to be there
taken really, seeing in effect it is not possible for us to forget it was for
us he gave his Body in Sacrifice, when we see he daily gives us the same
Victime to eat.

Must Christians under pretense of celebrating in the Lords Supper, the memory
of the Passion of our Savior. deprive this Pious Commemoration of what it has
most efficacious and tender in it? Ought they not to consider, that JESUS
CHRIST does not command them only to remember him, but to remember him in
eating of his Flesh and Blood? Consider the Connection, and the force of his
words. He does not say simply, as those of the Pretended Reformation seem to
understand him, That the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist should be to us a
Memorial of his Body and Blood; but he advertises us, that in doing what he has
prescribed, that is, in receiving his Body and Blood, we should remember him.
What is there in reality more powerful to make us remember him? And if Children
do so tenderly remember their Parents, and their Bounties toward them, when
they approach the Tombs where their Bodies are interred; how ought our
Remembrance, and our Love to be excited, when we possess under these sacred
Vails, under this mystical Sepulcher, this living and Life-giving Flesh, and
this Blood yet flowing with his Love, and full of Spirit and Grace? But if our
Adversaries continue to tell us, That he who commands us to remember him, does
not give us his proper Substance, we must in fine, desire them to agree amongst
themselves. They profess not to deny the real Communication of the proper
substance of the Son of God in the Eucharist. If their words are serious, if
their Doctrine be not an illusion, they must necessarily say with us, the
remembrance does not exclude all kinds of Presence, but only that which strikes
the Senses. Their Answer shall be ours, seeing that tho we affirm JESUS CHRIST
to be present, yet we acknowledge at the same time, that he is not present after
a sensible manner.

And if it should be demanded, how it comes to pass, that believing as we do,
the Senses to have nothing to do in this Mystery, we should not believe it
sufficient that JESUS CHRIST should be present by Faith: It is easy to answer,
and to clear this Equivocal Objection. It is one thing to say, the Son of God
is present to us by Faith, and another thing to say, we know by Faith that he
is present. The first manner of speaking, imports only a moral presence; but
the second signifies to us a very real one, because our Faith is most real; and
this real Presence known by Faith, Habac. 2.4.
is sufficient to work all the forementioned Effects in the Just Man, who lives
by Faith.

SECT. XII. Exposition of the Calvanists Doctrine concerning the real Presence.
BUT to remove all the Equivocations which Calvinists make use of in this
matter, and show at the same time, how near they have approached to us, it will
be convenient to add here, the exposition of their Sentiments, tho I only
undertook to explicate the Doctrine of the Church.

Their Doctrine has two parts; the one speaks of nothing but the Figure, and
the other of nothing but the Reality of the Body and Blood. We shall see each
of these parts in order.

They tell us first, This great Miracle of the real Presence, which we admit,
is useless; that it is enough for our Salvation, JESUS CHRIST died for us; that
his Sacrifice is sufficiently applied to us by Faith; and that this application
is sufficiently certified to us by the Word of God. They add, That if this Word
must be clothed with sensible Signs, it is enough to give simple Symbols, such
as the Water of Baptism, without any necessity of fetching the Body and Blood
of JESUS CHRIST from Heaven.

There seems to be nothing more easy than this manner of explicating the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Nevertheless, our Adversaries themselves do not
think it ought to suffice them. They know such kind of Imaginations made the
Socinians deny the great Miracle of the Incarnation. God might have saved us,
say these Heretics, without so much difficulty; he had nothing to do, but to
pardon out faults, and might have instructed us sufficiently, as well in Faith,
as in Manners, by the Preaching and Examples of a Man full of the Holy Ghost,
without any need of making him a God. But the Calvinists, as well as we, see
the weakness of this Argument, which appears first from its not appertaining to
us to deny or affirm Mysteries, according as they appear to us useful or
unprofitable to our Salvation. God alone knows the Secret; and it is our
business to render them useful and saving to us, in believing them as he
proposes them, and in receiving his Graces after the manner he bestows them
upon us. Secondly, not to enter into the question, whether it was possible for
God to save us by any other means than the Incarnation, and Death of his Son,
and not to meddle with that unnecessary dispute, which the Pretended Reformed
Religion treats of so at length in the Schools, it suffices, we have learnt
from the Scriptures, that the Son of God has been pleased to testify his Love
to us by incomprehensible Effects. This Love has been the Cause of this so real
an Union, by which he was made Man. This Love moved him to immolate the same
Body for us, as really as he united himself to it. All these designs are
consecutive, and this Love maintains it self in all things with the same
vigor. So that, when it shall please him to make each of his Children
experience the goodness which he has testified to all in general, by giving
himself to them in particular, he will find out a method to accomplish his
Desires, by no less efficacious means, than those by which he had already
accomplished our Salvation. Upon which account we must not be hereafter
astonished, if he give to each of us the proper Substance of his Body and
Blood. He does it that he may imprint this in our Hearts, that it was for us he
took them, and for us he offered them up in Sacrifice. That which preceded,
makes all that follows credible to us; the order of his Mysteries dispose us to
believe all this; and his express word permits us not to doubt of it.

Our Adversaries saw very well, that simple figures and signs of his Body and
Blood would not content Christians, who are accustomed to the Bounties of a
God, who gives himself to us so really. Wherefore they will not suffer us to
accuse them of denying a real and substantial participation of JESUS CHRIST in
their Supper. They affirm, Cat. Dim. 53.
as well as we, that he makes us there Partakers of his proper Substance; they
tell us, that he nourishes and quickens us with the substance of his Body and
Blood; Conf. of Faith, art. 36.
and judging that it would not be enough to show us, by some sign, that we are
partakers of his Sacrifice, Cat. Dim. 52.
they say expressly, that the Body of our Savior, which is given us in the last
Supper, assures us of it: words very remarkable, which we will examine by and
by.

Behold then the Body and Blood of JESUS CHRIST present in our Mysteries, by
the acknowledgment of the Calvinists: for what is communicated according to its
proper substance, must be really present. It is true, they explicate this
Communication, by saying, it is in Spirit, and by Faith: but it is true also,
they will have it real. And because it is impossible to make it intelligible
how a Body, that is communicated to us only in Spirit, and by Faith, can be
communicated to us really, and in its proper substance, therefore they have not
been able to continue firm in the two parts of a Doctrine so contradictory, and
they have been obliged to acknowledge two things which cannot be true, but by
supposing what the Catholic Church teaches.

The first is, That JESUS CHRIST is given to us in the Eucharist after a manner
whch neither agrees with that of Baptism, nor the Preaching of the Gospel, but
is peculiar to this Mystery. We shall see by and by the Consequence of this
Principle: but let us first see how it is granted us by those of the Pretended
Reformation.

I will not here allege the Authority of any particular Author, but the proper
words of their Catechism, where it explicates what concerns the last Supper. It
does not only tell us in express terms, that JESUS CHRIST is given us in the
Supper, in reality, and according to his proper Substance; but that, Dim. 53.
tho he be truly communicated to us, both by Baptism, and the Gospel, yet
nevertheless, it is only in part, and not fully. From whence it follows, that
he is given us in the Lords Supper fully, and not in part.

There is a vast difference betwixt receiving in part, and receiving fully. If
then we receive JESUS CHRIST every where else in part, and it be only in the
Lords Supper we receive him fully; it follows, by the consent of our
Adversaries, that we must look out for a participation in the last Supper which
is proper only to this Mystery, and which does not agree with Baptism and
Preaching; but at the same time it follows also, that this participation is not
annexed to Faith, because Faith being generally dispersed through all the
Actions of a Christian, is found in Preaching, and in Baptism, as well as in
the Lords Supper. In reality, it is remarkable, that what desire soever the
Pretended Reformers had to render Baptism and Preaching equal to the last
Supper, because JESUS CHRIST is there truly communicated to us, they durst
never affirm in their Catechisms, that JESUS CHRIST is given us, in his proper
Substance, by Baptism and Preaching, as they say he is given in the Eucharist.
They saw then, they could not avoid attributing to the Eucharist a manner of
possessing JESUS CHRIST peculiar only to this Sacrament; and that Faith, which
is common to all the Actions of a Christian, could not be this particular
manner. But this peculiar manner of possessing JESUS CHRIST in the last Supper
ought also to be real, seeing it gives to the Faithful the proper substance of
the Body and Blood of JESUS CHRIST. So that we must conclude, from what they
grant us, there is in the Eucharist a real manner of receiving the Body and
Blood of our Savior, which is not performed by Faith; and this is what the
Catholic Church teaches.

The second thing granted by the Pretended Reformers, is taken out of that
Article which immediately follows that which I have already cited out of their
Catechism; Dim. 52.
which is, That the Body of our Lord JESUS, for as much as it was once offered
up in Sacrifice to reconcile us to God, is now given to assure us, we have a
part in that Reconciliation.

If there be any Sense in these Words, if they be not an useless found, and a
vain amusement, we ought to understand by them, that JESUS CHRIST does not give
us a Symbol only, but his proper Body, to assure us, we partake of his
Sacrifice, and of the Reconciliation of Mankind. But if the reception of the
Body of our Lord, assures us of our participation of the Fruits of his Death;
this participation of the Fruits must necessarily be distinguished from the
reception of the Body, seeing one is the pledge of the other. From whence, to
proceed, I say, If our adversaries are forced to distinguish in the last Supper
the participation of the body of our Blessed Savior, from the participation of
the fruits of his Grace in his Sacrifice, they must also necessarily make a
distinction between the participation of this Divine Body, and all kinds of
Spiritual participation by Faith. This latter participation will never furnish
them with two distinct Actions, by one of which they receive the Body of our
Savior, and by the other, the benefit of this Sacrifice; no man being able to
conceive what difference there is betwixt partaking by Faith of the Body of our
Savior, and partaking by Faith of the Fruit of his Death. They must therefore
acknowledge, that besides the Communion, by which we spiritually partake of the
Body of our Savior, and also of his Spirit, by receiving the fruit of his
Death; there is also a Real Communion of the Body of the same Savior, which is
to us a certain Pledge of the others being assured to us, if we put no
impediment to such a Grace by an evil Disposition. This is necessarily included
in the Principles they admit, and they will never be able to explicate this
Truth, with the least shadow of Solidity, if they return not to the Sentiments
of the Church.

Who will not here admire the force of Truth? All the consequences which follow
from the acknowledged Principles of our adversaries, are perfectly understood
in the sentiment of the Church. Catholics, the meanliest instructed, without
difficulty conceive, that in the Eucharist there is a Communion which JESUS
CHRIST, which is not to be found any where else. It is no difficulty for them
to understand his Body is given us, to assure us we partake of his Sacrifice
and of his Death. They distinguish clearly betwixt these two necessary manners
of uniting or selves to JESUS CHRIST; the one in receiving his proper flesh,
the other in receiving his Spirit; the first of which is granted us, as a
certain pledge of the second. But seeing these things are inexplicable in the
sentiments of our adversaries, tho on the other hand they cannot deny them, we
must necessarily conclude, that error has thrown them into a manifest
contradiction.

I have been often astonished they did not explicate their Doctrine after a
more plain manner. Why did they not always, without so many formalities,
persevere to say, that JESUS CHRIST having shed his Blood for us, represented
to us this effusion, by giving us two distinct signs of his Body and Blood;
that he was pleased indeed to give to these signs the name of the thing it
self: that these sacred signs were pledges to assure us of our partaking of the
fruit of his Death, and that we were spiritually nourished by the virtue of his
Body and Blood? After so many endeavors to prove that signs often receive the
names of the things signified, and that for this reason the sign of the Body
might be called the Body, all this connection of Doctrine obliges them
naturally to fix there. To render these signs efficacious, it sufficed the
Grace of Redemption was annexed to them, or rather, according to their
Principles, that it was in them confirmed to us. They needed not have tormented
themselves, as they have done, to make us understand we receive the proper Body
of our Savior, to assure us we partake of the Grace of his Death. They were
well enough satisfied to have the water of Baptism a sign of the Blood which
washes us; and it never entered into their fancies to say, we there received
the proper substance of the Blood of our Blessed Savior, to assure us his
virtue is there diffused upon us. If they had argued after the same manner as
to the Eucharist, their Doctrine would have been less embroyled. But those who
invent and innovate, cannot express all they have a mind to. They find certain
truths, and maxims established which incommode them, and force a violence upon
their imaginations. The Arians would gladly have resused our Blessed Savior
the name of God, or the only Son of God. The Nestorians did not admit, but with
reluctance, that kind of I know not what unity of person in JESUS CHRIST, which
we find in their writing. The Pelagians, who denied Original sin, would also
willingly have denied that Baptism was given to little children for the
remission of sins: for by that means they would have been freed from the
argument which Catholics drew from this practice to prove that original
defect. But, as I just now said, those who find some truths firmly established,
have not the boldness, or rather impudence to overthrow all. Let the Calvinists
ingenuously confess the truth; they would have been well pleased to acknowledge
in the Eucharist the Body of our Blessed Savior only figuratively, and the
sole participation of his Spirit in effect, laying aside those great words of
Participation of his proper substance, and the many others which import a real
presence, and serve only to perplex them. It would have been more to their
humor, to have acknowledged, in the Lords Supper, no other communion with
JESUS CHRIST, but what is also common to Preaching and to Baptism, without
telling us, as they have done, that in the Lords Supper he is received in
plentitude, and every where else only in part. But however this was their
inclination, yet the very force of the terms opposed them, our Blessed Savior
having said so precisely of the Eucharist, This is my body, This is my Blood;
which he never did of any other thing, nor upon any other occasion: what
likelihood was there of rendering that common to all the Actions of a Christian,
which his express word had annexed to one particular Sacrament? And farther,
the whole order of divine providence, the connection of Doctrine and Holy
Mysteries, the intention of JESUS CHRIST in his last Supper, the words
themselves which he uttered, and the impression which they naturally form in
the minds of the Faithful, give us nothing but the Ideas of his real presence.
Therefore it was necessary our adversaries should find out some expressions,
the sound of which might, at least, give us a confused Idea of this reality.
When a Man fixes himself either entirely upon Faith, as Catholics do; or
entirely upon humane Reason, as Infidels do, it is easy for him to establish a
connected and uniform model of Doctrine. But when a man goes about to make a
composition of one and the other, he always says something which he would not
say, and afterward falls into opinions, the sole contrarieties of which show
the manifest falsity of them.

This is what has happened to these Gentlemen of the pretended reformed Religion;
and God has so permitted it to facilitate their return to Catholic unity. For,
whereas their proper experience shows them, they must necessarily express
themselves as we do, to speak the language of Truth; ought they not to judge it
necessary to think as we do, to understand it right? If they observe in their
own belief many expressions, which have no sense but according to our tenets;
is it not sufficient to convince them, that Truth is not in its full perfection
but amongst us? And those unconnected parts of Catholic Doctrine, which are
scatered here and there in their Catechisms, but which, as I may say, require
to be united to the whole, ought they not to excite them to search, in the
Communion of the Church, a full and entire explication of the Mystery of the
Eucharist? They would, no doubt of it, be brought to it, did not humane
Reflections trouble and perplex their Faith, which has too much dependence upon
Sense. But having shown what Fruit they ought to reap from the Exposition of
their Doctrine, let us finish the explication of our own.

SECT. XIII. Of Transubstantiation and Adoration, and in what sense the
Eucharist is said to be a Sign.
IT having been convenient, as it was said before, that the Senses should not
perceive any thing in this Mystery of Faith, it was necessary nothing should be
changed, in respect of them, in the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist. Upon which
account, being we see the same Species, and feel the same Effects as before in
this Sacrament, we must not wonder, if the same name be given to them
sometimes, and in some certain Sense. Yet notwithstanding, Faith being
attentive to his word, who performs what pleases him in Heaven, and on Earth,
acknowledges here no other Substance, but what is designed by the same word,
that is to say, the proper Body and Blood of JESUS CHRIST, into which the Bread
and Wine are changed; this is what we call Transubstantiation.

However, That real verity, which is interiorly contained in the Eucharist,
hinders not the exterior and sensible part from being a sign; but a sign of
such a Nature, that it is so far from excluding the reality of the thing
signified, it bears it necessarily along with it, seeing that in effect, these
words, This is my Body, pronounced upon that matter, which JESUS CHRIST himself
made choice of, is to us a certain sign that his Body is present, and though
the Symbols appear always the same to our Senses, yet our Mind judges otherwise
of them, and not according to Sense, because a Superior Authority interposes.
So that, whereas certain Species, and a certain sequel of natural impressions
on our Senses, have been accustomed to design to us the substance of Bread and
Wine, the Authority of Him, in whom we believe, causes these same Species to
begin to show us another substance. For we give ear to him who said, that this,
which we receive and eat, is his Body; and such is the force of these words,
they hinder us from referring those exterior appearances to the Substance of
Bread, and induced us to refer them to the Body of JESUS CHRIST there present:
Insomuch that the presence of such an adorable Object being rendered certain to
us by this sign, we are not afraid to pay it our adorations.

I will not dwell upon the point of Adoration, because the most learned and the
most intelligent of our Adversaries have long since granted us, those who are
persuaded of the real Presence of JESUS CHRIST in the Eucharist ought to pay
him in it their Adorations.

In fine, being once convinced, the all-powerful words of the Son of God
operate whatever they declare, we believe that in the last Supper, they had
their effect as soon as they were pronounced by him; and by a necessary
Consequence we acknowledge the real Presence of his Body, before our receiving
of it.

SECT. XIV. Sacrifice of the Mass.
THese things being supposed, there remains no particular difficulty about the
Sacrifice which we acknowledge in the Eucharist.

We have observed two actions in this Mystery, which cease not to be distinct,
the one of them has a Relation to the other. The first is the consecration, by
which the Bread and Wine are changed into the Body and Blood; and the second is
the receiving, by which we partake of them.

In the Consecration, the Body and the Blood are mystically separated, because
JESUS CHRIST said separately, This is my Body, this is my Blood; which includes
a lively and efficacious Representation of the violent Death he suffered.

So that the Son of God is placed upon the Holy Table, in virtue of these
words, clothed with those signs which represent his Death, this is effected by
consecration; and this Religious action, carries with it an acknowledgment of
Gods Sovereignty, in as much as JESUS CHRIST there present, renews and
perpetuates in some sort, the remembrance of his being obedient, even to the
Death of the Cross: So that there is nothing wanting to render this a true
Sacrifice.

We cannot doubt but this Action, as distinct from that of Communicating, is of
it self acceptable to God, and makes him look upon us with a more propitious
Eye, because it represents to him that voluntary Death which his beloved Son
has suffered for us Sinners, or rather places before his Eyes, that very Son of
his, under the signs of this Death, by which his Wrath had been appeased.

All Christians will confess the sole Presence of JESUS CHRIST to be a most
Powerful Intercession before God for all mankind; according to the saying of
the Apostle, That JESUS CHRIST presents himself and appears for us before the
Face of God. Heb. 9.24.
So that we believe that JESUS CHRIST, being present upon the Holy Table, under
this Figure of Death, intercedes for us, and represents continually to his
Father that Death which he has suffered for his Church.

It is in this Sense we say, JESUS CHRIST offers up himself to God for us in
the Eucharist; it is after this manner we conceive this Oblation renders God
more propitious to us, and therefore we call this a Propitiatory Sacrifice.

When we consider what it is, JESUS CHRIST operates in this Mystery, and that
we see him by Faith present upon this Holy Table, together with these Signs of
Death, we unite our selves to him in this Estate; we present him to God, as our
only Victim, and our sole Propitiator by his Blood, confessing we have nothing
to offer up to God but JESUS CHRIST, and the infinite Merit of his Death. We
consecrate all our Prayers by this Holy Oblation, and in presenting JESUS
CHRIST to God, we learn at the same time, to offer up our selves to the Divine
Majesty in him, and by him, as living Sacrifices.

This is the Sacrifice of Christians, infinitely different from what was
offered up in the Old Law: a Spiritual Sacrifice becoming the New Covenant, in
which the presence of the Victim is only perceived by Faith; in which the Word
of God is the Spiritual Sword which makes a Mystical separation betwixt the
Body and the Blood; in which by consequence the Blood is only shed Mystically,
and in which Death only intervenes by representation: and yet however a most
real Sacrifice, in as much as JESUS CHRIST is there truly contained, and
presented to his Father, under this Figure of Death: But a Commemorative
Sacrifice, which is so far from taking away our adhesion to the Sacrifice of
the Cross (as it is objected to us) on the contrary, it fixes us the firmer to
it by all its circumstances; seeing it has not only an entire relation to it,
but in reality, has neither being nor subsistence but by this relation, from
whence it deriveth all the Virtue contained in it.

This is the express Doctrine of the Catholic Church in the Council of Trent,
which teaches, that this Sacrifice is instituted only to represent that which
was once accomplished upon the Cross; Sess. 22. c. 1.
to perpetuate the memory of it to the end of the World; and to apply to us the
saving Virtue of it for the remission of those sins which we commit every day.
So that the Church is so far from believing, that something wants to perfect
the Sacrifice of the Cross; on the contrary, she thinks it so perfect, and so
fully sufficient, as what is added, is only instituted to celebrate the memory,
and apply its Virtue.

By which the same Church acknowledges, that all the merit of the Redemption of
Mankind depends upon the Death of the Son of God; and it ought to be
understood, from all we have already expounded, that when we say to God in the
Celebration of the Divine Mystery, We offer unto you this Holy Host, we pretend
not by this Oblation, to make, or present to God a new payment of the price of
our Salvation, but to offer up to him in our behalfs, the Merits of our Blessed
JESUS there present, and the infinite price which he once paid for us upon the
Cross.

The Gentlemen of the Pretended Reformed Religion do not think they offend
JESUS CHRIST, by offering him to God as present to their Faith; and if they
believed him to be really there, what repugnance could they have to offer him
up as truly present; So that the whole dispute ought indeed to be reduced to
the real presence alone.

From hence forwards, all those false Ideas, which these Gentlemen of the
Pretended Reformed Religion form to themselves of the Sacrifice which we offer,
ought to be effaced. They ought freely to acknowledge Catholics pretend not to
make a new propitiation to appease God anew, as if he had not been sufficiently
satisfied by the Sacrifice of the Cross; or to make some addition to the Price
of our Salvation, as if it were imperfect. All these things have no place in
our Doctrine; because all that is here done, is intended by way of Intercession
and Application, after the manner which we have now explicated.

SECT. XV. The Epistle to the Hebrews.
AFter this Explication, those mighty Objections drawn from the Epistle to the
Hebrews, and so much enforced against us, will appear to have little reason in
them: and it is in vain our Adversaries strive to prove, from the sentiments of
the Apostle, that we annul the Sacrifice of the Cross. But because the best way
to prove that two Doctrines are not opposite to one another, is to show, by
explicating them, that no proposition of the one is contrary, to any of the
propositions of the other; I think I am bound in this place to propose in short
the Doctrine of this Epistle.

The Apostle intends in this Epistle to teach us, that a sinnner could not
avoid Death, but by substituting some one in his place to die for him; that
whilst Men substituted only Beasts to be killed in their places, their
Sacrifices operated nothing, but a public acknowledgment of their having
deserved Death; and that, seeing the Divine Justice could not be satisfied by
so unequal an exchange, they begun again every day to slay new Victims; which
was a certain mark of the insufficiency of that substitution: But that, since
JESUS CHRIST had vouchsafed to die for Sinners, God being satisfied, by a
Person substituting of himself, so condignly sufficient, and nothing more to
exact for the price of our Redemption. From whence the Apostle concludes, we
ought not only to offer up no more Victims after JESUS CHRIST, but that JESUS
CHRIST himself ought to be but once offered up to Death for us.

Let the Reader then, who is solicitous for his Souls Salvation, and a lover of
Truth, reflect a little upon what we have said concerning the manner how JESUS
CHRIST offers up himself to God for us in the Eucharist; I am certain, he will
not find any Proposition contrary to those which I have here related from the
Apostle; or which weakens his Argument; so that nothing can be objected to us,
but his silence upon this point. But those who would but consider the wise
distribution which God makes of his secrets in the several Books of Scripture,
would not oblige us to receive, from the sole Epistle to the Hebrews, all our
instructions concerning a matter which was not necessary to the Subject of that
Epistle; seeing the Apostle intends to explicate in it, the perfection of the
Sacrifice of the Cross, and not the different manners which God has instituted
to apply it to us.

And to remove all equivocation, if we take the word Offer in the sense it is
made use of in this Epistle, as implying the actual Death of the Victim, we
will publicly confess, that JESUS CHRIST is now no more offered up, neither in
the Eucharist, nor any where else. But because this word has a larger
signification in other places of Scripture, where it is often said, We offer up
to God what we present before him; the Church, which forms her Language, and
her Doctrine not from the sole Epistle to the Hebrews, but from the whole Body
of the Holy Scripture, is not afraid to say, that JESUS CHRIST offers up
himself to God wherever he appears before his Face upon our behalf, and that
by consequence, he offers up himself in the Eucharist, according to the Holy
Fathers expressions.

Now to imagine this manner, by which JESUS CHRIST presents himself to God,
should injure the Sacrifice of the Cross, is what cannot in any kind be
supposed without overthrowing the the whole Scripture, and particularly this
Epistle, which is so vehemently objected against us. For it must, by the same
reason, be concluded, that when JESUS CHRIST offered up himself to God, In
entering into the World, Heb. 10.5.
to substitute himself in place of those Victims which could not please him, he
injured that Action by which he offered up himself upon the Cross, Heb. 9.24.
that when he continues to appear before God for us, Heb. 9.26.
he weakens that Oblation, by which he appeared once, Heb. 7.25.
by the immolation of himself; and that not ceasing to interceed for us, he
accuses of insufficiency that intercession which he made in dying with so many
tears, and such an exclamation. Heb. 5.7.


All this would be ridiculous. We must therefore understand, that JESUS CHRIST,
who once offered up himself to be the humble Victim of the Divine Justice, does
not cease to offer up himself always for us; that the infinite perfection of
the Sacrifice of the Cross consists in this, that whatsoever preceded it, as
well as what follows it, has an entire reference to it: that as what preceded
it, was a preparation to it; so that which follows it, is the consummation and
application of it: that in reality the payment of the price of our Redemption
is no more reiterated, because it was fully discharged the first time; but that
what applies that Redemption to us continues without ceasing; that lastly, we
must make a distinction betwixt those things which are reiterated as imperfect,
and those which are continued as perfect and necessary.

SECT. XVI. Reflections upon the preceding Doctrine.
WE conjure all those of the Pretended Reformation, to make some little
Reflection upon what has been said concerning the Eucharist.

The Doctrine of the Real Presence has been the necessary foundation of it.
This Foundation is impugned by the Calvinists. There is nothing appears more
important than this in our Controversies; seeing the Question is concerning the
real Presence of JESUS CHRIST himself. There is nothing our Adversaries find
more difficult to believe. And there is nothing in which we are so directly
opposite, as in this.

In most other Disputes, when these Gentlemen hear us with Calmness, they find
the difficulties to vanish, and that they are more offended with words, than
with the things themselves. On the contrary, upon this Subject, we agree more
about the manner of speaking; because both sides use the words of Real
Participation, and the like: But the fuller we explicate our selves, the more
we find our selves opposed; because our Adversaries do not receive all the
consequences of those truths which they admit, being discouraged (as I said) by
the difficulties which Sense and Human Reason find in these consequences.

This is therefore, to speak truly, the most difficult of all our
Controversies, and that in which we are the most opposite to one another.

Nevertheless God has permitted the Lutherans should adhere to the belief of
the real Presence as well as we: and he has also permitted the Calvinists
should declare this Doctrine to have no poison in it; that it does not subvert
the foundations of Salvation and Faith; and that it ought not to break
communion betwixt Brethren.

Let those of the Pretended Reformed Religion, who think seriously of their
Salvation, render themselves here attentive to that Order, which the Divine
Providence makes use of to bring them insensibly nearer to us and Truth. One
may either entirely dissipate all the other grounds of their complaints, or at
least reduce them to very few Heads, with a little explication. In this, where
we cannot hope to conquer by this Method, they have themselves removed the
chief difficulty, by declaring this Doctrine to contain nothing in it contrary
to Salvation, or to the fundamentals of Religion.

It is true, the Lutherans, tho they concur with us in the ground of the
reality, yet admit not all the consequences of it. They put Bread together with
the Body of JESUS CHRIST; some of them reject the Adoration; and they seem to
acknowledge the real Presence only in the Act of receiving. But all the subtilty
of the Ministers can never persuade ingenuous and understanding Persons, but
that, if they maintain the real Presence, which is the most important, and the
most difficult point they ought also to maintain the rest.

Moreover the same Providence, which labors secretly for our nearer Union, and
lays the foundations of Reconciliation and of Peace in the midst of Bitterness
and Disputes, has farther permitted the Calvinists to allow, that supposing
these words, This is my Body, ought to be taken in a literal sense, Catholics
reason better and more consequently than the Lutherans.

If I relate not the passages which have been so often cited on this account, I
hope I shall easily be excused, because all those, who are not obstinate, will
grant us without difficulty, that the reeal Presence being supposed, our
Doctrine is that which most naturally follows.

It is then an established Truth, that our Doctrine in this point contains
nothing but the real Presence rightly understood. But we must not stop there;
and we beseech the Pretended Reformed to consider, we make use of no other
things to explicate the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, but only such as are
necessarily included in this reality of presence.

If it should be asked us after this, how it comes then to pass the Lutherans,
who believe the real presence, should nevertheless reject the Sacrifice, which
is, according to us, only a consequence of it: our answer is in one word, that
this Doctrine must be numbered amongst the other consequences of the real
presence, which these Lutherans have not understood, and which we have
penetrated much better then they, as the Calvinists themselves confess.

If our Explications persuade these last, that our doctrine about the Sacrifice
is included in that of the real presence, they ought to see clearly that this
mighty dispute of the Sacrifice of the Mass, which has filled so many Volumes,
and occasioned so many Invectives, ought from henceforwards to be retrenched
from the body of their controversies, because this point has not now any
particular difficulty, and (which is much more important) because this
Sacrifice, against which they have so great repugnance, is no other but a
necessary consequence and a natural explication of a Doctrine, which, according
to them, has no venom in it. Let them now examine themselves, and after this,
try before God whether they have so much reason, as they imagine, to withdraw
themselves from those Altars, where their forefathers received the Bread of
life.

SECT. XVII. Communion under both kinds.
THere remains one other Consequence of this doctrine to be examined, which is,
that JESUS CHRIST being really present in the Sacrament, The Grace and
Benediction is not annexed to the sensible species, but to the proper substance
of his flesh, which is living, and life-giving, because of the Divinity which
is united to it. Upon which account, all those, who believe the real presence,
ought not to have any difficulty to communicate under one sole species, because
they there receive all that is essential to this Sacrament, together with a
plenitude so secure, because there being now no real separation betwixt the
Body and the Blood, (as has been said) we receive entirely, and without
division him, who is solely capable to satiate us.

This is the solid foundation, upon which the Church, interpreting the precept
of Communion, as declared, we may receive the Sanctification, which this
Sacrament carries with it, under one sole species, and if she have reduced her
Children to this sole species; it was not out of disesteem of the other,
seeing, on the contrary, she did it to hinder those Irreverences, which the
confusion and negligence of people had occasioned in these later ages,
reserving to her self, the re-establishment of communion under both kinds,
according as it should become more advantageous to Peace and Unity.

Catholic Divines have made it appear to those of the pretended Reformation,
that they have themselves made use of several such like Interpretations, in
what belongs to the use of the Sacrament; but above all they had reason to
remark this which is taken out of the 12 chap. of their discipline, Title of
the Lords Supper, art. 7. where we find these words: The Bread of the Lords
Supper ought to be administered to those who cannot drink wine, upon their
making protestation, that it is not out of contempt, and endeavoring what they
can possibly, to obviate all Scandal even by approaching the cup as near their
mouths as they are able. They have judged, by this regulation that both species
were not, by the institution of JESUS CHRIST, essential to the Communion:
otherwise they ought to have absolutely refused the Sacrament to those, who
could not receive it whole and entire, and not to give it them after a manner
contrary to that which JESUS CHRIST had commanded; in which case their
disability would have been their excuse. But our adversaries conceived it would
be an excessive rigor, not to allow at least one of the species to those, who
could not receive the other; and as this condescendence has no ground in
Scripture, they must acknowledge with us, the words, by which JESUS CHRIST
proposes to us the two species, are liable to some interpretation, and that
this interpretation ought to be declared by the authority of the Church.

But it might seem as if this article of their discipline, which was made in
the Synod of Poitiers held in the year 1560, had been reformed by the Synod of
Vertueil held in the year 1567. where it is said the company is not of opinion,
the bread should be administered to those who would not receive the Cup. These
two Synods nevertheless are no ways opposite. That of Vertueil speaks only of
those who will not receive the Cup; And that of Poitiers of these only who
cannot. In effect, notwithstanding the Synod of Vertueil, this article remains
in their discipline, and has been also approved by a latter Synod then that of
Vertueil, by the Synod of la Rochell in 1571, where this article was reviewed,
and put into that stare in which it now is.

But supposing the Synods of the pretended reformed Religion had differed in
their sentiments, it would only follow that the matter in question regards not
Faith, and that it is of the number of those, which are at the Churches
disposal according to their own Principles.

SECT. XVIII. The written and unwritten Word.
THERE remains nothing more now, but to explicate what Catholics believe
touching the Word of God, and the Authority of the Church.

JESUS CHRIST having laid the Foundation of his Church by Preaching, the
unwritten Word was the first Rule of Christianity; and when the Writings of the
New Testament were added, this unwritten Word did not upon that account lose
its Authority: which makes us reiceive with equal veneration all that was ever
taught by the Apostles, whether by Writing, or byword of Mouth, as St. Paul
himself has expressly declared. And it is a most certain sign, 2 These. 2.14.
a Doctrine comes from the Apostles, when it is universally embraced by all
Christian Churches, without any possibility of showing its beginning. We cannot
choose but receive all that is established after this manner, with the
submission due to Divine Authority; and we are persuaded those of the Pretended
Reformation, who are not obstinate, are in the bottom of their Hearts of the
same Opinion; it being impossible to believe a Doctrine, received from the
beginning of the Church, can flow from any other source than that of the
Apostles. Wherefore our Adversaries ought not to wonder if we, who are careful
to gather together all our Fathers have left us, should conserve the Depositum
of Tradition as well as that of the Scriptures.

SECT. XIX. The Authority of the Church.
THE Church being established by God to be the Guardian of Scripture and
Tradition, we receive the Canonical Scriptures from her; and let our
Adversaries say what they will, we doubt not but it is her Authority which
principally determines them to reverence as Divine Books, the Canticle of
Canticles, which has so few visible marks of a Prophetical Inspiration; the
Epistle of St. James, which Luther rejected; and that of St. Jude, which might
appear suspected because of some Apocriphal Books cited in it. In fine, it can
only be from this Authority they receive the whole Body of Scripture, which all
Christians accept as Divine, before their reading of it has made them sensible
of the Spirit of God in it.

Being then inseparably bound, as we are, to the Holy Authority of the Church,
by means of the Scriptures which we receive from her Hands, we learn Tradition
also from her; and by the means of Tradition we learn the true sense of
Scripture. Upon which account the Church professes, she tells us nothing from
her self, and that she invents nothing new in her Doctrine: she does nothing
but declare the Divine Revelation, by the interior direction of the Holy
Ghost, who is given to her as her teacher.

That Dispute, which was raised in the very time of the Apostles, upon account
of the Ceremonies of the Law, shows clearly, that the Holy Ghost explicates
himself by the Church; and their Acts have by the method by which that first
Contest was decided, taught all succeeding Ages, by what Authority all other
differences are to be ended. So that as often as there shall happen any
Disputes to cause a Division amongst the Faithful, the Church will interpose
her Authority, and her Pastors assembled will say after the Apostles, Act.
15.28.
It his seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us. And when she has spoken, her
Children will be taught, they ought not to begin again to examine those
Articles once so resolved on; but are bound humbly to receive her Decisions, In
this we shall follow the example of St. Paul and Silas, who carried this first
Sentence of the Apostles to the Faithful, and were so far from permitting a new
Discussion of what had been decided, that on the contrary, They went from place
to place, Acts 16.4.
teaching them to observe the Ordinances of the Apostles.

Thus it is the Children of God acquiess in the Judgment of the Church,
believing that from her Mouth they hear the Oracle of the Holy Ghost; and upon
account of this belief it is, that after having said in our Creed, I believe in
the Holy Ghost, we add immediately, The Holy Catholic Church: by which we
oblige our selves to acknowledge an infallible and perpetual verity in the
universal Church, because this very Church which we believe existent in all
Ages, would cease to be the Church, if she ceased to teach the truth revealed
by God. So that those who apprehend least she should abuse her Power to
establish a Lie, have no Faith in him by whom she is governed.

And if our Adversaries would but look upon these things in a more mild and
candid manner, they would be obliged to acknowledge, the Catholic Church is so
far from making her self Mistress of her Faith, as they have accused her, that
on the contrary, she has done what she could to bind, and deprive herself of
all the means of Innovation, seeing she not only submits herself to the Holy
Scriptures, but to the end she might for ever banish all arbitrary
Interpretations, which make Men's Imaginations pass for Scripture, she has
obliged herself to interpret them, in what relates to Faith and Manners, Conc.
Trid. Sess. 14.
according to the sense of the Holy Fathers; from which she prosesseth never to
depart; declaring in all her Councils, and (in all the Professions of Faith she
has published) that she does not receive any Doctrine, which is not conformable
to the Tradition of all preceding Ages.

Moreover, if our Adversaries consult their Consciences, they will find the
name of the Church has more Authority over them, than they dare avouch in their
disputes: and I do not think there is any one Prudent Man amongst them, who
finding himself the only Person of a Persuasion, tho it appeared to him never
so Evident, but would abhor that Singularity; so true it is, that Men have need
in these matters to be supported in their Tenets, by the Authority of some
Society, that is, of the same opinion with them. And for this reason, God who
created us, and who knows what is most proper for us, has ordained for our
Good, that all Particulars should be subject to the Authority of his Church,
which of all other Authorities, is without doubt the best Established. In
effect, it is established not only by that Testimony, which God himself gives
of it in the Holy Scriptures, but also by the marks of his divine Protection,
which are no less visible in the inviolable and perpetual subsistence of it,
than in its miraculous Establishment.

SECT. XX. The Sentiments of those of the Pretended Reformed Religion,
concerning the Authority of the Church.
THIS Supreme Authority of the Church is so necessary to regulate the
differences, which arise in matters of Faith, and about the Sense of Scripture,
that our Adversaries themselves, after having decryed it, as an unsupportable
Tyranny, have been at last obliged to establish it amongst themselves.

When those who are called Independents, declared openly, that each one of the
Faithful ought to follow the light of his own Conscience, without submitting
his Judgment to the Authority of any Body, or Ecclesiastical Assembly, and upon
this Ground refused to submit toany Synods; That of Charenton held 1644.
censured this Doctrine upon the same Reasons, and for the same Inconveniences,
for which we reject it. This Synod observes in the first place, that this Error
of the Independents consists in this, that they teach, Every Church ought to be
governed by her proper Laws, without a dependence upon any Person in
Ecclesiastical Matters, and without any Obligation to acknowledge the Authority
of Conferences and Synods for her regulation and conduct. After which this
Synod determines, that this Sect is a prejudicial to the State as to the
Church, that it opens a door to all sorts of Irregularities and Extravagancies;
that it takes away all the means of applying any remedy to it; and that if it
took place, there might be as many Religions framed as Parishes or particular
Assemblies. These last words show it is principally in matters of Faith, this
Synod would establish a Dependence; seeing the greatest Inconvenience into
which it observes the faithful would fall by an Independence, is, that there
might chance to be as many Religions formed as Parishes. Every Church then
(according to the Doctrine of this Synod) and much more every private Person,
must necessarily depend, in what concerns matters of Faith, upon some other
superior Authority, which resides in some Assembly, or in some Body; to which
Authority all the Faithful submit their Judgments. For the Independents do not
refuse to submit to the Word of God, according as they think it ought to be
understood; nor to accept the decisions of Synods, when, after having examined
them, they judge them reasonable. What they refuse to do is to submit their
Judgments to that of any Assembly for its sake; because our Adversaries have
taught them, that every Assembly, even that of the Universal Church is a
Society of men, subject to Error, and to which by consequence a Christian ought
not to submit his Judgment, that submission being only due to God. From this
pretention of the Independents it is, those inconveniences follow, which the
Synod of Charenton so well observed. For let a man make what Profession he
pleases to submit himself to the word of God, if every one think he has a
right to interpret it according to his own Sense, and against the Tenets of the
Church declared in her last Sentence, this pretention will open a door to all
sorts of Extravagancies; it will take away all the means of applying a remedy;
because the decision of the Church is not a remedy to those, who think
themselves not obliged to submit to it; in fine, it gives way to the framing as
many Religions, not only as there are Parishes, but also as there are Persons.

To avoid these inconveniences, from whence the ruin of Christianity would
follow, the Synod of Charenton finds her self obliged to establish a Dependence
in Ecclesiastical matters, and that even in Points of Faith; but this
dependence will never hinder those pernicious consequences which they desired
to prevent, if they do not, with us, establish this Maxim, that every
particular Church, and much more every particular person amongst the faithful,
ought to believe themselves obliged to submit their private judgment to the
Authority of the Church.

Thus we see in the 5th. chapter of the discipline of the pretended reformed
Religion, under the title of Consistories, Art. 31. that going about to
prescribe a means to end debates, which might arise upon any point of Doctrine
or Discipline, etc. they ordain first the Consistory shall endeavor to appease
the whole without noise, and with all the sweetness of the word of God; and
after having established a Consistory, a Conference, and a Provincial Synod, as
so many different degrees of Jurisdiction, coming at last to a National Synod,
above which, amongst them, there is no Authority, they speak of it in these
terms. There the entire and final resolution shall be given by the word of God,
to which if they refuse to acquiesce in every point, and with an express
disavowing of their errors, they shall be cut off from the Church. It is
manifest those of the pretended Reformation do not attribute the authority of
this last sentence to the word of God taken in it self, and without dependence
upon the authority of the Church, for tho this word was made use of in their
first Judgments, yet notwithstanding they permitted an appeal. It is then this
word as interpreted by the soveragin tribunal of the Church, which gives this
final resolution, to which whosoever refuses to submit in every point, although he
boast he is authorized by the word of God, is no more reputed but as a prosane
person who corrupts and abuses it.

But the form of those Letters of deputation which were addres'd to the Synod
of Vitre in the year 1617, to be observed by the Provinces when they were to
send their Deputies to a National Synod, has yet something more express; it is
in these terms. We promise before God to submit our selves to all that shall be
concluded and resolved of in your holy Assemblis, to obey them, and put them in
execution to our utmost power, being persuaded, as we are, that God will
preside in it, and lead you by his holy spirit into all Truth and equity, by
the rule of his word. Here the point is not about receiving the resolution of a
Synod, after they have found it to speak according to Scripture; they submit to
it even before it is assembled; and they do it because they are persuaded the
Holy Ghost will preside in it. If this persuasion be only founded upon a human
presumption, can a man in conscience promise before God to submit to all that
shall be there concluded and resolved of, to obey, and execute them to the
utmost of his power? And if this Persuasion has its foundation in a certain
belief of the assistance, which the Holy Ghost gives to the Church in her final
decisions, Catholics themselves require no more.

So that the proceedings of our Adversaries show them to agree with us in this
supreme Authority, without which it is impossible ever to put an end to any
difficulty in Religion; and tho whilst they were desirous to cast of the yoke
of obedience, they denied the Faithful to be obliged to submit their Judgments
to that of the Church, yet the necessity of establishing an order, has since
forced them to grant what their first undertakings had made them deny.

They have gone yet much further in the National Synod held at Saint Foy in the
year 1578. There was some overture made of a Reconcilement with the Lutherans,
by means of a general form of a profession of Faith common to all their
Churches, which was proposed to be drawn up. Those of this Kingdom were invited
to send to an Assembly, which was to be held upon this account, Virtuous
persons, authorized by all the said Churches, with an ample Procuration, TO
TREAT; AGREE UPON, AND DECIDE ALL POINTS OF DOCTRINE, and other matters
concerning that union. Upon this Proposal, see in that terms the resolution of
the Synod of St. Foy was couched. The National Synod of this Kingdom, after
having given God thanks for such an overture, and commended the care,
diligence, and good advice of the forementioned persons convocated, and
APPROVING THE REMLDIES WHICH THEY HAVE SUGGESTED, that is to say principally
that of framing a new Confession of Faith, and to give power to some certain
persons to compose, it, has ordained, That if the copy of the above named
Confession of Faith be sent in time, it shall be examined in each Provincial
Synod, or otherwise, according to the convenience of each Province; and in the
mean time has deputed four Min sters, the most experienced in those affairs, to
whom express charge has been given to be present at the place and day
appointed, with the Letters and full Procurations of all the Ministers, and
Elders, Deputies of the Provinces of this Kingdom, as also of the Lord Viscount
Turenne, to do all things above said: yea even, incase that MEANS COULD NOT BE
FOUND OUT TO EXAMINE IN EVERY PROVINCE THE SAID CONFESSION, it should be
referred to their prudence and sound judgment to agree and CONCLUDE all the
points which shall be brought into deliberation, as well FOR DOCTRINE, as for
other matters concerning the benefit, union, and peace of all the Churches. It
was to this, in fine, that this seeming tenderness of Conscience of these
pretended Reformes tended. How often have they reproched to us, as a weakness,
that submission which we pay to the Decisions of the Church, which say they, is
nothing else but a company of men liable to error? and yet nevertheless, being
assembled in a Body in a National Synod, which represented all the Churches of
the pretended Reformed in France, they are not afraid, by mutual consent, to
leave their faith to the arbitration of four men, with so absolute an
abandoning of their own sentiments, that they gave them full power to change
the very Confession of Faith it self, which they do at this very day propose to
the whole Christian world as a Confession of Faith, which contains nothing
but the pure Word of God, and for which, as they said in presenting it to our
Kings, an infinite number of people were ready to shed their Blood. I leave the
prudent Reader to make his reflections upon the Decree of this Synod; and shall
in a few words finish the Explication of the Churches Tenets.

SECT. XXI. The Authority of the Holy See of Rome, and of Episcopacy.
THE Son of God, being desirous his Church should be one, and and solidly built
upon Unity, has established and instituted the Primacy of St. Peter to
maintain and cement it. Upon which account, we acknowledge this Primacy in the
Successors of the Prince of the Apostles, to whom, for this cause, we owe that
Obedience and Submission, which the Holy Councils and Fathers have always
taught the faithful.

As for those things, which we know are disputed of in the Schools, tho the
Ministers continually alledg them to render this Power odious, it is not
necessary we speak of them here, seeing they are not Articles of the Catholic
Faith. It is sufficient we acknowledge a Head established by God to conduct his
whole flock in his paths; which those who love Concord amongst Brethren, and
Ecclesiastical Unanimity, will most willingly acknowledge.

And certainly if the Authors of the Pretended Reformation had loved Unity,
they would neither have abolished Episcopal Government, which was established
by JESUS CHRIST himself, and which we find in force even in the times of the
Apostles; nor have despised the Authority of St. Peter's Chair, which has so
solid a Foundation in the Gospel, and so evident a succession in Tradition; but
they would rather have carefully conserved Episcopal Authority, which
establishes unity in particular Churches, and the Primacy of St. Peter's
Chair, which is the common Center of all Catholic Unity.

SECT. XXII. Conclusion of this Treatise.
THIS is the Exposition of the Catholic Doctrine, in which, that I might tie my
self to the most principal, I have left some questions untouched, which those
of the Pretended Reformed Religion do not look upon as lawful matter for a
Separation. I hope those of their Communion, who shall impartially examine all
the Parts of this Treatise, will be better disposed by the reading of it, to
give ear to those proofs upon which the Faith of the Church is established, and
will in the mean time acknowledge many of our Controversies may be ended by a
sincere explication of our Tenets; that her Doctrine is Holy, and that,
according to their own Principles, no one of her Articles destroys the grounds
of Salvation.

If any one should think fit to answer this Treatise, he is desired to
consider, that to accomplish his intent, he must not undertake to refute the
Doctrine contained in it, seeing my Design was only to propose it, without
going about to prove it; and that if in some Places I have hinted at some of
the reasons which establish it, it is because the knowledge of the principal
reasons of a Doctrine, is often a necessary part of it is Explication.

It would also be a quitting of the design of this Treatise, to examine the
different methods, which Catholic Divines make use of to establish or explicate
the Doctrine of the Council of Trent, and the different Consequences, which
particular Doctors have drawn from it. To urge any thing solid against this
Treatise, and which may come home to the point; it must be proved that the
Churches Faith is not here faithfully expounded, and that by Acts which the
same Church has obliged herself to receive; or else it must be shown, that this
Explication leaves all the Objections in their full force, and all the Disputes
untouched; or, in fine, it must be precisely shown in what this Doctrine
subverts the Foundations of Faith.

Lettre de Monseigneur le Cardinal BONA a Monseigneur le Card. de BUILLON.
HO ricevnto il libro di Monsignor Vescovo di Condom, che V. E. si e degnata
inviarmi, e si come Conosco la qualita del favore, em^ne pregio, cosi rendo
alla sua gentilezza infinite gratie e per il dono e per il pensiero che si
pronde di acorescere la mia Libraria. L'ho letto con attentione particolare, e
perch V E. mi accenna che alcuni lo accusano di qualche mancamento, ho voluto
particolarmente osservare in che potesse esser ripreso. Ma realmente non so
trovarci se non materia di grandissima lode, perch senza entrare nelle
questioni spinose delle controversy, conuna maniera ingegnosa, facile, e
famigliare, e con metodo, per cosi dire, geometrica da certi principii communi
and approvati convince i Calvenisti, e li necessita a consessare la verita
della Feed Cattolica. Assicuro V. E. di haverlo letto con mia indicibile
sodisfattione; ne mi maraviglio chegli habbino trovato a dire, perch tutte le
Opere grandi, e che sormontano l'ordinario, sempre hanno contradittori. Vince
pero finalmente la verita, e da'frutti si conosce la qualita dell'albero. Me ne
rallegre con l' Autore, il quale ha dato saggio del suo gran talento con questa
a opera, e potra con molte altre servire lodevolmente a Santa Chiesa.

Roma 19. Gennaro 1672.
Lettre de Monseigneur le Cardinal SIGISMOND CHIG la Monsieur L'Abbe de DANGEAU.
RICEVEI con la sua lettera ill Libro della Espositione della Dottrina
Cattolica del Vescovo di Condom, molto erudito e molto utile per convertire gl
heretici piu con le vive ragioni, che con l'asprezza del discorso. Parlai al
Padre Mastro di S. Palazzo, and al Segretario dell' Congregatione dell Indice,
e conobbi veramente, che non viera stato chi havesse a questi Padri parlato in
disfavore del medesimo. Anzi li trovai pieni di estimatione per il medesimo:
and havendo poi parlato con questi Signori Cardinali della Congregatione,
trovai fra gl'altri il Signor Cardinale Brancaccio molto inclinato a pregiarlo,
e molto propenso a lodarne l'Autore. Onde io tengo certo che qua ancora
Monsignor di Condom ottenga quella lode, che e dovuta alla sua fatica and alla
sua dottrina. Resto per tanto obligato alla sua gentilezza che mi ha dato modo
di ammirar la medesima; mentre mi pare che l'Autore string a been i suoi
argomenti, e mostri chiaro i punti nei quali i divisi discordano della Chieza;
ne credo che il modo che tien l'Autore, sia da condannarsi nell'esplicatione di
qualche Dottrina insegnata dal Concilio di Trento, essendo praticato da molti
Scrittori and essendo da lui maneggiato molto regolatamente; in oltre che
l'Autore non ha havuto in mente d'inte pretare i dogmi di quel Concilio; ma
solo importarlinel suo libro esplicati perch gl'heretici restino convinti, and
in chiaro di tutto quello che la Santa Chiesa gl'obliga di credere.
Dell'autorita del Papa, ne parlabene, e con il dovnto rispetto della Sede
Romana ogni voliache parla del capo visibile della Chiesa; onde torno a dire
che non e capace che di lode.

Roma 5. Aprile 1672.
Lettre du Reverendiss. Pere HYACINTHE LIBELLI, alors Maistre du Sacre Palais,
and maintenant Archevesque d'Avignon, a Monseigneur le Cardinal SIGISMOND CHIGI.
HO letto il Libro del Sig. di Condom continente l'Espositione dellae Dottrina
della Chiesa. Devo infinite gratie a V. E. che mi habbia fat consumare
quattro hoar di tempo si virtuo samente, e con tanto mio diletro. Mi e
piacciuto sopra modo, e per l'Argomento singolare, e per le prove, che a quello
correspondono. La Dottrina e tutta sana ne v'ha embra di mancamento. No per me
so quello che possa opporvisi; e se l'Autore desidererache si ristamp: in Roma,
da me otterra totte le facolta che gli saranno necessary ad effetto che^si
ristampi sensa mutarne ne pure una parola. L'Autore che ha molto ingegno si e
servito in questa operetta del giuditio, perch laciate da part le dispute,
che sogliono quasi sempre accrescer le discordie, trovandosi di rai o chi
voglia cedere le prerogative del ingegno al compagno, ha trovato un 'altro modo
piu facile di trattar co'Calvinisti dal quale puo sperarsi maggior frutto.
Perch ogni volta che perdin quel orrore a nostri dogmi che hanno succhiato col
latte, a noi piu volentieri s'accostano, e posta in mala feed la dottrina che
hanno appresa da loro Mastri di cui la massima principale e essere i nostri
dogmi orrendi and incredili, si pongono con minor passion d'animo a cercar la
verita Cattolica, che e quello a che devono esortarsi acciccche rineghino gli
errori, perch, come V. E. discorreva l'atro gierno, la verita Cattolica vince
appresso ogn' huemo prudente riconosciuta a petto dell'Eresia agni volta che
sia esaminata senza preoccupatione di spirito. Ho preso ardire di fare a V. E.
questa lunga diceria per una sfogo del contento ch' ho havnto di legere il
sudetto libro, che Ella ha fatto gratia di participarmi, e pregandola a
continuarmi simili favori le baci^ riverentemente le vesti.

Roma 26. Aprile 1672.
Illustrissimo and Reverendissimo Domino JACOBO BENIGNO Episc. Condomensi S. P.
D. FERDINANDOS Episcop. and Princeps Paderbornensis Coad. Monasteriensis.
QVANQVAM ad virtutem as eruditionem tuam toti terrarum orbi omnique
posteritati commendandam sufficiat judicium Regis Christianissimi, qui filium
suum in spem tantae genitum tibi instituendum erudiendumque commisit: tu tamen
immortali proprii ingenii monimento, aureo videlicet illo libello, cui titulus
est, Expositio Doctrina Ecclesiae Catholicae, nomen tuum pariterque Christianam
disciplinam magis illustrare voluisti; coque non solum ab omnibus Catholicis
maximos plausiu tulissi, sed etiam ex ipsis heterodoxis verissimas ingenii
atque doctrine tuae lands expressisti. Elucet enim in admirabili illo opusculo
incredibilis quaedam res difficiles and plane caelestes atque divinas
explicandi facilitas, and gratissimus candor, ac vere Christiana Charitas atque
Benignitas, qua sedentes in tenebris and umbra mortis taw suaviter allicis, and
illuminas, ac dirigis in viam pacis, ut unus Episcoporum ad hosts Catholicae
fidei sub jugum suave veritatis mittendos fictus and factus esse videaris.
Quapropter ut eximii operis fructus longius manaret, atque per universam
Germaniam, aliasque gentes sese diffunderet, libellum tuum in latinum sermonem
convertendi impetum cepi; sed ubi literas tuas VIII. Call. Maii datas perlegi,
dubitavi sane utrum progredi oporteret, an incepto absistere, quia te non solum
Gallici, sed ctiam Latini sermonis nitore ac elegantia tantopere pollere
perspexi, ut quicunque praeter temetipsum tua scripta de Gallico verteret, is
pulcherimum ingenii tui partum deformaturus potius, quam ornaturus esse
videretur. Quare tu potissimum esses orandus, ut foetum, quem in lucem
edidisti, latinitate donares. Sed quia forsitan id tibi per occupationes non
licet, and siquidem tantum tibi sit otii, obsecrandus es potius, ut plura
scribas, quam ut scripta convertas; faciam id quod tibi pergratum esse
significas, and illum cui hanc provinciam dedi urgebo, ut inchoata perficiat;
tibique versionem libelli tui censendam corrigendamque transmittam. Te vero,
Praesul Illustrissime longeque doctissime, maximopere semper observabo and
amicitiam tuam ad quam hic meus conatus and tua benignitas aditum mihi
patefecit, omni officie colere studebo. Vale, antistes eximie, ac de Republica
Christiana optime merit, and me, ut facias, ama, atque Serenissimo Delphino
cum optimis artibus atque praeceptis nostram quoque memoriam and amorem
instilla, and Ducem Montauserium meis verbis jube salvere plurimum.

In Arce mea ad Confluentes Luppiae, Paderae and Alisonis, 3. Kal. Jun. 1673.
Lettre du Reverendiss. Pere RAIMOND CAPISUCCHI Maistre du Sacre Palais, a
L'Auteur.
IL merito sublime di V. S. Ill. da me ammirato, doveva esse ranche servito
nell'occasione del dottissimo, and eruditissimo libro da lei composto in difesa
della Feed Cattolica, and tradotto per beneficio di tutti anche nella Lingua
Italiana; onde io devo render singolarissime gratie, come faccio a V. S. Ill.
dell'occasione, che mi ha dato di servirla. Stiamo tutti attendo la
publicatione di questo bellissimo libro, per godere delle sue nobilissime
fatiche, and io in particolare che vivo, e vivero sempre ambitioso di al^ri
suoi commandamenti, e qui per fine con ogni ossequio la riverisco.

Roma 20. Guign. 1675.
Approbations de l'Edition Roman de 1678.
Approvatione del Signor MICHEL ANGELO RICCI, Segret. della S. Congr. dell'
Indulgenze e S. Reliq. e Consultore del S. Offitio.
QVOD Tridentina Synodus magno studio assecuta est, ut doctrinam Fidei ab
opinionibus, and controversus inter Catholices om uno secerneret, ac candem
apertius, and significantius explicaret; ac Tertullianus olim, ut Hareticorum
secessionem ab Ecclesia certis praescriptionibus improbaret; alii, ut principia
quaedam Haereticorum, and regulas, ad refutationem ipserum ingeniose
contorquerent: ea Clarissimus quoque Vir Jacobus Benignus Bossuet, Condomi
Episcopus, praestitit in hoc Opere, perspicua methodo, brevi, and ad
persuadendum accommodata, quae quidem praeclarum Auctoris ingenium refert. Quod
Opus Italorum commoditati nunc eleganter versum e Gallica in maternam linguam
praelo, ac luce dignum existimo.

Romae die 5. Augusti 1678. MICHAEL ANGELVS RICCIVS.

Approvatione del P. M. LORENZO BRANCATI da LAUREA delle Congr. Consist.
Indulgenze, Riti, Visita e S. Offit. Consul. e Qualif. e Pr. Cust. della Lib.
Vaticana, etc.
LVCE dignum existimo Opusculum, seu discursum Gallice and variis linguis
impressum, nunc autem ex Gallico in Italicum idioma conversum, in quo
Illustrissimus Dominus Jacobus Benignus Bossuet Episcopus and Toparca Condomi,
nobili, sed gravi ac solido stylo Religionis Praetensae Reformatae Ministros,
and Asseclas, tam communibus Ecclesiae fundamentalibus regulis, quam propriis
corundem principiis fortiter perstringit, ostendens, non Catholicos, ut ii
Ministri autumant, sed ipsosmet Ministros, per improp^ias consequentias
recessisse ab Ecclesiae dogmatibus, nobis, ipsisque communibus; and ex pravis
ejusmodi Scripturae vel Conciliorum intelligentiis, Catholicam communionem
reliquisse. Et si ipsi Ministri Catholicorum Regulas in Conciliis, praesertim
in Tridentino fundatas, absque passione serutarentur, proculdubio, ex Dei
auxilio, ad sanctam redirent unitatem; and discurrens per singulas
controversias suaviter, sed palmarie id exequitur.

Datum in Conventu Sanctorum XII. Apostolorum. Romae die 25. Julii 1678. F.
LAVRENTIVS DE LAVREA MIN. CONVENTVALIS.

Approbatione del Sign. Abbate STEPHANO GRADI.
LEGI diligenter, and studiose egregium summi Viri Jacobi Benigni Condomensis
Antistitis Opus, in sermonem Italicum fideliter eleganter que conversum, quo
Doctrina Ecclesiae breviter, enucleate, luculenter exponitur. Indeque sic
affectus animo discessi, ut legentes optima quaeque, at que a sana doctrina,
and summa ratione optime parata, solent discedere, ut non alia se dicturos, nec
aliter locuturos, si ad scribendum de talibus se contulissent, existiment.
Super omnia vero me cepit Scriptoris, ut it a dicam sobrietas in delectu rerum,
quas promit, dum circumcisis, quae lites extendere, and meliori causae invidiam
conflare nata sunt, ipsam veritatis arcem capessit, tutamque, and inaccessam
praestat; totus in recte constituendo controversiae statu, quam ea re
dijudicatu facilem, and expeditam efficit. Hune itaque librum, si me audient,
quibus concordi Ecclesia Christiana, and salva sua ipsorum anima opus est,
diurna nocturnaque manu versare non desinent; neque non fieri potest, ne eos
diversa a Fide orthodoxa sentire non pigeat, pudeatque.

Ita sentio ego STEPHANUS GRADIUS, S. Congreg. Indicis Consultor. and Biblioth.
Vatic. Praef.
Imprimatur si videbitur Reverendiss. P. S. P. Apost. Magistro.

J. DE ANGELIS, Archiep. Urb. Vicesger.


Imprimatur,

F. RAIMUNDUS CAPISUCCUS, Ord. Praed. S. P. A. Magister.



Bref De N. S. P. le Pape. INNOCENTIUS PP. XI.
VEnerabilis Frater, salutem and apostolicam benedictionem.
Libellus de Catholicae Fidei Expositione a fraternitate tua compositus,
nobisque oblatus, ea doctrina eaque methodo ac prudentia scripius est, ut
perspicua brevitate legentes doceat, and extorquere possit etiam ab invitis
Catholicae veritatis confessionem. Itaque non solum a nobis commendari, sed ab
omnibus legi, at que in pretio haberi meretur. Ex eo sane non mediocres in
orthodoxae Fidei propagationem, quae nos praecipue cura intentos ac solicitos
habet, utilitates redundatliras, Deo been juvante, confidimus: ac vetus interim
nostra de tua virtute ac pietate opinio comprobatur, magno cum incremento spei
jampridem susceptae fore ut institutioni tuae creditus, eximia, hoc est
paterna, avitaque praeditus indole DELPHINVS, eam a te hauriat disciplinam, qua
maxim informatum esse decet Christianissimi Regis filium, in quem una cum
florentissimo regno, Catholicae Religionis defensio perventura est: idque
perenni cum Regis ipsius decore, qui Fratermtatem tuam inter tot egregios viros
quibus Gallia abundat, ad opus potissimum elegit, in quo publicae foelicitatis
fundamenta jacerentur; cum divino doceamur Oraculo, patris gloriam esse filium
sapientem. Tu perge alacriter in incepto, ad quod incitare te, praeter alia,
magnoperc debet, qui jam apparet laborum, atque industriae tuae fructus.
Audimus enim and quidem ex omnium sermon, ac magno cum animi nostri solatio
inter tot prementia mala audimus, DELPHINVM ipsum magno ad omnem virtutem
impetu ferri, and paria pietatis atque ingenii documenta praebere, Illud tibi
pro certo affirmamus, nulla in re devincire te arctius posse paternam nostram
erga te voluntatem, quam in regio adolescente bonis omnibus, and Rege maximo
dignis artibus imbuendo, ut is adulta posted aetate, Barbaras gentes and
Christiani nominis inimicas, quas parentem inclytum reddita Europae pace, and
translatis in orientem invictis arm^s, Imperio late suo adjecturum speramus,
victor and ipse sanctissimis legibus, moribusque componat. Devotionem interim
atque observantiam quam erga sanctam hanc Sedem, nosque ips^s, qui in ea
Catholicae Ecelesiae immerito praesidemus, tuae ad nos literae luculenter
declarant, mutuae charitatis affectu complectimur, cujus profecto in
occasionibus quae se dederint Fratenitati tuae argumenta non deerunt, tibique
Apostolicam benedictionem peramanter impertimur.

Datum Romae, apud S. Petrum sub annulo Piscatoris, die IV. Januarii 1679.
Pontificatus nostri anno 111. MARIUS SPINVLA.

Et au dessus: Venerabili Fratri Jacobo, Episcopo Condomensi.
The foregoing Testimonies rendered into English from the French.
A Letter from his E. the Cardinal BONA of happy Memory, to his E. the Cardinal
de BUILLON.
I Have received the R. Bishop of Condom's Book, which your E. did me the
Honor to send me; and as I am sensible of the quallity of this Favor, and
esteem my self much honored by it; so I render you my most Cordial thanks, as
well for the Present, as for the Care you take to increase my Library. I have
read it with a particular attention; and because your E. tells me, there are
some who find some fault in it, I endeavored expressly to observe in what it
might be worthy of reprehension. But in effect I could not find any thing in
it, but matter of great Commendation; seeing without entering into the more
difficult questions in Controversy, he makes use of a most ingenious, easy,
and familiar manner, and of a Method, as I may say, Geometrical, to convince
the Calvinists, by common and approved Principles, and to force them to confess
the Catholic Faith.

I can assure your E. I found, in reading it, a Satisfaction which I cannot
express; and I am not astonished that some have found fault with it, for all
Works great and above the common Level, find Persons still to contradict them.
But Truth prevails in the End, and the quality of the Tree is known by the
Fruit. I congratulate with the Author, who has by this work given us an Essay
of his great Talents, and may by many others render considerable Service to the
Church.

Rome, the 19th. January, 1672.
A Letter from Cardinal SIGISMOND CHIGI, of happy Memory, to the Abbot of
DANGFAU.
I Have received, together with your Letter, the Exposition of the Catholic
Doctrine, composed by the Bishop of Condom, I have found it full of Erudition,
and so much the more proper to convert Heretics, as it presses them with lively
Reasons, without any Bitterness. I made mention of it to the Reverend Father,
Master of the Sacrod Palace, and to the Secretary of the Congregation dell'
Indice: I understood that no body had spoken against it to these Fathers, who
seemed to me, on the contrary, full of Esteem for this Work. I discoursed of it
likewise to the Cardinals of the Congregation, and, amongst all the rest, I
found Cardinal Brancas much inclined to praise the Author, and esteem the Book.
So that I doubt not but M. de Condom will receive here the same approbation,
which has been given him every where else, and which is so legitimately due
both to his Learning, and his Labor. I am very much obliged to you for having
given me the means of admiring him, and have perceived in this, your old and
ordinary goodness. The Author is close in his Proofs, and explicates very
clearly the Subject he treats on, in showing the true difference betwixt the
belief of Catholics, and that of the Enemies of the Church. I do not think the
method he takes, to explicate the Doctrine taught in the Council of Trent, can
in the least be disapproved. This Method having been practiced by many other
Writers, and being handled throughout his whole Book, with great Exactness.
Certainly it was never his Intention to give the Interpretation of the Tenets
of the Council, but only to deliver them in his Book, rightly explicated, in
such sort that Heretics may be convinced, and especially in those things which
the Holy Church obliges them to believe. He speaks perfectly well of the Popes
Authority, and wherever he treats of the visible Head of the Church, he
appears full of respect for the Holy See. In fine, I must tell you once again,
M. de Condom cannot be too much commended, etc.

Rome, April the 5th. 1672.
A Letter from the Reverend Father HIACINTHUS LIBELLI, at that time Master of
the Sacred Palace, and now Archbishop of Avignon, to the Cardinal SIGISMOND
CHIGI.
I Have read M. de Condom's Book, which contains an Exposition of the Doctrine
of the Church. I am extremely indebted to your Eminence for giving me the
opportunity of employing four hours so profitably, and with so much Pleasure.
It is impossible for me to express how much this work has pleased me, both for
the peculiar Excellence of the design, and for the Proofs which correspond to
it. The Doctrine is sound in all its parts; and without the smallest shadow of
a fault. As for my self* I cannot see what can be objected against it; and if
the Author would have the Book Printed at Rome, I will give all the necessary
Approbations, without changing a single Word. This Author, who has a great deal
of Wit, has shown a great deal of Judgment too in this Treatise, where, laying
aside disputes, which ordinarily speaking do but increase Dissentions, it being
rare to find any who will grant the Pre-eminence of Wit to their Companions, he
has found out another, and more easy, Method of treating with the Calvinists,
from which much better Fruit may be expected. In effect, as soon as they can be
brought to lay aside that horror which they have sucked in with their Milk,
against our Tenets, they come more willingly toward us, and discovering the
insincerity of that Doctrine which they learned from their Masters, the
principal Maxim of which is, That our Doctrines are horrid and incredible, they
apply themselves, with more tranquillity of Mind, to search into Catholic
Verities.

This is what they must be carefully exhorted to, sinee there is no better
Method to make them renounce their Errors; and your Eminence had great reason
when you lately said, That Catholic Truth will always be victorious in the Mind
of every man of Sense, who will only without prejudice consider it in
comparison with Heresy. I take the Liberty to write this long Discourse to your
Eminence, not being able to contain within my self the Pleasure, which the
reading of this Book, you have been pleased to let me have, has afforded me. I
beg your Eminence will continue the like Favors to me, etc.

Rome, 26 April, 1672.
A Letter from the Bishop and Prince of PADERBORNE, at that time Coadjutor, and
now Bishop of Munster, to the Author.
THE most Christian King, when he entrusted to you the Instruction and
Education of his Son, born to so much Greatness, did by his Judgment alone
sufficiently recommend your Knowledge, and your Merit to all the World, and all
Posterity: yet you have given a new Luster to your Reputation, and to the
Christian Doctrine, by an immortal Monument of your Worth; I would say, by that
most excellent Book, whose Title is, An Exposition of the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church, which has not only gained the vast applause of Catholics, but
forced the Heretics themselves to give deserved Praises to your Judgment, and
Erudition. In this most admirable Treatise, there appears a most incredible
facility to unfold the most difficult, the most sublime, and most divine
things; and at the same time a most winning candor, and a truly Christian
Charity, and Bounty, capable to draw with sweetness all those who are set in
Darkness, and in the shadow of Death, and to enlighten, and conduct them into
the way of Peace: Insomuch that you seem to be chosen amongst the Bishops, to
reduce the Enemies of Catholic Faith under the easy Yoke of Truth. To the end
therefore the effects of this great work might be the more extended, and might
spread it self throughout all Germany, and amongst other Nations, I had formed
to my self a design of having it put into Latin; but after having read your
Letter of the 24th. of April, I had a doubt whether I ought to proceed any
further in it, or quit my design, because I perceived you were as perfect a
Master of the Latin Tongue, as of the French; and that you writ it with so much
Purity, that if any other should undertake to translate your Works, instead of
adorning those curious Products of your Wit, he might on the contrary discredit
them. You ought the rather therefore to be desired to put your self in Latin
what you have published. But seeing that perhaps you have not leisure, and if
you had, it would be much better you should be employed in the Composition of
more new Works, than in the translation of those you have already Composed;
because you admit of it, I will hasten him, to whom I have committed it, to
finish what he has begun; and will send you the Version of your own Book, that
you may review and correct it your self. What remains for me, is always
infinitely to honor your Virtue and Learning, and to make it my endeavor to
cultivate that Friendship, which my care of the Version, and your Bounty have
given so favorable a beginning to. Continue still to love me, most worthy
Prelate who serve the Church so well, and while you give the Dauphin so many
excellent instructions, contrive for me a place in the remembrance and
affection of so great a Prince. Give, if you please, my most humble Service to
the Duke de Montausier.

In my Castle, at the confluence of the Lip, the Padere, and the Alise, the
29th. of May, 1673:
A Letter from the Reverend Father RAIMUNDUS CAPISUCCHI, Master of the Sacred
Palace, to the Author.
AFter having admired with all others so sublime a desert as yours; I must also
show the particular Inclination I have to serve you, occasioned by that
excellent and learned Work you have composed for the defense of the Catholic
Faith, and which has been lately translated into Italian, for it is farther
spreading. I am indebted to you an infinite acknowledgment for having afforded
me an occasion of rendering you some Service; we are all of us here in great
expectation of the publishing of this excellent piece, that we may enjoy the
fruits of your Labors. No body will have a greater satisfaction than my self,
who do, and shall always feel an ardent desire to render my self worthy of the
honor of your Commands. I end with assuring you of my Respects.

Rome, 20 June, 1675.
The Approbations of the Roman Edition, Anno 1678.
The Approbation of Signor MICHEL ANGELO RICCI, Secretary to the Congregation
of I. and H. R. and Consultor of the Holy Office.
WHAT the Council of Trent has with great care performed, in making an entire
separation betwixt Articles of Faith, opinions, and disputes of the Schools;
and explicating the same Doctrines of Faith in more clear and significant
Terms; what Tertullian had formerly done, in condemning the secession of
Heretics from the Church by several Prescriptions; what others have practiced,
whilst they ingenuously combated Heretics by their own Principles and Rules;
the same has the Right Reverend James Benign Bossuet Bishop of Condom performed
in this Work, in a clear and short Method, proper to persuade; manifesting to
us the admirable parts of the Author. Which work being now for the convenience
of the Italians, elegantly translated out of French, into our Mother Language,
I esteem worthy to be Printed and Published.

Rome, August the 5th. 1678.
The Approbation of the Reverend Father LAURENCE BRANCATI DE LAUERA of the
Congregat. Consist. of I. Rites, Visit, Consultor and Qualificator of the Holy
Office, and Bibliothecarian of the Vatican Library, etc.
I Esteem most worthy publishing the little Treatise or Discourse, Printed in
French and several other Languages, and at present Translated out of French
into Italian, in which the most Illustrious James Benign Bossuet Bishop and
Lord of Condom does forceably combat in a Noble, Grave, and Solid Style, the
Ministers of the Pretended Reformed Religion and their followers, as well by
the common and fundamental Rules of the Church, as by their own Principles;
showing, that it is not Catholics, as those Ministers imagine, but the
Ministers themselves, who by drawing unnatural Consequences, have receded from
those Tenets which are common to them and us, and by taking the Scriptures and
Councils in a wrong sense, have separated themselves from the Catholic Church.
But if they would examine without passion the Rules of Catholics grounded upon
their Councils, and especially upon that of Trent, they would without doubt, by
the Grace of God, return again to a Holy Unity: all which this Author shows
them in a most pleasing, and no less convincing manner, running through all the
points of Controversy.

Given in the Convent of the Twelve Apostles at Rome, the 25. July, 1678. F.
Laurentius de Laurea, Min. Conventualis.

The Approbation of the Abbot Stephen Gradi.
I Have with diligence and application read the excellent Work of the Lord
James Benign Bossuet, Bishop of Condom, faithfully and elegantly Translated
into Italian, where the Doctrine of the Church is explicated after a manner
both concise, clear, and full. And it wrought the same Impression in me, which
ordinarily those nobler sort of Writings, which are the products of a sound
Doctrine and solid Reason, do in their Readers, when they are convinced they
could not have said any thing more to the purpose, nor spoken otherwise, if
they had undertaken to write of the same Subject. But what Transported me the
most was that Wisdom and Moderation of the Author in the choice of those things
which he asserts; he retrenches all those things which serve only to lengthen
Disputes, and render a good Cause odious, and betakes himself to Truth alone,
as to a strong hold, which he renders not only secure but inaccessable:
applying himself wholly to establish the true state of the Question, which by
that means is rendered clear and easy to be judged of. Upon which account, all
those, if they will believe me, who are concerned for the Peace of the Church,
or the Salvation of their Souls, ought day and night to turn over this Book;
and it is impossible, but it should produce in them both shame and sorrow, for
holding Tenets, contrary to the Orthodox Faith.

I am of this Opinion, St. G. Consultor of the Congregation de l' Indice,
Prefect of the Vatican Library.
Let it be Printed, if it so please the Very Reverend Father, Master of the
Sacred Apostolic Palace.

J. de Angelis Archiep. Vrb. Vicesger.


Let it be Printed,

F. Raimundus Capisuccus Ord. Pred. S. P. A. Magister.



The Brief of our Holy Father Pope Innocent the XI.
VEnerable Brother, Health and Apostolical Benediction. Your Book of the
Exposition of the Catholic Faith, lately presented to us, contains such
Doctrine, and is composed in such a method, and with so much prudence, that it
is thereby rendered proper to instruct the Readers clearly in few words, and to
extort, even from the unwilling, a Confession of the Catholic Faith. For which
reasons we do not only think it worthy our commendation, but also to be read
and esteemed by all. We hope, this Work by the Grace of God will bring forth
much Fruit, and will not a little help to propagate the Orthodox Faith, which
is our continual care and principal solicitude. And in the interim, we are
more and more confirmed in that good Opinion we have always had of your Virtue
and Piety, and we feel an increase of those hopes which we had long since
formed in our selves of the Education of the Dauphin of France, and that he who
is entrusted to your care, and endowed with inclinations worthy the King his
Father, and all his Ancestors, will receive from you those instructions which
are proper to the Son of a most Christian King, whose Birth entitles him both
to so flourishing a Kingdom, and at the same time to be a Protector of the
Catholic Religion. And this King, who has chosen you amongst so many great men,
with which France flourishes at this time, to so great a Province, as is the
laying the Foundations of a public happiness, will no doubt receive an Eternal
Glory from the good success of your care, according to that Oracle of
Scripture, which tells us, that a Wise Son is the Glory of his Father. Continue
then to go forwards cheerfully in so important a work, especially since you
have before your Eyes such mighty Fruits of your Industry. For we hear, and
that from all Parts, and we cannot but feel an excess of Joy and Consolation,
amidst our many Troubles, when we hear, how this young Prince is carried on to
virtue with a noble Fervor, and daily gives new Testimonies of Prudence and of
Piety. This we can assure you, that nothing is capable of endearing our
Paternal affection to you more, than thus to employ your utmost Care to inspire
into this young Kings Mind those Maxims, which make a mighty King; that in a
riper Age, being happy and victorious, like the King his Father, he may
regulate by Holy Laws, and reduce to Christian Manners, Barbarous Nations, and
Enemies of the Name of Christian, as we hope to see them shortly subdued to the
Empire of this great King, since Peace being restored to Europe, he has so fair
an opportunity to transfer his victorious Arms into the East. To conclude,
Assure your self that the Submission and Kespect which your Letters show you to
have toward the Apostolic See, and Us, who now possess it, tho unworthy, for
the Government of the Catholic Church, find in Us a mutual affection; the
Testimonies of which, you shall perceive, when any occasion shall present it
self. With a sincere affection we give you our Apostolic Benediction.

Given at Rome, at St. Peter's, under the Fishers Ring, the 4th. of January,
1679. the third year of our Popedom. Signed Marius Spinula;

and on the outside, To our Venerable Brother, James Bishop of Condom.
FINIS.

