The Worthy of Ephratah: REPRESENTED In a SERMON at the Funerals of the Right
Honorable EDMUND Earl of MULGRAVE, Baron Sheffield of Botterwic. In the Church
of Burton-Stather, Sept. 21. 1658.

By EDWARD BOTELER, sometimes Fellow of Magdalen-Colledge in Cambridge, and now
Rector of Wintringham in the County of Lincoln.

coat of arms with three sheaves of wheat

PSALM. 126.6. He shall doubtless come again with rejoicings and bring his
sheaves with him. London; Printed by T.N. for G. Bedell and T. Collins, and are
sold at their Shop at the Middle-Temple-Gate in Fleetstreet. 1659.

To the Right Honorable, ELIZABETH COUNTESS OF MVLGRAVE, The Pious Relict of
EDMUND late Earl of MULGRAVE and Baron of BOTTERWIC.
Madam,
IT suits not with an homespun garment to be faced with cloth of gold or
silver: Nor should this poor Piece have presumed to wear your honorable Name to
the world, were it not that so much of your Ladyships interest is bound up with
it. You have a right in what was your Lords; and behold here an Inventory of
his best and choicest Goods!

Your Ladyship may please to read these Sheets without fear of discomposure,
without shrinking in, or giving back at the suspicion of any cutting and
doleful expressions in them; for they will show you more White in the gracious
Life of your deceased LORD, then will chequer all the Blacks of his Death and
Funerals.

Were there nothing but the voice of the Turtle to be heard in the Text, Cant.
2.12.
and were the Sermon, like Ezekiel's Roll, Ezekiel. 2.10.
all written within and without, Lamentations, and mourning and woe; I would
have sent no such company to knock at the door of your Closet, where I know,
Privacie and Passion would have been too hearty in their entertainment, and
harbored such Guests till they had become Inmates. I would wound no hearts, and
melt no eyes but for sin: God has a bottle for such tears, and a book for such
groans, when all the floods of worldly sorrows, which wander and run out into
other channels, shall be but like those tears in Ecclesiastes, chapter 4.1.
which found no comforter.

Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 1.3, 4.
the Father of mercies and the God of all comfort, who has comforted you in
your tribulations; so that you are not put to it at the taking away of your
Lord, as Micah was at the taking away of his gods; You have taken away my gods,
and what have I more? Judge. 18.24.
God has taken away one of your Lords, and you have another Lord for him,
(long may you have him!) a Lord of your womb, for the Lord of your bosom.

And how gracious was the method of this mercy, God giving you this young Lord
in hand (that I may so speak) for some years before he took t^^ other from you?
How did he seem herein to consult your comfort and establishment, providing
thereby against all future diffidence and despondencies, that you might put
your self into a posture of spiritual strength, whereby to stand with faith and
patience unbroken, receiving with courage that shock of sorrows, which is come
upon you in this day of your rebuke and trouble.

So that, Madam, your comfort is exchanged only, not taken away; and you have
great cause freely to trust that God, of whom you have had so friendly a trial.
Ps. 9.10.
They that know his name, will trust in him. You cannot fall, by leaning upon
him: He will keep them in perfect peace, Isa. 26.3.
whose minds are stayed on him.

Thus your Ladyship, by frequent removals of your mind from a dead Lord to the
living God, will happily lose your losses in such delightful and comprehensive
thoughts; and at length see little, or nothing of your sufferings, for the
p^enty and superabundance of your reparations.

Alas! Comforts in the Creatures taste of the cask, and are tainted with
mortality at least; in God they are sweet, and living, like waters in their
fountain: And those fading excellencies which lie scattered in them, Honor in
one, Wisdom in another, are all immassed and laid up in him as in their
treasury. Some sprinklings of happiness may a while sojourn in them, but in him
all fullness dwells. Whatsoever is good in it self or in others, is advanced to
a better being, is best in him. Make him your strength, and you have
Allsufficiencie; lay up your life in him, and it is Immortality: Affect his
beauty, and you are in love with Majesty; Match your soul with him, and they
are the espousals of Eternity.

Madam, I am neither worthy to counsel, or comfort you; I know you are better
provided: Only, I presume (being first commanded by your Honor to this
undertaking) to be your humble Remembrancer, that you will make use of those
graces which are now especially in season, useful most at such a time as this,
and most proper for the conjuncture: Resignation of your will, is your great
work: Be in subjection to the Father of spirits, Heb. 12.9.
and live.

Live in patience, die in peace, lie down in hope, rise in honor, and reign in
glory!

Your HONOR'S most obliged humble Servant, E. BOTELE^

Illustrissimum Dominum, Dominum EDMUNDUM, COMITEM Mulgravium, Insobili funere
raptum, and publicis hisce exequiis iterum elatum, Una cum BOTELERIO suo
comitatur, atque ex animo deflet, Johannes Merryweather.
FUnere Mulgraviensi denuo prodeunte, fletus denuo planctusque posci haud
immerito videmur: Liceat per te, Heroina pientissima, lachrymis pene tandem and
aegritudine confecta; liceat, suavissime nobilissimeque Comes, praesentis
saeculi palam deliciae, futuri future decus, vulnus illud infandum longeque
acerbissimum animo saltem and cogitatione lugubri aliquantisper retegere, ut ne
Justis unquam suis destituantur Mulgravienses exequiae.

Atque hic sane est, ubi linguas omnium, quicquid uspiam est, Chrysostomorum,
Stentorisque alicujus latera mihi dari velim; ut, omnibus quid perdiderint rite
edoctis, universos undecunque Anglos ad luctus conciam: ut public nunc demum
elato MULGRAVIO, publicitus adveniat luctus, publici summittantur gemitus.
Commune, dum vixit, bonum fuit: commune, cum moritur, damnum.

Sed been, quod nec linguis, nec lateribus opus est. Norunt jandudum satis
superque omnes, quae damna fecerint; nec quenquam arbitror in Israele hoc
nostro tam insolenten reperiri hospitem, qui moerendi scitetur causam. Norunt
Proceres, Anglique Patricii priscam pectoris morumque integritatem, priscam
fidem fortitudinemque, ac genuinum adeo avitae Nobilitatis exemplar, in
MULGRAVIO spirasse, sed expirasse. Justum strenuumque decessisse Rei communis
Vindicem, eumque qui public tantum vixerit, ut public prodesset, norunt
Plebeii; Norunt eum dum vixit, vixisse aliis, sibique soli mortuum. Norunt
afflicti miserique sibi raptum Patronum; norunt scilicet plorantes, aestuque
publico adhuc pallentes Naufragi, fortem fidelemque desiderari Hospitem.
Norunt, qui novissimis hisce nequissimisque temporibus, spectaculum Angelis and
Hominibus facti, tanquam purgamenta mundi sunt and omnium Peripsema usque
adhuc, periisse sibi Fautorem, Cultorem, Nutritium Patrem. Quid loquor veram
animi virtutem, niveam vitae per omnia sanctimoniam, morumque puritatem
emendatissimam!

Sed quas res ago miser? aut quo fe^or? siquis forte erit, qui quem virum, quem
heroa lugeamus nesciat, adeat, licet, Orationem istam Funeream, luculentissimam
sane eam fragrantissimamque, in qua ita Nardo Pistico perfusus obdormit Comes
MULGRAVIUS, ita suavolentissimis omne genus aromatis delibutus componitur, ut
in ipsis etiam Parcarum amplexibus vivus adhuc spiret, legentiumque oculis
contemplandus simul and suspiciendus obversetur.

Hic, inquam; nec tamen hic tantum vivit viviturque MULGRAVIUS: Vivit adhuc in
piis Propinquorum gemitibus, and lachrymis; Vivit in Clientum suorum, hoc est,
in bonorum omnium luctuosis animis; Vivit in Procerum suspiriis, in Popelli
planctu: In quocunque denique Very Rectique cultus, in quocunque generosum
Honestum pectori incoctum micat, in eo particulam aliquam Mulgraviam etiamnum
superesse dixerim.

Atqui in te, si uspiam alibi, totus simulque; in te, inquam, seorsim victurus
est, o Auree SHEFFELDIORUM Manipule! in te aureo resurgit culmo quodcunque in
Patre de^ssum querimur; in te regerminat ^ulgravii nominis decus. Ita quaeso,
lucidissima Sheffeldiani stemmatis Gemma; id esse stude quod Natales praestant,
Paternasque virtutes mature occupa: Jus tibi tuum ocyus assere; omnibusque hunc
aliis honorem invidus praeripe, ut nemo magis SHEFFELDIUM quam SHEFFELDIUS
referat. Facito, Veneres istae Gratiaeque dulcissimae, quibus quasi agmine
facto circumvolitantibus tum vultus tibi tum pectora renident, quibusque
quicunque spectator accedit; quasi perculsus and irretitus stupet, omnes tandem
originem suam, simulatque adoleverint, prodant; nec aliud demum quicquam
comperiantur, quam Nativae dignitatis praeludia, proseminatae virtutis
emicantes scintillulae. Sic tandem fiet, ut moerorem eum luctumque, quem nondum
aut fas erit deponere, aut facile, non nobis longa dies, ut alias solet, sed
MULGRAVIUS redivivus minuat.

To the READER.
Reader,
THough I do not call thee Courteous, yet I pray thee be so, be liberally so:
Many failings, and such as mine, will make work for much courtesy.

The Press and I have hitherto been strangers, nor did I ever intend my Pen
should scrape acquaintance with it; but the desires of some (which carry the
force of commands) and the importunity of other Friends, calling for more
Copies then I had list or leisure to transcribe, have overruled those thoughts,
and driven me out of my recesses and most desired privacie. Nor yet could I
ever look the world in the face with more confidence, and less fear of
blushing; having in all this Discourse kept close ^^^pany with Truth, which
needs not be ashamed. And if I had so little integrity that I would, my Lord
of Mulgrave had so much excellency, that I could not flatter. I am innocent
from that great offense, which is the reproach, and almost ruin of these
Sermons.

It is too much known, how the glozing tongues of some mercenary Orators have
preached themselves, and this kind of Preaching, out of credit; the rank
flowers of whose unsavory Rhetoric sprinkled upon rotten Names, have not only
distasted some sick-brained and silly ones, but even turned the stomachs of
sound and sober persons. So that the Preacher of a Funeral-Sermon may find his
fittest Text in that complaint of the Prophet; Isa. 53.1.
Quis credidit auditui nostro? Who has believed our report? And, an [Here
lyes] may as truly be inscribed on the Pulpit of the Preacher, as the Grave or
Monument of the Deceased.

As if the business of such Solennities was to garnish a Dish for the Worms; to
make a Trimming for the Grave, and Paint for the Chambers of darkness. But wise
men know the vanity of such Varnish, and Colors thus laid on give no complexion
to a judicious eye. And how miserably wall this Paint melt and drop away, and
leave some faces horribly appalled in that great Day of fire and flames, which
will mingle the stars of the Heavens, and the dust of the Earth together! Then
shall the mouth of all wickedness be stopped; Funeral-Sermons shall be shut,
Rev. 20.12.
and those other Books shall be opened, Books that know no Errata's, and which
cannot lie, and the Dead shall be judged out of those books: 1 Cor. 4.5.
Then shall every man have praise of God.

My sincerity in the following Discourse will (I hope) make it Judgment-proof,
and abide the test of the searching day. Read it, and a blessing from Heaven be
upon it and thee, and

Thy Servant, EDW. BOTELER.

A SERMON Preached at the Funerals of the Right Honorable EDMUND Earl of
MULGRAVE, Baron SHEFFIELD of BOTTERWIC. Sept. 21. 1658.
Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, Men, Brethren, and Fathers!

IT cannot be said of this great Assembly, as of that Act. 19.32. that it is
confused, and the greater part know not wherefore they are come together. We
all know, and, but that God only wise has set our price, should sadly complain
that we pay too dear to know the cause of our meeting this day.

A day, Job 3.5.
as ill as Job could wish; Darkness and the shadow of death stains it, a cloud
dwells upon it, and the blackness of the day terrifies it.

A day as sad as Zechary could prophecy, Zech. 12.12.
influencing upon several families, and cutting them out their mournful parts.

This Family, from whose heads the Lord has now finally taken their Master
this day, have parts so sad, no expressions of mine can reach them; I must
borrow for them all.

The honorable and elect Lady ('it is S. John's word, and I hope rightly applied)
has Naomi speaking her condition: Ruth 1.20.
Call me Marah, for the Lord has dealt very bitterly with me. Or the widow
Church, (if she can be a widow, whose Husband fills heaven and earth with his
presence;) Lam. 1.12.
Behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto
me, wherewith the ^d has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger.

The young Lord, that florid, hopeful, and honorable blossom, may sigh out his
sorrows in that of Elisha; 2 King. 2.12.
My father! my father! And we, taking in the public loss, may all subjoin,
One of the chariots of Israel, and one of the horsemen thereof!

You, who were sometimes his happy Attendants and Followers, David has cut you
out your parts, see how they will fit you: 2 Samuel 1.24.
Weep over him who clothed you in scarlet, with other delights, who put on
ornaments of gold upon your apparel.

All his whole Family, when you come home anon, may have your mouths, and
hearts all full with that of Mary; who being asked by the Angels why she wept,
Joh. 20.13.
cries them out this answer, They have taken away my Lord.

Other families, and other persons have their parts in this mourning too, and
this our meeting makes a Consort of lamentation, such an one as may seem to
emulate that memorable mourning of Haddadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo, Zech.
12.11.

And now, that we had a Jeremy for this place! Jeremy in the possession of his
wish, his head waters, and his eyes a fountain of tears! For he could broach
the eyes, and pierce the hearts of aftergenerations, and by the power of his
pen make impressions upon pious posterity. All the singing men and singing
women spoke of Josiah in their lamentations to this day, and made them an
ordinance in Israel; and behold they are written in the Lamentations. 2 Chro.
35.25.

Oh for a David! one that had power to his passion! who did not only himself
bewail the anointed Saul, and honorable Jonathan, but for their sakes commanded
the children of Judah to be taught the use of the Bow, (not to shoot in, as it
is ordinarily and easily mistaken, but) to sigh in, the lamenting song called
the Bow: behold it is written in the book of Jasher. 2 Samuel 1.18.

But, why do I call in mourners? we want none: We need not hire any Roman
Praefica's, a custom observed also among the Jews. Jer. 9.17.
Call for the mourning women that they may come, and send for cunning women
that they may come: s^^h as let out their eyes for hire, and set their tears to
sale, having both a trade, and a trick of mourning.

We have true tears in showers, and have more cause to suspect a flood then a
drought; and the fear is, lest so many rivolets met in one confluence, like
Jordan in harvest, should overflow all banks and bounds.

But, to keep us within compass, it was expressly provided by the deceased Lord,
whose honorable remains now lie before us, according to the constant tenor of
his admirable humility, desirous always rather laudabilem esse than laudari, to
be, than to be accounted good; That he might be buried with all Christian
warrantable decency, without pomp or costly vanity, quietly and peaceably,
without giving offense to any one person or creature, if possible. Those are
the very words of his last Will and Testament.

By which, as it is said of Abel, Heb. 11.4.
being dead he yet speaks: speaks against all immoderation and excess;
speaks, as our Savior sometimes did to the lan enting followers of his cross
and passion; Daughters of Jerusalem, Lu. 23.28
weep not for me, but weep for your selves and for your children. There Is a
black bill of Jerusalem's sins gone up to heaven, and given in against her; and
there is a black cloud of miseries hangs over Jerusalem's head, ready to fall
upon her You have sins, and are like to have sufferings will set your tears on
work; and therefore lavish not away such precious eye-water; be so thrifty in
what you spend upon compassion, that you be sure to keep for contrition. Thus
weep, or weep not at all for me, but weep all for your selves, and for your
children.

But, if moderation be intended, then what means this great and unusual
appearance? this sad and solemn Procession? these multiplied Blacks? that
stately Hearse? those Armorial Ensigns and tricks of Honor? those Atrati, the
Mourners walking about the streets?

-- Et non plebeios luctus testata Cupressus? Such a question was once put by
the Disciples, and that with indignation too, when they saw the Alabaster-box
of very precious ointment poured on the head of Jesus; Mat. 26.7, 8.
To what purpose is this waste?

S. John seems to take it off in some measure at least from the other
Disciples, and lay it upon Judas, making him the greatest, if not the only
murmurer? He had the filthiest heart, and foulest mouth; and so fittest to
speak that base objection, which he hatched in his bag, not his conscience:
Joh. 12.5
Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given to the poor?
It is not unlike there may be some of Judas his brood here this day, (Great
sins seldom die issueless;) who being of the same mind, may murmr after the
same manner, and therefore the same answer will fit them: Joh. 12.8
This is for the day of my burying; for the poor you have always with you, but
me you have not always.

They whom Christ cannot satisfy, deserve no answer; nor will I trouble my
self further with them, then to tell them, It is more then suspicious, that
they who have over-slovenly thoughts of Burial, have too slender hopes of the
Resurrection. He lays his clothes by handsomely, does not throw them away
carelessly, that intends to put them on again in the morning. Indeed, were our
minds after the Heathen Motto, Non est spes ulla sepultis, There Is no hopes of
them that are once buried; any burial were good enough; any hole will serve no
hopes: Let lost forlorn carcasses be kicked into corruption; the ditch is
fittest for that which will never be better then dirt.

But a body, which has been Animae domicilium, it is Origen's word, the
dwelling house of a divine soul; and whilst in the state of conjunction, Ephesians.
2.22.
(...), it is S. Paul's word, an habitation of God through the Spirit, a Temple
of the Holy Ghost, one of the dwellings of God, and mansions of the most High:

A body which shall rise in honor, 1 Cor. 15.43.
put on glory, and wear immortality:

A body which shall be fashioned like unto Christ's glorious body, Phil. 3.21
let it have some of the fashion of his burial too; the honorable attendance,
the spikenard and spices, Mar. 15.43.46.
the ointment and fine For questionless, had costly linen: solemnities been a
sin, he who knew no sin would not have made his grave with the rich in his
death; Isa. 53.9.
nor should the Sun (being under his command) have put both himself and the
heavens into black, Mat. 27.45.
to witness their mourning to the world.

Let them who live and die like beasts, be buried like beasts; the burial of an
ass, Jehojakim's curse, Jer. 22.15.
suits best with them. But let not man, a good man, a good man in honor, though
he abides not, be thus like the beasts that perish. Ps. 49.12.
Let us give him the honor due unto his name! Due indeed: For if ever Funerals
were called Justa, as being a debt to the memory of the deceased, these are
they; in which we do not perform, but pay the service of this day. Which whilst
we are about, let me bless you, 2 Samuel 2.5.
as David did the men of Jabesh-Gilead; Blessed be you of the Lord, that you
have showed this kindness unto this Lord, and are thus come to bury him.

But before his burial, there is a box of ointment, which a skilful hand would
open, but I must break, that the place may be filled with the odor of it. And
that it may be the sweeter, let us mingle it with some Scripture-ingredients.
We shall be better furnished to speak of the dead, when we have a while
consulted the Book of life, in that portion of it which is written --

RUTH 4.11. Do thou worthily in Ephratah, and be famous in Bethlehem.


A Scant and a short Text, to accompany so great a Person to so long an home.
But non est huic alter similis, (as David said of the sword) there is none like
that, ^ Sam. 21.9.
give it me: A fitter could not be found; I could not miss it, he was so much
the Comment on it; look at it, and you see him. The persons, the place, the
actions, the fame all agreeing; and what was there voted, is here verified; it
is now the praise of the dead, what was then a prayer for the living: Do thou
worthily in Ephratah, and be famous in Bethlehem.

The words are the gratulatory votes, and hearty wellwishes, signified by the
general acclamations of the Ephrathites, and people of Bethlehem-Judah, to the
great and noble Boaz; a Prince of the Assembly famous in the Congregation, a
man of renown, one that sat chief in the gate of his place, and was the honor
of his people: He was of good descent and extraction, great Grandfather to
David in the right royal line of Judah, whose fair pedigree is to be seen from
Adam the son of God, to Jesus the son of man, Luke 3. And which heightened his
height, and made his greatness yet greater, he was good too; there were apples
of gold set in those pictures of silver; Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, Love, Pro.
25.11.
Good works, a right Retinue for Nobility: This was the Temple which sanctified
the gold, and the Altar which makes pleasant the offering.

This person thus great, thus good, is best for our purpose: For it was not
every one that would have made a parallel for my Lord of Mulgrave, but he must
be great.

Not every Great one neither: For many like mushroms and children of the earth,
are sprung up and grown to their greatness since yesterday, and made but a step
out of the dirt into honor; like those Giants, which, the Poets tell us, were
simul sati and editi, sown and grown in the same instant: But he must be one,
the spring of whose honor is to be found rising in remoter ages, and his
Ancestors the acquaintance of History, ennobled in blood, great by derivation
from greatness, -- Satus sanguine Divum.

Not every Great and Noble one neither. If he have no evidences to show for it
but the Houses and Inheritance, the Lands and Lordships, the Escucheons and
Seal of his Family; if he be descended by as many degenerations from the worth
and virtue, as generations from the loins and blood of atchieving progenitors:
But he must be one who has brought in his share of Honor, has illustrated old
Dignities by new additions, and by doing worthily acquired fame. Such the
person presented in the Text, and represented in the Occasion: Do thou, etc.

In the Text, you have Nobility advanced betwixt two Supporters, Facts, and
Fame. Facts give fame a bottom to stand on, and Fame gives Facts a top to stand
up: Facts get Fame, and Fame gilds Facts. To do good, is the way to be great;
and to be great, is the reward of doing good. Worthy actions command honorable
commemorations; Do

I find several readings; and I Will name that first, which I like worst: Pro.
3.10
Compara opes Ephrathae, Get thee riches at Ephratah; have servants and cattle,
and flocks and herds; let thy garners be filled with plenty, Eccl. 2.8.
and thy presses burst out with new wine; Bring Ophir to Ephratah, gather
silver and gold, and the peculiar treasure of Kings and of the provinces. Some
will like this well enough, because it makes wealth the gage of worth; and so
it is by the rate of the world, where look what a man's estate is, that commonly
is said to be his worth. But to make this Worth, were to make the camel a
passage through the needles eye; Quidam scribunt (...)
let (...) signify the great beast it self, and not the Seaman's rope only, as
some contend upon that expression Mat. 19.24. To make wealth the standard of
worth, this were to offend against the generation of Gods children, and to cast
out those as vile and worthless among men, of whom the world is not worthy:
Heb. 11.38. Lam. 4.2.
This were to esteem the precious sons of Zion comparable to fine gold, as
earthen pitchers the work of the hands of the potter. Nor can I think the votes
of the Ephrathites ran so low as wealth, the last and least in the inventory of
good things; a blessing of the left hand, and not always a blessing neither,
Riches being sometimes kept for the owners thereof to their hurt. Eccl. 5.13.
It is but the fatness of the earth at best, which many have their full of, who
shall never taste of heaven.

And therefore I like the vulgar Latin better which reads it, Exemplum
virtutis; saving that their sit in stead of sis seems to incline that part of
the words to Ruth, which other Copies, and so our Translation applies to Boaz;
and speaking to him, it speaks to purpose, voting him to that which is the
ornament of great persons, an Exemplarity.

The highest lines are the writers copy; and therefore thou that art high, make
an advantage of thy place, prescribe those that be under, give a copy to others
to write after. But I shall speak to this, when I come to apply Text and
Occasion; and shall now follow our English reading word for word, Do thou
worthily in, etc.

In which words please to observe with me that there is,

1. Agendum, Something to be done: Do.

2. Modum agendi, the rule or measure of doing; worthily: Do worthily.

3. Motivum actus, the motive of such deeds; taken,

1. From the person on whom such doing is incumbent; Thou: Do thou worthily.

2. From the place where such a person is resident, Ephratah: Do thou worthily
in Ephratah.

3. From the name which is attendant on such a person, in such place, doing so
worthily; it is famous: And be famous in Bethlehem.

First for the Agendum, Do. Men must be active for heaven in their generations:
Souls are high metall'd, and it is a shame to rust them in their scabards: They
are Inanimates, or ill thriving Vegetables, that gather moss. A torpid life
misbecomes any man, most a Christian. We came not on the Stage, as Cato on the
Theater; who is said to have entered, only ut exiret, that he might go out
again: But we have our parts to act, something is to be done by us whilst we
live in the world.

As virtue is the luster of action, so action is the life of virtue: Faith
without works is dead. Lev. 18.5
It is not only the voice of the Law, Do this and live; but Gospel-impulses
upon the hearts of candidate Christians and Converts work them to this
importunate solicitation, What must we do to be saved? Act. 16.30.
We have enough to do, work cut out for every day, not an hour but we may find
employment: Mortify your earthly members. Col. 3.5. Lu, 13.24 1 Cor. 9.24. 2
Pet. 1.10. Heb. 4.11. Phil. 2.12.
Strive to enter in at the straight gate. So run, that you may obtain. Give all
diligence to make your calling and election sure. Let us labor to enter into
that rest. Work out your own salvation with fear and with trembling.

Who can look, who can think upon all, upon any of these, and not see enough to
do, should he do nothing else? And yet how slack are men at doing, though it be
to do themselves good? Do not most men like the people of Laish dwell careless,
and after the manner of the Zidonians quiet and secure? Jud. 18.7
Is it not the language of most hearts, when they are motioned to remember
their immortal souls, and to be doing something for eternity; Away tormentors
before the time! Mortifying motions and four precepts of repentance, you are up
too early, you are stirring too soon; go, and come again at threescore, Wisd.
20.6, 7, 8.
or when a sick bed may make you seasonable! Come, now let us enjoy the good
things that are present; bet us fill our selves with costly wine and ointments,
and let no flower of the spring pass by us; let us crown our selves with
rose-buds before they be withered; let none of us go without his part of our
voluptuousness, let us leave tokens of our joyfulness in every place. Heart
follow thine own ways, soul take thine ease, let us lie upon beds of ivory and
stretch our selves upon our couches: I charge you O ye daughters of Jerusalem,
that you stir me not up nor awake me (from my beloved idleness) till I please.
-- juvat molli torpere veterno.

Men and Brethren, Never was there such an idle generation, for all our
newfound word of Generation-work: The chymistrie of these days has so rarefied
Religion, that it is become a mere air, a wind, a next to nothing. Woe unto us,
Jer. 6.4.
for the day goes away, for the shadows of the evening are stretched out! But
how short is the substance? how many have their tongues tipp'd with Purity, but
how few have made it the living of their hearts? Is not a mouth-full of
holiness enough to justify both hands full of violence, and a heart full of
hypocrisy and rottenness? So that like the Church of Sardis, Rev. 3.1.
we have a name to live, and are dead; we are nominally the Church of God, but
really little better then the synagogue of Satan: Mat. 23.5
like the Pharisees we enlarge our Philacteries or Conservatories, scrolls on
which the Law was written, as if we grasped at all and every punctilio of it,
when indeed too like them we say, v 2.
and do not. It is time then to call upon men to be more practical, and less
prating; to set their hands to their words, and witness their profession by
their actions; and that upon a fourfold account.

I must work the works of him that sent me while it is day; Joh. 9.4.
the night comes when no man can work. Life is a portion of that general
duration from the rise of the world to the ruins of it, taken out and allowed
to Individuals to do their work in. Psalm. 103.23.
Man goes forth to his work and to his labor until the evening. Sudore
temporis paranda sunt praemia aeternitatis; Let the sweat of time bring in the
sweets of eternity: As we have opportunity, let us do good. Time is for doing.

It is time we were doing. It were well if that taunt of Seneca to the Jews in
reference to their Sabbaths, that they spent the seventh part of their lives
idly, might not charge us further, to the fifth, the fourth, nay the half, the
greater half of our lives, which we have squandered away by doing nothing, or
nothing to purpose, or worse then nothing. To pass by the toys and trifles of
the lap and cradle, the vanities and excursions of our youthful days, how
unprofitable have our riper years been? Let the best of us take a serious view
of our years and graces, and how much may we be ashamed of the disproportion?
May we not see the Almond-tree flourish, Eccl. 12.5.
where the Tree of life never yet budded? Old men in the world as far to seek
for the Newbirth, Joh. 3.4.
as Nicodemus who knew no other way then entering a second time into his mothers
womb to be born? It is ordinary for men to reckon many years, whilst their good
works cannot begin a number: It is the eleventh hour with some, it may be hora
novissima, the last hour. Into the vineyard then, and be doing; Mat. 20.8.
that when even shall come, the Lord may say unto his Steward, Call the
laborers and give them their hire. It Is time we were doing.

Time will quickly be done. The Sun and Moon, those great clocks of the
Creation, were not wound up for ever; No, Psalm. 104.19.
He appoints the Moon for certain seasons, and the Sun knows his going
down. Time is that strange something, nothing, whose transient nature never yet
had its own parts together: It will not stay till I tell you what it is: If I
should go about to describe it and say, It is -- I should consute my self
before I had done, and you might tell me, it is not. But allow us to speak
properly, when we say, that is time which is to come; yet alas! how coming is
it? Dum labitur, lapsum est; it is gone, whilst it is going. Particular time is
short; Mensurabiles posuisti dies meos, Thou have made my days measurable. And
his measure every man carries about with him; Behold thou have made my days as
an hand-breadth. Ps. 39.5. Rev. 10.6.
And general time cannot be long: The Angel lift up his hand to heaven, and
swear by him that lives for ever and ever, that there should be time no
longer. Which is a truth, as well to the dissolution of the world, as the
desolation of Babylon, of which some expound it. The ends of the world are come
upon us; the Judge is at the door: Isa. 21.12.
The watchman says, the morning comes, and also the night; if ye will
enquire, enquire ye; return, come: Come quickly, drive not in the momental
matters of another world, hazard not your unalterable Eternity upon
peradventures; What you have to do, defer not; Time will quickly be done.

Not doing in time, will be our undoing for ever. The servant who hid his
talent is charged, not for misdoing, but for not doing; for not acting his
share in the Commission, Negotiamini dum venio, Lu. 19.13
Be doing till I come. It will be long enough ere we talk our selves into
heaven: Mat. 7.21
Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven; but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven. No question
but if talking would do it, it would be a general plea: Many have been full of
tongue for him, and will say, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name?
Yes, it may be so: But where are the hungry which you have fed, Mat. 25.42, 43.
the thirsty you have given drink to, the strangers you took in, the naked you
clothed, the sick and prisoners you visited? You have been all tongue and
wind, and nothing you have done; Hos. 8.7.
you have sown the wind, and now you shall reap the whirlwind. Behold the
whirlwind of the Lord goes forth with fury, Jer. 30.23.
a continuing whirlwind, it shall fall with pain upon the head of the wicked,
in the latter days ye shall consider it. Oh that men were wise, that they would
consider this before the latter day! The last day will be a late day: When the
cry is made, Behold the Bridegroom comes! Mat. 25.6.
providing of oil and trimming of lamps will be out of date. I will therefore
close this with that suitable exhortation of the Preacher, preached upon in
this place the last day that ever the deceased honorable Lord was a h^^rer:
Eccl. 9.10.
Whatsoever thine hand finds to do, do it with thy might; for there is no
work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go.

That for the Agendum; Do.

2. Here is Modus agendi, the rule and measure of doing; worthily. Do; but no
more haste then good speed; as good do nothing, as nothing to purpose. Do, but
be advised how; Do worthily.

Worthily, how is that? Nobly: so some read it. Gild thy actions with honor;
let thy large heart appear in thy liberal hand. 1 Samuel 1.6.
Elkanah gave Hannah partem honorabilem, a worthy portion: Do honorably, and do
worthily.

Worthily; that is, ingenuously, 1 King. 1.52.
if we follow others. Si fuerit vir bonus, says Solomon of Adonijah, If he show
himself a worthy man, if he deal fairly and ingenuously. And such a
signification we meet with Mat. 10.11. Into whatsoever city or town you shall
enter, enquire who in it is worthy; who keeps an open heart to entertain the
Gospel, and is so ingenuous to give a free welcome to those precious guests that
bring it. Do ingenuously, and do worthily.

We shall contract all the several expositions of Doing worthily, into four
particulars. To do worthily, is,

1. To do decently; to do suitably and beseemingly: To act in a proportion to
our natural selves, to do as men; to our civil selves, to do as such men; to
our religious selves, to do as Christians. Thus our Savior exhorts to bring
forth fruits (...), Lu. 3.8.
worthy of repentance, that is, meet for repentance, suiting with that
contrition and consternation of poor broken Penitents, those Doves of the
valleys mourning for their iniquities. Ezekiel. 7.16. Act. 26.20. Col. 1.10 Ephesians.
4.1.
(...), is S. Paul's expression, works worthy of repentance. And so, To walk
worthy of the Lord, worthy of the vocation, denotes every where Decentiam
quandam and convenientiam, a certain suitableness and becomingness, Davenant in
Col.
as the Learned observe. And one place for all the rest so renders it in plain
English, (...), To. 16.2.
as becomes Saints.

Men and brethren, did we always consult this suitableness, it would give check
to folly, and keep us from unworthy actions. (...). Act. 17.28. Joh. 14.2. Col.
1.5. 2 Pet. 1.4. Col. 3.4. 1 Pet. 1.4. To. 8.18.
Remember your selves you that are born of God, and do nothing unworthy so high
a birth: Remember the calling wherewith you are called, the mansions prepared,
and the hope laid up in heaven for you; the great and precious promises, the
rich reversions of the life to come; the inheritance incorruptible, and the
glory to be revealed: And do in some proportion to these, to all these, do as
becomes persons of such pregnant hopes and expectations; Do decently, and do
worthily.

2. To do deservingly. Worthy and deserving are terms of equivalencie: The
laborer is worthy of, or deserves, his hire. So the Elders of the Jews being
sent to invite the help of Jesus for the sick servant of the devout Centurion,
that Rarity of his profession, (for he was a Church-building Soldier) they
speak his deserts, (...). He is worthy for whom Christ should do this, Luke
7.4, 5.
for he loves our nation and has built us a synagogue. There is no worth, but
what deserts bring in: That Honor is too cheap to be good, that was purchased
without atchieving, that cost nothing: And that Fame deserves to starve, that
cannot live but at the charge of another actions. Win then the honor you
intend to wear: deserve of the place, the persons, where and among whom you
live. Bid for a Name in doings, and pay for it in deserts. Please not your
selves with the petty thoughts and pitiful dreams of posthume honor, not only
born, but begotten after death; That the Poet and Artificer shall contrive a
fair (though false) Remembrance of you; That you shall have a Marble to mourn
over you, and a Monument to tell some golden Lie for you when you are gone: But
work your selves into the hearts, and out of the mouths of men; make every
breast your monument, and every tongue your epitaph: Do deservingly, and do
worthily.

3. To do exemplarily. And in this I follow the Vulgar Latin, which renders
this [worthily] an example of virtue, as before: It is worthy doing, to do
exemplarily. Men can do unworthily, without a pattern; but they must be good
indeed, that make others good by the convincing power of their examples. Few
leaders in our expedition for the other world; we are so far from being
leaders, that it were well if we could follow examples. In our walkings abroad
do we not stumble upon the husbandly provident Ant? And yet who considers her
ways to be so wise, as in summer to forecast for winter, and in time to provide
for eternity? In our sittings within and recesses, does not the Swallow sing a
confutation in our ears, whilst she is an example of observing an appointed
season, Jer. 8.7.
and we will not know the day of our visitation?

Men and brethren, As it is your shame not to follow, so it will be your honor
to make examples; Tit. 2.7.
in all things showing your selves patterns of good works, cuting out work for
the imitation of others. The most holy and humble Jesus, among the many
exemplarities of his heavenly life upon earth, commends to his ambitious
Disciples that condescending act of his in washing their feet, Jo 13.15.
under this expression, (...), I have given you an example, that ye should do
as I have done to you. And S. Paul exhorts, (...), 1 Timothy 4.12.
Be thou an example of the believers in word, in conversation, in charity, in
spirit, in faith, in purity. A Christian must be both (...) a visible, and
(...) a legible example: The word is taken from those letters and marks which
artificers in iron or brass use to make upon their instruments by stamping. Let
goodness be instamped upon you, wear a Divine impress; Mat. 22.20.
bear the image of the Heavenly, and the inscription of a greater then Caesar;
let there be upon you, as upon the bridles of the horses in the Prophet,
Holiness unto the Lord. Zech. 14.20. Phil. 2.15
There was never such a crooked and perverse Nation; therefore nev r more need
you should shine among them as lights in the world: Now, if ever, let your
light so shine before men, Matthew. 5.16.
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
Heaven. Do exemplarily, and do worthily.

4. To do excellently: Actions of a taller pitch then ordinary, to emerge the
sleepy Age, and strip the dull drousie World. Worth hates levelling, and
disdains the pitiful thoughts of a parity. The Saints those Worthies of God,
are called The most Excellent; Psa. 16.3.
and Tertullus the Orator coming to claw Felix, and flatter some favor out of
him for the Jews against St. Paul, calls his acts for that Nation very worthy
deeds: Act. 24.2.
(...); Right and straight works being done by thee, such as stand true by the
rule, such as others swerve from, or come short of.

David's Worthies had their names and honors from their great achievements and
actings above others. 2 Samuel 23.
There were the thirty, the three, and the first three. Benaiah the son of
Jehoiada had the name among three mighty men, Verse. 23.
he was more honorable then the thirty, but he attained not to the first three;
these were all such as out-did the generality, and acted above the common rate
of men.

Such worthies would our Savior have all his Disciples and followers to be:
What do you more then others? do not even the Publicans the same? what worth is
there in common actions? were Gold but like other Clay, the Cabinet would be no
place for it; were Jewels as obvious as the stones in the streets, who would
call them, would count them precious? He that keeps pace with the multitude,
shall never reach Heaven: There is none climbs that hill, but he leaves many
behind him.

-- Jam monte potitus
Ridet anhelantem dura ad fastigia turbam.
Men and Brethren, would you have worth in you? Seek that you may excel, 1 Cor.
14.12.
(...), that you may abound, and have overplus and run over; that you may
overrun others, as the Disciple did, that stripped Peter and came first at
Jesus. John 20.4. 1 Cor. 9.24.
So run that you may obtain. Get a name among thirty, if you cannot attain the
honor of three, of the first three. However, keep within distance; get beyond
the pitch of a Publican, do more then others, then many others, then most
others. Do excellently, and do worthily.

That for the Modus agendi, the measure and rule of doing: Do worthily.

Come we now to the third general part,

3. Motivum actus: The Motive and Incentive to this worthy doing; taken

From the person, Thou; the place, Ephratah; the name, Famous: It is thou, and
thou art in Ephratah, and thou shall be famous in Beth-lehem.

1. Thou: Thou that art great, and Daniel-like greatly beloved; thou that art
blessed, as if thou were the darling and delight of Heaven; thou whom Wisdom
seems to court with both hands full, Length of days in her right hand, Prove.
3.16.
and in her left hand riches and honor: Thou that art honored before the
Elders, and magnified in the gates of thy City, Lam. 4.20. Chap. 5.16.
The breath of their nostrils, the joy of their hearts, the Crown of their
head, the glory of Ephratah, the hopes and expectation of Beth-lehem, do thou
worthily.

Thou: For te decet, it becomes thee; there is no such incongruity as ill
placed honor, as dignitas in indigno (so Salvian) a worthless person in a place
of worth: As Snow in Summer, Prove. 26.1.
and Rain in Harvest, so honor is not seemly for a fool. What a ridiculous
monster is worthless greatness? Psa. 12.8.
when the vilest men are exalted, Quisquiliae popelli, the sweepings of the
raffle, the abjects, the lowest of the people (like Jeroboams usurping Priests)
got into high places. Giants in honor, and Dwarffs in deserts, are more
monstrous then those the Philosopher calls (...) the sins and byblows of nature.

But to see Goodness and Greatness walk hand in hand, outward excellencies
inlaid with Grace and Holiness, this is elegancy and beauty far above all the
accomplishments of flesh and blood. Job 41.12.
I will not conceal his parts, nor his power, nor his comely proportion.
Laudate Dominum in excelsis: To see God praised in the heights; to see
Mountains of Holiness, those that are eminent in place, to be so in piety too,
Isa. 35.2.
the glory of Lebanon is given unto them, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon:
Do thou worthily; for te decet, it becomes thee.

Thou: for te oportet, it behooves thee; necessity is laid upon thee: Thy
engagements are notable and numerous; God has tied thee with cords of love;
Luke 1.49.
He that is mighty has done to thee great things, and holy is his name: He
has laid his obligations thick upon thee, and unreturned mercies carry a
weight with them, are as heavy as judgments, will press to death. It is base
Earth which requites the bounty of Heavens sun and showers with nothing but
thorns and briers; Heb. 6.8.
it is rejected and nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned.

It was the charge aginst Saul, that he answered neither the expenses, nor
expectations of God: 1 Samuel 15.11.
It repents me that I have made Saul King. Such preferment might justly
expect some performance; but unthankful wretch that he is, I see he cares not
to enrich himself with the spoils of Heaven, and to raise his own name, though,
if possible, with the ruins of mine: It repents me that I have made him King.

Men and Brethren, let not our unworthiness give God cause to repent of any
mercy that he has bestowed on us; and where he has sown his favors thickest,
let him reap the greatest crop of thankfulness. Remember your engagements
recount your obligations, break not the Lords bonds in sunder, Psalm. 2.3.
cast not away his cords from you: Do what you are bound to do; where much is
forgiven, love much, and where much is given, do much: Do thou worthily; for,
te oportet, it behooves thee.

To close this: Greatness you see is a tie to goodness. My Lords and Gentlemen,
you that are greater, be better then others; let your Holiness go in as good a
place as your Honors; let your riches of grace outvie your revenues: Let your
goodness top as many as your greatness; make it appear though those two do not
often meet, yet it is not impossible they should come in conjunction. Let not
your heights make you barren, as if you were under the curse of the Mountains
of Gilboa, 2 Samuel 1.21.
that there should be neither dew nor rain upon you. Oh let dew be upon Hermon,
and let it descend upon the Mountains of Zion; Ps. 133.3.
for there the Lord commands the blessing, even life for evermore.

That for the first Motive to do worthily, Thou, Boaz; a great Man, a Noble
Person; do thou worthily.

2.
The second is the place where such a person is resident: Ephratah. Do thou
worthily in Ephratah.

In Ephratah: Where Is that? Enquire of a neighbor-word, and it will tell us,
Ephratah is a disjointed name, there is half of it behind, Beth-lehem
belonging to it, Beth-lehem and Ephratah are both one. The Spirit of God using
the like elegancy of expressing one place by two words elsewhere; Psa. 76.2.
At Salem is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Zion: Both which speak
but one Jerusalem. Josh. 19.15. Judge. 12.8.
There was another Beth-lehem in Zebulon, the birthplace of Judge Ibzan; from
which that it might be distinguished, this of the Text is called sometimes
Beth-lehem Judah, sometimes Beth-lehem Ephratah.

This is that Beth-lehem of Judea, Marth. 2.1.
so called by St. Matthew, where some time after, the Wise men sought the Sun
by Starlight, and found him, without whom the world was lost. Nor did the
blood of Innocents here shed by Herod, stain, but illustrate the place, it
being the field, Aetas rec dum habilis ad pugnam idonea catitit ad coronam.
Hier.
where those little Champions who could not fight, conquered and are crowned,
and by the charity, and upon the credit of the Primitive Church are
acknowledged to lead in the Van of the Noble Army of Martyrs which have been
since Shiloh came.

It is observed to be situate on the very Umbilical point of the Earth; from
whence as from a Center, Psa. 19.4.
the Lines of comfort might go out through all the Earth, and the Word here
made flesh, to the ends of the World.

Sometimes you have both these names in one. Mic. 5.2.
And thou Beth-lehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of
Judah.

Sometimes one for both, Genesis 35.19.
Rachel died and was buried in the way to Ephratah, which is Beth-lehem.

Sometimes both for one, as here, Do thou worthily in Ephratah, and be famous
in Beth-lehem.

Ephratah was so called from Ephrath the wife of Caleb, say some; others, 1 Chronicles. 2.19.
and St. Hierome among the rest, ^p. ad Eust. 27.
A fertilitate, qua locus ille aliis praestabat; from that great and notable
fruitfulness in which it excelled other places; and so it is well coupled with
Beth-lehem the house of Bread; a fruitful Land makes Houses of Bread: And most
deservedly was this place called (...), fruitful, especially if we look at that
fruit which sprang here from the Root of Jesse, David, Isa 11.1.
and Jesus the Son of David, the best fruit that ever the Earth bore. John 7.42.
Has not the Scripture said, That Christ comes of the seed of David, and out
of the Town of Beth-lehem where David was? It shall be said of Beth-lehem
Ephratah, that this and that man were born in her, Ps. 87.5.
and the Highest himself came out of her; excellent things are spoken of thee,
O City of God!

I cannot speak much of it now; only thus: Deuteronomy 12.5.
It was a near neighbor to Jerusalem, the place which God chose out of all the
tribes to put his name there, having that advantage which S. Paul speaks of,
that to them above many and among few others, To. 3 2. To. 9.4, 5.
were committed the oracles of God; to them pertained the adoption, and the
glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God and
the promises; of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all, God
blessed for ever, Amen. It was a City in whose palaces God was known for a
refuge: It was a City of Judah, and in Judah is God known, his name is great in
Israel. Here must Boaz do worthily, here especially, here if any where; such a
Theater is only for worthy actions. Do thou worthily in Ephratah.

Men and brethren! We live in Ephratah, a fruitful land, and our houses are
like Beth-lehem, houses of bread; The lines are fallen to us in pleasant
places, and we have a goodly heritage: The fountain of Jacob is upon a land of
corn, and milk, and honey, Deuteronomy. 33.28.
also our heavens drop down dew: God crowns our years successively with his
goodness, and his clouds drop fatness. And which is beyond all these, Ps. 65.11.
how are we warmed with the glorious and desirable days of the Son of man!
Does not man eat Angels food, and are we not dieted with the bread of heaven?
What a rich confluence of evangelical enjoyments have we lived under? Ps.
147.20.
He has not dealt so with every nation: He has fed us with the finest of all
the wheat, Ps. 81.16.
and satisfied us with the very honey out of the rock of goodness.

And now, O man, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to do
worthily? worthy of God, his Gospel, his goodness, the Ephratah, the Bethlehem
thou live in: Isa. 26.1^
Let not all this favor be showed thee, and yet thou not learn righteousness:
Let it not be charged upon thee, that in the land of uprightness thou still
dealest unjustly, and wilt not behold the majesty of the Lord. The cities
wherein most of the mighty works were done, Mat. 11.20, 21.
were upbraided, and no less then a woe will serve Chorazin and Bethsaida,
because Tire and Sidon, under such manifestations and visits from heaven, would
have repented long before in sackcloth and ashes. It was that which rendered the
rape of the Gibcathites more odious, Judge. 20.10.
because it was folly in Israel; they did evil in a good land. And it was the
emphatical goodness of Jeroboam's son, 1 King. 14.13.
that in him was found some good thing toward the Lord God of Israel, in the
house of Jeroboam; he was good in an ill house. Considering where we live,
should make us consult what we do. Places do notably circumstantiate actions;
remember Ephratah, and do worthily: Do thou worthily in Ephratah.

That for the second motive to doing worthily, the place where this great
person was resident, Ephratah: Do worthily in Ephratah.

3.
The third is taken from the name that is attendant on such a great person, in
so eminent a place, doing thus worthily; and that is here termed famous: And be
famous in Beth-lehem. Fac praedicetur nomen, make that thy name may be preached
and cried up, as Tremellius renders it: Proclaim thy name, as the Margin gives
it from the Hebrew: Habeas nomen celebre, so the Vulgar Latin; Have a great, a
renowned, a famous name. All speak one and the same thing; Be famous in
Beth-lehem.

A good name is a great blessing, and the guerdon of worthy actions: As the
works, so the worth of blessed men and women follow them. Mary Magdalen for her
Box of precious Ointment, Eccles. 7.1.
has a good name given her, which Solomon says is the better of the two; Mat.
26.13.
and wherever the Gospel is preached, that which she did is told for a
memorial of her. What an honor have the Romans got in one line of S. Paul's
Epistle to them, far above all that Histories write of them and their Ancestors
prowess; That their faith is spoken of throughout the whole world. To. 1.8.
Those Worthies whose heads are now crowned in heaven, have their names cried
up on earth; for, by faith they have obtained a good report, as it is said of
them, where they are fairly listed, Heb. 11. Memoria justi in benedictione; The
memory of the just is blessed, Pro. 10.7.
but the name of the wicked shall rot.

It is observed that God shows himself much in the disposal and ordering of
men's names: He deals with their names, as he affects their persons; so that his
love or his anger, blessing or punishment, are legible in names. Is God angry?
he will cut and curtail them, he will take them off by the halfs: Jeconiah shall be
but Coniah, and enough for him too, without he were better; Jer. 22.24.
Though Coniah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah were the signet upon my right
hand, yet would I pluck him thence. Is God pleased? sometimes he will add and
enlarge: Genesis 17.5.
Thy name shall no more be called Abram, but Abraham. Sometimes he will alter and
change: Thy name shall no more be called Jacob, Genesis 32.28.
but Israel; for as a Prince have thou power with God and with man, and have
prevailed. Has God a mind to punish? Deuteronomy. 9.14.
he will expunge and erase: Let me alone that I may destroy them and blot out
their name from under heaven. Isa. 56.5.
Does he intend to bless? Then, I will give them a name better then of sons and
of daughters; I will give them an everlasting name, which shall not be cut off.

God is ever ready to honor them that have honored him, 1 Samuel 2 30 Ps. 91.14
to set them on high that have known his name: As their lives and deaths, so
their names and memories are precious in his sight; they shall not be
forgotten, nor out of the mind of God, when they are dead men and out of the
sight of the world. It was a very passionate expression, and spoke abundance of
love, that of Ruth to Naomi: Where thou die will I die, chapter 1.17.
and there will I be buried. But the love or God is wonderful, passing the love
of women: 2 Samuel 1.26.
He says, Where thou die, my care shall not die, and there will I not bury my
loving kindness; mine eyes shall be upon thee in the chambers of darkness, my
faithfulness shall be seen in the grave; I Will value thy very dust, and set a
price upon thy scattered atoms; I Will embalm thy name for after-ages, and send
it down to posterity with a relish; Eccl. 49.1.
it shall be sweet as honey in all mouths, and as music at a banquet of wine.

A word of inference; And I Will promise you to have done with the Text, and be
as good as my word too.

If fame be the reward of worth, and it be such an honor to have a name on
earth, Lu. 10.20.
what is it to have our names written in heaven? If it be such a happiness to
have a deserved good name written upon a tombstone for others to read, what is
it to have the white stone given, and in the stone a new name written, Rev.
2.17.
which no man knows saving he that receives it? If it be such a blessing to
have our names up, when we are no more seen; what will it be to see the face of
God, and have his name written in our foreheads? Rev. 22.4.
Such honor have all his Saints.

Men and Brethren, Do you consult your fames? Would you have a name? Not any
name, not such an one as Jeroboam's which is seldom met without that sad clog
hanging at it, that made Israel to sin? Not an empty, aerie, frothy name, such
as those Ranters at the building of Babel aimed at, Genesis 11.4.
Let us make us a name? Not such a name as Absalom designed, of whom it is
said, Erexerat sibi titulum, 2 Samuel 18.18.
He reared himself a pillar; some Pyramid, some Monument with an inscription,
more title then truth, to speak more for him then he deserved: And therefore
God made his Ambition as issueless as his body, and disposed of him under a
rude heap of stones, as fittest for him whose name was rotten before his
carcass? Not a name to be tossed up and down, and talked of in the world, which
is of no advantage: Vae tibi Aristoteles, laudaris ubi non es, damnaris ubi es;
It is miserable happiness to be commended where a man is not, and to be
condemned where he is. But would you be famous in Beth-lehem? Have a name with
God and good men? A name like Demetrius, 3 John 12.
who had a good report of all men, and of the truth it self? A name enrolled in
the Book oflife, which may tread on the grave of History, Habent sua fata
sepulchra.
bury Monuments, outlive the funerals of the world, see Time laid in the dust,
and stand up with Eternity? Would you attain to that good name which is rather
to be chosen then great riches? Pro. 22.1. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Rev. 3.12.
The way to it is by worth: Fight a good fight, finish your course, keep the
faith, and take the crown: Overcome and be a pillar in the temple of God, and
have the name of God, and the name of the city of God, and the new name written
upon you.

Set the spur of glory to your side; To. 27.
by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for honor, and glory, and
immortality: Dan. 12.3.
Be wise and shine as the brightness of the Firmament, work righteousness and
shine as the Stars for ever and ever: Make Ephratah witness of your worth, and
Beth-lehem shall record your fame.

Do thou worthily in Ephratah, and be famous in Beth-lehem.
I Have done with the Text; and now there'll need but little to bring it and
the Occasion together. The persons, Actions, Fame, all run so true a parallel,
every one is by this time ready to prevent me in the application.

First then, for that eminent Person whose Obits we this day solemnise: He was
Boaz, of ancient and very honorable descent; it would lead us up to the further
end of our English antiquities, to follow his Name to the rise of it. And no
small happiness it is for a people to have such in place; if King Solomon's
vast knowledge and full grown experience had taught him what happiness is:
Happy art thou, Eccl. 10.17.
O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles. Such Progenitors being often, not
always, blessed in suitable productions: -- Nec imbellem feroces
Progenerant aquilae columbam.


Then for the Place, you may read it in his Escucheons; if you look at them,
you may find there both Ephratah and Beth-lehem. Behold the Garbs, Guil. Dis.
of Heral. p. 151.
the Sheaves, and they signify plenty or abundance, that their first Bearer
did deserve well for his hospitality; there you have Ephratah, Fruitfulness.
Idem p. 77.
Look at the Cheveron, and there the Heralds show us the representation of a
House in the roof or rafters of it; there is Beth-lehem, a house of bread, a
plentiful house; and such was his, I need not go out of the Congregation for
witnesses of it. So that he which looks on his Escucheons, may see another
interpretation of Joseph's dream: Genesis 37.7.
Lo his sheaf arose and stood upright, and behold the sheaves that stood round
about it did obeisance to his sheaf.

And if you say, these are to be reckoned among the -- Quae non fecimus ipsi,
those Honors which came to him, rather then he to them: Let us go on to the
parts of the Text, and come to the Agendum, the something to be done; and there
you shall find him nobly active and doing his part. He was much for action; his
hand ever kept pace with, and for the most part outwent his tongue.

He was not practiced in false Courtship, and perfectly hated that foolish
ostentation which our Savior charge upon the Pharisees, Mat. 23.3.
They say and do not. He would do as much, as others think enough to say; And
it was his grave and sober manner, rather to do a favor then profess it. He
showed his faith by his works; Jam. 2.18. 1 John 3.18. Joh. 13.17.
and loved not in word, nor in tongue, but in deed and in truth: Reckoning of
that only as happiness, to know the things of God and to do them.

Next for the rule of doing, it was that of the Text; He did worthily; take the
word in what signification you please.

First he did decently, things like himself. We may say of his actions, as Zeba
and Zalmunna of the brethren of Gideon; Judge. 8.18.
As he was, so were they, each one resembled the children of a Prince. You
might see what he was, by what he did; every action spoke it self the child of
honor: He hated any thing that looked like unworthiness; And though he was very
humble, yet he knew how to be a man and no worm, as well as when to be a worm
and no man: He knew when to lay his Honor in the dust, and when to no dust lie
upon his Honor: He could tell when it was not seasonable nor handsome for his
Honor to stoop; of which some instance might be given, but the time will not
bear it.

Next, He did deservingly, meriting much and many ways: And though we cannot
say of him as of the Centurion, He loved our Nation and has built us a
Synagogue; Lu. 7 5.
yet he loved this part of our Nation, and to witness it, declared, not long
before his death, his intentions to repair and keep against the assaults of
time, our Synagogue, I mean that elegant structure of the Cathedral at Lincoln,
(as sometime his Grandfather, when Lord President of the North, interceded for
the Conventual Church of Rippon.) And this I may say was done, because purposed
by him: For so God tells David upon his design for building the Temple; 1 King.
8.18.
Whereas it was in thine heart to build an house unto my name, thou did well
that it was in thine heart. This is a choice piece of desert, I wish it may
have some followers, that such a purpose may not die and go to the dust with
him.

Then, He did exemplarily: His whole life was a Copy of Virtue fairly written
over with few, very few blots. He was one of those whom Tully calls loquentes
leges, speaking Laws, unprinted Statutes, in whom men might read their duties,
as well as hear them from him. He knew what great evils evil great ones are;
that they have many followers, go they whither they will, and seldom go to hell
alone: -- Tutum est peccare authoribus illis. And therefore he was a practical
Comment upon that (...) of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.15.
See that you walk circumspectly, or exactly. Examples should be exact, and so
was he. But more of this by and by.

He did excellently too: His actions were (...) right by the rule, his dealings
eaven and square: Great was his integrity, appearing in all parts both of
commutative and distributive justice. Those who dealt with him, know his
commutative; and those who had been ill dealt with but for him, may be thankful
witnesses of his distributive justice. I could benight my Auditory with a
discourse of this subject; but, I must contract. He was a Worthy, I will not
assign him his place, let impartial posterity decide it, whether among thirty,
or among three.

And now for that Exemplarity, in which I shall engage all my following
discourse; not as if I were such a slave to the curse of the Council of Trent,
that I dare not but prefer the Vulgar Latin (though but a translation) before
the Original, but making now for my purpose, I shall readily follow it, and
speak of some of those many virtues wherein the deceased Lord was very
exemplary. Of some, I say; for I do not, I dare not undertake to give you in a
perfect List of his numerous excellencies: As well might the Spies who went to
search the land, Number. 13.
engage to bring all the land upon their shoulders, and lay it down before them
that sent them: It will be enough; and as much as the declining day will allow,
v. 23.
to let you see some Pomegranates, some Bunches of grapes, and some of the
Figs; they will give you a taste, and make you some discoveries; by their fruits
you shall know them: Mat. 7.16.
Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? You may ghess at the
gardens of the Hesperides, when you see some of the golden apples which there
grew.

And here I might speak of him in his several capacities, Lord, Landlord,
Husband, Father, Friend: In which he has not miscarriages to bewail like him
that cried out, Omnia fui, nihil profui; I was every thing, and did nothing!
For he made every station an advantage to do good by; All his Relations were as
so many cuts and channels for his goodness to run and flow in. But this would
lay more load upon them that groan under the burden of their loss, and give
them more gashes whose wounds are deep enough already; it may suffice to have
named it.

We shall go on; beginning first as he began every day, with his Devotions. God
was next his heart, he gave him his morning-thoughts, yea and his evening too:
Ps. 55.17.
Evening, morning, and at noon did he pray; four times a day, twice in his
family, and twice in his closet, was his course, to which he was faithfully
constant, say they that were near him. God was first and last in his mind and
meditations: Te veniente die, te decedente canebam. He entered, and ended every
day with him: His honor neither made him so high, but he could bow down, nor so
stiff but he would worship and kneel before the Lord his Maker. Ps. 95.6.
Nothing on Earth could make him neglect sending to Heaven; a sign and evidence
that he had great concerns, where he held such daily intelligence: No question
but he had a Bank of Glory going on, which made him send and seek so often, so
earnestly after it; his treasure was in Heaven, and his heart was there also.

Another excellency which will come in as a good second to this, was his
Constancy to the truths of Religion; the more commendable, because in such
bogling and starting times: So that it may be said of him as of Trajan, He was
Melior pejori aevo, Good, and the better for being so in a worse age. He was
fixed in flitting times; in lubrica aetate, that is S. Hierom's word. And he
stood his ground in a time of universal apostacy and revolts: He was no
miscellaneous Samaritan, no temporising Any thing, Every thing, No thing: He
was not Nobilis and Mobilis, like the Courtiers of the Heathen Tyrants at the
first entry of Christianity into this Nation, who measured out their Profession
by the Sword, liking the longest always best, and being Christian or Pagan,
according to the humor of the Conqueror. Naaman is for the God of Israel, but
he must have a toleration for the house of Rimmon. Great ones commonly move as
(they say) the Planets do, they will have their Epicycles. It Is Constancy
commends the deceased Lord: It Is choice fruit that keeps sound at the core in a
rotten age. And I might tell you, as he was stayed in himself, so he was a stay
to others: I dare not say as of Athanasius, that the Church leaned on him in
her persecution; but I may say, that he was a refuge from the storm; Isa. 25.4.
Bless God for this Lord, O house of Aaron! let the house of Levi say that he
was good! And I Will say no more of this.

I know not where to be next, I have such choice. His Wisdom; let us look at
that a while. To this he had a good title, whether we look at it as Science, or
Prudence. It was great in him, but not loud: Deep streams slide away in
silence, whereas shallow rills babble in their passage, and cannot roll down
their channels without a noise. He was very reserved, and no wonder if so much
treasure was under a lock, of which he kept the key himself; and when he did
open it, it was to good purpose, so that when the ear heard him, it blessed
him. Job 29.11.
By this wisdom of his I do not mean a crafty cunning, which prostrates and
lays down honor, and honesty, and conscience, and religion and all to tread on,
and climbs up to greatness by any steps; But that gracious gift which is (...)
from above, Ja. 3.17.
and is pure and peaceable, and gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of
mercy and good works, without partiality, without hypocrisy. For which he has
a place among those the Son of Sirach speaks of, The people will tell of their
wisdom, Ecclus. 44.15.
and the congregation will show forth their praise.

As a branch of this Prudence, I may speak of his Providence, not for this life
only (which was discreet and commendable) but chiefly for that which is to
come; knowing he could not be happy on this side glory: Job 14.14. 2 Timothy 4.6.
Therefore did he wait for his change, and the time of his departure, which he
looked on as at hand, and foresaw at some distance, and laid in for it. Parum
viae, multum viatici: When he had but a little way to go, he made great
provision for it. And though he did build, Ps. 49.11.
it was not with those inward thoughts that his house should continue for ever,
and his dewlling place to all generations. He was well acquainted with that
observation, That great Builders are seldom long Possessors: And therefore
carried on a Building for Heaven and Earth both together; and did so little
rely on this foundation in the dust, as that he was still careful to lay up in
store for himself a good foundation against the time to come, 1 Timothy 6.19.
that he might lay hold on eternal life.

Another grace, and another evidence of his wisdom, was his Meekness: So runs
the Apostles rule; Ja. 3.13.
Who is a wise man, and endued with knowledge among you? let him show out of a
good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom. He showed it, showed it
notably, showed it always. That which would have raised a storm in some
breasts, would not stir in his; Seneca.
Inferiora fulminant. He was calm and clear like the upper region of the air,
whilst all tempests and blustrings are below. I am persuaded he had outlearn'd
most that lived since our Savior gave out that lesson, Learn of me, Mat. 11.29.
for I am meek and lowly in heart; And now takes part in the annexed promise,
You shall find rest unto your souls.

We must not overlook that low, but high-prized grace of Humility: He was
eminent in it; this was his schola and scala coeli, a school to teach, a scale
to reach heaven. He was an high Star, and appeared little; yet it was not in
the eyes of others, but in his own, which made him great in God's: Isa. 57.15.
I dwell with him that is of an humble spirit. This lying low made him a rich
soil for graces to grow in, fruitful in every good work. Col. 1.10.
The valleys stand so thick with corn, Psalm. 65.14.
they laugh and sing: So have you seen a fruitful Tree with its laden boughs
stooping to the earth, when some proud aspiring Plants have run up all into
branches, and exalted their fruitless tops.

Nor may we pass his remarkable Temperance and Sobriety, which he both loved in
himself, and looked after in his family. Nor did this proceed from any weakness
of body, but goodness of mind; It was not the choice of an infirm constitution,
but of a virtuous inclination. And the more commendable it is, because in these
days, wherein luxury and riot have so far obtained, that Entertainments are
never thought well enough, except they be wet enough; and Drunkenness is deemed
the most fashionable and familiar treatment. And the greater the virtue still,
because in a Great person; Drink being become a Flood, which like the great
Deluge too often tops the Mountains: Genesis 9.21. 1 Sa. 25.11, and 36.
So easy it is even for Noah to plant a Vineyard and be drunk; and rich Nabal,
that wretched Churl, who could not afford David a little water, to overcharge
himself with wine. A rare thing it is, to swim in Plenty, and not swallow down
too much of it.

His Charity would speak for it self, should I hold my tongue: Not that the
Hypocrites trumpet gave notice of it, Mat. 6.2.
(For I have reason to think, much of it ran invisible, like the Mola and Anas.
Came. Br. p. 296.
Rivers our Antiquary tells us of, which spend their streams in part under
ground;) but because he left such tokens of it in all places where he came,
pouring it out rather then giving it; He was God's Almoner with his own estate.
He had (...), Col. 3.12.
that word which has, and yet will have no singular number, bowels of mercies.
Isa. 58. 10
He would draw out his own soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul.
Let me borrow an expression or two from Job, they will fit us as well as if they
had been made on purpose. Job 31.17.
He would not eat his morsels alone, the stranger and fatherless must eat
thereof: v. 19.
He would not see any perish for want of clothing, or the poor without
covering: v. 20.
Many loins blessed him and were warmed with the fleece of his sheep: He was
eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, chapter 29.15.
and a father to the poor: The blessing of him that was ready to perish came
upon him, v. 13.
and he caused the widows heart to sing for joy. I Will say no more of this, many
mouths are full of it, this place is a standing Monument of his Charity: He
has dispersed, Ps. 112.9.
he has given to the poor, his righteousness endures for ever, his horn shall
be exalted with honor.

I fear to have spent your Patience, before I speak of his: But a word of it
therefore. This grace was in him (like the rest, which makes them thus
concatenated) in gradu heroico, in an high and invincible measure, not to be
broken, nor baffled by any assaults. As he was not Tumidus agendo, so neither
was he Timidus patiendo; He did nothing proudly, Heb. 10.32.
he suffered nothing poorly. Many a great fight of affliction (as the Apostle
phraseth it) did he endure, endure without shrinking, or recoiling; one whereof
had been charge enough for ordinary pieces of Mortality. Indeed, his whole life
was a continued act of Patience, under a succession of several Sicknesses and
Infirmities; having (as it is said of overworne Students) Bonam Conscientiam,
and malam Valetudinem, a clear Conscience, and a crazie Carcass. He had need of
patience, v. 36.
and he had patience for his need; so much, that you have seldom heard of the
like; it being observed (as I am credibly informed) he was rarely, or never
heard to groan under whole loads of pressures that lay upon him. God had laid
in much of this grace, where he intended it should be much laid out; He had
given him a stock of it suitable to those great expenses he purposed to put him
to, and his stock held out like the Israelites clothes, Deuteronomy. 29.5.
it wore not out, it waxed not old on this side Canaan. No more of his
patience, lest I trouble yours.

Perseverance shall close all: That Is the last, but not the least grace; more
then a grace, a complication of many, the complement and perfection of all
grace. It is this that lays hands on the (...): Other graces run in the
celestial course, but this seiseth the prise, and sets the crown on the
Conqueror's head. Perseverance is grace scrued up to the highest pin; grace at
stretch, and holding out to the last. Such was his, enduring to the end, Mat.
24.13.
free from all suspicion of despondencie, notwithstanding those many batteries
and breaches made upon his walls of earth. All this was but Tundere vasculum
Anaxarchi, non Anaxarchum: This knocked but at the case, the casket, the
carcass; the jewel was safe, his soul prospered and did well: He possessed his
soul in patience, Luke 21.19.
till his soul was dispossessed of his body, and taken up into the prepared
mansions, Joh. 14.2.
there to rest within the embraces of the Everlasting arms: Deuteronomy. 33.27. Rev.
2.10.
He was faithful to the death, and has now changed his Coronet for a Crown of
life.

It remains then that we contribute our dues to his fame. Let us decently
commit to the Earth, what Heaven has left of him: Eccle. 44.14.
Let his Body rest in peace, and let his Name live for evermore! Let his
Virtues survive in his Son, his Memory in the hearts and mouths of his Country!
And when we can neither keep it nor our selves up any longer, let us make it
over to succession, and leave it for the children which shall be born, that the
Generations to come may know how good, how great he was! He has done worthily
in Ephratah, let him be for ever famous in Beth-lehem!

FINIS.

