A Defense and Justification OF Ministers Maintenance BY TITHES. AND OF
Infant Baptism, Humane Learning, and the Sword of the Magistrate; Which some
ANABAPTISTS falsely call Four Sandy Pillars, and Popish Foundations of our
Ministry and Churches.

In which Tithes are proved to be due by Divine Right to the Ministers of the
Gospel. All common Objections Answered, and diverse cases of Conscience humbly
proposed: with a light to clear them.

In a REPLY to a Paper sent by some Anabaptists to IMMANUEL BOURNE, Late Pastor
of the Church in Asheover in the County of Derby: now Preacher to the
Congregation at Waltham in the County of Leicester.

With a short ANSWER to Anthony Peirson's Great Case of Tithes, etc.

Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? Romans 2.22. LONDON,
Printed for John Allen, at the Rising Sun in Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

To the Supreme Authority of this NATION, The PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth
of ENGLAND, By the special Providence of God restored to their TRUST.
Christian Senators,
IT is now above twelve years since I Dedicated a larger Treatise to this
Honorable Parliament, then full of pious Members, and full of the Favor of
God, and high esteem in the World; the most wise and powerful Lord of Hosts,
the God of all the Armies in the earth, having made you hopeful Conquerors over
the Adverse Party, and given you power to establish the Nations upon the sure
Foundation of Truth and Righteousness, and not only to confirm the settled
Maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel by Tithes, according to the Laws of
the most wise God, and the most ancient Law of this Nation, but to have
increased their Maintenance in those places, where by that abominable Sacriledg
of Antichrist, the Tithes were appropriated to Abbeys, Monasteries, and such
superstitious uses: and after most unjustly detained from the right Owners, the
particular Parish-Ministers, by King Henry the Eighth, and the Parliament that
then consented to him for their alienation; by occasion of which; in diverse
thousands of Parishes, (even since the time of Reformation) poor ignorant, yea
scandalous Ministers have been settled and continued, to the dishonor of God,
our Religion, and succeeding Parliaments, A light from Christ, leading unto
Christ, Printed for John Wright, 1646.
multitudes of Souls made ready to perish for lack of Knowledge (as they are in
too many places at these days.) In the Epistle Dedicatory of that Book of mine
presented unto you, I did complain of this miserable ignorance as a cause that
such a multitude of poor blind Souls did run to the Kings Standard set up at
Nottingham, and join with that Army against the Parliament, which was a sad
occasion the King did not return, Humble Petition presented at York.
although he was most humbly Petitioned by multitudes of his most faithful
Subjects from several Counties in this Nation, (which if it had been the will
of God he had done) might by Gods b^essing have prevented those Rivers of Blood
which have been shead in these intestine Wars: and for my own particular, have
saved me from that most barbarous plundering of my house and Goods, in which I
lost (with what is still owing me upon the Public Faith and in other respects)
above five hundred pounds, which I hoped I should have received before this,
having the Engagement of England and Scotland in print, that those who were
plundered and lost their Estates for their faithfulness to the Parliament, and
the Cause of God and the Nation then undertaken, and continued faithful, should
have their Estates restored, and be recompensed to the full, or words to that
effect; but when the Parliament was Dissolved, I gave up my hopes as dead; yet
since God has raised you from the Dead again, and in his Providence brought
you to sit here to perfect the good work was begun, I will not despair, but
both I my self and others may find that Promise of both Nations made good to
our comforts in time. And yet Right Honorable, my Spirits have not been a
little troubled to hear and see a Generation of Seduced Souls, Quakers,
Anabaptists, and others, cry out so bitterly against the Godly, faithful
Ministers of Christ in the Nation, as all Antichristians, to be destroyed, and
their maintenance by Tithes to be taken away; Ye to see those inhumane, I am
sure most unchristian abuses are still offered to too many of us till this day.
I am afraid lest if the God of Heaven and Earth find it to be with England as
it was with Israel, when the God of their Fathers sent to them by his
Messengers rising up betimes, 2 Chro. 36, 15, 16.
and sending, because he had compassion on his People, and on his
dewlling place: they mocked his Messengers, and despised his words, and misused
his Prophets until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there
was no remedy: therefore he brought against them Foreign Enemies to their
destruction; the Lord pardon these our sins, and prevent those Judgments if it
be his will; Josh. 6.
and I fear if Achans sin of Sacrilege, the taking away of Gods reserved part
be found in England as it was in Israel, the punishment of Israel may befall us
also, that our Army, as theirs, should fly before our enemies, and then how sad
our condition may prove, none but God himself knows; to prevent this, to the
best of my power, I make bold most humbly to present this little Treatise to
your Honors, in which to the best of my understanding, Tithes are proved to be
Gods Reserved part, and due to the Ministers of the Gospel by Divine right; and
the unsetling of this ancient Right may prove (I fear) the removing of a house
built upon a Rock, and setting it upon the Sand, or a sandy Foundation, which
may prove the ruin of the House, and of those that inhabit it. Upon my
studying of this Question, had I found Tithes unlawful, or the Wages of
Unrighteousness, as my Adversary-Anabaptists in their written paper sent to me
did affirm, or Theft and Robbery as the Quakers; I hope the Lord would have
given me such a spirit of Contentment, that I should have chosen rather to have
begged my Bread from door to door (as old as I am, now almost Threescore and
Ten) rather than to have lived and dyed a Thief and a Robber, accursed of God
and Good men. But as worthy Luther professed when he contested against the
Popes Indulgencies, If any man can show me a more firm and better way of
Ministers maintenance, than by Tithes, which the Lord himself in his wisdom
found out to be the fittest. I shall lie down in the Dust, and when my
Conscience is satisfied, change my mind.

In the mean time not cease to pray the most Wise God to guide your Counsels,
and prosper you in all your just and lawful Endeavors, hoping of your
Protection and encouragement for my self, and the rest of my Brethren the
faithful Ministers of the Gospel, I most humbly Subscribe my self,

A most unworthy Servant, and Ambassador of the Lord Jesus, and your Honors
Servant in Christ, and for Christ, Immanuel Bourne.

TO ALL THE Reverend, Godly and Faithful Ministers and Ambassadors OF JESUS
CHRIST, in ENGLAND, Whether moderate Presbyterians, Independents, or of
different Judgments, The Blessings of Truth, Peace and Love, with oneness of
Spirit, and Protection in the Lord Jesus.
Reverend Fathers, and Brethren,
IT is a sacred and certain Truth, witnessed by the Spirit of God in holy
Scripture, and manifested in the various turnings of the wheels of Gods
Providence in all ages, that the Lord Jehovah, the Omnipotent, all-sufficient
and only wise God does and will order all things for his own eternal Glory, and
the everlasting happiness of his Church and Children, beloved in the Lord
Jesus. But yet the dispensations of God, and the footsteps of his infinite
wisdom are sometimes so obscure and dark, that our blind and weak eyes are not
able to see the cloud of his Gracious protection walking with us by day, nor
his pillar of fire to give us light in the night. So that a troubled and
trembling soul is sometimes amazed and constrained to cry out with that great
Apostle, Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!
how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! And
sometimes with the Prophet to reason the case with God, in a time of trouble,
fear, and danger; O Lord how long shall I cry and thou will not hear, even cry
out of violence and thou will not save? Why do thou show me iniquity, and
cause me to behold grievance, for spoiling and violence are before me, and
there are that raise up strife and contention. It is apparent that since the
fallen Angels left their first habitation; and by the subtilty of the Serpent,
tempted and overcame our first Parents, to break that first Covenant, and to
sin against God, and lose that happy estate wherein they were created, and
since God was pleased to publish the second Covenant in that Gospel-promise,
the seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head, that old Serpent the Devil
and Satan, and the seed of that Serpent, the wicked of the world, discovered at
full that enmity that is in them, against the seed of the woman, the servants
of the most high God, the sons and daughters of the King of Glory, in Christ
the Redeemer: The Lord has prosecuted his design according to his eternal
council, for the salvation of his people, and to this end, as he himself
preached the Gospel at first, and revealed his mind and will to our first
Parents in Paradise, so he constituted Christ his only begotten Son, to be the
Anointed, the eternal High Priest and Prophet and King of his Church: And this
Prophetical Office, as Christ did exercise and execute himself, sometimes
before, and sometimes since his coming in the flesh; so did he call and ordain
his holy Prophets and Apostles, part before, and part after his resurrection,
yea, after he ascended up on high, and led captivity captive, and gave gifts
unto men, he gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Pastors and
teachers, for the work of the Ministry, for the edification of the body of
Christ, until we all come in the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of
the Son of God, unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ; and has promised to be with them to the end of the world.
And for their comfortable maintenance and encouragement, although the great God
his Father, Lord of Heaven and earth, after he had created the world, and gave
to Adam and his posterity the Lordship and dominion over the creatures, (to
hold upon his and their good behavior) of the Lord himself their Creator, as
chief Lord of all; yet the Lord did never give all to Adam or to his posterity,
but has reserved a special part to himself (as he did the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil in the garden of Paradise) this special part to be
for his worship and service, and the maintenance of his Ministers and
Ambassadors to the end of the world, as is fully proved (to my understanding)
in this following Treatise. But as God has prosecuted his design to further
the salvation of his people, and maintenance of the Gospel, and
Gospel Ministry, so has the Devil and his Angels and servants had their design
to hinder the Lords great work by all subtle frauds, and open hostility to
their power, the wicked to this end have labored to get and keep in their
hands Gods reserved part: They robbed God of old, before the coming of Christ,
and they have robbed God since, and their plots and designs still are to rob
the Lord Christ and his faithful Godly Ministers and Ambassadors to the utmost
of their abilities, both in these Nations and other Parts, where the Gospel of
Christ is, or has been preached. It was the policy and practice of Julian that
Apostate Emperor, that he might more easily destroy the Gospel and
Gospel Ministry, to destroy and take away their Maintenance. And this certainly
is, and has been the design of those who are enemies of us the Godly and
Faithful Ministers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and under the name of
Antichristian Ministers, seek to destroy us, and our Maintenance, and persuade
many godly people against us, and labor to stir up the godly Magistrate, yea,
the Parliaments and powers of the Nation, to take away our Tithes, and to allow
us no settled Maintenance, but that we should live of the Charity and alms of
the people, that we might be starved as Antichristian Ministers (as some of
them have expressed themselves to me) although it is evident, none are more
zealous and laborious to bring down the Kingdom of Antichrist, and to set King
Jesus upon his Throne, than we are; not by blood, as some dream we would have
it, but by the powerful preaching of the Gospel of peace, and our winning of
souls to God; not by blood (I say) for this is, and has been the nature and
design and practice of Antichrist, that whore of Babylon to be drunk with the
blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus Christ fulfilling the Prophecy of our
Savior, that the time should come that whosoever (of the blind wicked world)
should kill his Ministers and Disciples, should think they did God good
service, and these things shall they do unto you (says Christ) because they
have not known the Father, nor yet me. This is that which diverse seduced souls
have lately discovered to be their desire and design; not only that the
faithful witnesses may prophecy in s^ckcloath, by taking away their
Maintenance, but be slain, lie dead, and unburied in the streets, to the
rejoicing of the wicked damnable world. But the Lord has wonderfully preserved
us to this day, blessed be his Name. The many Pamphlets lately written and
printed against Tithes, or any settled Maintenance to the Ministers of Christ,
and the Petitions delivered to many Parliaments, by that Generation of men
(poor deceived souls) confirm this to the full. But the Lord has yet put it
into the heart of the Parliament not to destroy, but to defend the Faithful and
Godly Ministers of the Gospel, and their just Maintenance, established both by
the Laws of God and the Land, for which let us praise God, and pray to the Lord
still, to be so present with them as to guide and rule their hearts, that our
wise Senators may rather establish and increase the maintenance of the Godly
and Faithful Ministers of Christ in the Nation, than take away or diminish any
part of it, for this will be not only for the honor of the Parliament, but for
the Glory of God and good of the Nation, whatsoever seduced Spirits would
persuade to the contrary; for whom let us pray as Christ did for his
Persecutors, Father forgive them, they know not what they do. And my beloved
Brethren, let us who are the Lords remembrancers, give God no rest, nor day,
nor night, till he establish his Gospel and Faithful Ministers and their just
maintenance, and by enabling us by the assistance of his blessed Spirit to
perform constantly our duties in our several places, that his and our Jerusalem
may be made a praise in the earth. But if our adversaries, and the adversaries
of the Gospel should prevail against us, and all should be taken away (though
they cannot take Christ away nor Heaven away,) Let us labor to live by Faith,
and depend upon God, who has provided for many of us, when we had lost all,
preserved our lives, when we were in eminent dangers, and will preserve us to
his Heavenly Kingdom. In the mean time, Honored and Reverend Brethren, let us
labor by wisdom and power from Christ, to fulfill our Ministry which we have
received from the Lord, to preach the Word in season and out of season, to
Catechize and instruct our people in the first Principles of the Oracles of
God, and this both publicly and from house to house, often to confer with
them, and to build them up, and confirm them in the knowledge of Christ, that
if it please God they may know the Lord, as the truth is in Jesus, that they
may walk as becomes the Gospel of Christ, and manifest the truth of their
Faith, by fruitfulness in all good works; that they and we may by our holy and
righteous lives, put to silence the malevolent spirits of all our adversaries,
and bring forth abundantly like trees of righteousness the planting of the
Lord, that God may be glorified. And for our selves (especially) let us by the
Grace of God, endeavor the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace; and
although our light be not equal in all respects, yet let it be far from us by
our divisions, to rent in pieces the seamlesse coat of our Lord and Savior,
but rather in love enlighten, and by our frequent communion strengthen one
another, that though they speak evil of us, as the wicked and deceived souls
have done of the Prophets and Apostles, yea of Christ himself, yet seeing our
holy lives, and faithful performance and discharge of our duties in our
Ministerial Office, they may be convinced, and glorify God in the day of
visitation, knowing that if we fight the good fight of Faith, and keep the
Faith, and be faithful to the death, there is laid up for us the Crown of
righteousness which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give us at that day,
and not to us only, but to all them that love the Lord Jesus, and wait for his
appearing. Which that we may persevere to do, and enjoy, is the most humble,
hearty and daily prayer of

London, June 18, 1659. Your most unworthy Brother and Fellow Laborer in the
work of Christ, Immanuel Bourne.

A Defense and Justification OF
Ministers Maintenance by Tithes, Humane Learning, Infant Baptism, and The
Sword of the Magistrate.
In a Reply to the Answer of some Anabaptists, or Antipedobaptists, Declaring
their Grounds of Separation.

For John Darker and Tobias Watson, and the Thirty Congregations of
Antipedobaptists; The blessing of Truth with freedom from Errors, and false
foundations, if it be the will of God in Christ Jesus.

FRIENDS,
FOr so I desire you may be in and for Christ, hoping better things of some of
you, and such as accompany salvation, although for the present too many of you
appear to be Adversaries, if not Enemies to the Truth of the Gospel, and to the
Godly faithful Ministers of Christ in England, and in other parts of the
Christian world.

Unto the Paper I sent ( November. 11. 1658.) unto one of you living within the
limits of the Town, and amongst the People to whom God in his Providence has
called me to preach the Gospel, I received your Answer in writing December. 8. in
one sheet of paper, with a Confession of thirty Congregations; and I conceive
you have consulted with your Church (as you esteem it) and other Congregations
of your opinions to give answer unto my Demands, and it was my desire you
should so do, that I might know your strongest Arguments or Grounds of your
Separation from our Reformed and Reforming Congregations; that if it be the
will of God, I might convince you (by the help of the Spirit of Truth) of the
weakness and error of your Grounds, and your eyes might be enlightened to see
you have been deceived, and now be per^waded to return and join with our
Reformed and Reforming Congregations, for your edification in the Truth of the
Gospel, and good of your Souls, which I pray for

And friends, I have read your Answer, and am sorrowful to see such pride of
spirit, self-conceit, and vain boasting, That your foundation-principles, of
the Church of God (as you esteem your selves) have Scripture proof, as clear as
the Sun at noon day, without the help of Consequences or Illustrations, with
such rash censurings, and uncharitable, unchristian expressions, telling me I
allege Scripture out of ignorance, or weakness, and that I am like the
Tempter, who brought Scripture against Christ, and that the old Romish
principle grows still in the hearts of many of us, to make Reason to be our
Rule, and cast away the Scriptures; And your comparing me to Popish D. Story,
in his plea against Philpot the Martyr. But whether your vain boasting be a
truth or falsehood, Thil. 1.27.
and whether your rash censurings and unchristian charge be as becomes the
Gospel of Christ, I leave to God, and your own better enlightened consciences to
judge; and the Christian Reader to consider.

Anabaptists Answ.
First (you say) You have received some lines of my writing, which I sent you
upon the Eleventh of November. and having weighed them in the balance of the
Sanctuary, you find them very light.

Mr. Bour^^ Reply.
To which I reply, Certainly you were mistaken, it was not the Balance of the
Sanctuary in which you weighed my lines, for God requires his people should
have just Balances, and just weights, Levit. 19 36. He would have no other
used in his Sanctuary; but this was some false Balance of your own, or you
borrowed it of some seduced Brother, who makes use of diverse weights and false
deceitful balla^c^s (used by too many) both which are abomination to the Lord,
Prove. 11.1. and 20.23. Hos. 12, 7. or otherwise you held the scales in a
quaking hand, or your eyes were grown so darkened by a prejudicate opinion that
you could not see which way the scale went, nor pass a right, but a rash
judgment upon my lines, or according to the flesh, which our Savior
reproves, as you may read Joh. 8.15.

And Friends, did you weigh your own lines in the Balance of the Sanctuary,
before you sent them to me? if you had, and had had spiritual eyes to see, and
right ordered judgments to discern, certainly you might have found them
wanting; yea, so light and weak of any true Scripture Proof, Ephesians. 4.20, 21.
that they can move none (who have learned Christ, and been taught by him as
the truth is in Jesus) to separate with you, or to refuse our Reformed and
Reforming Congregations (at least) to hear the Doctrine of the Gospel preached
by us, who are the godly, lawful and faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ.

But let both our lines and writings be weighed in the Balance of the
Sanctuary: My lines I sent to you, begin thus.

Mr. Bourns desire.
November 11. 1658. or M. 11. D. 11.

John Darker, yesterday I told you, that I had been diverse times with you to
have known your grounds of Separation from the public preaching of the Gospel
by the faithful and godly Ministers in our Congregations or public meeting
places. But you refused to join in reasoning your self, except I would join in
a public Disputation, which I did refuse.

The first Reason is, Because I have formerly disputed with those we call
Anabaptists, and with Nayler the Quaker, and have found I met with false
reports of what had passed; my Adversaries having many words without Reason,
have reasoned to no purpose but to confound the hearers, not to Christian
Edification as becomes Saints.

The Anabaptists Answer.
To which you answered, Now Sir, I pray you consider what you have said, if you
judge that those who you call (though falsely so styled) Anabaptists, to be
without Reason, why would you then reason with us in private? will a man in
common sense dispute with one that is without Reason? For man being in honor
and understands not, is like the beast that perishes, Psalm. 49.20.

Mr. Bourns Reply.
To which I reply first, For the fault you find with me for calling you
Anabaptists (though falsely so styled, as your ignorance writes) and it
seems thinks) had you but so much of that humane learning (which you
sentence to be a sandy pillar, and a popish foundation) as to understand a
little of the Greek, in which it pleased the Holy Ghost to have the New
Testament written by the holy men of God, To. 15.4. 2 Timothy 3.16 2 Pet. 1.2^.
for our learning, you might have learned the better to have understood the
name that is given you, Anabaptists. For those that have learned by man's
teaching, or their own industry, through the blessing of God, any measure of
skill in the Greek tongue may tell you, ^ (...) in compositione valet (...),
rursus, G. P. and Lex. and in N.T.
that the preposition (...) in Greek when it is in composition, it is as much
as rursus in Latin, which in English signifies agdin; and so an Anabaptist is
one that is baptized again: And have not you, or many of you been baptized
again, once in your infancy, and again in your men's estate? And so you are
deceived, and delude your Disciples to say you are falsely styled Anabaptists;
but bewail your ignorance that you had no more of humane Learning, that you
might have the more easily understood by the help of the holy Spirit that
Divine learning which is revealed in the holy Scripture written in the Greek
and the Hebrew tongue.

Anabaptists Answ.
Secondly, You say, If I judge you to be without reason, why would I reason
with you in private?My Reply is,

Mr. Bourns Reply.
That it was the desire of the holy Apostle Paul to his Christian
Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 3.1, 2. That they would pray for him and Silvanus, and
Timothy, not only that the word of the Lord might have free course and be
glorified, but, that they might be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men,
for all men have not faith: and truly that is my desire also, the rather,
because I have met with such unreasonable men already, and and have some ground
of suspicion I may meet with such again; for I believe there are such in the
world now, as well as there were in the Apostles days; and if all of your
Separation be not such, yet some of you may: There was one Judas amongst the
twelve Apostles, whom Christ calls Devil, Joh. 6.70.

Anabaptists Ans.
But why would I dispute with such in private, say you.

Mr. Bourne Reply.
First, My Reply is, That it was with you John Darker, with whom I would have
argued out of the holy Scripture in private, and for that end desired you would
call for a Bible, because I hoped if there was not that right spiritual Reason
in you to judge of spiritual things spiritually, yet you was capable of right
Reason, by the grace of G^d, and so by giving you spiritual reasons o^^ of the
Book of God, you might be convinced of your Error, and be brought by Gods
blessing to see the light of Truth revealed in the Scripture of Truth for your
edification.

And now you proceed and discover an uncharitable and unchristian spirit, A
defense of the Scriptures printed for John. Wright. 1650.
comparing me to Popish Dr. Story, as if I cast away the Scriptures, when I had
sent one of you my Defense of the Scriptures, in my Disputation with James
Nayler, which you approved of. And also my greater light from Christ, in which
I declare the holy Scriptures to be the most perfect Rule of Faith and Life: A
light from Christ leading to Christ; printed for John Wright 1646.
And in my paper I now sent you, I desired you would bring your Arguments out
of the holy Scriptures, therefore you could not charge me with taking away the
Scripture. And your finding fault with me and reverend Mr. Baxter, because we
bring Reason for proof, as if Scripture-Reason were unlawful, I pass over as
not worthy a larger Answer.

I gave you a second Reason, why I was unwilling of a public Disputation,
especially with such as you are; Because commonly in public Disputations weak
Believers are admitted, unable to discern the strength of Arguments, or mind of
the Holy Ghost in Scriptures alleged; and to receive such is contrary to the
Apostles direction, Romans 14.1. Him that is weak in the Faith receive, but not
to doubtful Disputations. Besides, there are several Disputations in print
already enough to satisfy. Yet if you John Darker would write your Arguments
drawn out of the holy Scriptures to prove what you affirmed yesterday (as I
apprehended you) That the godly preaching Ministers in England are all
Antichristian, and our Reformed and Reforming Churches, Babylon, and to be
departed from, and our preaching not to be heard, with your hand, and the hand
of your chief Teacher, I should, God willing, give you my Answer; And to this I
subscribed my name,

Immanuel B^urne.

For your wresting and misrepresenting my words, and opprobrious terms you give
me, and false consequences you put upon me, I have learned not to give reviling
speeches for reviling; But I may tell you, That you raise a false position like
a man of straw, and then you will father it on me, and fight against me for it,
when it is a Bastard of your own begetting: I pardon this also.

The Anabaptists Answer.
Then you proceed in a magesterial way, and with a high vapor. But Sir (say
you) we must let you understand that those foundation-Principles of the Church
of God (which we suppose you well know) would have been the matter of our
discourse, has Scripture as clear to prove them as the Sun at noon day,
without the help of your consequences or illustrations, (and you set down
diverse of your grounds or foundation-principles) as that God made the Heaven
and the earth, Genesis 1.1. That all men are sinners, Romans 3.23. That God made men
upright, Eccles. 7.29. That God sent his Son to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. The
Resurrection from the dead, Joh. 5.29.

Mr. Bourns Reply.
For Reply, These are plain Truths, and full proof without consequence; But
these Truths are not in controversy between us: But now you come to shuffle in
matters of controversy amongst the rest, like a man that mingles corrupt wares
among good, the more easily to sell them, and deceive the people; As it follows
in your Answer.

The Anabaptists Answer.
If I would dispute (say you) that the subjects of baptism are men and women,
and Repentance and Faith go before to fit them for it, it is clear without
dubiousness, Act. 8.12.37. and 2.38.

And you further tell me,

First,

Secondly,

Your third Reason or Ground of Separation is, Because (as your opinion is) our
Church stands upon these four sandy Pillars, or Popish foundations.

Four sandy Pillars
1. Humane Learning. 2. (Say you) Baptizing (as you call it) but Rantizing, or
rather cousening of Babes in their cradles; take away that (say you) and you
would have no Church. 3. Your Tithes, or forced Maintenance, the wages of
unrighteousness (say you) after which you all run astray, take away that, and
preach who will. 4. The Magistrates sword which the Priests have run to in many
Generations; take away that (say you) which has ever been the fundamental of
your livelihood, and then you would be in danger of starving amongst them whom
you call Christians.


Mr. Bour^^ Reply.
Now I see, friends, you have changed your method, for before your first ground
was admission of Infants to be members by baptism of our Churches; And in your
four sandy pillars, you put Humane Learning before Infant Baptism. I shall in
like manner take liberty to change your method, and for my Reply begin first
with that which is your third sandy Pillar or popish Foundation (as you may
please to term it) and this is our Tithes or forced maintenance which you call
the wages of unrighteousness; Because it is so much opposed and spoken against
by too many in these times, who are not only adversaries to Ministers
Maintenance by Tithes, but to the Ministry it self.

First let us look into the Book of God, even from the Creation; read Genes.
chapter 1. and 2. and you shall find, That howsoever the Lord the Creator of heaven
and earth, the chief Lord of all the world, did and has entrusted Adam and
Eve, and their sons and daughters, with the keeping and possession of inferior
creatures and dominion over them, and with the fruits of the earth and the
increase thereof; yet the Lord has reserved a twofold right yet in the
creature. First general over all the world and the kingdoms of the earth, and
goods therein, to dispose of them when, and where, and to whom he pleases.
This the Scripture witnesses at full: He gave the land of Canaan to the seed
of Abraham, Genesis 15.18. And Hanna tells us, that the Lord makes poor and
makes rich, he brings low and lifts up, 1 Samuel 27.8. And the Psalmist tells
us, The earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof, Psalm. 24.1. So the Psalmist
again brings in God himself speaking; All the beasts of the forest are mine,
and so are the cattle upon a thousand hills; and if I were hungry, I would not
tell thee, for the world is mine and the fullness thereof, as is expressed Psalm.
50.10, 12. And the word of the Lord to Jeremiah from the Lord: Thus shall ye
say, I have made the heaven and the earth, the man and the beast that are upon
the ground by my great power and by my outstretched arm, and have given it to
whomsoever it seemed meet unto me. And now I have given all these lands into
the hands of the king of Babylon my servant; as you may find recorded Jer.
27.5, 6. This Daniel declares in the interpretation of Nebuchadnezzar's dream
of the high tree in the midst of the earth which was decreed to be cut down:
The decree was for bringing down Nebuchadnezzar himself, till he did know that
the Most High rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he
will. Witness Daniel, chapter 4.25. Thus has God a general right over all the
world and all that is therein

2. Again, God has a special right in the creature, or part of the creatures
and the increase of them, which he reserved for his own proper use and service.
And this special right he has never given away, but has his special right
still, which he did and has reserved in all ages of the world for the outward
maintenance of his worship and service, and for encouragement and livelihood of
his laborers and servants whom he calls and imployeth in his own work, for
his own glory, and the good of his Church and children.

First the Scripture tells us, that although the Lord gave to our first parents
the creatures upon the earth, with every herb bearing seed, and the fruit of
the tree yielding fruit for meat, yet he reserved some part for himself for his
own service, according to his own will and pleasure. G^^. 12.16, 20.
Of every tree of the garden thou may eat freely, says God to Adam, but of
the tree of the knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat, for in the day
that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die. And wherefore did God forbid
Adam upon pain of death to eat of that tree of knowledge of good and evil?
Learned and holy Augustine brings in Adam reasoning with God in this manner: If
the tree be good, why may I not touch it? Si bona est, quare non tango? si
mala, quare in paradiso ^ Ideo in paradiso est quia bona est; sed nolo tangas,
quia obedien em te volo.
and if it it be evil, why is it in Paradise^? And he answers the question as
in Gods stead, It is therefore in Paradise, because it is good; but I will not
have thee to touch it, because I would have thee obedient. The Lord would have
Adam know, that he had reserved the Royalty to himself; and that although he
gave Adam an inheritance in the rest of the earth and the fruits thereof, to
hold to him and to his posterity upon their good behavior, yet he should hold
it of him as chief Lord; and to touch any part of what God had reserved for his
own service, was no less a sin then Sacrilege it self, and to be punished with
death: This was the penalty for the breach of that Divine law, as Adam and all
his posterity since have found by sad experience.

Again, this forbidden tree in Paradise was not all the part of the world which
God reserved for himself and his service: For if you read Genesis Gen 4.15, etc.
4. you shall find that not only that tree of Knowledge of good and evil
planted in Paradise, was Gods reserved part (or rather a part of it,) but part
of the increase of Corn and of Sheep also. This is witnessed in those
sacrifices and divine services of Cain and Abel: Cain brought of the fruit of
the ground, and Abel of the firstlings of his flock and the fat of them. And
without controversy, Col. 2.23.
this was not a will worship of their own invention (odious to God) but that
which was of Divine institution, and so of Divine authority; As to acknowledge
their homage to God the Sovereign Lord of all, so to typifie forth the
sacrifice of Christ that seed of the woman, Genesis 2.15. Joh. 1.29.
(which God had promised them should break the Serpents head) That Lamb of God
which takes away the sins of the world. Thus a part of Cain's Corn, fruit of
the ground by tillage, and of Abel's increase of his Sheep, was the Lords
portion reserved and due to the Lord by Divine right, for the maintenance of
that Divine service which God had appointed our first parents, (...) In fine
dierum, in the end of days. Genesis 41.1. A year of days.
and those their postetity. And this in process of time, or at the end of days,
as the Hebrew word may well be rendered; that is, at the end of the year when
they had gathered in the fruits of the earth.

3. The same custom or duty we find continued in after-ages, as well as in that
first age of the world Read Genesis 8. Genesis 8.20.
and you shall see that Noah, after the Flood, when the waters were abated from
off the earth, and Noah and his family with the rest of the creatures went
forth of the Ark, he remembers God had a part due to him, who had in mercy
saved all: Therefore he takes of every clean beast, and of every clean sowl,
and offered up a burnt-offering to the Lord, and the Lord smelled a sweet
savor; that is, the Lord accepted of Noah's sacrifice; which he would not have
done, if it had been a Will Worship, and not been his own institution; his own
Divine Law and appointment as a service due to him (by Divine right) who is
Lord of all; for Joh. 4.24. God is a Spirit, and he will be served in spirit
and truth, according to his own will, not the will of men.

Fourthly, The Sons of Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japhet and their posterities, by
whom the whole earth was peopled, they had so much light even of nature, or of
that Law of God given to our first Parents, and to their posterity before, and
continued after their fall, as to know that God the great Creator had a part of
the Creature and their increase due to him as a yearly chief Rent to he
disposed at his own pleasure for his Worship and Service, which even the
Gentiles of the Sons of Noah did pay at every years end. It was a custom among
the Gentiles, that the ancient Sacrifices and Assemblies to that end, were
after the gathering in of the Fruits at the years end; witness our learned
Countryman Ainsworth in Genesis 4. ex Arist. Ethic. lib. 8. Cum multis aliis,
etc. (as some ancient Writers do record.)

But you will say, Adams sons, and of Noah's sons seem to be God's, yet what is
this to the Tenth or Tithe which the Ministers of England do seek after every
one from his Parish where he lives and preaches to the people?

I answer, Noah Shem and his offspring, we find that long before the Levitical
Priesthood, or that Levy was born, that what was the special part or the Lords
portion, was declared by that great Patriark, and excellent Christian, Joh.
8.56.
faithful Abraham (called by the Apostle, the Father of the faithful, Romans
4.11. Genesis 14.18, 19, 20, 21.
or of all them that believe, Romans 4) and this is that memorable action of his
recorded Genesis 14.18. When Abraham came from smiting Chedor-Laomar, and the
Kings that were with him, Melchisedec, (...) Omnibus dedecima^ The Tenth of
all. Heb. 7.12.
who was a Priest of the most high God met him, and brought him bread and wine
and blessed him, etc. and he gave him the Tenth of all; the same is repeated by
the Apostle to the Hebrews chap. 7. This Melchisedec was King of Salem, Priest
of the most high God, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the Kings
and blessed him, to whom also Abraham gave the Tenth of all.

And why the Tenth part, Abraham give the Tenth part of all to Melchisedec?
Vnde enim homo re^um juarum decimam potius quam nonam vel octavam vel aliam
quamque partem offerendam esse scire potuisset, nisi a Deo ^octus suisset? From
the beginning men were taught by God to pay Tithes, as Hugo de Sancto victory
Erudii. Theol. de Saer. lib. 1. par. 12. cap. 4.


I answer, Certainly Abraham did know God's will, what was Gods part, either by
the Law of Nature, or the positive Law of God taught him from his Ancestors,
from the Patriarks, Noah or Shem or some other, or they or their Father had
received from Adam, and Adam from God, and therefore Abraham gave to
Melchisedec the Priest of the most high God, the Tenth part, and neither more
nor less; this was acceptable to God, and this was received of Melchisedec, as
the Lords portion no doubt, and not a will worship of Abraham.

Again, not only Abraham but Jacob, the Grandchild of Abraham, and Father of
Levi (before Levi was born, or that solemn gift of Tithes by the Lord to the
Tribe of Levi) he follows the steps of his Grandfather Abraham, and freely
declares what was and is the Lords part or portion for maintenance of his
Service, and Servants in their Ministerial Office. Genesis 28.12, 13, 14, etc.
This he does upon that vision or apparition of Christ to Jacob, in that Dream
of the Ladder, whose top did reach to Heaven, and the Angels of God ascending
and descending, Genesis 28. and Jehovah promising blessings to Jacob, upon which
when he awaked he was taken with an awful reverence of the Majesty of God and
his presence there, and makes that solemn vow to God, That the Lord should be
his God, that he would worship God in that place, and if God should bless him,
etc. and give him but bread to eat, and raiment to put on, of all that God
should give him, he should give the Tenth to God. This certainly was no rash
vow of Jacob, no Will Worship, nothing but what h^ did know to be his duty, and
that which God would accept: therefore he voweth, not the eight part, nor the
twelfth, nor the twentieth, but the Tenth; And of all that thou shall give me,
I will give the Tenth to thee. Thus you have two witnesses from the sons of
Noah in the posterity of Shem, where the true Religion was chiefly preserved,
and the Church planted, and these recorded in the written word of God, the
sacred Scriptures; and this before the Levitical Law.

But this is not all, for we find the same witnessed in the posterity of other
the sons of Noah; of which, though many of them lost the true knowledge of the
true God, and the right manner of giving all the Honor and Service to God, yet
they retained some parts of Worship due to God, which they gave to their false
Gods, when they were ignorant of the true God; amongst the rest, that spark of
light of the Law of Nature, or of the positive Law of God, which they had
taught them by their great Grandfather Noah, or some from him, to pay as a due,
the Tenth or Tithe to God.

Thus we read, Dydimus old Grammarian.
That it was a Greek custom to consecrate (...), the Tithes of their abundance
to the gods. And Pisistratus that Tyrant of Athens writes to Solon, De Lacr^^
in vita Solonis.
that all the Athenians do separte the Tithe of their fruits, not to be spent
for our use (says he) but for public sacrifice, Herodot. in Clio.
etc. And King Cyrus his Soldiers, by the advice of Craesus, were staid from
spoiling the Lydians City, That the Tithes might first be paid to Jupiter. And
as among the Greeks, Festus. Decima quaeque veteres Diis s^is offerebant
Macr^bius, out of Varro. Plut^ ^ucul
so among the Latins, the Ancients did use to offer all their ^ythes to the
gods. And another witnesses that the Ancients were wont to give the Tenth to
Hercules. And it was a common custom amongst the Romans. It is reported of
Lucullus, That he grew rich because he observed the use of paying Tithes to
Hercules. Zenoph^n witnesses that others used to pay Tithes to Apollo. Yea,
this custom was not only used amongst the Civil Nations of the Gentiles, Plin.
hist lib. 12. cap. 14.19.
but even amongst the ruder also. Pliny writing of the Sabaeans and
Aethiopians, says, That in the Spices, of which those Countries yield
abundance, the Merchants may not meddle with any before the Priests have laid
out the Tenth to their gods. (...), A.R. his view of all Religions.
I have read that in the old Arabians Religion, the custom of the Nabathaeans
was to pay Tithes of their Frankincense to their god Sabis, and the Priests are
not to take it by weight but by measure; and they are tied by their Dicipline
not to gather Cynamon till they first sacrifice, then they divide it with a
consecrated Spear, and assign to that God they worship his portion, and
afterward they take their own parts to themselves. Plut in the life of
Camillus.
And Plutarch relates of Camillus that Roman Dictator, and valiant Soldier
(who by some was called the Sword of Rome) when he went to War as Captain
General of the Roman Army against the famous City of the Vejans (which some
take to be the Venetians) before the Roman Emperors, Dr Heylins Geograph.
and diverse hundreds of years before the birth of Christ, he vowed that if he
won the City, he would offer the tenth part of the Spoils unto the gods. But
after the Victory, he did either forget his vow, or was unwilling to trouble
the City, or suffered the Soldiers to take the Spoils without reserving the
Tithes of all as he had vowed. But after, when upon some occasions the Romans
thought the Divine Powers were offended (though they did not know for what) and
that Camillus was discharged of his charge of being General: He acqainted the
Senators with his vow, upon which they made an order, That every man should
upon oath present the tenth part of all his gains in that War, that so it might
be given to the gods. But that being found difficult, they agreed, That a
massy cup of gold should be made and sent to the Temple of Apollo at Delphos
(whom they esteemed a chief amongst the gods) in lieu or exchange of the
Tithes: Yea, and the Ladies and rich women were so zealous to promote this
gift, that they gave their gold and jewels to make it more rich, and as they
thought more acceptable.

I should not have remembered these Religious and conscientious payments of
Tithes by these Heathens, these Gentiles, children of Japhet or Ham, but to
answer a proud peremptory Quaker, who called me Old Jew, because I justified
that it was lawful for the Ministers of Christ to take Tithes, and that they
were justifiable by the written Word of God; Jos. B.
when as he thought them to be only a Jewish Ceremony. But it is evident that
Tithes are not only Jewish, or paid by the Jews only. For ancient History
tells, that the Gentiles paid Tithes as well as the Jews. And although these
Histories are not to be received with a divine faith, as well as Scripture, yet
they are to be credited as well as our Chronicles, which testify there was a
King William the Conqueror, or King Henry the Eighth that pulled down or
dissolved the Abbeys, or a King Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, or Queen
Elizabeth, or as after ages may believe there was a King Charles, and a dismal
War in England, upon which has followed these sirange and wonderful changes we
have seen with our eyes. I might add more, but who are not satisfied, Dr.
Carleton Tithes examined and prov'^ to be due, by Diviue right.
I leave them to those learned men who have writ and proved the Divine right of
Tithes, and to other Histories which record the practices of Painims.

This that you have read may suffice to witness, that the payment of Tithes was
acknowledged a due to God amongst the Gentiles to that God they did know, Dr.
Tillesley his Animadvers. upon Seldens Hist. of Tithes. Dr. Slater, Mr. Prynn,
etc.
and this even by the Law or light of Nature, or Tradition of Gods Law
acknowledged by a common consent that Tithes were due to God (to that God they
did know and worship) and certainly this custom could not be so common amongst,
or in so many Nations, had there not been some Divine instinct from the Law of
Nature, or knowledge of some divine law from their forefathers, that Tithes
were due to God from all nations by a divine right for his worship and service,
as an owning of a Divine Power, Ps. 40.10, 11, 12.
who is chief Lord and owner of all we have. But of the tenth, God's own part,
he is owner of that in a special manner as his own reserved portion for his
worship and service, for this the Lord challenges in a special manner for his
own portion; witness God's servant Voses that great Prophet: All the Tithe of
the land, Lev. 27.30, 31.
of the seed of the land, and of the fruit of the tree, it is the Lords, Lev
27.30. He does not say it is the Priests, or the Levites, or the peoples, but
it is the Lords. And thus the Lord himself by the Prophet Malachi does many
hundred years afters challenge the Tithe as his own; And when the people did
not pay their Tithe as his due, the Lord calls them thieves and robbers, and
tells them they had robbed him: Will a man rob God? Mal. 3.8, 9.
yet ye have robbed me, says the Lord. But ye say, wherein have we robbed
thee? And he answers, In Tithes and Offerings. And he concludes v. 9. Ye are
cursed with a curse, for ye have robbed me even this whole nation. So that the
Tithes were the Lords, his own part and portion to be disposed of at his
pleasure; all the time of the Old Testament, from Adam to Moses, and from Moses
to Malachi, the Lord had a reserved part due to him as chief Lord of all.

But the Quakers and some of these Anabaptists will object, Priests and
Levites, either before, or since Christ? If Tithes be the Lords portion, what
have the Priests and Levites to do with it, or how come they to challenge any
right in them, or title to them?

The Answer is easy. Adam, and Cain, and Abel did; or to teach their families,
Genesis 18.18, 19. Genesis 20.7. Genesis 26.25
as faithful Abraham and the Patriarchs, and their firstborn did; as we read
Genesis 8.18, 19. Number. 8.17. Then the Lord needed not his part of his Tenths for
maintenance of his Priests and Levites, but what part he had was chiefly for
his sacrifices and services But when he took to him the Levites in stead of the
Firstborn, as Number 8.18. then you may read the Lords Deed of gift of his part
of the Tithes to Levi for an inheritance: Number. 18.20, 21.
Behold (says the Lord to Aaron) I am thy part and thy inheritance amongst the
children of Israel; and behold I have given the children of Israel all the
Tenth in Israel for an inheritance, for the service which they serve, even the
service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, Lev. 18.21. And thus you may see
what title the Levites and Ministers of God have to the Lords part, even by a
Deed of gift from the Lord himself: And this is a Deed or Great Charter
enrolled and recorded in sacred Scripture, the written Word of God himself.

I know the common Objection: We will grant (say they) that the Lord did give
part of the Tithe to Levi and his posterity that taught the people, as
Nehemiah: Nehem. 8:7, 8, 9.
But he did not give all to them; for part was to be eaten before the Lord, in
the place which the Lord did choose to put his name, there they the children of
Israel were to bring their tithes, and their sacrifices, and their choice vows,
and to eat them before the Lord with their families, they and their sons and
daughters, and menservants and maidservants, and Levite within their gates,
yea the poor stranger, and widow and fatherless, as we may read Deuteronomy. 12.11,
12. and Deuteronomy. 14.29. Therefore the Tithes were not all given to the Levites as
their portion, as is said by the Ministers that plead for Tithes.

For Answer: If you read, Vltra duas Decimas quas quotannis pendere jam jussi,
1. Alteram Levitis, 2. Alteram in sacras epulas, 3. Tertia tertio quoque anno
est conferenda, quae in egenos vicinos and pupillos distribuatur. Joseph.
Antiq. lib. 4. cap. 8.
you may find there was a threefold Tithe which the children of Israel did pay.
The first Tithe was the tenth of the whole increase, which was first tythed;
and this was the Levites portion, and might be eaten every where with their
household, because it is a reward unto them for their service; But first they
were to give the Heave Offering, the tithe of that tithe, to Aaron the
High Priest, as you may read Numb. 18.26. And this Tithe has a Morality in it,
as after we shall show.

Again, there was a second Tithe of the Nine parts that were tythed before: And
this Tithe might not be eaten in any place, as the first Tithe which was the
Levites portion might, but at Jerusalem. Thus you may read Deuteronomy. 14. Deuteronomy.
14.22, 23, etc.
Tything thou shall tithe (or thou shall truly tithe) all the increase of thy
seed which thy field brings forth, and thou shall eat before the Lord thy God
in the place he shall choose to place his name there; and if the place be too
far, thou shall turn it into money and buy what thy soul likes, and shall eat
there before the Lord thy God, and thou shall rejoice, thou and thy household,
and the Levite within thy gates. Ainsworth in Deu. 14.
This second Tithe might not be eaten any where but before the Lord in
Jerusalem, as the Hebrew Doctors affirm, and is evident from the text. This
might be Levitical, and to end with that Temple-worship.

Thirdly, besides these two Tithes, there was in the place or stead of this
second Tithe a third Tithe every third year, Amos 4.4. Tithes after three
years, etc.
which was for the Levite, the stranger, the fatherless and the widow within
their gates, as you may read Deuteronomy. 14.28, 29. This may cease in part as a
Tenth, but the substance is moral.

But the first Tithe was wholly for the Levites for their maintenance, as the
Lords wages or reward the Lord allows them for their service in the
Sanctuary, to continue in the Gospel, as after will appear. Yea, besides the
Tithes, the Lords portion, the Lord commanded that the Levites should have
their Cities to dwell in, Number. 35.3 4, 5, 6, etc.
and the suburbs of them shall be for their cattle and for their goods, and for
all their beasts; and the suburbs of the city shall reach from the wall of the
city two thousand cubits round about, Number 35. Rich conveniences, besides
extraordinaries, which were very many. This was the Levites lawful gain due
unto them by Divine right, by the law of God, and law of Nature, as a reward
for their labor in the Lords service. And this gain they might lawfully seek
after, every one for his gain from his quarter. And this they did, when their
just portion and maintenance was not brought them by the people. Nehem 13.10,
11, 12.
The Levites went every one to his field for his just gain or portion, as you
may find Neh. 13. Thus did the Levites seek every one for his gain from his
quarter to live of, his portion of land and tithes at his field, when the
second tithe was not brought into the treasury as it ought to have been. And
this was just and lawful for them to do, as the Ministers of Christ may
lawfully do at this day.

There is another Objection. Heb. 3.1, 2.
and is not only risen again and ascended into heaven and lives for evermore,
Rev. 1.18.
but makes intercession for us to God his Father, and the Levitical Priesthood
is ended: Now what evidence is there that God has any part or portion in men's
estates or the increases of them for himself, or to be disposed of as his own?
or that the Ministers of Christ have either Tithes or any Maintenance due unto
them by Divine right, since Christ? And then, how can it be lawful for them to
seek after every one his gain, as they do?

For answer: Adam, or to Noah's posterity, and that this was the Lords for his
service until Christ's coming in the flesh, Genesis 3.17, etc.
which I conceive none will deny that truly believes there is a God that
created the world, and gave part only, not all to Adam, or that truly believes
the Holy Scriptures to be the written word of God; answer the Anabaptists, who
call Tithes the wages of unrighteousness; or the Quakers who accuse the
Ministers of Christ as if they did seek for unlawful gain, the gain of Tithes,
of that which is neither God's nor theirs, every one for his gain from his
quarter or people.

I have searched the New Testament, and can find Tithes mentioned but only in
four places; and in none of these does Christ deny, or give away, or release
his right to his tenth part, or forbid his Minfsters to receive Tithes; yea
rather Tithes are approved by Christ, and his Apostles that speak of them.

First place. The first place is that of our Savior, Mat 23.23. where he
pronounces that woe against the Scribes and Pharisees for their hypocrisy:
Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites; for ye pay tithe of mint, and
annise, and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law,
judgment, mercy, and faith: These things ought ye to have done, and not to
leave the other undone. It is evident our Savior does not reprove them for
their payment of Tithes, but for their omission and neglect of the weightier
matters of the Law, judgment, mercy, and says. For he tells them plainly, it
was their duty to pay their tithes even of the smallest things, mint and
annise, and cummin; these things ought not to be left undone. Thus both the
payment of tithes even in the time of Christ, and Christ's approbation of
tithes, is witnessed at full in this place; No prohibition of tithes evidenced,
no cessation of tithes declared, no denying of Christ's Ministers to receive
tithes.

2. Again, a second place we find Tithes spoken of in the New Testament, is
that of our Savior recorded Luke 11.42: to the same effect with the former,
Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, for ye tithe Mint, and Rue, and all manner
of Herbs, and pass over judgment and the love of God; these ought ye to have
done, and not to leave the other undone. You see our Savior in this place also
approves of the payment of Tithes, not a word of prohibition or cessation, but
an approbation of the payment of Tithes, as the peoples duty in those days. Had
he declared that Tithes should no more be paid after his time, certainly it
would have pleased many a carnal hearer at that time, as the hopes of that
prohibition or cessation it is to be feared would please too many carnal
hearted, profane, or spiritually and Antichristianly deluded and seduced souls
in these days, who would remove both Ministers and their just Maintenance, if
it did lie within their power: But you have not a word from Christ of cessation
or taking away of Tithes from the Priests of those times, or from the Ministers
of the Gospel in succeeding ages.

3. The third place in which Tithes are spoken of, is that of the same
Evangelist, Luke 18.11, 12. Two men went out into the Temple to pray, the one a
Pharisee the other a publican, the Pharisee gloried in his performances, God, I
thank thee that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or
even as this publican; I fast twice in the week, and give Tithes of all that I
possess: The Publican humble in his own eyes, O God be merciful to me a sinner.
Our Savior does not condemn the Pharisee for his giving of his Tithes of all
he did possess; but for that he trusted in his own righteousness, as you may
see evidently manifest in the end why Christ did speak the Parable, Luke 18.9.
He spoke this Parable unto certain that trusted in themselves that they were
righteous, and despised others. So that you see here is not a word of our
Savior against Tithes, or the payment of Tithes in his time, nor a word of
prohibition that his Ministers in the New Testament should not receive Tithes;
yea, rather Christ approves the payment of Tithes, as part of the Pharisees
righteousness which they ought not to leave undone, and he tells his Disciples,
that exccept their righteousnss do exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, they cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven, Matthew: 5.20. Origin in
Mat.
From which Origin in his time prosseth the payment of Tithes in the Gospel as
a duty.

The fourth and last place in the New Testament where tithes are spoken of, is
that of the Apostle Heb. 7. in which Chapter tithes are mentioned six or seven
several times, and in none of these are Tithes condemned by the Spirit of God
in the Apostles, but rather approved and declared to continue even to the
worlds end, as Christ's right and special part for maintenance of his service,
who is a Priest not after the order of Aaron for a time, but a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedec.

To give you a clear light to see this truth, read the Chapter, and you shall
find that the Apostle in the three first verses rehearses the History
recorded in Genesis of Melchisedec and Abraham. First, Melchisedec described by
his Offices, 1. A King, or King of Salem, verse. 1. Interpreted first, King of
Righteousness; secondly, King of Salem, that is, King of Peace, verse. 1, 2. 2.
A Priest of the most high God, yea, made like the Son of God, abiding a Priest
continually, verse. 2. 3. He describes Melchisedec by his Actions. First, he
met Abraham as he returned from the slaughter of the Kings: Secondly, He
blessed him.

2. Again, he describes Abraham by his owning of Melchisedec as a Priest of
the most high God, giving him the tenth of all, as Gods portion, the Tithe due
to God; To whom Abraham gave the tenth part of all, verse. 2.

3. He sets forth the greatness of Melchisedec above the Patriark Abraham.
First, Because Abraham gave him the tenth: Now consider how great this man was,
to whom even the Fatriark Abrahm gave the tenth of the Spoils, De summitatibus
rerum, Of the tops of things.
verse. 4. So our Translators render it. But the Greek is (...), de praecipuis,
etc. the Greek signifies of the tops of the heaps, of the very best things
which may be, of other things as well as of the spoils. Secondly, because
Melchisedec blessed him, for the less is blessed of the greater, says the
Apostle, verse. 7.

4. The Apostle compares the Priesthood of Melchisedec and Aarons ^iesthood
together, and proves the superexcellency of Melchisedec's Priesthood above
Aaron's; and this by diverse arguments taken from Tithes, or their diverse
grounds, manner, and order of their taking of Tithes; as you may read in the
fifth and sixth verses, and the verses following. For first, verse. 5. he
affirms, that they that are of the sons of Levi, who receive the office of the
Priesthood, they have a commandment to receive Tithes of the people according
to the Law, or by virtue of that law; yea, of their brethren, though they came
out of the loins of Abraham. But verse the sixth, He, that is Melchisedec, Heb.
7.6.
whose descent is not counted from them, received Tithes of Abraham, great
Grandfather of Levi who had the Priestood, and blessed him that had the
promises: Therefore Melchisedec's Priesthood is far more excellent then the
Priesthood of Aaron or Levi, because he received Tithes not by virtue of the
Levitical Law, but by a higher and far more ancient right, even by a right from
God himself, as Gods High Priest, more ancient then Levi by far, as your may
read Genesis 14.20. Abraham, Great-Grandfather of Levi, paid Tithes to Melchisedec
the Priest of the most high God, four hundred years before Levi's Priesthood
was appointed.

Secondly, Heb. 7.8.
Verse the eighth, the Apostle proves this by another Argument: Heb. 7.8.
Here men that dye (says he) receive Tithes; that is, herein in the Priests of
Aaron and Levies order, they who are mortal receive Tithes; they and their
Priesthood are mortal, and so their receiving of Tithes it mortal, as dying
like themselves, and their order of Priesthood is dead and gone, and their
tything dead as Levies Priesthood ended; But here Melchisedec, that Priest of
the most high God, and his order receive tithes, of whom it is witnessed that
he lives: for verse 3. Melchisedec is said to have neither beginning of days,
nor end of life, and so he lives to receive tithes while the world lasted, not
in himself but in Christ, whom he typified, and who is a High Priest after the
order of Melchisedec, and so to receive Tithes as Melchisedec did, not from any
right from Levi or the Levitical Law, but in his own right from God his Father,
who made him heir of all, Heb. 1.2.

Thirdly, Melchisedec's Priesthood was more excellent then Aaron's or Levi's,
because Levi who received tithes, paid tithes in Abraham to Melchisedec, for he
was yet in the loins of his Father his Grandfather Abraham when Melchisedec met
him, as the Apostle declares, Heb. 7.9, 10.
Verse 9, 10. But we read not that Melchisedec paid tithes at all. It is
Christ's privilege to receive tithes, not to pay tithes; therefore
Melchisedec's and Christ's Priesthood is far more excellent then Aaron's or
Levi's Priesthood or their order.

Fourthly, The Apostle takes another Argument from the Law of Ordination of
each Priesthood, Melchisedec's and Aaron's, and so of Christ's and Aarons. This
verse. 15, 16, 17. Because Christ who arises another Priest after the order or
similtude of Melchisedec, he is made not after the Law of a carnal commandment,
the Levitical Law which is ended, Psa. 110.4.
but after the power of an endless life: Thou art a Priest for ever after the
order of Melceisedec. Therefore as Melchisedec did, so does and may Christ
receive tithes, for they are Gods part, and Christ's part as Heir to God his
Father, and so tithes are rightly, yea, by Divine right due to Christ.

And thus you see there is nothing in the New Testament in all these places in
which tithes are mentioned, by which God the Father may be proved to have given
away tithes from Christ his Son, the Lord of his Church and of his Servants in
the Ministry of the Gospel, nor in which Christ has released his right to
any, or disposed of it to any but to his Ministers for their labor in his
service in the Gospel. Therefore whatsoever the erring Anabaptists or Quakers
speak to the contrary to their seduced Disciples, Tithes are the Lords still,
and will be to the end of the world.

But some Quakers or Anabaptists it may be will object further, Tithes are the
Lord Christ's, yet what proof is there that they are the Ministers of Christ now
in the New Testament? Christ does not name Tithes with any command to give them
to his Ministers and Ambassadors: where find we any such thing in the New
Testament?

I answer,

For first, Mat. 10.7.8. Luke 10.1, 2, 3.4, etc.
If we read the manner of Christ's Commission, or sending those his Disciples to
preach the Gospel, as it is recorded Mat. 10. and Luke 10. Christ sends them
forth as laborers into his harvest, and he gives them a charge to take no
purse, nor scrip, nor silver, nor brass, no provisi, on for maintenance, but to
eat and drink what was set before them; and he gives the reason, For the
laborer is worthy of his meat, and worthy of his hire, or reward for his labor.
Now I demand the Question, Whose laborers are Christ Ministers? are they not
Christ's? and who should pay them their wages, or give reward or maintenance for
their labor in preaching and publishing the Gospel? is it not Christ? and out
of whose substance or estate should Christ pay his Workmen? is it not our of
his own? If not, why then did not Christ give them provision with them, when he
sent them out to preach the Gospel; but sends them to the people of the world
(many of which would not receive them) and wishes them to receive of the
people whither they came for their maintenance? Certainly it is not that Christ
would take any thing from others that was none of his own, to pay his workmen
with; but to teach us, that Christ had a part, a portion and inheritance in the
peoples hands, the Tithes, the Lords reserved part; and out of this his own
part Christ expected, his Disciples, his Preachers of the Gospel should be
maintained, and threatens those who should refuse to give his servants
entertainment; Luke 10.11.
If any receive you not (says Christ) shake off the dust of your feet against
them. And it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment,
then for that man, or that woman, or that city that refuses Christ's servants,
or denies them that part which the Lord Christ appoints them for their just
and due maintenance. Witness our Savior himself, Luke 10.10, 11.

2. Again, Romans 15.26, 27.
the Apostle Paul holds forth this as a duty, That to those that communicate
spiritual things, it is the peoples duty to communicate carnal things to them,
Romans 15.26. Thus between the Jews and the Gentile, and thus between the
Ministers of Christ and the people; for the reason is the same: The Ministers
communicate spiritual things in the preaching of the Gospel, therefore the
people are debrors to them, and it is their duty to communicate temporral or
carnal things, such as are for the comfortable livelihood of Christ's Ministers.
And if it be the peoples duty, then it is a debt they owe to Christ and to his
servants; and if they owe it to God and to Christ, then it is Gods, none of
theirs. And what is held forth to be Gods special part or portion for
maintenance of his service and servants, Mal. 3. Heb. 7.
but the tenth part, the Tithes, which were and are Gods and Christ's, as noted
before.

3. The same Apostle, A compatatis.
1 Cor. 9 proves by diverse arguments from diverse comparisons, that there is a
part due to Gods faithful Ministers, laborers for Christ in the Gospel. Thus
verse. 7. --

1. From a Soldier: 1 Timothy 6.12. 2 Timothy 23. Jud. v. 4. And why noticceive their
pay due from Christ for the same? 1 Cor. 3.6, 7.
From a Soldier: Who goes a warfare at any time at his own charges? Gods
Ministers are soldiers for Christ, to defend the truth of the Gospel against
all enemies, to contend for the faith once given to the Saints.

2. Again, Who planteth a vineyard and eats not of the fruit thereof? Gods
Ministers are planters; And wherefore should they not eat of the fruit for
their labor? feed on Gods part which he has reserved, the Tithes, for their
maintenance?

3. Act. 20, 28
Who feeds a flock and eats not of the milk of the flock? Gods Ministers
are Shepherds, and wherefore should they not eat of the milk of the Flock? why
should not Gods tenth be for their nourishment?

4. The like arguments taken from the husbandman and other laborers, and these
grounded upon the law, the law of God, nature or reason, verse. 8, 9. Say I
these things of my self, (says he) says not the law also the same? For it is
written in the law of Moses, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the ox that
treads out the corn. Den. 25.4 1 Cor. 3.9 10.
Does God take care for oxen, or says he it altogether for our sates? For our
sakes no doubt this is written, that he that ploweth should plow in hope, and
he that thresheth in hope should be partaker of his hope. Gods Ministers are
Gods husbandmen and laborers, Gods people are Gods husbandry: And good reason
Gods laborers should partake of the benefit of their labors, and receive Gods
part, the Tenth which the Lord has reserved for them.

The Apostle proceeds with other arguments from the equity of this duty, v. 11.
No man goes to war without wages etc. We are Ministers of Christ, fig^^ for
you, plant you, feed you, etc Ergo, It is your duty to pay us wages, fruit, and
m^lk. Sir James Sempill of Sacrilege since Gospel, p 53.
If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we reap your
carnal things? If we communicate to you the Gospel-gladtidings for the
nourishment of your souls, is it a great matter that we receive Gods part from
you for the nourishment of our bodies?

In a word, this he confirms by analogy and similitude with the maintenance of
the Priests and Levites before Christ. If the Priests and Levites who did
minister about holy things of the Temple, did by Gods appointment live of those
holy things, namely of Gods reserved part, the Tithes, and of Gods consecrated
part, As Levi lived by the Law, so must our Ministry by the Gospel: but Levi
lived of holythings by the law viz tithes, Ergo, so must Ministers live of them
in he Gospel. Sir J. Semp. p. 58

As Levi lived by the Law, so must we by the Gospel, but Ievi lived by a
certain maintenance by the Law, viz tithes, Ergo, so must we live by a certain
maintenance in the Gospel, and why not by tithes? Idem p. 56.


things dedicated and freely given to God by the people; then certainly the
Ministers of Christ who in like manner so preach the Gospel, should according
to Christ's appointment live of the Gospel, yea of Christ's reserved part, the
tenths of all, and of those free gifts where tithes are not sufficient for
their comfortable maintenance in and for their attendance upon the service of
Christ their Lord and Master.

Thus does the Apostle, though not name tithes, yet require as much in effect
as a duty from the people to communicate tithes, or an equal maintenance for
and to the Ministers of Christ: And this from the Lords ordinance for the
payment of that certain reward for their labor, Luke 10.1, 2, 3, etc.
which the Lord has appointed. And of this certain reward or wages, we read
not in the Scripture what part it is, but the Lords portion of tithes, which
was and is Gods part, as we prove before.

Fourthly, Gal. 6.6.
If you consider that command of the same Apostle Gal. 6.6. it will make this
yet more evident: Let him that is taught in the word, communicate to him that
teaches him, (...), in omnibus bonis, in all goods; Our translators render it,
in all good things. But if it be in all good things that he must make his
Teacher partaker of, yet whose must they be? And if they be his own good
things, and then of his own goods, why should the Apostle require this as a
duty, Let him that is instructed, make him that instructs him partaker of all
his goods? And why this as a duty to Christ's servants, if Christ has not a
right in them?

But what part must he make him partaker of?

Certainly the Quaker or Anabaptist will not say, of the sixth part, Agree that
Christ has a right to some part.
witness this Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.8. Let us agree then, that Christ has a right
to some part, whatsoever part the Lord himself in his infinite wisdom has set
down and determined as his own reserved part for the maintenance of his
Ministers, that is the most fit, the most equal, and just part to be paid and
given from him that is taught the Gospel of grace, to him that teaches him:
Genesis 14.8. chapter 28.
And this is the Tenth of all. This tenth Abraham paid to Melchisedec, and
Jacob vowed this tenth to God before the Levitical Priesthood was in the world.
This tenth part he gave to Levi for an inheritance for his service in the
Sanctuary during the life of his Priesthood, and this tenth is due to Christ,
who is a Priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedec; and good reason
the Ministers of Christ should partake of this tenth, and receive it for Christ
as Christ's part for their service, to the end of the world. Thus you see what
may be the sense of the Apostle, Let him that is instructed make him that
instructs him partaker of all goods; or in all good things of Christ in his
possession. For if Christ have no right, why should he pay his Servants wages
of that which he had no right unto? certainly he would not do it.

But some Quaker or Anabaptist or others, Mat 10. Luke. 10.
then wherefore did not Christ direct his Disciples, when he sent them abroad
to preach the Gospel, to require the tenth of the people? nor his Apostle Paul,
neither in that 1 Cor. 9. nor in this place Gal. 6.6. command and expressly
require their tithes as due to Christ and his Ministers by divine right, and to
be paid upon pain of damnation, Luke 10. Mal. 3.7, 8
it being no less sin then sacrilege to rob God or Christ of them, as is
taught by some godly men both in ancient and latter times.

I answer; Levites of Aaron's or Levi's order, as is evident in the Pharisees
practice, Luke 18.12. And if Christ had commanded or directed his Disciples to
demand Tithes, it would have occasioned a controversy not easy to be decided.
Besides, Levi's Priesthood was not then ended, and therefore Tithes were then
due to them, and so ought to be paid, as our Savior himself tells the
Pharisees, Matthew. 23.23. Therefore there was no reason Christ should then have
commanded his Disciples to demand Tithes. Again, If Tithes had been to have
ended with Levi's Priesthood, and never to have been received by any of the
Ministers of Christ, then we may demand on the contrary part, wherefore did not
Christ our Savior give an absolute prohibition to his Disciples, and to preach
it to all that should be converted to Christianity, that they ought never to
take any Tithes; but that Tithes should be declared to end with Levi's
Priesthood? and this would have ended the question, and settled a great deal of
quiet in the Church, if Christ had declared what maintenance his Ministers
should have instead of Tithes; for Christ was faithful in all his house, as
Moses, Hebr. 3.2. But Christ no where forbids Tithes, nor serteth any
maintenance instead of Tithes, and therefore Tithes certainly are to coninue
still by the mind of Christ, even to the end of the world; for would Christ
here provide no settled maintenance for his Ministers, who were sure to find
cold entertainment in the world?

For the Apostle, that he did not require Tithes of the Corinthians or
Galatians, nor claim them as due to Christ's Ministers by Divine right, nor
other Apostles, Peter, John, James or the rest; there are good and sufficient
grounds, reasons good enough to answer this Objection.

1. In those days in diverse places, and especially at Jerusalem, there was a
community of goods; the Belivers sold there Estates, and laid the money down at
the Apostles feet, Act. 4.32.34. and what need was there then of any claim of
Tithes, when all was at the dispose of the Ministers and Apostles of Christ, or
of the Church and Deacons, and they lived of the common Treasuries, what wisdom
had it then been to claim Tithes?

2. Eusebius. Ec. Hist lib. 4. cap. 25.
Again, then were times of persecution, as you may read Act. 11.19. and 12 1,
2. etc. and this persecution against the Church continued to after times, above
a hundred and fifty years after hrist, as Eusebius relates. Melito Bishop of
Sardis in his A pology to the Emperor writes, that the godly people were
grieved by new Edicts published throughout Asia, and suffered persecution; yea
impudent Sycophants, and greedy gapers after other men's goods, having gotten
occasion through those Proclamations, openly rob and spoil day and night;
therefore he desires the ^mperor that he would not despise them who were
greived and oppressed with that shameful spoil; Diverse persecutions were
both before and after, and was it then a time for the Ministers of Christ to
press or claim the Tithes of poor persecuted Christians? certainly no.

3. These Corinthians and Galatians, and others Churches were but new Converts
living amongst other Gentiles, who were unbelievers; and though the Apostle did
claim and argue for his right of maintenance, yet to avoid offense and hind:
rance of the Gospels propagation in those infant days of the Church, he did not
use that power and right he had to take maintenance of them, but charged other
Churches to spare them; not that he had not a right, or that other Ministers
had not a right, but it was not then a fit time to require this right, and
therefore much less to claim or preach up Christ's his right in Tithes.

4. In a word, the Apostles then were travelers up and down the world, in
several Countries, to preach the Gospel, and had no certain dwelling place, as
Paul himself witnesses, 1 Cor. 4.11. and what then should they have done with
Tithes, or to have claimed Tithes, when Ministers were not settled, nor was
there any quiet state of the Church? And these are reasons sufficient to quiet
the Quakers quarrelling spirit, if they were not restless in their malice
against the Ministers of Christ; or any moderate Anabaptist, that their
maintenance is due unto them by divine right: Thus did the Apostle spare the
Gentiles of any demand or nameing of tithes; but when he writes to the
Hebrews, then he names tithes, Heb. 7.
and declares them to belong to Christ, and so certain to Christ's Ministers,
not from Aaron or Levi, but from Christ himself, who was a Priest for ever,
after the order of Melchisedec.

But some Quakers or Anabaptists it may be, Heb. 7.12. The Levitical Priesthood
being changed, there must needs be a change of the Law. Therefore tithes being
under the Levitical Law, and that Priesthood of Levi being changed, there must
needs be a change of the Law of Tithes, and so Tithes must cease in the Gospel,
as being Levitical and Ceremonial.

I answer, Levi by Sacrifices and Ceremonies figuring Christ the Messiah to
come, that is changed and ended, all being fulfilled in Christ; for that Law of
Levies Priesthood, in what respect it was Typical, Heb. 10.1, 2
that had but a shadow of good things to come; for it was not possible that the
Blood of Bulls and Goats could ever take away sin; therefore Christ comes and
offers his own body, and by that one offering once for all, he has perfected
for ever them that are sanctified; Heb. 10.14.
so that these Levitical Sacrifices they are all ended by that one sacrifice of
Christ. But there were diverse things which Levi did, which were not typical or
figurative ceremonies to be ended at the coming or ascension of Christ, or in
the time of the Gospel.

As first, The Levites did ear, and drink, and wear apparel for their bodily
nourishment, and preservation of the life of Nature; and this was not
ceremonial, but nature to be done by the Law of Nature, and by the positive Law
of God, for God commanded our first parents to eat freely of the trees of the
Garden, Of every tree of the garden thou shall eat freely, Genesis 2.16. and this
was not Levitical nor Ceremonial, nor to end at the coming of Christ; for
Christ himself commands his Disciples when he sent them abroad to preach the
Gospel, to eat such things as were set before them, Luke 10.8. And if these
actions of Levi were ended in Christ, then it was unlawful for any man or woman
to eat, or drink, or to wear apparel, which is irrational and contrary to the
mind of Christ, Lu. 10.7.

Secondly, The Levites did bless the people; this was another action of theirs
Number. 6.22, etc. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, Speak unto Aaron and his
sons, and say unto them, on this wise shall ye bless the children of Israel.
And the Lord separated the Tribe of Levi to stand before the Lord, and to bless
in his name, Deuteronomy. 10.1. And this was not ceremonial neither, nor to end at
Christ's coming; for Christ teaches his Disciples to bless them that curse
them, Mat. 5.44. And the Apostles and Ministers of Christ do bless the bread
and wine in the Sacrament, 1 Cor. 10.16. And it was the practice of the Church
and Ministers of Christ to bless or pray for a blessing on the corgregation, 1
Cor. 4.16.

Thirdly, The Levites taught the good knowledge of God, for which that good
King Hezekiah spoke comfortably to them 2 Chronicles. 30.22. And they did read in
the Book of the Law, Nehem. 8.8, 9.
and gave the sense, and caused to understand the reading, Nehem. 8. And these
actions were not ceremonial, nor to be abolished by Christ; for Christ commands
his Disciples that they should go and teach all Nations, Mat. 28.19, 20. And
thus Philip did by the direction of the Spirit of God, he opened the Prophet
Isaiah to the Eu^uch, Acts 8.30.35. And the Apostle tells us, that Christ gave
some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastort and
Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. and therefore this office of teaching the people was not
merely Leviticall, and to be abolished by Christ; we see the holy Scripture,
does plainly witness the contrary.

Fourthly, Reward and wages for Levi's service was not ceremonial, but Moral,
according to the Law of God and Nature; not to end in Christ, or at Christ's
coming, but to continue to God to his Minister, laborers, and Servants for
their labor in the work of the Gospel unto the end of the world; for Christ
himself appointed wages for his Apostles and Ministers, and this not of
charity, or Alms, at men's pleasure whether they will pay or not, but of due
debt for their labor: When he sent them to preach the Gospel, he gave them
direction to expect wages and maintenance from them to whom he sends them,
Provide (says he) neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses, neither
scrip for your journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves; for
the workman is worthy of his meat, Mat. 10. Mat. 10.11
and Luke 10.7. for the laborer is worthy of his hire, or reward, it is due to
him, and the people to whom he preaches the Gospel are bound by the Law of God
and Nature to pay him for his labor. And hence the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 9.14.
Christ has ordained that those that preach the Gospel should live of the
Gospel, of their due reward and maintenance for their labor in preaching the
Gospel. And the Elders that tule well (says the Apostle) are worthy of double
honor, 1 Timothy 5.17, 18.
especially they that labor in the word and doctrine. And he gives the reason
from the Law of God and Nature, For the Scripture says thou shall not mussel
the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn; and the laborer is worthy of
his reward. Therefore maintenance of Ministers was not Levitical, but Moral, as
wages and reward for their labor, as all other men's labor is and will be to the
end of the world.

But does not our Savior say, Freely you have received, freely give; what wages
then can Christ's Ministers require?

I answer, read that Text Matthew. 10.8. to heal the sick, cleanse the lepers,
raise the dead, and to cast out Devils, and to this he adds, freely ye have
received, freely give: But for preaching of the Gospel he does not say so, for
he directs them to receive meat, drink, and wages, as if you compare those
Scriptures Mat. 10. and Luke 10. you may see the Apostles of Christ then might,
and the Ministers of Christ may lawfully expect and require Gods reward or
wages for their labor in preaching of the Gospel, and that was the Tenths, as
we have proved already, they may lawfully look every man for his just gain from
his quarter.

Fourthly, Judicial were the Givil laws of the Jews Lev. 17.30, etc. Tithes
holy to the Lord.
The Tithes which were given to Levi for his service, were not Levitical,
ceremonial, nor typical, nor Judicial, which were the Jews Civil Laws,
whatsoever the Quakers or Anabaptists or any other have dreamed to the
contrary; no holy things are Judicial, but Tithes were holy things; and Tithes
were not shadows, and figures of holy things, not ceremonies to be abolished by
Christ, but the Lords own portion declared to be Gods part, in every man's
estate, long before Levi or the Levitical Law was instituted, though given to
the Levites by Gods appointment for their service during the life of that
Priesthood, and Gods part still, Christ's inheritance, and the inheritance of
his Ministers to the worlds end, for there is a morality in them, and they are
Gods part, for which he will call men to a reckoning at the great day of
Judgment, when all the sacrilegious wretches in the world shall tremble,
except God in time give them to see their sin and repent: For although Levi's
Priesthood be dead, Heb. 7.
yet Christ lives who receives Tithes (as the Apostle witnesses) and Christ's
Ministers live and receive Tithe, not by any right from Levi or Aaron's
Priesthood, but from Christ who is a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedec. That Tithes were ceremonial, was an opinion devised by Alexander
de Hales an Englishman, Dr. Carleton in his Tithes examined, and divine right
proved, fol. 20
who lived about twelve hundred years after Christ, as that learned Dr.
Carleton well observes, and this indeed to please the Pope, that he might
better appropriate Tithes to his Monasteries, his Abbots, Monks and Friars, as
after we shall touch. A ceremony is well described to be a carnal type of a
holy thing, which for the service of the Tabernacle was enjoined only until the
time of Reformation, as the Apostle Heb. 9.10 holds them forth unto us; but
Tithes are no such ceremonies, they have a morality in them, and whatsoever
arguments may be brought against the morality and perpetuity of Tithes, the
same may be brought against the morality and continuance of the Sabath or Lords
Day, as that learned, acute and solid Dr. Sclater in his sevenfold parallel of
Arguments against the morality of Tything, Dr. Sclater in his Q^estion of
Tyth^s, rev^s^^ and proved moral, page 224 A book I never read till I had
almost ended the Answer of this Question.
and the morality of the Sabbath, or Lords Day, does manifest. These opinions,
that Tithes and Sabbath are ceremonial, have run parallel in the hands of those
who would destroy both the time and maintenance of the Worship and service of
God in the Gospel, as if since Christ there was no Lords Day to be kept holy,
as a time appointed in special for the glorifying of God and good of poor
souls. And as if there were no maintenance due to Christ's Ministers, since
Christ's ascension into Heaven; an opinion well agreeing to the profane
Atheists of the world, who like those fools in the Psalm say in their hearts
there is no God; Psa. 14.1.
and those high conceited Familists and quaking spirits, who boast their are
equal with God; or those who deny the souls immortality, or dream that it dies
with the body, or is turned into they know not what. But one day they shall be
awakened; when the trumpet shall sound, and the voice of the Archangel shall
cry out, Arise yet dead and come to Judgment. And then they will find, that
there is a God that is greater then they, that he has appointed a Sabbath or
rest day, the Lords Day, for his special service, and appointed Maintenance for
his Ministers; yea, that their souls are immortal, and the Lord Jesus is Judge
of quick and dead: The Lord open their eyes in time, to see their errors, and
repent, if it be his blessed will and pleasure.

And thus I have sufficiently answered that Objection, Where there is a change
of the Priesthood, there must be a change of the Law: We grant a change of
Levi's Priesthood, and of Levi's Law; and yet the Law of Tithes, as maintenance
for Christ's Ministers, remains still, not from Levi, but Christ, who is a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec, and ever lives to take Tithes,
though not in his own person, yet as he or God his Father did before Christ's
coming in the flesh by his Ministers and Servants, whom he has ordained to
teach his people. Sir J Sempil in his Sacrilege S. handled in which he proves
the Divine right of Tithes. Hebr. 7.
I shall conclude the evidence of this Answer to this Objection against the
continuance of Tithes in the Gospel, with a few Syllogisms of that worthy,
learned, and religious Knight Sir James Sempil, in his Sacrilege sacredly
handled, and Tithes proved due by Divine right.

1. He that takes Tithes, and lives, is a perpetual Priesthood:

Melchisedec takes Tithes and lives:

Ergo, Melchisedec is a perpetual Priest.

2 Whatsoever is spoken here (viz. Heb. 7.) of Melchisedec typically, is
transferred unto Christ's verity.

But Tything is spoken of Melchisedec typically. Therefore Tithes must be
transferred unto Christ's verity.
3. Whatsoever is due to an eternal Priest, is perpetually due. Tithes were and
are due to Melchisedec an eternal Priest, viz. in himself, the Type, or in
Christ the verity signified. Therefore Tithes are perpetually due to
Melchisedec, or to Christ who is a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedec.


4. Whatsoever was given as maintenance of both the Melchisedecian and
Levitical Priesthood, must be also the maintenance of the Evangelical.

But Tithes were given as maintenance of both the Melchisedecian and Levitical
Priesthood: Ergo.

Tithes must be also the maintenance of the Evangelical Priesthood. These
Syllogisms are well fortified by Sir James Sempil himself against all pretended
Objections; so as what has been said might satisfy a Quaker himself, if he
would be satisfied.

But yet another Objection is made by some Anabaptists, John Cann his second
Voice from the Temple of Babylon, or Baal, p. 13, 14.
and their confederates; or rather a false accusation, damning Tithes as
Popish, and the pleading for them a pleading for Babylon and for Baal. Thus
does John Cann in his Second voice from the Temple of Babylon; And that Pope
Gregory the tenth was the first that ordained Tithes to be paid to the Priests,
in the year 1214. And that with much mistaken ignorance and impudence, as
learned, A Gospel plea, by W. Prynn or Swainsw. Esquire;,
godly, and laborious Mr. William Vrynn observes, in that excellent Gospel plea
for Ministers maintenance, proving the ancient settled maintenance of ^ythes due
by Divine Right; and contrary to these malevolent Quakers or Anabaptists, who
would persuade men that Tithes are no older, or not so old as Antichrist, and
to be abolished as Antichristian.

But for answer, Melchisedec, and faithful Abraham, the father of the faithful,
many hundred years before the Levitical Law, and above two thousand and five
hundred years before that Romish Antichrist had lift up his head in the Church.
Let us enquire into the History of the Church, and ancient writers since
Christ, and we shall find Tithes to be Christian diverse hundred years before
Pope Boniface (who was the first that took upon him the name of Universal
Bishop, and the chair of Antichrist at Rome) was born.

First, If we examine the Apostles time, Act. 4.34, 35.
and times immediately after, there was a community of goods (as we proved
before) the converted Christians sold their lands, and brought the money to the
Apostles, and then no need, nor indeed power of paying Tithes in the Christian
Jewish Church, the Tithes being paid to the Priests amongst the Jews whiles
their Synagogues and Priesthood lasted, as before you heard; and for the
Gentiles converted, in those times there was such persecution, that it was best
for the Ministers of Christ to live upon the common Treasury among Saints.
Tertul. Apol. cap 3^. He lived about 200 years after Christ. Eusebius eccl. hist
lib. 2. cap 47.
This community did continue until Tertullian's time, about two hundred years
after Christ. All things are common with us (says Tertullian) praeter uxores,
except our Wives; yet this community was chiefly at Jerusalem, and at
Alexandria in Egypt, and at Carthage in Africa, where Tertullian lived, and
some other places where persecution was: And then, in the private meetings of
Christians each one give in to the common Treasury what they had laid by them
in store for the maintenance of the Saints, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. Act. 24.17 Romans
15.26, 27. 2 Cor. 11.9.
as St. Paul directed, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. This Paul brought from the Gentiles to
the Jews; and without question the Apostle Paul had his part, for he himself
testifies, that the Brethren which came from Macedonia supplied his want, and
others also were supplied out of the common treasury. Thus for those times of
danger and persecution, as it was in the Apostles days, few (in comparison) of
the multitude being converted, and the Emperors being no Christians, The
beginning of petsecution we read Acts 7. and Acts 12, etc. Herod etc. After,
Emperor Nero. First of ten persecuting Emperors, etc. Eusebius Eccles Hist lib
2. cap. 25. l. 3. c 1. Tertull. Apol c 1. Marsilius Patavinus Defen. pacis per.
2. c. 15.
but pesecutors, it was sufficient they had their lives for a prey, and yet
often times these also were taken away by cruel tormentors, as the histories of
the Church does witness at full: And then it was no time to demand or receive
Tithes of the people, but to live of the common Treasury, and of lands, and
rents of lands and other gifts given to the church for maintenance of Saints,
and the Ministers of Christ, who did preach the Gospel unto them, as God
stirred up beleivers hearts to give them, out of conscience that they were
bound to maintain the Ministers of Christ, and that those who preached the
Gospel should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14
as the Apostle Paul witnessed it was the Ordinance of Christ. But when
community of goods was ended, at least in that manner as it was used in the
primitive times; And when the Church had more quiet rest from persecution, and
the Ministers of Christ were settled in particular cities and places certain, to
abide as Pastors and Teachers over particular congregations; then we read Lands
and Tithes settled and given to the Church, not as out of Frankalmoign or Free
alms, but as Gods due right, and the maintenance of the Ministers of Christ who
did labor in the Word and Doctrine. The Glebe-lands and Tithes were part of
that double honor which S. Paul witnesses the Ministers of Christ are worthy
of, 1 Timothy 5.17.

This truth we may find witnessed in ancient Histories, and in the primitive
Fathers of the Church.

First for History, we will begin with our own British Antiquities, remembered
by that learned Mr. Pryn in his Gospel-plea, proving that the present
opposition against Tithes proceeds not from any real grounds of conscience, but
base covetousness, Mr. Prynne his Gospel plea, p. 123. cites John Capgrave in
vila Joseph. Christ. Glastoniens. Vincent. spect. Hist. lib. 23 cap. 147. cited
by Doctor Usher. Brit Eccles. Antiq. cap. 2. page 973. etc.
carnal policy, etc. and a Jesuitical and Anabaptistical design to subvert our
Ministers, Church and Religion.

Now Mr. Pryn, out of that godly, learned and worthy Dr. Usher relates, that
Joseph of Arimathea (who with Nicodemus took care for the burial of our Savior
in a new sepulcher where never man was laid, as S. John witnesses Joh. 19 21.)
This Joseph came with some others into England about the year of Christ Forty
eight, and preached the Gospel to Arniragus a British King (a valiant Prince,
Dr. Prideaun in Romans Tribun. page 289.
called Hector of Britain, who embraced the Christian faith; and understanding
the purity of their doctrine and holiness of their conversation, he gave (as
the History relates) twelve Hides of land in the Isles of Avalon, since called
Glastenbury, in Somersetshire, where they built the first Church, made (as the
Historian speaks) of Wattle and Reeds, and there they continued together
preaching the Gospel, and living upon this their Glebe (now of great value,
says Mr. Pryn) which was afterward confirmed to them, and the Ministers of
the Gospel there succeeding them, both by Marius and Coilus, next successors to
Arniragus, whom also they instructed in the Christian religion. Thus was
Ministers maintenance taken care of by that Christian King here, about forty
eight years after Christ. Dr. Usher Brit. Eccles. Antiq. Spelmanni Conc. page
12. cited by Mr. Prynne his Gospel plea. page 124 The Poet thus: Lucius in
Christum credit, Christoque dicatos Ecclesias dotat, distinctas ordinat urbes
etc.


Again, about the year of Christ One hundred seventy six, within two hundred
years after Christ, we read of Lucius our King of Britain, that being converted
to the Christian faith by Faganus and Damianus, Preachers of the Gospel, sent
to him at his request by Elutherius Bishop of Rome, he builded and endowed
Churches through his Dominions with Glebe-lands and Tithes, and this for the
maintenance of the Ministers of Christ, long before Pope or Popery was set up
in the world. And this afterward the British and Saxon Kings confirmed and
enacted more fully.

I may tell you, that about three hundred years after Christ, the Christians
being here and elsewhere restored to peace, Gild^s. Dr. Vshers Brit. Eccles.
Antiq. page 193. SpelConc. p. 36. 45. Cited by Mr. Prynne.
and freed from persecution by Constantine the Great (who was born in England)
the first Christan Emperor, they began to build and repair those Churches or
Meeting-places the Emperor Dioclesian and other persecutors had rased to the
ground; And then were Churches endowed, and Ministers maintained by Tithes, as
well as Glebe-lands; witness the ancient Writers and Fathers of the Church,
then and before those times: And this long before Pope or Popery, and
Antichrist of Rome, was styled Universal Bishop, and declared Antichrist in the
Church.

I might give you a catalogue of Godly men from those times almost to these
very days, who witnessed Tithes to be Gods right and due by Divine right to the
Ministers of the Gospel. I will name but a few: And first I begin with
Irenaeus, Iren. lib. 4. cap. 20.
who lived about one hundred and eighty years after Christ; and he tells us,
that the Apostles (and so the Ministers of Christ) are the Lords Priests that
serve at the Altar, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14.
that must eat the Lords part, that must have the substance of the Levites, not
of gift, but of right: Of them spoke Moses. And what was the principal
substance of which the Levites did live, but the Tithes which God gave to Levi
for his fervice in the tabernacle? Number. i8.2i.
Therefore certainly Irenaeus witnesses what was due of right to the Ministers
of the Gospel in his time; and this was Tithes.

Again, Origin who lived about two hundred years after Christ, Sed and in novo
Testa mento similiter venerabilis est decas etc.
in his Homilies upon Genesis (as in other places) he declares his judgment
concerning Tithes: But also in the New Testament (says he) the Tenth is
venerable; And because there is one Author of all, one fountain, one beginning,
even Christ, therefore the people pay Tithes to the Ministers of Christ. Thus
you see in Origen's time, within two hundred years after Christ, Tithes were
esteemed venerable in the New Testament, as well as in the Old, and the
Christians paid Tithes as of old; And this was four hundred years before the
Antichrist of Rome was risen up in the Church, or made himself manifest in the
world: Tithes were not then Antichristian nor Popish, (as the Quakers,
Anabaptistical Can and others would make men believe.)

Thirdly; Cyprian de unit. eccles.
Cyprian who lived about two hundred and fifty years after Christ. They did
then ( viz. in the primitive times) sell their houses and lands, and laid the
money down at the Apostles feet for the use of the Church, laying up treasure
in heaven: But now (says he) De patrimonio nec decimas damus, We do not so
much as give the Tenth of our patrimony to God* The Father reproves the
Christians for coming short of the Jews in giving God his right.

But some Quaker or Anabaptist will object, Cyprian.

I answer, Mal. 3.6, 7.
That is not so: For you may read Mal. 3. that the Lord reproves the Jews for
not paying of their tithes, and tells them they were robbers of God, guilty of
that odious sin of sacrilege: Ye have robbed me, says the Lord, and ye say,
wherein? In tithes and offerings: but ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have
robbed me, even this whole nation. Does this prove that Tithes were not due
then by the law of God, or that none were then paid in that Nation? Certainly
no, but rather the contrary, that they were due by Gods law, yea that they were
the Lords, and that those whosoever kept them back, they were thieves and
robbers then, as they are now in the times of the Gospel? Tithes certainly were
due by Divine right in S. Cyprian's judgment, which was long before the days of
the Pope or Papacy, or that Antichrist of Rome in the world,

Fourthly, Hilar lib. explan. in Mat. c. 24.
Hilary who lived about three hundred and fifty years after that, in his book
of Explanation upon Matthew: Because the Law (says he) prescribes the tything.
of Mint and Annis, the tything of every herb was not to be omitted for the
example of future times. For this cause, in Hilary's judgment, Christ does not
forbid, but approve of tithes in the New Testament.

Fifthly, Gregory Nazianzen, Greg Naz. Orat 5.
who lived about three hundred and seventy years after Christ: Christ (says he
is called Melchisedec, as receiving tithes; And if Christ receive tithes, it
must be by his Ministers, and this must be by right from Christ. Thus does this
Father declare tithes as due to Christ and his Ministers in the New Testament.

Sixthly, Amb. ser. 34 in Feria 3. post prim. dominicam quadrages.
Holy Ambrose that famous Bishop of Millaine, who lived about three hundred
years after Christ. Quia de omni substantia quam Deus hominibus donat decimam
partem sibi servavit, etc. Because of all the substance which God has given to
man, he has reserved a tenth part to himself; therefore it is not lawful for
man to retain that, which he has reserved. God (says he) has given to thee
nine parts, and if thou shall not give to God the Tenth part, God may take away
from thee the nine parts. And he concludes, He that pays not the tenth, does
not yet fear God, nor know what is true repentance. This does witness it was St
Ambrose's judgment, that in his time Tithes were due by Divine Right; and this
was not four hundred years after Christ, and two hundred years before the
Antichrist of Rome did lift up his head above his brethren; Tithes then were
not Antichristian, nor popish, as the ignorant Anabaptists, or popish Quakers
teach their Proselytes.

Seventhly, St. Hierom, who lived three hundred and ninety years after Christ,
two hundred year, In Ecclesia quoque populis intelligite quibus praeceprum est
non solum decimas dare, sed and vendere omnia and dare pauperibus, etc. Quod
qui non fecerit, Deum fraudare and Dominum supplantare convincitur, etc.
Hierom. in Mal. 3.
before the rise of the Romish Antichrist. That which we have spoken (says he)
of the Tithes and first fruits which long ago were given to the Priests and
Levites, understand ye also in the people of the Church, to whom it is
commanded not only to give their Tithes and First fruits, but to sell all they
have and give it to the poor, etc. which he that shall not do, he is convinced
to deceive, and rob, or defraud God, and is subject to the curse, etc. Thus
does this Father also testify the Divine right of Tithes, or that Tithes are
due in the Church of Christ amongst the Gentiles, Jure Divino, by Divine right.

Eighthly, Chrysostom, Si tunc periculum erat decimas negligere, perpende
quanti nunc istud fuerit. Chrysostom. hom. Ephesians. cap. 2.
who lived about three hundred ninety eight years after Christ in his Homilies
or Sermons upon Genesis, speaking of the Jews paying their Tithes by Gods
command, They did freely and willingly pay one Tithe to the Priests, and
another Tithe to the poor; but Christians (says he) are scarce willing to pay
one Tithe. But if it were a danger then to the Jews not to pay their Tithes,
consider what it is now, if we neglect it. Thus does St. Chrysostom plainly
witness that Tithes are to be paid jure Divino, by Divine right.

Ninthly, in a word, St. August. Hom. 40. inter 50. Hom.
blessed Augustine that holy and laborious Father in the Church, who lived
about four hundred years after Christ, and two hundred years before Boniface
the third took upon him to be universal Bishop, and so Antichrist apparent:
This holy man who was a valiant Champion of Christ to defend the Faith of the
Gospel, Jud. v. 4:
the old Faith that was once delivered to the Saints. In his forty eighth
Sermon, Majores nostri ideo copiis abundant quia Deo decimas dabant, etc. Mal.
3.6, 7, 8, 9.
Our Ancestors (says he) did therefore abound with plenty, because they gave
their Tithe to God, God did bless the nine parts when they gave the tenth. But
now (says the Father) Because Devotions decrease, Exactions have increased, we
will not give the tenth part to God, and now all is taken away; that which
Christ cannot have, Caesar will have; what was hoped to be saved in Tithes, is
lost in Taxes: Yea, the nine parts are almost gone and tenths and all. This was
the sad condition of those times. I may add, That we have many now murmr at
the payment of Taxes, but they do not lay to heart the non payment of Tithes;
if we rob God of his due, how can we expect God should bless us? If Achan,
sacrilegious Achan be in the Camp, how should we not fly before our enemies,
as Israel once did before the men of Ai? Josh. 7.1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
Let men consider and enquire, whether diminishing of Tithes has not brought
increase of Taxes; whether it may not in Gods just judgment be with us now, as
it was in Gods just judgment with the people of whom St. Augustine complains,
for their negligent payment of Tithes.

Again, Aug. sermon. de tempore, 219.
the same Augustine in his 219 Sermon De tempore, he presses this duty of
paying Tithes by diverse arguments. If thou will not give God the tenth, God
will turn thee to the tenth by his curses and judgments. Havoc and spoil
(says he) shall be in your treasuries, and in your houses; thus shall thou
give that to the unmerciful Soldier, which thou would not give to Gods
Ministers. And in another place he argues the case from Mal 3. Mal. 3.10.
God is always ready to give his blessings, but the perverseness of man
opposes; for he would have God give him all things, and he will offer unto God
nothing of that whereof God himself is the owner. But what if God should say,
The man that I made is mine, the ground that thou tillest is mine, the seed
that thou sowest is mine, the cattle that thou weariest in thy work are mine;
the showers, the rain, and the gentle winds are mine; the heat or warmth of the
sun is mine; and since all the Elements whereby thou live are mine, thou that
lendest only thy hand, deservest only the Tithe or Tenth part? Yet because
Almighty God does mercifully feed us, he bestows upon the labourer a most
liberal reward for his pains; he gives him nine parts, and reserveth only the
tenth unto himself, for his service and the maintenance of his servants. And I
may add to this, What is it but base ingratitude, yea, flat robbery and
sacrilege, to deny God the tenth, or that the tenth is due to Christ and his
Ministers by Divine right? since God so freely gives the nine parts, and
reserveth only the tenth for himself, whatsoever the Quakers or Anabaptists
dare deny. Thus you have St. Augustine's judgment, that Tithes are Gods, and
so due to Christ and his Ministers by Divine right; and this was two hundred
years before the Pope or Antichrist of Rome was born.

But I might go on with a long Catalogue of ancient Writers to the rising of
Antichrist, yea, and since that Antichrist of Rome did exalt himself, and give
evidence from many godly men in several ages, who have witnessed and confirmed
by diverse arguments, the Divine right of Tithes, as due to Christ's faithful
Ministers in the Gospel by Divine right.

But I commend those that desire to see many more testimonies, D. Tillesley in
his Animad. on M. Seldens hist. of Tithes.
to that excellent Catalogue composed by learned Dr. Tillesley, wherein he
produces about Threescore witnesses that assert the Divine right of Tithes, or
give arguments to that purpose, That they have been, and ought to be so paid.
And I might add the judgment of the godly learned of later times: But these
before Antichrist's time are sufficient to witness Tithes are not
Antichristian, nor any popish invention, whatsoever the Quakers, or
Anabaptists, or others imagine to the contrary.

But when did Antichrist arise, 1 John 2.18.
may some demand? Does not St. John say, there were many Antichrists in his
time? 1 John 2.18.

I answer, It is true, the Apostle does witness, that there were then many
Antichrists, and so there are now many Antichrists, many adversaries to Christ
and his Ministers now in the world: Those malignant Quakers who plot and labor
the overthrow of the Gospel established Ministry, what are they but the spawn
of Antichrist, Rev. 16.13
and creeping frogs out of the mouth of the Beast, of the Dragon and the false
Prophet? But the Apostle in the same Chapter and the same verse, 1 John 2.18.
he spoke of another Antichrist, that Antichrist; that principal Antichrist,
whom St. Paul describes 2 Thessalonians. 2.3, 4. The man of sin, the son of perdition,
who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped: so that he as God, sits in the Temple of God, showing himself
that he is God, or as if he were God; we may say suffering himself by his
flatterers to be called God (as some Popes have done) that scarlet colored
Beast, full of names of Blasphemy, As Jewel against Harding proves.
to whom the ten Kings give their power and strength to fight against the Lamb
Christ; as Antichrist, and the whore of Babylon is decyphered, Rev. 17. Rev.
17.1, 2, etc.
This Antichrist did not arise until about six hundred years after Christ.
Gregory the Great 600 years after Christ.
We read of Gregory the Great who was Bishop of Rome about the year six
hundred, that he foretold, whosoever he was that should take unto him the name
and title of Universal Bishop, he was either Antichristus, or praecursor
Antichristi, Antichrist, or the forerunner of Antichrist; and this was
fulfilled in his next Successor Boniface the Third: For when that peremptory,
proud Centurion Phocas, Phocas killed Mauritius the Emperor about 600 years
after Christ. The papacy began, as the great Autichrist.
had wickedly and treacherously killed his Lord and Master, the Emperor
Mauritius; then Boniface the Third being Bishop of Rome, by the countenance of
the Murderer Phocas did take upon him that Antichristian name and title of
Universal Bishop. So fulfilling the the Prophecy of Gregory the Great his
Predecessor. And this pride of papal dignity his successors embrace as well as
he, then laboring by all means to exalt the Papacy: yet many hundred years
after, yea, and to this day God preserved some holy men to preserve the Truth,
and to defend Gods right, and the right of his servants. As in the days of Ahab
and Jezabel, God had seven thousand in Israel which had not bowed the knee to
Baal. Diverse Councils confirmed, and good Laws were enacted to maintain the
Divine right of tithes: I shall omit the Councils, and give you an ancient Law
or two for this purpose.

First, King Ethelstan (a King of this land) about nine hundred and thirty
years after Christ, by the advice of his Council at that time: I do command all
my chief Officers (says he) in all my Kingdom in the name of the Lord, that
first of my own proper estate, they give the tenth to God, as well in my living
goods, as in the dead fruits of the earth; and the same he requires his
Bishops, Aldermen, and others to do. Thus he does, as out of conscience
acknowledge Gods due.

And that Law of King Edward the Confessor, The Laws of K. Edw. the Confescited
page 224. 1050 years after Christ
who lived about a thousand and fifty years after Christ, six hundred years
since. De omni decima garba Deo debita est, ideo reddenda, etc. Of all the
corn, the tenth sheaf is due to God, and therefore to be paid; And if any one
has a flock of Mares, he is to give the tenth Foal; and if he have but one or
two, he shall give for every one a penny; and he that shall have many Kine, he
shall give the tenth Calf, and he that has but one or two, he shall give for
every one a halfpenny: And he that makes cheese, let him give God the tenth;
and if he make none, then the milk the tenth day; likewise the tenth Lamb, the
tenth Fleece, and of Bees the tenth of the profit, and so of lesser Tithes of
Boss, Gardens, and other things. And this Law you see does witness Tithes due
to God by divine right, many hundred years since, to let pass Statutes made of
later years; but I cannot pass over that of Sir Edward Coke, that learned Judge
and famous Oracle of the Law, who affirms, That in the very body of the ancient
Common Law of England, Tithes are due Jure Divino, by Divine Right, and we have
declared they were so judged, for the first six hundred years after Christ, and
after that again, until the time of King Edward the Confessor, about a thousand
and fifty years after Christ, When the Pope would appropriate Tithes to Abbeys,
ben began the opinion that Tithes were not due by Divine Right.
the same opinion continued in the Church. But after that the Popes of Rome
began to be more politic, to maintain their own greatness by enlarging the
maintenance of their Abbots, Monks and Friars in the Monasteries of several
orders devised to maintain the Popes great ness, not content with those Lands,
which out of fair pretense were given to them by men and women religiously,
Gratian c. 3 q. 2. Leo 4. Cited by D. Carleton in Tithes examined.
and some superstitiously affected, but seeking also to get the Tithes from the
particular Parish Ministers, to whom they were anciently settled as their proper
right, which was done in part by Dionysius Bishop of Rome, about two hundred
and seventy years after Christ, Mr. Hanmer his Cronography. page 577. Jo: Can
his second voice from the Temple.
which was many hundred years before the Council of Lateran or any Popes
Decretals for payment of them, to which some would relate this division of
Parishes, and the payment of Tithes. But after that the Pope had appropriated
Tithes to his Monasteries, and robbed the particular Parishes and their parish
Ministers of them, then these new opinions concerning Tithes began to creak
out; and the Schoolmen and others to please the Pope, they endeavor to justify
the Popes Sacrilege; for certainly that was a diverting of the Ministers
maintenance of Tithes from the original intention and use of them, whatever men
may suppose to the contrary, or the Pope pretend to ustifie himself: Alexander
de Hales. 3. part. qu 51. art. 3.
Then Alexander De Hales an Englishman and a Schoolman, he affirms tithes to be
judicials, and so might more lawfully be disposed of by appropriations to
Monasteries. This was about One thousand two hundred and fifty, four hundred
years since; The opinion that Tithes were Alms did arise from the abuse of
Tithes in Popery, taking them from the Ministers to Abbyes Monastery, etc.
and Aquinas endeavors to the same effect. This is one opinion of Rome; but
Tithes cannot be judicials, for no holy things are judicials: The judicial laws
did concern the civil government of the Jews, but Tithes are holy to the Lord,
Levit. 27.32. therefore they cannot be judicials, as the said men devised. And
before we noted another later opinion, that Tithes were mere Alms given by the
Church, and to Church Ministers, as men were converted to Christian Religion,
and Religion more settled in the world. This opinion, say some, was brought in
by the Waldenses upon their sight of the abominable abuses of Tithes in the
Church of Rome, (if I may call it a Church) the Popes having perverted Tithes
from the true use, and turned and abused them to maintain the luxury of lazy
Abbots, Monks and ungodly Friars who were full of all abominations. But these
good men did not rightly consider the first original, nor the reason which
moved godly men to give the Tithes to Gods Ministers, who taught them the
Gospel, for their comfortable livelihood and better maintenance. And this was
because those holy men which gave their Tithes, were satisfied in Conscience
that Tithes were Gods right, his own reserved portion due to Christ as a Priest
for ever after the order of Melchisedec; Genesis 28.32
therefore Jacob vowed to pay Tithes as a duty to Christ for the maintenance of
his faithful Ministers: And the abu^e of them in Popery could not take away
Gods right, nor deprive Gods faithful Ministers of that comfortable maintenance
which is due to them from Christ for their service to him in preaching of the
Gospel. 2 Cor. 5.20.
For what else are Gods Ministers, but Christ's servants? We are Ambassadors for
Christ, and we beseech you in Christ's stead, as if God did beseech you by us,
we pray you in Christ's stead that you be reconciled to God; and therefore may
lawfully expect and look for this lawful gain for their labor, every one even
in the place where he is, whatsoever Anabaptists or Quakers allege to the
contrary.

To conclude; A fourth opinion yet later has been, that Tithes are ceremonial,
and that they are to be abolished, and that Ministers that take Tithes, deny
Christ to be come in the flesh, and endeavor to setup again Aarons Priesthood
and to revive it again: That there is nothing due to Christ's Ministers, but
they should live in high or rather low poverty, and the like. These are the
common cries of our croaking Quakers, who are cunningly (and I believe) some of
them ignorantly by the Devil, and Antichrist and his Emissaries, set on to
overthrow the Ministers of Christ in England, and the Gospel too, if God suffer
them. And thus as Scholars of that most wicked Apostate Emperor Julian, by
destroying Tithes and Ministers maintenance, to destroy the Ministry it self,
that they may more easily remove the Candlestick of the Gospel, and set up the
Kingdom of Antichrist, instead of Christ in the Nation; which God of his mercy
keep from us, least Ephesus lot be our portion, to love both the Gospel, and
our lives, estates, and liberties, to some Turkish Tyrant or other Antichrist,
to our sorrows and undoing for ever.

But these men blinded by the spirit of Error, speak they know not what: For
what are Ceremonies, but carnal rites, which were enjoined until the time of
Reformation, as you may read Heb. 9.10. noted before. These the Apostle calls
weak and beggarly rudiments which held men in bondage, as the observation of
days, and months, and times, and years, such shadows and ceremonies as were
appointed for instruction and teaching men until Christ who is the substance
and end of all was come. Now Tithes were not appointed to teach men any thing,
but for the maintenance and livelihood of them that are Teachers, the faithful
Preachers of the Gospel, and Ministers of Christ. Therefore Tithes are not
ceremonies, as the ceremonious Quakers would have them; but the just Temporal
outward gain and reward for their labor, which the faithful Ministers of Christ
may lawfully seek by every man for his labor in his place. As it was with the
Levites in Nehemiahs time, I perceived, says he, Nehe. 13: 10, 11, 12.
that the portions of the Levites had not been given them: For the Levites were
fled every one to his field. Then contended I with the Rulers, and said, Why is
the house of God forsaken? and I gathered them together, and set them in their
places. Then brought all Judah the Tithe of the Corn, and new Wine and Oil into
the Treasuries. This was the second Tithe which was to be eaten before the
Lord, and of which the Levites were to have part; and when that was kept from
them, they fled every man to his field, to his quarter, where they had their
houses, and where they taught the people, and where they had the first Tithe to
maintain them.

It was lawful for them in that case to seek every man for his gain from his
place; and so it is now for the Ministers of Christ, when their just dues are
kept from them, they are constrained sometimes to seek (though sore against
their will) every man for his just gain in his place where God sets him.

And this they may lawfully do, yea, to desire the help of the Magistrate, if
it cannot otherwise be obtained, and this without any just blame, whatsoever
Quakers or Anabaptists teach their Auditors.

And thus I have sufficiently answered the Objections, pretending, that Tithes
are Popish, Antichristian, and Ceremonial, and cleared the contrary at full, if
men will not hoodwink themselves, or be wilfully deceived by the deceivers.

I shall only propose and examine some Cases of Conscience, and wish the
Anabaptists, Quakers, and those that take their parts, to enquire into them
before they go on any further to oppose Tithes, or take them away from the
faithful Ministers of Christ.

And this is to examine thoroughly upon all that I have writ, A Case of
Conscience.
and is further manifested by godly men concerning the Divine Right of Tithes;
Whether the taking away of Tithes from the faithful Ministers of Christ, be not
that abominable sin of Sacrilege, for which God has not only threatened, but
punished men with fearful plagues and judgments in several ages of the World;
as we shall manifest by some examples, before we end this Question.

It may be some will demand, 1 John 3.4.
for sin is the transgression of the Law.

I answer, Thou shall not steal; And every theft is sin. But sacrilege is a
stealing from God, or a robbing of God, and so a sin of a higher nature then
the robbing from any man whatsoever. Sacrilege is as stealing or robbing God of
his holy things: Will a man rob God? (says the Prophet;) yet ye have robbed
me, says the Lord, Mal. 3.6. Mal. 3.6.
The taking away of the holy things of God and turning them to man's private
use, or to any other use then God has appointed, this is sacrilege. Now things
are said to be Gods, and holy to the Lord two ways, or by a twofold means.
First by way of Reservation, when God reserveth or excepteth them for himself
for his own pleasure or service: As God did reserve and except the tree of
knowledge of good and evil in the garden of Paradise from our first parents; It
was Gods reserved part holy to the Lord, and might not be eaten of upon pain of
death, Genesis 2.17. And secondly, Levit. 27.30, 31, 32.
so are Tithes Gods reserved part, as we proved before they are the Lords, and
holy to the Lord, Lev. 27.

2. Again, things may be said to be holy to the Lord by way of consecration:
And this first either by God himself to some holy use; Or secondly, by men to
God and his service.

First, thus did God consecrate the gold and silver, and vessels of brass and
iron which were found in Jericho, these by Gods appointment were consecrate to
the Lord: But all the silver and gold, and vessels of brass and iron are
consecrated to the Lord, they shall come into the treasury of the Lord, Jos.
6.19.

Secondly, whatsoever is consecrated or devoted unto God by men, that also is
holy by consecration unto God. Levit. 27.28.
Thus Lev. 27. Notwithstanding no devoted thing that a man shall devote unto
the Lord of all things he has both of man and beast, or of the field of his
possession, shall be sold or redeemed; every devoted thing is most holy to the
Lord.

First then, to take away or steal Gods reserved part, was and is sacrilege; As
the taking of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, Genesis 2.17.
Mal. 3.6, 7.
Genesis 2. and the taking away or stealing of Tithes, Mal. 3. And thus the taking
away or stealing of things consecrated by God himself, as the gold and silver
of Jericho, is sacrilege, or whatsoever else is given to God by men for his
worship or service, or the maintenance thereof, this is sacrilege, for
whatsoever is devoted is is holy to the Lord. And the wise man Solomon guided
by the Spirit of God tells us, It is a snare (a deadly snare) to devour that
which is holy, Prove. 20.25
or consecrated to God, and after vows to make enquiry. Men cannot give to God,
and take away again at their pleasure, without sacrilege. Act 5.1, ^, 3, 4. etc.
This is evident in the example of Ananias and Sapphira Act. 5. First they gave
to God the price of their lands, and so the Apostle and the Church did
understand them; but they secretly kept back part after they had given it to
God and to Christ, and his Church; and this was sacrilege, and for this and
their lying they were stricken dead suddenly, as you may read there at full.

And now I desire all these Anabaptists, or Quaking or other adversaries to
Tithes, who pretend to conscience, to enquire diligently into this case of
conscience, and search whether the taking away of Tithes from the right use God
has designed them unto, be not sacrilege in a double respect.

First as being Gods reserved part kept to himself for his worship and service,
and for the maintenance of his Ministers to the end of the world, as we have
proved at full, and which to take away is declared sacrilege.

Secondly, as Gods consecrated part given by men out of conscience to the
Ministers of Christ, both in the primitive times, and in later ages; witnessed
both by their Donation of, and good Laws enacted for due payment of Tithes, as
we have in part declared in those laws of King Ethelstan, and King Edward the
Confessor, noted before; And as may appear in the Donation and and Gifts of
Constantine the Great, his care for the maintenance of the Ministers of Christ,
not only the good Bishops assembled at the great Council at Nice, Eusebius. Ecclde
vita Constant. lib. 1. cap. Epist. of Constant. to Eusebius. B. of C^saria in
Palestine. Levit. 27.30, 31 The taking away of Tithes is Sacreledge.
as witnesses Eusebius, but of other Ministers and Churches appointed for the
more convenient meetings of the people, and furtherance of the Christian faith,
as Socrates relates. And the taking away of Tithes consecrated to God by holy
men, given out of conscience and duty to the maintenance of Gods service, what
is it else but sacrilege, except they be redeemed, as Lev. 27. they may? And
these consecrations of Tithes, and further manifestations of this truth, that
the taking them away is sacrilege, we shall declare by several examples, partly
in other, and partly in this our own Nation.

First Mr. Mr. Seldom in his. Hist. of Tithes. page 49.
Seldom in his History of Tithes tells us, that a perpetual Right of Tithes was
consecrated to some Churches by grant or assignment out of such and such lands
at the owners pleasure; that is, as he intends it, as voluntary contributions;
(this was his new opinion.) But here I cannot but demand, upon what ground was
this done? or what was the cause that moved these good religious men instructed
in the faith of Christ, to consecrate their Tithes, the tenth part of their
increase, to the maintenance of the Ministers of Christ? or to what end did
they do this? And certainly, if we consult their donations and declarations of
their minds, (if we had them written at large) they would witness that they did
consecrate their Tithes, as being convinced in conscience they are Gods due and
Christ's right for the maintenance of his faithful Ministers, who are careful
and painful in preaching the Gospel of Christ; not out of any wrong ground or
superstitious end, as a will worship. And therefore the taking them away from
God, and the right use and end the Donor gave them, what can it be less then
the sin of sacrilege.

And upon this ground and reason I believe was the gift of King Lucius, Lucius
king of Britain. Dr. Usher his British Antiq.
and his endowment of Churches both with Glebelands and Tithes, within or near
two hundred years after Christ; besides all the practice of holy men converted
to the faith, then, and in succeeding ages. And what other can we conceive of
that Donation of Pipin King of France, the son of Charles Martel that
Church-robber? certainly out of conscience they were Gods due, and belonging to
the Ministers of the Gospel, he did restore those tithes which he and Charles
his father had taken away. Dr. Tilsley his Animadvers. p. 64, 65, 66.
So Dr. Tilsley in his Record of the History of Charles Martels Sacrilege, and
Animadversions upon Mr. Selden's History of Tithes, observes. This King Pipin
lived about eight hundred years after Christ, Molanus de sanctis Belgii. In 18
Octo. bris in vita Monen.
and royally gave the tithe he had between Lesche and Ourt to Monon that
blessed man, who was slain for his profession of Christ.

But what need I travel beyond sea for proof? That excellent example of King
Ethelwolph, the Son of King Egbert (a King of this land of the Saxon race) who
brought the Heptarchie or Sevenfold Kingdom of the Saxons into a Monarchy; this
King Ethelwolph having received the Christian Faith, he had by his conquest all
the lands in England for his Demesne (as is acknowledged by that learned Judge
and judicious Lawyer Sir Edward Coke in his Commentary upon Littleton) and
conferred the Tithes of all his Kingdom upon the Church by his Royal Charter,
Sir Ed Coke his com. on Little^on. Sir H. Spel. com. 85.
dated in the year of Christ Eight hundred fifty five, related in these words.
King Ethelwolph by the consent of his Prelates and Princes which ruled in
England under him in their several Provinces, did enrich the Church of England
with Tithes of all his lands, and goods by his Charter Royal, etc. Adding in
the end That whosoever should increase that gift, God would please to prosper and
increase his days: But if any should presume to diminish the same, An item
against Sacrilege, or sundry Queries concerning Tithes printed 1653.
that he should be called to an account for it at Gods Judgment seat, etc. And
this he did not only as Lord Paramount, but as Proprietary of the whole land,
the Lord and great men having no propiety or estates of permanency, but as
accountants to the King whose the whole land was; and yet they also gave their
free consents, which the King required, that thereby they might be barred from
pleading any Tenant right; as also to oblige them to stand in the maintenance
of Tithes against all pretenders that might come in after-time. Here you see
was a free and full donation of all the Tithes of England unto God, and to the
Church of Christ for the maintenance of the Gospel and Gospel-Ministery, and
this no doubt out of conscience informed by the word of God, that they were due
to them by Divine Right.

Now if all the Tithes of England be be God's; First, by reservation as his own
proper right; Secondly, God's by dedication and consecration unto him for his
service: Rev. 20.12
Then I desire that men would enquire into the Book of Conscience (which one
day shall be opened) and be fully resolved whether to take away Tithes from
their proper use, for which God and good men did give them, be not horrid
Sacrilege, Mal. 3.8.
that dreadful sin which subjects men to the wrath and curse of God.

To quicken your meditation upon this case of Conscience (now consciene has so
much liberty) and to move it to look within doors, and truly to see if it know
its own face; let me mind you of some few examples of Gods direful Judgments
against this sin of Sacrilege.

First, Genesis 3.132, 3, 4, 5, etc.
We have all cause to remember the sacrilege of our first parents in taking of
Gods reserved part, the forbidden tree, for which they were driven out of
Paradise, and they and all their posterity subject to death, and the curse of
God, yea, Genesis 3.15.
all miseries in this life and the life to come, had not God given the seed of
the woman, Christ our Savior, to break the serpents head, and make our peace
with the blood of his cross; Col. 1.20.
had not God in his unspeakable love in Christ reconciled us unto himself, as
the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5.19
yea, by the death of his, son, Rom, 5.10 without which we were all the
children of wrath as well as others, Ephesians. 2.3
Ephesians. 2.3.

Secondly, And what need I rehearse that judgment of God that fell upon
sacrilegious Achan, Josh. 7.1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
yea that great affliction that fell upon the Army of Israel for Achan's sin?
First, the Army of Israel did fly before the men of Ai verse. 4. And Achan, his
sons, his daughters, Jos. 24, 25
all he had were stoned with stones, and burnt with fire for that sin.

Thirdly, Sacrilegious Nebuchadnezzar and Belshazzar his son; 2 Chro. 38.18.
Dan. 5.1, 2, 3, etc.
the Father took away all the consecrated Vessels of the house of God, and
brought them to Babylon; and the Son Belshazzar he repented nor of his Fathers
sacrilege, but profaned those holy vessels in his drunken Feasts; and what
was his punishment? God smites him on a sudden with trembling terror and
amazement, his knees smite one against another, and the joints of his loins are
loosed, the handwriting upon the wall witnesses an end of his life and
Kingdom; he was weighed in the balance and found wanting; and that night was
Belshazzar slain, and Darius the Median took the Kingdom. Dan. 5.31.


Fourthly, How sudden and fearful the death of Ananias and Saphira was, Act.
5.1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
I related before.

Fifthly, King Herod committed Sacrilege in robbing God of his honor, taking
that glory to him him which was due to God; and you may read both his sin and
judgment, The Angel of God did strike him that he was eaten of worms and gave
up the ghost, Act. 12.
Act. 12.23.

Sixthly, In particular, the sin of Sacrilege in taking away of the Tithes,
the tenth part which is Gods part, Mal. 3.8,
it was to be cursed with a curse, a fearful curse, Mal. 3.

Seventhly, If we proceed to the ancient History of the Church and Records of
latter times, wherein the acts of Gods providence, and his works of Judgment
are registered, we may find too great a number of sacrilegious persons, and
fearful judgments to be their portion.

1. I shall only name that wicked Emperor, that Apostate Julian; Socrat. Ecel
Hist. lib. 3. cap. 12, and 14, 16, ^7^ and ^8 cap. Sezomen lib 6. ca. 2. Theod.
lib. 3. cap 25. Niceph. lib. 10. cap. 5. Of Dioclesian it was said, occidit
Presbyteros, but of Julian, occidit Presbyteriu^, by his Sacrilege taking away
their maint^nance.
whose enmity against the Christians, and Christian Religion (against good
Athanasius, who fled Alexandria, yet said that Julians persecution was but a
little cloud that would quickly vanish away:) And his forbidding the Christian
children to be brought up in learning, his countenancing of Idolatry, yea the
Jews against Christians, his own apostasy from the outward profession of the
Christian Faith to Paganism, his Sacrilege in spoiling the Christian Churches
and taking away Ministers maintenance, to destroy the Ministry, God punished
with a sudden death in the Persian War, an arrow from an unknown hand pierced
through his arm, and stuck in his ribs, and he pulled out the dart all bloody,
and threw it up into the air and cried out, Vicisti Galilaee! this Julian died
an. 367.
Now thou have got the victory, thou Jesus of Galilee! or words to that effect,
and so died desperately.

2. Of the Sacrilege of Charles Martel, Agobardus de dispens. minis. p. 65
I spoke a word before. And Agobardus, who lived about Eight hundred and twenty
eight years after Christ; writing of the Emperor Charlemain, he informs a
Counselor of the great spoil and sacrilege committed, in which not only
Churches goods, but Churches themselves were spoiled and sold, and amongst
these Tithes, which Pipin after res^ored. But these things were not done by our
Emperor (says he) but by his Predecessor, which was Charles Martel, whose
Sacrilege was notable, and his end miserable.

Again; Prideaux of the Western Franks, period. 6. Emperor the 8.
we read of Arnulphus Neph^w to Charles the Fat Emperor, who lived about 880
years after Christ, he was a sacrilegious Prince, rifled the Churches, did much
mischief; but God's vengeance overtook his Sacrilege, and he died, some write,
of the Lousie disease; some, that he was poisoned, but miserable was his end.

To let pass foreign Sacrilege (in Bohemia, Palatinate, Germany) and Gods
Judgments there within memory, ruinating all. And to come nearer home in our
own Nation: I will but relate some examples of those many, Sir H. Spel. de^non
Temerandis I col s^is.
which are more exactly remembered by the Son of that noble Knight Sir Henry
Spelman in that pithy tract to the Reader hefore his Fathers learned Book,
Entitled, Churches not to be violated; persuading a restitution of Tithes and
Impropriations to the Church.

He first begins with William the Conqueror, Holl. f. 7, 8.
who in the first year of his reign (as he relates it) by his Normans fireth
St. Peter's Church in York; and about the eightteenth year destroys about
Thirty six Churches in Hampshire, to make his New Forest, takes their spoil,
robs them of Ministers, Tithes and all. Mr. Speed chron. fol. Mr. Camd. 262.
About the nineteenth year of his reign, Richard his second, but first beloved
son, sporting in his Fathers New Forest is there strangely killed by the
goring of a Stag, (says Speed) Camden, by a pestilent air. In the twentieth
year he burnt the City of Monts, and the Church there, and coming too near the
flames, his horse leaping breaks his riders belly, whereof he dies
miserably, and in a strange manner is hindered his burial, till a composition
made for a place, as unworthy to be laid near other Christians, who had robbed
sacrilegiously so many meeting-places of Gods people. Again, Dan. p. 48.
his Grandchild, son of Robert of Normandy, hunting in the New Forest is
struck through the jaws with a bough of a tree, and like Absalom found hanging
in the thicket of an Oak. His Grandchild William second Son to Robert Duke of
Normandy, Speed 621
was made Earl of Flanders, and in a War against his Uncle Henry the first
received a small wound in his hand and thereof died, being the last of the
Conquerors Grandchildren, by his eldest Son Robert of Normandy. Matthew. Paris, 7
3.
The Conquerors eldest Son dis-inherited by his Father, is taken prisoner by
his Brother Henry the First, Stows Chr.
who puts out both his eyes; and after six and twenty years imprisonment dies,
starved in the Goal at Cardaff.

William Rufus succeeds his Father in his Crown and Curse: Speed, 440. Matthew.
Paris, 54. A great Stag passing before the King, he said to the Knight, Draw
thou Devil. The flying Arrow went forth, and hitting against a Tree, making a
refle^ sideway through the middle of the Kings heart, killed him dead. Speed,
449.
In his first year his Nobles rebel; in his sixth, a great Famine rages, and
such a Mortality, as the quick can scarce bury the dead. About the nineth year
he robs the Churches; in his thirteenth year, Sir Walter Tirrel shoots at a
Dear in the New Forest, he kills the King in the same place where a Church
stood, who dies beast-like, not speaking a word. The King dead, his followers
leave his body; and the corpse laid in a Colliers-cart, drawn by one silly lean
Beast (says the Book) in his passage the Cart brake in foul and filthy ways,
leaving his body a miserable spectacle, pitifully goared, and filthily bemired;
so like his Father, he passes not quietly to his Grave.

And this was the third of the Conquerors issue that was killed in the New
Forest; where the Dogs licked the blood of Naboth, there they must lick the
blood of Ahab; where the sacrilege was committed, there must be the place of
the punishment; as the Relator observes.

Henry the First, Ma^th Paris, 69. Speed, 459 Hollin. 41.
the Conquerors fourth Son is his Brothers Successor; he had several children,
whereof his eldest William, with his Brother Richard and Sister Mary, in a calm
day were drowned by the English shore; himself eating Lampreys, dies of a
Surfeit, and being opened, the stink of his body and brains poison his
Physician; one other of his Daughters mourns her Virginity in a Nunnery, and
dies childless; and in the next Generation his name is forgot, Plantaginet
takent the Crown.

Thus in or under Threescore and ten years, the Conquerors Sacrilege is
punished with the rooting out of him and his posterity from the Nation. Speed
49. The Norman time held sixty nine years.


A fearful example^ I wish James Naylor and his Quaking companions who go about
the Nation, profanely and sacriledgiously crying out, Down with your Idols
Temples, with your Steeple Houses, your Houses of Stone; and away with your
Priests, your Tythe-takers, would lay this fearful example to heart; yea, and
all Anabaptists and others that are of their minds, and repent of their
Sacrilegious designs, least God in his terrible judgment root them out, as he
did this Sacrilegious Conqueror, and left him an example to all posterity.

I pass over the Sacrilege and punishment of King John, with many others:
Hollin. 194
Of Cardinal Wolsey who did rise up from a mean condition to a high estate,
Matthew Paris, 284. and 684.
to be Counselor and Favorite to King Henry the Eighth; and who for his
Sacrilege (which I here speak of) did but turn Tithes out of the right
channel, and prospered not; after, lost the Kings favor whom he took care to
serve more then God, and lost all his estate, and his life and all (as most did
judge) poisoned himself at Leicester, Martin, 304, 306.
and died miserably, lies buried at Leicester Abbey or Priory. The great memory
of his great Sacriledges, is the most he left, but what he lost before. The
Relator remembers diverse more persons punished for Sacrilege. But I pass them
over; only let me not, yea, I cannot forget King Henry the Eighth (who as the
Relator speaks) engrossed Sacrilege and intailed it to his posterity. For the
first half of his reign (whiles he was free from Sacrilege he was honored of
his Allies abroad, loved of his Subjects at home, successful in his Actions,
and at peace as it were with God and man: But after his Sacrilege (as in
disfavor with both) his Subjects rebel first in Suffolk, after in Lincoln,
Somerset, Yorkshire, and the Northern parts; and now like Saul, forsaken of
God, he falls from one sin to another. I will not relate his sins, nor the
judgments of God that followed; Speed, 104. 1629. etc. Sir Henry Spelman,
Printed 1646. 35 Hen. 8.
but leave the Reader to that Preface to the Reader before mentioned in that
Book of Sir Henry Spelman, which is my Belator out of our own Chronicles; He
took diverse Wives, which were ^now to people a Canaan, some of whom he used
like a cruel Tyrant; and in the end growing old, entails his Crown upon his
children, and all successively swayed the Scepter; but all died childless, and
his family extinct, his name not mentioned, but the memory of his Sacrilege,
and other crimes is revived to his dishonor. His Sacrilege I apply to the
taking away of Tithes and Impropriations from the particular Parishes and
Ministers of the Gospel, and not restoring them, which the Pope had
Sacrilegiously taken away. For the Lands of Monasteries misapplied, I speak not
of them, (although it is a question) if they were once given to a holy use,
whether it be not Sacrilege to take them from God, if once they were given to
God for a good end.

This I cannot observe but with sorrow, That the Parliament then consented to
King Henry's Sacrilege, hoping it seems, that Tithes and Glebe-Lands would
have been better bestowed; but they being once in the Kings hands, to prevent a
restitution, he distributes them to the Laity; Speed, 1086.
some to Noblemen, some to Gentlemen and others, some he sells, some he
exchanges: But as my Relator notes, to little joy of him or his, or of those
that have since possessed them: To many men they have been like the Ark amongst
the Philistims, bringing a curse instead of a blessing to the pretended owners.
Though they have enjoyed them by countenance, and confirmation of Parliament;
yet I would some of them would truly lay to heart, and examine and search for
satisfaction in this Case of Conscience, Whether they have not lost more of
their estates by these late wars, then ever they or their Ancestors have gained
by these Impropriations, and Impropriate Tithes which they possess, especially
in places where there is left no competent maintenance for a Minister of the
Gospel, to instruct poor souls in the way to Salvation, and this in so many
hundred Parishes where the Parsonages are Impropriate.

There are Parish Churches in England 9284. Came b Brit. 162,
whereof 3845 are Impropriate; and in few of these places is there a sufficient
maintenance for an able Godly Minister to preach to the people. And who shall
give account for so many Souls at the day of Judgment? I pray God the
Parliament and all others may lay it to heart.

I cannot think, without grief, of the Sacrilege continued and committed in
the times of that good Prince, Godwine, 52.
King Edward the Sixth; and the sad and ^ore afflicting hand of God upon those
that had their hand in it. Sir Henry Spelman.
Some I hope, otherwise good men, I will not name them, but leave the Reader to
my Relator in the Book beforementioned: Nor will I mention the many examples
of Gods afflicting hand at least, if not fearful curse upon many others. Some,
yea, diverse of whom I have known in my memory near Threescore years, to have
felt the smart of Gods hand in their Sacrilegious enjoyments, though they had
no hand in the Sacrilege, but as they have come to them from their Ancestors
or others, who it may be bought them, and it may be thought it lawful, being so
settled by Parliament.

I will say nothing of diverse Sacrilegious Customs in many Parishes and places
of robbing God and his Ministers of what is due to them. I am sure, the custom
of sining in this respect, has taken away the conscience of sin. I should have
been glad to have read, that the Reigns of King James and King Charles, and the
Parliaments in both their times, had drawn no guilt upon them by neglecting
Reformation in these, as well as in other things.

I am sure, one horrid act of Sacrilege was committed in the late Kings days by
the plotting and power of the late Archbishop of Canterbury, charged against
him in the sixth Additional Article by the House of Commons then assembled in
Parliament; That whereas diverse godly people, who were truly accounted good old
Puritans, out of conscience and persuasion that Tithes were due to God for his
worship and service, and they were sacrilegiously taken away from the faithful
Ministers of particular Parishes, they endeavored by all good means the
redeeming of them; yea some religious Noble-minded men did freely give and
restore Impropriations of great value to the Church again, and others gave
great sums of money toward the redeeming of them, The Feoffees were, Four
Divines, viz. Dr. Gouge, Dr. Sibbs, Mr. Offspring, Mr. Davenport. Four Lawyers.
Ralph Air. Sam Brown, C. Skirland, John White Esqs John Geering, Richard
Davies, George Harwood, Francis Pridges, Citizens. See Canterbury's Doom, by
William Prynne Esquire p. 386. This undone Feb. 13. 1632.
and put the money into the hands of Honorable Feoffees in trust to buy in
Impropriations, and to allow a good allowance for present to a godly Minister;
and after a time when the money laid out was received in again by a yearly
rent, then to give the whole Impropriation to the Minister of that Parish, and
the rest of the money to go on to buy more Impropriations to be laid to the
Church again.

And this I know was done in diverse places, which would in a short time have
redeemed all the Impropriations in the land if it had been continued, and have
been a means to have settled a sufficient Maintenance, and an able godly
Minister in every Congregation. But by the late Archbishop of Canterbury his
project destroyed, lest (as was pretended) Puritan Ministers should fill the
places. But how sad his end was for this and other practices proved against
him, is yet fresh in memory: All the politic wisdom in his head, could not
keep his head and body together. It is and ought to be grief of spirit to
remember, or record these things to posterity.

I shall only leave some Quaere's or Cases of Conscience, to be enquired into
and laid to heart of all they may concern, and draw to an end of this Branch
and Reply to that false accusation of these Anabaptists, That Tithes are the
wages of unrighteousness, and Ministers that take them Antichristian deceivers,
as in their Answer they declare themselves.

First let all enquire and consider, or Case of conscience.
since as God did take away the posterity of King William the Conqueror, he did
also take away the posterity of King Henry the Eight, both guilty of this sin
of Sacrilege; Whether this sin was not, or might not be one principal ^in which
provoked God to remove them and theirs from the Government of these Nations?

Secondly, James and King Charles, and their children, from the power of
Government; whether their not endeavoring to reform this sin of Sacrilege,
might not be one sin and cause amongst others of their removal, and translating
of the power from them to the present Power now in the Land?

Thirdly, Henry the Eight, when this Sacrilege was chiefly committed, and the
Popes Sacrilege in part justified by their giving consent to King Henry to
alienate Impropriate Tithes and Glebe-lands from their proper particular
Churches; and especially later Parliaments to whom God gave a greater power to
reform this sin of Sacrilege, and to redeem Impropriations, have not been one
sinful neglect and cause which provoked God to afflict them and the Nation with
such ill success of Disagreement among themselves, and with the chief
Magistrates of these Nations from time to time; yea to humble them and us with
the loss of that power which once God had put into their hands, not only for
redeeming Impropriations, and settling a sufficient honorable Maintenance for an
able godly Ministry throughout the Nation, that so many thousand souls might
not perish for lack of knowledge; But of the power and opportunity of enacting
other good Laws for preservation of Truth, and true peace and prosperity in
this Commonwealth, which we have cause to seek the face of God daily for, in
and through the Lord Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, His Highness Procl. November. 1659.
in the Humble Petition and Advice in the days of the late Lord Protector, and
of his Highness since, by his late Proclamation for encouragement of godly
Ministers, and enjoying their dues and liberties according to Law

I shall conclude this but with a few words to you John Darker, and Tobias
Watsen, and to the Thirty Congregations (whose Faith you sent me) and which you
would pretend to be of your opinions.

Friends, I desire you to consider what is professed by them in the Fifty
eighth Section, That it is the good pleasure of God which has given gifts of
his grace to the Saints or Church of God, that some of the gifted men should be
appointed or set apart to attend upon the preaching of the Word, etc.

And Section Fifty nine, A book entitled, The Faith and practice of Thirty
Congregations, printed, 1651. p. 50. sect. 58, 59, 60.
That it is the will of God, that those which are appointed so to spend their
labors in teaching or exhorting in the knowledge of God to their edification,
and consolation, ought to have maintenance of those that receive spiritual food
by them.

You say, They ought to have maintenance; certainly, then it is the peoples
duty to maintain them, by your own confession, otherwise how can you say they
ought to have maintenance? And if they ought to have maintenance, why not
Tithes, appointed by God himself, and approved both before and since the coming
of Christ, and in the Church of God, yea, by Christ himself (as I have proved
at large) as well as any other maintenance of Charity or Alms, as you or they
would pretend in their next Section? And if they be appointed or set apart to
attend upon the preaching of the word (as they say in the Fifty eighth Section)
Then how ought they to labor with their hands, that they may not be
overchargeable, as they say in Section Sixty, and for which they allege 1
Cor. 4.12. St. Paul's practice in a time of persecution and extreme necessity.

This they seem to bring in by head and shoulders to justify the preaching of
laborers, men of Mechanic Trades, Tailors, and Carpenters, Smiths and Tinkers,
and of Mercers and Bakers, and other such like: But if you or they had
consulted the same Apostle, in the same Epistle, Chapter 9. Verse 6, 7. you
might have learned that both Paul and Barnabas had power to forbear working. It
was not any Ordinance of Christ, that they or any other Minister of Jesus
Christ should work with their hands to maintain themselves or get a livelihood,
but that they that preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel, as the Apostle
testifies, 1 Cor. 9.18. I let pass diverse Errors in that Declaration of their
Faith, too long to trouble the Reader with. I shall conclude this with prayer
to God, that the Lord would open the eyes both of you and them, to see your
error and sin in departing from, or at least, continuing your forsaking of our
Reformed and Reforming Congregations, making Rents and Schisms in the Churches
of Christ, and giving advantage to the common enemy to destroy the godly party,
either amongst us or your selves: For although you are too full of error, yet I
dare not think but some who are not satisfied with the practice of Infant
Baptism, may yet be members of Christ, though sick with error, and such as
stand in great need of healing by the Sun of Righteousness, who will arise to
them that fear his name, with healing in his wings. Mal. 4.2.
For such as are of Antichristian, persecuting spirits against the godly,
faithful Ministers of Christ in England, who have and do receive Tithes, such
as forsake our Churches, and hate our Ministers because they receive Tithes; I
conceive they are more of Antichrist then Christ, Mat. 16.
and are instruments in the hand of Satan, rather to destroy, then further the
Gospel of the Lord Jesus.

Thus I have done with the greatest ground (as I conceive) of your separation
or most cried out against) this is Ministers maintenance by Tithes, or any
constrained certain maintenance, which too many desire may be taken away, that
they might more easily cast off the Ministry it self.

The Anabaptists Answer
Only to your close, That Tithes are wages of unrighteousness, after which
(you say) we all run astray; Take that away, and preach who will (say you.)

Mr. Bourns Reply.
To this I must needs Reply, You do us manifest wrong, and it is a false and
scandalous aspersion, as if none did or could preach without Tithes, or forced
maintenance; It is well known, that many of us (and I my self) did not leave
off preaching of the Gospel, when we had no Tithes nor forced maintenance; yet
both publicly, Mal. ^.6.
and from house to house have endeavored to convert sinners, and to prepare
Saints in grace for glory. But the Lord himself thought Tithes the fittest way
amongst his people of old: And although I grant they may be redeemed, yet I am
confident of a Divine right in Tithes due to the Ministers of Christ in the
Gospel; and to take them away without full redemption, is a sin no less then
Sacrilege, accursed of God, as I have proved at large. I leave this to the
blessing of God, and the wisdom of the Parliament to consider of, and order by
the council and direction of Gods spirit, for the glory of God and true
heavenly good of the Nation; into which I pray God to guide them.

I. B.

Books sold by John Allen, at the Rising-Sun in Paul's Churchyard.
BEzae Novum Testamentum, Fol. Mr. Allen's Scripture-Chronologie, 4o. Mr.
Lukins Practice of Godliness, 12o. A Catechism of the chief heads of Christian
Religion, by Mr. Davenport and Mr. Hook of New England, 8o. The Faith and Order
owned and practiced in the Congregational Churches in England; A greed upon and
consented unto by their Elders and Messengers at their Meeting at the Savoy,
October. 12. 1658. 4o. Mr. Cotton's Treatise of the Covenant of Grace, 8o.
Johannes Becoldus redivivus, The English Quaker, the German Enthusiast revived,
8o. Presbytery and Independency vindicated, in answer to Mr. John Timpson's
Treatise of a Free admission to the Lords table, 8o. It Is now in the Press. Mr.
Gataker against Judicial Astrology, 4o. The Vanity of Judicial Astrology,
written by Gassendus, Mathematical Professor to the King of France, 8o. The
Quakers Folly made manifest to al^ men, By Thomas Danson, 8o.
SOME ANIMADVERSIONS UPON Anthony Peirsons GREAT CASE OF Tithes, etc. Printed
1659.


And first upon what he Writes next to the Title Page.

Anthony Peirson's case.
To the Countrymen, Farmers, and Husbandmen of England.
IT is for your sakes (says he) that this small Treatise is sent abroad, that
in a matter wherein you are so much concerned, you might be truly informed.

Mr. Bourn's answer.
FOr answer: I desire that this Writer would without Equivocation declare
truly, whether he desires only to have the maintenance of Ministers by Tithes
taken away, or the established known godly Ministers in England also, or both
to be removed out of the Nation? If he desires to have Tithes only taken away:
then I desire you Countrymen and Farmers to consider whether the payment of
money may not prove worse to most of you than payment of Tithes, money being
oftentimes hard to be gotten? or if in money, to have it gathered by
State-Officers, and paid into a common Treasury.

Secondly, If he desire the Ministry it self to be destroyed, and your Teachers
removed into corners, and that instead of them you must be content to be taught
by Tailors, and Tinkers, Mercers, Bakers boys, and Carpenters, and instead of
being fed with Heavenly manna, the truth of the Gospel, to be choked with
error and heresy, and lead by blind guides to the pit of Destruction; if so,
then is it not more profit for you to pay your Tithes, than to endanger the
loss of your precious Souls by false Teachers? for what is a man profited to
win the whole world, and to lose his own soul, says our Savior, Mat. 16.26.

Anthony Peirson's Case.
Thirdly, (says he) If there be any who have something to say for them, which
is not herein touched, it shall be acceptable to me.

Mr. Bourn's Answer.
I answer, if Anthony Peirson, or the Reader please to read over again my
Justification of Ministers maintenance by Tithes, he may find something which
he has not touched, several places of Scripture opened to prove the Divine
Right of Tithes to the Ministers of Christ, and diverse arguments pressed, to
which he has said nothing, or nothing to the purpose.

Again, for his History in general: It is a rule, that Rectum est index sui and
obliqui, that which is straight is a declarer both of its own rectitude, and of
that which is crooked; It is so here, a true History of Tithes will easily
discover a false, if the Reader please to read my History of Tithes, in which
it is manifest they are the Lords portion, and reserved-part for the
maintenance of his Ministers, both before and since the coming of Christ; and
so Tithes proved to be due by Divine Right; and to compare it with his History,
in which he endeavors to show that Tithes, and Ministers maintenance, both
before and since Christ, were but arbitrary Devotions, and mere Alms given at
men's pleasure to the poor (as in diverse places he affirms) I conceive the
falsehood of his opinion will soon appear, and I need say no more for answer,
it will be evident that his Faith depends but upon humane testimony, and a view
of some men's practices, without considering the grounds and Reasons of their
payment of Tithes, which was conscience enlightened that they were Gods due,
and paid upon that account, both by Abraham, Jacob, and the Jewish Nation, yea
by Gentiles before, and by Christians converted to the Faith since Christ his
Ascension to Glory.

But although this be sufficient to answer, yet according to my short time (the
Printer staying for my paper) I shall give you some further Animadversions upon
his History of Tithes.

Anthony Peirson's case.
He begins Page 1. God (says he) having chosen Aaron and his Sons for the
office of Priesthood, and the rest of the Tribe of Levy for the service of the
Tabernacle: he gave all the Tenth in Israel to the Levites for an inheritance
for their service.

Mr. Bourn's answer.
First, you may observe he begins his History of Tithes with Levy, as if no
mention of Tithes had been in Scripture before Moses and Levy, when as if you
read, Genesis 14.20. and Genesis 28.22. you may find that both Abraham paid Tithes
to Melchizedeck, (not as a free gift from him, but as Gods Right, and an owning
of him to be Gods High Priest, and Tithes Gods reserved part, as I have proved
at large in my History of Tithes; and upon this account Jacob vowed to pay
Tithes, not as a will worship, odious to God, Col. 2.22. and spoken against by
the Spirit of God in that holy Apostle.

Anthony Peirson's Case.
Again in the same Page he tells us, That besides the Tithes, the First Fruits
also were given to the Priests, but yet he would insinuate, that they were but
as the Owner pleased, and at the devotion of the Owner, for which he quoteth in
the margin, Deuteronomy. 18.4. and Ezekiel. 45.13.

Mr. Bourn's Answer.
For answer: if the Reader consult those places of Scripture, he shall find
Deuteronomy. 18.3, 4. this shall be the Priests due from the people; both for
Offerings, and First Fruits: and if due, then not at the peoples devotion as
Peirson would infer, because a direct quantity is not expressed; if the
First Fruits were a duty, then not an arbitrary devotion. And here I pray you
consider what Doctrines we are like to have of his collection, when he
endeavors to draw a false Doctrine from the first Scripture he names, and to
lay this as a Foundation to build his opinion, That Tithes and Ministers
maintenance are but Devotions arbitrary, to be given or not given at men's
pleasure, as it God had no right in them, which is the drift of his History.

And if you read that other Text, Ezekiel. 45.13. the direct part what shall be
offered is expressed: and what ground is there then of gathering a Doctrine
hence of arbitrary devotion, as if no command from God, but at men's pleasure;
as he would have Tithes to be: the Lord open his eyes to see his Error.

I pass over what he has said, little to this purpose.

Anthony Pierson's Case.
Page 3. He proceeds, A view of the Doctrines, Decrees, and practices of
Tything from the Insancy of the Christian Church to this day.

And in this view he tells us, that when Christ was preached, the Apostles and
Ministers of Jesus Christ did not go about to establish the Law by which Tithes
were given in the former Priesthood, but preached freely, and did not require
any settled Maintenance, but lived of the Free Offerings and Contributions of
Saints, Hierom. in vita Mar. Philo Judaeus.
for which he alleges Scriptures, Acts 11.29. 1 Cor. 16.2. and that
Christians lived together in societies, for which he alleges other testimony.

Mr. Bourn's answer.
For answer, I grant this to be so in those Primitive times, as Acts 4.31. etc.
when they had all things common, then the Apostles and Ministers of Christ had
their part, yea when men sold their Lands, and brought their money into the
common Treasury of the Church, they laid it down at the Apostles feet: Read my
Book, p. 55.
then was no need to desire Tithes, or any settled maintenance, they having no
certain dwelling-places. But I have answered this at full in my Defense of
Tithes, to which I desire the Reader to look back, where he may find full
satisfaction; this community of Goods in those times of necessity and danger,
does nothing hinder, but that when better times came, and Churches were settled,
the Duty of Tithes might be required and paid as it was in after ages, as I
have evidently manifested: and this as a due by Divine Right to the Ministers
of Christ.

Anthony Peirson's Case.
page 4.5.
And all those humane testimonies he brings of Tertullian in Apologet, cap. 39.
the practice of the Church, according to St. Paul's direction, 1 Cor. 16.2. And
Eus bius, that this custom continued till the great Persecution under
Maximinian and Dioclesian, Eus^bius lib. 4. c. 22.
as appears by diverse, as Origin, that Lands were given to the Church, etc. and
used in common, Ministers had but their maintenance with the people, not by
Tithes.

Mr. Bourn's Answer.
I grant that in those times of persecution it was the best way for Ministers
to live, and for the Church, they having many poor to maintain of the common
treasury; Justification of Tithes, p. 55, 56.
but this will nothing disprove the Divine right of Tithes to be paid to Gods
Ministers, as it was when times of persecution were ended, as I have proved at
large in my Justification of Tithes,

Anthony Peirson's Case.
For that he says page 3. They preached the Gospel freely.

Mr. Bourn's Answer.
I answer: for that direction of Christ, Mat. 10.7, 8. Freely you have
received, freely give: this relates to that power of working miracles, of
healing the Sick, cleansing the Leapers, raising the Dead; for these freely you
have received, freely give. But for preaching of the Gospel, Christ when he
sent his Apostles, he gives them no provision, yea wishes them to take none,
but to receive and expect their maintenance from their hands to whom they
brought the Gospel, and this out of Christ his part which was in their hands:
for we must not think that Christ would have his Laborers paid out of other
men's estates, but out of his own, and out of that they must be paid, for says
he, The Labourer is worthy of his meat, Mat. 10.8, 9, 10. and worthy of his
reward, Luke 10.7. etc. and this to be paid out of Christ's own reserved part,
not out of other men's goods; as if Christ had said, fear not provisions, for
the people to whom I send you, to turn them from darkness to light, and from
the power of Satan to God, they have my goods in their hand, ( viz. the Tenth
of every increase, or else the price of the redemption of it,) and I will rule
their hearts to pay You my Laborers out of my part in their hands for your
labor in my work: This not as a free benevolence, but as a duty due to me and
to you, Luke 10.7.
for it is my Ordinance that those that preach the Gospel should live of the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14. as afterward the Apostle Paul did witness; so that this
preaching does nothing hinder the Divine right of Tithes, as in my Defense (to
which I refer the Reader) I have declared at large.

Our Friend Anthony Peirson brings in diverse more humane testimonies to the
same purpose, to prove (as he would have it) no right of Tithes, nor settled
maintenance to be given as a due for the Ministers of the Gospel, but to live
of the benevolence and charity of the peole together with the poor.

Anthony Peirsons case.
For this he brings Origin Homily upon Genesis and Urban Bishop of Rome, Anno
about 227 after Christ. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, Prosper and others, about
250 years after Christ, in which times it seems that Lands were given to the
Church for maintenance of poor Saints, as well as the Ministers, and Ministers
were thus maintained, not by Tithes.

Mr. Bourn's answer.
If I grant this, as I may, yet this hinders not that Tithes were Gods right in
all Ages; but this was still a time when the Church was subject to persecution
and dangers, and many poor, and so a necessity to live in Societies, as the
people of God did in those days; a full answer you have in my Justification of
Tithes to belong to Christ and his Ministers, Hom. 23. ad Epist. 1. a Cor. ^ in
cap. 16 Ambros. Tom. 5. Sermon. in Ascenti Domini.
by Divine right, and yet all places were not in like condition, even in those
times.

Now Sir, you proceed forward, and bring in Hierom and Chrysostom, (who you
say) did press payment of Tithes; and Ambrose Bishop of Millan, about the year
400 after Christ, pressed the payment of Tithes.

Anthony Peirson's case.
And page 5. Augustine (say you) in Sermon de tempore in Tom. 10. This is the
just custom of the Lord, that if thou do not give the Tenth to him, thou
shall be called to the Tenth thy self: And after Decimae ex debito requiruntur,
tithes are required as due debt, you add Leo, Severine, and Gregory.

Mr. Bourn's answer.
Thus you have now alleged diverse Ancients who do not only declare for payment
of tithes,but for payment of them by Divine right, or as a duty; Gregory's
judgment was that the tenth of all was to be given to God, as many others; and
truly any man that rightly considers the Histories of the Church, and what is
written by the Ancients, may see clearly, that howsoever in the beginning and
dangerous times, tithes were not pressed for weighty Reasons, as I have showed
in my Defense, page 44, yet so soon as ever the Church came to a settlement,
and they were more free from persecution, tithes were preached, and pressed,
and paid as a duty, not as alms, or liberal devotions as you would make men
believe.

Anthony Peirson's case.
Again page 6. he affirms,that from the opinions of these, and other ancient
Fathers who took their ground (as he thinks) from the Law, tithes were brought
into the Church, but not received as a general Doctrine, that Tithes ought to
be paid till about 800 years after Christ.

Mr. Bourn's answer.
First, how know you that these ancient Fathers took their ground out of the
Law, that Tithes ought to be paid, as if it had been the Levitical Law only?
why might they not take their ground long before that Law, even from that
payment of Tithes by Abraham to Melchizedeck the Priest of the most high God,
and from Jacobs Vow, and what Christ spoke, and his Apostles writ in the
Gospel, and Epistles, especially that to the Hebrews, chap. 7. I am sure some
of the Fathers do allege arguments from diverse of these, See my Book, page 59,
60, 61, 62, etc.
and so it might be from a light to the conscience, that Tithes are Gods part,
and Christ's right for maintenance of his worship and service, and hence might
press the payment of them. For what you say, that the Doctrine was not received
till the 800 year, certain it does not appear, but the contrary, for many
Writers before that time did assert the payment of Tithes, and that as a due,
yea by Divine right, as I have declared in my Defense of Tithes; read my Book,
with Doctor Slater, and Doctor Tilseley his Animadversions on Mr. Seldens
History, and others.

Anthony Peirson's case.
In his 7. page and following he endeavors to prove, That Tithes belonged to
the Poor above 800, 900, 1000 years after Christ, and that the Clergy was not
to use them as their own, and people had more willing mind to give them for the
poor, than the Priests, but after in the year 1274. there was a Law that people
should not give them at their pleasures, but to the Church; this by Pope
Gregory.

Mr. Bourn's answer.
I answer: that before that time there were amongst the people diverse things
out of order; it was some reason till Ministers of the Gospel were settled,
people should have more liberty to pay their Tithes where they pleased; but yet
they were paid, and due to be paid long before that time, and that Law was good
by whomsoever it was made, That Tithes should be paid to the Church where
Ministers were settled to preach the Gospel, or to be paid to them for their
labor, in the Word and Doctrine, which was most agreeable to the Divine
Institution.

Peirson's Case.
Now page 8, 9. etc. Peirson brings History to witness payment of Tithes; I
shall not trouble the Reader (says he) with a relation of Joseph of Arimathea
coming into Britain, sent by Phillip the Apostle in the Reign of Arviragus (as
History reports) he about the year 600, and of Augustine the Monk, who came and
preached the Gospel in this Land, and when they had brought a great part of the
Nation to the Faith, they began to preach up the old Romish Doctrine, that
Tithes ought to be paid, etc.

Mr. Bourn's answer.
For answer: I desire the Reader to observe, he relates indeed the story of
Joseph Arimathea coming into Britain to preach the Gospel, but he leaves out
the History of that gift of Gleab lands in those days at Glassenbury, for the
maintenance of them that preached the Gospel: yet he confesses that when the
people were converted to the Faith, then they pressed the payment of Tithes:
this says he, about 600 years after Christ; and yet he says they began to
preach the old Romish Doctrine, that Tithes ought to be paid. I would ask
first, how old the doctrine of payment of Tithes was at Rome 600 years after
Christ? if it was an old doctrine within 600 years after Christ, certain then
it was in or near the Primitive times, as indeed it was in some places long
before the Pope, or the universal Bishop of Rome was born, for Origin speaks of
the payment of Tithes, who lived near the Primitive times about 200 after
Christ, as I have showed in my Justification of Tithes, read page 59, 60.

Secondly, I demand, why old Romish Doctrine? for Hierom was not Bishop of
Rome, and yet he approves of Tithes; and Augustine Bishop of Hippo in
Alexandria, and diverse in other places in those times writ of Tithes as due to
be paid, and due by divine Right; but he would fain make Tithes Romish, that he
might make them odious; though they were thought by the Lord the best way to
maintain his servants for his worship and service, and indeed are Gods right,
and Christ's right for the maintenance of his Ministers to the end of the world.

Anthony Peirson's case.
Anthony Peirson goes on page 9. etc. As concerning Laws (says he) for
Tithes, in the year 786. of a King of Merceland, and Elswolph King of
Northumberland made Decrees that those two Kingdoms should pay Tithes. And
Ethelwolf King of the West Saxons in the year 855. made a Law that the Tithe of
all his own Land should be given to God; and he tells us out of the History,
that at that time the Nation being under heavy pressure by the Danes, Bernredus
King of Mercia, and Edmund King of Eastangles being present, he called a
Counsel, and they to remove the judgments then over them, granted the Tithe of
all their Land to God and his servants; and diverse other Princes after made
Laws for the payment of Tithes; thus Anthony Peirson.

Mr. Bourn's answer.
To which I answer, that even this making Laws for Tithes, and that when
Judgments of God were upon the Land, this certainly does witness evidently
that they were persuaded in their consciences that Tithes were due to God and
his servants, and the detaining of them was a sin, and therefore they made
Decrees and Laws to pay them to God, as due to him and his servants by divine
right, for had they not believed that the payment of Tithes had been well
pleasing to God, they would never in that time have made Laws that Tithes
should be paid to God for his servants.

Anthony Peirson's case.
Now that the Reader may understand (says he) the ground that some men paid
Tithes, I have in the margin, declared the grant of King Stephen, pro salute
animae meae, etc. For the health of my soul, etc. I Stephen King of England do
grant Tithes, etc.

Mr. Bourn's answer.
I answer still, though there was some error in king Stephen, yet this does
witness that there was a Conscience in him, persuaded that Tithes were Gods
due; and therefore he confirms Tithes, as other Princes upon the same ground
had done before him.

Peirson's Case.
In the tenth page, Wickl^ffe (says he) did make a complaint to the Parliament
(which he sets down in Wickliffes words, Ah Lord God that people should be
constrained to find a worldly Priest unable both in life and cunning, in pomp,
and pride, covetise, and envy, drunkenness, gluttony, and lechery, in symony
and heresy, with fat horse, and jolley, with gay saddles and bridles, etc.
when within few years they paid Tithes and Offerings at their own wills to the
worship of God, and fairness of the holy Church, etc.

Mr. Bourn's answer.
Let the Reader observe, Wickliff does not complain that Tithes were paid, but
to such profane and wicked men; still this does argue a due of Tithes to be
paid, and that for Gods worship, whatsoever Anthony says to the contrary.

Anthony Peirson's case.
Anthony Peirson proceeds to add to Wickliff, Walter Boute, and William
Thorpe, and others, whose arguments, says he, are at large in Fox his Acts and
Monuments, they did in their days bear testimony against Tithes, for which
some of them suffered in flames, (as he thinks); this page 14.

Mr. Bourn's answer.
To this I desire the Reader if he can to read the History in the Book of
Martyrs, page 669, 670, etc. and you cannot find that they or any other were
burned, or suffered flames because they spoke against Tithes, for there were
other Articles which were more fundamental, for which they suffered death: had
there been nothing else but Tithes, no doubt they would not have laid down
their lives against Tithes, as Anthony Peirson would make men believe. Again
particular men's opinions do not determine the right which God has in the
world, and the increase of the earth for the maintenance of his worship and
service; the Scripture Proof is sufficient to witness perpetuity of Tithes.
Anthony would handle the Question whether Tithes be due or not.

Anthony Peirson's case.
But Peirson alleges the Laws for Tithes, page 15, 16, 17. etc. some made by
the Pope, and Papal decrees, and the opinion of Schools, Popes exemption, etc.
as if Tithes had not been Gods part before.

Mr. Bourn's answer.
I answer: if tithes be due to the Ministers of the Gospel by divine Right (as
I have proved) these several claims of several men do not infringe, nor can
these Laws or Cannons of Popes hinder Christ or his Ministers from challenging
tithes as Gods reserved part for his worship and service. I may say the same
for the Laws of King Henry the Eight, and since, Edward the 6. Queen Elizabeth;
thus we bless God for these good Laws, and confirmations, and settlement of the
payment of tithes to the Ministers of the Gospel by so many Honorable
Parliaments, for whom we pray that God will guide them still in his ways for
the maintenance of his worship and service, and for the good of the
Commonwealth, yet this will not therefore conclude against the Divine right of
tithes, good Parliaments and godly men have been, and are more willing to pay
and establish the payment of tithes, because they are persuaded a godly
Ministry ought to be maintained and countenanced, and this way of tithes is a
way which God himself has prescribed of old, and the Kingdoms that have
received the Gospel, have approved and practiced in several ages of the world;
this still confirms the divine right of tithes.

I let pass his seeming Answers to Objections, as to Abraham's payment, and
Melchizedecks receiving of tithes before Levies Priesthood, page 17, 18, 20,
etc. and the rest, I have given answer to that in my Justification of Ministers
maintenance by tithes, which may satisfy any good man that is not prejudiced
against the Ministers of Christ, or has not some self-end in his not being
satisfied.

Anthony Peirson's Case.
But Anthony Peirson cries out, page 25. What a shame it is, that a man
should be compelled to set out the tithes of his own Goods, etc.

Mr. Bourn's answer.
I answer, though the goods be his own, the Corn, Hay, etc. yet the tenth is
not his own, nor ever was, neither theirs or their Forefathers, never bought
nor sold with the Land, but are Gods reserved part, as we have proved to the
full, and they are by right from Gods Law to be tythed, and by the good Laws of
the Nation, to which Ministers may lawfully appeal for recovery of their just
Rights, Paul did appeal to Caesar for his just defense, Acts 25.1.

Anthony Peirson's case.
But Anthony Peirson objects, if any claim tithes by my Ancestors gift, may I
not ask him to whom, and for what my Ancestors gave them? all those tithes
since Augustine the Monk were given to Popish Priests for superstitious uses,
or causes Popish.

Mr. Bourn's Answer.
I answer: there were no tithes given them, as if those that gave them had any
right of their own in them originally, they did not give them to God, but
restore them to God again, when they had been stolen, and unjustly detained
from God, and abused, that continuing to be paid, they might be for
maintenance to Christ's Ministers in times of Reformation, and this no more than
what duty men owe to God, witness our Savior, Render to Caesar the things that
are Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods, Mat. 22.21. for his other
Objections page 14. etc. I have answered; see my Book.

Anthony Pierson's Case.
And for that Anthony Peirson alleges out of learned Mr. Shepherd, page 28.
that tithes was never claimed in respect of any ownership of the Land, but Ex
debito by the law of God, for substraction whereof no remedy lay at the common
law, and therefore if a Parson, let a lease of a Gleab to another, with all
appurtenance, yet he himself shall have the tithe of it, page 28.

Mr. Bourn's Answer.
I entreat the Reader to confider here is a testimony of the claim of tithes by
the law of God, or divine right; this in ancient times. It is no new doctrine
then as in my Justification I have declared at large.

Anthony, Peirson's case.
For his other Objections which he prevents, and answers, they are nothing to
the claim of tithes by divine right, but by humane right; that Land (says he)
which any man has bought, or his Ancestors, it was bought with this supposal,
that it ought to pay tithes, and so bought cheaper, then it should have been if
the Land had been free from Tithes.

Mr. Bourn's answer.
But I answer: it is true, that the Land was ever charged with tithes, but not
that the Land is free from tithe, for the Land pays tithe Hay, and tithe
Corn; and the tithe of Cattle is not in respect of the Cattle, but in respect
that they feed upon such Lands; therefore Anthony Peirson is deceived, and
tithe neither sold nor bought, therefore must be paid.

Peirson's Case.
For his last Objection, that prescription is an old device.

Mr. Bourn's answer.
I answer, if prescription be good in Law against a Minister for non-payment of
tithes, or of small composition, why may it not be good for a Minister for
payment of tithes, whatsoever Anthony Peirson would declaim, or exclaim to the
contrary?

Anthony Peirson's case.
Thus Authony would affirm, that because Bishops were voted down by the
Parliament, therefore all Parsons, Vicars, and Curats lost their office, and so
tithes belonging to their office, they are lost also, and so for maintenance,
all ends together.

Mr. Bourn's answer.
I answer, this is a conceit of his own, and witnesses the malignity of his
antichristian spirit against the Ministers of Christ, he declares but what he
is, and into what condition he would bring the Ministers of Christ Jesus;
certainly he is either a Quaker, or possessed with the spirit of Antichrist, or
infefected with some Jesuit, he discovers so much envy and hatred against the
faithful godly Ministers of the Lord Jesus; do thou expect thanks for this at
the Day of Judgment? beware of your enmity Anthony, fight not against Christ
and his Ministers, but submit to Christ and embrace him and his servants that
you perish not, and be wise ye Kings, Psalm. 2.11, 12.
be learned ye Judges of the earth, serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with
trembling; kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish in the way, if his
wrath be kindled, yea but a little, Blessed are all they that put their trust
in him; if those shall receive that dreadful sentence at the last day, Go ye
cursed, Mat. 25.41.
who have not relieved Christ and his servants; what shall be the punishment of
those that seek by all means to rob and spoil the Lord Christ, and his
Ministers and Ambassadors? the Lord pardon and change your hearts if it be his
blessed will.

Anthony Peirson's Case.
You now come to the last, those that claim Tithes by purchase, and those say
you, are the Impropriators; and you prevent an Objection, that they bought, and
some paid dear for them, therefore no reason they should be taken a way from
them; to which you answer, that you have showed before, that in the root all
Tithes is alike, whether it be claimed by the Priest, or Impropriator, and both
must fall together; and seeing those that sold them had no good title, neither
can those be made good, which are derived from them.

Mr. Bourn's answer.
I answer: for the Impropriators I cannot defend them, though some
consideration is to be had of them; but yet you err in saying the Tithes
impropriate, and the Tithes which is still continued for the Ministers of
Christ, are alike in the root, for the tithes of Impropriators were alienated
by the Pope to his Abbeys, and Monasteries, and then again by King Henry the
Eight, and by him sold, and there was the root of Impropriate-tythes; but
tithes belonging to the Ministers of the Gospel, whom you with a malevolent
spirit call Priests, as if they were Popish Priests (which we are not) that so
you may make them more odious to the people and Parliament, their tithes I have
proved to have a higher Root than Proprietors, even Gods own appointment, even
Gods reserved part for his worship, and the maintenance of his Ministers who
labor in the Word and Doctrine, and are worthy of double honor, of reverence,
and maintenance; witness the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. whatsoever Anthony
Peirson would make men believe, and therefore I cannot but observe that you are
so just and charitable to the Impropriators, that they must have some
recompense for their tithes; but for the poor Ministers of Jesus Christ, they
must be turned off with nothing, for this is the cry of many of you, as if we
were thieves and robbers, (as your Generation please to call us) and not
Ministers of Jesus Christ.

But let me speak a little further to what you say to the Impropriators; you
say the Root is all one; I deny it (as before I did) the tithes of Ministers
are more ancient many hundred, yea some thousand years before any Impropriate
tithes were heard of in the world. Now you would have the Impropriators to have
some recompense for them, so would I also, but the less because they bought
them of such persons as had no right, nor lawful power to sell them; if Anthony
Pierson would remember what he says page 18. the conclusion will be against
Impropriators, and all others.

Anthony Peirson's case.
If tithes be absolutely due by the Law of God (says he) no custom, usage,
prescription, or Popish dispensation can acquit from payment of the utmost
penny, of the tenth part.

Mr. Bourn's answer.
Now I assume, but tithes are absolutely due by the law of God, as I have
proved at full from the holy Scriptures, besides multitudes of testimonies
witnessing the divine right, both in ancient times, and at this day.

Therefore no custom, usage, prescription, or Popish* dispensation can acquit
from payment of the utmost penny of the tenth part; this conclusion necessarily
follows from Anthony Peirson's premises.

And then first, all prescriptions, compositions, and customs for payment of
less than the tenth part, are utterly unlawful, and the detaining of such
tithes must needs be sacriledg for to take or keep away that which is Gods, and
belongs to Christ, and to his Ministers and Ambassadors, is a robbing of God,
and sacriledg, against which the Prophet Malachy proclaimed a curse, Mat. 3.6,
7.
and promises a blessing to the restorers of them It is a lamentable thing
that Lay men should receive the tithes, and the people maintain their Ministers
to teach (if they will have any.)

Again, if the Tithes be Gods reserved part, and belong to the Ministers of
Christ who preach the Gospel to the people, by Divine right (as we have proved
out of the Word of God sufficiently) then as Anthony Peirson confesses, the
Popes dispensation, or acquitting of any Lands from payment of tithes, was
utterly unlawful and sacrilegious, as was all his improper Appropriation, or
tithes to Abbeys, Monasteries, or any such popish inventions, sacrilegious also
certainly it was; and was not King Henry the Eight his taking and selling of
tithes from the Church sacrilege also? certainly it must needs follow, it was
a robbing of God, and of the Ministers of Christ, and so sacrilege: and then
is it not sacrilege in them that withhold them? this God has witnessed by
many examples, his wrath against such as detain them from the faithful
Preachers of the Gospel, as I have declared in my Justification of Ministers
maintenance by tithes, and as might be proved, by many sad examples of Gods
judgments against Sacrilege, both in this and other Nations, therefore it is
very good all the Impropriators should part from them, yea upon reasonable
considerations, since many bought them as Anthony Peirson intimates, for little
or nothing; but it is not that tithes should be taken away from the faithful
Ministers of Christ, but restored to them as their just due, both by the law of
God, and the most ancient laws of the Land. The Lord grant the Parliament may
lay these things seriously to heart, and provide a remedy, that the danger of
Gods curse may be removed from the Nation, and Gods blessing be upon them and
the people, till Shil^ the Savior Christ our Lord come again. Amen. Amen.

I. B.

I Shall add but a little concerning our Gleab-lands, and haste to a
Conclusion. Anthony Peirson (or at least many of his Society) or erring way,
have cried out against our Houses, and Gleab lands also, yea would have all our
Meeting-places, our Churches, our Steeple Houses (as they call them) pulled
down to mend Highways: so Churches and Parish-Ministers, all must be cast
away together. And would not this prove Sacrilege?

If you read Numb. 34.13. etc. the Land of Canaan was commanded to be divided
by Lot; and Numb. 35.2, 3.4. the Lord commands the Children of Israel, that
they give to the Levites of the inheritance of their possession Cities to dwell
in, and shall give also for the Levites suburbs for the Citysround about them,
and their Cities shall they have to dwell in, and the suburbs of them shall be
for their Cattle, and for their Goods, and for all their Beasts; and the
suburbs of the City which ye shall give to the Levites, shall reach from the
wall of the City and outward, a thousand Cubits roundabout. A Cubit was from
the top of the point of the elbow to the top of the middle finger (as learned
Weames affirms.) Doctor VVeams his Christian Synagogue, p. 192.
And the Cubit of the Sanctuary was a handbredth more than the common Cubit
was, so that here it is evident, the Lord had not only given the Levites
Tithes, but convenient Houses to dwell in, and Gleab-lands for their Beasts and
Cattle; and our Godly and Learned Countryman Mr. Ainsworth upon that affirms,
that the equity of this Law both for honoring the Lord with our substance,
Prove. 3.9. and for maintenance of his Ministers, Gal. 6.6. is perpetual, Josh.
21.
and these Lands were set out to the Levites according to Gods command, and
they taught the people by office, as Nehem. 8.8. and these Lands were never to
be sold or alienated from the Levites; and certainly the equity of this
remains still, that the faithful Preachers of the Gospel should have not only
Tithes, or value of them by redemption, but convenient Gleab also, and the
taking away of these, what is it but Sacrilege? (Caveat Emptor.)

Again you seem to be charitable to the Poor, and would be profitable to the
Commonwealth to pay the Soldiery, and provide for the Poor; and it is with
our Tithes and Gleab-Lands (as many of you profess.) You would have us robbed,
that others may be relieved; is this your charity and piety, like a Thief that
steals to give Alms, robs by the High way, and gives liberally to the Beggars
and poor Cripples that are there waiting for an Alms; certainly this charity is
not Christian charity, but abominable iniquity. In our Honorable Army I know
there are many truly religious and godly Gentlemen, who would not be paid with
that which belongs to Christ, but with the Money and Estate of the
Commonwealth, and good reason they should, For who goes a warfare at their
own charge, says that great Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 9.7. I have done with this
also.

But a word to your word to the Parish Ministers.

Anthony Peirsons case.
Thirdly say you to the Parish Ministers,With these I desire to expostulate the
matter; First, as touching the end of their work. Secondly, as to the way of
their maintenance, etc.

Mr. Bourn's answer.
I answer to your quarrel, why in Market Towns, and other places where there is
small Maintenance, there is but a poor Vicar, or poor reading Curate, and the
people untaught; you mean, why do not Ministers preach there without
Maintenance, or take such small places: is this your meaning? I answer, that
there is not maintenance in such places, see where the fault is, I am sure it
is none of ours, we must live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14. And Secondly for
Preaching, if your eyes be not blind, or your ears deaf, and refuse to hear,
you might hear and know that many godly Ministers do preach in Market Towns,
and many other places freely, witness weekly Lectures, and monthly Exercises,
in which commonly two Ministers join together, and preach to the great comfort
of Christian souls, whose hearts God moves to attend at wisdoms gates; Prove.
8.34.
this is the practice in London, in Derby-shire where I lived, and is in
Leichestershire where I now live, and in Lincolnshire, and Rutlandshire,
Northamptonshire, and in many other places: and this I have known near this
fifty year, and have Preached my self in many places; but you would fain find
some fault with the Ministers of Christ, that you like other Antichristian
enemies might root us out, if it lay in your power. But this I shall and do
tell you, that if Ephesus judgment fall upon England for the loss of our first
love, if God remove the Candlestick of the Church and Gospel, then England is
undone, Rev. 2.3, 4.
as was Ephesus, and those Eastern Churches; I have said enough to answer your
quarrel against our Tithes, enough to satisfy any godly undeceived man
whatsoever; and spoken sufficient concerning our Gleab-Land, at which it
seems you have an evil eye.

Anthony Peirson's case.
There is a way (say you page 41.) which would establish the Nation upon a sure
foundation of true freedom, and give satisfaction (to some) separated
Congregations, as to Ministry, and maintenance, but it is such a way as is not
yet so fit to be revealed.

Mr. Bourn's answer,
It is some mystery of Iniquity sure, or depth of Satan's policy you are so
fearful to discover it; Rev. 2.24.
but if it be for selling our Tithes, and Gleab, and putting out the godly
learned Ministry, and putting in Jeroboams Priests, Cobblers, and Taylers, and
Tinkers, and such like to be Preachers: this way will please but a few people
in the Nation I am confident; and for our gleab-lands, I have showed they had a
higher Foundation than Pope or Popery by Humane testimony, besides Divine; they
were given in diverse places before Pope and Popery began, as in the times of
Arviragus whom you name in page 8. here in this Land, as I have showed at
Glassenbury within a hundred years after Christ, a fair Gleab-Land was given to
the Church to maintain the Preaching of the Gospel there; this witnessed by
diverse ancient Writers, some of which I have named in my Defenc^ before.

I say no more, but desire all to consider, whether if to devour that which was
sanctified and set apart for a Divine use approved by God himself (as the Gleab
to the Levites was) and after the Vow to make enquiry, Prove. 20.25.
may not prove a snare to the Nation? The Lord keep us from making Snares for
our selves, we have Enemies enough, whose daily designs are to make and lay
snares for us; but the Lord has delivered us, the Lord deliver us still, as he
has done for many years since, from the Powder Treason, 1605.
and since that from many deep designs of Antichrist, so that England may sing
that Song of Praise which Israel did, Psalm 124. If the Lord had not been on
our side (may England now say) when men rose up against us, they had swallowed
us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us, etc. Blessed be the Lord
who has not given us as a pray to their teeth: and the Lord continue the
preservation of these Nations in truth and peace to his Glory, and our Eternal
comfort. So prays he who wishes no worse to Anthony Pierson, nor to any that
sincerely seek true Happiness in Christ Jesus, but that when this Life is
ended, we may live together with Christ in Heaven for ever.

Immanuel Bourne.
June 25. 1659.
THere are diverse others who have writ against Tithes, that they may overthrow
the Ministers of England as well as Tithes, that Pamphlet called, The
Tythe-Cart overthrown; several Quakers and others in several Petitions to the
Parliament; all which may receive a full Answer in my Justification of
Ministers Maintenance by Tithes, if God be pleased to open their Eyes, which I
pray for.

I. B.

A DEFENSE OF Infant Baptism.
I Now proceed to your second Sandy foundation, The Anabaptists Answer. The
Second sandy Pillar, Infant Baptism. M Bour. Reply. (...) aspergo, I sprinkle,
of (...) a (...) fluo to flow, Hence (...) aspersus sprinkled. Heb. 12.24.
which indeed was your first you named in your Paper, before (...) join them
together: This is Infants membership by Baptizing or Rantizing of Infants (as
you call it) and our accepting of them by Baptism as members of our Church.
Take away that (say you) and you would have no Church.

For Reply, First to your terms, not Baptizing, but Rantizing of poor Infants,
I may demand of you that speak so much against humane Learning, and call it a
Popish foundation, whence had you your term of Rantizing? Can you speak Greek?
what, and without humane Learning? this were a kind of miracle, or at least an
extraordinary gift of that tongue which is now ceased. For Rantizo in Greek
signifies to sprinkle in English. And is this that you call cozening of poor
Infants in their cradles? Certainly that child that is sprinkled with the blood
of sprinkling, is not cozened; and so Infants have been, else they were not
sanctified from their mothers womb, as the Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 1.5. Lu. 1.15.
and John the Baptists; and so Infants may be still for what you have proved to
the contrary. Nor can you or any of your separation bring any Scripture proof
to the contrary, as clear as the Sun at noon day, without a consequence or
illustration, as you vainly boasted. If we examine your Scriptures alleged
against Infants to exclude them from being members of the Church of Christ, it
will be evident.

The Anabaptists Answer.
Your first place was John 13.34, 35. from whence you argue, That because
Children cannot love or declare their love one to another, as those Disciples
might who were men of ripe years, (...), you conclude they are not, they cannot
be Disciples of Christ, or Members of the Church.

Mr. Bourns Reply.
To which I reply, First, Where is your boast of Scripture proof as clear as
the Sun at noonday, without a consequence or illustration, Is not this a
consequence? What is ergo else? but I leave the Reader to see your weakness.

The Anabaptists Answer.
The rest of your places of Scripture you allege are all of the same nature,
and all consequences. I shall only name them, and leave the judicious Reader to
judge. The Scriptures follow, John 15.8. Mark 13.37. Lu. 21.36. Mat. 13.11. Lu.
14.33. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. and 11.28, 29. ^ Cor. 6.4. 1 Th. 5.2, 3, 4, 5. Heb.
6.11.12. 1 Th. 2.11. Ep. 2.2, 3. These are the Scriptures you allege, and to
all or most of these you add an ergo, a therefore, because little children
cannot do that which Christ requires of men of ripe years, therefore (say you)
they are nor, they cannot be Disciples of Christ, nor members of Christ's
Church.

Mr. Bourns Reply.
First, For Reply, These are all Consequences still, and not Scripture Proof as
clear as the Sun at noon day without a consequence or illustration: Contrary to
your vapor at the first. And they are false consequences also; for God does
not require as much of little children to make them Members of the Church, as
he does of men and women of ripe years; and yet they may be Members of the
Church of Christ, as no doubt Jeremiah, and John the Baptist and Isaa^ ^^ere
even in their Infancy; yea, and all the elect children of God to the end of the
world, yea, members of the visible Church when they are admitted by Baptism, as
Isaac was when he was admitted by Circumcision. A Light from christ, pr. 1646.
But I have answered this long ago in my greater Light from Christ, leading
unto Christ, noted before, p. 284, 290, 291. I give a distinction of
Church Members.

1. Men and women of ripe years converted to the Faith of Christ, and of these
a declaration of faith and repentance is needful to a complete membership in
the Church, and to practice those duties Christ requires in those places of
Scripture you have alleged.

2. Children of believing Parents, (...) in the Church, and of these, those
duties are not required to be admitted Infant-members of the Church: But when
they grow up in the knowledge and faith of Christ, then a declaration of their
faith and repentance is necessary before they be admitted to the Lords Supper,
that great and distinguishing Ordinance of Christ, in which there is a sweet
communion of members with Christ their Head, 1 Cor. 10 16, 17. My Book, pr.
1646. Mr. Marshall, pr. 1646. M. Blake pr. 1653. Mr. B^xter, print. 1656.
and one with another. I refer you further to my own Book recited before, and
to the labors of so many Learned and Godly men, who have writ of this Subject;
to godly and learned Mr. Marsha his Sermon for proof of Infant Baptism, learned
and laborious Mr. Blak^'s Treatise of Birth Privilege, and Covenant Holiness
of Believers, in answer to Mr. Tombs, Learned and laborious Mr. B^xer's
^lain-Scripture-Proof for Infant Baptism. ^r. Cook's Font Uncovered. And the
Reformed Churches in their Harmony of Confessions, and Profession of pure and
holy Faith, in all the Kingdoms, Nations and Provinces of Europe, Allowed by
public Authority, and Imprinted by Tho. Thomas, Printer to the University of
Cambridge (1586) now about 72 years since. The Anabaptists Doctrine denying
Infant Baptism, is condemned, and Infant Baptism is approved, as lawful in the
Churches of Christ.

Thus the Churches of Helvetia, we condemn (say they) the Anabaptists who deny
that young Infants born of faithful Parents are to be baptized, for according
to the Gospel theirs is the Kingdom of God, and they are written in the
Covenant of God, and why should not the sign be given to them? Thus the Church
Reformed in Bohemia confesses they baptize their children. And the Reformed
Church in Bel^ia, Commending Baptism, they conclude, Therefore here we do
detest the error of the Anabaptists, who are not content with one only
Baptism, and that once received, but do also condemn the Baptism of Infants,
yea of those that be born of faithful Parents Thus the Reformed Churches in
France. The English Confession. The Reformed Church in Saxony, We baptize
Infants because Christ says, Suffer little children to come to me, for to such
pertains the Kingdom of God. And Origin writes upon the sixth to the Romans,
that the Church received the custom of Baptizing Infants from the Apostles, and
say they, Many things are written and published in our Churches by which the
Anabaptists are refuted. I let pass the Confession of the Reformed Churches of
Wittenberge, and others of the same Judgment. By which it is evident that the
Opinion of the Anabaptists, then springing out, was condemned in all the
Reformed Churches now above threescore and ten years ago: And these are but a
spawn of that horrid sect which did work mischief in Germany, and have been
long since condemned by the Churches of Christ. And whatsoever is written to
the contrary, either by your chief Teachers, or by other your miserable,
ignorant and scribbling later Pamphlets, it is already answered or replied unto
by such Reverend, Learned and Godly men before mentined, and others of our
Judgment, and that with sufficient Scripture Proof, and full evidences from the
voice of the Spirit of God speaking in the holy Scriptures, far better than
your false and non following consequences, you have brought against Infant
Church Membership and Baptism, although you find fault with us for
consequences. Read your best Teachers, and see if you can find one proof or
show of proof against Infant-membership of Believers children, or their
Baptism, without a Consequence or Illustration.

This is the proof of your writers against it by consequences. Read Mr. Tombs,
Mr. Haggar, Mr. Gosnold, and the rest. And if you use consequences against
Infant Baptism, and consequences which will not follow, why may not we use
consequences to prove the lawfulness of Infant Baptism? Pr. by J. S. 1657.
Read your late friend Mr Gosnold (as honest and learned as any of you) his
discourse of the Baptism of water and of the Spirit, read his first Chapter to
prove a Truth, That Water Baptism is to continue, he proves by a consequence.
That which was once commanded by Jesus Christ, and never repealed by him, is
still in force and to continue, but water Baptism was once commanded by Christ
and never repealed by him, therefore it is still in force and to continue. Thus
I may argue against you for Infant Baptism.

That which was once commanded by Christ, and never repealed by him is still in
force and to continue. But an outward sign and seal of the righteousness of
Faith, and privilege of Church membership was once commanded by Christ and
appointed for Believers and their infant-children, Genesis 17.7.
viz. circumcision to Abraham, and Isaac at eight days old, and never repealed
by Christ; Therefore a sign and seal of the righteousness of Faith, and
privilege of Church Membership is still to continue to Believers and their
children: And if children must have the same sign with their Parents, then what
but Baptism; but you cast off our consequences, though you make bold with them
your selves. I urged this argument twelve years since, therefore I leave it off.

Again read John Gosnold his second Chapter, where he labors to prove the
manner of Baptizing, that it was by dipping the whole body in water, his
seeming proof is by consequence.

1. From men's testimony.

And 2. From the nature of the word signifying to dip, though the word does not
only signify to dip, and no Scripture says that they did dip the whole body
in water. And if they had, yet a circumstance in Baptism may as lawfully be
changed, as the time of celebration of the Lords Supper was changed, which was
a circumstance.

Read his third Chapter, in which if he could, he would prove the subjects of
Baptism to be grown persons, fitly qualified, and not Infants. His seeming
proofs are by consequences, and false consequences too, like those it seems you
borrowed of him; requiring those qualifications for Baptism, all which are only
requisite in men and women of ripe years, not of Infant-children of Believers,
to admit them to an Infant-membership in the Church. And what are his arguments
and answers in his Book, but consequences, not one place of Scripture as clear
as the Sun at noonday; as you boasted in your answer. And if both use
consequences, and agree in the use of these, wherefore is there such bitterness
of spirit because we cannot agree in Opinion? Wherefore are you so violent to
deny us to be Ministers of Christ, to affirm us to be Ministers of Antichrist,
and our maintenance Antichristian, as if you would destroy us and our Calling
out of the Nation. If you have such liberty to live ^uietly in the Land,
wherefore do you think us unworthy of it? The Lord heal our breaches, and unite
our spirits in Christian love if it be his blessed will.

A DEFENSE OF Humane Learning.
I Come now to another sandy Pillar and Popish Foundation, as you term it.

Third sandy pillar. The Anabaptists Answer.
This is Humane Learning: Take away that (say you) which you h^d at Cambridge
and Oxford, and then you have no Ministers, but Laymen might preach as well as
you.

Mr. Bourns Reply.
For Reply, 1. Do not you make use of Humane Learning your selves? Whence had
you your words of Art, Scholastical, Logistical, Sophistical? Had you them by
immediate revelation, or were taught them by some Apostate Phygellus, 2 Timothy
1.15.
that went out from among us? Or did you learn them from Books? certain then
this was humane Learning. How came you to so many Ergo's, ten or eleven one
after another, was not this by Humane Learning? and do not you make use of
humane Learning? How was the Bible translated into our English Tongue? Was it
not by men? and do not you read and write as you were taught? Now if you make
use of Humane Learning your selves, why are we no Ministers because we make use
of Humane Learning? Mat. 7.12.
Do as you would be done by, and let us have the same liberty you practice your
selves; this is fair dealing and Christian-like.

2. Again, do ye find so much fault with us, because we have been at Oxford or
Cambridge, It seems (I fear) that Oxford and Cambridge are great beams in
your eyes; you cannot but stumble at the glorious University-Libraries, and
fair Colleges, and envy that poor Scholars should by the charity and piety of
so many Honorable and Honored Founders and Benefactors receive maintenance to
nourish them in the studies of Humane Learning, as if Divine Learning were not
by Gods blessing attained there as well as Humane. I hope you are not like
those wicked men, against whom the Palmist prays so earnestly, Psalm 83.8, 9,
10, 11. which said, Let us take to our selves the houses of God in possession,
I would not have you nor any other to be of that mind, least that dreadful
curse fall upon you or them, which is there mentioned; lest God do unto you as
unto the Midianites, to Sisera and Jabin, who perished at Endor, and became as
dung for the earth. But I hope better things of some of you, and such as
accompany salvation, as the Apostle did of those to whom he wrote, Heb. 6.9.
though error for a time has deceived you. And let me tell you, I deny that
humane Learning is a Popish Foundation, except you will make Popery to be as
old as Moses, who was brought up with humane learning; for he was learned in
all the wisdom of the Egyptians, Acts 7.22. and that many hundreds, I may say
some thousand of years before there was any antichristian Pope in the world.
And blessed Paul the Apostle, was no doubt endowed with Humane Learning, as
before we have showed by his skill in the Greek Heathen Poets which he
alleges; and brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, as himself confesses, Acts
22.3. And this Six hundred years before that great antichrist the Pope, who
first took upon him the proud Title of Universal Bishop did arise. Pope
Boniface.
Read the History of the Church, and you may find it. But why are you so angry
at Humane Learning, which as well as you can, you make so much use of your
selves, as we have fully proved before.

Why do you charge us that our Church and Ministry are antichristian, and to be
separated from, because we make some use of Humane Learning, because we make
use of some arguments and consequences from holy Scripture to confirm the
Truths we maintain; and the ancient Faith once delivered to the Saints we
contend for, and to overthrow your errors? What! Is every Church and Ministry
builded upon a sandy Pillar and Popish Foundation, and to be separated from as
antichristian, which makes use of Humane Learning? Will not this argument
prove against your selves, pull away your sandy pillars, and pull down your
house and Castle of errors upon your own heads? If it be lawful for you to
use Ergo's and consequences, let me give you one.

No Church or Teacher that stands upon, or makes use of the sandy pillar or
popish foundation of humane learning to uphold their Doctrine and Church, are a
true Church of Chirst or true Teachers or members of any Church of Christ, but
of antichrist, and to be separated from, as from antichrist, and Babylon it
self.

But the Church of John D^rker and Toby Watson, or at least John and Toby yea
many more of their Opinion, as Learned Mr. John Tombs, Mr. Benjamin Cox, Henry
Haggar, and John Gosnold, and diverse others, yea the thirty Congregations of
your Society, no doubt make use of Humane Learning, as is evident in diverse of
their Books, as I have declared already you do, in your Paper sent to me,
witness your Terms of art, Consequence and Ergo's.

Therefore the Church of John Darker, and To^ya^atson, of Mr. Tombs, Mr. Cox,
Henry Haggar, John Gosnold, and your Thirty Congregations are no true Churches
of Christ, nor John, nor To^y, nor any of the rest true Teachers of Christ, but
antichristian, and to be separated from, as from antichrist and Babylon it
self, This is a consequence from your own premises. The first Proposition is
yours in substance in your Declaration sent to me of your grounds of
separation. The second is evident in your practice, in your paper you sent me,
making use of consequences and Latin Ergo's to maintain the practice of your
Church, and to oppose ours. And the conclusion necessarily follows far better
than the consequences you bring to prove Infant-children of believing Parents,
no Disciples of Christ, nor members of the Church. For the Universities, G. N.
Orat. 3.
the Learned tell us that it was the plot of that wicked Apostate Emperor
Julian by a public Edict to put down the Schools where the children of
Christians were to be educated, that he might more easily have put down
Christianity it self, for which Gods just judgment overtook him, and dying, he
cried out that Jesus of Galilee had got the victory, as elsewhere we have
noted. Certain it is the design of the subtle Jesuit carried on by Quakers,
some Anabaptists, and Familists to cry down Universities, Humane Learning and
Ministers, that they might more easily bring us back to the bondage of Popery,
blind Superstition, and antichristian Tyranny. And too many weak souls without
question are in this the servants of antichrist ignorantly; Job 42.6
which if they understood what they did, would bewail their ignorance, and
repent in dust and ashes. But for Humane Learning, we do not make that to be
the foundation either of our Church or Ministry, as you falsely accuse us; but
the Word of God, and the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ himself
being the chief corner stone, upon which the Church is builded. Witness Christ
himself, Mat. 16.17, 18. and the blessed Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 2.20. Yet we may
tell you it is lawful for us to make use of Humane Learning, and it is
necessary for us, since by the confusion of Tongues at Babels building, Genesis 11.
we lost those Original Languages of Hebrew and Greek, in which it pleased the
holy Ghost the holy Scriptures should be written for our Learning, Romans 15.4.
that we through patience and comfort of them might have hope. And although God
did miraculously bestow the gift of Tongues to the Apostles and others in the
Primitive times, as we read, Acts 2.4. yet that gift is not now obtained
without men's teaching, and much labor and industry. And had it not been for
humane learning, how could you have had the Holy Bible translated into the
English Tongue? or how could you spell, or read, or write English, or have
gotten any measure of that knowledge you pretend to have. I will easily grant
that if you had been trained up in the Universities, and had as much Learning
Divine and Humane, and as much Grace and natural parts and gifts of God, as
Gods faithful Ministers have, you might preach as well as we, and as lawfully
too, if you had as lawful a Call and Ordination to the ministerial Office, and
therefore whatsoever high thoughts you have of your selves, you are but mere
intruders and furtherers of the Kingdom of antichrist, and of errors, Mat.
13.25.
in stead of Truths, which such Teachers do sow, as the envious man did tares
amongst the good wheat of Christ. The Lord open your eyes to see your
presumptuous sin if it be his will.

Thus I have said sufficient for Reply to your third sandy Pillar and Popish
foundation of Humane Learning, which may much rather be charged upon your
selves, as favorers of antichrist, The Triumph of Learning by R. B. B. D.
Fellow of Trin. Col. in Came. 1653. Mr. Hall Pulpit guarded the 3 Edition.
and many Popish errors broached amongst you by diverse of your Society. But if
you would see more to convince you of your erroneous opinion of Humane
Learning, and your unlawful practice of preaching at unfit times, and unfit
places, to oppose and withdraw from the godly Sermons of Gods faithful
Ministers, Read those Books of the Advancement and Triumph of Learning over
Ignorance, and Truth over Falsehood, written by Mr. Boreman, and others. And the
Pulpit guarded, written by Learned Mr. Hall, occasioned by a dispute with a
Nayler, a Baker, a Plow-wright, and a Weaver, public Preachers, nibled at, but
yet not answered, nor can be, to justify your practices, whatsoever you or any
of your company pretend to the contrary.

A DEFENSE of the Sword of the Magistrate.
Anabapt. Answer. Fourth sandy Pillar and Popish Foundation.
I Am now at last come to your last Sandy Pillar and Popish Foundation which so
much troubles you, and causes you to separate from our Reformed and Reforming
Congregations, and this is (you say) The Sword of the Magistrate, which (say
you) the Priests have in all generations run unto; Take that away, and then,
you tell us, we would be in danger to starve amongst those we call Christians.

Mr. Bourns Reply.
For Reply. I cannot but wonder you should dare to speak against the
Magistrates sword, since you enjoy such Liberty of Conscience, and such
Protection under it. I had thought Tertullus Oration before Felix, might rather
have befitted you, Seeing that by thee we enjoy great quietness, Acts 24.2, 3.
and that very worthy deeds are done unto this Nation by thy Providence, we
accept it always and in all places most noble Felix with all thankfulness:
much more living under Christian Magistrates: A Christian Parliament, and
Christian Judges, and Justices, such as have been, and are so tender over, and
for truly tender Consciences, and of peaceable spirits, though of different
Judgments in their Worship of God through Christ Jesus according to the
Scriptures. Can you justly desire more than you have, except you would have all
in your own power? and if so, then we have cause by your expressions of your
minds to fear it would be very much against the Godly-faithful Ministers in
England, and their established Maintenance, both by the Laws of God and the
Nation, as we hinted before. But I believe I may guess at your meaning, you are
not offended at the Magistrates Sword as it is a defense unto you and your
peace; but as the Magistrates (blessed be God for it) by their Power defend Us
and Our Maintenance by Tithes, according to the Law and present Government
established; and why I pray you may not we have protection by the Magistrates
Sword as well as You? Is this a Peaceable and Christian behavior to desire and
be well-pleased with Liberty of Conscience, and quietness for your selves, and
to desire and endeavor the same may be denied unto us? yea to have us denied
our settled maintenance by Tithes, and We and our maintenance to be banished the
Commonwealth as Antichristian? Is this according to our Saviors rule, Mat.
7.12.
to do as you would be done unto? certainly no; this rather discovers a spirit
of Antichrist, a persecuting spirit rather than a spirit of love and peace,
such as becomes Saints.

But let me reason the case a little with you Is not the office and calling of
a Magistrate an Ordinance of God? Romans 13.1, 2, 3, 4.
read Romans 13. and consider it well; Let every soul ^e subject to; the higher
Powers, for there is no power ^ut of God, and the Powers that be are ordained
of God, and he that resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and
they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation; for Rulers are not a
terror to good works, but to the evil. VVilt thou then not be afraid of the
Power, do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same: for he is
the Minister of God to thee for good, but if thou do that which is evil, be
afraid, for he bears not the Sword in vain, for he is the Minister of God, a
Revenger to execute vengeance upon him that does evil, wherefore you must
needs be subject not only for wrath, but also for Conscience sake.

But your conscience is against the faithful Ministers of God in England, and
their maintenance by Tithes, and therefore You cannot be subject; and what if
Yours be an erroneous, deluded, deceived conscience? do You not then sin in
refusing to give obedience to the Christian Magistrate, and good Laws of the
Nation, which require the payment of Tithes? certainly you will confess you do
if there be christianity, or conscience, or ingenuity in you; but if you do
not, can you well say, why should any Minister appeal unto, or make use of the
Magistrates Sword to compel you to do your duties; are you not free, and have
Liberty of Conscience? I answer: if it were demanded, would you not have
liberty not only from Tithes, but from Taxes also if it were in your power? You
will answer as these thirty Congregations, (the Faith of which you sent me) do
in the Postscript of that Book, That you do own a Magistratical Power for the
governing this our English Nation; You do own it but with a limitation: I say
nothing to your limitation, I am sure for what I know, you have no reason but
to own the present Powers, and to submit and obey the Magistrates, and all
other in Authority, when they upon complaint do command the payment of Tithes
to Ministers according to Law, as in all other lawful commands; and as
Magistrates have a lawful power to compel, so the Ministers of Christ may
lawfully appeal to them for Justice and Right; and although I would not have
any of my Brethren to be contentious for trifles, or small matters, yet it is
their duty to defend, and not to lose the just Rights of the Church for
succeeding ages, especially in these days, when Sacrilege is by so many
accounted no sin, as if God had no special right now to any thing in the world,
and so men could not rob God of any part of the Creature which is his either by
Reservation, or Consecration, for maintenance of his worship and service; but
if this were so, why does St. Paul writing to his converted christian Jews at
Rome (such as were called to be Saints, Romans 1.7.) demand the question, and
reason the case with them, Romans 2.22. Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou
commit sacriledg? sacriledg sure then might be found to be a sin committed
amongst Christians, for such were these to whom St. Paul writ; it is some
question what kind of sacriledg the Apostle means: but the Greek word used by
the Apostle, Romans 2.22. (...) Sacrilegium committo, (...), Proprie ^st Templa
Despolione, Gerh. in Loc. M. Leigh upon the Romans. Calvinus in Romans Hac
ratione Ovidius metamorpho. 3. Sacrilegum appellat lycurgum ob contemptu Bachi
sacra and in fastes sacrilegos manus quae numen veneris violarant.
signifies to despoil and ^ob Temples, or to despoil holy things, things
consecrated to Divine worship, or maintenance thereof, as if St. Paul had held
as good a false Religion as a spoiling Religion, and although Sacriledg is not
worse, yet it is as bad as Idolatry, as that learned man Mr. Leigh well
observes upon the place. And godly learned and judicious Mr. Calvin in his
Commentaries, The Apostle (says he) understandingly opposes Sacriledg to
Idolatry, as a thing of the same kind, (certainly both a like odious to God)
for Sacriledg is a profanation of the Divine Majesty, (or of a worship and
service) or any thing that belongs thereunto. And this says Mr. Calvin was
not unknown to the Ethnic Poets, who called those sacrilegious who contemned
the holy things of their Heathen Gods; and what can it be but sacriledg, or a
robbing of God, when men violate and take away that which is Gods, reserved by
him for the maintenance of his worship and service; for the taking away of that
which belongs to God for the maintenance of his worship, certainly is a sin
which the Magistrate may take notice of as well as other: especially when as it
is a settled maintenance by the Laws of the Land, as well as by the law of God;
and certainly the Ministers of Christ may lawfully appeal to the christi^n
Magistrates for Justice, as well as the blessed Apostle Paul did appeal to
Caesar (a Heathen Emperor) against his unjust adversaries, as you may read,
Acts 25.10, 11. I stand at Caesar's Judgment Seat, where I ought to be judged;
to the Jews I have done no wrong, I appeal unto Caesar. I might show you at
large how good Kings and Magistrates have comforted and encouraged the Prophets
of God: The Levites they taught the people the good-knowledg of God before
Christ, witness good King Hezekiah, the 2 Chronicles. 30.22. He spoke comfortably to
the Levites, and commanded the people to give the portion to the Priest and
Levites, that they might be encouraged in the law of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 31.4.
and good J^hoshaphat before him honored the Levites, as you may see, 2 Chronicles.
20. And Nehemiah that good Magistrate contended with the Nobles in Judah for
profaning the Sabbath; and when he perceived that the portion of the Levites
had not been given them, he contended with the Rulers; and then brought all
Judah the Tithes of the Corn, and the Newwine, and the Oil unto the Treasury,
that the Levites might be supplied, and they might be dist^ibuted to them
according to their right, as is recorded Nehemiah 13.10, 11, 12. And we hope
that as God has formerly, so God will bless and honor this present Parliament
to be a defense to all the godly faithful Ministers in the Nation, though too
many desire they may be their destruction.

What need I tell you of Constantine the Great, that first christian Emperor,
what great respect he had to the Ministers of Christ, Eusebius in vi^a
Constantini.
witness Euseb^us in the life of Constantine: or of those many christian
Princes also, who endowed, and according to conscience and duty as they
believed, gave and settled Tithes for the maintenance of the Ministers of
Christ; I have given a Catalogue of many before; I might vindicate at full, and
justify the authority of Parliaments, christian Kings and Magistrates for
punishing of offenders, and their coercive power to compel refractory men to do
their duties according to the just and good Laws of God and men established;
but I refer you and the Reader to that learned Work of that learned and
laborious man, William Prynne of Lincoln's Inn, Esquire Entitled, The Sword of the
Magistrate supported, That Is a Book not answered, nor answerable, so as to
deprive the good Magistrates of their just Power given them by God, and the
laws of the Nation, over which the Lord in his wise Providence has placed
them; and thus I have done with your last ground of separation, which you are
pleased to call, A Sandy Pillar, and Popish Foundation, that is the Sword of
the Magistrate, Romans 13.1, 2, 3, etc.
but it is Gods Ordinance, and that which you ought to obey, even for
conscience sake, as we proved before.

And we must tell you, that we do not make the Sword of the Magistrate the
Fundamental of livelihood (as you imagine) though we do bless the Lord, that
our good Mag^strates are not against us, but for us; yet we live by Faith, and
we hope the Lord will strengthen our Faith to depend upon him, Hab. 2.4. Mat.
28.20. Heb. 13.5.
who has promised to be with us to the end of the world, never to fail us, nor
forsake us; nor do we fear starving amongst those we call christians, when
Tithes and all we had, were plundered and lost; we found by experience the
goodness of God in opening christian hearts to communicate to our necessities,
and doubt not but if the Lord should suffer us to be brought to the like
straights again, Romans 8.28. 2 Timothy 4.18.
yet we know all shall work together for our good, God is the same God still,
and will provide for us here, what he sees best, and preserve us to his
Heavenly Kingdom.

The Anabaptists answer and conclusion.
I come now to your conclusion, which follows in these words.

SIR, I might have added hereunto many Arguments from the Scripture to prove
what I affirmed: but I judge them needless, supposing that what is here
contained is sufficient to convince you, or any rational man in the world of
the Grounds and Reasons of our Separation from your Assemblies. Vale.

John Darker Tobias Watson.



Mr. Bourn's Reply.
Friends: I see you are very forgetful of what you boasted of in the first page
of your sheet of paper, That your Foundation Principles, (for as I understand
you, it is the Principle of your own Church you speak of) if you account your
selves and your company a Church of God, That these your Foundation Principles
have Scripture as clear to prove them, as the Sun at noonday, without the help
of Consequences, or Illustration; but now it appears it was but a vapor: for
let the Reader consider and judge whether you have brought any one Scripture
proof of these Points in Difference between us that is as clear as the Sun at
noon day, without a consequence or Illustration, I am sure not one, neither for
your first, second, nor third Ground of Separation. First, you speak
magisterially against Infant-membership, and accuse us as if our Church were
builded only of these, but you prove it not, and your places of Scripture are
all consequences; Ergo, etc. and so for your Second, your places of Scripture
are all falsely applied, they may belong rather to your selves than to us. And
for your Third, which consists of your Friend Haggars four legs, which you call
Sandy Pillars, and Popish Foundations, if any show of proof could have been, it
must have been by consequences, of which here you bring none, and so have
neither proof, nor show of proof: so that I may justly tell you what you had
writ in your Paper, is not sufficient to convince me, or any rational man in
the world of the sufficiency of the Grounds and Reasons of your separation from
our Assemblies.

Therefore I hope if God be pleased to open your eyes to see your Errors, you
will in Gods due time return to us again, I do not mean to join with those
Congregations, or Assemblies which are neither Reformed, nor Reforming, who
take no care to separate the precious from the vile, Jer. 15.19.
but admit all ignorant and scandalous to communion with them, whose Ministers
neglect Catechizing, that truly profitable and necessary work, to prepare
people for a ripe-year Church Membership, and comfortable fellowship with the
Saints, and the Lord Jesus Christ; 1 John 1.3.
but to join with those Congregations which are Reformed, and reforming,
whether they be Presbyterial, Independent, or any other godly Ministers, and
Reformed Congregations, for if they be godly they are Brethren, Genesis 41.24.
and will not fall out by the way, if they be of christian peaceable spirits,
and such as love and desire the peace and unity amongst the Churches of Christ,
which every faithful soul ought to pray daily for.

I leave the Reader to take notice of your VALE (it seems you will take your
leave in Latin, though you find fault with our Humane Learning)

But I conclude with my humble and hearty Prayers to our good God in Jesus
Christ, that it will please him to open your hearts to attend not to the
Doctrines of men, or humane Tradition, which they call New lights, but upon
true examination will be found old E^to^s, 2 Timothy 3.5, 6, 7.
which by means of your secret Meetings, seducing spirits have an easy way to
draw you unto, yea to wicked heresies; Gal. 5.20.
too frequent works of the flesh, scattered by diverse of you amongst poor
simple souls, but that you may keep close to the word of Truth, the holy
Scriptures, not wrested, 2 Pet. 3.17.
and falsely applied as we see too many do to the great danger of their souls,
and the souls of others. but according to the mind of the Holy Ghost speaking
in the Scriptures, and by plainer places giving light to understand those which
are more difficult: that being guided by that holy Spirit of Truth, you may
walk as becomes the Gospel of Christ, not in enmity against, but in peace and
love with the godly faithful Ministers of Christ in England, commonly so known
and esteemed, and in peace and love with the churches of Jesus Christ,
attending conscionably upon, and at the public preaching of the Gospel, that
you may receive strength from Christ in Grace, and in the end (if it be the
will of God) have communion with us, and all the Saints of Christ in glory. In
the mean time let us pray with the Apostle Paul; Romans 15.6, 7.
Now the God of patience and consolation grant that we may be likeminded one
toward another, according to Christ Jesus: that we may with one shoulder, one
mind, and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ;
which is the earnest desire and Prayer of him who subscribes himself, one
desirous to be found

A Friend and Servant to all the Churches of God in Christ Jesus, Immanuel
Bourne.
Waltham in Com. Leicester, June 10. 1659.
To the High and Mighty PRINCE, The Captain General of SIONS ARMIES, And the
Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, the Wonderful Counselor, the Mighty God, the
Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, the Great Lord, Patron and Governor
of his Church and Children, the Lord Jesus Christ.
The most humble Supplication and Petition of one of his most unworthy
Servants, and daily Orator at the Throne of Grace.
MY truly gracious Lord, the blessed Father of thy poor divided, John 19.23, 24.
distressed Church and Children, thy coat was without seam, woven from the top
throughout. O that thy Church and people were without Rents, Schisms, and
Divisions; but this is the grief of thy poor servants soul, that thine and thy
Churches enemies have sowed Tares among thy wheat, Judge. 9.13. 1 Cor. 1.12.
yea that a spirit of Division is come into the midst of thy Congregations, and
separateth Saints from Saints; so that one says, I am of Paul, another, I am
of Apollo, another, I am of Cephas, another I am of Christ, far unlike those
blessed christians in the Primitive times, who were of one heart and of one
soul in thy worship and service, Acts 4.32.
agreeing sweetly together in the Faith of thee their Lord and Savior; but
alas, alas how contrary are we to them, by means whereof instead of that bond
of love and peace, Ephesians. 4.34.
and that unity of the Spirit and truth which ought to be amongst thy
Disciples, behold a looseness for Divisions, and a spirit of Error and
Separation has made thy Saints naked to their shame, Exodus 32.25. Psalm. 2.1.2,
3. Psalm. 83.2, 3, 4. Isai. 26.8, 9.
Behold O Lord, Satan's Kingdom, and the Kingdom of Antichrist can hold fast
together and combine against thy Majesty and thy children, the desire of whole
Souls is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee; yea, whose souls desire
thee in the night, and whose spirits within them seek thee early in the
morning; but thy Kingdom outwardly seems like a tottering state, a broken
Nation, a people ready to be destroyed by a common enemy; I confess Lord that
it has been so in former Ages, Jerusalem was brought to great ruin, Lam. 1.5.
and their enemies were Lords over them, and adversaries the chief, by occasion
of their dismal divisions, yea the Romans, Titus, and Vespatian destroyed that
City. The Eastern churches falling into Error and Heresies, were desolate by
that false Prophet Mahomet, and the Turkish Tyrants, as the Western were by the
strong delusions of an Antichrist in Rome; and what will become of thy Churches
in these Nations if thou delay to heal our breaches, and to give Grace, Ps.
60.2.
the Graces of union and peace amongst thy people. O most blessed Lord, Romans
8.34. Ephesians. 1.17. James 1.17.
will thou not intercede for us to thy Father, the Father of glory, from whom
comes every good and perfect gift, for thy merits and righteousness sake, to
enlighten the minds, and move the hearts of thy chosen ones to see and consider
the great evil of that sin of fad Divisions and Schisms in the Churches, or
among them that pretend at least that they fear thy Name: and the great evil
and misery that hangs over all our heads, if thou in thy infinite mercy be
not our Protector and preserver. O that thou would discover the plots and
designs of Antichrist, Psalm. 37.12, 13 Mat. 1.16. Psalm. 124.6, 7. 1 Cor. 4.13.
and the abettors of that Kingdom of Darkness, and make thy children though
harmless as Doves, yet wise as Serpents, to escape the destructive traps and
snares they have and do daily lay for thy servants. Remember O blessed Savior
the reproach and scorn that is cast upon thy Ministers thy Ambassadors, whom
thou have sent to the people of these Nations, to turn them from darkness to
light, Acts 26.17, 18
and from the power of Satan to God. We confess O Lord, too many of us have by
our unfaithfuln^ss in our places justly provoked the eyes of thy glory, Isai.
3.8.
and because we have not been more careful to separate the precious from the
vile, Mal. 2.9.
thou may in justice cause us to appear vile, base, and contemptible before
the sons of men; yet Lord remember that although some unworthy ones have
dishonored thy name, and that holy and honorable calling, yet thou have many
that are faithful in the Land, 1 King. 19.18.
that have not bowed their knee to Baal: for their sakes therefore, and for thy
own glory sake, and the honor of thy great name, remember thy servants; and
remember I most humbly pray the enemies of thy Church, and of thy painful holy
Ambassadors; Remember and rebuke O Lord the sacriledg that is committed in the
Nations, Romans 2.22. Luke 10.7.
robbing thee of thy reserved part, which thou have kept for the maintenance of
thy faithful Laborers. Move the hearts, and touch the consciences of all thy
servants in Power and Authority, and put it into the hearts of the Parliament
to reform what thy all-seeing eye sees amiss in the Land, and give Repentance
to all estates, that thy Judgments which hang over our heads, may be removed,
Psalm. 39.10. John 1.3.
and thy great mercies continued if it be thy blessed will; and work such a
gracious union in the hearts of all thy Saints here, that walking in thy truth,
and love one with another, we may all enjoy a blessed communion in Grace in
this life, John 17.20, 21, 24.
and in the end that most glorious union and communion with thy own glorious
Majesty, yea with God thy Father, the Blessed Spirit, and all blessed Saints
and Angels for ever in Glory. This is the most Humble Petition of,

June 12. 1659. Thy most unworthy Servant, and Ambassador for thy Majesty,
Immanuel Bourne.

FINIS.
Books sold by John Allen, at the Rising Sun in Paul's Churchyard.
Mr. Caryl's 5th. Vol. 7th. Vol. 8th. Vol. 9th. Vol.
on Job.

Several Cases of Conscience concerning ASTROLOGY, and seekers unto Astrologers
answered, both from the Word of God, and from the Testimony of our most godly
and eminent Divines; published by a Friend to the Truth, in which Book Judicial
Astrology is proved to be

1. Expressly forbidden by the Word of God as a grand offense, and ought not to
be practiced, countenanced, and tolerated, Deu. 18.10, 11. Lev. 20.6. Isai.
47.13, 14. Jer. 10.2.

The Reasons why it is so expressly forbidden, are:

1. It is a practice whereby men do assume to themselves that which is peculiar
unto God, viz. Judgment concerning future events either concerning Kingdoms or
Persons, Isai. 41.22, 23.

2. Because it draws the heart of men from God the Father, and Christ his Son,
from considering the Works of the one, and harkening to the words of the
other, Isai. 5.12. Col. 1.8, 18, 19. Deuteronomy. 18.10, 16.

3. Because it is false, delusive, and uncertain, Isa. 44.15.

4. Because it nourishes vain and forbidden hopes and fears, Jer. 10.2.

All which Considerations published, are to this end.

1. As an alarm, that the Consciences of those that study it may be awakened,
that they may be fully convinced of the great evil that is in it, that
abhorring such an abominable evil that is so hateful to God, and a real
trouble to the Consciences of good men; by leaving the sin, they may avoid the
punishment.

2. That Conscientious Magistrates may know how nearly it concerns them to do
their duties, in vindicating the Glory of God, by putting a period to the study
of Judicial Astrology, a practice indeed that brings the honor of God into so
much contempt in the world.

3. Lastly, That all those that have a desire to learn it, and those who
enquire of Astrologers what good or ill Fortune (as they term it) shall happen
to them in the course of their lives, may through Gods Grace stifle such
unlawful desires; all which through the Grace of God shall be the prayers and
supplications of him (put up in the name of the Lord Jesus) who is their friend
to his power,

JOHN ALLEN.
He that conver^eth a sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul from
death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. James 5.20.




