THE Seamen undeceived: OR, Certain Queries to a printed Paper, Entitled,
The humble Tender and Declaration of many well-affected Seamen, Commanders of
Ships, and Members of Trinity-House, to the Commissioners of the Navy.

Wherein are may Objections answered, very necessary for public use in these
times.

By R. B. a Seaman, and Member of the Trinity-House.

Directed to Mariners and Seamen in general, and to all others among whom
the forementioned printed Papers have been spread.

But more especially it is commended to the underwriters of the said Paper.

Published according to Order.

Read all or none.

LONDON, Painted by Matthew Simmons. 1648.

The Authors Apology to the READER.
UNTIL this time it has been ever as far from my thoughts to come forth in
Print to public view, as it is for those things of the greatest antipothy to
be reconciled to a mutual agreement; Therefore I even wonder my genius should
be so metamorphozed, which was occasioned by the coming to my hand of a printed
Paper entitled The humble Tender, and Declaration of many well-affected
Mariners, and Seamen; Commanders of ships and Members of Trinity house, to the
Commissioners of the Navy; which having seriously over looked, I was not a
little amazed there at, considering what application might be made thereof by
the generallity, in these distracted times; And afterward finding my self not
deceived in my expectation, in regard it had such influence upon a great number
in City and Country, as to cause them to be possessed with an opinion, and
therefore to averr (as to speak truth with some reason, considering the latter
clause in the afforesaid printed Paper) that Seamen in general (except a few
inconsiderate persons) do justify what those aboard of the revolted ships
have done, in refusing to be under the obedience of the two Honorable Houses
of Parliament, where upon my thoughts were to have used my interest, that the
Subscribres might be called together to have spoken something to them by word
of mouth, in a way of persuasion to vindicate themselves in some other printed
paper, thereby to undeceive the people: But calling to mind how some
dissenting from them in the draft of their paper to which I speak, was hissed
at for speaking but reason (as all reasonable men not possessed with a
prejudicate opinion against the man must confess) I feared such kind of
dealing my self, and therefore desisted from that course; whereupon I was
troubled in so much that my thoughts seemed not to be contented, to abide any
longer imprisoned where they were conceived: but would violently break forth;
so I put pen to paper that I might give them vent, however thought to deal
wisely with them, though not to stifle, or destroy them, yet to hide them for
my own private use, and did so till some weeks being passed and notice being
given me that he that stands in the head of the underwriters was gone aboard
the revolted ships; I then thought it my duty to cast in my Mite amongst
others, of far better abilities, and although the unfittest and unworthiest of
all others (I speak unfainedly in my own thoughts it is so) yet seeing others
silent, from an opinion that it may (by Gods blessing) accrue unto others
benefit in a way of undeceiving them I thought good to proceed in the work,
and not valuing men's censures: but casting my self wholely upon Gods
Providence, am at length willing it should go abroad to the public view.

What I have to say it chiefly by way of Quere, upon certain particulars in
the above specified printed Paper, wherein I hope I shall not discontent any
that se^mes to be most concerned therein: but if any be discontented without
any just cause given them, I say, as the Proverb has it honi soit qui mali
pense, evil be to him that evil thinks, I think none and therefore have hardly
particularized any one man, neither bear I the least private grudge to any
one; Nay I think many of the underwriters to be as honest and well-meaning men
as my self, and drawn into that business through the deceit, or rather
deceitfulness of others, that do make them believe they break not the
Covenant, although they express themselves as if they would join with, or at
least stand as Newters in reference to what has been done, or is in agitation
to be done by those aboard the revolted ships. My great aim is of this deceit
to convince them. Jn fine God that knows my heart knows I desire not
Salamander like to be employed in the fire of Contention.

Thoughts of advancing the public good has put me upon this work, and
therefore I do not fear that I shall be rewarded evil for the good intended
hereby. Nay I hope it will be digested (as it was suggested) in much love, that
as many of us have done heretofore so hereafter on all occasions we may eat
and drink, and walk into the House of God as friends; which shall be the
earnest desire and Prayer of

Your Friend, and Servant to his power Richard Badiley.

CERTAIN QUERIES to a printed paper entitled the Humble Tender and
Declaration of many well-affected Mariners, and Seamen, Commanders of ships,
and Members of the Trinity house, to the Commissioners of the Navy.
Wherein that I may not be mis-understood I shall premise by way of Caution
these two ensuing expressions.

FIRST, that although I do abominate, and detest the actions of those aboard
the revolted ships as an unparralled breach of Trust, and therefore judge my
self bound by the National Covenant to use my uttermost ability (if I am
called to it) to help to reduce them to their former obedience, whether they
impede a Personal Treaty or not.

Yet know I am so far from being against a Personal Treaty with his Majesty
(if it be the only remedy to cure our maladies) that I wish it were to night
before to morrow morning; For what Christian would desire the wounds of the
Kingdom to lie open and not be healed up: But herein we ought to be very
cautelous, not as it were forcing the Parliament to it before the foundation of
a well grounded peace be laid, lest the remedy prove worse than the disease,
and while we seek to evade running a shore upon Scilla, we fall upon
Charibdais.

2. Secondly, that I may not be understood as one that is a Botufeu or kindle
fire, and one that in these times of division goes about to make the rent
wider, or a person that is a stirrer up and instigater to the shedding of more
blood. I say far be it from me so to do, I say, scatter them O Lord that
delight in war. Being verily persuaded that as for oaths, so for innocent
blood the Land mourns; the late unseasonableness of the weather seemed to
show it. Insurrections and offenses have come: but I am afraid woe will be to
them that have been the cause thereof; and let me tell you friends if any such
thing should fall out hereby, I shall wish my thoughts had proved abortive, and
on foresight thereof should presently desist, and say as Naaman to Elisha in
another case, so in this thing that I have made such progress, the Lord be
merciful unto his servant, and I should proceed no further.

But my conscience bears me witness, that I am fully persuaded it is the
nearest way to peace, and a mutual Agreement between our selves, to labor to
undeceive one another; for now some amongst those that under wrote the printed
Paper before mentioned, malignes and speaks disdainfully of others that
dissented from their opinion; I may truly say they know not for what, and
peradventure they think in what they do they keep to the Covenant, when every
rational man knows they seem to break many Articles thereof, as to instance
in that passage of the 6th Article, wherein we promise not to make defection on
the contrary part, or give our selves to a detestable Indifferency, or
Newtrality in this cause, which so much concerns the glory of God, the good
of the Kingdoms, and honor of the King. And let me tell you, I hope hereupon
those men amongst them who are moderate and have not their spirits greatly
imbittered, will be ready to say, the truth is, now we see out mistake; and
therefore we will apply our selves to join heart and hand against the Common
Enemy, that there be no decay, nor breaking out, nor yet complaining in our
streets: but Merchants be encouraged to trade liberally; and our selves may be
freed ftom those fears, that (if those Revolters be soothed up in their way)
will often possess us; as that from their example our own men may turn us a
shore, and do what they will with our ships upon every discontent.

Having thus by way of caution spoken to those two particulars, I shall now
proceed to the thing intended, (viz.) to endeavor the undeceiving of the
underwriters, and others amongst whom their printed Papers may be spread.

First, therefore I shall speak a word or two to the occasion of the meeting,
which produced the printed paper, and the rather because many of the
Subscribers may be ignorant thereof. The Honorable House of Commons made the
ensuing votes.

Die Sabbathi 17. Junij 1648.
Resolved that as great a Fleet as the Parliament shall think fit, be provided
with all expedition, for the safety of the Kingdom and the reducing of the
revolters.

Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parli.

Die 17. Junij 1648.
Resolved, That a Letter be written by the Lord high Admiral, to the Trinity
House, to employ their best endeavors for the manning the Ships of such a
Fleet with cordial and well-affected men.

Henry Elsing, Cler. Parl.

Whereupon the right Honorable, the Earl of Warwick, Lord high Admiral, did
write to the Master and Wardens of the Trinity House, a Letter, whereof
follows the Copy, I hope without offense to any: For without it the error
these men run into, could not so clearly appear.

After my hearty Commendations,
YOu cannot but take notice of the defection of some Ships of the Fleet, and
the great prejudice that may be occasioned thereby to the Trade of the
Kingdom, besides the interruption it may give to public settlement, which the
Parliament are effectually endeavoring. In order therefore to the safety of
the Kingdom, the encouragement and preservation of Trade, and the reducing of
such of the Ships as have revolted from their duty: It is now in agitation by
the Parliaments direction, That a convenient Fleet be provided and set to Sea:
And because nothing is of more importance, then the getting of the said Fleet
manned with cordial and well-affected Mariners, I do therefore recommend it
to you, (as that, that is of great concernment to the public service,)
speedily to employ your best endeavors for getting such mariners to serve in
the said Fleet, of whose courage and faithful affection to the Parliament, you
shall have very good assurance, and of the proceedings to make as speedy
return unto me as may be, by your diligent and effectual compliance. And
thereby you will not only give a further testimony of your care of the
public interest of the Kingdom and of your respect to the Parliament, the
House of Commons having by their Order published those votes, a Copy whereof I
send you here enclosed; it being resolved that your best endeavors in this
behalf be thus desired, I say you will not only answer their expectation
thereby: but will also more oblige

To my very loving Friends the Master, Wardens, and the Assistants of the
Trinity house. Your very assured loveing brother and friend, Warwick.

Whereupon the younger brothers (it seems) were ordered to be called to a
meeting at the Trinity house, which leads me to the first Quere.

Quaere 1. Whether you think it were sit, or justifiable that some Members of
the Corporation should be called, and others left out (who will think
otherwise but to carry on the design intended the more smoothly) and in their
rooms those (not members of the Corporation should be warned to appear) and
some of them invited to procure all the friends they could, that would be for a
Personal Treaty? Now if this be not contrary to reason and the Covenant which
in one Article tells us, we ought no to make factions or Parties amongst the
people, let the world be judge.

But herein I would not be understood, as if I meant the Worshipful the Mr.
Wardens and Assistants of the said Trinity house were blameable herein, No; I
am persuaded better things of them: But I doubt not but their Officers are to
blame therein, who (if reports belyes them not) some of them are very fit for
such a purpose.

1 Object. But it may be said, the Officers were ordered to call all Seamen, or
as many as could be got, as well not Members of the Co poration as thos^ that
were.

Answ. But why were not all the Members first called, as is usually done in and
among all Companies, and Corporations in such cases.

Quere 2. Secondly, Whether at such a meeting upon such an occasion, (where
every one should have free liberty to speak his mind) it can with the least
color be justifiable, that when a Personal Treaty was propounded, and one
replied saying (under favor) it is not the business of the day, we are called
to answer my Lord Admiralls Letter; let us therefore do that. (A very
reasonable request) yet that this man should be hist at by many, Nay, that some
should take the boldness to say it were a good turn to thrust him and some
others out of doors that dissented from them, or that some should add and say,
they that are in the revolted ships were as honest as those that were there;
with what reason such things should pass unreproveable it seems to me very
strange.

And now to the printed Paper it self, it having for its frontispeice, or
title; The humble tender and Declaration of many well-affected Mariners etc.
which leads me to the next Quere.

Quaere 3. Thirdly, Whether men that are rational and no way biassed, will not
(at least till you show, you do abominate the act of the Revolters, and will
endeavor their reducement) judge you well-affected to the Parliaments
proceedings the contrary way, especially if they look back to the occasion of
your meeting, and how you rallied about from the thing that was propounded or
desired in the Letter, to have a Petition drawn for a Personal Treaty at that
time, and compare that with the carrige of some at the time of the meeting,
which is above mentioned; and withal shall consider the latter part of the
Declaration it self.

The next thing we come to is the Declaration it self, which has this first
expression, you desire a petition may be drawn in the behalf of Seamen and
Mariners.

Quaere 4. Whether it had not been more fair to have desired it might rather
be drawn in the behalf of many, or some Seamen and Mariners, especially
since you might perceive that at that time many were not of your mind, and
many more might be found that were not of your opinion, as now more clearly
appears; for that above half a hundred that are and have been Commanders of
ships and Barques, equallizing as many of you in experience, have lately
declared they do abominate that unparalleld breach of Trust the Revolters are
guilty of; and they will use their utmost endeavor to reduce them, whether
there be a Personal Treaty or not.

2 Obj. But it may be you will object, would it not have bin more justifiable
to have been noted in your memoandum at the bottom of your late Petition, and
have said there were so many Commanders of ships, and so many of them Members
of the house: but to say fifty two of those were Commanders of ships and
Members of the Trinity house is not fair, when its clearly known not half of
them were Members of that Society, and some were only Masters of Barques, and
small Vessels.

Answ. To this I answer, there was some error in the printing because some few
amongst the fifty two were Masters of such small vessels as you speak on,
therefore in the Original it is only (note that fifty two of these are
Commanders, without these words, Of Ships. And then in the next place it is
confessed, many of them were not members of the Trinity House; and truth is, I
was deceived, the Memorandum should have noted, that some or many of them were
members of the Trinity House, being of that mind, we should not do the least
evil, that the greatest good might come thereby. Yet in that some of these were
members of the Trinity house, it is justifiable by the example of the under
writers of the printed paper I am now speaking to, because their Memorandum is,
that we must note the subscribers thereof were Commanders of Ships, members of
the Trinity House, and dwelling in and about London; when it is clearly known,
some many of them were not Commanders of Ships, nor Members of the
Trinitie-House: and some of them, as I am informed, did not dwell in and about
London. And now we come to the thing petitioned for, a personal Treaty.

Quere 5. Whether moderate men will not judge it had been much better to have
added to your request for a personal treaty; provided there be care taken that
such a foundation of security be laid, as may keep your selves, and those that
have adhered to you, from destruction; the rather, because they could not but
hear that both houses of Parliament had voted a treaty with his Majes y before,
and had answered the Essex men, that they had the business of settling the
kingdom, under consideration, and they would make a progress therein with all
the convenient speed that might be.

Now the next thing I come unto, is this expression, And it is humbly conceived
by us, that we are obliged and bound thereto according to the Protestation, and
solemn League and Covenant formerly taken by us to maintain and defend with
our lives, powers and estates, the true reformed Protestant Religion, his
Majesty's Royal person, honor and estate, and also the power and privileges
of Parliament, etc. Doubtless the words are good: But oh that there were in us
a heart to perfome them.

Quere 6. Whether men that compare the aforementioned passage with what
follows, will not be ready to say, These Men speak good words, but they seem to
mean nothing less. Nay, will not many be ready to say, These men speak good
words, but they seem to mean nothing less. Nay, will not many be ready to
say, This phrase is only to make the paper seem the more plausible, (as
Pragmaticus and Elencticus so much brag of in their Pamphlets, God forbid
them that know the underwriters should think so of most of them. But if any
such were, let me say to them as Jacob by his sons Simeon and Levi, Genesis ^.
My soul come not into their secret, my glory be not joined to their Assembly.

Object. 3. But you will say, we did not only seem, but we meant really to
keep to the Covenant.

Answ. Indifferent men will tell you, your expressions show, you make as wrong
an interpretation of the Covenant, as possible can be. Do not your words seem
to declare as much, the Parliament ordered you should be called to give your
best assistance that faithful men may be provided to man the Ships that are to
reduce the Revolters: You answer, Yea, if they, viz. the Revolters, shall
impede the thing ^ou desire. Now tell me, Is not that expression as much as to
say, You will either be Newters, or else join with their enemies, the worst of
which are Revolters: And does not so doing cross the end of the Covenant,
which was made to the end that men might have some weight upon their
consciences, to keep them from revolting from the Parliaments of England and
Scotland, and from joining with, or newtralizing with Revolters in this common
cause, which so much concerns Gods glory and the public good. Is there not
an expression telling, that neither directly nor indirectly, we are to make
defection to the contrary part, or give our selves to a detestable
indifferency, or new trality in this cause, which so much concerns Gods glory
by advancing Reformation in Religion, and uniting the Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, etc. And do you think these Revolters are more likely to advance the
one, or endeavor the other, then were the Earl of Marlbrough his Forces by Sea,
or the Earl of Newcastles heretofore by land. About which work of Reformation,
(while we are speaking) give me leave (as I go along) a little to expostulate
with you; Either it is the truth we should contend for, or not. That we should
not, I tbink no Christian that has taken the Covenant will affirm: If we
should, especially (since it has cost so much treasure and blood to purchase
in any measure) shall we now be so far from being valiant for the truth upon
earth, that we shall sell it for very trivials; or as the Gadarens dealt with
our Savior, shall we banish it, preferring our worldly lusts and earthly
enjoyments before it? At this passage it may be some will be ready to say, He
begins to make a preachment. However, before I pass from this passage in
reference to the Covenant, I must make a further digression to express my
thoughts about it.

First, that although I my self have taken the Covenant, and intend as God
shall enable me, to keep close to it in the sense it was expounded to me when I
took it: and although it be far from my thoughts to discourage any from
taking it, yet seeing it is made such a nose of Wax of, and so many turn it
about to their several interests, leaving the right rule it should be
expounded by, I heartily wish, care may be taken, that men put in Offices, and
places of Trust, may be judged fit and faithful by some other way and
principles, then by their mere taking the Covenant, lest some men of selfish
and corrupt minds (after the example of these Revolters in the Ships) should
for by respects, betray their Trust, and so open a way either for the ruin of
the Parliament, and those that have adhered faithfully to them all along; or,
which is worse (if worse may be) like those that are bought and sold as sheep,
they and we should be led to the slaughter before we know who hurts us.

But now to return again to the printed paper, having toward the later end this
passage, And if they shall impede a personal treaty; then with our lives and
fortunes we will endeavor to reduce them.

Quere. 7. The Quere then is, Whether the well-affected (amongst which they
profess themselves that framed the paper) will not think by that clause, you
put a mere mock upon the Parliament: For who knows not but the Ships revolted
appear as those that would join with the County of Kent, one part of whose
desire, or pretense, was expressed to be for a personal treaty. And if so,
what rational man can think it is likely, or with the least color probable,
they should go to the Isle of Wight, to impede his Majesty's passage over
toward a personal treaty, or otherwise, some think such a kind of impeding
you mean. But if it were not intended as a mock, as I think verily it was not,
will not such men (especially they that know what influence it had upon many
men in the Countries) conclude it a piece which has much wounded the
Parliame^ts cause, insomuch as they may say by you, as in another case Caesar
said in the Senate House; What, you my son Brutus: What, and you against me
also? What, you Mariners and Seamen, for whom we have done such things, what
you also against us? You cannot be ignorant, that whereas in former times the
ordering of the Navy, and the command at sea, was usually put into the hands
of Gentlemen that were Land-men, yet since our fitting (under King and
Parliament) men of your own coat have been placed at the Stern to manage the
maritine affairs of the Kingdom, and what else chiefly concerns the Navy:
insomuch that Masters of Merchantmen, being employed in the service, have
usually now the command of their own ships, not common before. And for their
better encouragement in those and the other ships, there is larger allowance
for wages given to the Mariners, then was given heretofore; and that wages
from time to time punctually paid them, a privilege above all others employed
in public affairs: and do you thus requite us? I beseech you therefore
acknowledge your mistake, or express your selves what you fully meant in time,
lest great provocations make great alterations.

But again, looking among the Names, I cannot but discern that many amongst
them have been in the service of the King and Parliament, which makes me
premise another Quere.

Quere 6. Whether indifferent men will not be ready to judge, (although I do
not think so of many of you) you acted against the kings forces for by
respects, as to gain, wealth, honor, or for some such sinister end: and now
that the Kingdom has more immediate need of you in their low estate; now you
leave them, and either side with, or at least (by your paper) seem to connive
with them that are revolted from their obedience; and if you were upright at
your engagement, and not biased with by-ends, why then keep you not to your
integrity while you dye?

I appeal to you all that were the subscribers: Will it not be of ill
consequence, that it should be told abroad, and published among the Heathen,
among the Turks, Jews, Armenians, and those other Nations, Italians,
Spaniards and French, that use to honor us in that as they have trusted their
persons and estates with us, so we have carried them up and down, and never
betrayed our Trust. I say again, when it shall be said, we join with, or at
least connive at those that have not broken their trust with Heathens, but with
their own Nation, the Representatives of their own Kingdom, etc.

Object. But you may say, We see many are seeming to ingratiate themselves into
the Kings favor, that they may save their estates, and gain his good esteem,
and why should not we, some of us being those that went up with our Boats to
Westminster, and thereby gave him such great distaste.

As in Mr. Calamies speech at Guild Hall.
I answer, An unjust way of doing that which otherwise may lawfully be done, is
not the way to have an estate: For God may so order it, that though you be
thought no Roundheads, yet your goods may: your goods may be Gybalins though
you be Gwelfes, as the story is.

To conclude, I will not take upon me to obtest you, but I entreat and
earnestly desire you, by your oath and covenant, and by all the good that the
Parliament has done for you, that you side not with the Revolters, or give
your selves to a detestable Indifferency or Newtrality in this cause, which so
much concerns Gods glory, and the Kingdoms good: But in time show that you
abominate that unparalleld breach of trust by joining with others, and that
freely to reduce the aforesaid ships to their former obedience.

Object. But some may object, If we be faulty, or blameworthy, could you not
tell us of it between you and us, or some other way; and have not you your
faults as well as others? Would you have them written upon your forehead, and
published to all the world in print, as you do by ours, setting it home with a
kind of violence.

The answer is in two parts, First, when I declare them in that kind, to inlect
or harden any others in a way that is not good, do it with a very good will,
it shall be such a kindness to me, that shall not break my head, no nor my
sleep neither in the least (if I know my own heart.

Secondly, had not the blow of your Declaration sounded far and near, this
Echo, or Countermand had not sounded so loud: For then I should have lost the
golden Rule, Do as you would be done by: Or that Rule, Tell thy brother his
fault first between him and thee.

Obj. But it is like some may object, It Is a bad bird will foul his own nest.

Answ. I appeal unto all unbyassed men in the world, whether it tends not
rather to cleanse it, when it shall be said at a great and general meeting in
London: Seamen without exception are perfidious, so that there is no trust in
them. And worse words also, if I am not mis informed.

Obj. But (peradventure) some may yet object, Now you have said all you can, we
do not judge that those aboard the revolted ships, have betrayed their trust,
because they engaged upon such terms as are expressed in the Covenant. And
that it may appear so, wherefore else were they called to take it, but as an
argument to prove that they were fit men for the service and employment. Now if
it appears they wheeled about on purpose to maintain the Covenant, or some
chief branch of it, as that wherein we oblige our selves to preserve the Kings
Majesty's person, honor and authority, that the world may bear witness (with
our consciences) of our loyalty, etc. And this they do out of conscience, in
that they see this clause so much slighted amongst those that should see it
performed, as well as any of the other parts of the Covenant.

Ans. 1. I wish from my heart, some further endeavors had been used to have
settled his Majesty and this Kingdom in their just Rights and Privileges. For
no doubt the one with the other ought to be equally endeavored, or at least
that some further reasons might have been given of the obstruction, that (if
possibly it could have been prevented) there might not have been so much
effusion of blood, as now is like to be. Yea, suppose I join issue with you,
and confess, that the Honorable Houses of Parliament (on whose part these
matters chiefly lie upon) have not taken those opportunities that (by Gods
providence) have been put into their hands, to redress a great part of those
grievances which is the cause of so much complaint at this time; yet
notwithstanding Revolters, nor their Abettors, are any thing to be excused from
being guilty of betraying their trust, since out of tenderness of conscience
to keep that particular Article above mentioned, they did not first acquaint
the Parliament (by who^ they were entrusted) of their intention to desist from
their service upon that ground, and were ready to deliver back the ships into
the hands of those they should send aboard them to look after them. But now to
deny the Lord high Admiral and others admission, which were desired to go down
to take charge thereof, and without order to go out of the Kingdom with the
ships, upon any pretense whatsoever, it is a betraying of their trust; insomuch
that I may appeal to all reasonable men, whether it may not be judged one of
the greatest wounds that ever the Protestant Religion did receive, in regard
that whereas the History tells us, some of the late Kings of France, (though
Roman Catholics themselves) have above all others employed Protestants, such
as were of the Scottish Nation, to be of their Lifeguard, and otherwise in
places of trust near their person, upon this account, that whereas the Papists
hold it no sin, upon some occasion privately to destroy and make away Kings
themselves: yet the principles the Protestants held, were in no case to betray
their trust. Now then in regard of this revolt that I have been chiefly
discoursing of, how for ever are their mouths stopped in justifying and honoring
of us for that particular principle of Religion, especially if we shall go on
saying, A confederacy with them that have made a confederacy in that kind.

Secondly, to make a fuller answer to that objection, that (if possibly) those
may be undeceived that think in what the Revolters and their Abettors have
done, and do, yet they cannot be reckoned among Covenant-breakers (I care not
who knows it) I never took pleasure in, or any way cared for tautologies,
amongst which some may say the ensuing passage may be termed, having spoken to
the Covenant before: however, as the proverb has it, Necessity has no law,
therefore I must crave excuse herein, and so proceed.

Can conscience of covenant keeping argue for covenant breaking? or can
religion be pleaded for keeping one Article of the Covenant by breaking
another? Or is the Covenant against it self, that he that resolves to keep it
must resolve to break it. As Divines tell us that exposition concerning one
particular place of Scripture that crosses the end and scope of the whole, is
wrong construction. And so for the Covenant, it is not to be observed in a
divided sense, that is, we are not to observe one part of the covenant apart
from the rest. For every particular Article has such dependence upon the
other, that it cannot be separated; so that if you plead no breach of covenant,
because (as you say) you do no other then what you are bound to by the third
Article: yet that plea is not sufficient, because that Article is not to be
kept by it self, but as it stands in conjunction with the rest. Besides, in
that very Article there is conjoined so far, The Rights and Privileges of
the Parliament, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms, together with the
preservation of the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, that if you part
them, and go to work as the Revolters have done, you proceed directly against
that very Article, and (I may boldly say) break the whole Covenant. For was not
the Covenant made (as I have hinted it before, to detect the Parliaments
enemies, and unite their friends, was not the main end of the Covenant (so far
as it was civil) to join us together by a solemn bond, with hands lifted up
to the most high God, though not to be against the Kings Majesty in the
preservation of the true religion, and the liberties of the Kingdom, yet to be
against him and his party, as fighting to destroy the kingdom. With what face
then can men plead the Covenant in revolting from the Parliament and their
party, to join with the Kings party? Was it not a trick of Judas to betray
Christ with a kiss, and shows of love? And do not men deal so by the
Covenant, destroying the very life and spirit of it, under a pretense of
conscience to keep it? Does the Covenant bind us to Judas it by delivering up
the Kingdoms interest residing in the Parliament, into the hands of the sons
of violence, that seek to apprehend and destroy it by several insurrections
with swords and staves? Does the Covenant bind us to join with those that do
not only hate it, but them that have taken it, and for no other cause but
their faithfulness in so doing. To pretend covenant in joining with a known
common enemy against the Parliament and their party; what is it but with
Baalack and Baalam to pretenc sacrificing with a Royal design to curse
Israel? Are we not bound by the covenant to bring delinquents to condign
punishment, and shall we join with them, and plead covenant? In fine, if I see
any thing between light and darkness, these kind of men and their abettors, be
they what they will, whether in England or Scotland, or whether in City or
Country (and put in the Army too if you please) (having lifted up their hands
to the high God to keep the Covenant) they have falsified their oath, and so
without repentance make themselves liable to those fearful judgments,
threatened by the word of the Lord against covenant-breakers, as Master John
Vicars worthily sets down about the Covenant.

Note.
I would not be understood as if I would have no kind of compliance with such as
have been Delinquents, and termed Malignants; I clearly give up my opinion,
that many that were accounted such, were and are men of excellent natural
abilities, and otherwise, very useful in the Commonwealth, and therefore
showing how they have been led into a snare by the deceitfulness of others, or
having paid their compositions desiring to sit down and live peaceably and
quietly by their neighbors in the Commonwealth God forbid we should heave
dirt in their faces, by giving them any provoking terms, nay rather should we
not more and more convince them, by showing of love and respect to them, giving
them to see we desire peace by all means, It Is those that do endeavor to
raise and maintain a new war, with whom (I say) we ought not to have any
compliance, for they being such by whom God has suffered once again the
sword to be drawn; The sword the sword, the sword of the Lord of Hosts; the
bright glitering, or as the Prophet Ezekiel has it, The well furbished sword,
threatening to eat yet more flesh, and drink yet more blood. Lest we a nong
them may in all likelihood fall into the pit they have dug for others, and
with them drink of the same cup, yea (it may be) the dreggs of it, which they
have provided for the innocent, those against whom the points of their swords
and instruments of war are set, and they are ready to shoot at, and truly
that is (if I am not deceived) at the upright of heart.

Object. But peradventure some may further say, suppose his Majesty is, and
has been willing to grant whatsoever shall be conducing to the settling of
the true Reformed Religion, the Liberty of the Subject, and Privileges of
Parliament; and yet has not been hearkened unto by those whom it chiefly
concerns: But have (as you did seem to confess) slipped their
opportunities. Then have we not reason to be against them, and not be
accounted Covenant breakers?

Answ. First, If that were proved which you instance in your Objection, then
you may be the more excusable: but who shall be Judge therein, was not the
Parliament called together by his Majesty's Writ to consult of the great and
weighty affairs of the Kingdom. And afterward had they not liberty by Act of
Parliament to sit whilst these things aforementioned were settled to their
minds, that they themselves should think it fit to disolve; Again, did not
we by a free Election choose out Burgesses? to see that security might be
given, (if possible) that Reformation of Religion, the Liberty of the Subject,
and consequently the Privileges of Parliament might be settled and confirmed,
that so our peace might be established as the Sea, and our righteousness might
flow in as a mighty stream; Now then, either we did choose them such men as
Jethro councelled Moses to choose. Able men, such as feared God, men of truth,
hateing covetuousnesse; or we did not, if such men were chosen, I doubt not
but you will confess they are fitter to judge when security is given for what
is above mentioned than we are; and if the men chosen were not such men as I
have herein expressed; I think the fault does lie upon those that did not
look better and more norrowly to it at their choice, and then we must have
patience, or by way of humble Remonstrance we may acquaint them with our
greivances, and Petition for redress: But to precipitate their Counsels, and
to endeavor to destroy them and their friends, upon any pretense whatsoever; I
conceive (with humble submission to better judgments) is a very great breach of
Covenant.

2. Yet further, to Answer you more fully, you say, the Parliament have (as I
seem to confess the same) slipped some opportunities in which some further
endeavors might have been used, to have prevailed with his Majesty for a safe
and well grounded peace, or at least to have showed some further reason of the
obstruction, that if possible some of the damage that is now like to fall upon
the Kingdom by this new war, might have been evaded.

Answ. Though I wish something to the purpose you do here express, yet I do
not positively affirm they have lost any opportunity for accomplishing of the
aforenamed ends, because they see what we do not see, and know what we are
not made accquainted withal: But suppose I again join issue with you, and
fully confess what you may say, I seem to do, yet if it appear an
opportunity has been lost out of no by-end, or for no sinister respect, nor
yet through wilful neglect: but from a jealousy or fear, least they might go
as well to fast as to slow, the face of things looking as they did at that
time, and I add, if it appear they used their best endeavors that all
interests might be justly settled, and the Kingdom fully satisfied by their
waiting a little longer; if now the event has not fallen ^ut according to
their expectation, and the Kingdoms desire: Shall we go about therefore to
destroy them and their Friends? Simile.
God forbid, Give me leave to make one similitude, I shall leave the
application thereof to your selves; Have not some of us that have been
entrusted with Ships and other men's Interests, to ploy a Voyage sometime, have
we not lost an opportunity by which the proprietors have suffered much damage,
yet it not being wilfully done by us, (we being as willing to be doing for
accomplishment of their desire as they themselves could be) however the weather
looking untowardly we have waited a little as loath to proceed, lest we should
hazard all we have been trusted with, but in process of time it proved, by
not taking the op^ortunity, through our timorousness our friends have suffered
loss, however having done for the best; would we think it justice, reason, or
conscience, that our Imployers should seek to destroy us upon that ground? If
they should some of the Heathen would condemn them (for amongst which) the
story tells us, That some of their Emperors have called their Commanders sent
by them into the Wars, to give account of their actions, and upon hearing
every ones reason for what passed, and was done by them whilst they were
abroad, seriously weighing each man's saying for all their transactions: have in
their wisdom bestowed as much honor, or more upon them which have lost strong
Holds, and caused them to be much damnified, as upon those that have gained
Cities and strong holds, and greatly advanced them, being not able to give such
good reasons of their proceedings, as them by whom they had suffered the
greatest damage, I speak as to wise men that may know my meaning, and if so,
what I have to say is, Do as ye would be done by.

Obj. 8. Yet again it may be some will further object While you have been
laboring to convince others wherein they break their Oath and Covenant, yet
you seem to have no respect to your own oath, which was taken by you at your
admittance into the Corporation, or Brotherhood of the Trinity House. And
besides, would you not have a reformation in officers that are to be entrusted
in the public affairs, that your self may be preferred therein.

The answer is in two parts, as is the objection: but first, by way of
introduction, Are we not fallen into such an age wherein it is so usual for
one man to asperse and raise false reports of another, that it would be no
wonder if I be also (among other far better then my self) falsely accused: I
appeal to you, though yet we are not living at such a time, wherein it is men's
ordinary and common practice to deal one with another as Jesabel did by
Naboth, that is, 1 Kings 21.10.
subornefalse witnesses against each other, saying, This man blasphemes God and
the King, let him die: yet is it not ordinary to accuse one another as her
husband Naboth did Eliajah, 1 King. 18.17.
saying, Are not thou he that is the troubler of Israel? Or thus, Is it not
you, and such as you are, that trouble the kingdom? Were it not for you, we
might be at peace and quiet; Dealing with honest men therein just as you may
sometimes observe pick-pockets do, who having cut a purse, will with the
first, be ready to lay hold of an innocent man, crying out, This is the man,
this is the man, when God and their own consciences know they themselves are
guilty of the fact. Where is the well and Fountain head from whence the late
revoltings and insurrections came? Do you not think it is among such men as are
very active in charging others to be the troublers of the kingdom? I doubt not
but some among us run to the name of the Lord as to a strong tower of refuge:
but how common is i^ now grown for men to run to lies for refuge, yea and to be
strengthened the better to carry on their designs. To instance in one or two
particulars among many hundreds, or many thousands, I fear: A little before,
or just upon the revolt of the ships, a report must be raised, that Col.
Rainsborough should (without the order of the Parliament) impose a new oath
upon those that passed through the Downs; and to this purpose, to make it the
more credited, some declare up and down, they have seen letters, wherein Mr.
James Goody writes as much, (and withal how the Admiral got an anchor aboard,
and heft a peeke with the other. And in fine, would have fired upon him, but
that his men denied it, and all because he refused the new oath. Much longer is
the story of the particulars of that business (which if there be truth in men,
the Mastee, and others that were aboard the Admiral) affirm is a long L -- y.
Another he raises a report upon the rising in Kent, that he saw certain
Ferkins of Silver, (which were generally said to be Parliament men's) that were
taken out of a Frigot at Dedford, I hope no truer then that report of a Bull
turned out of Colchester with Flax fired upon the back of it; or the report of
him that said he saw Colonel Cromwell interred in Gloucester: Nay, I believe these
reports were only raised, that when the insurrections intended were brought
about and accomplished, then honest men should have their mouths stopped, as
not being able justly to vindicate either the Parliament or any of their
Ministers in Office. But yet give me leave here also to express my hearty
wishes, which are, that the Honorable Court of Parliament would think of some
way wherein it may be declared, and clearly showed to the people, how none of
them has hitherto, nor never will employ any of the public treasury of the
Kingdom, to their own private uses, except what part thereof they may justly
challenge as their due. I think I may be very confident in affirming; that if
Parliament men were now and then in such companies as we meet with, and did
there hear what we do; for want of this thing, they would with indignation
cast off those reproaches, and with that good Judge Samuel, would vindicate
themselves, saying, Whom have we wronged? and where is the man that can prove
we have employed the public interest to our private ends, and it shall be
restored three or seven fold? I profess, for want of something done herein,
oftentimes their best friends are at a stand, not having a word to say in their
behalf. But if yet we want of our expectation herein, is it not for beter
stating our grievance by way of remonstrance and humble petition to have our
grievances removed, then by making insurrections and tumults, whereby innocent
blood often falls to the ground. Pardon the digression, it being done purposely
that one noble Gentleman or other belonging to that House, casting his eye
hereon, may acquaint others thereof, that in time it may be of some use in
causing the work to be set forward.

I shall now give you answer to the objection: The scope of our oath is, that
we should do nothing to the prejudice of the Corporation, nor against the
government thereof; wherefore let what is here done, be carried to the
balance, and weighed. As to the matter of partiality, in calling some, and not
other of the members to the meeting, I clear the Society thereof it so far, as
that I tell you, herein I am persuaded better things of them, then so to order
it.

And then as to the other matter, indeed some may take exception, and pick a
quarrel with me, in that speaking of the incivility of some, I seem to charge
them with not reproving thereof. To which I answer, I mean not the Court) in
that passage, it being spoken out of their hearing; but I wonder such passages
should be unreproveable from some others that stood by when they were spoken.
And as to the rest of the particulars, to which I speak, they were met withal
without doors, having to do only with one elder brother, and nothing near the
one half of the younger brothers, or the rest of that Society: and if this be
contrary to my oath, I am yet to distinguish between light and darkness: Yet
further (by what I have heard) the Court or the most of the elder brothers did
not own the paper, and I hope never will, that nor any thing else that may
cause the to be mistrusted: as those that would seem to stand as newters. And
while I am mentioning those aged or Elder ones, Solomon's passage comes to my
mind, Prove. 16.3.
The hoary head is a crown of glory if it be found in a way of righteousness.
Then God forbid those should be found out of that way in a way that inclines to
detestable newtrality in this cause, which by lifting up their hands to God,
they have acknowledged so much concerns his glory.

Question 1. But some may ask, Is not the case altered?

Answ. Yes somewhat, in regard that whereas heretofore the Earl of Mrrlbrough
was seeking to destroy us by Sea, and the Lord Hopton and Culpepper the
Kingdom by land: now it is reported that the Earl of Marlbrough is about the
same work by Land, and the Lord Hopton and his Company is upon the same design
by Sea: So the case is altered, but the cause is the same.

Quest. 2. But now those pretend to be for a personal treaty, and so for peace.

Answ. Oh that there were in them such a disposition! As we use to say, there
is a great deal of difference between saying and doing, or between pretending
to do a thing, and doing it really. We know Ehud pretended fair to King
Eglon, till he had his opportunity, and then he thrust the Dagger to his heart.
To come a little nearer, even to some of the aforenamed persons: We know, or at
least may know, the Earl of Marlbrough came toward the ship Merchant
Bonaventure (as if he were for peace, with the Banner of St. George in his Main
Top, even till the Master of the other ship was provided to drink to him: But
when the Earl thought he could make sure prize of him, he then changed his
Banner, and like a Bear robbed of her Whelps, tears the ship both with great
Gunnes and small, and thereby the poor man, that thought his pretending and
doing would be alike, lost not only his own life, but some other men lost
their lives also.

Again, did not the Lord Goring and his Company at the entry into Colchester,
pretend a great deal of good will to the inhabitants? But now how many of them
cry out, Our Houses are burnt, and otherwise our wrongs by them have been so
exceeding great, that we may bewail our selves, as Jeremy in his Lamentations,
Lam. 1.1^.
Is it nothing to you, all you that pass by? Behold and see, Is there any
sorrow like unto our sorrow? and all because (...) were caught with the fair
pretenses of that party, and did not join heart and hand to keep out the common
enemy. And to come a little nearer, Do not some of them that went down into the
Downs, with confidence that if they met with the revolted Ships, they should
suffer nothing by the^, now advise their friends, how that their ammunition and
provision is taken away; so that their voyages at least are overthrown, and
they fear all will be lost. If yet men's eyes be not opened to see, it is high
time to be stir themselves. I would sound an alarm to my friends of the
Navigation; but because I would not be too tedious, consider some of the Heads
of what I would speak to, in case we now sit still, is is not like to be of
very ill consequence?

As first, Will not those Merchants, in whose employment (under God we have
gained something, be ready to charge us with extreme ingratitude, that now
their goods are already taken by the Revolters, and are like more and more so
to be, and they have no way to have it helped, but by our endeavors to redeem
the prey out of their hands that have taken it, and remedy the like for the
future. I say, if now we should sit still, like those that owed them no kind
of service, appearing like them that cared not for their destruction, but
laughed when the fears of their losses came upon them. I appeal to you, will
they not do as abovesaid?

Object. 9. Some Merchants are so far from encouraging us to go against the
revolted ships, that it is expressed often by them, they hope Seamen have more
wit then to fight one against another.

Answ. No man would willingly fight and shed blood, if any fairer means would
serve turn, (as Indemnity, and the like) but if no such means will do,
another course must be taken, and I warrant you when such men feel the smart,
received by their losses, and you get their estates redeemed out of the hands
of those aboard the revolted Ships, then they will be so far from saying you
have done ill, that contrarily they will say you are, and think you to be the
bravest men in the world.

But secondly, if we act not to clear the way for our shipping to pass to and
from the Sea without surprizall, it will necessarily follow, the Merchants will
ship off no goods, and consequently the shipping (wherein the Seamen are not a
little concerned) must as we use use to say) lie by the walls, and in their
rooms strangers be frhaigted to carry Merchans goods from the vintage to the
West of England; whereby it is like London will be served over land, although to
their great cost: and then how many other are the inconveniences that will
follow thereupon? I shall name only three.

The Clothiers, and many others that use to vent their wares at London to
Merchants for transportation beyond the Seas, must desist, and consequently the
multitudes of poor employed that way, will cry out against those that have
been the Obstructors of the Trade.

2. Again, will not the Manual Craftsmen about London, and the poor under
them, groan for want of employment, when shipping shall not go to and again,
as usually, and lament of those that are the cause thereof.

3. Will not ordinary Mariners, that by consequence must want employment, and
they being not usualy so provident as others, to lay up against such a time of
necessity, run to other parts and places of the Kingdom to look employment;
or, which is worse, nto other Countries, leaving their poor Families to cry
out under wants, against them that have been the cause of this great stop of
trade, and we know that here yes of the poor and needy come up into the ears
of the Lord of Hosts. Psalm. 12.5.
Oh then let us not be counted the cause of these evils, but in time let us
bestirre our selves in a way of endeavoring the reducing of the revolters,
before it be too late: and if men will yet be obstinate, give me leave to tell
you what I think of, Esth. 4.14.
If we be altogether silent, or Newters at this time, even Mordecai's answer to
Esther, Think not you shall escape in the Kings house, or if you will under a
pretense you are for the Kings cause, God will cause enlargement and
deliverance to come some other way.

Quest. But how is it likely? Answ. I cannot very well tell: But me thinks God
that has done so much for his people as he has done of late for us, will yet
do more (although by very despicable means) how ever our sins may be the
cause, our hope of outward prosperity may be diverted: And although I and
thousands of other men perish, however the Lord will carry on his own work.
Believe me friends, God will not answer the wishes of Mercurius Aulicus in his
pamphlet this week, no he will not stand as Newter in these differences. Which
passage while I am mentioning, me thinks many of the very Heathens would be
ashamed of such an expression, I pray God lay it no^ to our charge that in a
Christian City, where there are so many differing in judgment, one speaking
against (...) Fresbyterians, and another speaking against those they call
Independents; Psalm. 50.^
and its feared most speak against both: yet it is thought many speak not
against this kind of blasphemy, or these kind of blasphemers, of which says
^salmist, And because God keeps silence, they think he is altogether such a
one as themselves: but if men will reprove them, and set their faults in order
before their eyes, etc. All such would do well to read the next words.

Yet before I pass along (friends) mark, they wish God may stand as Newter, by
which expression they acknowledge God is against them. Job. 9.4.
O then what mad men are these to go on in such a way? us Job says, Who ever
hardened himself against God and prospered?

I am come now to answer the second part of the objection, in these words: You
desire a reformation in Officers to be put in trust, that your self may have
some preferment therein.

Answ. Is this a course to obtain such an end? Should a man run to the fire to
be quenched, or run into a hedge of thorns to find a better way? Again, did
you never hear how he that speaks the truth from his heart, makes himself
but a prey. Me thinks common Reason should teach men that in these times
wherein the raines of government are so far let loose, that hardly any thing
done or said will please men, men should be so far from having such thoughts of
others (especially if they have any calling or way to live and employ
themselves in) that contrarily they should think all would make excuse one
after another, What shall I leave my Calling wherein I have liberty to honor
God, and serve men, and go and be promoted over others at such a time? But for
further answer, I shall say no more then what is expressed in my Apology to the
Reader. For if a man should make all the asseverations and protestations in the
world, some would hardly believe him, the disease is so Epidemicall for men to
look after honor and great things in the world, that not only Mucknall, for
whom the East India Company had done so well for, appears guilty thereof: But
it is feared others that the Parliament of England has advanced, are likewise
troubled with the same malady. For the clearing of which, I wish they had
sounded in their ears, or rather into their hearts and consciences, some of
the deceased Mr. Burtons observations upon Solomon's words: Prove.
My son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are
given to change: for their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the
ruin of them both? Though this place seems at first glance to make for them,
they would then be convinced their going to the other side, contrary to
covenant, were as contrary to the scope of the words as possibly may be.

Friends, is this a time to look after great things? (what) while not an
Egyptian and an Isralite are one seeking to destroy the other, but these of one
and the same nation are putting peace far away from them, endeavoring daily to
dig out the heart blood of each other: insomuch that if any loved our Country
as Jobs friends loved him, and came among us, they would, as men astonished (if
not sit down and speak not a word for 7 days and 7 nights together) yet if
they did speak, it is likely it would be somewhat like the Prophet Jeremies
speech: My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at the very heart; my heart makes a
noise in me, I cannot hold my peace, because thou have heard, Jeremy.
O my soul, the sound of the trumpet, and the Alarm of war; destruction here
is upon destruction, and the whole land is like to be spoiled: especially if
they should go abroad, and see parties meet, and as those that went to a play,
or a sport, as the young men we read of before Abner an Joab 2 Samuel, 2.14, 15,
16. suddenly each man taking hold of the other, and sheathing their swords in
one anuthers sides: but more especially if they should take notice of our
battles, and the issue of them oftentimes both by Sea and Land (we wonder now
and then at the sudden death of a man) but there they should see hundreds of
healthy, stout, and strong men struck dead in the twinkling of an eye, without
so much as Lord have mercy upon us: in the Camp often like what Job expresses,
Job 3^. from v. 18. to 25. and in all battles oftentimes some seen with their
arms struck off from their shoulders, another is by him that has lost his
leg: here one with half a sace, there another fighting upon his stumps; a
little further another discharging his Musket, is discharged of his life. And
do you think this is a time for Christians to seek after great things for
themselves? God forbid this should grow into custom.

Obj. But why do you put your hdnd to it? Is it not out of pride, or some
selfish end or other? Ans. God knows I have bin willing enough to eschew
putting my hand: not that I was afraid to prove any thing of what I have said;
but all our natures are often timorous to meddle and own such matters as these
are, fearing Solomoms words should prove true, Rebuke a scorner and he will
scorn thee, In fine, persuasion of some friends prevailed with me, the rather
considering that otherwise it would be counted a pamphlet, and so thrown aside
without doing any good; especially if it had not been licensed by those the
Parliament has appointed to such purposes, which I judge would not in
likelihood have been without my hand were to it: and withal I was induced to
it from the remembrance of another passage of Solomon's, If a man's ways please
the Lord, He will make his enemies his friends.

I have (...) purposely to show men the evil of that so^ (...) ^h^ng of
Religion) that so much (...) to be among us of the Nav^gation; (...) some
objections, one is being this, That it is not (...) being religione, but for
being singular, and N^n co^. In my answer thus I argue: The Cr^ss^, (called
f^rme^ly that innocent Ceremony) to hang about ones neck, or at ones wrist; ^o
natural reason is of good use, to put us in mind of Christ and bis passion.
Q^est. Why th^n is it laid aside by the Church of England? Answer., as upon
this ground, Because God requires no such thing at our hands; so th^^ although
('it is natural reason) many other forms contended for among as, are fit to
promote devotion, yet by the same Rule they are not to be laid aside, or at
least we are not to quarrel with others for non conforming to them, especially
when as we cannot clrarly show, that that God that has commanded us to worship
him in spirit and truth, and has said, he seeks such worshippers, does yet
require us to serve him in such and such forms as we would have.

But because my Book begins to swell, and the work does more properly belong
to Divines, I shall now wave it, with this expression, Seamen go down into
the Sea, and compass it about from one end of the earth to another, having but
a plank between them and death, and in their Travise are subject to many
perils, besides th t which is very ordinary the springing of a leake, which
oftimes grows bigger and bigger, till the Sails like Pharaohs c a ^ot wheels,
can carry or d ive the ship or vessel no further, but incontin^n^ly like a
stone, all sinks down to the bottom without recovery Now then, would it not be
a sad thing, that we who are often delivered from such casu^lties, should yet be
judged as loose, profane, and a great if not greater scossers at God and
goodness, then any other in the kingdom.

To wind up all with a word of advice, although amongst Papists it is accounted
heresy for Laymen to meddle with Scripture, and we are fallen into such
times wherein are such outcries of Heretics, and Heresies, that were never
heard of, or least used to be so termed in the primitive times, most being
like those at the tumult of Ephesus, knowing not wherefore; yet I hope it will
not be accounted Heresy in me, to borrow a few Scripture expressions to
express my self in that way. My friends, or if you will have it in that word
so much scoffed at, My Brethren, Heb. 13.1.
be not provoked to wrath, but let brotherly love continue. In reference to to
my self I am neither fearful nor careful what ever clamours I meet withal
from those furious fools whose rage is above and beyond reason, considering
that place I have often thought of both at Sea and a shore, The waves of the
Sea are mighty, Psalm. 93 4.
and so oftentimes are the waves of men's proud minds, and they rage horribly,
but the Lord above is Mightier, and when he pleases (as in another place)
stilleth the raging of the Sea, the roaring of the waves, and the madness of
the people. In reference to your selves, I say, Psalm. 65.1.
be not provoked to wrath, lest ye heap coals of fire upon your own heads.
Believe it friends, they that join with, or connive at Revolters, or any other
that are about raising of a n^^ war, to troub e and oppress Gods good people,
that old live quietly and peaceably in the land, they were ^^st to consi^^r
what they do; For the Eternal GOD has spoke it by his Holiness, and said,
(wherein such kind of persons are proud) He will be above them. Again, as I
wish you not to be provoked unto wrath, so I wish you not to provoke one
another unto wrath: For it may be, seeing somewhat of evil consequence come
to pass by reason of what has bin done, and is in this Treatise so much spoken
against, some may be ready to lay the blame on others, as Joseph's brethren one
upon another but it ought not so to be, I have been taught a better L^sson, and
you may learn it also if you please; that (...) ^^ee are Christians, our duty
is to consider (...), Heb. 10.24.
that we may provoke one another to (...) to good works. Psalm. 133.1.
O how amiable it is for all especially for Brethren to live together in
unity! Let us therefore live and love without dissimulation; Rom 12.9.
yea, let me further advise, Me thinks it is no Atheism, though it may be
scorned at, and charged with folly, (if not in after times with Heresy) To
seek unto God, that whilst many have been like Nimrod the mighty Hunter,
towering up Bables of selfe-interest to themselves, and God has thrown them
down as fast; and whilst we are broken to pieces by division and subdivision,
and dashing our selves more and more to pieces, like a Potters vessel; he
would be pleased to show forth the riches of his Grace, and the exceeding
greatness of his wisdom in making us up, and joining us together again. To
which end, let us further pray, Psalm. 72.1.
Lord, give thy judgments unto the King, and thy righteousness unto the Kings
son. Let the Mouncaines of the Parliament bring us peace, Isai. 1.25, 26.
and the little hills thereof righteousness; Take away all our dross, and
purge away our Tin, restore us Judges as at the first, and Counselors as at
the beginning, that the helpless folk, and the poor may receive their right,
and the wrong doer may be punished. Psalm. 72.12
In their time let the righteous slourish, that God may be glorified, we may
have abundance of peace as long as we and our posterity shall have any Being.

I shall not now vigilantly overlook what faults may be in the phrases, or
otherwise by the Printer, an ingenious Reader will connive at them, coming from
a Seaman. But were the Title page yet to print, I should add to the Title: a
friend of mine would needs give the Book thus: Down right Dealing; or, a word
spoken from the Heart,

FINIS.

