Mr BAGSHAW'S SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT February the ninth, 1640. Concerning
EPISCOPACY And the LONDON PETITION.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Constable. 1641.

Mr BAGSHAW'S SPEECH In Parliament Febr. 9th 1640. Concerning EPISCOPACY And
the LONDON PETITION.
Mr. Speaker,
I Was yesterday and the time before, for the retaining of the London Petition,
and am in the same mind still; and therefore do now rise up against the
proposal of that question which is now called for; Whether Episcopacy it self
be to be taken into consideration by the Committee: wherein I do distinguish
of a twofold Episcopacy, the first, in Statu puro, as it was in the Primitive
times: the second, in Statu corrupto, as it is at this day, and is so intended
and meant in the London Petition. Now I hold that Episcopacy in this later
sense is to be taken into consideration as a thing that trencheth not only upon
the right and liberties of the subject, of which I shall have occasion to speak
hereafter. But as it is now, it trencheth upon the Crown of England in these
sour particulars, wherein I know, this House will willingly hear me.

First, it is maintained by the Bishop of Exeter in a book which he has writ
to this purpose, that Episcopacy it self both in the office and in the
jurisdiction is do Iure Divino, of divine right; which position is directly
contrary to the laws of England, of which I will cite but two or three in
stead of many more. The Statute of Carlisle 35 Ed. 1. mentioned in Caudries
case, in the fifth Report, says, that the Church of England is founded in the
state of Prelacy by the Kings of England and their Progenitors. Which likewise
appears by the first Chapter in Magna Charta, in these words, Concessimus Deo
and Ecclesiae Anglicanae omnes libertates, etc. and in the twenty fifth year
of Edward the third, in the French Roll which I have seen, there the
Archbishop and Clergy petition the King for their liberties, in these words,
thus englished, That for the Reverence of God and holy Church, and of his grace
and bounty, he will confirm all those liberties, privileges, and rights,
granted and given by him and his noble Progenitors, to the Church by their
Charters: which plainly shows, that they have their Episcopal Jurisdiction
from the Kings of England, and not Iure divino by divine right: and this
likewise is acknowledged by themselves in the Statute of 37 H. 8. cap. 17. that
they have their Episcopal Jurisdiction, and all other Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction whatsoever solely and only, by, from, and under the King.

The second thing that is trenching upon the Crown is this, that it is holden
at this day, that Episcopacy is inseparable to the Crown of England; and
therefore it is commonly now said, no Bishop, no King; no Miter, no Scepter:
which I utterly deny; for it is plain and apparent, that the Kings of England
were long before Bishops, and have a subsistence without them, and have done
and may still depose them.

The third is likewise considerable, as trenching upon the Crown, which is
that was said under the Gallery, that Episcopacy was a third estate in
Parliament, and therefore the King and Parliament could not be without them;
this I utterly deny, for there are three estates without them, as namely, the
King, who is the first estate; the Lords Temporal the second, and the Commons
the third; and I know no fourth estate. Besides, the Kings of England have had
many Parliaments wherein there have been no Bishops at all: as for example,
Ed. 1.24. of his Reign, held his Parliament at Edmundbury, excluso Clero; and
in the Parliament 7. R. 2. cap. 3. and 7. R. 2. cap. 12. it does appear that
they were enacted by the King with the assent and agreement of the Lords
Temporal, and Commons, where the estates of Parliament are mentioned, and not
the Clergy. Diverse other Statutes might likewise be named to this purpose,
which I omit.

The fourth and last thing is of the Bishops holding of the Ecclesiastical
Courts in their own names, and not in the name of the King, nor by Commission
from him, contrary to the Statute of 1 Ed. 6. cap. 2. and contrary to the
practice of Bishop Ridley, Coverdale, and Ponnet, who took Commissions from the
King for holding their Ecclesiastical Courts, as may be seen at this day in
the Rols.

And although it will be objected, that by a late Proclamation in 1637. wherein
the opinion of the Judges is mentioned, it is declared upon their opinion, that
the Act of the 1 Ed. 6. was repealed, and that Bishops may now keep Courts in
their own names, and send process under their own seals; yet it is well
known, that the Statute of 1 Q. Mary, which repealed the Statute of 1 Ed. 6.
was it self repealed by the Statute of 1 Iac. cap. 25. whereupon it was holden
upon a full debate of this point in Parliament 7 Iac. which I have seen, that
upon consideration of the Statutes of 1 Iac. and 1 Eliz. cap. 1. and 8 Eliz.
cap. 1. that the Statute of 1 E. 6. was revived, and that Bishops ought not to
keep Courts in their own names: So that for these Reasons so nearly concerning
the right of the Crown of England in the point of Episcopacy, I am against the
proposal of that question, and am for the retaining of the London Petition,
and for a thorough reformation of all abuses, and grievances of Episcopacy
mentioned in the Ministers Remonstrance, which Reformation may perhaps serve
the turn without alteration of the Government of England, into a form of
Presbytery, as it is in other Kingdoms of Scotland, France, Geneva, and the
Low Countries, which for mine own part, had I lived in these Kingdoms, I
should have been of the opinion of the Protestant party in point of
Presbytery, because those Kingdoms are governed by the Civil Law, which
maintains the Jurisdiction of the Pope and Papal Episcopacy, which the
ancient Laws of England condemn, being likewise in themselves opposite to the
Civil and Canon Laws. And if not withstanding all the Reformation that can be
made by the Laws of this Land, a better form of government may evidently
appear to us, concerning which there is no form now before us; it is to be
taken by us into consideration, according to that imperial Constitution in
these words, In rebus nobis constituendis evidens utilitas esse debet, ut ab eo
jure recedatur quod diu equum visum est.

And so Mr. Speaker, I shortly conclude, that for these Reasons, omitting
diverse more, the London Petition is to be retained.

FINIS.

