MASTER BAGSHAW HIS WORTHY SPEECH In Parliament, Febr. 18. 1641.

Concerning the passing of a Bill, for the disarming of the Papists within this
Kingdom.

LONDON, Printed by T. F. for J. Thomas, 1641.

A Speech made in Parliament by Mr. Bagshaw, Concerning the Bill passed for the
disarming of Papists the 17. of February, 1641.
Mr. Speaker,
THis Bill was Voted and passed by this Honorable house for the disarming of
Papists, and confining them to several places of safe custody distant from
their several places of habitation, I conceive will prove to be the
determination of all Plots and Conspiracies privately or publicly in agitation
by those of that Faction cofavourers thereof, that notwithstanding their malice
and malignant endeavors be not by the same extinguished and diverted, yet
thereby the opportunity of putting in execution their designs, is quite taken
away.

Mr. Speaker.

The distractions and Troubles raised in this State by that party, has
necessitated this Bill for their disarming and confinement; There is no force
so weak but upon advantage and sit opportunity it may do mischief to its
adversaries, no man so cowardly, but fit his disposition according to his mind,
whereof he may conceive himself out of danger in acting any design, but he
will be as ready as the most valiantest to put the same in Execution; There is
no man what ever he be if of an Evil and disaffected Spirit either to his King
or Country, although to the outward view never so cautious of offense, never so
conformable to the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom, but if an opportunity at
any time be obtained, will show what in him lies by his outward Actions the
secret intentions of his heart formerly harbored privately in his breast,

Mr. Speaker,

All men know, or at least may know if they will, that are of any judgment, or
have but reasonable understanding, the good Laws and Ordinances of this
Kingdom that have been made and enacted against Papists Recusants, And that
during the time of their due Execution in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; and
King. James of blessed Memory. The evil Spirits of that Faction that were
always plotting and devising mischief against the State and the very persons
of the godly and wise Princes thereof, but by the same they have been
prevented and all these practizes brought to naught, And that since the
remissness of Evil Officers to whom the Execution of these Laws was entrusted
in Executing the same to what a head and impudent boldness that faction is
increased; Is it not then time to beware of them, and by confirmation of the
Ancient Laws of this Kingdom, by this present and more then needful
Parliament, and such Order taken that they may be duly Executed, that such
Officers and Ministers of State may be chosen for that porpose as may
faithfully discharge their Duties therein, in conscience toward God, whose
cause they have undertaken, to defend in dutiful obedience to their undoubted
and lawful Sovereign, and integrity and duty to their Country, of which they
are Members.

Mr. Speaker,

We see to what height that party is grown in Ireland for want of timely
prevention, by putting the Laws in execution against them in that Kingdom,
while they were but weak in strength and power, we see the daily cruelties by
them exercised against the Protestants that they overcome. Their impudent and
altogether unreasonable Demands to the State and Council there, And can it
otherwise be conceived, that if they be not here in this Kingdom timely
prevented that they will not grow to the like height, do the like actions, and
work the like destruction to this State as of that, And surely their Spirits
are all alike, and when opportunity fits the same, there is no trusting that
Faction nor any adherents thereunto.

Mr. Speaker.

Is it likely, so long as the Grand Authors of all mischief, the Priests and
Jesuits, resident in any parts of this Kingdom be not searched out, and
executed according to the Laws, or banished for ever, that this State can be
safe or secure from their wicked Stratagems and divilish practizes, no surely;
Therefore let not time be protracted in expediting this Bill, by consent of
both Houses, and presented to his Majesty, for his Royal assent thereunto, and
that the Laws we now make and confirm may be speedily with severity put in
Execution; Their practizes with foreign States is not likely to be wanting
whole Eyes have ever been watching to destroy this our little Jsrael, The Pope
we may have just cause to suspect will now bend all his wits and policy to
defend his own cause which his servants have undertaken, and woeful experience
has made it too manifest, what bloody and cruel Wars has by their means
beeone raised in former times, not only in the King of Englands Dominions, but
even over the whole Christian World, and I believe? Nay it is too apparent, his
malice still remains against Christ and his true Religion, which God in his
good time restore in all his Majesty's Kingdoms to its ancient height and
glory.

FINIS.

