blazon or coat of arms

VRBS DEPLORATA. A SERMON Preached in Course In the Cathedral Church of St.
Mary LINCOLN, On the Tenth Sunday after Trinity, Aug. 19. 1666. Happening at
the time of THE GENERAL ASSIZE.

By Edward Boteler, Prebendary of that Church, Rector of Wintringham in that
County, and one of his Majesty's Chaplains.

Thren. 1.9. Noc recordata est finis sui, deposita est vehementer, non habens
consolatorem.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Octavian Pulleyn, at the Kings head in
Little-Britain. 1669.

To Sir John Monson, Knight of the Honorable Order of the Bath, and Baronet.
SIr, I have, not without smiling, observed how some doting Dogmatists of
late, pretending to a Gravity some Centuries higher then the Age they live in,
have scouled upon intitling Epistles, and by an affected Morosity have
attempted to explode this honest way of Dedication. I like not the humor at
all; it has too much of the Proud, or the Peevish, or both, in it. These
sullen Sirs, under pretense that they are afraid to be thought to fawn upon
others, do most notoriously flatter themselves: He is certainly the Grand
Opinator, that dares face this Age of Vertuoso's single, and venture abroad
with no better countenance then his own. Let Brutes creep into the World
without help: to Convoy a Youngling into its first light, is nearer of kin to
Humanity. Away then with such rude severities, let them be Tubb'd up with old
Reprobate Philosophy! Give me a Patron; and, if I may choose, give me him that
none can give but your self, that is, your self. A Lincolnshire Dedication
would not, should not miss Sir John Monson: you stand Title Page to your
Country; every Letter of your Name is great, and Capital among us.

These Sheets, Sir, were voted to you long since, but could not till now pass
some difficulties that lay betwixt them and the Press. And truly, I gratulate
their stay; for had they come out hastily, they would have looked like some
good Mood, or fit of Devotion to you; whereas now they speak me constant, and
that to serve you is my meditation.

Live, Great Exemplar of Piety, Prudence and Loyalty, and whatever may entitle
to Glory and Virtue: and live again. Live in your self, and live in your son;
all that know you both, hope so, pray so: there is but that one Copy of you, but
it is a fair one, a full one; and may happy Posterity speak you both to the
World. Honor, Blessing, and immortality be upon your Name. These are no seldom
ingredients in the prayers of, Sir,

Your faithful devoted Servant, Edw. Boteler.

A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral Church of Lincoln, on the tenth Sunday
after Trinity, Aug. 19. 1666.
IT cost me no pains to seek out a Text for this great Assembly; the Gospel for
the day brought it to my hands; there you have lately heard it read, there you
may again see it written.

Luke 19.42. Dicens, Quia si cognovisses, and tu, and quidem in hac die tua,
quae ad pacem tibi.

Saying, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things
which belong unto thy peace.

Saying. And whose saying is it? That would be known. It is the first word of
the verse, and calls for our first enquiry, lest we make an immethodical entry,
a breach upon the Text, and do it wrong.

But there is no danger of that, if we consult the words immediately foregoing,
they point at him, and direct us to him: He (they say) beheld the City, and
wept over it.

He: But who is that? Look a little higher, and you have him. He was a King, a
blessed King, a King that came fairly by it, that came in God's Name; Blessed
be the King that comes in the Name of the Lord, Ver. 38.
v. 38.

Do you not yet see him plain enough, but would you a more particular account
of him? You have him named, and may see how he was mounted, v. 35. They cast
their garments upon the Colt, and set Jesus thereon. You have him attended, and
may hear how he was applauded, v. 37. At the descent of the Mount of Olives,
the whole multitude of the Disciples began to rejoice, and to praise God with a
loud voice: As if they overheard that call of Zechary, Zech. 9.9.
Rejoice greatly O Daughter of Zion, shout O Daughter of Jerusalem, behold thy
King comes unto thee!

We have found then who He is, but we find him in a strange posture, one would
think; the holy Jesus is weeping, weeping even then, when the multitude of his
friends and followers were tripudiating, and in a transport of joy because of
him. Such are all joys on earth, they have their mixtures, and allays; pure
joy, and uninterrupted, is the reserve of Heaven. The Inhabitants of the New
Jerusalem are only thus privileged, Rev. 21.4.
to have all tears wiped from their eyes, and know no more death, nor sorrow,
nor crying, nor any more pain. When we have climbed the holy Hill, we are above
the reach of trouble; whilst we are passing the valley of Baca, Psa. 84.6.
the Pools are filled with water, filled till they run over: He beheld the
City, and wept over it.

And wept. And why wept? Valentinus indeed, (the Ecclesiastical History tells
us) like a Dotard, fancied a God weeping when it rained, and laughing when the
Sun shined: But how comes a Cloud in the face of the Sun? whence is it that
this Well of Life at the same place sends forth sweet water, and bitter?
Strange that tears should flow from the fountain of joy! Ludolph. vit. Christi
O but, Fons pietatis lachrymas continere non poterat: He was such a Fountain
of piety and pity, that he could not look with dry eyes upon the insolent sins,
and ingruent desolations of the Daughter of Sion. Isa. 53.4.
Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows. Nec planxit aedificia
parietum, sed subversionem animarum. He bewailed not so much their City, as
their souls; It was not so much the goodly stones of their houses, as the
ungodly stone in their hearts, which was the object of his tears. It is a rare
affection, and worthy our imitation, to be solicitous for the precious souls of
men. Blessed be that passion that has a sense of their sins, and sad estates,
who have none of their own.

When Saul was grown so bad, that Samuel declined all converse with him, would
not come at him, which was a long time before his death, Veruntamen lugebat, 1 Samuel 15.35.
Neverless Samuel mourned for Saul.

And what Bottle big enough to hold the tears which were spent upon this
wretched people? 2 King. 8.12.
Elisha wept because of the evil which Hazael would do unto the children of
Israel. Jeremy, because of that they suffered under the Caldeans, his Soul wept
in secret, Jer. 13.17.
and his eye wept sore, because the Lords Flock was carried away captive. And
as if he could never mourn enough unless he were melted, he would be turned
into a Well, an Ocean: Chapter 9.1.
Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night for the slain of the Daughter of my People!

It was the last Item which our Lord, that Man of Sorrows, Isa 53.3.
gave them in that black walk to his passion, (where, it seems, some had the
good nature to lament him) Daughters of Jerusalem weep not for me, Luke 23.28
but weep for your selves, and for your children. But since they had not the
grace to do it for themselves, he has the compassion to do it for them; for,
He beheld the City, and wept over it; saying, If thou had known, even thou,
at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace!

You see by this time whose the saying is, and what it means. Patent viscera,
St. Bern.
per vulnera; as his bowels did appear by those wounds which they after made in
his body, so are they here audible from his tongue, legible in his eyes, all
parts of him speak his passionate thoughts for the sins and sufferings of
Jerusalem.

Sins, and sufferings, they were not parted in his, must not be in our
mourning. We care not for them in conjunction, are over-apt to divide them.
Sufferings we quickly feel, and heavily complain of: scarce a word of our sins;
we go under them, as if we were insensible. Tears for sufferings overflow our
cheeks often; for sins, seldom fill our eyes. When we suffer we can weep
showers, but we put off our sins with a few heat-drops, and rarely they get
them too.

But this is a squandring away that precious Eye-water intended for better use,
and meets with few or no Comforters. Rachel wept, and would not be comforted;
she wept for her losses. Mary Magdalen wept, and found joy; she wept for her
lusts. Sorrow was made for sin, is good for nothing else; and whatsoever
streams run another way, are straglers, and have lost their Channel.

Let us then borrow from our sufferings, to bestow upon our sins: Isa. 61.3.
this will bring the Garment of Praise for the spirit of heaviness. This is
Aquam fluentem in Cloacam deducere in hortum, as St. Augustine expresses
himself; to turn the water which ran through the Sink, and bring it to the
sweeter and more delicious service of the Garden. And certainly we have cause
enough, never more; our sins are many, our sufferings not a few: The Sword has
slain its thousands, and the Plague its ten thousands; and the Fire has
devoured our Habitations, a Fire only short of that threatened in Jeremy, Jer.
21.12.
To burn, and none can quench: a fire only second to that in Deuteronomy, which
burns to the lowest hell, Chapter 32.22.
and sets on fire the foundations of the Mountains. And for our sins, who can
number them? How shall we list those Anakins which are all Commanders? Pride,
Luxury, Profaneness, Atheism, Irreligion, Whoredom, Drunkenness, and Oaths of
the new fashion; Propter hoc lugebit terra, Hos. 4 3.
therefore shall the Land mourn. Because of these, Ne faceat pupilla oculi;
Thren. 2.18.
Let tears run down day and night, let not the apple of thine eye cease. We may
well weep for sin, who are all sin, when he wept who knew no sin; we heartily
for our selves, when he so affectionately for others: He wept over it, saying,
If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which
belong unto thy peace.

The words are very passionate, and so somewhat broken, like the language of
Mourners. Griefs can hardly speak out: The Book of the Lamentations is observed
to have no Title in the Original; Cor. a Lapid. Arg. in Thren.
that which it now wears, was bestowed on it by the Seventy two Interpreters.
Sorrow is none of the best Speakers.

Flevimus, and gemitus Luctantia verba repressit. The affectionate thoughts of
our Lord abounded till they crowded one another; so that like a multitude at a
small Port, each hindered the others pass; broken words, coming from a broken
heart; a Soul sighing it self out in love, and with an earnest compassion
crying out, Oh that thou; or, If thou had known, etc.

Nor does the Aposiopesis, or repression of some words, make so wide a breach
in the sense, that we need fetch in any kind of Fillers to make it up.

Indeed if we make the [If] conditional only, then we must resolve with the
Commentator, Maldonat. in Loc.
Dictio si exigit aliquod verbum ubi quodammodo quiescat: there must be
something brought in for it to lean and rest upon, and it will need a larger
Supplement.

If thou knew, what? There must be an object for knowledge; it will starve
if it have nothing but second notions to feed upon.

If thou knew, what then? It must be to some purpose, or else it makes but a
sounding brass, and a tinkling Cymbal.

To supply these defects, Interpreters have busied themselves more then needed;
they might have spared their Paralipomenon's with more thanks. Some of them are
not worth naming: I Will only present you with two or three of the better sort.

If thou, The people in thee, and the chief of thee; knew me, as this poor
company of Disciples does, and as those lesser Cities which have acknowledged,
and received me. Annot. in Locum.
So the Italian Diodati.

If thou knew, Ruinam scilicet, and subversionem quae tibi imminet, how near
thou art to ruin and destruction, thou would weep who now rejoycest. So our
Countryman Gorran. In Loc.


If thou know, sicut and ego cognosco, says Gregory and Bid, Homil. 29 in
Evang.
What I know, and see coming upon thee, thou would weep as I do, and have a
more serious sense of thy sad and deplorable condition.

But this Conditionality ingageth it is followers in unnecessary difficulties,
and gives the Text not so much a supply, as a surfeit. Nor is it so safe Verba
foris accersere, Beza in Annot.
(says a learned pen upon the place) For if we may call in words at pleasure,
we shall soon open a way to heretical depravations.

If we must have condition, that of Saint Cyril, Augustine and Theophylact, is
doubtless best, who rest the Si cognovisses upon the following Quae ad pacem
tibi, and so make but one supply, thus. If thou knew the things which belong
unto thy peace, thou would not neglect the opportunity now put into thy
hands.

But what need this [If] be conditional, when it may be Optative, may better be
so? Praestat ut in optandi forma legamus, quam cum reticentia. Oh that thou
had known, or, Would thou had bin so happy as to know the things that
belong unto thy peace in this thy day! And then we have the complete sense
within us, and the sentence will be more emphatical: nor does this want the
countenance of the best Authors; for besides that it is usual in the elegant
Lucian, the Critics tell us that the Hebrew [Si] is often all one with an
[Vtinam.] And the Seventy two Interpreters have so rendered it more then once;
of which instances might be given, if it were a time or place for such a
purpose.

But I wave that. Be it a Si optantis then, Oh that thou had known! This
quickens the Emphasis, and suits well with that vehemence of affection, with
which our Lord did here intend to express himself, crying out both for and
against the City. Neque enim tantum miseratur urbis cladem: sed simul ingrato
populo extremum scelus exprobrat. He both pitties them because of their
ingruent calamity, and also objects to them their incomparable madness and
stupidity. For

Here is Oculus plangentis, and Aculeus pungentis. A melting and gracious eye
bewailing; and a sharp, and quick sting, upbraiding them for that sad condition
into which they had sinned themselves. And we shall see it the better, if we
look at it as the Text presents it to us under a threefold charge of Ignorance,
Improvidence, Impudence.

I. Ignorance, in Si cognovisses: If thou had known; and this heightened by
the personal aggravation of Et Tu, If thou had known, even Thou.

II. Improvidence, in that there was,

1. An Opportunity, In Die; they had a fair time, there was day for it.

2. A propriety, In die tua; it was a day to which they were especially
entitled, a day of their own. In thy day.

3. An Haecceity, or critical particularity, In hac die tua; it was one day
among many, and above all; a day with a This pointing at it, an Hic with an Et
quidem too, at least in this thy day.

III. Imprudence, in Quae ad pacem tibi: the things which they knew not in
their day, were of greatest concern to them, they belonged to their peace. If
thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong
unto thy peace.

We begin with the first charge against them, in the first words, Si
cognovisses, If thou had known.

Sed numquid Israel non cognovit? St. Paul made it a Query, and so may we, Romans
10.19. Romans 3.2. Act. 7.53.
Did not Israel know? Is it possible? To them were committed the Oracles of
God. They received the Law by the disposition of Angels. Their Fathers kept a
correspondence with God, by Moses, who was admitted to nearer approaches, then
any that ever wore flesh, and was not Divinity within. The Tabernacle of God
was among them. Psalm. 147, 19, 20.
They had Statutes and Ordinances to a Non taliter fecit, He dealt not so with
any Nation. So that Notus in Judaea Deus, was the triumphant Song of this
eminent people, In Judah is God known, Psalm. 76.1.
and his Name is great in Israel; and is it now come to a Si cognovisses, If
thou had known?

But it may be this Ignorance is among the Rabble only, where better cannot be
expected; This people who know not the Law are cursed; Joh. 7.49.
possibly the better sort are better knowing: the Pharisees took it ill that
their knowledge should be suspected, they ask with scorn, Joh. 9.40.
Are we blind also? We had best then take the Prophet Jeremie's course: Jer.
5.4, 5.
I said, These are poor, they are foolish, they know not the way of the Lord. I
will get me unto the great men; and how speeds he there? not a whit better,
These have altogether broken the yoke. Out of their own mouths we may condemn
these wicked servants; you have them boasting of their folly, Joh. 7.48.
Have any of the Rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him? The Priests said
not where is the Lord? Jer. 2.8.
and they that handle the Law knew him not. Samaritana Messiam cognovit ad
fontem, Hier. Ep. ad Rustic.
quem in Templo populus Jadaeorum ignorabat. There was abundant blockishness
lurking under the Gowns of the Temple, desperate Dunces among the Doctors; and
they that affected the name of Rabbi, and walked in print with their enlarged
Phylacteries, were but painted posts with some gay inscriptions, nothing in
them, as ignorant as any. The stupidity was universal, past Saint Paul's
Quidam, Some have not the knowledge of God: nearer the Psalmist's Non est usque
adunum, not one that understands, and seeks after God. They are all within Si
cognovisses; Our Savior bewailes them for it, upbraides them with it, If thou
had known.

Nor was it a simple nescience, but a sinful ignorance. There are several
things (as Parisiensis observes) to which a man may rereturn a Nescio, and not
blush. Ask the Divine if he can cut out a shoe, or shape a Garment; and he may
with a whole credit say, Nescio. Ask the Artificer if he can preach, it may be
some as bold as ignorant will pretend to it, but a prudent sober person will
say, Nescio; and it is no dishonor to him. It is safe to sit down in an humble
and contented ignorance, of what either is not the proper object of our
enquiry, or revealed to us, and required of us as our duty to know. Our Lord
chides such darings, repells them with a Non est vestrum, Act. 1.7.
It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father has put
in his own power. What God locks up, we may not break open. His Counsels are
great depths, Diving will bring in danger of drowning. Miranda sunt, non
Rimanda: We must admire them only, when we are not admitted to them.
Abscondita Domino Deo nostro, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
The secret things belong unto the Lord our God: but those things which are
revealed belong unto us, that we may do them. Not to do them shall have many
stripes, not to know them shall have some: the Si cognovisses has one lash at
him, If thou had known.

And that we may make good this charge, and give in the clearer evidence
against this Ignorance, let us (if you please) borrow the usual distinction of
Ignorance from the Schools, with whom it is, Crassa, Supina, and Affectata; We
need no more but them three.

1. In the Si Cognovisses, is Ignorantia Crassa, an Ignorance of some
thickness. Their eyes were not only made up with Scales, like Readiness; Act.
9.18.
but their whole souls were crusted over. What holy Agur says modestly of
himself, may be justly said of them: Prove. 30.2
Surely they were more brutish then any men, and had not the understanding of
men. Their rudeness set them below the School of the Ant, and those other
sagacious creatures, and ranged them with the Horse and Mule, which have no
understanding. Not so like Pelagius, born with one eye; as the man in the
Gospel, Joh. 9.2. Psa. 14.4.
who was born blind. These workers of iniquity had no knowledge. There was not
only Velamen in Mose, but Velamen in Cord, Mat. 13.15
For this people's heart is waxed gross. There was an (...), Theophylact's
word, Theophyl. in Loc.
a Nonsense upon them. So untaught they were, they knew not their own
language, in so much that after seventy years captivity, when Ezra read the Law
to them, they understood not what was read, until Scribes were appointed to
expound it, which was the original of that office, (which after became a Sect
among them) as some learned pens have observed. The King of Assyria gave them
as good as he took, when he transplanted Men from Babylon, 2 King. 17.24, 26.
and Cuthah, and Ava, and Hamath, and Sepharvaim, that knew not the manner of
the God of the Land. Here were the Prophet's Tenebrae, Joel 2.2.
and Caligo, darkness, and thick darkness. The Apostle's (...), Jud. 13.
the very blackness of darkness, nothing darker but Hell: A most sad Si
Cognovisses, If thou had known.

2. In this Si Cognovisses, is Ignorantia Supina, which, though some mossy and
overgrown Philosophers have confounded with the former, yet those of a modern
and quicker eye have distinguished according to the import of the word. A
gazing and a gaping ignorance, an oscitancy, they were an heedless people.
Wisdom stretched out her hands, and lifted up her voice, and no man heard, no
man regarded. Veternus civitatem occupat, (in the Orator's phrase) they were
under the seizure of sloth and obtorpency, dwelt careless, Judge. 18.7
after the manner of the Zidonians, quiet and secure; never regarded the work
of the Lord, nor considered the operation of his hands. Isa. 26.11.
Let his hand be lifted up, and they see it not. Let things go as they will
with Sosthenes, and the Synagogue, Act. 18.17.
let the Judgment Seat be affronted, they are of Gallio's humor, care for
none of those things. They think the Keeper of Israel, is as sleepy as Baal,
and say in their hearts (so Zephany charge them) The Lord will not do good,
Zeph. 1.12
neither will he do evil. The Storke and Crane, the Turtle and Swallow are let
fly in their faces by the Prophet, Jer. 8.7.
for observing their appointed times, whilst they know not the day of their
Visitation. They were weatherwise, could discern the face of the sky: Mat. 16.3.
but discerned not the times, looked not at those black clouds which hung over
them, and threatened a storm of wrath ready to fall upon their wretched heads.
Matt. 3.7.
John Baptist warnes them to flee from the wrath to come. Our Savior moves it
to them as a difficulty not to be easily encountered, Mat. 23.33
How will you escape the damnation of Hell? But they (like Job's Leviathan) are
made without all fear. Job 41.33
It was in theirs as in the days of Noah and Lot, Luk 87.28
They eat, they drank, and married, and bought, and sold, and planted, and
builded: neither the Old World, nor Sodom; neither fire, nor water startles
them; whilst they are inadvertent, they are safe. 2 Samuel 13.13.
Such Fools in Israel whither will they cause their shame to go? A strange Si
Cognovisses indeed; it is Ignorantia Supina, or neglectus Remedii, If thou
had known. That Is a second.

3. In Si Cognovisses, is Ignorantia Affectata, a worse Ignorance yet. They
knew not, and they would not know. Latet eos volentes, as it is in Saint Peter,
This they willingly are ignorant of. It is not so much Privatio Luminis, as
Aversio voluntatis, in Aquinas his words: The Judgment possibly sees, but the
Will says nay. What they see, they will not consent to. They forsake their own
mercies, and reject the Counsel of God against themselves. In Jeremie we find
them declaring, Jer. 44.16.
As for the word that thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will
not hearken unto thee. This their way is their folly; Psa. 49.13.
yet their posterite approve their savings: they are their fathers sons to a
little, or rather the Fathers are outdone by these children of disobedience.
How often do we meet with their disputes, (such as they are) against the Grace
offered? And what they could not do by agument they would do by arms, the
common trick of them that have a weak or wicked cause. Let them be followed
close, and they have their (...) to retreat to, such strong holds as will yield
to no summons or assaults of truth. It was usual with them to fence and
fortify against Heaven. When St. Act. 6. and 7.
Stephen preached that quick Sermon which out down so many Sectaries and
Synagogues before him, lest he should enter them by the force of conviction,
they stopped their ears, and ran upon him with one accord.

It is not once only we hear complaints of their obstinacy; Their Will Nots,
and Would Nots, are frequent, and notorious.

Nolumus hunc regnare, (there is one of them) Hunc, a lawful prince, no Usurper;
Regnare, a gracious reign, no Tyranny, or arbitrary imposition; No, all lies
in nolumus, it is their perverseness, Luke 19.14
We will not have this man to reign over us.

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem (there is another of them) how often would I have
gathered thy children together, as a Hen does gather her brood under her wings?
At noluisti, there is the mischief on it, You would not Luke 13.34
Et haec summa delicti est nolle agnoscere, quem ignorare non possunt; So St.
Cyrpian. No ignorance like that which will not know. It is Ignorantia
Affectata, or Rejectio Remedii, that is the third.

I have but two Inferences to make now, and we shall have done with this.

This Si Cognovisses tells us, there are Cognoscibilia, Things that may be
known; and Cognoscenda, Things that must be known.

1. Si Cognovisses, If thou had known; There are Cognoscibilia then, Things
that may be known. Here is no precluding by a Decree: If so, then had our
Savior's tears bin feigned, and this vote of his a very vanity, a complemental
compassion; his wish had not bin hearty, but hypocritical, as too many of that
rigid opinion are thought to be. S. Augustine has a hard saying, who can hear
it without shrinking? Quidam ideo non salvantur, non quia ipsi nolunt, sed quia
Deus non vult. But he was an Affrican, and had too much of the heat of his
country in his head oft-times, for which he may well be called Durus pater,
though otherwise of great parts, piety, and industry: The Church is in debt to
his name for the light of his Generation. It is pity he cannot be reconciled
to St. Paul, who tells Timothy, that God our Savior will have all men to be
saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth. If they may not, away then
with Si Cognovisses, our Savior meant Jerusalem no good, when he so
passionarely desired, If thou had known.

2. Si Cognovisses, If thou had known; There are Cognoscenda then, Things
that must be known, must, upon necessity, indispensible necessity. There is not
only the necessity of a duty in it, We sin if we be Ignorant: but the
necessity of a remedy, We die unless we know him whom to know is eternal life.
It is Maxim enough that of Fulgentius, Gravius Lex agnita, quam ignorata
condemnat, Knowledge damns deeper then ignorance, but yet ignorance condemns
too. Capernaum is damned with a Strapado, exalted up to Heaven, and then thrown
down to Hell, because they heeded not the advantages of the Gospel: but yet
Sodom, and Gomorrah (with whom the comparison is made) destitute of such means,
shall also suffer the vengeance of eternal fire. Vt mitius ardeant, is all the
miserable mercy which Ignorance can pretend to; it may alleviate, cannot
acquit: and what is that, when nothing of Hell is less then intolerable? To say
thou never taughtest in our streets, will be but an insecure plea in that day,
when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, 2
These. 1.7, 8.
in flaming fire to take vengeance on them that know not God.

And that for Si Cognovisses, If thou had known; They were Ignorant.

But that is not all Here Is an Et Tu beside, or, a Vel Tu (as Beza) Even Thou. A
personal, or rather a national aggravation of this Ignorance, If thou had
known, Even Thou. Thou with an Emphasis; Thou that have most cause, and from
whom it might most justly be expected, having bin brought up under the
Paedagogy of Moses, disciplined by the Prophets, and taught of God. Thou
rather, before, above all others; for it is a tacit comparison of Jerusalem
with the other cities of Judea, with the whole world: so notable a Thou is
this, Even Thou. And that the Emphasis may appear in greater force and vigor,
please to look at this Thou, through the following particulars.

1. Thou. And that Thou was Vrbs, in the foregoing verse, He beheld the City,
saying, If Thou. It was no rude, and untutour'd village, no infrequented Town,
and so void of commerce with what was more ingenuous and civil; but a City, a
place of Order and Discipline, under the immediate administration of Law and
Covernment, full of Synagogues and Schools, the chaffering place of opinions,
the Empory for tongues, Nations, Psa. 122.5
and Languages. There were set Thrones of Judgment, the Thrones of the house of
David.

Gadara was Swinish, knew not to prize a Savior, discharged him their coasts.
Micah was doltish, got a house full of Gods, made an Ephod, and Teraphin, and
consecrated a Priest: yet the less to blame, because one of them was a
Country-Town, the other a Grange only on Mount Ephraim; few paths of knowledge
led to them, they were out of wisdom's walk. But thou, Even Thou, A City, full
of people, great among the Nations, the joy of the whole Earth, and a Type of
Heaven. A chief place of Concourse, a Confluence of Priests, and Elders, and
Scribes, and Rabbi's, and long Robes, and yet be ignorant? Thy Glory is thy
shame, Thou the City, that is the First.

2. Thou, and that Thou was Vrbs electa, the chosen City. Psalm. 132.13, 14.
The Lord has chosen Zion to himself, he has desired it for an habitation:
this is my rest for ever, here will I dwell. It was the place he chose out of
all the earth to place his Name there. Deuteronomy. 14.23. Cant. 6.9.
She was the only One of her Mother, She was the choice One of her that bare
her: the Daughters saw her, and blessed her; the Queens, and the Concubines,
and they praised her. Others were vile, Psalm. 60.8.
and refuse in his eyes; Moab is my Wash-pot, over Edom will I cast out my
Shoe. Isa. 43.4.
But thou wast precious in mine eyes, and honorable. Deu. 32.9. Am. 3.2.
The Lords portion is his people, Israel is the Lot of his Inheritance. You
only have I known of all the families of the earth. Psa. 10.4.
And now through the pride of their countenance they will not know, nor seek
after God. Deuteronomy. 32.6
Do you thus requite the Lord, O foolish people; and unwise? Shall he that has
chosen you complain of you, Psalm. 81.11
Israel would none of me? It is an Ingratitude incomparable, a guilt could lie
at no door but thine, If Thou had known, Even Thou.

3. Thou, and that thou was Vrbs Adamata, The beloved City. What the Jews said
when they saw his tears for Lazarus, we may say, when we hear him weeping over
this City, Joh. 11.36
Behold how he loved it! Psalm. 47.4. Psalm. 87.2.
This was the Excellency of Jacob whom he loved. The Lord loves the Gates of
Zion more then all the dwellings of Jacob. Jacob more then all the world, and
Zion more then all Jacob. The time of this people was a Time of love, says,
Ezekiel. 16.8
Ezekiel: of love and marriage, and all, says, Esai; Isa. 62.4.
Thou shall be called. Hephzibah, and thy Land Beulah, for the Lord delights
in thee, and thy Land shall be married. They shall be mine, Mal. 3.17.
says the Lord of Hosts, in the day when I make up my Jewels. They his? and he
not theirs? That Is not fair. Isa. 1.2.
Hear O Heavens, and give Ear O Earth! Nay, Isa. 5.3.
Let the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and even of Judah themselves judge betwixt
God and his Vineyard. Amor amoris praetium; and it is a reasonable price too,
to repay one love with another. The Spouse thought so, Cant. 2.16
My beloved is mine, and I am his. St. John makes the same account, We love him
because he loved us first. 1 John 4.19
And this people were of that mind once, God remindes them of it by the
Prophet; I remember thee, Jer. 2.2, 3.
the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest
after me in the Wilderness, in a Land that was not sown. Israel then was
holiness unto the Lord; But now false and faithless that thou art, Thou have
forgotten me days without number, Jer. 2.32.
and have forsaken thy first love. Thou, even Thou, Rev. 2.4.
It was Vrbs adamata, that is the third.

4. Thou, and that Thou was Vrbs Sancta, The holy City. Jerusalem made Greek,
carries holiness in the name. Zech. 12.20.
Sanctum Domino, is the Motto and Impress of it, Holiness unto the Lord. It was
dedicated to God betimes; there Abraham sacrificed, Genesis 22.13
having commuted his Offering, when it was as yet but Mount Moriah. And after
that it was made the Residence and Station of the Arc, where God did exhibit
and presentiate himself, Heb. 9.1, 2, 3.
where were Ordinances of Divine Service, the Tabernacle, the Sanctuary, and
the Holiest of all, so the Apostle enumerates them. Hither the Tribes go up,
Psalm. 122.4
the Tribes of the Lord unto the Testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the
name of the Lord; so the Psalmist applauds them. To be short, Hier. Ep. ad
Marcel.
To tum mysterium istius nostrum urbis vernaculuus est; what ever rarity
sojourned in therest of the World, was at home in that City. Had it been Dan,
or Bethel, that had not known him, it had been less wonder: the infection of
Jeroboam might still stick by them, they were his nurseries of Idolatry and
Rebellion; He durst not let them know the worship of the true God, for fear
they should honor the King, and return to the house of David. Nor had it been
so much for Beersheba; they were naught by prescript, corrupted to a custom,
The manner of Beersheba lives (as it is in Amos) Secundum usum Beershebae.
Cha. 8 14.
And Samaria may go in the same rank with them, The Statutes of Omri are kept
there; Mic. 6.6.
they were devoted to the follies of Ahab their founder. But Thou, the City of
God, of which such excellent things are spoken, the City of his holiness,
Coeleste in terris Sacrarium, the Repository of all that is mysterious and
sacred, Thou to carry an Inscription like that Altar at Athens, Act. 17.23.
To the unknown God, Thou to be confuted by the Ox that knows his owner, and
be like the Beasts that perish, Thou thus to unhallow thy name, Hier. Ep ad
Eustoch.
Palma vitiorum est honesta polluere; This heightens thy sin, and hastens thy
ruin, If Thou had known, even Thou: It was Vrbs Sancta, The holy City; be
that the last.

I shall pass this particular by applying only as Nathan did his parable to
David, 2 Samuel 12.7.
Thou art the Man. This is ours too, We are an Emphatical Thou: Thou the
Church, and people of England, Psa. 72.12, 14.
delivered when thou were poor and had no helper, Redeemed from deceit and
violence, Am. 4.11.
A Firebrand plucked out of the burning: Hos. 6.1, 2.
torn, and healed; smitten, and bound up: killed, and revived, and thou live
in his sight. Deuteronomy. 33.29.
Happy art thou O people, who is like unto thee, saved by the Lord, the shield
of thy strength, and the sword of thine excellency; thine enemies are found
liers unto thee, and thou treadest upon their high places? The Lord has saved
thee to a miracle by Land, and showed many wonders for thee in the deep. The
eternal God is thy refuge, ver. 27.
and underneath are the everlasting Arms, and he shall thrust out the Enemy
before thee, and shall say destroy. Thy mercies are Talleys to Hierusalem's,
more then second to them; O do not overmatch her in sin and sottishness, be not
the transcript of her unworthiness; let it never be said of thee, If thou had
known, even thou.

And that for the first part of the charge against this people, their Ignorance
hinted in Si cognovisses, and aggravated in Et Tu, If thou had known, even
thou.

The first part of our Text has had a large portion of our time, the rest must
be put off with less: briefly then of the

2. Their Improvidence, which is manifest

1. Because of their opportunity, it was In Die, they had a day for it. Day,
and so it must needs be, the Sun was up, Mal. 4.2:
Malachi's Sun of Righteousness was now risen with healing in his wings. Day it
was, for all was little better then night before. Tenebrae or Vmbrae; natural
darkness, or legal shaddows, were till now in every Quarter of the World. And
therefore the estate of the World before this day, is described by night and
darkness: The night is far spent, Romans 13.22. Mat. 4.16
the day is at hand. The people which sat in darkness saw great light: and to
them who sat in the Region and shadow of death, light is sprung up. Illuxerunt
quaedam Coruscationes Orbi terrarum, says St. Prosper; of all that little
light which the quickest eyes could hitherto discover, there were some little
glimmerings only broke out, and now and then appeared. Abraham saw this day and
was glad, but it was E longinquo, afar off, and through the perspective of an
extraordinary faith. Balaam when his eyes were opened to see the Vision of the
Almighty, could discover a Star coming out of Jacob. Job saw through those dark
times, and the darker chambers chambers of the grave, St. Hier.
Et nec dum natus erat Dominus Redemptorem suum vidit a mortuis resurgentem;
Saw him rising from the dead, before he was seen conversing among the living.
Act. 3.24.
And not only Moses, but all the Prophets, from Samuel, and those that follow
after, as many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of these days, says St.
Isa. 60.3.
Peter in his Sermon at the Temple-Gate. Esai saw the Gentiles coming to this
light, and Kings to the brightness of this rising. John Baptist, who stood
betwixt the Law and the Gospel, and is therefore by the Fathers called Fibula
utriusque legis, brought in some more light; yet he was not that light, but was
sent to bear witness of that light. Joh. 1.8.
He was only Day Star to the Sun, and it was as yet, but Sicut mane expansum
super montes; it is Joel's expression, Joel. 2.21.
As the morning spread upon the Mountains. It was never till the air was
enlightened with that brisking Hodie, issuing from the mouth of an Angel, This
day is born to you a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. It was (that I may
borrow several tongues to speak withal at once) Crepusculum legis, The Law's
Twilight; Gallicinium Prophetarum, The Cockcrowing of the Prophets; but now
(...), through the tender mercies of our God, the Dayspring from on high has
visited us. It was never perfect day till those Beams of light began to gild
the World. The Sun till then was under the Horizon, now he is come to his
Zenith, and shines from the heights of Heaven. And now none can be blind, but
Vespertiliones fidei post occasum Solis evigilantes, (in the words of
Parisiensis) They are Bats and Owls that withdraw and will have no Sun. Joh.
3.19,
This is the condemnation, that light is come into the World, and men loved
darkness rather then light. This was their case, it was In die, fair daylight
with them, and yet they would not see, they abused their Opportunity, The first
piece of their Improvidence.

2. They had a propriety in this day too, it was In dietua, In thy day.

Dies Hebraeorum more dicitur, say the Glosses, The Hebrews call day, that
alotment of time in which Overtures for Heaven are made to them in the tenders
of the Gospel. Which were now so made to this people, as never the like to any.
The Sun shined upon others Radio obliquo, upon them Radio directo. primarily
upon them, and directly; but obliquely upon the rest of the World. Luke 2.32.
He was a light to lighten the Gentiles, but the glory of his people Israel.
They were within the Tropic where the Sun had all his motion, his Influence
most warm, and powerful there. How hardly he was forced into his Apogaeum, or
recesse from them, let his patience and long suffering bear him witness; Sun
stand thou still! and the Sun stood still in the midst of Heaven, and hasted
not to go down for a whole day, as long as it was Dies tua with them, Thy Day.

There are two Days which God allows the World.

1. Dies hominis, (if I may make so bold with the Apostles expression) The Day
of Man, or Man's Day, as he calls it; a Day of nature, a time of life and
pilgrimage, a space of Sojourning on this side the Grave, before he launch out
into that unfathomable Ocean of eternity, when Days and Time shall be no more.

2. Dies Tibi hominis, A Day the Gospel mentions often, The Day of the Son of
Man; the Day of Grace, wherein God waits to be gracious; the Day of Treaty with
Souls; the Day of Expectance, and Visitation. All men have the former, a day of
life, Till the silver cord be loosed, Eccl. 12.6, 7.
and the golden bowl be broken, and the dust return to the earth as it was. The
latter fell especially to the lot of this wretched people, the most unworthy of
all; they carried it from all by a singular Prerogative. Luk 10.24
Many prophets and kings have desired to see those things which they saw, and
did not see them; and to hear those things which they heard, and could not hear
them; for Nondum venerat hora, their hour was not yet come, it was not their
Day.

This Day. Thine so much, so wholly thine, that not a moment of it belonged to
any other, but such as by an extraordinary strength of Faith could crowd in for
a share of it; such as the Magi of the East, the Syrophoenician Woman, and the
Captain of the Italian Band. His (...), that glorious work of Redemption was in
common, appertained to all; His (...), the gracious Ministration of his
Apostleship, was confined, and peculiar to the Jews, to them only; Matt. 15.24.
He was not sent but to the lost Sheep of the house of Israel. And his Apostle
had it in Commission, not to go In viam Gentium, Matt. 10.5.
nor yet into any City of the Samaritans, who had some of the Jews in them
still; such proprietors were the Jews in the rich treasures of the Gospel. St.
Augustine observes, that the Title of The God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, goes
with such a grace in Scripture, Tanquam trium hominum esset Deus, as if he was
the God of these three men only, and all the World were shut out but they and
their seed. And in a manner so they were, till by their Apostacy, they made
way for others, and opened that door in Isaiah, to let in The Dromedaries of
Midian, Cha. 60.6, 7.
and Ephah, and those of Sheba to come; the flocks of Kedar, and the rams of
Nebaioth. Then, indeed the comings in were great and numerous; V. 8.
Then, Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their windows?
Hieron. Ep. ad Paulinum.
Siccato Judeae vellere, Vniversus Orbis coelesti rore perfusus est: When the
Jews refused, then the Gentiles were called in, Joh. 4.22.
not till then. Salvation is of the Jews, says he that brought it. And two of
his Apostles at once declare thus to the people at Antioch, Act. 13.26.
It was necessary that the Word of God should first have been spoken to you:
but seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting
life, Lo, we turn to the Gentiles. The Jews had the first refusal, the Day was
chiefly theirs. Thy Day, that is the Propriety.

3. And which makes their improvidence the greater, there was an Hecceity, or a
critical Particularity in it too; it was, In hac die tua, in this thy Day.

In this; not that, or the other; not every, not any day, which lust will
allow, or pleasure appoint, or profit dispense with, or leisure admit of; but
this, this before all, this or none, In this thy Day.

Jerusalem had other days, some black enough: Psalm. 137.7.
The Children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem, cried, Raze it, raze it even to
the foundations thereof; and it may be they were better in those worse days.
But this was a bright and glorious Day, A Day of Visitation (as it is called v.
44.) A Day in which Christ came to visit in great humility, (as it is in our
Advent-Collect.) And a Day of visits from Heaven makes a This indeed, it may
well be called This; In This thy Day.

Let us compare it above other days, and see what a This it is above them all.

The Antediluvian Fathers had a Day. 1 Pet. 3.20.
The long suffering of God waited in the days of Noah; but behold a greater
then Noah is here! they were not like This Day.

Wisdom had a loud voice in the days of Solomon; She startled the distant
corners of the Earth, and awakened the drowsy World: The Queen of the South
came from the uttermost parts to hear him: Matt. 12.42.
But behold, a greater then Solomon is here! they were not like This Day.

Niniveh had forty days, and repented at the preaching of Jonah; V. 41.
but behold, a greater then Jonas is here! they were not like This Day.

God spoke at sundry times, Heb. 1.1.
and in diverse manners in time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets; but has
in these last days spoken by his Son, a Prophet, more then a Prophet; there
were none of them like This Day.

Moses was Impeditoris linguae, of a slow speech, (Stammered, Exodus 4.10.
as some render it) he says so of himself. Isa. 6.5.
Esai cries out of Labia immunda, I am a man of unclean lips. Jer. 1.6.
Jeremy complains, with a Nescio loqui; Ah, Lord God, behold, I cannot speak,
for I am a Child. Thus were the former times served: but now the Master
himself serves, the Word himself speaks, Bern.
Et ipse quem loquuntur, ipse loquitur, (that you may have it in the Fathers
language:) He speaks, they all spoke of. The consolation of Israel, the desire
of all Nations was come; and Spectant, in the stead of Expectabant; they may
now see him, whom so many Ages had sought after; Et Phosphore read diem, is
now out of date; for the Sun has brought away the Day, that Day like unto
which there was none before it, nor after it shall be any till day and night
come to an end; it was This thy Day

And, for a close of this, it was This with an Et quidem too, At Least, in This
thy Day. There Is much in this At Least, very much; take a little of it.

At Least, whilst the Ports and Passages of Mercy are open, the healing wings
expanded to gather thee, and the everlasting Arms extended to embrace thee;
before he bend his Bow like an Enemy, and stand with his right hand like an
Adversary, and slay all that are pleasant to the Tabernacle of the Daughter of
Zion.

At Least, whilst patience waits, and long-suffering expects, and importunity
sollicites; Love standing till his Head be wet with the Dew, and his Locks with
the drops of the Night.

At Least, whilst you may go about Zion, and tell the Towers thereof, and mark
well her Bullwarks, and consider her Palaces: before the Heathen come into Gods
Inheritance, and desile the holy Temple, and bring in the Abomination which
makes desolate.

At Least, whilst the Candle of God shines upon thy head, and the Almighty is
yet with thee, whilst thou washest thy steps in Butter, and the Rock pours thee
out Rivers of Oil; before the measure of iniquity, and the Vials of wrath be
filled up, and inquisition be made for blood, the blood of all the Prophets,
and it be required of this Generation.

At Least, whilst thou sit under the smiles of Heaven, Mercy is near, and
blessings hover over thee; before they be gone, and leave no place of
repentance, though thou seek them carefully with tears.

At Least, whilst the last, and most inviting offers are made; before loving
kindness be shut up in displeasure, never to open more.

At Least, whilst he strengthens the Bars of thy Gates, and blesses thy
Children within thee, and thou have a capacity of thy welfare by thee; before
thy Walls be rased, and those goodly stones of the Temple made a ruinous heap,
thy Country desolate, thy City burnt with fire, the Daughter of Zion be left as
a Cottage in a Vineyard, as a lodge in a Garden of Cucumers; and thou be as
Sodom, and be made like unto Gomorrah, because thou know not the Day of thy
Visitation, thy Day, this thy Day, At least in this thy Day.

You have heard their Improvidence, the second charge against them, which our
Savior bewails them for, upbraids them with; they knew not, though they had a
Day for it, a proper and peculiar Day; If thou had known, even thou, At least
in this thy Day.

The third only remains, their Imprudence, in that the things they knew not,
were no trifles, or impertinences; no curious Vanities, nor empty Speculations;
but matters of moment and weight, of nearest and greatest interest; they had
all at Stake upon it; they were Quae ad pacem tibi, The things which belong
unto thy Peace.

Peace, it is the Nerve and Sinews of Cities and Kingdoms; it holds the world
in being; it is the chiming of the Universe, Heaven and Earth in harmony: It
is the Breviate of Blessings, the World in a World. Quae ad pacem, is, all this
people, any people could or can have. Beza Annot. in Locum.
Ea in quibus posita est tota tua faelicitas, that in which thy present and
eternal welfare does consist.

The Hebrews were wont to call all which they thought good, by the name of
Peace. The Priest's Blessing in the old Testament was, Lev. 6.26.
The Lord lift up his Countenance upon thee, and grant thee peace: And the
Apostle's Blessing in the New was, Grace and Peace, Truth and Peace, Mercy and
Peace; Peace of the Quorum still among all good things, as if all were good for
nothing without Peace.

Christ gave it when born, 'twas Xenium, his New-years-gift, Peace on Earth;
Luke 2.14.
left it when dying, 'twas (...), his Legacy, (so St. Joh. 14.27.
Basil) My peace I give unto you.

It was the purpose of his Mission, Ephesians. 2.15.
Vt duos condat in uno, faciens pacem, to make of twain one new man, so making
Peace: It was the purchase of his Passion, Pax vobis, Joh. 20.19, 20.
and then he showed them his hands and his feet.

When I have said Peace, I have said all; so these people not knowing Quae ad
pacem, did in truth know nothing at all.

Strange! Jerusalem the Vision of Peace, In Epist. ad Marcell. Et Bernard. 9.
Ser 2. in vig. natal. Domini.
as St. Hierom interprets it, should not see Peace. Their Neighbors of Tire
and Sidon were wiser, who implored a Peace from Herod upon a less concern. Gal.
4.9.
But they spent themselves In egenis elementis, busied their enquiries after
weak and beggarly Elements; and never regarded Wisdom, whose Merchandise is
better then sine Gold.

Tertullus his Tongue was well hung; Gamaliel, the glory of the Bar; Nicodemus,
a Master in Israel, expert in all Customs and Questions among the Jews: these
could make Ceremonies speak, sum up the very Letters of all the Sections of the
Law; tell you what odds betwixt them, and the days and hours of the year;
compare words and syllables, with the joints and bones of their bodies, and
make out the comparison too: but come to speak of the Messiah, the Savior of
the World, how and when born; the mystery of Regeneration, and how a man may
be born again; they find no such Case in their Law Books, you have given a
baffle to all their Learning. Their knowledge went much at the rate of their
Tithing, Mint, Mat. 23.23.
Anise and Cummin, with neglect of the Weightier matters of the Law, Judgment,
Mercy and Faith. They did Haerere in Cortice, and Shells speak emptiness. They
were men of the Letter only, and so in truth but illiterate. No people
pretended more to knowledge; but for Quae ad pacem, there is a Si Cognovisses
twitcheth them; If thou had known the things which belong unto thy peace.

And now, if you please, let us see if this Si Cognovisses do not come a little
nearer us. There Is a great deal of knowledge in the World, of which little
looks at Quae ad pacem, the things which belong to Peace.

The Gnostics, I wave as unworthy; they pretended to know, rather then knew;
their name was no great credit to them, though derived from knowledge: Viam
paecis non cognoverunt, the world had better never have known them.

The Jesuits rant it high, Penes nos est Imperium Literarum; they know much, we
will grant it: but all Christendom knows, and beyond Ganges and Indus it is
known (if the late China-stories do not wrong them) Quae ad pacem is least in
their designs, they will not know the things that belong to Peace.

To come nearer home yet. We live in a Sagacious Age; men begin to scour off
the rust of antiquated Authors, and burnish themselves with new and happy
acquirings. Never Age made an higher improvement of Natural Knowledge; may the
Divine keep pace with it, that Si Cognovisses quae ad pacem may never reproach
such excellent Indagatots. If thou had known the things which belong to thy
Peace.

The Divine takes the Chair, ties and unties knots, raises scruples, resolves
them; Champions it for his Church, disarms his Adversary, fills the Schools
with his Trophies, and atchieves the name of irrefragable; but at last, it may
be, is baffled with a Si Cognovisses quae ad pacem, If thou had known the
things which belong to thy peace.

The Lawyer is thought somebodie in his Country; and how usefully knowing some
may be in that eminent Profession, we need not seek out of this Assembly for
evidence: The better World pays a just honor to the merits of some here
present; Baron. Hales, etc.
may their share be as great in the best knowledge, that they may never hear a
Si Cognovisses quae ad pacem, to implead them at the great Tribunal, If thou
had known the things which belong unto thy Peace.

The Physician has found a new stream through the old Lake of blood; rifled
the bosom, and raved into the bowels of Causes; gone deep to lay the
Foundation of his Mineral Kingdom, pretending to make some pretty little
Immortalities here below: but he dies like the Fool, Psa. 49.10.
and the brutish person, and sadly reflects upon himself with a Si Cognovisses
quae ad pacem; If thou had known the things which belong unto thy Peace.

The Vertuoso, disdaining the shoulder of the tallest Philosopher to help him
up, looks over all Antiquity by new Modes and Methods of his own; finds out
the Original of Forms; sees those Effluviums of kindness, that pass betwixt
attractive bodies and their Objects; discovers how the Species of things are
laid up in the Memory, and each comes up, and presents it self at the call of
the Understanding, whilst the rest lie still; reads Lectures of Magnitude upon
the most Minute Bodies; looks wishly into the Air, and finds it all stones,
and those animated too; takes the Heavens with his Telescope; holds
intelligence with the Stars; knows all their Gests and Journeys: no Travailer
is better versed in the ways of this lower World; and yet happily at last is
convinced that Si Cognovisses quae ad pacem is infinitely desirable before them
all. If thou had known the things that belong unto thy Peace.

All these are Dross and Dung, nothing, or worse then nothing to Quae ad pacem,
to the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ; so St. Paul, who was
Scholar enough, charged by Festus for overmuch, by none for over-little
learning.

When they of Ephesus began to know Quae ad pacem, and the Name of Jesus; the
Prince of Peace was magnified; the Conjuring-Books, and Papers of curiosity
were burned, not now fit to remain as waste Paper, though formerly of great
value, more worth then many of our whole Libraries.

There is still some inconvenience haunts and attends all knowledge, but this
of Quae ad pacem. Scientia inflat, other knowledge puffs up, but this edifies:
Scientia destruitur, other knowledge shall vanish away, but this is above the
power of the grave, keeps us company into the other world. All other is but
Saltus Cicadae, like the short skips of a pitiful Grasshopper; this is Volatus
Aquilae, the soarings of an Eagle in the face of Heaven. When we have gotten as
much knowledge as our heads can hold, we shall find Quae ad pacem is all in
all, to know the things that can make us happy, that belong unto our Peace.

And now, the Apostle, if you please, shall lead us to a close of all. Let us
follow after the things which make for peace, Romans 14.19.
and things whereby one may edify another. Quae pacis sunt, the very
appurtenances of peace are precious, and worthy our pursuit.

My Lords the Judges, and you the Magistrates, remember, I beseech you, that
you carry Quae ad pacem in your Commissions and Title; and let the troublers of
Israel know that you carry not the sword in vain.

Let the Clergy remember that it is a promise at least, made at the Ordering of
Priests, to set forward peace and love among all Christians; that we may have
no more of that dismal wildfire thrown abroad from the Pulpit, which probably
kindled, but most certainly increased our late flames. Quam speciosi pedes
Evangelizantium pacem? How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the
Gospel of peace?

Let the Gentlemen of the long Robe hug no quarrels under it, but Love Quae ad
pacem better then commonly they do. It is below you, with Demetrius and his
Fellows, not to 'bate an Hair of your Diana, because by this craft you have
your wealth. Assure your selves, Quae ad pacem will get you a better name;
build you a surer house; make you a happier Exit: Mark the just man, Psa. 37.37.
and consider the upright; for the end of that man is peace.

And as to the Commonalty, me thinks Quae ad pacem should do well with them,
after such noise of the Warrior, and Garments rolled in blood. And though it
may justly be suspected, there are some still, whose words are softer then
butter, but War is in their hearts; yet it is to be hoped God will ere long
scatter those people that delight in War, and give his people the blessing of
Peace.

That we may see Augustus his peace, the Temple of Janus shut, Janum Quirinis
clausit. Hor. li: carm. 4. Od. 15.
peace of Nations. Orbem pacatum, a constant petition in the Common Prayers of
Tertullian's days, a quiet World.

Hierusalem's Peace, the Peace of the Church. Psalm. 122.6.
Let them prosper that love it.

Hamor's Peace, the Peace of the Commonwealth: Genesis 34.21.
These men are peaceable with us, let them dwell in the land, and trade
therein: Peace of Commerce.

St. Paul's Peace, Peace and joy, the ceasing of the storm, and the breaking
out of the Sun: Peace of Conscience.

Jacob's Peace, Peace with God, a Ladder from Earth to Heaven: Peace of
Correspondence.

Hezekiah's Peace, Peace and Truth in our days, Peace all our lives.

Simeon's Peace, Peace at our death, Pacem in Novissimis, Lord now let thou
thy Servants depart in Peace.

And so at last come to the Disciples Peace, a little before the Text; Pacem in
Coelo, Peace in Heaven, and Glory in the Highest.

To which Peace he brings us, who has bought it for us with his Precious
Blood, and is our Peacemaker; the Mighty God, the everlasting Father, the
Prince of Peace: Unto him be Glory in the Church throughout all Ages, World
without end. Amen.

HALLELUJAH.
FINIS.

