The SCOTS CONSTANCY. OR, An Answer to CLEVELAND'S Scots Apostasy. April ^^
1647.
written by Robin ^^^^^k Stationer
IS Cleveland new in print? Is this the fume
Of his last cup of Sack? the strong perfume
Distilled from his noddle? What, to spue
Such vile prodigious curses? nothing new?
Poor Crumms of Comfort to a dying cause
Of his malignant party; whose applause
The meager starveling feeds on; it is a feast.
At some malignant Tavern: scraps at least
Which noselesse Davenant sends: these cram his muse
With strong bum-basted raptures, to abuse
The poor compounders: yet it will not fall
One penny of their rate at Goldsmiths Hall.
No paper-kites from York, no proclamations
To undeceave the people, no observations
Upon the Kings return; no pregnancy
Of new invention: all dull poetry.
Where Is the Court parasites, to resolve the case
Of none-resistance now? what is their place
Empty at court? where is Hamond, Fer^, and he
Pretends himself Bishop of Ossory?
All silent? speechless? dum as Aulicus?
What Is Heylin's table turned? how comes it thus?
No hope, no comfort for malignancy,
Except to join with Independancy.
Cajole the Scots, the City: why so dull?
No fine designs abroach? come, one more pull:
Where Is Digby? in a valt? what, no new plot?
Is this the last, to rail and curse the Scot?
Send to Kilketto post: what, cannot he
Disturb that Kingdom, raise more mutiny?
What Is France transformed a stone, and will not stir
To help your gasping cause? Thou bauling curre,
Bark more incessantly: let Denmark hear;
He soundly snorteth: what will none appear?
Where are the Rebels? the Cessation sure
Commands them from their boggs, now it is secure,
To help their Popish Queen; or else to see
Her and her favorite in a Monast'ry.
Are your designs abortive? is the Scot
More faithful to the King? and is the plot
Become apparent now? does Ormond hate
Your base designs? does he congratulate
The good success of this blessed Parliament?
Forbear your cursed language; come, repent:
All things miscarry amongst you; and we see
The vip'rous venom of malignancy.
This makes you mad, and some; observe, the Scot
Breaks not his Covenant; 's constant; Spoils your plot.
And had the King kept faith, and not the Queen
Been so predominant, we should have seen
His blessed reconcilement with the State:
But sure his CHARLES most unhapy sat.
How dare thou (Sycophant) abuse the King?
Is he not just to punish? such a thing
Of most profaned cursing, cannot be
Endured by any who love piety.
Should we retort thy curses, there would be
A Vollume vented against malignancy.
But Silence is sufficient: it is enuffe
TO extinguish thy abhorred stinking snuff.
I tell thee Cleveland how to get some praise;
Add but those curses to the last new plays:
The Stationer, no doubts will give thee pence,
Join to the last of 's verses thy nonsense,
Jeare not the proffer; for thy friends now hate
Thy profane curses, and abominate:
Thy hateful title does more fit become
Thy sweet companions and friends at Rome.
It is not long ago since we did see
Thy famous Wentworth's grand Apostasy.
The King s' in safety (greeve not) it is with those
Who will persuade him never to oppose
The good advice of Scotland: not like Laud,
Who bid him break his faith, and then applaud
That most unkingly breach, unnatural war
With his best subjects: no, King Charles is far
From any more such counsel: he does see
The fatal consequence of all flattery.
What foul mouthd language thou give that nation
So ancient; with whom a combination
France did solicit, England now does twine,
And is completed in that royal line.
But what of Londons speech? it is writ in Gold;
With admiration honest men behold
His Loyaly: what did the King declare
Amongst the Scots? what protestations are
D^vulged to the world by him? yet he
Must be excused for infirmity.
But let the noble Londons speech be scanned
By most, nay all malignants in the land;
The proper genuine sense of all will be,
We will maintain the King, not Tyranny.
And here of purpose thou forgetst the place
Where London, was confined; but no disgrace
To Londons Innocence: we did see
Some stepps then near to Turkish slavery.
That good advice which pious Henderson
Gave to the King, thou hat'st to mention:
Or that thy flattering Clergy did adore
The Scottish nation but a while before:
O how their papers then did make you glad?
How jocund? but of late exceeding sad.
Did you expect a change? And now to see
The City right, and the Scots constancy,
O how it frets malignants! they had hope
By our dissentions to have taken scope
To work some new designs; malignancy
The brat of Machavell, Independency,
His Jesuited brother; and those two
Are acting mischief, hopeing to undo
Two ancient Kingdoms, that they might be free
Of Presbyterian and of Monarchy.
But we have hopes it is far from the intent
Of the Scots nation, or our Parliament.
What sixty Kings were murdered by the Scots?
It Is but a fable: thrice as many plots
Have acted been of late, to overthrow
This rich and ^amous City, and to blow
Three Kingdoms into atoms; by such men
Who merely vapor, curse and rail: but then
We find them most unnatural not to spare
The essence of a Parliament: pretend (...) fair*
Great faith and Loyalty; a fained thing
To gain a party, and abuse a King.
That hardy nation has been ever free.
And scorned the bondage of base slavery.
Read but Thuanus an Historian
Who writes impartially; read Buchanan
King James his Tutor, one who did not fear
The frowns of Kings; was bold, and durst appear
In The cause of truth in spite of opposition:
There we may read the freedom of that nation,
Beloved of good men; for their Constancy
Recorded is to all posterity.
FINIS

