To the Supreme Authority of this Nation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England.
The humble Petition of Thomas Bosevile, Son of Sir Thomas Bosevile of Eynsford
in the County of Kent,Knight.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioners Father being a servant to the late King, was unhappily
engaged with him, in the first war against the Parliament.

That the Parliament were pleased to invite all those who were engaged with the
said King to leave him, promising thereupon to pass by and remit the offense
by them committed, so that by a day certain they would return to the Parliament.

That your Petitioners Father having not been engaged above half a year dyed
about Michaelmas 1643. which was before the day of Grace and Favor appointed
for coming in, your Petitioner being then under the Age of 3. years.

That immediately after the death of his Father, your Petitioners Mother being
in the County of Kent, where your Petitioners land lies, was by several
process issuing out of the Court of Wards sent unto, and by them threatened,
that unless he would find an Office and compound for the Wardship of your
Petitioner, that the Wardship of your Petitioners body and Estate should be
granted away, which was usual in such Cases, as Council did then inform.

That in obedience to the said Court, he did find an Office, and Compound with
the said Court, paid and secured a fine of 200 l. took a Lease of the Lands of
your Petitioner during his Minority under the Great Seal, which Office and the
charges thereupon depending, the fine, the passing of the Lease, and the rent
which has been paid, has amounted unto more then a Composition would have
come unto, had he Compounded according to the rules then set.

That Council did advise that your Petitiones Father dying before the day of
coming in, that the offense was excused, and my Lord Say being then Master of
the Wards, did promise that upon payment of this fine, the Sequestration should
be taken off, and directed an Order to the Committee of Kent, to free the same
from Sequestration.

The Committee of the County of Kent informed, that they could not free the
Estate from Sequestration, but directed, that application should be made to the
Committee of Lords and Commons for Sequestrations, where having attended 2.
years, that Committee was dissolved.

That since he has applied to the Barons of the Exchequor, where after a years
attendance he was referred to Goldsmiths Hall, where the cause lately coming to
hearing, he was directed for relief to this Honorable House.

The attendance hereupon has bin for this 6. years, in which your Petitioner
has expended above 400 l. and the Estate in possession is not worth above 50
l. and in reversion not above ^00 l.

The premises considered, he humbly prays, That you will be pleased to free
his Estate from Sequestration, he having paid in his fine and rent, as much to
the use of the Commonwealth, as the Composition would have come unto, and
besides has spent double the sum for relief herein, for which favor, he and
his poor Sister, who has nothing left her, but the love of your Petitioner.

shall ever pray etc.

