POSTLIMINIA CAROLI II. THE PALINGENESY, OR, SECOND-BIRTH, OF CHARLES the
Second to his Kingly Life; Upon the day of his First, May 29.

By Abiel Borfet,M. A.

crown

LONDON, Printed for M. Wright at the King's Head in the Old Bailey, 1660. June 8.

POSTLIMINIA CAROLI II.
THat I, whom Nature never made a Poet,
Nor was adopted once by Art unto it,
Soar above Prose, and force my Novice-Quill
To uncouth Laws against Minervaes will:
It is no marvel, when my Subject's such,
That Art and Nature cannot do half so much;
My Matter is my Muse, I find it here
More easy task to write then to forbear.
Fear made the dumb man speak, seeing the King
Ready to perish. Wonder not if I sing,
Though doubly tongue-tied; seeing him renate:
Since fear contracteth, but joy does dilate.
When Indignation made a verse before
Upon the Rump, and lasht it over and over;
Shall the Priest only, not the Poet shed
Some oil of gladness on the sacred Head?
No, though among those Stars, which did appear
At his renewed Nativity this year,
The true Platonic, when the Spears are rolled
Back to the Loyal points they kept of old;
Although among those Stars, whose glorious train
Was in conjunction with Charles his Wain,
This be an half-mixt Meteor; yet give us
Leave to bring forth our Ignis Fatuu^,
A Pageant to the show: About a King
Fools have an office; why not this I bring?
His entrance, though contrived with costly Art,
Denying not the Morrice-Dance a part;
And, while the Canons of the Tower do roar,
Accepting Muskets of a lesser bore.
We cannot augment the Glory of that day
By this; yet thus Remember it we may:
Our Torch may lose its own, not give a light
Unto the Sun: but, when he is gone at night,
May represent him; this commends my Theme,
Its the Days sight repeated in a Dream.
But that I doubt, whether a Dream can tell
An History, that is so Incredible;
That Sight might pass for one, and make men think
Their rising early on that Day did bring't.
For like those Persians, which contended who
Should see the Sun first at his rising; so
We hasted to this sight, before the shine
Of Charles his Phosphorus proclaimed the Sign.
Some take the Vigils; some till Day defer,
Thinking the Night too little to prepare:
And will next day so much the longer lie,
When they have seen our sleeps security.
How many now can say, that they have seen
The Sun to rise? which false before had been.
The Virgins early walks sufficient were
To banish the green sickness for a year:
Old men were up, who meant not else to rise
Until the Resurrection ope'd their eyes.
When other times I overtake and met
So many various faces in the street;
I think within my self, that each Man's End
Is no less diverse, which he does intend?
But by a common Physiognomy,
I there discerned one sense in every Eye;
An happy foretast of our union,
When multitudes thus lose themselves in One.
Such multitudes within and out; that then
The streets seemed paved, the Houses built with Men;
The first I viewed, I though a Limners shop
Faced with lively Pictures to the top;
And wondered the Exchange, through which I past,
Was on the Southern side of Cornhill cast:
It was a Frollick at my second view,
Which all the Household at the Windows threw.
For not an house appeared, which was not set
So thick; the King might think his Kindomes met,
And that to show their Loyalty is true,
They had turned inside outside to his view.
Blessed Prince! whose Glory in great Numbers stands,
That rather court then suffer his commands.
More blessed Land! under that greater Soul,
Worthy to rule the Sphere from Pole to Pole.
How were we pressed, and like the Scaffolds built
On one another backs? yet never felt
The weight with our light hearts: O let the King
Still such oppressions, and such burdens bring.
Let this be all the use of naked Blades,
Of Drums, and Trumpets, and of armed Brigades:
Let Us know no other Soldiery but this,
Whose brave Battalia's then brought in our Peace.
Who will repine to give them now free Quarter,
Whose Generals Belt is suppl'd to a Garter?
How did they lose their Name, while we descried
A Loyal Heart thorough an Iron side?
They have unspell'd that Proverbs mighty charms,
Which strikes dumb the Laws amongst Martial Arms:
For when I heard the Guns give forth their sense,
My Ears thought Cooks Reports proceeded thence;
Seeing their Buff, I fancied with my Eyes,
Sure Magna Charta in that Vellum lies;
Their Swords appeared as innocent and fair,
As that which was supported by the Mayor;
And as they past the Goldsmiths company,
Both Metals chinkt a perfect Harmony.
May they, who used Iron so justly, never
Want Gold to change an Helmet for a Beaver!
In these we saw the Body politic
Restored to strength, which had so long been sick;
With mighty Arms, and Iron-sinews strung:
But we have stayed upon the strength too long.
View we the Beauty now, which though my Ink
Cannot resemble; yet be pleased to think
How Venus Mole was nothing like her Face,
Yet by comparison did lend a Grace:
My Pen, may't lay but some black patches on
That Days fair Face, has its Ambition.
Thus may my shady praises give't some light,
Because, compared, they are but black to white.
Cornhill was Silver-Street, I will be bold
To called the Milken-way, cream'd over with Gold,
[While braver metal glister'd from among
The English faces, then that Indian Dung]
As much out-shining that, which Poets call
The Ovid. Metamor. lib. 1.
Regent-walk to JUPITERS white hall;
As Starry Orders of the primest size
Out-vye the small confused Sporades.
They made their Progress here, who have the odds
In all perfections of the Pagan Gods;
Who had they lived of old, had been known by
The Names of Neptune, Mars, and Mercury:
When Jupiter did with his thundering call
Summon his Peerage to his judgement-hall
In old Deucalions days; Those Gods had then
Less valor and less wisdom, then these Men
Nor did ennoble Via Lactea,
Like London-streets, through which these made their way
Their outward splendor's but a Foil to this
Their Brighter fame: But yet, as He who is
The true Autocalon, and does outshine
The most contrived Glory of his Shrine;
Was glorified by the external gay
Of the Salomonjah Temple: so we may
Not wrong the True worth of these Heroes,
While we consider their Appendices.
Here Englands Youth we see renewed again,
Blasted by twenty years of war in vain.
The Fable made of Aeson, here is true,
Who lost his old blood to be filled with new.
As propagation of the Kind we call
A step of Death to the Individual:
Accordingly it seems a Nation does,
While Single Persons lose it, gain her youth;
For who can find so beautiful a show
In all the Chronicles of Speed and Stow?
Which, could it be described to the life,
Will win to all past stories our belief;
And strain the Faith of every future age,
Till the great year rebuilds the present Stage.
The Proverb said that England, were it tried
Could no where match that Garden in Cheap Side;
Till the unfitness was by Tichbourn found,
Who set that Eden in more holy ground:
Let but the Proverb go for Prophecy,
And who can give our Grandames teeth the lie?
The Flowers of Noble Gentry, which our eyes
There saw, did prove it Englands Paradise.
That Winter, under which so long they lay,
Strengthening their Roots for the ensuing May;
Proud to be Garlands for what greater grace,
Our Tree of life, who in the Middle was;
Under whose Shadow long may England dwell,
Tasting the sweet Fruits of his ruling well!
May he be a Forbidden fruit no more
By Flaming Swords, which kept the way before!
But let perennal happiness flow thence
To his dominions circumference;
As he that day the center did appear,
Scattering his luster round the Theater:
All the Stars of which orb must needs confess,
That this Sun lent them all their noble dress;
And that the Names and Titles, which they bear,
Begin with these two Capitals, C. R.
That costly Wardrobe, which these persons decks,
Is but the unfolded Livery of Charles Rex;
The naked letters signify the same,
As when they are flourished with so long a train:
All those contents are summed up in these two,
The Title Page and Index of the show.
But since we are born children, slaves to sense,
And few in Reasons Art do Men commence,
Being not capable to know a King,
But as he is pictured in some gaudy thing;
It Is fit this useful Science go among
The vulgar, written in their Mother Tongue,
Described in all the Nations Pomp, which is
No more then Charles in a Periphrasis.
These ceremonies are in State, though not
In Church, the best Books for the Idiot,
Had the King shown his worth in making Laws
Beyond the Idea of the ancient Saws,
That Plato's Commonwealth might seem to be
Of later date, transcribed from him we see;
Had he put forth his inward glory then,
Which Angels are more fit to view then Men;
He should have had but few spectators more,
Then the invisible which Saints adore.
But when he condescends to take from Us
Some Glory; we do flock to see him Thus:
Like those, who will not worship God, unless
He bear their Image, and be rendered less,
In whom the Fountain of their honor lies,
By borrowed luster from his votaries.
So since that costly show I heard it said,
These Laymens Books have many converts made;
Who, since His species stamped it, do afford
The Faith they feared to give his current word.
See how all eyes delight on him to dwell,
As Platoes Virtue now made visible:
One strides a post, and makes a noted Sign;
Yet they within the Tavern know no Wine:
Another Eyes hard by his Mistress were;
Yet lose their object, and forget she is there:
A thirds can see Him scarce, they are so dim
With want of sleep, yet watch all day for Him:
One Soldier, being hoarse with many a shout,
Would choose to whistle rather then stand out:
Our Acclamations rend the Heavens, to woe
The Angels Harmony with us below:
Though Ringers stirred them not, the Churches Bells
And Stones would cry out, Here our safety dwells.
And when this Day was gone, we savv no Night;
The frequent Bone-fires were Meridian light:
And its no marvel, when we were our own
Antipodes, and this our Sun went down
Amongst us; Hence those fiery pillars rise,
Londons black Night-Robes turned to scarlet Skies.
The Country saw the brightness, and had run
To quench the Towns, but that the cause was known:
Who can think darkness in that night can dwell,
Where the light lodges of our Israel?
The Aspect of our Heaven had been complete,
But that our Sun without a Moon did set.
For in this single Scheam we could not view
Our present fortune, and our future too:
Though Charles were proof against his other foes,
Our sins will kill Him, when, God only knovvs:
Heaven send's a Queen, that may bring forth his Mind,
And Travail with the Virtues of the Kind;
A Prince so like him, that at length we might
Behold the Royal Picture drawn aright.
Till then the Painter, and the Poet too,
Blaspheme him, and their colors Treason brew;
His Pencill, and my Pen, deserve to feel
The Fate, which the other day befell the Seal:
The Prince of Wales is only fit to be
The King of Englands pourtraicture. Thus we
Shall have no new King, when the present's dead,
But Charles himself shall to himself succeed.
But this defect as yet is well supplied
By the two Dukes, which rode on either side;
Like two Supporters of that Family,
In whose extinction all the rest must Dye.
Whole Lands pay Tribute unto James, whole Seas
Render him the just custom of his praise.
Henry was born both Mars and Mercury,
Valiant and Politic ex Traduce:
When Charles the First was forced to mind the Art
Of war, but studied Peace more in his Heart;
When the Queen welcomed home an armed King,
As Semele did Jove in lightening.
God grant we never come to need their Merit!
Who say Amen, not wishing to inherit.
Let this Payre-Royall [I may call them so,
Whom Kingdoms want more, then They Kingdoms do]
Let this Payre-Royall live in bliss and love,
Like those I pray to, Three and One above.
FINIS.

