THE LIFE AND REIGN OF King CHARLES, From his Birth to his Death.

Faithfully and Impartially performed

By Lambert Wood Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Simon Miller at the Star in St Paul's Churchyard, near the
West end. 1659.

Carolus REX Angliae


TO THE READER.
COURTEOUS READER,
HEre is presented to thy View, the Life and Reign of King Charles, from his
Birth to his Death; together with all the transactions both Military and Civil
during his Reign; by which thou may plainly see, the degrees and steps, which
occasioned the fall and untimely end of that great, though unfortunate Prince.

I was the rather encouraged hereunto, by the sad complaint of Prince Henry,
eldest Brother to the Late King, which was, That the English Nation, being
inferior to none for praiseworthy Achievements, yet were surpast by all, in
remitting their praiseworthy Actions to posterity.

In the Compiling this History, I have kept close to the naked truth, without
the least reflection upon any Party or Interest, and that in as few words, as
is imaginable, not omitting any thing considerable, or worthy the Readers
taking notice of.

His whole Reign was full of mutations and changes; For it is with times, as it
is with ways, some are more rough and steep, others more smooth and level; or
rather may they be compared to the sea, which is now calm and smooth, and
presently boisterous waves and surgies are only prevalent; the truth of both
are evident and fresh in the memory of many of the different Raigns of King
James, and King Charles; the first being subtly indulgent to his own ease,
had entayled an empty Exchequer upon the latter, which in humane probability
was the occasion of the sad breaches and differences, that happened betwixt him
and his Subjects. There is a natural desire in all mankind since the fall, to
know good and evil; and it is as natural to most men, to pry into the secrets
of Princes; and the more Princes endeavor to conceal their thoughts, the more
the people labor to divine them; and when people are most in the dark, they
fain to themselves the clearest light, and take the presumption to censure
rashly the intentions of Princes; as when the Thunderbolt fell on Sejanus his
head, the vulgar and most ignorant of the people boasted, they foresaw the
tempest; Therefore it is best to Take St Paul's advice, not to judge any thing
till the time come.

I have omitted affected words and height of Rhetoric, neither being so
essentially necessary for a History, which is chiefly intended for surviving
Ages.

Thus requesting thee gentle Reader to accept of the poor endeavor of him, who
is

Thy Friend LAMBERT WOOD.

King Charles his Life and Death.

Courteous Reader, These Books following are Printed or sold by Simon Miller,
at the Star in St Paul's Churchyard.
Small Folio.
THe Civil Wars of Spain in the Reign of Charles the fifth, Emperor of
Germany, and King of that Nation, wherein our late unhappy differences are
paralleled in many particulars.

A general History of Scotland, from the year 767. to the death of King James,
containing the principal Revolutions and Transactions of Church and State, with
Political observations, and reflections upon the same: by David Hume of
Godscroft.

The History of this Iron Age.

Doctor Lightfoot his Harmony on the New Testament.

Mr. Paul Baine on the Ephesians.

In Quarte large.
Barklay his Argenis, Translated by Sir Robert le Grise Knight, by his Late
Majesty's special Command.

Quarto small.
Abraham's Faith, or the good old Religion, proving the Doctrine of the Church
of England to be the only true faith of Gods Elect: By J Nicholson Minister of
the Gospel.

The Anatomy of Mortality: By George Stroad.

Aynsworth on the Canticles.

Paul Bain, his Diocesans Trial.

Gralle against Appolonius.

A Treatise of Civil Policy, being a clear decision of 43 Queries, concerning
prerogative, right and privilege, in reference to the supreme Prince and the
people: By Samuel Rutherford professor of Divinity of St Andrews in Scotland.

Politic and Military observations of Civil and Military Government,
containing the birth, increase, decay of Monarchies, the carriage of Princes
and Magistrates.

Mr Pinchin his meritorious price of man's redemption, cleared.

Astrology Theologized, showing what nature and influence the Stars and
Planets have over men, and how the same may be diverted and avoided.

The Harmony of Confessions.

Camdens Remains.

Large Octavo.
Florus Anglicus, with the Lively Effigies of all the Kings and Queens since
the Conquest, cut in Brass.

The Reconciler of the Bible, wherein above two thousand seeming Contradictions
are fully and plainly Reconciled.

Evidences for Heaven, containing infallible signs and real demonstrations for
assurance of salvation, published by Edm. Calamy Minister of Aldermanbury, Land.

The Life and Reign of King Charles from his birth to his death, By Lambert
Wood.

A view of the Jewish Religion, with their Rites, Customs and Ceremonies.

Small Octave.
Ed. Waterhouse Esquire his Discourse of Piety and Charity.

A view and defense of the Reformation of the Church of England, very useful
in these times.

Mr Peter du Moulin, his Antidote against Popery; published on purpose to
prevent the delusions of the Priests and Jesuits who are now very busy
amongst us.

Herberts Devotions, or a Companion for a Christian, containing Meditations and
Prayers, useful upon all occasions.

Mr. Knowles, his Rudiment of the Hebrew Tongue.

A Book of Scheams or Figures of Heaven, ready set for every four minutes of
times, and very useful for all Astrologers.

Florus Anglicus, or an exact History of England, from the Reign of William the
Co^nqueror, to the death of the Late King.

Lingua, or the Combat of the Tongue, and the five Senses for superiority: a
serious Comedy.

The Spirits Touchstone; being a clear discovery how a man may certainly know
whether he be truly taught by the Spirit of God, or not.

The poor man's Physician and Chyrurgion.

The Idol of Clowns.

The Christian Moderator, in 3 parts.

The Golden-fleece, or a Discourse of the clothing of England.

Dr. Sibbs his Meditations.

Doctor Smith's practice of Physic.

The Grammar War.

Posselius Apothegmes.

Fasciculus Florum.

Crashaw's Visions.

Helvicus Colloquies.

The Christian Soldier, his combat with the three arch-enemies of mankind,
the world the flesh, and the devil.

Vigerius precipes Idiotismus.

Hensius de Crepundiae

The History of Russia, or the Government of the Emperor of Muscovia, with the
manner and fashions of the people of that Country.

Drexeliu's School of Patience.

Viginti Quat.
The New Testament.

The third part of the Bible.

Plays.
The Ball

Chawbut.

Martyred Soldier.

THE LIFE and REIGN of KING CHARLES from his Birth to his Death.
CHARLES the second Son of King James, was borne at Dumferling in Scotland the
19 of November 1600. who during his Infancy was of a very weak and sickly
temper, but arriving to riper years, proved to be of a very healthful
Constitution. Whilst he abode in Scotland was created Duke of Albany, Marquess
of Ormond, Count Ross, and Lord of Ardmannoth, and was the sixth of January
1604. in presence of all the Lords of the Privy Council, and other Peers of
the Realm, at Westminster Created Duke of York, with all usual and
accustomed solemnities.

Count Gundamore being sent over Ambassador from the King of Spain, to treat
of a Match betwixt the young Prince and the Infanta of Spain, who confidently
affirmed, there was no other way to regaine the Palatinate, and to settle a
perpetual Peace in England, but by this Match.

King. James having a natural inclination to peace, gives great attention, and
by advice of the Privy Council, the Prince on the 17 of Feb. 1622. is sent
disguised with the Duke of Buckingham, attended by Endimion Porter, of the
Bedchamber, and Richard Greenham, Master of the Horse to the Duke, who were
met at Dover by Sir Francis Cottington, Secretary to the Prince, who being
Imbarqued, Land at Boloigne, and so post to Paris, where staying one day, he
had a transient View of that excellent Lady the Princes Henerettae Maria, at a
Mask, which The Great Disposer of all things had preserved for him.

On the 7th of March he arrives at Madrid, and alighted at the Earl of
Bristolls house, then extraordinary Ambassador, whose sudden arrival
startled Bristoll, who was altogether a stranger to the Journey.

The next Morning notice was given to Count Olivares, the Spanish favorite
(and by him Communicated to King Philip) of the arrival of the Duke of
Buckingham, who in private informed the King of the Princes hazardous adventure
to have a sight of the Infanta, which accordingly was afterward performed with
a great deal of seeming affection. But the crafty Spaniard could by no means
be drawn to admit the restitution of the Palatinate, but would reserve it as a
Gratuity to be freely bestowed after the Marriage.

Much time was spent, and Articles were drawn on both sides ready to sign,
when on the sudden Pope Gregory dies, who was to give his dispensation for
the Match; application is made to Pope Urban, which protracted much time: the
Prince being sensible of delay, desires leave to return, and with many
Complements takes his farewell of the King and Infanta, and with much danger
arrives the fist of October at Porchmouth, the next day posts to London, where
he was received with unspeakable joy of the people, and soon after hasts to
Royston, where the King then resided; to whom he gave an ample and large
account of the whole proceedings: the King communicates it to the Council, who
concluded to acquaint a Parliament with it, and forthwith a Parliament was
summoned to meet in February following. Which being met, he declared the
necessity of a mutual compliance betwixt a King and his Parliament; urging it
with the parallel of Christ and his Church, the husband and the wife; and so
falls upon the business, giving a short account of his Sons going to Spain,
with Buckingham to attend him, and his endeavors therein for the peace and
welfare of Christendom, and desires their advice and assistance for the good of
the Commonwealth, Religion, his Son, his Children of the Palatinate, how that
his Estate and welfare consisted with theirs, and that he was free to follow
their advice; and concluded with serious and Christian Protestations, that
never wayfaring man in the burning deserts more desired water to quench his
thirst, then he thirsted and longed for the happy success of this Parliament.

The House after debate desired a further account of the particulars, which
accordingly was performed by the Duke of Buckingham and the Prince.

Buckingham having satisfied the curiosity of a searching Parliament, was by
them greatly esteemed and looked upon as the preserver of the Nation.

The Parliament after nature Consideration, advise the King to break off the
Treaty, and to proclaim open war; the King being naturally of a peaceful
disposition, was very timorous of it, and urges his great want of money to
maintain it, the Exchequer being much drained by his Sons Journey into Spain,
Ambassadors, the maintenance of his Children abroad, who eat no other bread
but by him; besides, he was loath to show his Teeth, and could not bite; he is
willing to dissolve the Treaties, but if he should begin a war, God only
knows when it will end, but he would engage his Son for the Recovery of the
Palatinate, and in his old age will, if need require, assist in person,
promising the disposal of the moneys to a Committee of Parliament.

Forthwith a Council of War is chosen, who order 6000 men to be sent
immediately into the Low Countries, in order to their passage into Germany.

Buckingham is accused of treason by the Spanish Ambassador, but nothing came
of it.

The Prince growing in years, and in the favor of the people, the Treaty with
Spain being nulled, some overtures are made for a Match with the Princes
Henneretta Maria, the youngest sister of the French King; King James breaks it
to his Privy Council, which jointly applaud it, a Parliament being summoned,
and the business propounded, it was entertained by them with an unanimous
consent, and proposed that an Ambassador be forth with sent to negotiate in
behalf of the Match; the Earl of Holland is with all Expedition sent to feel
the pulse of the French King, in whom he found a ready inclination, so that he
could easily guess at the event; having advertised his Majesty of it,
instantly the Earl of Carlisle is sent as an additionall Ambassador to the
Earl of Holland; the French King sends Marquess D'Effait for, England in the
quality of an Ambassador; the Noble Instruments plied their business so
close, that on the tenth of November 1624. Articles on both sides were signed,
and there wanted nothing for the Completing the Match, but a dispensation from
Rome, for which the King of France solicited.

In the Interim King James being molested with a tertian Ague, which drove him
into a Fever, delivers up his soul to God the 27 of March 1625. at Theobalds,
leaving his three Kingdoms to his Son.

Various rumors past among the people concerning a plaster which the Duke of
Buckingham caused to be laid to the Kings wrists; but his Physicians, Sir
Matthew Lister, Dr Chambers, and others, being examined, cleared the Duke of
that scandal.

He was accounted and called Great Britains Solomon, by some Courtiers; a
General Scholar, and made all his Studies and Learning subservient to that of
Divinity.

He was a perfect hater of Arminianisme, the Semipelagians, and of the
Calvinisticall Presbyterian humor, which several times attempted to break
forth in his Raigue, but he by his wisdom suppressed; an excellent Orator, and
by some charged with Epicurisme: A man studious of peace.

The sad News of King James his death came to Whitehall just when Bishop Laud
was in his Sermon, which made him to break off in compliance with the sadness
of the Congregation.

His Son Charles was immediately proclaimed at the Court Gate, King of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland, who presently, dispatcheth aviso's of his
Fathers death to all Confederate Princes and States to Next he took care for
the solemn Interring of the Royal Corpse, which on the 14 of May was performed
with all funeral Rites; his Statue was lively presented on a magnificent
Hear, King Charles being present thereat. His funeral Sermon was preached by
Dr Williams Lord Keeper and Bishop of Lincoln.

King James (by his death) had intailed a war and an empty Exchequer upon his
Successor, which in all humane probability was the occasion of the great
differences and vast breaches betwixt him and the people.

The King, though much possessed with grief, yet there remained some part for
love, he had still an eye toward France, and to manifest it, he sent out
Letters of procuration to the Duke Chevereux to Espouse the Lady Heneretta
Maria, which Espousalls were solemnly performed in the Church of Nostredam in
Paris.

The Bride prepares for England: the Duke of Buckingham and the Earl of
Montgomery, with diverse other Gentlemen of quality, were sent to attend her: At
Bulloigne she was attended with one and twenty Ships, and diverse Ladies of
Honor, and on Sunday the 12 of Jane 1625. she landed at Dover; the King then
lay at Canterbury, and the next day met her at Dover, whence with all solemnity
she was conducted to Somerset House in London, where a Chapel was prepared for
her devotion, with a Covent adjoining of Capuchin Friars, according to the
Articles of Marriage.

London at that time was much visited with the Contagion, which broke out under
the same roof that it formerly did at King James his Initiation into the
Government; and that which is more remarkable, on the same day.

The King was not altogether Rapt up with the enjoyment of his dear Consort,
but he was mindful of the affairs of State; summons a Parliament, which being
met, he speaks to this purpose.

My Lords and Gentlemen;
You are not ignorant that at your carnest Entreaty, March 23d 1623. my Father
of happy memory first took up Arms for the recovery of the Palatinate, for
which purpose by your assistance he began to form a considerable Army, and to
prepare a Goodly Armado and Royal Navy, but death intervening between him and
the achievement, the war with the Crown is divolved upon me, to the
prosecution whereof I am obliged both in nature and Honor: so I question not
but the same necessity continuing, you will cherish the Action with the like
affection, and further it with a ready contribution.

True it is, you furnished my father with affectionate supplies, but they hold
no simmetry and proporti^o with the Charge of so great an enterprise; for those
your donatives are all disburst to a penny, and I am enforced to summon you
hither, to tell you that neither can the Army advance, nor the Fleet set forth
without further aid.

Consider I pray you, the eyes of all Europe are defixt upon me, to whom I
shall appear ridiculous, as though I were unable to out go Muster and
Ostentation if you now desert me. Consider, it is my first attempt, wherein if
I sustain a foil, it will blemish all my future Honor.

If mine cannot, let your own reputation move you, deliver and expedite me
fairly out of this war, wherewith you have encumbred (let it never be said,
wherein you have betrayed) me. I desire therefore your speedy supply; speedy I
call it, for else it will prove no supply: the Sun you know is entering into
his declining point, so it will be soon too late to set forth, when it shall
be rather too soon to return.

Again, I must mind you of the mortality now Regnant in the City, which should
it (as so it may, and no breach of proviledge neither) arrest any one member of
either House, it would soon put a period both to consultation and session, so
that your own periclitation necessitates an early resolution.

In sum, three of the best Rhetoricians, Honor, Opportunity, and Safety, are
all of a plot, and plead you see for expedition.

Perhaps it may be expected. I should say something in way of account of my
Religion, as also of the temper and tenure of my future Government; but as I
hope I have not been guilty of any thing which may justly start the least
question in either; so I desire you will repose in this assurance, that I will
in neither vary from those principles wherein I have been instituted at the
feet of that eminent Gamaliel my late Father.

Which being ended, he valed his Crown.

This Speech I set down at large, it being the first, and I think not
Inferior to any for Rhetoric.

Though this Speech consisted of very pressing Arguments, yet the Parliament
made but slow have; for they had two Petitions, one for Religion, the other for
Grievances: which were presented to King James the last Session, but received
no answer: which Petitions were presented to the King with this pretense, that
he might have time to consider and give a deliberate answer.

To the Petition for Religion, his Majesty promised very fair: but to the
Petition for Grievances, his Majesty gave very many satisfactory Answers; he
caused the Accounts of the several disbursments relating to the Army and Navy,
to be delivered in to the Parliament, which wrought such good effect, that they
gave him freely two Subsidies from Protestants, four from Papists, and three
from the Clergy.

The King taking notice of the small appearance in the House by reason of the
Infection, Adjourned the Parliament to Oxford; and the first of August the
Parliament met at Oxford, where they presented his Majesty a Petition against
Recusants, which the King readily and freely assented to.

The King urges the speedy Contributions, which caused great debates, some
were very free and willing, others were backward, and pretended the business
was managed with green heads, speaking very unworthily of the Duke; the greater
part that refused, resolved upon a Remonstrance; the King being informed of it,
and fearing the distemper would grow too high, dissolves the Parliament.

In September the States of Holland send over an Ambassador to request a
League offensive and defensive, against their common enemies, the Emperor, and
the King of Spain; which the King consented to, on condition they would bear a
fourth part of the charge of the Fleet, Buckingham and Holland are sent over
into the Low Countries, to advise with the Ambassadors of several Princes,
about the restoration of the Kings sister; but they were disappointed, for the
Danes denied ability, the French unwilling; upon their return came the sad
news of the ill success of our Fleet, who put out the 8 of October, and by
the 12. were dissipated by reason of a furious storm, which was so violent,
that 50 ships of 80 were missing for some time; the storm being over, a
Council was called and concluded to annoy the Ships in Gades Bay, but finding
it difficult by reason of a Fort just before it, orders were issued out to
clear it or secure it in order to the design; but finding it Impregnable by
Sea, they conclude to attempt it by Land, Captain Buroughs an experienced
Commander, with a Regiment of foot was ordered for that service, who managed
it with so much care, that a parley was immediately granted; the Sea-forces
being permitted to go on shore, took such liking to the Spanish wines, that
they grew disorderd, which occasioned the Admiral to prevent further mischief
to hasten home.

The Contagion raging in London, Michaelmas Term was ordered at Redding, and
special Instructions were given to the Judges to put in execution the Statutes
against Recusants.

February the 2d 1625. was the day appointed for the Kings Coronation, which
was performed with all usual and accustomed solemnity, except his passage
through London, which saved some money, the Exchequer being low.

A Parliament was called, and met the 6 of Feb. the Commons began where they
left, concerning Religion; the Lords present the King with a Petion concerning
Grievances of their order. The King promised speedy redress. Mr Pim of the
Commons, discovers to the House a Letter, and signed to the Lord Mayor of York
for reprieving some Priests and Jesuits: a Committee is ordered to examine it.

The King being sensible of the necessities of the Kingdom, demands supply,
and by Sir Richard Weston tells them, That the Fleet was returned, victuals
spent, and the men in great necessity for want of pay, for which they were
ready to mutiny, which would be of dangerous consequence; and that there were
40 sale ready to go out, which want a present supply; that the Army on the
Seacoast wants victuals, and clothes, with other pressing wants and
necessities. In stead of a supply Mr Clement Coke, a Member of the House of
Commons, Insolently delivers this; It is better to die by a foreign Enemy,
then to be destroyed at home. The King being advised of it, was sensibly
troubled at it, sends Sir Richard Weston to require satisfaction, but they made
very slow have in it, which occasioned him to summon both Houses together, and
by the Lord Keeper delivers his mind in part to them in a large Speech (much in
vindication of the Duke) which being ended, the King spoke as follows.

I must withal put you in mind of times past, you may remember my Father moved
by your council and woune by your persuasion, brake the Treaties. In these
persuasions I was your Instrument toward him, and I was glad to be
Isntrumental in any thing which might please the whole body of the Realm; nor
was there any one then in greater favor then this man whom you now traduce,
and now when you find me so far entangled in war, that I have no honorable nor
safe retreat; you make my necessity your privilege, and set what rate you
please upon your supplies, a practice not very obliging toward Kings: Mr Coke
told you it was better to die by a foreign Enemy, then to be destroyed at
home. Indeed I think it is more honorable for a King to be invaded and almost
destroyed by a fortaine Enemy, then to be despised at home.

The Commons nothing startled at this, made a quick reply concerning the
Remonstrance, the King would have them to dispatch business of greater
concernment, and there would be time enough for that. But the Houses thought
nothing of more concernment, then proceeding against the Duke; which gave
occasion to the Lord Digby, who longed for nothing more then to exhibit 12
Articles against the Duke: The Duke being wary and vigilant, had long before
provided Articles against Digby, though wanting one of the others number, which
the next day were exhibited in Parliament.

Many rejoiced at it, that by their quarrelling truth was discovered, and they
were so equally matched, that it was hard to discover which had the better of
it. But it rested not here, for within few days the Commons drew up 13
Articles against the Duke, and presented them to the Lords, and sent a message,
desiring he might be committed. Sir Dudly Digs, and Sir John Eliot, two
principal. Actors in the Charge, were serit to the Tower. The House
Remonstrate to the King, upon which they were discharged; the Duke having made
his defense, delivered it to the Lords, who sequestered him from sitting till
the trial was over.

The defense was expressed with a great deal of humility and modesty. But the
Commons having gone so far, were resolved to bring it to an upshot, drew up a
Declaration, to back it before the subsidyes, at which the King being much
Incenst, the next day, June 15. 1626. he dissolved the House; some interceding
for some time, he replied, No not a minute. That very day was the Earl of
Bristoll committed to the Tower; and Proclamation for burning all Copyes of the
Commons Declaration before their dissolution.

The breaking up of the Parliament was by some charged upon the Kings
Indulgence toward the Duke.

The King of France pretending a martial design against Italy, and the
Vatoline, craved of King James his aid, at whose request the King promised to
lend the Vantgard, a gallant Ship of the Navy Royal; the Merchants on
satisfaction to lend 6 more. The Rotchellers being most Hugonets, on pretense
that the King had not slighted For Lewis, according to agreement, and taking
the advantage of the Advance of the French Army for Italy, surprised the Isle
of The, together with many Ships that were in the Harbor. King Lewis
understanding of it, makes what warlike preparation possibly he could, requires
aid of the Dutch. King Charles to perform his Fathers promise, lends the Ships
to King Lewis, who together with the French and Dutch Ships, fall on Subize the
Stasiarch, the chief Rebel, retaketh his strong Holds, and chaseth him to the
Isle of Oleron.

King Charles being sensible of his Brothers mis-implying his Ships, sent to
demand the restitution of them; who answered that his subjects detained them
contrary to his mind, and that he might get them as he could. The King, not
being satisfied with this demand, and wifely foreseeing it might occasion a
further breach, looks home, and finds the French who attended the Queen, very
insolent, who Imposed on the Queen a strange kind of penance, viz. That she
should go barefoot from Somerset House to Tyburn Gallows, to offer up her
prayers for Priests and Jesuits there executed for treason. For which the King
was very much discontented, and on the first of January 1626. he came to
Somerset House, attended by the Duke, and diverse Officers of State, (all the
Queens servants and attendants being the day before summoned to attend) he
spoke as follows.

Gentlemen and Ladies;
I am driven to that Extremity, as that I am personally come to acqucint you,
that I desire your return for France; true it is, the deportment of some
amongst you has been very inoffensive to me; but others again have so dallied
with my patience, and so highly affronted me, that I cannot, I will no longer
endure it.

Diverse endeavored to excuse themselves, but the King replied, I name none:
the Queen endeavored to pacify the King, but it would not serve; for a
special Order was signed for their departure, and sent the Lord Charlton to
give his Brother a true account of that action. The French King being informed
of his Message, would not permit him audience, but sent Monsieur the Marshall
de Bassom Pierre, as extraordinary Ambassador, to demand their Restitution,
who might as well have saved the labor, for it was in vain, the King would by
no means permit it: all the Merchants Ships were stopped by an Imbargo at
Burdeux; which incenst the King so high, that he resolved on open wars with
France.

And accordingly in October a Fleet of thirty sail, under the Command of the
Earl of Denbigh and the Lord Willowby, set out; which by a violent storm were
very much damaged, and forced to return.

Anno 1626. dyed the Reverend Prelate Bishop Andrews, a man very well skilled in
the Oriental Languages, truly pious and devout. Three hundred thousand pound
was borrowed by Loan toward the Relief of Rotchell, which was then intended
to be besieged by the Duke of Guiz.

On the 27 of June the Duke with six thousand horse and foot, and ten of the
Navy Royal, assisted with ninety Merchant men, set sale for Portsmouth, and
published a Manifesto of the Kings undertaking for the relief of the
Protestants.

Sir John Buroughs, with diverse Gentlemen of quality, and 1200 Soldiers
landed in the Isle of The, who were received by the French valiantly, which by
their valor made it hard to distinguish who had the better.

The Duke perceiving the backwardness of the French to engage, lands his
horse, and sends Sir William Beecher with 500 foot and some horse, to the
relief of Rotchell. Upon their approach to Sr Martins Town, the Inhabitants
immediately fled into the Castle. The Duke being possessed of the Town, raised
batteries against the Castle, where after he had lain before it two months
without doing any considerable hurt, and by poisoning their springs, had almost
enforced them to yield, had not Monsieur Balon at high water by twelve Pinaces
in the dead of the night supplied their necessities; and on the 29 of October
Marshall Schomberg at Port dela Pree, landed 4000 foot, and 200 horse, who
facing the besiegers, put them to a great fright: whereupon they resolve to
rise and be gone, and in their retreat had diverse skirmishes. The French with
fury fell in on the rear of my Lord Mountjoys Troops, who endeavoring to fly,
routed our own party; which the Enemy perceiving, pursue with violence. We lost
in that Encounter near 2000 common Soldiers, and 50 Officers, prisoners of
note 35. besides 100 common Soldiers, which the King dismissed out of respect to
his Sister.

But the Duke being returned with those few scattered Troops, the King resolves
speedily to besiege Rotchell, endeavoring to gain the Town by famine, built
three Forts, and drew a line toward the Land with many Redoubts within
Musket Shot of the Town, and by the Advice of Cardinal Ritchlew made a Huge
Boon or Barachado a-crosse the Channel, almost 1500 yards in length, leaving a
small space for the ebbing and flowing of the Sea.

The Rotchellers perceiving their utter ruin approaching, send over Deputies
into England, to solicit the King in their behalf, who promised what
assistance he could.

The Kings necessities were at that time very great, wanting almost what ever
was necessary for a war.

He resolves to summon a Parliament to meet on the 17th of March 1627.

March 17. 1627. the Parliament met, Sir Jo. Finsh was chosen Speaker; And thus
the King speaks to them:

My Lords and Gentlemen,
The times are for action, for action, I say, not for words, therefore I shall
use but a few; and (as Kings are said to be exemplary to their subjects, so) I
wish you would imitate me in this, and use as few, falling upon speedy
consultation. No man is, I conceive, such a stranger to the common necessities,
as to expostulate the cause of this meeting, and not to think supply to be the
end of it; and as this necessity is the product and consequent of your advise,
so the true Religion, the Laws and Liberties of this state, and Just defense of
our friends and allies, being so considerably concerned, will be I hope argument
enough to persuade supply; for if it be, as most true it is, my duty and yours
to preserve this Church and Commonwealth, this exigent time certainly requires
it.

In this time of common danger, I have taken the most ancient speedy and best
way for supply, by calling you together, if (which God forbid) in not
contributing, what may answer the quality of my accasions, you do not your
duties, it shall suffice I have done mine. In the conscience whereof I shall
rest content, and take some other course, for which God has empowered me to
save that, which the folly of some particular men might hazard to lose.

Take not this as a menace (for I scorn to threat my inferiors) but as an
admonition from him who is tied both by nature and duty to provide for your
preservation; and I hope though I thus speak, your demeanor will be such as
shall ablige me in thankfulness to meet you oftener, then which nothing shall
be more pleasing to me.

Remembering the distractions of our last meeting, you may suppose I have no
confidence of good success at this time; but be assured I shall freely forget
and forgive what is past, hoping you will follow that sacred advise lately
inculcated to maintain the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.

The Parliament being deeply affected with the necessities of our neighbor
Protestants and friends in eminent danger, forthwith granted five subsidies
with unanimous consent; Secretary Cook brings the news to the King, who wept
for joy, and bid him tell them, he would deny them nothing of their just
liberties.

Immediately the House fall upon the peoples libertyes, and vote, that no
freeman be imprisoned by King or Council, without legal cause alleged.

They draw up a petition to this effect: 1. That no person be compeld to make,
give, or yield any gift, loan, benevolence, tax, but by common consent of
Parliament.

2. That no freeman be imprisoned or detained of his liberty, but by the Laws
of the Land.

3. That the soldiers and mariners be removed from billiting, and the people
eased for the time to come.

4. That martial Law be revoked.

Which petition was presented, to which his Majesty gave a speedy answer, with
plenary satisfaction, and withal told them, he having done his part, if the
Parliament have not a happy conclusion, the sin was theirs, he was free.

Which answer was received with great acclamation and Joy. The House having
fared so well, fall a ripping up of old fores, and drew up a Remonstrance,
which reflected upon the Duke, at which the King stood amazed.

They likewise were drawing a Bill against Tunnage and Poundage, which the King
would by no means permit. On the 26 of June the King prorogued the Parliament
to the 20 of October; and in his speech made an ample illustration of his
concessions to the petition of right, which by some was accounted a great
failing. And now a 3d Fleet is reasdy at Portsmouth, for the releif of Rotchel.
The Duke was very diligent in preparation, when on the 23 of August 1628. the
Duke having prepared himself to wait on the King (who made that in his
progress) called for his breakfast; the Duke comes down from his chamber to a
lower parlour. where taking leave of Sir Tho. Friar one of his Colonels, Just
as he was going in, one Felton stabd him to the heart with a knife, which the
Duke took out, but the effusion of the blood was so great, that he died
instantly: the Earl of Cleveland and others that were within hearing, reported,
that the murderer seconded his blow with these words, The Lord have mercy upon
thy soul. The murderer imediatly went into the Kitchen; the report throughout
the house was, where is the murderer, which he misconstrued, here is the murderer,
suddenly starting, cried, I am he; who was imediatly secured, and hardly
escaped the fury of the servants: The King was at his devotion when the news
was brought, who was not in the least startled at it.

The commons rejoice at it, and by this means hoped of a freer and more
permanent correspondency betwixt the King and people, which the event suddenly
showed.

The Dukes body was interred the 25 of September, at Westminster, at the charge
of his Executors.

Felton was arraigned at the Kings bench-bar, who upon examination confessed,
That the only motive that induced him to the fact, was the late Remonstrance of
the Commons, and that he could not sacrifice his life to a nobler cause, then
by delivering his Country from so great an enemy. He being found guilty, was
hanged at Tiburne, and his body afterward sent to Portsmouth to be hanged in
Chains.

This tragic act nothing hindered the Fleets motion, which by the personal
industry and care of the King, set fail from Portsmouth the 8 of September
1628. the Earl of Linsey being Admiral, and being arived at the mouth of the
haven, found that monstrous Boon and Baracado finished, which was designed by
Cardinal Ritchlew, a cross wind suddenly arose and beat them back with great
confusion, which the Rotchellers beholding from the bulwarks, imediately set
open the gates and submitted themselves wholly to the King, who entered the 8 of
October, and found only four thousand remaining of twenty two thousand; the
Fleet upon the news returned home safe.

A Proclamation was proclaimed against Papists.

The 20 of October the Parliament met, diverse complaints and petitions were
exhibited touching the seizing of merchants goods for Tunnage and Poundage. The
King had notice of it, summons them to the banqueting house, and thus speaks:

The occasion of that meeting was a complaint made in the lower House for
staying some merchants goods, for denying Tunnage and Poundage, which
difference might be soon decided, were his words and actions rightly
understood; for if he did not take these duties as appendixes to his hereditary
prerogative, and had declared he challenged them not of right, and only desired
to enjoy them by the gift of his people, why did they not pass the Bill as
they promised to him, to clear his bypast actions and future proceedings,
especially in this his time of so great necessity.

Therefore he did now expect they should make good what they promised, and put
an end to all questions emergent to their delay.

Two Committees were appointed, one for Religion, the other for civil affairs;
that for Religion report, that upon due inspection they find it in a very
tottering and declining condition:

The other report, that many merchants had had their goods seized for not
paying the customs of Tunnage and Poundage, being then against the Petition of
Right and privilege of Parliament; for which Sr Jo. Worsham, M. Daws, M.
Carmarthen, Farmers of the Customs, were required to give an account. The King
intervenes, and tells the Parliament that what they did was as men addicted to
his command, neither were they commissionated to take it as a due debt, but he
presumed the Parliament would perform their large professions and grant it by
bill.

They replied the Farmers did it without warrant, the warrant being only to
levy and collect, not to seize; for the Bill they desired his pardon, being to
insist on matters of Religion first.

The King requests them to forbear prosecuting these men, and intimated that
what they did was by his warrant. The House in great discontent adjourned for
some few days, and being met again, they resolved upon a Remonstrance, which
the Speaker refusing to read, and offering to rise, Mr. Hollis held him, and
swore he should fit there so long as they pleased; which not prevailing; Mr.
Hollis read these ensuing Articles as the Protestation of the House.

1. Whosoever should bring in Innovation of Religion, or by favor seek to
introduce Popery, or Arminianism, or other opinions disagreeing from the true
and orthodox Church, shall be reputed a Capital enemy to the Kingdom and
Common wealth.

2. Whosoever shall council or advise the taking and levying the subsidies of
Tunnage and Poundage, not being granted by Parliament, or shall be an actor or
instrument therein, shall be reputed a Caitall enemy to this Commonwealth.

3. If any man shall voluntarily yield or pay the said Subsidies of Tunnage and
Poundage, not being granted by Parliament, he shall be reputed a beirayer of
the Liberties-of England, and an enemy to the Commonwealth.

At which the House gave a great shout.

The King advised of it, sent the Usher of the black rod to dissolve the
Parliament who would not be admitted; Sir Miles Hobert locked the door. The King
incensed at their contempt, sent for the Captain of the Pensioners and the
Guard to force a passage, the members fearing the issue, slunk away.

The King went presently into the House of Lords, and delivered his mind as
follows.

My Lords;
I never came here upon so unpleasing an occasion, it-being the dissolution of
a Parliament; therefore you may have some cause to wonder why I should not
rather choose to do this by Commission, it being a general Maxim of Kings to
leave harsh commands to their Ministers, themselves only Executing pleasing
things; yet considering that Justice consists as well in reward and praise of
virtue, as punishment of vice, I thought it necessary to come here to day, to
declare to you, and all the world, that it was merely the undutifull and
seditious carriage of the Lower House, that has made the dissolution of this
Parliament; and you my Lords, are so far from being causes of it, that I take
as much comfort in your dutiful demeanor, as I am justly distasted with their
proceedings: yet to avoid mistakings, Let me tell you, that it is so far from
me to adjudge all that House guilty, that I know there are many there as
dutiful subjects as any in the World, it being but some few Vipers among them
that cast this mist of undutifulnesse over most of their eyes; yet to say
truth, there was a good number there that could not be infected with this
contagion; in so much that some did express their duties in speaking, which
was the General fault of the House the last day.

To conclude, as these Vipers must look for their reward of punishment; so you,
my Lords, must justly expect from me that favor and protection that a good
King owes to his loving and dutiful subjects.

And now my Lord Keeper do what I command you; who in the Kings name dissolved
the Parliament.

The Parliament being dissolved, the King sets forth a Declaration of the
Causes, Grounds, and Motives, that caused him to dissolve them, together with
an account of all the Transactions of this and the last Parliament.

Not long after the King sent for ten of the last Parliament to appear at the
Council Table, viz. Mr. Hollis, Sir Miles Hobert, Sir John Eliot, Sir Peter
Hayman, Mr. Seldom, Mr. Stroud, Mr. Correton, Mr. Valentine, Mr. Long, Mr.
Kirton, who having been examined by the Lord Treasurer, some were sent to the
Tower, some to the Gate House, others to the Fleet: which afterward begot a
very high controversy in Law.

The Queen being affrighted, was before her time delivered of a Son, who was
baptized Charles, which lived not above two hours.

The States of Venice sent over an Ambassador to mediate for a peace betwixt
us and the French, which was concluded in eight Articles, and confirmed with
solemn Oaths on both sides.

Two great Reasons were given for the Kings sudden consent to a peace; the
one was the ill success and bad fortune that always attended his warlike
designs; the other and maine, the sinews of war being dried and shrunk up, the
Exchequer was very barren.

Peter Reuben, the famous Painter of Antwerp, came over into England, and made
overtures of a peace with Spain, by offering the restitution of the Palatinate
(then which nothing was more desirable of the King) but he had not full power
to perform.

On the 29 of May 1630. the Queen was delivered of her second Son, who was
baptized the 27 of June at St James's, with all Princely ceremony, and named
Charles, which caused great rejoycings and acclamations among the people,
excepting the Puritan party.

At his birth a Star appeared visibly at noone day, just as the King went to St
Paul's Church to give thanks; where he was presented with these Verses.

When to Pauls-Cross the Grateful King draw nere,
A shining Star did in the Heavens appear;
Thou that consults with divine Mysteries,
Tell me what this bright Comet signifies:
Now is there borne a valiant Prince in the West,
That shall Eclipse the Kingdoms of the East.
The King being deeply sensible of his brothers miseries, and being informed of
a Diet at Ratsbone, sent Sir Robert Anstruther Ambassador to the Emperor, and
Estates in Germany, to mediate in his brothers behalf; to which the Emperor
returned Answer, that no foreign business was to be meddled withal at the
Diet, but as soon as possibly he could, he would do that which might be for
his Honor, and he hoped to his Majesty's content: upon which the Ambassador
returns.

One Layton, a Rigid Presbyter, who published a book, called Zions Plea, (in
which he excited the Parliament and People to kill all the Bishops. Very
abusive also to the Queen, calling her the Daughter of Heth a Canaanite, an
Idolatresse) was sentenced in the Star Chamber to have his nose slit, his ears
cropped, and stigmatized in the forehead; which he for some time prevented, by an
Escape out of the Fleet, but being taken, underwent it.

The Peace betwixt England and Spain was at last concluded, the Articles being
the same in effect, with those that were betwixt King James and Philip the
Third, excepting that the King of Spain should dispose of all his Interest in
the Emperor toward the restitution of the Palatinate; which was proclaimed
Sunday the 27 of November 1630. with Great solemnity.

April the 25. 1631. Mervin, Lord Audley, Earl of Castle-Haven, was arraigned
at the King's Bench. Bar, before Thomas Lord Coventry, who for that day was
appointed Lord High Treasurer of England, he being found Guilty of Rape and
Sodomy, was by his Peers condemned, and Executed the 14 of May at Tower hill.

And on the 27 of June following, Mr. Broadway, and Fitz Patrick, servants to,
and concriminaries with the Lord Audley, were tried at the Kings-Bench-Bar, and
being found Guilty, the one of Rape, the other of Sodomy, were condemned, and
on the sixth of July were executed at Tyburne.

The Queen was the 4th of November, 1631. delivered of her eldest Daughter,
who was baptized Mary.

December 2d, 1632. The King was visited with the small Pox, but by Gods
blessing soon recovered.

Anno 1632. The Church of St Paul (which by the pious zeal of our Ancestors
was raised to that huge bulk, that all Christendom was not able to parallel)
being through age decayed, was by the piety of his Majesty, the Bishops, the
Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of the Nation, begun to be repaired, and a
very great progress was made therein, but the unhappy differences of the
Nation ensuing caused its obstruction.

Anno 1633. The King having been often solicited to go into Scotland, in order
to his personal Coronation; on the 13th of May he sets forward, with a
Princely Train: most of the English Nobility, all the Scots that attended
here; and on the way was very Nobly treated by diverse of the Nobility and
Gentry, ospecially by the Earl of Newcastle at Welbeck.

On the 10 of June he came safe to Edenborough, where he was Crowned with all
outward seeming affection; and on the 20 of July returned safe to the Queen at
Greenwich.

In the beginning of August dyed the Reverend Prelate, George Abbot, Archbishop
of Canterbury; William Laud then of London immediately succeeded him.

October the 13th 1633. the Queen was delivered of her second Son, who was
baptized James; and on the 24 of the same month was by Letters pattent created
Duke of York.

The King taking into his Princely care the Irreverend and remiss service of
God in the Kingdom of Scotland, sent Orders to be observed by the Deane of his
Chapel, as in England.

1 That prayer be said twice a day, according to the English form. 2 The
Sacrament to be administered once a month, and to be received Kneeling. 3 That
he which Officlates on Holy days, do it in his Surplice.
Which though backed with a Letter, requiring exact obedience, the Deane durst
not perform, for fear of discontenting the people.

The King by the Advice of the Bishops and Council, Revived his Fathers
Declaration for tolerating Lawful Sports on the Sunday, which gave great
distaste to the people, especially to the puritanicall party.

On the second of February being Candlemas day at night, the King and Queen
were entertained at White Hall with a Mask of the Gentlemen of the Inns of
Court; The like was never in England seen before for State and Magnificence;
and afterward were Royally entertained by the Lord Mayor of London, with a
stately Feast and Banquet.

1634. The English Coast was much perplexed with Pirates of several Nations,
and the Kings Dominion in the narrow Seas evidently usurped by the Dutch, and
defended by Grotius in his book, Entitled, Mare Liberum; which was exactly
Answered by the Learned Seldom in his Book, Entitled, Mare Clausum.

The Exchequer at that time was very much drained: The King having tied
himself up by granting the Petition of Right, could not tax or levy money
without consent of Parliament, and how to expect it from them, with whom he had
parted so foully, he could not imagine. He declares his Intentions to his
Attorney Noy, together with the Necessity of raising money, but desires it to
be done Legally, who after much study and pains finds out an ancient president
of raising a Tax for setting forth a Navy in case of danger without a
Parliament. The King was very glad of it, Writs were Instantly Issued out to
the Seaport Towns, to raise money for a certain number of Ships well
provided, for the safety of the Nation: they complained that it equally
concerned the whole Nation; upon which a Tax was laid throughout the whole
Kingdom, every one endeavored to excuse it; and some alleged it was against
the Petition of Right, it being done out of Parliament, which begat a great
quarrel.

Great Contest happened in Ireland this year between the Protestants and
Papists; which occasioned the Lord Strafford, then Lord Deputy to summon a
Parliament, for the raising of moneys, for the payment of the Army, and the
Kings Revenue, which was managed with so much wisdom and prudence by the Lord
Deputy, that he obtained his desire.

There was likewise a Synod called, wherein the Articles of 1615 were repealed,
and the 39 Articles of the Church of England established in their room: they
did likewise unanimously declare their consent and agreement with the Church of
England in the profession of the same Christian faith.

The Scots were now Hatching mischievous designs against the King, which they
colored with specious pretenses; as, The Kings endeavoring to Entrench on
their Liberties, and after some time were so Insolent as to charge the King
with favoring of Papists, in a desperate Libell, which by the care and
diligence of the Lords of the Council was suppressed: the Author was discovered
to be one Hagge, and the principal abettor the Lord Bellamore, who being found
Guilty, received the sentence of death, but upon his application to the Kings
mercy was pardoned.

The 29 of September (by the procurement of the Earl of Arundell) one Robert
Parr aged 160) was brought to London, one of the wonders of this last age.

In November following, the Prince Elector came to London, to tender his
respect to his Uncle, and to solicit touching his restitution; and not long
after came his second Brother Prince Robert.

On the 28 of December 1635. was borne the Kings second Daughter, and was the
second of January baptized Elizabeth.

March the sixth, William Juxson, Lord Bishop of London, was made Lord
Treasurer; a man of great Piety and Integrity.

At this time, if ever might England be said to be in a happy condition; the
Church the most Glorious and splendid that ever was since the Apostles times;
the Civil Government managed by a King, who for piety and morality was not
Inferior to any in the Christian world; Encompassed about with peace on all
sides; what mortal would ever have imagined, that this bright Sunshine of
Felicity should be so soon Eclipsed.

William Land, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, taking notice of the careless
observance of the Ecclesiastical Canons, which he strictly put in practice in
his solemn Visitation, and in his zeal gave order for the Removing of the
Communion Table to the East end of the Church, upon an ascent, and to be rayled
In, to prevent profanation; which gave great distaste to the puritan party, who
charged him with Innovation.

1636. In July set forth the Kings Royal Fleet, to scowre the Seas of
Pirates, and to prevent the Intrenching of the Hollander in Fishing upon our
Coasts, which was effected; but by their humble Request, the King Indulgently
Granted them Liberty.

In September the Earl of Arundell was sent Extraordinary Ambassador
(attended by a Noble Train) to the Emperor, to solicit in behalf of the
Prince Elector, who being wearied with delays, returned in a discontent.

The unhappy Controversy of Ship Money began now to be disputed.

The Writs for raising Ship Money having been formerly Issued out, diverse
refused to pay, among the rest Mr. Hamden of Buckingham-shire, by wilful
default refused, and desired it might be argued in Law, which occasioned the
King to write a Letter to Sir John Brampston, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings
Bench, Sir John Finsh, Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, Sir
Humphry Davenport, Baron of the Exchequer, and to the rest of The Judges of the
several Courts, to know their opinion, who jointly and severally gave their
opinion, that it was Lawful: upon which, Process is immediately Issued out
against Mr. Hamden, who demurred and desired the Judges opinion, which was
argued in the Exchequer, the Major part was for the King, only Judge Crook
and Judge Hutton seemed to favor the other party, but Judgment was past by
the Barons against Hamden.

On the 17 of March 1636. was borne Anne the Kings third Daughter.

In June following, Mr. Prin, Dr Bastwick, and Mr. Burton, three violent and
restless spirited men, were sentenced in the High Commission Court, for
seditious and scandalous Libells, by them made and dispersed against the
Bishops, and their Ecclesiastical Government; which sentence was by some
accounted harsh and severe.

The King knowing the necessity of a mutual Compliance in matters of Religion,
and understanding his Fathers Intention in composing a Liturgy for the Church
of Scotland, Orders the Bishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of Ely, together with
diverse other Bishops of both Nations, to revise and correct, as they should
think meet, the Service, Compiled in his Fathers life time, (which very little
differed from that of England) orders it to be sent to the Council in Scotland
to be made use of.

When on the 23 of July 1637: the Dean of Edenborough began to read the Book in
St Giles Church, a sudden uproar began by the women and baser sort of people;
The Bishop appointed to preach goes into the Pulpit, hoping to convince them of
their Irreverend Carriage, which nothing prevailed, for they were the more
Insolent, flinging stones, stools, and what ever else came next to hand, so
that he hardly escaped with life.

Diverse other Churches were likewise Infested with the like fury and madness;
but by the Industry of the Archbishop of St Andrews, Lord Chancelour, and other
Magistrates, the tumult was appeased, some were afterward apprehended, and
endeavors made to find out the first beginner.

But it rested not here, for not long after it was observed, that a great
concourse of people from all parts of that Kingdom came to Edenborough, which
occasioned the Lords of the Council to put forth several Proclamations to
prevent the like disorders; but they nothing prevailed; for the next day the
Bishop of Galloway going to the Council, was followed by a great multitude,
railing and reviling him, until he came to the Councell-doore, where he was no
sooner entered, but they beset the House with very great multitudes, threatening
destruction to all that were within. The Council immediately require aid of
the Provost and other Magistrates of the City, who return answer, that they
were in the like danger. The tumult still increasing, they of the City were
forced for the safeguard of their own lives to subscribe as follows.

1. To join in opposition to the Service Book, and to Petition against it. 2.
To restore Ramsey and Rollock, two silenced Ministers. 3. To receive in Mr
Henderson, formerly silenced.
Which being signed, the Council thought was a good step to suppress the
tumult, but entering into the High street, The Lord Treasurer and other Lords
were afresh assaulted, trodden under-foote, and brought back by violence to the
Councell-House, where being in great danger, they require aid of diverse
Noblemen disaffected to the Common Prayer Book, who promised what assistance
they possibly could, and in the end returned home safe.

In the afternoon proclamation was made at the cross of Edenborough, for
prevention of the like disorders, but to small effect; some Citizens demanding
the restitution of the Ministers, and the performance of what was subscribed.

Suddenly two petitions were presented against the Common Prayer book, and the
Composers and Abettors of it, which petitions were sent to the King (with the
narrative of the whole) who immediately sent instructions for adjourning the
Term to Sterling a strong place, and to make proclamation of severe penalties
to be inflicted on the breakers and contemners of the peace; which was no
sooner proclaimed, but the Lord Hume, Lindsey and diverse others protest against
it, and in contempt of Authority, compeld the Heralds to hear the Protest, or
Covenant read, all which being imparted to the King, he sends Marquess
Hamilton as high Commissioner, to settle peace, and a right understanding, who
dealt treacherously and deceitfully, trifling away eleven months time, having
three times returned to and again for England, and at last published the Kings
gracious Proclamation, nulling the Service book, and high Commission, promising
an Assembly to be held at Glascow, Novem. 21. 1638. and a Parliament at
Edenborough the 15. of May 1639, but this nothing satisfied, for the more the
King granted, the more averse they were.

During the treaty the Covenanters had provided Officers, Arms, and what was
necessary for a war. The General Assembly being met, they proceed to declare
against the Book of Common prayer, which occasioned the Bishops to draw up a
protest against their proceedings, and in conclusion by the Unanimous consent
of all the Council, excepting Argile, the Assembly was dissolved. Proclamation
was made and published throughout the Nation, showing the grounds and reasons
of their dissolution, which proclamation was opposed by the Covenanters, with a
protestation to adhere to all their former Covenants to put by all the Bishops:
Some they excommunicate, and not long after totally abolished Episcopacy, as
being (as they pretended) inconsistant with the word of God and Laws of that
Nation. Which occasioned the Marquess and Commissioners to return for England
seemingly much discontented.

In the interim the Covenanters began to raise Arms, Levy soldiers, Impose
taxers upon the people, seize some of the Kings Castles, raise fortifications,
and prepare for a war, and chose David Lesley an old soldier to be General.

Toward the latter end of October 1638. came the queen mother into England,
many of the Common people were troubled at it, as being generally by them looked
upon as a forerunner of a greater mischief.

The Scots are very high and insolent, assuming all authority, and invent new
and unheard of Judicatures in defiance to the King and Council; and having cast
of Episcopal Jurisdiction, declare for the Calvinistical presbyterian
Government which for a long time had bin hatching in that Kingdom, but could
never take head till then.

The King to suppress their insolency, by the advice of the Bishops, prepares
an Army, which they contributed very largely to, and being backed with the
assistance of the Nobility and Gentry, a considerable force is raised, the
Earl of Arundell being made General.

The King on the 17 of March, the day of his Inauguration advances against the
Scots.

The Scots hearing of the Kings advance, march forward under the Conduct of
their General David Lesley to meet him, with Petition in one hand, and their
Arms in the other, and on the 28 of May both Armies came within view. The
Scots after some time sent to treat about a pacification, the King willingly
consented to it; and for the English were chosen the Earls of Holland,
Pembroke, Salishury, and Barkshire, and Sir Henry Vane: for the Presbyterian
Covenanters, the Earl, of Rothes and Dunferling, Lord Louden. Douglas,
Archibald, Johnson, and Alexander Henderson; Who after much Consultation
conclude Articles of pacification on both sides, which were signed the 18 of
June. Which Articles were as follow.

On the Kings part.

1. His Majesty to confirm what his Commissioners promised in his name. 2.
That a General Assembly be called to sit at Edenborough, August 6. 3. That a
Parliament be called and sit at Edenborough the 20 of August. 4. That he recall
all forces by sea and land, and restore all ships arristed and detained since
the pretended Assembly at Glascow, upon the Covenanters disarming and
dishanding of their forces, dissolving their tables, and restoring to the King
all his castles, forts and ammunition, and releasing all the persons, lands and
goods, then under restraint since the pretended Assembly at Glascow.
This to be done by declaration.

On the Covenantes part, 1. All the forces of Scotland to be disbanded within
forty eight hours after publication of the Kings declaration. 2. They to
render up after the said publication, all Castles, Forts, Ammunition of all
sorts, so soon as the King should send to receive them. 3. They to hold no
meetings, treatings or consultations, but such as are warranted by act of
Parliament. 4. They to desist from all fortifications and these to be remitted
to the Kings pleasure. 5. They to restore to all the Kings subjects their
lands, liberties, houses, goods, and means taken or detained from them since
the first of Feb. last.


Notwithstanding the declaration, the Scots are still averse, and draw up a
Protestation of sticking close to the late General Assembly at Glascow, and to
their solemn Covenant, and perfidiously broke all their Articles of agreement,
continue their meetings, neglect slighting the fortification and continue their
officers in pay; which with many other insolences, compeld the King to
consider of reducing them to obedience. The King fummons his Privy Council, who
conclude a Parliament to be called the 13 of April 1640, and for the present,
each of the Council (except Hamleton who pretended poverty) subscribed large
Contributions for the carrying on of the war, until such time as the
Parliament should convene, which was a leading card for the rest of the
Nobility, the Judges and others.

The Scots being informed of the Kings Preparation for a war, sent the Lord
Dunferling, Lord Louden, Sir Will. Douglas, and M. Markham, as Commissioners to
represent the affairs of their transactions, which were friendly received by
the King, and he well hoped that all differences might be composed with lenity
and gentleness: but it could not possibly be, for during the treaty most of
the Nobility that wished well to the Kings interest in Scotland are imprisoned,
procured old soldiers out of Holland, made diverse fortifications, required aid
of the King of France, and by coloring their designs with the pretense for
Religion and the cause of God, they had gained a very strong party here in
England.

By this time Episcopacy was totally extirpated in Scotland, and the
Presbyterian Contagion began to reign here in England.

The Bishop of Canterbury, a man learned, pious and devout (though unseasonably
zealous) was by the vulgar looked upon as a great friend and favourer of Popery,
by reviving ancient Ceremonies in the Church, and service of God, which gave
great occasion of discontent to the more precise and godly party.

On the 13 of April 1640. the Parliament began, and were composed for the most
part of persons of Honor, affectionate to Religion, and their Country, only
some sew violent restless spirited men, that endeavored to represent all the
transactions of the King in the most ugly colors.

The King laid before them the treacherons designs of the Scots, and demands 12
subsidies, Mr. Pim and diverse other members made long speeches, reciting the
greivances both of Church and State, which were very many; for it is with
Government both Ecclesiastical and Civil, as it is with watches, that how good
and excellent soever they be, length of time disorders them, they urge that
there was never more need of redressing grievances, and that would be the only
way to procure the Subsidies required. The King promised to redress the
grievances afterward. The King seeing them very backward concerning the
Subsidies which his pressing necessities called for, on the sift of May came
into the House, and dissolved the Parliament, using Civil Language, protesting
that he would govern as much according to Law, as if a Parliament were
constantly sitting; yet Mr Bellosis, and Sir John Hotham were committed for
speeches a small time, and Mr Crew Chaireman to the Committee for Ministers,
was committed to the Tower for refusing to discover some Petitions presented to
the Parliament.

The Convocation now sitting had formed an Oath for maintaining their
Hierarchy, (as the Scots on the other side had Covenanted for the destruction
of Episcopacy;) for which they were much blamed by many good men.

They likewise granted a large Contribution of 45. in the pound for six years
to be assest on all the Clergy of England, toward the carrying on of the Scotch
war, which was looked upon as Illegal, being without consent of Parliament.

And now the English in Imitation of the Scots, began in a rude manner to
assault the Archbishop of Canterbury (as they did the Archbishop of St Andrews)
conceiving him to be the only man that advised the King to break up the
Parliament; and on Monday the 16 of May 1640. a great number of rude disorderd
persons meet together, and go to his house at Lambeth, beset it, but he being
forewarned had sufficiently provided for his own safety. Some of the principal
were apprehended, and committed to the White Lion in Southwarke, which not long
after was violently by the multitude broke open, and the prisoners discharge.
One of the Principal Riag-leaders was afterward apprehended, and condemned to
be hanged drawn and quartered, to terrify the rest.

The King being in want, applies himself to the City for supply, but they
being discontented at the last dissolution, pretend poverty, a likely thing,
after so many years of peace, plenty, and prosperity, as they had enjoyed
under his Government; besides they are a little troubled at the questioning of
their London-Dery Lands in Ireland by the Star Chamber.

They Gentry were generally more free, and afforded large Contributions, by
which means the Army began to Muster, the Earl of Northumberland was
appointed General, and the Earl of Strafford Lieutenant General; but both
being indisposed in health, the King resolved to go himself in person.

In July 1640. The Queen was delivered of a Son, who was baptized Henry.

August 20. 1640. The King advances toward the North, the Army having
rendevouzed some days before; whether being come, he was informed of the sad
disaster of a defeat given by Lessly to 1200 Horse and 3000 foot, under the
Command of the Lord Conway, who were lest to secure the pass over the River
Tine, nere Nuburne; as likewise Sir Jacob Astley Governor of Newcastle, quit
the Town, after he had sunck all the Ordinance, as being no way tenable.

By this time the Earl of Strafford was recovered, and came to his command,
much troubled at my Lord Conways loss; which Conway stoutly alleged, was
neither through neglect nor oversight.

Yet notwithstanding the Covenanters had a Check in their own Country, Lesley
having left some superfluous Ordnance at Dounse, which the Garrison of Warwick
being advertised of, adventure forth, and did seize them; which allarum'd the
Earl of Haddington, who with 2000 horse and foot pursue, and with a very
sharp Encounter rescue them, which were carried back to Duglasse. The Earl
being at dinner the next day with diverse Knights and Gentlemen in a room over
the Magazine of Powder, in the midst of their mirth they were suddenly blown
up, whether by easualty or on purpose, it was not known.

In September following, the King was at York presented with a Petition,
subscribed by eleven of the English Nobility; To which he made Answer as
follows.

Before the receipt of your Petition, his Majesty well foresaw the danger that
threatens himself and Crown, and therefore resolves the twenty-fourth of
this month to summon all the Peers, and with them to consult what in this
case is fittest to be done, for his own honor, and safety of the Kingdom,
where they with the rest may offer any thing that may conduce to these ends.

And accordingly they were by Writs from the Lord Keeper summoned to attend the
24 of September.

Great were the sufferings at that time of the Northern Counties; for Lesley
the Scots General had imposed a tax of 350 l. per diem on the Bishopric of
Durham; and 300 l. per diem on Northumberland, on penalty of plundering; and
likewise seaz diverse English Ships laden with Corn in Newcastle Road, as
lawful prize.

On the 24 of September, the Lords assembled at York, where it was resolved
that a Parliament should assemble the third of November following, and to
desire a speedy Treaty with the Scots at York; the Scots replied, it was no
way safe for them, by reason that my Lord of Strafford, General of the Kings
Army, had proclaimed them traitors in Ireland, before the King had done it in
England; he being an utter Enemy to them, and one whom they did Intend to
Impeach.

At last Rippon is the place agreed on; The Commissioners on both sides are
Chosen; The Scots present their demands to this purpose.

1. To confider how their Army should be maintained till the Treaty be ended,
and their peace secured. 2. If more Commissioners be required, they may be
convai'd with safety. 3. All Intercourse of Letters betwixt them, and the
Parliament, to be convai'd with safety. 4. That there may be a free
correspondency of Commerce with Newcastle, especially for Victuals.
Which Proposalls at first seemed very hard to the English, who thought it more
reason first to provide for their own Army; but the Conquering sword decides
the Controversy. The English must yield to the Scots unreasonable demands.

After many meetings of the Commissioners, at last in thirteen Articles they
agreed upon a cessation, which was signed by the King the 16 of October: but
the Grand Treaty, was by their supplication to the King, appointed at London;
and in the mean time all acts of Hostility to cease.

At that time the Earl of Montrosse, who had acted all along with the
Covenanters, began to discover the treacherous Designs of the Scots; and now
plainly saw that they meant nothing less then what they pretended, viz. The
Honor of his Majesty, and the preservation of Religion (as always the vilest
actions, are covered with the most specious pretenses) yet was so wise as not
presently to discover himself, but from time to time advertised his Majesty of
the proceedings; which Letters by Hambiltons advice were taken out of the Kings
pockets, transcribed and sent to the Covenanters, who dissembled it to the
Earl, but cast dirt in his face, raising frivolous aspersions, endeavoring to
make him odious to the people.

Great was the Expectation of the whole Kingdom for the happy meeting of the
Parliament, and every small obstruction was looked on as a great Impediment,
many Good men hoped for the redress of Grievances; others waited to spit that
venom, which they had a long time contracted.

In November 1640. the Parliament began, where the King in a Gracious Speech,
declared his earnest desire for the happiness and prosperity of the Kingdom,
giving an account of the Scotch war, and desired them, as he promised he would,
to lay aside all prejudice, and he would now clearly and freely put himself
upon the love and affection of his English subjects; desiring them to consider
the best way for the safety and security of the Kingdom of England, and in
order to it, for satisfaction of their just Grievances, wherein he would
heartily concur, that the world might see his Intentions were to make this a
Glorious and flourishing Kingdom; freely leaving it to them where to begin;
and concluding, That it should not be his fault if this were not a good and
happy Parliament.

Many Members made long Speeches about Grievances, as Sir Ben: Ruddier, Mr.
Grimston, Mr. Pim, Sir John Clotworthy, and others, which were backed by diverse
other Members.

Their first business was to Vindicate distressed Ministers, diverse were
enlarged, and restored to their former Livings. Many Petitions were presented
from most parts of the Kingdom for Redress of Grievances.

The Lords complain that the privileges of their House were broken, because
the Earl of Warwick, and the Lord Brooks, had their Studies and Cabinets
searched.

The House discharged Mr. Prin, Mr. Burton, and Dr Bastwick out of prison; and
Voted Mr. Burton 6000 l. damage: Mr. Prin and Dr Bastwick 5000 l. a piece.

Mr. Denzill Hollis, not many days after, was sent from the Commons to the
Lords to Impeach the Earl of Strafford of High Treason; Mr. Pim made a report
to the House what Capital Crimes were objected against him, upon which in
fourteen Articles he is Charged by Mr. Pim. The Earl is forthwith sequestered
the House, and committed to the Black Rod.

On the 18 of December, Bishop Wren, and Bishop Laud, are Voted by the Commons
Guilty of High Treason, and a Charge was immediately brought in against Bishop
Laud, upon the Reading of which he is ordered to the Tower, but upon his
request was respited for two days.

Sir Francis Windibanke principal Secretary of State fled, and not long after
him my Lord Finsh, one that had been very Active for Ship Money, which was then
Voted Illegal; and most of the Judges were Voted Delinquents.

The Parliament began to strike a terror into all that had any way offended, or
had been violent in action, both in Church and State.

In December Alderman Penington with a great multitude out of London (for now
it was customary for Petitioners to come in great numbers) Petitioned the House
against Episcopal Government, and other Ceremonies of the Church, of which a
Committee was appointed to consider.

The Armies in the North lay heavy upon the Kingdom, which moved the House to
allow 100000 l. toward their present pay, and the money to be borrowed of the
City of London, until the same be raised by subsidy.

The King summons both Houses together to the Banqueting House, and declares
himself not satisfied with their slow proceedings, and the Great Charge of
maintaining two Armies; next of the low condition of his Navies and Forts,
whereby his enemies are encouraged, and his friends disheartened; and likewise
took notice of diverse strange Petitions presented to the House against the
Government of the Church; he told them, he was content with a Reformation, not
an alteration of Church Government. He took notice of a Bill preparing in the
House, for frequent Parliaments to be elected by the Sheriffs, without his
consent, which he could by no means admit of, it being an Inseparable right of
his Crown; and did freely confess that frequent Parliaments were the best
means for preserving a right understanding betwixt him and his subjects.

These were the two principal rocks he would have them avoid.

Not long after, arrived the Dutch Ambassador, to negotiate in behalf of a
Match, betwixt the Prince of Orange and the Lady Mary, the Kings eldest
daughter, which the King thought fit to Impart to the Parliament, they for the
present do nothing in it, but proceed to the drawing up the Bill for a
Trienniall Parliament, which being past by both Houses, was the 16 of Feb.
presented to his Majesty for his consent.

To whom he declares himself, reminding them, that this was one of the two
rocks which he formerly told them of, and that the Consequence of it was such,
that never Bill past the House of more favor to the subject then this; minding
them that by reason of their proceedings, he might justly question the doing
it, and took notice how they had taken the Government all in pieces; how that a
skillful Watchmaker to cleanse his Watch will take it asunder, and when it is
put together, it will go better, provided no pin be omitted. Now I have done
this on my part, you know what to do on yours, reposing Great Trust and
confidence in your affection.

The passing of this Bill, was by wise men thought to be none of the least of
his failings.

Judge Barkly was by the Usher of the black Rod arrested, as he sat on the
Kings Bench, for high treason.

Thomas Earl of Strafford was next brought upon the stage, the Articles
exhibited against him were from 14 made 28. and on the 22 of March 1640. his
Trial began. The place appointed was Westminster Hall, where scaffolds were
raised on both sides, nine degrees in height: The two uppermost for the Scotch
Commissioners, and the Irish Lords: In the midst in a lower ascent sat the
Peers of the Realm; a Throne also was erected for the King, but he never
appeared publicly, but was every day of the Trial in a Close Gallery to
hear and observe the whole proceedings, and took notes. The Earl of Arundell
was Lord High Steward, and the Earl of Linsey Lord High Constable.

The Charge was principally managed by Mr. Glin and Mr. Maynard, both Members
of the Commons House; fifteen days together was the Earl arraigned, and gave
in his answer to every particular Charge.

The Commons Charge him afresh by Mr. Pim concerning some Notes taken by
Secretary Vane, which were discovered by his son, of his telling the King, be
had an Army in Ireland which his Majesty might Employ to reduce this Kingdom
to obedience.

He is again called to the Bar, and Mr. Glin and Mr. Pim endeavor to prove
him Guilty by Law; They extend his Crimes, and make him as Odious as possible
they can. The Earl moves for Council, which the Peers could not in reason
deny: The Commons oppose, but after three days contest, the Peers prevail;
Council is assigned him, viz. M. Lane, The Princes Attorney, Mr. Gardner,
Recorder of London, Mr. Lo, and Mr. Lightfoote; and Saturday the 17 of April
was appointed for him and his Council to appear, where his Council argued
his case in Law; that day they adjourn, not appointing any time for their next
meeting.

The Commons House Vote him Guilty of high Treason, upon the evidence of Sir
Henry Vanes notes, which Bill of Attainder was sent up to the Lords, which in
their House was much opposed.

Some few days after, Mr. St John, The Kings Soliciter, was sent by the
Commons to the Lords, to Justify the Bill by Law, which accordingly was by him
performed in Westminster Hall; The Earl being present, and The King in his
accustomed place.

The Peers in their House proceed to Condemnation.

The King having notice of it, on the first of May Calls both Houses together,
where he declares, that he had been present at the whole Trial, and that in
Conscience he could not condemn him of high Treason.

He likewise in Vindication of the Earl, declares.

1. That he never had any Intention to bring over the Irish Army, nor ever was
advised by any body so to do. 2. That there never was any debate before him,
either in public Council, or private Committee, of the disloyalty of his
English subjects.
And that though he could not in Conscience condemn him of high Treason, yet
he could not clear him of misdemeanors; He desired them to consider what a
tender Conscience was, and that to satisfy his people, he would do much, but
in this of Conscience, neither fear nor any other respect, should make him go
against it. He desired them to find out some middle way, and was of opinion
that for misdemeanors he thought him not fit to serve him, or the
Commonwealth, in any place of trust, no not a Constable.

This speech gave much discontent to both Houses.

Sunday, May the second, The Prince of Orange was married to the Lady Mary at
White Hall, with Great solemnity and triumph.

The next day diverse seditious persons had stirred up the multitude, to the
number of 5000 or 6000. who in a Tumultuous manner came armed to Westminster,
crying out for Justice to be executed on the Earl, committed outrages on
diverse Lords, but by fair promises of my Lord Chamberlain, they were appeased.

They likewise posted at Westminster Hall Gate, and the Exchange, a Catalogue
of those that opposed the Bill of Attainder, under the title of Strafordians.

The fifth of May a Motion was made in the House for a loan of 650000 l. to be
Lent till it was Levied by Subsidy, provided the King would pass a Bill not to
adjourne, prorogue, or dissolve this Parliament, without the consent of both
Houses; upon which Motion a Bill was ordered to be drawn up.

The Lords by advice of the Judges, Vote the Earl Guilty of the 15 and 19
Articles. And at a Conference of both Houses, it was ordered, That some Lords be
sent to the King with the two Bills; one for executing the Earl, The other for
continuance of this Parliament; which accordingly was done on Saturday; and The
King promised his answer on Monday.

All the Sabbath day he was much perplexed within himself. The Clamours of the
multitude, were great, he sends for the Judges to advise, summons the Privy
Council, and with them spends much time in arguing the Case, sends for five
Bishops, viz. London, Lincoln, Carlisle, Durham, and Bishop Usher, who for Law
wholly remit him to the Judges, and for Conscience, he having heard the whole
proceedings, if he conceived him Guiltless, he ought not to condemn him.

The Judges in part satisfy the King, by declaring that he was Guilty of high
Treason.

The Earl himself that day writ a Letter with his own hand, To set his
Majesty's Conscience at Liberty, humbly requesting him, to prevent such
mischiefs as might ensue upon his refusal, to pass the Bill; and, That his
consent herein, should acquit him to God more then all the world beside.

Monday the 10th of May, his Majesty being wearied with complaints, granted a
Commission to the Earl of Arundell, Lord Privy Seal, Lord Chamberlain, and
others, to pass the two Bills.

The next day being much afflicted in his spirit, he wrote to the Lords, and
sent it by the Prince, wherein he requests, That although he had past the Bill
of Attainder against The Earl, yet desired to show mercy, by letting that
unfortunate man to end his life in Close Imprisonment; but if no less then
life can satisfy my people, I must say, Fiat Justicia. The Postscript was, If
he must die, it were Charity to reprieve him till Saturday.

The House returned answer, that his request could not possibly be admitted
without apparent danger to Him, his Wife, and Children.

On Wednesday the 12 of May, he was brought from the Tower to the scaffold on
Tower Hill, attended by Bishop Usher, where he made his last Speech to the
people, Protesting his Innocence in that for which he was condemned, acquitting
all the world, and desired God to forgive them, wishing presperity and
happiness to the Kingdom, and desired they would seriously consider whether
the Reformation of a Kingdom should be written in Letters of blood; much
fearing they were in the wrong way; professing he died a true son of the
Church of England, wherein he was borne, and in which he was bred: addressing
himself to his brother Sir George Wentworth, desired to be remembered to his
Wife and Children, willing him to Charge his Son never to meddle with the
patrimony of the Church, for it would prove a Canker to his estate; and after a
short time spent in prayer, he submitted his neck to the Block, which was
struck off by the Executioner at one low.

There was at that time a discovery made of diverse persons that had
endeavored the Earls escape out of the Tower, diverse Gentlemen of worth were
engaged in it, but the timely discovery prevented its execution.

Upon which the House oderd some Lords to be assistant to the Lieutenant of the
Tower for the safety of the City.

Several Great persons were displaced, as, The Earl of Essex made Lord
Chamberlain, in the room of Pembroke; The Marquess of Hartford Governor of
the Prince, in the room of the Earl of Newcastle, Dr Juxon Lord Treasurer,
resigned his Office to five Commissioners; The Lord Cottington Master of the
Wards, was displaced, and the Office conferd on the Lord Say.

In May last the Parliament to engage the people to stick close to them, framed
an Oath or Protestation, which was by them taken, and sent through England to
be taken by the people.

The Parliament being secured for their everlasting sitting, began to consider
of the raising of moneys for the payment and disbanding of the two Armies; much
Plate was melted down; and the Earl of Holland was by joint consent of King
and Parliament ordered to go down as General to disband the English Army.

The House in February following, Voted 300000 l. for the Scots, and days of
payment to be appointed.

For the Levying of this money a Bill was brought into the House for
Pole Money, Viz. a Duke 100 l. a Marquess 80 l. Earls 60 l. Vicounts and
Baronets 40 l. Knights of the Bath 30 l. Knights Bachelours 20. l. Esquires 10
l. every Gentleman able to expend 100 l per annum 5 l. and so every one
according to their degree, no person exempted, every Head paid six pence; which
Bill with two other were offered to the King, one for putting down the
Star Chamber, another for putting down the high Commission, at which the King
was a little startled.

The House Voted he should sign all, or none, which notwithstanding, he past
that for Pole Money, and took time for the other two, and not long after with
much Importunity he past them also.

Sir Thomas Roe was sent in the quality of an Ambassador to the Emperor, to
solicit the restoration of the Prince Elector, which after much stay and
nothing effected, he returns.

The Parliament considering the heavy burdens of the Northern Counties, Order
100000 l. part of the 300000 l. to be paid to the Scots; and in August
following both Armies were quietly disbanded, and departed to their own homes.

Bishop Wren is committed to the Tower for misdemeanors amounting to treason.

The Judges that gave their opinion for Ship Money are questioned, and several
Charges drawn up against them.

The King having Informed the House of his resolutions to take a Journey to
Scotland, on the tenth of August set forward out of London toward Scotland,
but that very Morning came to the House and past diverse Bills, and likewise
signed a Commission for the passing of Bills in his absence, the Commissioners
appointed were the Lord Keeper, the Lord Privy Seal, Marquess of Hartford,
Earl of Lindsey, Earl of Essex, Earl of Dorcet, Earl of Bath.

He likewise signed another Bill, constituting the Earl of Essex General of
all the Forces on this side Trent, by which he had power in case of necessity
to Levy an Army.

The Parliament adjourned from the eight of September till the 20 of October,
and appointed a standing Committee of fifty Members to act in the Intervall.

The Parliament being adjourned, and the King gone to Scotland, every one took
advantage to vent the humor of his own brain; many using Irreverend behavior
during the time of divine service, many outrages and riots were committed
against Clergymen, and the Prelaticall party (as they called them) strange and
unheard of practices were used, as tub-preaching, and that openly in the
streets; which gave occasion to many sober minded men to think evil of the
Parliament, as though it was their contrivance.

During the Kings being in Scotland, a Letter was sent from the
English-Committee in Scotland, to the standing Committee at Westminster,
discovering a plot against the lives of Marquess Hamilton, and others the
greatest Peers in Scotland, the Earl of Craford, and others, being the
Conspirators: which occasioned the standing Committee (to prevent the like
here) to appoint strong guards in several parts of the City, and so to
continue till the next meeting of both Houses.

Before the King returned from Scotland, about the end of October 1641. brake
out the most barbarous and inhumane Rebellion in Ireland, that ever was heard
of in any age of the world. The Innocent Protestants turned out of their
estates, and above two hundred thousand persons, men, women, and children, most
barbarously and cruelly murdered.

But we will leave Ireland weltring in her blood, and look home.

Where in November 1641. we find the King returned from Scotland, and was by
the City of London feasted, and in Great State conducted to Hampton Court, with
much seeming expressions of Joy; some few days after the King Invites the
Aldermen and principal Citizens to Hampton Court, where they were sumptuously
feasted, and diverse Aldermen were Knighted.

During the Kings residing at Hampton Court, the Commons present the King a
Remonstrance of the state of the Kingdom, with a large recital of all the
Grievances and oppressions that the people had groaned under since the
beginning of his Reign. Upon which within few days the King published a
Declaration in answer to their Remonstrance.

And now began visibly to appear the sad breach betwixt the King and his
Parliament, which did daily increase, until the Kingdom was involved in a sad
war.

Great endeavors are used to stir up the Common people with a dislike of the
Kings actions, to which purpose freedom was given to every party without
contradiction, to write and publish many bitter and Invective Pamphlets against
the Bishops, and their Government, and all the ill actions of the Kings
Ministers were laid upon him, and not content with that, they came down in
Great multitudes to Westminster, and by the way gave uncivil and threatening
Language to diverse Gentlemen at Whitehall-Gate.

Which caused the King to send to the Lord Major to summon a Common Council,
to receive his pleasure, which by the Chancelour of the Duchy, he declares his
utter dislike of the numerous multitude coming in that rude manner, and desires
care may be taken to prevent the like for the future, assuring them of his care
and protection.

And the same day the King sent to the City, the Commons Petition for a Guard
to defend them from a malignant party now prevalent; which Petition the King
denied, promising them in the word of a King, That his care for their security
should be as great as for his wife and children, and if that wauld not serve
their turn, he would appoint a Guard of such as he would be answerable to God
for.

Proclamation was made against the Irish Rebels, and the King desires the two
Houses to enter into Debate concerning relief, and proposes, that 10000
Volunteers be raised and sent over, if the Commons will pay them.

The King being informed of a design carried on by diverse Members of the
House of Commons, which held Intelligence with the Scots, endeavoring to
subvert his Authority; and the better to carry on their designs, countenanced
the Tumults in the City, causes Sir William Killigrew and Sir William Fleming,
to go to the Chambers and Studies of diverse Members of the House of Commons,
to seal up their Trunkes, and to seize on their papers, as the Lord Kimbolton,
Mr Pim, Mr Hamden, Mr Deuzill Hollis, Sir Arthur Haselrig, and Mr Stroud, but
none of their persons could be met with: they presently make report to the
House, who immediately Vote it a breach of the privilege of Parliament, and
that it shall be lawful to make resistance, and to require the aid of a
Constable to keep such persons endeavoring to seize on any member, till the
further pleasure of the House.

On the third of June the King sent his Attorney Sir Edward Herbert to demand
the five Members, and sent a Sergeant at Arms to charge them with Articles of
high treason, and with them the Lord Mandevill, the Earl of Manchesters second
son; which Articles were these.

1. They endeavored to subvort the Government, to deprive the King of his
Legal power, to place on the subjects an Arbitrary and tyrannical Power. 2.
They had endeavored by foul aspersions upon his Majesty's Government, to
alienate the affections of his people from him. 3. That they endeavored to
draw his Army from his obedience, to side with them in traitorous designs. 4.
That they traitorously invited and encouraged a foreign Power to invade his
Majesty's Kingdom of England. 5. That they had traitorously endeavored to
subvert the very rights and beings of Parliaments. 6. That they had endeavored
by force and terror to compel the Parliament to join with them in their
traitorous designs, and to that end have actually raised and countenanced
tumults against the King and Parliament. 7. That they traitorously conspired to
Levy, and actually have Levied war against the King.
The 4th of January 1641. The King attended with diverse Gentlemen came to the
House-door, he only entered the House of Commons, seating himself in the
Speakers Chair, demands five Members of that House to be delivered to him;
Their names were Sir Arthur Haselrig, Mr. Denzill Hollis, Mr. Pim, Mr. Hamden,
Mr. Stroud. The King finding they were not there (for they were absent by
appointment of the House) rises from the Speakers Chair, and tells them he was
very sorry for that occasion, and that no King ever was, nor should be more
careful to preserve the privileges of Parliament then he should be, that
those five Members were dangerous men, he protested in the word of a King, that
he never intended any force, but to proceed against them in a Legal way; he
expected they would send them so soon as they came into the House.

The King is no sooner gone out of the House, but they are in a great
confusion, crying out. Privilege, privilege; and the next day Voted the Kings
coming to the House a breach of the privilege of Parliament.

The King made Proclamation the next day for their apprehension, which the day
following the Commons Voted illegal and scandalous.

The day after he had been at the House, be went in his Coach to London, being
informed they were fled thiher, where all the way as he went, the Citizens and
others flocked about his Coach, desiring him not to Infringe the privilege of
Parliament: Upon his return one Walker flung into the Kings Coach a seditious
pamphlet, entitled, To your Tents O Israel; for which he was apprehended.

The Gentlemen of the Inns of Court, offered their service to the King as a
Guard; a small Court of Guard is built at White-Hall-Gate, and some Gentlemen
entertained: Within two days after a great multitude came out of London in
their accustomed manner, to Petition against Bishops, and in their passage by
White Hall using menacing terms, which the Gentlemen not brooking, some small
mischief was done.

At Westminster they offered violence to diverse Bishops, which caused 14 of
them to draw up a Protest against the proceedings of the House.

The Commons resent it ill, and Vote them Guilty of High Treason.

The City Petition the King concerning the putting of persons of Honor out of
the Tower, and placing others in their rooms; and of the Great preparations in
the Tower, of the fortifying White Hall, and withal desire, that the five
Members may not be restrained, nor proceeded against, but by consent of the
House; to all which his Majesty gave an answer.

Two thousand Petitioners came out of Buckingham-shire to Petition the King in
the behalf of Mr. Hamden, their Countryman, desiring that he and the rest of
the five Members may enjoy the Privileges of Parliament; which moved the King
to send to the Parliament, that for the present he would wave his proceedings
against the five Members.

The multitude not being content with the destruction of Bishops, they openly
demand the Liturgy of the Church to be abolished, condemning the use of all
set-formes of prayer.

The Pulpits every where sounded aloud that now was the time that the
Israelites should plunder the Egyptians, and that the Just should wash their
footsteps in the blood of the ungodly; and publicly exhorted the people, to
take up arms against the Kings Evil Council (as they called it) and to
destroy all such as joined with them: and to this effect these following Texts
of Scripture were pressed by the zealous Ministers, Luke 19.27. Those mine
enemies that would not that I should Reign over them, bring hither and slay
before me. Judges 5.23. Curse ye Meroz, Curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants
thereof, because they came not to help the Lord against the Mighty. Jer. 48.10.
Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord deceitfully; and cursed be he that
keeps back his sword from blood. Thus there was no way for Reformation in
these men's accounts, but to pluck up and to destroy, and all for the Love of
God, and for the advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

The great multitudes still resorting to Westminster every day, caused the King
for his own safety to repair to Hampton Court, with the Queen and Prince, for
which by many good men he was much blamed.

The next day after the King went to Hampton Court, many Citizens, with a great
company of boats, with Guns and flags, Guard the five Members, in Triumph, to
Westminster; which gave occasion to the King to dislike the City.

The House of Commons Petition the King for the Militia; To which he gives a
speedy answer, though not satisfying to them.

They likewise Petition that the five Members may be estated and cleared of
that Imputation of Treason; To which he answered, That he had ground and proof
enough to accuse them, but he is willing to forbear prosecution; if that will
not do, to satisfy the people, he will pass a free and General pardon, as
they shall think fit.

The King after he had been at Hampton Court some small time, sends for the
Earl of Essex, then Lord Chamberlain, and the Earl of Holland, Groom of the
Stool to attend him; but they refused, rather choosing to obey his Writ; upon
which he sends a Messenger for the Staff and Key, the Ensigns of their
Office, which they willingly resigned.

The Queen having received a Message from both Houses by the Earl of Newport
and the Lord Seamor, that they intended to charge her with Treason.

She answered, she never saw any Articles in writing, and therefore gave little
credit, and she hoped they would lay no aspersions upon her that never
mistrusted the actions of one single person, much less the whole House, and
that she ever wished a happy and right understanding betwixt the King and his
people.

In February the King and Queen went to Canterbury, and so to Dover, with the
Princess Mary, wife to the Prince of Orange. The Queen went along with her into
Holland; and some affirm, carried the choicest Jewels of the Crown with her
to pawn.

During the Kings stay at Canterbury, he signed the Bill to take away Bishops
Votes in Parliament.

The King came back to Greenwich, and sends for the Duke of York to attend him
in his going to York, where he intended to reside.

From Greenwich he removes to Theobalds, where he is presented with a Petition
for the Militia, and likewise to reside near London, and not to take his Son
with him. The King refused to give any other answer to the Militia, then what
he had already done; and that he should take such care of his Son, as should
justify him to God as a Father, and to his Dominions as a King, and that he
conceived himself not safe near London.

The House immediately Vote, That his Majesty's answer was a flat denial, and
likewise Order The Earl of Northumberland, Lord High Admiral, to take care
for the providing and rigging of the Royal Navy for the service of the
Kingdom.

The House seeing they could not prevail with the King for the Militia, past
an Order for settling the Militia throughout England and Wales in confiding
persons hands.

From Huntingdon the King sent a Message to both Houses, showing the Grounds
and Reasons of his removal to York, desiring them to expedite the necessary
supplies for Ireland, and forbids them by any pretense of Order or Ordinance to
meddle with the Militia, or to do or execute any thing against Law, he being
tied up by the Law as well as his subjects, and must obey. Upon which the House
drew up a Declaration of their utter dislike of his proceedings.

The King at Stamford puts forth a Proclamation for putting in execution the
Laws against Papists.

And being at York puts forth a Proclamation for Tunage and Poundage.

The eight of April 1642. the King sends a message to both Houses, declaring
his Intentions to go himself in person to chastize the bloody rebels, and
that he intended to raise forthwith by Commission a Guard for his own person,
consisting of 2000 foot and 200 horse, and to arm them from his Magazine at
Hull.

Upon which the Houses Petition to remove the Magazine from Hull.

The Gentry, Ministers, and Freeholders of the County of York, Petition the
King, to which his Majesty gives a speedy and gracious answer.

The House again Petitions, that (the Magazine at the Tower of London being
much drained) that from Hull may be brought up; to which his Majesty answered,
That for the Charge of Locking to the Magazine at Hull, as it was by them at
first voluntarily undertaken, though unnecessarily, yet you may free our good
people of that Charge, and leave it to Us to look to, who are the proper owners
of it.

The Parliament, though they could not prevail by Entreaty, resolve to do it
by possicy, for they had sent to keep out the Earl of Newcastle, and committed
the Town and Fort to a faithful Friend of theirs, Sir John Hotham.

The County of York petition the King, that the Magazine may remain there for
the security of the Northern Countyes; and during the Contests, the Parliament
went on might and maine, settling the Militia in many Countyes; and by Reason
the Earl of Northumberland was indisposed in health, and could not attend the
Sea-service, they petition that the Earl of Warwick may be Admiral.

The King utterly refuses the Earl of Warwick, yet notwithstanding the Earl
of Warwick being Encouraged by some Votes of the House, though with some
opposition, got possession of most part of the Navy.

The King attended by many of the Nobility, a great number of Gentlemen, and
some Soldiers, came before the walls of Hull, but found the Gates shut, and
the Bridges drawn up by the Command of Sir John Hotham, a Member of the
Commons House.

Sir John Hotham appeared on the wall, Kneelling down, Entreating his Majesty
not to command that, which he must be enforced at that time to deny, and that
he could not admit him in, without breach of trust to the Parliament, craving
leave that he might have time of acquaint the Parliament. The King being very
wrath, desired to know if he had any Order in writing, expressly to deny his
entrance: And after some hours stay, Proclaimed Sir John Hotham a Traitor,
after he had received The Duke of York and the Prince Elector out of the Town,
who had been there one day.

The King forthwith sends a Message to the Parliament, accusing Hotham for a
traitor; and likewise sent a Letter to the Mayor of Hull, to take care that no
part of the Magazine should be conveyed away without his consent: there were
Scouts appointed to Intercept all Letters between London and Hull; and a Letter
accordingly was Intercepted going from the Parliament to Hull, giving
encouragement to Sir John to continue firm, nothing doubting but they would
stick by him.

The House being Informed of the Intercepting of their Letter, Voted it a high
breach of the privilege of Parliament; and that what Sir John had done, was in
obedience to that House; and that the proclaiming him a traitor without due
process of Law, is a breach of their privilege, against the Laws of the Land,
and the liberty of the subject.

They likewise past an Order to prevent the Levying any Soldiers in Yorkshire,
or Lincolnshire, to force a passage into the Town of Hull; and the more to
enrage the King, Hotham is ordered to Levy The trained bands, which being come
into the Town, he disarmes and dismisses them.

There was a select Committee appointed to go to Hull, with Instructions for
the safety of the Counties of York and Lincoln, to whom all Sheriffs, Justices
of the peace, Constables, and other Officers, are required to be ayding and
assisting.

Things began to grow very high; The King summons the Gentry of the County of
York, where he gave them a large account of all the messages and replies
touching Hull, and the Reasons why he did not sign the Bill for the Militia.
To be short, You see my Magazine is going to be taken from me directly against
my Will; The Militia against the Law (and my consent) is going to be put in
execution; and lastly, Sir John Hothams Treason is countenanced; all which
being considered, none can blame me to apprehend dangers, and upon this real
Ground to tell you, that I am resolved to have a Guard only to secure my
person; In which I desire you assistance, that I may be able to protect you the
Laws, and the true Protestant Religion from any affront or Injury.

Which speech was by them received with great affection.

The Parliament being informed of the Kings Speech to the Yorkshire Gentry,
declare that it is against the Laws and liberties of the Kingdom, that any of
the subjects thereof should be commanded by the King to attend him at his
pleasure, and that whosoever upon pretense of his Majesty's command shall take
up Arms in a warlike manner, shall be esteemed disturbers of the peace, and to
be proceeded against accordingly: and likewise signed an Order to the Sheriff
of that County, to take care to suppress the raising of the trained bands upon
the Kings Command.

But the Parliament Issue out Commissions to all parts of the Kingdom,
appointing certain days for all the trained bands to be exercised in each
County; and that several Members be sent into the several Counties to see the
Commissions put in execution, and all the Magazines in the several Counties to
be put into the hands of their confiding friends.

Which Commissions were answered by Proclamation from the King, forbidding the
trained bands and all others to rise or muster, on pretense of any Ordinance of
Parliament, without his consent.

The breach was now grown wide; the Parliament still opposing and thwarting
the King on all occasions, moved diverse of the Members to desert it, and
repair to the King, so that in a small time, the Lords at York were more in
number then those at Westminster.

The names of those that went, were, the Marquess of Hartford, the Earl of
Lindsey, Cumberland, Huntington, Bath, Southampton, Dorset, Salisbury, who
presently returned, Northampton, Devonshire, Bristoll, Westmerland, Barkshire,
Munmouth, Rivers, Newcastle, Dover, Carnarvan, Newport, the Lord Howard,
Charlton, Newwark, Pawlet, Paget, Matreverse, Willowby, Rich, Fawconbridge,
Chandois, Coventry, Lovelesse, Savill, Seymor, Mohune, Dunsmore, Lord Capell,
Gray of Ruthen; Together with above fifty of the Commons House, whose departure
startled the active men of the House, who notwithstanding having gone so far,
proceed and Vote, That it appears that the King being seduced by evil
Council, Intends to make war against the Parliament, and that when he does, it
is a breach of trust reposed in him; and likewise that whosoever shall aid or
assist him in the said war, are traitors by the fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom.

And on the 30 of May by Vote summon nine of those Lords that went, to return,
but they utterly refused, which the House deemed a sleighting of them, which
occasioned Mr. Hollis after a long Speech to Impeach them of high treason,
which the Peers afterward confirmed, in Voting them never to sit in the House
more, and to be incapable of any privilege of Parliament.

And not long after the Lord Keeper Littleton, sent away the Great Seal to the
King, and immediately followed it, which put the House to a great plunge for
the present.

In June 1642. The two Houses sent a Petition with 19 Propositions to the King,
to which he reutrn'd a smart answer, taxing them, that they had contrary to law
pressed their Ordinances on the people, wrested from him the command of the
Militia, countenanced the Treason of Hotham, and had directed to the people
Invectives against his Government, asperst him with the favoring of Papists;
and with an utter dislike of the Propositions, protested, that if he were
vanquished and a prisoner, in worse condition then any the most unfortunate of
his predecessors had ever been reduced unto, he would never stoop so low as to
Grant those demands, and to make himself of a King of England, a Duke of
Venice.

And now both sides prepare for war: The Parliament the 10 of June 1642. past
an Order for bringing in money and plate to maintain horse and foot for
defense of the public peace, for which they did engage the public faith.

The King on the other side receives advice by Letters from Amsterdam of a
considerable quantity of Arms and Ammunition, which was provided upon some
Jewels pawned by the Queen; he likewise sends Commissions of Array, with
Letters to the Lieutenants of the several Counties, making use of the
Parliaments Vote, and declares, That the Kingdom being in danger of Enemies
abroad, and a Popish party at home, it is necessary to put the people in a
posture of defense, that you immediately cause to be restored all the ancient
trained bands, and freehold bands, and to appoint Collonells and Captaiens,
and other Officers, to command them.

The Parliament Vote the Commission to be against Law, and the actors therein,
to be esteemed disturbers of the peace.

Whereupon the King summons the Lords of the Council, with the rest of the
Nobility at York, and declares that he requires no obedience of them, but what
shall be according to law, and requires them to yield to no commands Illegally
Imposed by any other, and that he will not Engage them in any war against the
Parliament, except for necessary defense against such as shall Invade him or
them; Upon which, with unanimous consent, they all freely engaged to him their
duty and allegiance.

The King sends a Letter to the Lord Mayor of London, Aldermen and Sheriffs,
forbidding any contribution of money and plate toward the raising of any Armies
whatsoever for the Parliament.

By this time the Arms were arrived from Holland, but the King wanted men to
weild them, yet by his Speeches and Declarations, had gained the affections of
many of his people, and a considerable number was got together; and from
Beverly he sends a Message and Proclamation to the Parliament, of his
Intentions to go against Hull, requiring it might be delivered up to him,
which they answered with a Petition, moving him to accord with his two Houses;
they likewise set out a Declaration for the safety of Hull, promising
satisfaction for all damages sustained.

On the 11 of June 1642. The Parliament Vote that an Army shall be raised for
the defense of King and Parliament, and the Earl of Essex to be General.

The King according to his former Intentions, with an Army of 3000 foot and
1000 horse, Intends to besiege Hull by Land, and made Proclamation that none on
pain of death carry any provisions into Hull.

Hotham being Informed of the Kings advance, summons a Council of War, which
resolve to hold the King play with their Ordinance, till the tide came in, and
then to draw up their sluices, which accordingly was performed with much damage
to the Kings Soldiers.

Hotham likewise sends to the Parliament, requiring 500 men for the safety of
the Town, and provisions.

Upon which by command of the Parliament, Drums are beaten p in London, and
other adjacent Counties, for Volunteers to go immediately to Hull, and within a
week 500 men and more were sent by Sea under the command of Sir John Meldram,
to assist Sir John Hotham.

The King calls a Council, and resolves to break up the siege.

By this time the Earl of Warwick was possessed of most of the Fleet for the
service of the Parliament, and they were in a considerable way to raise an
Army, by the assistance of that mass of money and plate that was brought in,
for it is almost Incredible with what zeal and affection (by the Ministers
persuasions) the people were willing to be rid of their Treasure, every one
vying who should contribute most; nay the women and maidens spared not their
Rings, Thimbles and Bodkins, for the advancement of the cause.

The Earl of Essex with much prudence raises a considerable body of horse and
foot. The Earl of Bedford was Voted to be General of the Horse.

Collonell Goring, eldest Son to the Lord Goring, was sent down to Portsmouth
by the Parliament; but suddenly he declares for the King.

The King being returned to York, summons the Gentry, and requires their
assistance for the raising of a Regiment for the Princes Guard, to be commanded
by the Earl of Cumberland.

The Parliament declare against the Commission of Array, and Vote it Illegal:
on the other side, the King being Informed of the Earl of Essex his raising an
Army, proclaims hm a Rebel and a Traitor to the King and his Crown, and that
all Collonells and other Officers under his Command, that shall not Instantly
lay down their Arms, are Guilty of High Treason. And likewise Commands the
Marquess of Hartford, to raise what Forces he could to suppress him.

Great was the Contest almost in every County, betwixt the Parliament
Commissioners, and the Commissioners of Array. In some Counties the Kings party
prevailed, in others the Parliaments. London the Great Metropolis was not
exempted; for Sir Richard Gurney, then Lord Major was committed to the Tower,
for causing the Kings Commission of Array to be read, and was by the Lords
deprived of his Majoralty, never to bear Office in City or Commonwealth, and
to continue prisoner during the pleasure of the House.

The King being at York publishes a Grand Declaration of all the proceedings
from the beginning of this Parliament to this present time, concluding with a
solemn Protestation of his affections to Parliaments, and the peace and
happiness of the Kingdom; and within few days sends a Message to the
Parliament, taxing them with borrowing 100000 l. out of the Adventures money
for the relief of Ireland; to which they return a speedy answer.

The King in person moves from place to place; On the 22 of July he made a
Speech to the Gentry in Leicestershire; on the 4th of August, to the Gentry in
Yorkshire; and that war might not want its solemnity, on the 20 of August, he
sets up his Standard Royal at Nottingham, and by Proclamation requires the aid
and assistance of all his Subjects on the North side Trent, and within twenty
miles Southward thereof, for his just defense; and that whosoever shall supply
him with money and plate, he (as God shall enable him) will repay and reward,
accordin gto the measure of their love and affection to him and their Country.

On the 25 of August 1642. from Nottingham the King sends a Message to both
Houses, by the Earls of Southampton and Dorset, and Sir John Culpepper, for a
treaty of peace; and that an equal number may be chosen to meet where they
should appoint, that there may, if possible, be an accommodation, out of a deep
sense of the Calamities that attend the Kingdom. To which they answer, That
until he recalls that Proclamation which proclaims them Rebels, and takes
down his Standard, they will by no means hear of it: To which he replies,
That to remove all scruples that may hinder the Treaty, by him so much desired,
so that a day be appointed by the Parliament for revoking their Declarations
against all persons as traitors assisting him, he will with all cheerfulness on
the same day recall his Proclamations, and take down his Standard; and likewise
promised to grant any thing that should be for the good of his subjects,
assuring them that his greatest desire was to get a right understanding.

To which they humbly answer and petition, that his Majesty would take down his
Standard, withdraw his Declarations, and leave his Forces, and return to the
Parliament, and receive their faithful advice, of whose real affection he
need not to doubt.

Within few days the King sends a second reply, That he could neither do nor
offer any more then he had already, and that he should think himself clear
fromany blood that might be spilt in this quarrel.

The Parliament give encouragement to the well affected, that what moneys they
should lend, should be satisfied out of Delinquents estates; and declare, that
whosoever shall return from the King to the Parliament within ten days shall
be pardoned, excepting the Duke of Richmond, the Earls of Newcastle,
Cumberland, Bristoll, Rivers, and Carnarvan, Mr. Edward Hide, Endimion Porter,
Secretary Nicholas, Vicount Newwark, Vicount Haltland.

The Parliament being Informed that the Queen was soliciting the States of
Holland to contribute Arms and Ammunition for the King, send Mr. Walter
Strickland, a Member of the House, over into Holland, with Credentiall Letters.
They likewise drew up a Declaration to the States of Holland to satisfy them
of their whole proceedings.

Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice in September arrive in England, and offer
their service to their Uncle, who were immediately put into Command.

Prince Rupert with a small body of Horse flew up and down through diverse
Counties, and gained a considerable body together.

The King himself moves, though with a slower pace, and had gotten a great
number together, marches to Shrewsbury (a place of great concernment, as being
the Inlet to Wales) where he orders a Mint to melt down the plate, which was
largely contributed by the Gentry, and offers the Crown Lands in Morgage to
ease the Country of the burden of taxes and free Quarter.

The Earl of Lindsey is chosen General for the King, and the General
Rendevouz of his Forces was appointed at York.

The Earl of Essex General for the Parliament, appointed a Rendevouz of all
the Parliament Forces at Northampton, being about 20000 Horse and foot, who
gave stirct Charge to restrain all profaneness and disorders in their Army.

He divided his Army into several bodies, to prevent the Roving of Prince
Rupert, and to find out the King: from Northampton he marches to Coventry,
thence to Warwick.

Worcester was possessed by Sir John Byron: a skirmish happened betwixt Prince
Rupert, and Mr. Fines, Collonell Sands, Captain Hales, and others. Thus, the
Prince came out of Worcester into a green Meadow, resolved to fight those he
could first meet withal; The passage to the Meadow was narrow; Collonell
Sands being over-valiant Charged with his Regiment before the rest could come
up; both sides being equal in number, fought with Great resolution, but the
prince fearing the Generals approach, retired into Worcester, though with some
loss in the Rear, being pursued through the Town by the Parliaments Forces:
Collonell Sands, and Sergeant Major Duglaas were slain at the first Charge.
There was found dead in all thirteen person.

The Prince marched immediately to Ludlow, and the King with some horse marches
into Wales, and made a Speech full of protestations to the Gentry of
Denbighshire and Flintshire, and returns to Shrewsbury, where his strength
much increased, being 16000 foot, and 5000 Horse and Dragoones.

Both Armies think of providing winter Quarters; Collonell Essex, with two
Regiments of foot, is appointed Governor of Gloucester, but not long after was
ordered to Bristoll. The town being divided, and hearing of his coming, began
to mutiny, but he had a party which opened the gates to him in the night, and
surpised the Mutiners.

Upon Essex Removal from Gloucester, Collonell Massey was appointed Governor.

The Earl of Essex sends horse and soote to the Lord Wharton, to make a body,
to prevent the Cavaliers going to Wollverhampton.

The King being at Shrewsbury, summons the County to bring horse and carts for
his removal, who marches near Coventry, and that night lay at Southam.

The King so exceedingly increased in strength, that he caused fear in those
at London, who order all the trained bands of London, and the adjacent
Counties, to be in readiness, and to set up Posts and Chains in all the
passages into the City, and order twelve Companies out of London for the
security of Windsor Castle.

The Parliament Vote that it was and should be lawful for all Counties in
England to enter into a mutual association, for the defense each of other.

The danger that the Parliament apprehended was real, for the King had gotten
between the Earl of Essex and London, and they conjectured it more fesable
forhim to attempt London, then fight the Army.

Yorkshire at that time abounded with Cavaliers, commanded by the Earl of
Cumberland, Sir Francis Wortley, Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and Sir Thomas Glenham.

In Cornwall there was a considerable strength for the King, who were commanded
by Sir Ralph Hopton.

In Wales they began to body, besides the Army the King Commanded, and a great
body of horse commanded by Prince Rupert.

The King with an Army of 14000 foot and 4000 Horse and Dragoones came on
Saturday the 22 of October within six miles of Keynton, and quartered his Army
at Crepeda and Edghill.

The Earl of Essex quartered at Keinton with his Army.

On Sunday the 28. both Armies draw up in a body. The King having the advantage
of a high hill, called Edg Hill, at the foot of which was a vale, called the
Vale of the red horse, where Essex his Army was drawn up upon a Rising Ground,
in Battalia, three Regiments of horse on the right wing, commanded by Sir
Philip Stapleton, Sir William Belford, and the Lord Fielding, Sir John Meldram
commanded the Van; the General, Collonell Hollis, and the Lord Brooks, in the
Rear; on the left wing twenty Troops of Horse commanded by Sir James Ramsey.

The Earl of Lindsey was General for the King, but the Battle was ordered
by the Lord Ruthen Earl of Forth. The General on foot led on the maine body
of the Army with a pike in his hand.

The Earl of Essex showed personal Valor, till he was dissuaded not to
expose himself to danger, and so retired to the body.

The Forlorn on the Kings side was commanded by Major Backstake and Captain
Hamond, who being come down to the bottom of the hill, charged the Parliaments
Forlorn, which was no sooner done, but the Kings Canons began to play.

Prince Rupert, General of the Horse, Commanded the Right wing, Charged
furiously the Left wing of Essex his Army, and Routed them, pursuing them to
Keinton Town, took the Carriages, the Earls Wagons, and Cloak-bag, being
too Eager of the plunder.

The Earl of Lindsey being too adventurous was killed, and by reason of the
absence of Prince Rupert, the maine body of the Kings was assaulted with great
fury, and his Standard taken (Sir Edmund Varney the Standard Bearer being
killed) which was afterward retaken, by an unknown person, and conveyed away.

The foot on both sides Charge with equal Valor, until the night came on,
which parted the fight.

Both Armies continue in the field all night, and the next day the King made
Proclamation of pardon to such as would lay down their arms and submit. The
Victory was much disputed, both sides returning thanks to God for Victory.
Indeed there was real signs of Victory on both sides, by the taking of
Colors and Canons of equal number. And although the Parliament lost more men,
yet the King lost more men of quality. The number of the slain was computed to
be between five and six thousand.

The Kings Army drew off toward Keinton, and the Earl of Essex withdrew toward
Warwick.

In Examining the Earl of Essex his Cabinet, they discovered one Blake that
attended the King to be Treacherous, by holding a Correspondency, who was
immediately condemned by a Council of War, and hanged in the high way.

On the Parliaments side were slain of note, the Lord St John, Collonell Chapter
Essex, Lieutenant Collonell Ramsey.

The Parliament take care to recruite their Army by giving Liberty to
apprentices to serve their time in the war, which occasioned very many to leave
their trades, and repair thither.

They likewise solicit the Scots to raise and Army for their own defense.

The King on the other side sends a Declaration to his Council in Scotland,
Stating the quarrel betwixt him and his Parliament, requiring their assistance.

The King and Prince Rupert repair near London with a flying Army, which
occasioned the Parliament to provide for their own safety.

The Earl of Essex likewise drew near to the City, quartering his men at
Acton, and the places adjoining.

The Kings Artiffery with some Troops of Horse, advance from Colebrooke to
Branford, eight miles from London, fell upon Collonell Hollis his men, which
quartered there, but the Lord Brooks and Collonell Hamdens Regiments came
speedily to their relief, and for a time maintained a bloody fight.

The Earl of Essex was sitting in the House when the news was brought, who
immediately horst, and with what strength he could, hastens to meet the King,
but night approaching, the King retired.

All that night vast numbers of Soldiers flockt from the City, above three
times the number of the Kings Army, and they had hemmed hm in on every side, had
not Kingston bridge been left destitute, over which the Kings train of
Artillery was drawn, whilst a body of Horse faced the Enemy, and then retired
toward Oxford.

The Parliament orders the General to follow him, and fight him.

The Kings Forces in the North under the Command of the Earl of Newcastle, and
the Earl of Cumberland, being 8000 Horse and foot, were too potent for the
Lord Fairfax, Lieutenant for the Parliament. The Earl marches to tadcaster,
where the Lord Fairfax, and Captain Hotham were, fell on the Town, and forced
the Lord Fairfax with some loss to quit the Town, and march to Cauwod and
Selby for supplies for his Army: Sir Thomas Fairfax is sent to Leeds with
diverse Troops of Horse, but was forced to retire.

In December, Goring with Arms, money, and eighty old Commanders, with the
Queens Standard, arrives from Holland, and joins with the Earl of Newcastle.

The Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge, Hartford, Essex, associate, and
the Lord Gray of Wark is appointed Major General over them.

The Parliaments Forces possess themselves of Winchester and Chichester.

The Parliament send Propositions to Oxford by four Lords and eight Commoners;
To which the King returns a speedy answer.

The Queen arrives the 16 of Feb. 1642. and brings over Arms, money, and
Ammunition with her from Holland. The Earl of Montross, and the Lord Ogle
present their service to her at York, with two Troops of Horse, which she
afterward made up a considerable body.

The Earl of Essex in the Spring marched forth of his winter quarters,
resolving to besiege Reading, which was possessed by the Kings Forces, in it was
3000 Soldiers, and twenty pieces of Ordinance; the General sits down before
it in April 1643. with an Army of 16000 foot and 3000 Horse, which after
sixteen days, was delivered up on easy conditions by the Deputy Governor
Collonell Fielding, Sir Arthur Aston the Governor being indisposed by reason
of his wounds.

At Cirencister was the most considerable party for the Parliament in all those
parts; Prince Rupert with a considerable Army marches against it, the Town not
being fortified, he falls on with a furious assault, which at first was
Gallantly received, but after two hours dispute possessed himself of the Town,
the most part of the Earl of Stamfords Regiment being cut off, seized a
considerable Magazine with above 3000 Arms, and eleven hundred persons, which
were conveyed to Oxford.

Immediately he faces Gloucester, summons the City; To which Massey Replied,
That he kept the City for King and Parliament, and would not deliver it to any
foreign Prince.

The Army in Wales raised for the King, advance toward Gloucester, and in their
march, fall on a Regiment of Collonell buroughs, which they rout, diverse
Officers being slain, took fifty prisoners, and so march on to Gloucester.

News was brought to the Parliament of a considerable defeat given to their
forces in Devonshire, and that Prince Maurice, and the Marquess of Hartford
had Intentions to secure all the West for the King.

And not long after there was a discovery made for the betraying of Bristoll,
but by timely notice it was prevented, and the Conspirators executed.

Likewise a discovery was made in London of a plot to settle the Kings
Commission of Array, for which Mr. Tomkins and Mr. Chaloner were both Executed.

The Lord Brooks, a very active man for the Parliament, being in Staffordshire
with his Forces, with Intentions to dissipate those Gentlemen that were got
together for the King, advances to Litchfield. The Earl of Chesterfeild had
some Forces in the Town for the King, who upon the Lord Brooks his advance to
the Town, quits it, and retires with his Forces to the Close, which was far
more tenable then the Town.

Brooks takes possession of the Town, and being in a Window peeping to watch
an advantage against the Enemy, was shot into the Eye, and died immediately.
His Soldiers notwithstanding the loss of their chief Commander, fall on with
much resolution, and after a short dispute possessed themselves of the Church and
Close, took the Earl of Chesterfeild, with diverse Commanders, and many common
Soldiers.

Prince Rupert immediately lays siege to Litchfield, and having notice of the
advance of some of the Parliaments forces under the Command of Brereton and
Gell to raise the siege, drew out near a thousand Horse and Dragoones, fell on
the enemy, which they put to flight, and by their flight left Bag and baggage
to the Kings forces, with diverse pieces of Ordinance, and many prisoners.

But the Earl of Northampton Charging in the head of the body was slain, they
return to the siege, spring a mine, and scale the walls; whereupon the
besieged desire a Parley, and on reasonable conditions quit the Town.

In May 1643. the Lords and Commons Vote that an Act be past for an Assembly of
Divines immediately to be called to settle Religion.

They likewise Vote the making of a new Great Seal, a thing never heard or
read of in the Natition; which Mr. Prin defens in his book, entitled, The
opening of the Great Seal of England.

Sir John Hotham sends word to the Earl of Newcastle, that Hull and Lincoln
shall be delivered up to him for the service of his Majesty, and both father
and son resolve to stand on their own Guard at Hull.

Mr Jermin Generalissimo for the Queen, was at New-wark, who levying a
considerable party for the securing of the County, she with thirty Companies of
Horse and Dragoones; and three thousand foot, meets the King at Edghill, it
being the first time she saw him since her departure into Holland. The King and
Queen retire to Oxford.

The Parliament draw up Articles of High Treason against the Queen; That she
had pawned the Jewels of the Crown, raised the Rebellion in Ireland,
endeavored to raise a party in Scotland against the Parliament, that she had
appeared in the head of a Popish party, which was at last past by both Houses.

They likewise Vote that the King and Queens revenue should be detained, and
employed in the public service.

They likewise Voted a new and unheard of tax to be laid upon Beer, Wine,
Tobacco, and whatsoever is necessary for support of life, which they called
Excize.

Sir John Hotham and his son are both taken prisoners by Sir Matthew Beynton,
their estates seized and confiscate, Sir John endeavoring to escape, was
knocked down by a Soldier at the same Gate that he denied the King Entrance.
They are both sent by Sea prisoners to the Parliament, and Sir Matthew took
possession of the Town.

June 17. 1643. The Earl of Essex at Taken, orders the Buckingham Forces to
beat up the Kings quarters, which accordingly they did; Prince Rupert having
notice of it, falls in with a body of Horse, Routed and dispersed most of the
party; There was slain the Earl of Musgraves Son, and Mr. Hamden, one of the
five Impeached Members, a man violently active against the King.

At that time the Parliaments Army was much visited with the Contagion, many
dying daily.

On the fifth of July was a great defeat given to Sir William Waller in the West
(after he had continued there victoriously for some time) by a party from
Oxford, conducted by the Lord Wilmot, which defeat gave a great Check to the
Parliament.

The General by reason of the sickness, and other great wants of his Army,
marches toward London, quartering them at Kingston on Thames, and other
adjacent places.

Great were the successes of the King almost in every part of the Kingdom; for
Sir William Waller was quite routed in the West, Sir Ralph Hopton in the head
of a Gallant Army, upon whom the King was pleased for his fidelity and Valor,
to confer the Honor and Title of a Baron.

Prince Rupert was ordered to besiege Bristoll, which in short time was
delivered to him.

Prince Maurice besieged Exceter (whither the Earl of Stamford was fled) which
on the fourth of September 1643 was diliver'd up to him upon Articles, Sir John
Barkly was made Governor.

The Lord Fairfax, Sir Thomas Fairfax, and most of the Parliaments forces in
the North were defeated and driven into Hull, by the Lord of Newcastle, who at
that time commanded the Greatest Army in England, and not only able to
terrify the Parliaments Forces in England, but likewise formidable to any
Scotch forces that should come to their assistance.

Collonell Goring landed at Newcastle with 200 old Soldiers.

The Earl of Newcastle in his march from Tadcaster, surprised Leeds, and in it
diverse persons of quality, friends to the Parliament; he likewise proclaims
the Lord Fairfax traitor.

The King in the Head of a Gallant Army summons Gloucester, offering free pardon
and protection to the Inhabitants, if they would lay down their Arms,
requiring a positive answer in two hours. In the Interim he surrounds the
Town with six thousand Horse and foot; by the time appointed, the
Magistrates, Officers, and Soldiers, return this answer; That they kept the
Town for his Majesty and his Royal posterity, and do accordingly conceive
our selves wholly bound to obey the Commands of his Majesty signified by both
Houses of Parliament, and are resolved by Gods Help to keep the City
accordingly.

The King stood amazed at their confidence, for at that time they could not
hope for relief; In the Town was only one Regiment of foot, an hundred
Horse, beside the trained bands, in all not exceeding fifteen hundred men. The
King resolves to lay a close siege, and a considerable party Intrencht on the
South and East side, though they within sallied out with some damage to the
Kings forces, the Welsh and Worcestershire forces on the North west side,
General Ruthen on the South Side, the East and South parts were damned up with
Earth: They within make no less then eight sallies in ten days, with no small
prejudice to the besiegers.

The King prepares for a storm, which with much valor was performed on both
sides; a mine was sprung under the East gate, which they countermand by the
industry of Collonell Massey the Governor.

The Parliament being informed of the Kings Intentions toward Gloucester, order
the General to march out, who mustred about 10000 Horse and foot at Hounslow,
and so marches forward for the relief of the Town. They likewise took care
for recruiting an Army for Sir William Waller. The General being come within
seven miles of Gloucester, fired some pieces of Ordinance to give notice of his
approach. On the first of September a party of Horse is sent to face him,
whilst the King drew off from the siege.

Many of the Kings friends much blamed him for sitting down before the Town,
when he might without difficulty have come to London, and fully ended the work;
for the Parliament were never in so low a condition since the beginning of the
war, as they were when the King first sat down before the Town.

The Lords House being sensible of the danger, Uote a Treaty, and the Commons
were consulting of it.

The Parliament sent to require the assistance of their brethren of Scotland,
and Vote 30000 l. be instantly borrowed for their advance.

The Solemn League and Covenant was drawn up, and taken by all the Members of
both Houses, and orderd to be Imposed on all the associated Counties; Doctor
Featly, a reverend and learned Divine, was Imprisoned for refusing to take it.

The King immediately sends out his Proclamation against it, in these words;
Whereas there is printed a paper pretended to be ordered by the Commons in
Parliament, on the 21 of September last, to be printed and published, which
Covenant, though it seems to make specious expressions of piety and religion,
it is indeed nothing else but a traitorous and seditious combination against
him, and against the established religion and Laws of this Kingdom, in
pursuance of a traitorous design and endeavor to bring in foreign forces to
invade this Kingdom: his Majesty does therefore straightly charge and command
all his loving subjects, of what degree and quality soever, upon their
allegiance, that they presume not to take the said seditious and traitorous
Covenant; most straightly forbidding all his subjects to tender the said
Covenant, as they will answer the contrary at their extremest peril.

The Earl of Bedford and Holland came to Oxford to tender their allegiance to
the King, but after a short stay returned to the Parliament.

The Marquess of Ormond, the Kings Lieutetenant General in Ireland, upon the
Kings Letter sends over five Regiments of Soldiers for the Kings service,
every Officer and Soldier first took an Oath to defend the Protestant cause,
and the Kings person against all enemies.

Essex suddenly surprises Cirencester, by killing the Centery, marched into the
Town without any opposition, and in it took Great store of Arms and
Ammunition, with thirty Cart Load of provisions, which was there reserved for
the Kings Army. From thence he marches to Chilleton.

The Kings Forces drew up on Maverne hills.

The Earl of Essex drew off toward Hungerford, and from thence toward Newbery,
which the Kings Forces had possessed beforehand.

On Wednesday the 20 of September 1643. was fought the famous battle of
Newbery, on which depended the condition of the whole Kingdom. The Kings
Forces early in the morning had possessed themselves of Biggs hill: Essex his own
Regiment assisted with Collonell Barkleys and Collonell Holburnes Regiment
marched, and Charging furiously beat them from the Hill and possessed it.

By this time a great body of the Kings Horse fell on a party of Horse
commanded by Sir Philip Stapleton, who received the Charge with much
resolution, and beat the Enemy up to their maine body. The fight continued
till near night.

The London Trained bands and Auxiliaries behaved themselves with much Valor
and resolution.

The number of the dead was not certainly known. There were diverse persons of
quality slain, and wounded on the Kings side, as likewise diverse Colors were
taken and sent up to London.

Collonell Massey from Gloucester moves up and down with a party of Horse, and
does much mischief to the Kings Forces.

The Kings forces Garrison all round about Gloucester, a party of the Kings
Horse and foot rove up and down, and seize upon diverse good booties.

But the Kings maine body was orderd toward Reading, which was then besieged by
Essex.

Arundell Castle having been 28 days besieged by Sir William Waller, was
delivered on Conditions.

The King in December 1643. summons the Members of both Houses to appear in
January following at Oxford, to advise in settling the peace of the Kingdom;
where on the 22th of January they meet at the Great Hall in Christ-Church,
where his Majesty declared, That if he had the least thoughts of disagreeing
with the happiness of this Kingdom, he would not advise with such Councellers
as they were.

The Lords sat in the Upper Schools; the Commons in the Great Convocation
House.

There were assembled, the Prince, the Duke of York, Cumberland, Fr.
Cottington, Treasurer, Ed. Littleton, Keeper of the Seal, the Duke of
Richmond, and Marquess of Hartford, 19 Earls, 18 Lords, 126 Knights and
Gentlemen, beside a Great quantity of Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen,
employed in his Majesty's service in the several parts of the Kingdom.

Their first work was to endeavor a peace, to which purpose a Letter is sent
to the Earl of Essex, which he communicates to the House at Westminster.

On the 16 of January 1644. The Scots Army, consisting of 18000 foot and 2000
Horse, enter England by the way of Newcastle, and set forth a Declaration of
the justness of their Cause, the Lawfulness of their Call.

New-wark having been three weeks besieged by Sir John Meldram, with an Army of
7000. Prince Rupert with a body of 4000 Horse and Dragoones, and 1000 foot
raises the siege.

The Lord Fairfax and his Son Sir Thomas go on victoriously in the North, and
in several Encounters gave diverse defeats to the Earl of Newcastles forces.

The Parliament at Oxford having sat from January to April, and done no great
matter, the King after a Speech prorogues them to the 8 of October, and
afterward by Proclamation till the 9 of November.

The Queen went from Oxford toward the West of England, in order to her going
over into France, was attended the first days journey by her two eldest Sons,
and many of the Nobility.

The King in presence of the Peers at Oxford, received the Sacrament from the
hands of Bishop Usher, using these solemn Protestations.

My Lords;

I epsy here many resolved Protestants, who may declare to the world the
Resolution I do now make, I have to the utmost of my power prepared my soul
to become a worthy receiver, and may I so receive comfort by the blessed
Sacrament, as I do intend the Establishment of the true reformed Protestant
Religion, as it stood in its beauty in the happy days of Queen Elizabeth,
without any connivance at Popery. I bless God that in the midst of these
public distractions, I have still liberty to communicate, and may this
Sacrament be my damnation, if my heart do not join with my lips in this
Protestation.

The Countess of Darby held out Latham House against a considerable force of
the Parliaments for near 18 weeks; The besiegers hearing of Prince Ruperts
advance for the Countesses relief, drew off from the siege, upon which they
sally out and did great Execution upon the Enemy.

The Parliament at Westminster Vote it treason for any Member of either House
to desert them, and go to the King, and the Member or Members so doing, never
to be received more into the House.

In June 1644. Collonell Massey summons Malborrough, which was commanded by
Collonell Hen. Howard, who refusing to deliver it up to him, causes a Great
battery, and with some Great Ordinance forced his passage, who with much
Courage enters the Town, put the Enemy to flight, and took above a hundred
prisoners.

Sir William Waller with a body of Horse and foot attends the Kings motion
from place to place, and near Crepida bridge, the Kings Horse faced Sir
William, and Charged them through and through, killed 150 men, and took all his
Train of Artillery, together with diverse considerable Officers, prisoners.

The King presently marches to Bath, with intent to follow the Earl of Essex,
who was gone that way.

On the 23 of July 1644. he came to Kingsmore, and by the first of August came
to Liskard, some few miles distant, where he encompast the Earl of Essex his
Army, his Majesty and Prince Maurice at Boneke; on the one side Sir Richard
Greenvill in Bodnim, and Sir Jacob Astley at Hall.

The Kings Soldiers were very desirous to fight, but it was thought more
convenient to keep them up from provisions.

In eight days attendance very little was performed, but some small skirmishes
of Horse; a party of 1500 foot was sent West to prevent all provisions coming
that way.

Essex his Army marched toward Foy, leaving most of their great Pieces behind
them, the King followed, and fell in upon the rear, forced them to retire in
disorder, and had not night prevented, in all probability, the whole Army had
been destroyed.

The next morning Early the Earl of Essex quit his command, and went by boat
to Plymouth; They require a Parley, and chose Collonell Barkley, Collonell
Whichcot, and Collonell Butler on the Parliaments party; On the Kings side,
Prince Maurice, the Lord General, and the Lord Digby, in eight Articles the
agreement was made, to deliver up all their Artillery, with all their bag and
baggage, no person under the degree of a Corporal to wear any kind of weapon,
all Officers above only sword and pistol; There were accordingly delivered up
49 Pieces of Brass Ordinance, 200 barrells of powder, with bullet and match
proportionable, 9000 Arms for Horse and foot, some thousands of the common
Soldiers were immediately upon their desire entertained in his Majesty's
service.

Essex endeavors to excuse it to the Parliament, as if by reason of Wallers
not pursuing the Kings Army.

Yet notwithstanding this Great Victory, the King sends a Message to both
Houses of Parliament for a peace, and likewise a Letter to the Earl of Essex
to the same purpose.

The Nobility likewise subscribe a Letter to the Earl of Essex.

The King from Tavestoke sends another Letter to both Houses for an
accommodation; but the Parliament were so averse that nothing could prevail.

The Parliament at Oxford met again, but unfortunately they fell into
divisions and factions, which the King plainly perceived could produce no good
effect, in March following he dissolves them.

Not long after the Estates of the Low Countries send over Ambassadors to
mediate in behalf of a peace betwixt the King and Parliament.

Prince Rupert goes on Victoriously with a flying Army, relieves Bolton,
Stopford, and Leverpoole, advances to York (in his way Raises the siege of
Latham House) which was at that time besieged by the Parliaments Forces. Upon
his approach the Enemy drew off their siege. They within sally out and do some
mischief to the rear of the Enemy. The Prince pursues them, with a Resolution
to give them Battle.

At last he comes to York, upon whose approach the besiegers drew off; the
Prince follows, intending to fight them, and accordingly the third of July 1644
at seven a clock in the morning the fight began, the Parliaments Forces having
the advantage of the ground, being on the South side of Marston Moore, within
four miles of York; the Prince with the Right wing fell on the Parliaments
Forces, routs them; the General Goring, and Sir Charles Lucas, fell on the
maine body of the Enemy, and routed them, but pursuing them too far, the Enemy
Rallied, and fell on the divided bodies, totally dispersed them, took 3000
prisoners, 20 pieces of Ordinance, beside a considerable quantity of Officers.

Immediately the Lord Fairfax and his Son, the Earl of Manchester surround
York; Sir Thomas Glenham being then Governor for the King, but by reason of
Marston-Moore-fight, all their powder and Ammunition was spent, Sir Thomas was
compeld to deliver it on honorable terms.

In December 1644 William Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, after above an hundred
times Attendance on the House, was by the Commons Voted Guilty of High Treason,
and therefore condemned to be hanged, drawn, and quartered, which sentence he
patiently received; but upon his Petition, they Vote him to be beheaded: he
likewise Petitions for his Chaplain Dr Stern, to whom they join Mr Marshall
(whom he refused) for the Comfort of his soul; and accordingly on the tenth of
January he was conducted by Penington to the scaffold on Tower Hill, where he
made his last Sermon to the people, enlarging himself on this Text, Heb. 12.
and 2d, Let us run with patience the race that is set before us, looking unto
Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith, who for the Joy that was set before
him, endured the Cross; and despised the shame, and is now set down at the
Right hand of the throne of God; which Sermon or Speech continued almost an
hour, and after prayer, and some short Ejaculations, laid down his head upon
the block, which the Executioner struck off at one blow, and thus with much
patience and Christian magnanimity he delivered up his soul to God.

Sir John Hotham in December 1644. was sentenc't to loose his head, Captain
Hotham was likewise Condemned and Executed the first of January, Sir John the
second of January on Towerbill.

Not long after there was a treaty of peace appointed at Vxbridge; The
Commissioners on both sides being met, the Proposals on both sides were made,
but all hopes of peace were frustrate; Mr Love was much complained of, who
preaching there, told them, That the Kings Commissioners came with hearts full
of blood, and that there is as great distance between this treaty and peace, as
between heaven and hell, for which in stead of being checked, he is taken into
favor by the Parliament.

In March 1645. Sir Lewis Dives took Waymouth for the King; In which was good
store of Ordinance, and all other provisions answerable, with forty small
Vessels in the Harbor.

The Kings Forces lay siege to Melcomb Regis. Crumwell intends to join with
Waller for its relief.

They of the Garrison of Plymouth issue out, and beat the Kings Forces from
Mount Stamford, and took 150 prisoners.

Sir Marmaduke Langdale went out of Oxford with 2000 Horse and Dragoones, fell
upon the Lincolnshire Horse, and forced them to retire confusedly, having taken
two complete troops, marched forward with Intentions to cause the Parliaments
Forces to draw off, thereby to relieve New-wark, Belvoire, Ashby de la zouch,
with provision to enable them to hold out the longer when they shall be
attempted.

They likewise endeavor the relief of Pomfret Castle, but my Lord Fairfax is
ready with a body to receive him.

However, Sir Marmaduke advances, falls on the Enemy, and after he had killed and
taken diverse hundreds, relieves the Castle, and returns to New-wark, from
thence to Litchfeild, that thereby he may make choice either of going to
Oxford, or joining with Prince Maurice.

The King at Oxford takes care to furnish it, as also Wallingford and Banbury,
with all necessary provisions for six months, and to get a formidable Army
into the field this Summer.

The House of Lords made the Earl of Northumberland, and his Lady, Governor
and Governesse of the Kings Children at Whitehall.

The Earl of Northampton lying at Banbury with four hundred Horse, fell on
the Northampton Horse* routed and killed many.

Major General Brown at Abbington sent out several parties at times, who
returned very successful, with good store of provisions, having killed diverse
of the Enemy.

The Commons conceive the Earl of Essex too mild in the prosecution of the
war, he having had such ill success in the West; and began to think of New
Moddelling the Army; to which purpose a Bill is brought into the House for Sir
Thomas Fairfax to be General. They likewise Vote the Earl of Essex, to
pacify him, 10000 l. per Annum out of Delinquents estates.

Both Houses Vote Sir Thomas Fairfax, a Gentleman descended from a Noble and
ancient family, to be General for the Parliament, who with much modesty
accepted of it.

On the first of April he issued out Commissions; and on the third of April
went privately to Windsor, to assist in the New Moddelling of the Army.

They likewise continued Lieutenant General Cromwell, a stout Champion for his
Country, who having received his Commission, immediately marched and found the
Enemy, and engaged them at Ipsley Bridge; the Enemies Brigade consisted of the
Queens, Colonel Wilmots, the Earl of Northampton, and Colonel Palmers
Regiments, Routed them, killed many, took 500 Horse, and 200 prisoners, together
with the Queens Standard; and pursues them to Blechingdon-house, which Colonel
Windebank kept for the King.

He sends a sharp Summons to the Governor to be speedily answered; The
Governor doubting of relief from Oxford, immediately surrenders the House,
with all the Arms and Ammunition; Cromwell immediately slighted the house, and
sent the Arms to Alsbury.

For which Windebank was sentenc't by a Council of War at Oxford to be shot to
death.

The General having completed the Army, was at a loss which way he should
steer his course, either to Oxford, or the West; Oxford was the Kings chief
Garrison, and there lay the most part of his train of Artillery, which if he
could take, would be of very great consequence: but the distressed estate of
Taunton, then close besieged by the Kings Forces, ballanc't the scale, and at a
Council of War it was resolved to relieve Taunton.

The King at that time was in a condition to take the field, and had sent
several Dispatches to that purpose.

Sir Thomas Fairfax on the first of May advances with the whole Army, first to
Blauford, then to Salisbury, excepting that party of Horse and Dragoones,
Commanded by Lieutenant General Cromwell, and four Regiments of foot, which
were ordered to join with him.

The King taking the advantage of the Armies march into the West, draws forth
his Artillery from Oxford, and began to gather into a considerable Body;
Lieutenant General Cromwell and Brown were orderd to attend him; but being
too few in number to engage, The General by the Committee of both Kingdoms
was commanded back, all but a Brigade for the Relief of Taunton, which were
near 5000 foot and 2000 horse, who march without any impediment till they came
within ten miles of Taunton, where they discharged ten pieces of Ordinance, to
give the Enemy notice of their arrival.

The Enemy being informed that the General and the whole Army were within ten
miles, prepare to draw off; upon which Blake made a sally out, and fell upon
the rear, killed and took diverse. Colonel Wildon sends a party of Horse, who
approach to the walls, for the Enemy had quit it.

The viewing the Town was one of the saddest spectacles that ever eyes beheld,
it being almost consumed by fire, and the people almost starved.

The General, and most of the Army, being come back to Newbery, were met with
an order of the Committee of both Kingdoms, immediately to lay close siege to
Oxford; Cromwell and Brown, that attended the King, were commanded back to
assist in the work, and after fifteen days surrounding the Town, it was by a
Council of War thought altogether Inconvenient to continue the siege, and the
Kings Army unattempted in the field, which the General presents to the
Committee.

The King Horses most of his foot, and moves up and down (and taking the
Advantage of the Scots advance toward Westmorland) and after he had relieved
Chester, comes on and faces Leicester, Prince Rupert sent a Summons to the
Town, offering quarter to the Soldiers, Townsmen and Countrymen. The
Committee and Officers within, desire till next morning to return their
answer. The Trumpeter no sooner comes to the Kings Army, but immediately a Drum
is sent to require an answer in a quarter of an hour, which while they were
debating in the Town, the Kings Canons from the battery began to play, and all
were commanded to their Charge, in order to a storm; the Contest continued a
day and a night, with a great deal of Resolution on both sides. In some
breaches they came to push of Pike.

On Saturday at three of the Clock they enterd the Town, and in hot blood many
were put to the sword, some plunderd.

On the other side, Colonel Massey with 2000 Horse and foot, having lain two
days before Evisham, stormed the Town, and took it, with the Governor, and
twenty Officers, 500 foot, 120 Horse, with all the Arms and Ammunition.

The Commons order six hundred men to be sent for the security of Portsmouth.

There came news from the West, that General Goring, Sir Ralph Hopton, and Sir
Richard Greenvill, had joined together, and fallen upon that party that had
relieved Taunton, and forced them to retire to Taunton in great disorder.

Upon the news of the taking of Leicester, the Commons order that the
straightning of Oxford be turned to a close siege; Lieutenant General Cromwell
was orderd toward Ely, to prevent the Kings breaking into the associated
Counties: they like vise order the Earl of Leven to advance with the Scots
Army, and to join with Colonel Vermuden, to prevent the Kings going Northward.

But upon second thoughts the Commons order the General to raise the siege at
Oxford, and to take care to preserve the associated Counties, and fight the
King.

The General on his removal viewed Bostoll House, and ordered a party to
besiege it.

He likewise sent a party of Horse and foot, Commanded by Colonel
Rainsborough, to summon Gaunt House; The Governor upon the first summons
returned answer, that he liked not Windebanks Law, but the next day
Rainsborough having provided all things ready for a storm, the Governor
caused a parley to be beaten, and surrenderd upon Quarter.

Lieutenant General Cromwell, moving up and down in Cambridge-shire,
Huntington, and Ely, managed his business with so much discretion, as that he
was able to have raised an Army of 12000 men to assist him in following the
King.

But leaving those Counties in a posture of defense, he marches toward the
General with 600 Horse and Dragoones.

The King sends a party of Horse, and faces Northampton, he himself being at
Harborough with the maine Body.

The King sends 1200 Horse with good store of Cattle and sheep to Oxford)
which immediately return.

Sir Thomas Fairfax came with the Army to Wotton, thence to Glastenborough,
within five miles of Borough hill, where the Kings Forces were all drawn up
in a readiness.

The General for the Parliament advances from Gilling to Naseby, endeavoring
to engage the Enemy, the scouts discover that they were at Harborough, and
great bodies of Horse appeared on the hills nigh Harborough; he orders a
Randevouz of the Army near Naseby, and to put them in such a posture, that
should the King advance toward them, they might, having the advantage of
ground, receive him. By this time the Kings Army advances, endeavoring to get
the wind, which occasioned Sir Thomas Fairfax to draw off the Army into a
large fallow field, toward the Northwest of Naseby, which was defended on the
right hand with a Hedge, a place very convenient for a battle.

January 13. 1645. the King draws off from Borough hill, the scouts bringing
Intelligence of the Parliaments Army approaching, took up their quarters in
Naseby.

Ireton with a flying party of Horse fell upon the flank of the Enemy, killed
some, and took diverse prisoners, which so allarum'd the King that he posts to
Harborough for better security; summons a Council of War, and considerd that
should they draw off and march to Leicester, if the rear were engaged, the
whole Army might be in danger, and they could with no safety march with the Van
till the Rear was secured; whereupon it was resolved to give battle, which
was the most fatal and destructive to the King that ever happened since the
first beginning of the quarrel; yet many of the principal Officers
endeavored to persuade to avoid fighting.

The King Commanded the maine body; The Right wing was Commanded by Prince
Rupert and Prince Maurice; The Left by Sir Marmaduke Langdale; The Right Hand
Reserve by the Earl of Lindsey, and Sir Jacob Astley; The Left by the Lord
Bards, and Sir George Lisle.

Sir Thomas Fairfax Commanded the maine Body; Lieutenant General Cromwell the
Right Wing; Ireton the Left: Prince Rupert falls in on the Left wing, Routs
them, pursues them to Naseby Town, and being too eager of the plunder, lost
the King the day; for in his absence Lieutenant General Cromwell Charges
furiously on the Kings Left Wing, and forced them to retire from the body; Sir
Thomas Fairfax with the maine body advances, falls on the Kings body, who
received them with much Valor and courage; Great Rallyings there was on both
sides, and for a long time the battle was fought with Equal Courage, but it
pleased God to give the Victory to the Parliaments Forces; for upon their
Rallying they recovered Courage and Charged with greater fury, forcing the
Kings Forces to fly, and had the pursuit of them within two miles of
Leicester, which is near fourteen miles. They left behind them all their
train of Artillery, bag and baggage, many were slain, 4000 taken prisoners,
200 Wagons, 3000 Horse, many Officers of note.

On the Parliaments side about 1000 Officers and Common Soldiers, diverse
Officers wounded.

Great were the successes of the Parliament in diverse places.

In the field was taken the Kings Cabinet of Letters, which were sent up to the
Parliament, and by them published.

The Marquess of Winchester held out Basing House for the King a long time
after it was besieged. The Parliaments Forces despairing of gaining it drew off.

This was the last pitched Battle that ever the King fought. The King with some
forces fled to Leicester, and not conceiving himself safe by reason of the
Parliaments forces advance, goes to Ashbe de la Zouch, where after he had
rested himself a small time, in the dead of the night went to Litchfield, and
so into Wales.

Sir Marmaduke Langdale fled the same night to New-wark.

Monday the 16 of June, the Parliaments General and Army comes before
Leicester: The General summons the Governor immediately to deliver the Town,
with all the Arms and Ammunition: the Lord Hastings being Governor returns
answer, that he would not deliver it, but hold it out to the last man; which
occasioned the General to Issue out Warrants to summon the Country to bring in
Ladders and things necessary for a storm.

And on the 17 of June they began to storm; the Governor perceiving the
danger, sends a Trumpet to desire a parley for the delivery of the Town; which
was concluded in then Articles, and the next day the Town was delivered up. In
it was 14 piece of Ordinance, 30 Colors, 2000 Arms, 500 Horse, with diverse
other necessaries for war.

The King returns for Hereford with 2000 foot, that Major General Gerhard
had raised in Wales for him, and posts over Severne toward Bristoll; Prince
Rupert following him with 3000 Horse.

Sir William Brereton in Shropshire, sell on a party of the Kings, routed them,
and took 300 prisoners.

Not long after Sir Thomas Glenham, Governor of Carlisle for the King, having
been a considerable time besieged, and having no hopes of Relief, delivers up
the Town on honorable Conditions.

Sir Thomas Fairfax marches with the best part of the Army to the Relief of
Taunton, then besieged by Goring.

At that time there was in the West a multitude of Rude people called Clubmen,
who declaring for the King, did great mischief to diverse of the Parliaments
Garrisons; they boldly Capitulate with Sir Thomas Fairfax at Dorchester, and
desire safe passage for such as they should appoint to go both to the King and
Parliament, in order to an Accommodation.

Sir Thomas civilly sends them an answer, which not answering their
expectation, and fearing to oppose so potent an Army, they draw off in
discontent, not without doing some mischief to the Governor of Linne then for
the Parliament.

Upon the news of Sir Thomas Fairfax his arrival within a days march of
Taunton, Goring draws off his forces, the besieged sally out, and forced the
rear to retreat in disorder; upon the Enemies flight, the Army advances,
falls upon the Rear, and took diverse prisoners.

They still pursuing, at last engaged Goring at Langport, whom they worsted and
put to flight, having taken diverse Colors, some Arms and Ammunition.

The General returns with the Army, and resolves to besiege Bridgewater, and
having staid some time till supplies came, he closely begirts the Town,
summons the Governor, who returns a resolute answer, being every way well
fortified and provided. The General resolves to storm it on Monday the 22 of
July 1645. Which accordingly was performed with much Resolution; but the enemy
within being nothing daunted, fling Grenades and other combustible stuff, to
the prejudice of the besiegers.

The General the next day sends a Message, telling them that their denial had
wrought in him no thoughts of Compassion, but only to women and children, who
might otherwise suffer by the Governors obstinacy, and accordingly diverse
Ladies and Gentlewomen and Children came out of the Town.

The General assaults them again, and at last compells them to a surrender;
they all to submit themselves prisoners, and the Town to be preserved from
plunder, which accordingly was performed.

Immediately after Pomfret and Scarborough Castles were surrendered; no Relief
being expected.

Toward the latter end of July, the General summoned Bath, which was
accordingly surrendered.

In August 1645. Lieutenant General Cromwell falls on the Club-men, who at
that time were very high and insolent, kills diverse, and took above 300
prisoners.

The General summons Sherburne Castle, of which Sir Lewis Dives was Governor,
who returned a resolute answer; but the next day was taken by storm.

The General immediately resolves to besiege Bristoll, which was governed by
Prince Rupert; Orders were sent for Ships to begirt it by Sea, he summons the
Governor, who refusing to surrender, immediately he surrounds it; they within
sally out six or seven times, not without loss on both sides: at last it was
agreed, to send a positive summons, and upon refusal to storm it.

The Prince requires leave to know the Kings mind, but the General would by
no means permit it.

Upon the Princes refusal, at a Council of War it was resolved to storm it,
which accordingly was with much Courage performed; the Town was fired in many
places, which moved the Prince to request a parley, which the General consented
too, on condition that care should be taken to quench the fire, and accordingly
by Articles of agreement the 11 of September 1645. The City with all the Arms
and Ammunition was delivered up.

The Prince with the rest, immediately march to Oxford.

During the time of Bristolls siege, news was brought of the several successes
of Montrosse in Scotland, against the Covenanters, which moved the General,
Lieutenant General, and all the Colonels of the Regiments, to subscribe a
Letter to General Leaven of the Condition of the Kingdom, and their
willingness to spare forces for their assistance.

All this while the King moves up and down, sometimes in Wales, sometimes in
one County, sometimes in another, still hearing the mishaps and disasters
happening on the neck one of another; so that all his hopes were almost frustrate.

Lieutenant General Cromwell with part of the Army marches Westward, who after
he had soundly batterd the Castle at the Devizes, forced it to be surrendered;
and not many days after he comes before Winchester, and summons it, which was
on honorable Conditions surrenderd.

He immediately marches to Basing-House, (which for a time had been besieged,
but to no purpose) and having summoned it, he on refusal resolved to storm
it, by which means he got it.

The General was now before Tiverton, and had raised several Batteries, by
which means he gained the Town.

In October 1645. Langford-House was delivered up to Lieutenant General
Cromwell.

The General approaches near Exceter, October 20. 1645. summons it, and
received a flat denial; it was for sometime besieged, but by reason the King
had a body moving up and down, it was twice deserted, only a party left to
surround it; upon the Armies return from the West after it was stormed, was
delivered up on Articles.

He likewise summons Dartmouth, on refusal, took it by storm.

A great defeat was given to Hopton at Torrington, who not long after was
forced to disband his Army in the West.

Sir Marmaduke Langdale received a great defeat near Sherburne.

In March, Ashbe de la zouch was surrendered to the Parliaments forces.

In the same Month Prince Charles set sail for Scilly, with diverse Lords and
Gentlemen.

Other Garrisons, as Westchester, Barnstable, St Michaels Mount, Ruthen Castle,
Woodstock, together with diverse other Garrisons were delivered up to the
Parliament.

The Scots Army was at that time besieging New-wark, with the assistance of
some Yorkshire Horse.

There was not at that time a Town or Castle in England, but what was either
besieged or blockt up by the Parliaments forces.

The Commons Vote the Committee of Darby-House, to take care to besiege Oxford,
and accordingly the General having secured the West, returns with intent to
besiege it, which at that time was the Kings Royal seat.

The King Causes a Muster of Horse, which in all amounted to 1100 Horse and
Dragoones; great care is taken to make good the Works, and to repair what
ever is amiss.

The Town being besieged, the King offers to come to the two Houses, upon
assurance of the safety of his person, and to advise with them for the good and
safety of the Kingdom, Provided all that have adhered to his Majesty may have
Liberty to go to their own homes in safety, their sequestrations to be taken
off; upon these conditions his Majesty is willing to disband all his Soldiers,
and dismantle his Garrisons, pass an act of oblivion and free pardon to all.

These Propositions the Parliament would by no means consent unto, they having
him at that advantage.

The King seeing no hopes, on the 27 of April 1646. in disguise came out of
Oxford, attended by Mr John Ashburnham, and one more; several conjectures past
which way he should go.

The Parliament being mis-inform'd that he was come to London, Order that
Proclamation be made, that whosoever shall conceal his Majesty, shall dye as a
traitor, and forfeit his estate.

On the sixth of May 1646. His Majesty came to the Scots Army, and had cast
himself upon them, which occasioned the Scotch Commissioners to write to the
Parliament, that contrary to their expectation the King was come to their Army,
engaging to stand for the Interest of the Kingdom.

The Commons Vote that his Majesty's person be disposed of, as both Houses
shall desire and direct, and that he be sent to Warwick Castle.

Upon the Kings desire to the Governor, Newark was delivered up to the English.

The Scots marched away to Rippon with the King.

The Parliament seeing the King was got into the Scots possession, sent a
Letter to the Prince of Wales, then in Gersie, to invite him to come to London,
with promise of Honor and safety, but he durst not venture.

The siege before Oxford being more close then formerly, the General sent a
summons to Sir Thomas Glenham the Governor, who sent a civil answer, with a
request, that Sir John Minson and Mr Philip Warwick, may inform his Excellency
in order to a Treaty, and accordingly on Articles it was surrendered on
Honorable terms.

The 19 of May the Scots Army came with the King to Newcastle; the reason of
their retreating Northward, was for fear that Sir Thomas Fairfax should have
fallen on them, and compeld them to deliver up the King.

A great dispute was at Newcastle betwixt the King and Mr Alexander Henderson,
which was since published.

Diverse Propositions were presented to the King, by the Commissioners from the
Parliament, who were, the Earl of Pembrooke, Earl of Suffolk, Sir Walter
Earl, Sir John Ipsley, Mr Goodwin, and Mr Robinson, who came to Newcastle the
27 of July, and ordered to return in ten days; the next day the Propositions
were presented, and his Majesty promised an answer within the time; but withal
told them, that if they had not power to treat, they might as well have sent a
Trumpet; at the reading of the Propositions his Majesty protested he would
never give away his Crown and Militia, and further told Mr Marshall, he could
not in Conscience sign some things therein required.

His Majesty gave the Commissioners in a Paper, which not being satisfactory
they return to London.

The Scots likewise petition him to take the Covenant, and likewise they set
out a Declaration of their Intentions for the good of both Kingdoms.

Litchsield, Worcester, and Wallingford, were all delivered on Articles.

In July 1646. Prince Rupert went for France, and Prince Maurice for the Hague,
where they both safely arrived.

The Duke of York came for London, and was Honorably received by the Nobility.

His Majesty wrote four times to Montrosse, at the Scots Commissioners request,
to lay down his Arms.

In August 1646. the Commons order the Presbytenan Government to be settled in
London.

In the same Month the Commons caused the Great Seal to be broken in the
Lords House.

The 14 of September 1646. dyed the Noble Earl of Essex, of an Appoplexie; a
man truly faithful to the Interest of his Country. The House having respect to
his former service, Voted 3000 l. to be given toward his funeral; Mr. Vines
preached his funeral Sermon; he was Honorably attended to his Grave, not
without much Lamentation.

Upon the Kings refusal of the Propositions, the Scots sent Commissioners to
the Parliament to desire an agreement betwixt them.

Pendennis and Ragland Castle are in August surrendered.

The Scots Commissioners demand 500000 l. upon the payment of which they offer
to deliver up the King. And accordingly it was Voted by the House to deliver
200000 l. then borrowed of the Citizens of London, and raised out of the sail
of the Bishops Lands, together with the assistance of the Excize, and 200000 l.
more secured to them to be paid at several times.

October the 8th 1646. the House Votes to every Member 1000 l. a piece, in
recompense of their Good service, and that so many as are Lawyers may have
Liberty to plead within the Bar; and likewise the Lord Fairfax 1000 l. per
Annum.

The Scots being encouraged by the Votes of the House, pretend, that Scotland
was much exhausted by the late war, and that his Majesty's presence in
Scotland, might endanger the peace of that Nation; so that it may truly be said
of him, as the Scripture expresses of our Lord and Savior; He came to his
own, and his own received him not.

At last it was concluded, 100000 l. to be told at York, sealed and put in
boxes; The Scots to give Hostages to deliver up Newcastle, Tinmouth, and all
other Garrisons, thereabout; the other 100000 l when they shall go on the
other side of Tine; The other 200000 l. to be secured to be paid out of
Delinquents estates; They to deliver up the King, and depart home, and quit all
their Garrisons.

The Assemblyes Confession of Faith, was Voted by the House to be printed.

And likewise an Ordinance past for continuing the Army under Sir Thomas
Fairfax for six months, and the disbanding Major General Masseys Brigade.

The Common Enemy being quite beaten out of the field, there happened sad
divisions in the Parliament and Army at home; They were distinguished into two
several parties, under the title of Presbyterian and Independent, the
Independent being the most subtle and close, Insinuated into the most part of
the Army, and carried on their designs with greater Vigor and Resolution then
the other, as the sequel will manifest.

The King from Newcastle on the 20 of December 1646. sends a Message to both
Houses of Parliament at Westminster, and to the Commissioners of the Parliament
of Scotland, for a personal Treaty.

Charles R.

His Majesty's thoughts have been always sincerely bent to the peace of his
Kingdoms, was and will be ever desirous to take all ways that might most
clearly make appear the candor of his Intentions to his people, and to this
end could find no better way then to propose a personal and free debate with
his two Houses of Parliament, upon all the present differences: yet finding
very much contrary to his expectation, that this offer was laid aside, His
Majesty beat all his thoughts to make his Intentions fully known by a
particular answer to the Propositions delivered to him in the name of both
Kingdoms the 24 of July last; and that his Majesty plainly saw, that
whatsoever answer he could give, was subject to mis-informations and
mis-constructions, which upon his own explanation he is confident will give
good satisfaction for the settling of a lasting peace; to which purpose his
Majesty desires to come to London, or any of his Houses thereabouts, upon the
public faith and security of his two Houses, where by his personal presence
he may not only raise a mutual confidence betwixt him and his people, but
also have those doubts cleared, and those difficulties explained to him,
assuring them that he will make no other demands, but such as he believes
confidently to be just, and such as will tend much to the tranquillity of the
people; for except King and people have reciprocal care each of other, neither
can be happy.

To conclude, it is your King that desires to be heard, (the which if refused
to a subject by a King, he would be thought a tyrant for it) wherefore his
Majesty requests you to accept this offer, and that it will be the readiest way
to make these Kingdoms a Comfort to their Friends, and a Terror to their
Enemies.


The Lords and Commons after some time, sent a Letter by Sir Peter Killigrew,
in answer to the Kings Message.

Both Houses Voted his Majesty to come to his House at Holmbey in
Northamptonshire, a House not Inferior to any in the Kingdom.

They likewise Vote, that the Earl of Pembrooke, the Earl of Denbigh, and the
Lord Mountague, Sir Walter Earl, Sir John Holland, Sir James Harrington, Sir
John Cooks, Mr. Crew, and Major General Brown, with Mr Marshall and Mr Caryl
to attend them, be sent as Commissioners to receive the King at Newcastle, and
to conduct him to Holmbey.

They likewise orderd diverse servants to attend him.

The sixth of February 1646. The Scots according to agreement quit Newcastle,
and the English possessed it; they likewise delivered up his Majesty to the
Commissioners sent by the Parliament; his Majesty seemed somewhat unwilling at
first to go to Holmbey, rather choosing to go to Newmarket; but after a short
time he was satisfied; but by no means he could be drawn to hear Mr.
Marshall or Mr. Caryl preach, hoping they will allow him his Conscience.

Monday the 8 of February, his Majesty with a sad and sorrowful Countenance
set forward with the Commissioners, attended with 900 Horse, and that night
came to Durham, on thursday to Aukland, friday to Richmond, saturday to Rippon,
and there rested the Sabbath day, Monday to Leeds, tuesday to Wakefeild,
wednesday to Rotheram, so to Mansfeild, thence to Leicester, where he stays the
next Lords day; on Monday He sets forward for Holmbey, whither being no sooner
come, but Proclamation is made, that none that had deserted the Parliament and
assisted the King, should presume to come near his Majesty.

Sir Thomas Fairfax came to Leicester with a considerable part of the Army,
where he was met with the Mayor and Aldermen in state.

His Majesty sent a Letter to the House to request his Chaplains to be sent to
him, he named twelve; viz. Bishop of London, Bishop of Salisbury, Bishop of
Peterborough, Dr Shelden, Dr March, Dr Sanderson, Dr Bailey, Dr Hamond, Dr
Beale, Dr Haywood, Dr Fuller, Dr Tailor, but desired any two; hearing no
answer, he sent a second Letter, but still they delayed sending an answer.

The 25 of February, his Majesty at the Commissioners request, kept the fast,
ordered by the Commons, it happening on the same day that he had appointed, for
the Calamities of Ireland.

February the 28 his Majesty was pleased to bestow a visit on the Earl of
Pembrooke, who was at that time dangerously sick.

His Majesty made a Resolution to keep every friday a day of solemn fasting
and humiliation.

The Commons Vote and Order what Garrisons shall be slighted, and which
continued.

The Parliament Vote likewise the remainder of the Army to disband, all but
those that were appointed for Ireland, and the several Garrisons.

Upon which diverse Petitions came in from several Counties to the General,
not to disband till such time as he had fully settled the Kingdom; whereupon
immediately the Army had a Randevouz, and draw up a Petition to be presented to
the Parliament, That their arreares might be paid; An act of Indemnity pass,
to secure them; that the foot might not be compeld to serve out of the
Kingdom; that the widows and children of such as had lost their lives in the
service might be provided for; which Petition was presented by Colonel Hamond,
Colonel Rich, and Colonel Ireton.

The Parliament showed their dislike of the Petition, and Vote that those that
shall continue in this disturbing condition, shall be proceeded against as
enemies to the State.

Petitions were likewise on the other side out of Essex, and other Counties,
presented to the Parliament, of their utter dislike of the Armies proceedings.
But to close the breach, Commissioners are chosen by the Parliament and Army,
and meet in order to a Right understanding.

The Parliament order 60000 l. a month for payment of the Forces appointed, to
prevent free quarter.

Upon his Majesty's desire to come near London, the Lords Vote him to come to
Otelands, so soon as the House can be provided; to which the Commissioners
consent.

After his Majesty had been near five months at Holmbey, on the fourth of
June 1646. near a thousand Soldiers, Commanded by Cornet Joyce, came somewhat
late to Holmbey, and desired to speak with his Majesty; it was answered that
then it was unseasonable; However, with much Importunity Cornet Joyce was
admitted into his Majesty's presence, where he told him he was come by command
of the Army to remove him from that place; his Majesty replied, it was then too
late, but in the morning he would speak further with him.

His Majesty according to his promise came down in the morning to the Cornet,
where he was attended by the Soldiers; he asked them by what Authority they
came there; they replied from the Army; He further asked if they came from Sir
Thomas Fairfax his Army; the Cornet replied from the Army.

His Majesty said, what if I should refuse to go with you, would you compel
me; they replied, we hope your Majesty will not refuse, but we have command to
bring you.

His Majesty replied, I have these Questions to put to you, which if you
consent to, I will go with you.

The first was, That he might have no violence offered to his person; they all
unanimously shouted and cried out, none, none.

Secondly, He desired that his trunks and papers might not be rifled and
tumbled; they promised to set a Guard on them, and that they should not be
touched.

Thirdly, He required such servants to attend him, against whom there was no
just acceptions; they answered he should.

Lastly, He desired that nothing be Imposed upon him contrary to his
Conscience; they answered, it was not their Judgment to force-any thing
against conscience on any one, much less on his Majesty; At one of the Clock
his Majesty went along with them.

The next day the General sent a Letter to the Parliament, to certify that he
knew nothing of the party that attended his Majesty, neither what number, nor
by what Authority: the reason that the party had sent to him, he sends up,
which was that there were certain persons that intended to take away his
Majesty, thereby to make a new war, the plot and plotters they were able to
prove, when called thereunto, which necessitated them to secure his Majesty's
person.

His Majesty was according to his own desire, conveyed to Newmarket; by this we
see clearly, that the Greatest in the world, are but pilgrims on Earth.

The General and Army Randevouz at St Albones, and sent a Letter of his
Intentions to come to London with the Army.

Eleven Members of the Commons House are Impeached by the Army.

On the 28 of June, 1647. His Majesty was brought to Hatfield, the Duke of
Richmond attending him, with many of the old Courtiers.

Dr Hamond and diverse others of his Chaplains were admitted to read divine
service to him, according to the Ancient custom of the Church of England.

The House being Informed of the Duke of Richmond, and the Chaplains attendants
on his Majesty, Order a Letter to be forthwith sent to the Governor for their
removal.

The General by Letters certify the Parliament of his Majesty's desire to see
his Children, and his request for continuance of those persons about him; and
further to satisfy them, that the Army have no treaty with his Majesty, nor
aim at nothing more then the settling of the peace of the Kingdom.

From Hatfield his Majesty was removed to Causum, attended by all that waited
on him at Hatfield, excepting the Duke of Richmond, who voluntarily absented
himself.

The House according to the Kings request, order his Children to go to him,
and the Earl of Northumberland to attend them; his Majesty was Joyful at the
sight of his Children.

The General being in the presence Chamber was much respected, which moved the
Princess to ask who it was, who being Informed it was the General, she
immediately addressed her self to him with great civilitie, and thankt him for
this great happiness, that she then enjoyed the sight of her dear Father,
effected by him alone, which she should ever thankfully acknowledge, and
endeavor to requite.

The General returned humble thanks, and that what he had done was but the
least of those duties he was obliged to serve his Majesty and Children in, and
kissing her Hand withdrew.

The Eleven Members discharge themselves of their charge, and require leave of
the House to go beyond Sea, which was consented too.

Upon the Armies removing to Bedford, his Majesty was brought to Wooborne, a
House of the Lord of Bedfords, with his old attendance.

The Parliament Order the Militia of London to raise Forces, and immediately
the Trained Bands and Auxiliaries are commanded to man the Forts, upon
Information of the Armies coming to London; Colonel Massey was appointed Major
General, Colonel Poins and others are put into Command.

The General Orders a Randevouz at Hounslow, in order to his coming to London;
thither diverse of the Members of both Houses with the Speaker repair, and
consult of Getting the City without blood, and accordingly a party is sent to
face Southwark Fort, upon whose approach it was delivered up to them.

The City petitions the General.

The General requires all the Forts from Tyburne to the Thames, to be
delivered up to him, that he might Guard the Parliament, and secure the eleven
Members.

On the seventh of August the General and Army march in triumph through the
City, most of the Soldiers having Bays in their hatts in token of Victory.

Immediately Sir Thomas Fairfax is made Constable of the Tower, by which he
has power to constitute a Lieutenant, and accordingly the Honor was conferd
on Colonel Titchburne.

Massey and Poyns fly over into Holland.

The General presents a Declaration to the House of the Grounds and reasons of
the Armies March.

The Lords and Commons Null all those Votes that past during the time that the
Major part of the House went to the General.

On the twelfth of August was appointed a thanksgiving for the preservation of
the City.

His Majesty was removed to Oatlands; on the 23 of August, he went to Sion to
visit his Children, and rested that night.

Upon his Majesty's desire he was removed to Hampton Court, and his Children
orderd to be with him.

Both Houses order the Casting down of the Works about the City, the
maintaining whereof was very chargeable and burdensome.

The Houses Vote of sending Propositions to his Majesty; to which the Scotch
Commissioners consent, and on the seventh of February 1647. they were carried
to his Majesty by Major General Brown, and the Scotch Commissioners, who were
to bring an answer in six days; upon the Receipt of the Propositions, he
desired to know whether they were the same with those he received at Newcastle;
it was answered, there was only some little alterations as to persons that
served him in the late war; then he desired to know of the Scotch
Commissioners, if they concurred, they answered they did.

His Majesty said they were matters of Great concernment, and required serious
consideration, but he would take care that they should have an answer within
the time limited.

The Committee and Commissioners order 6000 foot, 2400 Horse, and 500
Dragoones, to be sent into Ireland, and care was taken to provide all necessary
provisions.

The Commons likewise Order a months Gratuity to be given to the Army.

They likewise Vote a standing Army of 18000 foot, 7200 Horse, and a 1000
Dragoones be kept up as a standing Army for England.

An answer came from his Majesty, which was by the House Voted not satisfactory.

The Commons took into consideration the Actions of diverse Eminent Citizens in
London tending to a new war, Vote a Charge of high nature be brought in; and
the Lord Mayor, Alderman Adams, Alderman Langham, Alderman Bunce, and Sheriff
Cullam, with diverse other active Citizens were taken into Custody; diverse
Lords were committed to the Black Rod, as the Earl of Lincoln, Earl of
Suffolk, Lord Barkley, Lord Willowby, Lord Maynard, Lord Hunsden.

September the 28. 1647. The Commons once more Vote to send to his Majesty, and
to that purpose they considered of several Propositions; That about Religion
being the maine thing; They also Vote his Majesty be desired to give his
consent to such Act or Acts of Parliament, as shall be presented to him for
settling of Presbyterian Government, according to the matter of several
Ordinances of Parliament, for the Directory or Church Government to continue
for the space of three years, from the time that the King shall give his
consent to such Act or Acts.

They likewise Voted the Common-prayer-booke shall not be used in private.

The Soldiers about his Majesty are very civil, permitting his Majesty to
Hunt with the Duke of Richmond, Marquess of Hartford, Marquess of Ormond,
Earl of Southampton, and diverse others of the Nobility, without any
Interruption.

His Majesty sent a Letter to the General, desiring his Children to stay with
him a night or two, it being too great a Journey to go and come to St James's
in a day; which he communicates to the Parliament.

They Order the Earl of Northumberland to satisfy his Majesty about his
Children.

The Heads of the Propositions agreed upon by both Houses, to be presented to
his Majesty, were these.

1. The Militia for twenty years in the hands of Parliament, or Committee of
Parliament, in Intervalls.

2. Money be raised to pay the public debts of the Kingdom.

3. All Honors bestowed by his Majesty since the 22 of May 1642. to be Null
and Void.

4. Nulling his Majesty's Great Seal, and confirming that of the Parliament.

5. Totally to abolish Bishops, and their Hierarchy, root and branch.

6. All their Lands to be sold for the payment of public debts, and other
necessary Charges of the Kingdom.

7. Make void the cessation of Ireland.

8. The Election of all the Chief Officers of trust, as Treasurer, Admiral,
be by Parliament, and they to hold during their good behavior. The Deputy of
Ireland to be appointed by Parliament, and to hold during pleasure.

9. The Presbyterian Government to be settled, as to the Religious service of
God.

10. The Treaties betwixt England and Scotland be confirmed, as it is now
agreed.

11. Justices of peace and Sheriffs to be Chosen by Grand Jury men.

12. That his Majesty restore all such servants to their places, as have been
put out for adhering to the Parliament.

13. That his Majesty pass an Act for the sale of Deane and Chapters Lands,
and the money to be disposed of, as both Houses of Parliament shall think fit.

14. That his Majesty shall not give pardon of Life to seven excepted persons.

15. That his Majesty pass an Act for the disforresting all the Forests and
Chases in England.

16. That his Majesty pass an Act for securing the arreares of the Soldiers
of the Army, and all other Soldiers that have served the Parliament, and those
arreares to be paid out of the Remainder of Bishops Lands.

17. That the Count of Wards be null, and that his Majesty have 50000 l. per
Annum in lieu of it.

18. A period may be set to this Parliament.

All which being Granted, His Majesty, the Queen, and Prince, to Enjoy their
revenues, and the King to Govern.

The Commons order diverse of his Majesty's old servants be discharged, and
that there be a stricter Guard then usual.

The Scotch Commissioners sent a Letter to the House of the deep sense of his
Majesty's Imprisonment, withal desiring his Majesty may come to London, to
treat with Honor, Freedom, and Safety, and advise that it would withal be
the most profitable and effectual means for attaining of a happy peace, and
settling Religion, the Restoring of his Majesty to his just Rights, and
continuing and strengthening a good understanding with both Nations.

Which Letter was laid aside.

News was brought to the House, that his Majesty had made an escape out of his
restraint from Hampton Court. The manner thus;

November 11. 1647. He according to his custom, withdrew himself to be
private a little before Evening prayer, staying somewhat longer then was
usual, it was taken notice of, yet at first without suspicion; but he not
coming forth suddenly, there were fears, which increased by the Crying of a
Grayhound several times within in the room; and upon search it was found that
the King was gone, and by the way of Paradise, a place so called in the garden,
much about the close of the Evening. He left on the Table three Papers, one to
the Parliament, one to the Commissioners, and a third to Colonel Whaly; one of
them was as follows.

Liberty being that which in all times has been, but especially now is the
condition, the aim and desire of all men, common reason shows that Kings, less
then any, should endure captivity; yet I call God to witness, with what
patience I have endured a tedious restraint, which so long as I had any hopes
that this sort of my suffering might conduce to the peace of my Kingdoms, or
the hindering of more effusion of blood, I did willingly undergo; but now
finding by too certain proofs, that this my continued patience, must not
only turn to my personal ruin, but likewise be of more prejudice then
furtherance to the public good, I thought I was bound as well by natural as
political obligations, to seek my safety, by retiring my self sometime from
the public view, both of my friends and enemies, and I appeal to all
indifferent men to judge, if I have not just cause to free my self from the
hands of those, who change their principles with their condition, and who are
not ashamed openly to Intend the destruction of Nobility by taking away their
negative voice, and with whom the Levellers Doctrine is rather countenanc't
then punished, and for their Intentions to my person, their charging and putting
more strict Guards upon me, with the discharging most of all those servants of
mine, who formerly they willingly admitted to wait on me, do sufficiently
declare; nor would I have this my retirement mis-interpreted, for I shall
earnestly and uncessantly endeavor these things for a safe and well-grounded
peace, where ever I am, or shall be (and that as much as may be) without the
effusion of more Christian blood, for which how many times have I desired, yea
pressed to be heard, and yet no ear given me; and can any reasonable man think
that according to the ordinary course of affairs, there can be a settled peace
without it, or that God will bless those who refuse to hear their own King,
surely no. Nay I must further add, that (besides what concerns my self)
unless all other chief Interests have not only a hearing, but likewise just
satisfaction given unto them, (to wit, the Presbyterians, Independents, Army,
those who have adhered to me, and even the Scots) I say there cannot (I speak
not of miracles, it being in my opinion a simple persuasion in such cases to
expect or trust to them) be a safe and lasting peace. Now I cannot deny but
that as my personal security is the urgent cause of my retirement, so I call
God to witness, that the public peace is no less before my eyes, and I can
find no better way to express this my profession (I know not what a wiser man
can do) then by desiring and urging, that all chief Interests may be heard, to
the end each may have satisfaction; as for example, the Army (for the rest
though necessary, yet I suppose are not difficult to content) ought in my
judgment to enjoy the Liberty of their consciences, and to have an act of
oblivion and Indemnity, which shall extend to all the rest of my Subjects, and
that all their arreares shall be speedily and duly paid, this I will undertake
to do, so I may be heard, and that I may not be hindered from using such
lawful and honest means as I shall choose.

To conclude, Let me be heard with freedom, Honor and safety, and I shall
instantly break through this cloud of retirement, and shall show my felfe
ready-to be Pater Patriae.

Charles R.


His absence struck all into amazement; The Parliament order his near
attendance to be under restraint until examination; all the Seaports to be
laid to prevent his Majesty's Transportation.

They likewise Voted that whosoever shall conceal his Majesty, shall forfeit
Life and estate.

Every one was big with Expectation to know what was become of his Majesty.

On the 15 of October, 1647. Information was brought to the House that his
Majesty was safe at the Isle of Wight, and had put himself into the protection
of Colonel Hamond, then Governor of the Island.

His Majesty told the Governor, that there was a design against his person,
which moved him to fly thither for safety.

The Lords and Commons were well satisfied with his Majesty's being there; and
Order those servants that attended him at Hampton Court, to attend him there.

On the 18 of November, his Majesty sent a Letter to the Parliament, and
another to the Scotch Commissioners, giving them to understand of his being, as
he apprehended, in more safety there then at Hampton Court, and does profess
his readiness as to an agreement, and though he cannot consent to alter the
Government by Archbishops and Bishops, neither as a Christian, because
Apostolical, nor as a King, because at his Coronation he swore to maintain
this order, yet he is willing to consent, that their power be so limited that
they be not grievous to tender Consciences. For the sale of Church Lands, he
accounts it sacrilege, that it subverts the Intent of the Donors, discourages
learning; He is willing Presbytery be continued for three years, provided
those that cannot concur be not obliged, and that a free debate be had with the
Divines at Westminster, and twenty that he shall appoint, to resolve how Church
Government hereafter shall be settled, with full Liberty to all that differ, yet
without toleration of Popery, Atheism, or blasphemy.

He is willing to put the Militia both by Sea and Land to be disposed of by his
two Houses, or who they shall appoint for his Reign, provided it return to
his Successors; that it be limited to suppress disturbance in this Kingdom,
and against foreign Invasion, and that the power go from his Majesty by Grant
of Patent to those that act.

He is willing and consenting to the payment of the arreares of the Army, and
that he will undertake to raise 400000 l. in eightteen months, and if that
will not do, he is willing to give way for the sale of Forest Lands; and for
payment of other debts his Majesty is willing to pass such an Act as both
Houses shall consent to.

He is willing the Parliament do choose privy Councellers during his Reign,
provided they have their Pattent from him.

He is willing the Court of Wards be taken away, provided there be a valuable
consideration allowed, and that care may be had of his Children, who were by
that Court cared for.

And that the memory of these late sad distractions may be quite wiped away, he
is willing to Null all Oaths, Declarations, Proclamations, against both or
either Houses of Parliament, or any Indictment against any for adhering to them.

And his Majesty offers as the best expedient, an Act of oblivion to all his
subjects.

And although his Majesty cannot in Honor and Justice make void all his Acts
and Grants under his Seal, since the 22 of May 1642. yet he doubts not but
upon perusal, to give full satisfaction to his two Houses in that.

And thus he conceives he has satisfied all Interests, for other things that
may be proposed to him from both Houses of Parliament, on his part he moves
earnestly for a personal Treaty at London; all which being done, he believes
the Houses will think it reasonable to think of such Proposalls as were made
by the Army, touching the succession of Parliaments, and their due Election.

For the Kingdom of Scotland, he is ready to give satisfaction to what shall
be propounded.

Not long after the Scots sent a Letter to the Parliament, that they Regret
that no answer is given to their Letter, and that they are informed that
Propositions are to be sent without allowing any competent time to consider.
They take notice of his Majesty's being carried from Holmbey, and his just
cause of going from Hampton Court. And in regard the Kingdom of Scotland are
highly concerned in the safety of his Majesty's person, and in duty bound to
do their best to prevent his ruin, they therefore desire his Majesty may come
to London, to treat with Honor, freedom and safety, and that neither he nor
his Parliament be Environed with Soldiers, that so their consultations being
free, all differences may be ended by a personal Treaty, the best way to
settle a sure and lasting peace.

See the uncertainty of men in the world, that those very Scots that had not
long before declared, that it was altogether Inconvenient for the Parliament to
admit his Majesty to come to London, until he had given satisfaction to their
just and reasonable desires, should now desire the King to come to London,
which at that time swarmed with Malignants, apt for any tumult, nay the
Parliament it self at that time could not sit with safety, without an Army to
guard them.

On the 23 of November, 1647. both Houses Voted not to have any personal
Treaty with his Majesty.

Yet after three days debate in the House, they conclude that four
Propositions be drawn up in form of Acts, to be sent to his Majesty to sign,
which when he had signed, they would admit a personal Treaty at London. The
Propositions were as follows.

1. That a Bill may be past into an Act by his Majesty for settling the Militia
of the Kingdom.

2. A Bill be past by his Majesty, calling in all his Declarations, Oaths,
Proclamations against the Parliament, and those that have adhered to them.

3. To pass an Act that those Lords who were made after the Great Seal was
carried to Oxford, may be made incapable of sitting in the House of Peers
thereby.

4. That power may be given to the two Houses to adjurne, as the two Houses of
Parliament shall think fit.

On the 30 of November, the King sent a Letter to the General and Army, by Sir
John Barkley, desiring their furtherance of a personal treaty, with a promise
of Recompense when all should be settled. To which answer was returned, that
they had wholly left it to the Parliament, and that they would be passive.

The Army sent a large Declaration to both Houses, taxing them with neglect,
contrary to promise, and laying forth the wants of the Army, by reason they had
not expedited their pay, which must necessitate them to take free quarter, and
be burdensome to the subjects, if not by them timely prevented.

His Majesty sent another Letter to the Lords, wherein he expresses himself,
that if any thing had been of more concernment then the peace of this Kingdom,
he would with patience have expected an answer to his former Letter, but his
tender affection to his subjects welfare, has prevalency with him to press a
personal Treaty, and Intimates, that if the Houses please that he come among
them, it will no doubt speed a good end.

The Lords and Commons according to their former order, Vote the Lord Qenbigh,
and the Lord Mountague for the Upper House, Mr Lisle, Mr Goodwin, Mr Kemp, and
Mr Bulncley, for the Commons, to carry the four Propositions to his Majesty,
which if he sign they will admit of a personal Treaty.

The Scots Commissioners likewise went to his Majesty, and after some
conference with him, declare against the four Bills to this effect;

That they had endeavored by all ways and means with the Parliament of
England for the furthering of a happy peace, but having seen the Propositions
now brought to his Majesty, they apprehend them to be prejudicial to Religion,
the Crown, and the Union betwixt both Kingdoms, and therefore in the name of
the Kingdom of Scotland declare their dissent.

Colonel Hamond wrote a Letter to the Parliament, that he could not secure his
Majesty, unless they would allow him more strength, there being so great a
concourse into the Isleland; upon which the Commons order, that his Majesty's
person be secured, and more Forces be sent for the security of the Island.

The Commissioners returned with a large Message from his Majesty, showing the
Grounds and reasons why he cannot pass any thing till the whole Treaty be
concluded on, professing he is willing to give any reasonable satisfaction to
whatsoever shall be required.

He now again earnestly presses for a personal Treaty, of which he will not
despair, there being no visible way left for the Kingdoms peace, but by it;
However, his Majesty is at peace and quietness within himself, in having
fulfild the offices both of a Christian, and a King, and will patiently wait
the good pleasure of Almighty God, to incline the hearts of his two Houses to
consider their King, and compassionate their fellow subjects miseries.

Its very observable that his Majesty received the Parliaments Commissioners
very gratefully, desiring them all to be assistants to him in promoting a
well=grounded peace, the expression he said was theirs, but it was a very good
one; he told them, there were many Interests to be considered of, Viz. the
Parliament, Army, and Scots, he desired all might be considered; but when he
was informed of a dissenting Declaration of the Scots, he told them, he was
very sorry for it, and he hoped they might agree in the maine, though they
might differ in circumstances. His Majesty delivered his Message to the
Commissioners open, with Injunction to keep it secret till they had delivered
it to the Parliament.

There happened a tumult at Newport in the Isle of Wight, diverse declaring for
the King, and one Captain Burleigh caused a drum to be beaten up for the
service of his Majesty; the Mayor and others that came to his assistance, fell
upon them, dispersed them, took the Captain, who was afterward executed.

This tumult caused the Governor of the Island immediately to discharge all
such as had aided and assisted his Majesty in the late War against the
Parliament.

Monday the third of January, 1657. The Commons tok into consideration his
Majesty's Message, and finding the same as it appears to them, not
satisfactory, nor that he has any Inclination to a composure, it was put to
the Question, Whether any addresses should be made hereafter; after many hours
debate it was Resolved;

That 1. No addresses shall hereafter be made to him by the Parliament of
England.

2. That none shall on pain of Treason, make any address without leave from
the Parliament.

3. That no written Paper, Message, or Declaration, be received from his
Majesty on penalty of Treason.

They likewise Vote, that Colonel Hamond and Sir William Constable, shall have
power to displace any man from his Majesty whom they shall think fit.

Immediately they take care for the managing of the affairs of the Kingdom,
by completing the Committee of Darby-House, who were to transact the whole
business of the Kingdom; they Vote the Earl of Kent in the room of the
Earl of Essex who was dead.

Mr Nathaniell Fines and Mr John Evelin in the rooms of Sir Philip Stapleton
dead, and Mr Glin, who was sequestered the House, Sir William Waller was
continued.

The Committee being completed were 21 in number, Viz. the Lord of
Northumberland, Earl of Kent, Earl of Warwick, Earl of Manchester, Vicount
Say and Seal, Lord Wharton, and Lord Roberts; For the Commons, Mr Perepoint,
Mr Nathaniell Fines, Sir Henry Vane, senior, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Sir Gilbert
Gerard, Sir William Ermine, Sir John Evelin, Sir Henry Vane, junior, Sir
William Waller, Mr Crew, Mr Soliciter, St John, Mr Wallop, Mr Samuel Brown,
Lieutenant General Cromwell.

A General Council of the Army being met at Windsor, they were very Joyful,
and unanimously approved of the Votes of the House touching his Majesty, and
ordered two Declarations to be drawn up, one to show their good liking of the
Houses proceedings, with promise to aid and assist them in settling the
Kingdom, yea without the King, or against the King; the second, for the
maintenance of the Peerage of England, with Resolution to stand by Lords and
Commons to the last man.

On the 17 of January, the Votes for non-addresses past the Lords House; They
Ordered Colonel Barksteds Regiment to quarter in White Hall, Colonel Rich his
Regiment of Horse to quarter in the Mews.

His Majesty having heard of the Resolves of both Houses, continues very
cheerful, and is much retired.

The Scots Commissioners desire leave to Return.

The House of Lords added four of their order to the Committee of Darby-House,
Viz. the Earl of Salsbury, the Lord Mograve, Earl of Denbigh, and Lord Howard.

The Earl of Pembrooke was Voted Chancellor of Oxford.

Both Houses Vote that the Committee of Darby-House have plenipotence to order
the dispose of the Army Commanded by Sir Thomas Fairfax, as they shall think
fit.

The Commons considered of Commissioners to go to Scotland, to acquaint the
Parliament of Scotland with the miscarriages of their Commissioners here. And
Order Mr Goodwin, Mr Ashurst, Mr Brian Stapleton, and Colonel Birch, to receive
their Instructions from the Committee of Darby-House.

The Lords join the Earl of Nottingham, and the Earl of Stamford to go with
them.

The second of February, the Commons past an Order, that all the servants
lately made by the Commissioners, attending his Majesty, be removed, and that
the General Sir Thomas Fairfax place such about his Majesty as he should
think fit, provided they exceed not thirty.

They likewise ordered a Declaration to be drawn up, to satisfy the Kingdom
of the Grounds and Reasons of their passing the Votes for non-addresses.

The 21 of February, Judge Jenkins was brought to the Bar of the House, where
he refused to kneel; a Charge was read against him, That he had condemned or
pasT sentence upon men to be hanged, drawn and quartered, for not assisting
against the Parliament: That he took up Arms himself, that he stirred up
others to levy war and assist against the Parliament, that he accused the
Parliament, and charged them with counterfeiting the Great Seal; and bein
required to speak what he had to say for himself, he answered, that they had
no power to try him, he assured with confidence the Militia was in the King
alone; he said Kings did not formerly covenant to maintain the Law, but only
to be merciful to the people: He endeavored to terrify the Parliament with
his Majesty's numerous Issue in Geniollogy, he prayed the Laws might be
protected, he says there can be no Laws without a King, and that there is none
in Venice nor the United Provinces; for his ill deportment and words, which
were indeed a breach of the privilege of the House, he was fined 1000 l. and
the House Voted a Charge to be brought in against him.

His Majesty at Caresbrooke Castle is very much dejected and discontented at
his confinement, and the removal of his old servants; he will not permit his
hair nor beard to be meddled withal, but by a Barbar of his own choosing, by
which means he is grown very hairy.

The Scots Commissioners Report to their Parliament, much to the prejudice of
the Parliament of England, touching their proceedings with the King.

The Lords and Commons Concur, that no forces be raised in London, nor ten
miles round, but by special warrant from the Committee of Darby-House.

The House being Informed that one Colonel Poyer, Governor of Pembroke
Castle, had refused to deliver it up, being required thereunto by Letters from
the General, Order that if the said Colonel Poyer shall not within twelve
hours after notice hereof, surrender the Castle, with all the Arms and
Ammunition therein, that then the said Colonel Poyer, and all that shall
adhere to him, are hereby declared Traitors, and Rebels; and the General is
hereby required to reduce the said Castle, and to bring the said Colonel Poyer
and his adherents to Justice, and the General was required to send this Order,
that the Colonel might not plead excuse.

Colonel Langhurne likewise raised a body of men, and came to the assistance
of Colonel Poyer, and had gathered together a considerable body of men near
2000 Horse and foot.

They publish a Declaration of their Resolutions to establish his Majesty in
his full power and dignity.

The General Ordered thirty Companyes of Horse and foot to suppress them,
under the Command of Colonel Horton.

The King though set aside, and confined to the Isle of Wight, was more
formidable this Summer then ever he was since the beginning of the late
troubles; for the very name of a King was now grown into great credit with the
people throughout the Kingdom, and by it not only tumults, but Armies were
raised.

A mutiny happened at Bury about a Maypole; some discontented persons declare for
the King; the House order the General to send some forces, who besieged it,
and after some time was delivered up to mercy.

Chepstow was likewise surprised for the King.

On the 22 of April, the Earl of Northumberland Informed the House of the
escape of the Duke of York from St James's; The manner thus; The Earl went,
as his custom was, to attend the Duke at eight a clock at night, after some
stay the Duke came from his brothers Chamber; when the Earl was gone the Duke
went out again, as his manner was, in way of play, to obscure himself, that
his Gentlemen might seek him, which accordingly they did, but could not find
him, upon search they Inform the Earl, who upon enquiry dilcovers that he had
borrowed the Key of the Garden door the day before of the Gardner; as also
there was discovery made of his footsteps.

The Parliament in Scotland order a Committee for safety, who advise that an
Army of 40000 men be forthwith Levied for the preservation of his Majesty and
Kingdom of Scotland, notwithstanding diverse Lords, Knights and Gentlemen,
Members of the Parliament, Remonstrate of their utter dislike of it.

Immediately the Parliament of England Order the fortifying of Newcastle and
Hull, to prevent the Scots Invasion.

The Parliament men being summoned to attend the House, were called over, and
found to be near 320 men.

A Petition was presented to the Parliament from the City, Requiring the Armies
removal from the City, and that the Posts and Chains may be put up for the
safety of the City, and that Major General Skippon be appointed Major General
for the City, and all the Forces within the late Lines of Communication, with
resolutions to adhere to them according to the Covenant.

Immediately the Houses approved of Major General Skippon, and orderd him to
put the Militia in Execution, and the Posts and Chains to be set up as
formerly; They likewise Voted all the Members that had not taken the Covenant
to take it.

On the 28 of April, the Commons proceeded in settling the Kingdom, and Voted
that they would endeavor to continue the Government by King, Lords and
Commons, and that they might have Liberty to debate such Votes as had past
concerning the King; they likewise Voted that the Propositions presented to his
Majesty at Hampton Court, were subject matter for a settlement.

The second of May, the General sent a Letter to the Parliament, approving of
the Cities choice in Electing Major General Skippon, Major General for the
City; and finding the City desirous of the Armies removal from them, had sent
an order for Colonel Barksted to draw his Regiment out of White Hall, and
Colonel Rich to draw off his Regiment from the Mews. He likewise desired them
that they would provide a Guard for themselves.

The Common Council of the City Order 600 l. per Annum for their Major
General, and a Guard for the Parliament, that so the Army might draw off.

A considerable party of Scots and English surpised Barwick; The manner thus;
The party that came was much about an hundred, with swords drawn, and pistolls
Cockt, entered the Town on the South side, as soon as they had past the
bridge, they drew it up, seize on the Mayor, and all other eminent persons.

Drums were likewise beaten up in Colchester, and several Towns in Suffolk,
for the service of his Majesty.

On the third of May, Letters were brought by Colonel Marshall to both Houses
from the Parliament of Scotland, giving them to understand their results
concerning England; and withal, that he had but fifteen days time allotted
him to stay for an Answer.

The Heads of the Scots Declaration were these, That his Majesty may come to
London, or some of his Houses near, and that with safety; That Reparation be
made for his carrying away, or satisfaction, by punishing them that did it;
That the Army under the Lord Fairfax be disbanded; That Presbytery be settled,
Sectaries punished; That all Members of the House be restored.

The same day the Commons Consulted whether they should in the settlement of
the Kingdom, take in the Scots or not, or whether to make addresses to his
Majesty again or not.

May the fourth, came above a thousand Petitioners on Horseback, and near as
many more on foot, out of Essex, to Petition the Parliament for a personal
Treaty with the King, and to expedite a course for the satisfaction of the
Army, and their disbanding.

The Lords return Answer, that they will seriously consider of their Petition;
and the Commons take notice of their good affection to the Parliament, desiring
them to return, and to satisfy their Country.

May the fifth, The Commons agreed, first, that they will keep their Covenant
and Treaty with the Kingdom of Scotland.

Secondly, That they will be ready to Join with the Kingdom of Scotland, upon
the Propositions agreed to be sent to his Majesty at Hampton Court. And that a
Letter should be sent to the Parliament of Scotland about the surprise of
Barwick, by some that were enemies to both Kingdoms.

They likewise ordered the seven Northern counties be put into a posture of
defense, and that the Committee of Darby-House take care to pay them.

At a Council of War at Windsor, it was orderd, that Lieutenant General
Cromwell go to Wales to suppress Poyer and Langhorne, others for the security
of the North with what strength they could.

Colonel Horton sent a Letter of the defeat of the Welsh Army, consisting of
8000 foot and 400 Horse, who being terrified with the news of Lieutenant
General Cromwells coming, Resolved to fight Horton, which he nothing more
desired; they fell upon him, but he soon Routed them, took 1500 Officers, 3000
Common Soldiers; for which a day of thankesgiving is appointed.

On the 16 of May, diverse hundreds came out of Surrey with a Petition, much in
the same nature with that of Essex; some bickering happened betwixt the
Countrymen and Soldiers, in so much that from words they came to blows, and
some of the Coutry-men were killed.

The Scots go on amain to raise their Army, Duke Hamilton, a selfish
unfortunate man is made General (General Lesley is contented with a pension,
and willing to be quiet) The Earl of Callendar Lieutenant General.

Their Levies go on amain, they have orderd forty days pay at their General
Randevouz.

In the mean time, Sir Marmaduke Langdale with a small body of Horse goes on
the Scotch side of Tweed to Carlisle, to raise men, in expectation to join with
Sir Philip Musgrave his forces in Cumberland and Westmerland, who being well
respected, the Country flockt to him amain.

And now the Kings party began to swell big with expectation, not looking upon
themselves as vanquished, but rather Conquerors.

The Southern part of the Kingdom was not free from Insurrections, for news
was brought to the Parliament, that 600 disaffected persons had seized and
secured Rochester, possessed themselves of the City, planted Ordnance on the
bridge, and compeld all that came, to sign their Petition, and increased to
the number of 10000.

The City of London was likewise backward in raising a Guard for the
Parliament, to relieve the two Regiments, which the General then wanted.

In Cornwall likewise were insurrections, and diverse disaffected were landed;
Sir Hardresse Waller sent a party of Horse and foot to subdue them.

The Commons Vote, that if his Majesty will grant the Militia, settle Religion,
and Recall all Proclamations and Declarations, they will Treat with him.

Diverse forces orderd Northward, were called back to suppress the Kentish
Insurrection.

Chepstow Castle was retaken by Colonel Ewer.

Sir Thomas Glenham had seized on Carlisle for the King, and Sir Marmaduke
Langdale was come as far as Appleby with a formidable Army.

Major General Lambert marched up and down, to prevent him from Injuring the
Country.

The General musters his Army at Hounslow heath, he sends a party round by
Sussex to relieve Dover Castle, then besieged by the Kentish men.

He with the rest marched into Kent, several small skirmishes happened betwixt
both parties, he comes to Maidstone, which he found to be stoutly manned, well
provided with Ordinance and barracadoed, and the Enemy drawn up into a body;
it was thought unconvenient to engage the body, and leave the Town
unattempted, in which were the most resolute persons.

A party of old Soldiers were drawn out to face the Town, whilst the body
was drawn up, ready to receive the Enemy.

The old Soldiers assaulted the Town by seven at night, where they met with
men of like Resolution, there being the stoutest men of the Enemies Army,
Apprentices and Seamen, and such as had been in Arms for the King.

The fight continued for six hours, they valiantly disputed in every street;
at last the Town is taken, with the loss of sixty men; in it were taken 1300
prisoners, diverse of quality, 400 Horse, eight pieces of Ordinance, with good
store of booty.

The General showed personal Valor by Charging in his slippers.

Many of the Kentish forces march over Rotchester bridge toward London, where
on Black heath they muster a considerable Army, whither many apprentices and
resolute persons repair, under the Command of old Goring.

The Essex men had by this time secured the Committee men, and sent to require
an answer to their Petition, to which the Parliament speedily send an answer.

The Seamen likewise Revolt, and refuse to receive the Earl of Warwick, but
upon their own terms; they likewise sent Vice Admiral Rainsborough on
shore, and unanimously declare for the King.

Whilst the Earl of Warwick shows his affection for the Parliament, his
brother the Earl of Holland unfortunately rises in arms with the Duke of
Buckingham, and the Lord Francis, who with 500 Horse at Kingston, take the
advantage of the Armies dividing.

But by the care and industry of Sir Miles Livesey, who fell on them, they were
put to flight; The Lord Francis refusing quarter, was killed; Major Dalbere, and
diverse others were killed: the Earl of Holland fled to St Needs, where he was
totally subdued, and taken by Colonel Scroope, and immediately sent prisoner
to Warwick Castle.

While the Essex men were requiring an act of Indemnity, Sir Charles Lucas was
come to Chensford with a party of 2000 Horse and foot, Colonel Whaly was
orderd to go against them.

Those with Goring being denied a passage over London bridge, come over on
Essex side, secure Bow bridge with a small party, whilst the rest march further
into the County.

Sir John Owen in North Wales endeavors to raise forces for the King, which
the Sheriff of a County Endeavored to impede, but being too weak was taken
prisoner, and his party suppressed; a second time, several parties well affected
to the Parliament join together, and with contrary success to the former,
fell upon Sir John Owen, took him prisoner, and totally dispersed his forces.

Pomfret castle is likewise surprised by one Morris.

The General spared what forces he could over into Essex, with the assistance
of the well affected of the County, who pursued the Enemy till they came to
Colehester, which Town they closely begirt, but diverse times sallyes were
made out to fetch in provisions.

The Lieutenant General having lain long before Pembrooke Castle, and hearing
of the Scots on their March for England, and the Report of the Prince and Duke
of York being at Sea, thought fit to give Conditions to Poyer and Langhorne,
for the delivering up of the Town and Castle, that thereby he might have
Liberty to advance Northwards, which Conditions were accepted.

And to say truth, as things then stood, it was of a considerable value, as to
the service of the Parliament.

On the 13 of July Marquess Hamilton enterd England with an Army of 9000 Horse
and foot, the Generality of the people of Scotland were wholly averse to it,
the Ministers every where exclaiming against the Duke.

The Duke immediately sent a Letter to Lieutenant General Lambert of the
Grounds and Motives of their coming into England, which the Lieutenant General
as speedily answered.

The Parliament immediately Vote, that those Scots that enter England in a
Hostill way with authority of Parliament, are enemies to the Kingdom of
England, and shall be proceeded against as such.

July the 17. the Commons debate to what place his Majesty shall come, and
concluded the King name three places, two whereof within twenty miles of
London, and one within ten, and the Parliament to make choice of one of the
three.

Mr Ashurst comes from Scotland with a Declaration of the Council of Estate,
in which they declare that they were Invited in; upon which the Parliament Vote
all those hat Invited them in, to be traitors.

On the 18 of July, the Commons considered of a personal treaty with his
Majesty, and having duly weighed all the Inconveniences that might arise by his
Majesty's coming to London, and duly considerd all the objections against his
Majesty's granting the three Propositions before the Treaty, they resolved that
the Treaty should be in the Isle of Wight, and that it be with Honor, freedom
and safety; they appointed a Committee to consider of time, manner, and place.

July 30 they Vote to send to his Majesty to nominate a place in the Island to
trat in; two of the Commons were orderd to go to his Majesty to that purpose.

They likewise order the Earl of Warwick to fight with the Revolted ships,
notwithstanding their specious Declaration.

Information was brought to the Parliament that Colonel Bourton Governor of
Scarborough Castle had declared for the King.

Major Huntington left the Army, having taken distaste at the proceedings of
some Grandees.

The Prince from aboard in the Downs, sent a Letter to the Speaker of the House
of Peers, relating to a Treaty with his Majesty, and diverse other
particulars, which was laid aside.

On the same day a Petition was presented from the Court of Aldermen and Common
Council of the City of London, for a personal Treaty, his Majesty to be freed
of his restraint, Church Government to be settled, according to the Covenant,
all Acts of Hostility to sease, to which the Commons promised a speedy and
satisfactory answer.

Lieutenant General Cromwell being joined with Lambert, their force is 5000
Horse and Dragoones, and 7000 foot, he sent a Letter to the House, giving them
an account of his proceedings, with a return of thanks for their care in
providing for his Army.

Tinmouth Castle Revolted, but was suddenly retaken.

The Lieutenant General immediately marches to Pomsret, assaulted the Town
with much Resolution, killed thirty, and took an hundred prisoners.

The Lorch of Middlesex returned from his Malesty with his answer, which was to
this effect, That if the peace of his Dominions were not dearer to him then any
Inlerest, he had too much reason to take notice of several Votes that past
against him, with his sad condition seven months together; and sets down what
soever he conceives is necessary to so blessed a work, professing he can no
more treat in this condition, then a blind man judge of colors, or that he can
run a race whose foot is tied, and therefore desires the recalling of those
Votes, that bar mean from coming to him, and that all that he shall send for,
for necessary use, may have leave to come unto him, and wait on him in this
treaty, the place Newport, and that he may be in the same condition that he was
in at Hampton Court, conceiving he cannot treat in honor so long as men are
afraid to come to him; for safety he mentions not, as not fearing his person in
danger, requiring the assistance of the Scots, and that he has fully accepted
of the treaty proposed, and gives it all the furtherance that lies in him, by
demanding the necessary means of effecting, not doubting of the Parliaments
ready compliance. He conjures them is Christians, and good Patricts, that they
will make all possible expedition, by hasting down their Commissioners,
praying the God of peace to bless all endeavors, that all his Dominions may
enjoy a safe and happy peace.

A design was laid for the betraying of Stafford for the King, but by the
Industry of Captain Stone it was prevented.

The Commons upon the City Petition Order a Bill to be brought in, that Major
General Skippon lift no more, but by special Order of the House.

The Earl of Pembrooke was made Constable of Windsor-Castle, in the room of
the Earl of Holland.

The Lords communicate to the Commons their Votes touching the Kings Letter,
which were to this purpose, That the four Votes of non-addresses formerly made
by both Houses be null.

And 1. That his Majesty may have all such to come to him as are necessary for
the carrying on of the Treaty on his part.

2. That he have such servants as are needful to attend his person.

3. That the Treaty be at Newport.

4. That his Majesty may also invite the Scots to the Treaty, to treat on the
Propositions at Hampton Court, wherein they concurred.

5. That the number of Lords to treat be five, and the Commons to appoint ten.

6. That his Majesty may have as much Liberty as at Hampton Court.

Lastly, That all possible expedition may be made therein; this being
apprehended to be the most necessary for the settling of a peace.

Tinmouth Castle at that time Revolted, and retaken; the manner thus; The
Governor being absent, the Deputy Governor sends all the old Soldiers abroad
in parties, he suddenly declares for the King, Arms all the prisoners, Invites
Seamen, and other discontented persons to his assistance; one making an escape
over the walls, Informs Sir Arthur Haslerig of it, who immediately sent a
party under the Command of Colonel Alhfeild, also 100 Dragoones, who with what
Ladders could be got, scaled the wall, Major Cobbet led on the forlorn, after
a very hot Encounter enterd the Castle, put all in arms to the sword; The
Deputy Governor was found dead.

The Prince having lain long in the Downs, and effected nothing, resolves upon
Laud service, to which purpose they land eight hundred on the Kentish shore,
diverse of which were Resormades, and persons of quality; Colonel Hewson being
orderd for the security of the Kentish forces, draws together what force he
could, which were betwixt three and four hundred, who together with the
assistance of Major Husbands with 100 Horse, fell upon them, killed many, totally
dispersed them, took diverse prisoners.

In Herefordshire 200 Horse were got together, Commanded by Sir Henry Lingen
for the King, who suddenly surpised the County troop and destroyed them.

The Commons fell into debate of the Heads of the Kings Letter concerning a
treaty, they agreed to all, excepting their calling the Scots to their
assistance, who had broke the peace, and enterd England in an hostile manner,
secured the towns of Barwick and Carlisle, but after a long debate, they
assented, that the King should Invite any of the Kingdom of Scotland to come
and treat in the behalf of that Kingdom, and that they should have safe
conduct.

They likewise orderd Instructions for Colonel Hamond, and order that he so
deport himself, as that the King may be in the same condition as at Hampton
Court, viz. with freedom, Honor and safety.

The Lieutenant General and Lambert being Joined, the whole Army was concluded
to be 12000 fighting men. The Army march of Gisburne, where there was a
skirmish betwixt Major Righy and some part of the Enemy: The next day the Army
marched to Stonyhurst, a great house in the way to Preston, a party was drawn
out commanded by Major Sanders, who fell on the Enemies out-guards, and took
the Earl of Connought, a Scotchman, and six others prisoners. The next morning
early the Army marched to Preston, where the whole Army of the Enemy both
English and Scotch lay, which by computation could be little less then 24000
fighting men; a forlorn was commanded out by Major Smithson, consisting of 500
foot, 200 Horse, and two Troops of Dragoones, who charged furiously upon the
Enemy, pursuing them from lanes and Villages with great resolution, which so
alarmed the whole Army, and caused them to draw up upon a More, two miles East
of Preston; out forelorne notwithstanding the deepnesse of the ways, behaved
themselves with much Gallantry, who after they had cleared the lanes, our foot
drew up; the Van consisted of Colonel Bright, The Lord General, and the
Lancashire Regiments; The Rear of Colonel Overtons, Deane, and Prides
Regiments; The Battle of a sudden was very hot, and there was a fierce
dispute for two hours; the enemy having lined the hedges, did much mischief
both to Horse and foot, but by the Courage of our men, they quickly cleared
the Hedges, and forced them to retire: The enemy still gave ground, and we
still pursuing from hedge to hedge; our Horse pursue them through Preston
Town: the enemies Army divides and retreats two several ways.

A body of 3000 Horse move toward Lancnster, the rest of their Horse and foot
retreat over the river Ribble; our men follow, and pursue them several ways;
Colonel Twissleton and Colonel Thornelow pursue them Northward, overtook,
Rout, scatter, and took multitudes prisoners.

But the maine of our Army followed that part that went Southward, there was a
very hot dispute over Ribble birdge, which they Gallantly defended for two
hours, at length a body of our Pikes runs furiously upon their Muskets, and
forced them to retire; we killed and took many of them, but night approaching
hinderd the pursuit.

The next morning the Enemies whole body was drawn up upon a hill on the side
of Preston, our men fall on with courage, and forced them to retire in
disorder; we killed and took many, and that night they fled to Wiggon, which they
plunderd.

The next morning the Enemy came within two miles of Warington, where they drew
up in a very strong field, which had high banks like fortifications; where O
swold King of the Northumbers was formerly slain.

We fell upon them, though with very great disadvantage, our Horse Charge
Resolutely; The dispute was long and sharp, until such time as the foot could
come up to engage, which no sooner came but they retire, and we pursued them to
Warington bridge; there was killed of the Enemy above a thousand, and above two
thousand taken prisoners, the rest fled over Warington bridge, where the foot
were left by the Horse, who fled; upon our advance they sent a parley, and above
4000 well accoutred men with the Lieutenant General laid down their Arms,
and submitted to mercy.

Those that went with Duke Hamilton, move up and down in Cheshire; the Country
people in Arms on their own defense, seize on diverse straglers, many
expecting no good, leave him, at last he moves toward Staffordshire.

Several parties of Horse were sent after them, one meets with Middleton, who
commanded 400 Horse, falls on him, dispersed his company, and took him prisoner.

Sir Marmaduke Langdale is appareheded in an Inn.

The Duke sent to the Lord Gray for a Cessation, and to render himself
prisoner to him, which accordingly he did; Immediately Commissioners are
appointed by the Parliament to examine him.

Colonel George Monroe being newly come into England with a considerable body
for a reserve, understanding the total defeat of Hamilton, returns back into
Scotland: and not long after came the Marquess of Argile, Lord Louden, Leaven,
and other of the Nobility to Lieutenant General Cromwell, to manifest their
utter dislike of Hamiltons coming with an Army, and Monroes endeavors to Levy
Forces for the prosecution of the War, and to desire his assistance against
him: To which the Lieutenant General returned answer of his wiilingnesse to
assist them, and to join with them to subdue Monro, and that he did really
believe, that God gave the Dukes Army into the hands of those under his
Command, to make way for the relief of the faithful in Scotland; he forthwith
communicates it to the House, who accordingly Vote that they approve of his
Entering Scotland, for the assistance of those that endeavored to oppose
Hamiltons Levies.

The Parliament Orders so many of the Scots prisoners, being in all 15000 that
were forced away, be sent home in regard of the dearnesse of provissions; The
rest to be sent to several parts abroad.

The King from Caresbrooke, August 28. 1648. sent a Letter to the Speakers of
both Houses; thus;

My Lord, and Mr Speaker, I have received your Letter of the 25 of this month,
with the Votes that you sent me, and though they are not so full as I could
have wished to the perfecting of a Treaty, yet because I conceive by what you
have: done, that I am in some measure fit to begin on (such is my uncessant and
earnest desire to give a peace to these my now distressed Kingdoms, as I now
accept the Treaty) and therefore desire that such five Lords and ten Commons,
as my two Houses shall appoint, be speedily sent, fully Anthorized and
Instructed to treat with me, not doubting but what is now wanting, will at our
meeting upon debate be fully supplied, not only to the furtherance of this
Treaty, but also to the Consummating of a safe and well-grounded peace.

So I rest your good Friend, Charles R.

Indorsed For the Earl of Manchester, Speaker of the House of Peers pro
tempore, and William Lenthall.

He likewise Enclosed the Names of those persons which he desired might attend
him, most whereof were Granted him.

The Town of Colchester having held out the longest siege of any Town in
England since the first beginning of the troubles, in Expectation of Relief
from the North; but the Scots Colors being brought before the Town, totally
disappointed them of their Expectation, and being by famine the sorest of
Calamities, compeld to deliver the Town up to mercy (they having sed near ten
days together on Hors-flesh) The Great ones endeavoring to escape were turned
back by their own men. The Town was delivered up on these Conditions.

The General permitting the Common Soldiers to depart with life, and the
Officers to remain at his disposal, he to exempt from mercy whom he pleased,
the remainder to be remitted to the mercy of the Parliament.

The Town to Raise 14000 l. to preserve it from plunder.

And accordingly August 27. they marched out on the Conditions above expressed.

The miseries of the Town were great, there being hardly so much as Hors-bread
lest to have preserved them alive one day.

On the 28 of August at a Council of War, it was resolved that Sir Charles
Lucas, Sir George Lisle, and Sir Barnard Jaskin, a Papist, be shot to death.

And accordingly Sir Charles Lucas was brought out into the Castle yard, where
he insisted upon an appeal, but being denied, he took Courage, and looking
death in the face with an undaunted resolution, submitted himself.

Sir George Lisle was next brought forth, who Kissed Sir Charles being dead, and
after private prayer desir d a speedy death, more desperate then many of the
ancient Romans on Record.

Its Credibly reported by Eyewitnesses, that upon the very place where they
were executed, there grows no grass, notwithstanding all the ground
thereabout is very fertile.

Sir Barnard Jaskin was reprieved.

The General sent immediately a Letter to the Commons, giving them an account
of the whole proceedings as to Colchester; as likewise certified the names of
those Officers prisoners, which were near two hundred, and to know their
pleasure; withal Telling them that to satisfy the Soldiery, and to take
vengeance, he had caused to be shot to death Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George
Lisle; the first having contrary to promise falsified his word with him; the
second, directed the shooting of poisoned bullets, both being against the Law
of Arms.

August the 31. the Commons took into Consideration the Kings Letter, and those
persons that he had nominated; And by reason that some of them were exempted
persons, others prisoners, or under bail, they were not all allowed.

The rest that his Majesty had named had freedom to go.

The next day the Lords and Commons nominated their Commissioners to treat with
his Majesty, viz. The Earl of Northumberland, the Earl of Pembrooke, Lord of
Salsbury, Lord of Middlesex, Lord Say and Seal: for the Commons, Mr Hollis,
the Lord Wainman, Mr Perepoint, Sir Harbottle Grinastone, Sir Henry Vane,
Junior, Sir John Corbet, Mr Crew, Mr Samuel Brown, Mr Glin, and Mr Bulkley.

The Commons order a Letter to be sent to his Majesty, with the names of the
Commissioners, withal letting him know how far they had proceeded in the
Treaty.

They further considered of Instructions for the Treaty, and require money of
the City to defray the Charge.

The Prince Riding in the Downs with the Revolted ships, sent a summons to the
Earl of Warwick, to tender and submit himself to the Kings Majesty, for the
better security and settlement of the Kingdom. The Lord Admiral returns
answer, that God-willing he will perform the trust reposed in him; and for
settling the Kingdom, he leaves that to the Parliament.

September 11. a Petition was presented to the Commons, entitled, The humble
Petition of thousands well affected in the City of London, giving diverse
Reasons why they assisted them in the war with their lives and fortunes, giving
them to understand that they expected other means for a settlement, then a
personal Treaty; as likewise taking particular notice of the several wants
and necessities of the Nation, concluding that they had laid to heart the blood
and loss of the people, and wished them seriously to consider, whether an act
of oblivion will satisfy Gods Justice, and appease his wrath.

Which Petition was laid aside.

Money being provided, on the 14 of September the Commissioners set forward for
the Isle of Wight, forty days was the time limited; his Majesty desired that
the first day, on which nothing was performed but visits, might not be reckoned
for one of the forty.

The next day the Personal Treaty began, and it may very well be called
Personal, for was it ever known that a King of England argued and disputed
alone with able men selected out of the Parliament, they personally to argue
pro and con with a King?

His Majesty being seated in a Chair of State, those his assistants by him were
silent.

His Majesty desired a Copy of the Heads that they came to treat upon, the
Commissioners answered, they were the same with those at Hampton Court.

His Majesty replied, some of those Heads concerned Scotland; the Commissioners
said they came to treat only of those that concerned England and Ireland.

The King desired the Scots might be Included; to which the Commissioners
answered, they had no Instructions to permit it; his Majesty further desired
that what papers he might put in during the Treaty, might be no way obliging
till such time as all was agreed.

The Commissioners Insisted on the first Article, which was, that his Majesty
should recall all his Declarations; to which he brought many pressing
arguments, professing he was in a very great straight, to yield would leave a
blot and stain upon himself and those that assisted him, and to break off
the Treaty upon that, would be very prejudicial to him, and the whole
Kingdom, desiring some expedient might be found out. The next day the
Commissioners gave weighty reasons to his Majesty, which moved him to sign it
with this proviso, that if the whole was not concluded, this concession of his
should not be taken advantage of.

The second Proposition wholly related to the settlement of the Church, which
being very long took some time; In it he scrupled at two things, first at his
own taking the Covenant; the second against pluralities, much wondering that
this should be put on him, when the Parliament had granted more pluralities to
some men, then ever he did to any: after much serious consideration, the King
gave in a Paper, wherein he agreed; First, to settle the Directory; secondly,
to pass an Act to confirm the Assembly; thirdly, that Presbyterian Government
be settled for three years, in the Interim, a consultation be had what
Government shall be settled at the expiration of the three years, provided he
and his party may have Liberty to use the old form; he liked not the sale of
Bishops Lands for ninety nine years, and utterly refused to take the Covenant;
Further, adding that when he came to London he should be willing to pass any
thing that his two Houses should advise to.

As to the Proposition for taking away all Honors since 1642. his Majesty is
consenting that all persons on whom Honors have been conferred since May 21.
1642. shall be incapable of sitting in the House without the consent of both
Houses of Parliament.

Concerning Delinquents his Majesty consents that all persons that have had any
hand in the plotting contrary designs, or assisting the Rebellion of Ireland,
shall expect no pardon.

For Delinquents his Majesty desires they may compound moderately for their
Estates; and further, for the quiet and settlement of the Kingdom, his Majesty
is willing that all those Delinquents whom the Parliament shall not think fit,
be not admitted to Council or Court without the consent of both Houses.

The Commissioners being bound up to receive a positive answer, durst not
accept of that.

Diverse meetings and arguings were on both sides, for and against; at last on
the 21 of October, the King put in a Paper containing the Heads of those things
that he required, which were: 1. That he be put in a condition of freedom,
Honor and safety, and have the faith of the two Houses therefore. 2. That he
may be restored to his Lands and Revenues. 3. That he may have compensation for
the Court of Wards, and such other of his revenue as he shall part withal. 4.
An Act of Oblivion and Indemnity be past.


Which Propositions the Commissioners communicate to the Lords, who upon debate
find them to be so reasonable, as to consent to them all; They likewise
Inform the House of his Majesty's answer to Religion, and the Covenant, which
the House Vote not satisfactory, and will by no means permit him the use of
the Common prayer, but for the Covenant they are content to suspend it, but
order the Commissioners to proceed on the rest.

The Lords Vote that they approve of his Majesty; suspension of Episcopacy for
three years, provided it take no place afterward but by consent of Parliament.

The Lords and Commons Vote their Commissioners return from the Treaty,
excepting the Earl of Northumberland, Mr Perepoint, and Mr Hollis.

The Commons debated of his Majesty's Propositions, and Vote that they agree.

1. That he be in Honor, freedom and safety, according to the Laws. 2. That
he have his revenue as before, excepting the Dedications of such Forts and
Garrisons, as were of old accustomed to be allowed maintenance. 3. That he have
compensation for the Court of Wards. 4. That an Act of Oblivion be past.
All which they communicate to the Lords.

The King having Granted the Parliament to dispose of all Great Offices for ten
years, they Vote it satisfactory.

Lieutenant General Cromwell enters Scotland, and puts out strict Proclamation
for the Civil deportment of his Army; He no sooner enters the Kingdom, but
Monroe and others dispairing of success, disband the new Levies, and return
malancholly to Edenborough.

The Lieutenant General was with many of the Officers of the Army Nobly
feasted by the Nobility and Gentry of that Nation at Edenborough.

The Scots send Commissioners to London, to the Parliament, to show their Just
dislike of the late Levies.

On the 9th of October, he had Carlisle delivered up to him, who immediately
appointed Sir Arthur Haslerig to be Governor.

Endeavors were made for the betraying of Pendennis Castle, but it was timely
prevented.

Lanerick the Governor of Barwick sent, desiring Conditions for the delivering
of the Town, which was accordingly consented to.

The Lieutenant General with the Army return out of Scotland, not without
much thanks from the Generality of the Nobility.

The Committee of York Petition the Lieutenant General to take care of the
siege of Pomfret, who accordingly sent a sharp summons to the Governor, to
which the Governor sent a Reply, which in effect was a denial.

Major General Skippon Reports to the House the great danger they were in, by
reason of the great concourse of Malignants and disaffected persons into the
City, together with the plots tending to assassinate many of the Members, and
of his Inability to assist them without a Guard, requiring if they think it
convenient, that some of the Army come to Guard them, upon which the House
appointed a time to consider of it.

The Complaint of the Country every where was very Great, by reason of free
quarter, which the Officers of the Army upon serious Inspection, discover a
design to stop their pay, to make them more odious to the people.

At a Council of War held at the Bull in St Albanes, where were present
sixteen Colonels, besides other Officers, a Declaration was read of all their
Grivances, and desires, containing 26 sheets of Paper, which was orderd to be
presented to the House Nemine contradicente.

The Commons order the drawing of several Acts to be signed by his Majesty.

As, 1. An Act for Justifying the War made by Parliament.

2. An Act for Nulling all Honors, since the carrying away of the Great Seal.

3. An Act for explanation, and preventing future Interpretations of the
Statute 25 Ed. the 3d, and all other Acts of Treason, and that of the 11 of
Henry the 7th, concerning the subjects aiding the King in his Wars, for the
better securing the Kingdoms peace, and subjects lives and estates, which
being sent to the Commissioners, together with the Votes of the House
concerning the Bishops and their Lands, were by them presented to his Majesty,
who seemed very much dissatisfied. The Commissioners again press upon the
King, to which he replies, that he had given his answer already, and could not
with a safe conscience consent to the abolishing of Bishops, nor approve of the
alienating of their Lands, because he is persuaded the first is Apostolical,
the second sacrilegious. He further told them, that if his two Houses will not
recede from their former Votes, and content themselves satisfied in order to
peace, He can be content with Christ to suffer any thing that can befall him,
rather then deprive himself of the tranquillity of Conscience, still hoping
that the Parliament will consent.

To which the Commissioners answer that the Parliament conceive it necessary
that his Majesty grant their request for the peace and welfare of the Kingdom,
assuring that it is not the Apostolical Bishop which they require, but the
Bishop established by Law, grown up to that height of pride and state,
Insulting over all power, and burdensome to the persons and estates of the
subjects.

And for alienating Bishops Lands, they answer, they were settled by Law, and
by Law may be alienated, and that it was an ordinary practice of his Majesty's
Predecessors in the Case of Abbey Lands.

On the 26 of November, was presented a Declaration of the Army to the Commons
House, which was the day before subscribed by the General, it contained 26
sheets of paper, showing the misgoings of King and Parliament severally, also
in all Treaties betwixt them, especially that they are now in: They conceive
the Parliament has abundant cause to lay aside any further proceedings in this
Treaty, and to return to their Votes of nonaddresses, and settle with or
against the King, that he was Govern no more, by rejecting those demands of
the King, especially concerning his restitution, and coming to London with
freedom, Honor and safety, and that they proceed against the King in way of
Justice, and that a peremptory day be set for the Prince of Wales, and Duke of
York to come in, if not, to be declared incapable of any Government, and stand
Exiled for ever as traitors.

The Governor of the Isle of Wight sends a Letter to the Lords, that he may be
discharged of his Employment, which they would by no means consent to, but
ordered him to continue his Employment.

The General Orders Collonell Euers Governor of the Island, and sent for
Colonel Hamond to the head quarters at Windsor; whither being come, He was for
some time detained.

The General sent a Letter to both Houses, of the Grounds and reasons of his
advance with his Army toward the City, in pursuance of their former Declaration.

And on the second of December, accordingly the General and Army enter the
Lines of Communication; The General quarterd at White Hall, with a Regiment of
foot, the Horse and the rest of the Army quarter in the Mews, St James's, York
House, and diverse other places about the City.

The King from Newport was by the new Governor conveyed to Hurst Castle, a
very noisome and unwholesome place, where during his restraint he composed his
book, entitled, The portraiture of his sacred Majesty in his solitude and
sufferings, a Royal Monument which he left to posterity.

The House sat all day and night till eight of the Clock next morning; many
Speeches were made by diverse Members of the Kings Concessions, among the rest
Mr Prin made a long Speech, proving the Kings Concessions to be a Ground for a
settled peace, which was afterward Voted in the House, 129 being for it, and 84
against it.

Wednesday December the sixth, some part of the Army having a List of those
Members that were to be taken into custody, according they did it, not
permitting them to enter the House, the number seized was thirty-four, two
whereof, viz. Sir Benjamine Ruddier and Mr Nathaniel Fines, were by the
General discharged, the rest were carried to the Kings head in the Strand, and
diverse other places of Westminster, having Guards upon them.

Presently after was published the Reasons why the Army had secluded diverse
Members which were; First, That very many had turned Malignants, and had
brought such into the House, and kept them in, notwithstanding Votes to the
contrary; secondly, They endeavoring to bring the King in upon his own
terms; thirdly, Their protecting the 11 Members from Justice; fourthly, Their
abetting and pertaking with the Cities violence on the House, and tumults;
fifthly, Encouraging the City and others to Petition for a personal Treaty;
sixthly, Encouraging the late Insurrections, and calling in the 11 Members.

The remaining Members continue sitting; on the seventh of December, Lieutenant
General Cromwell came to the House, and had their thanks for his faithful
service both in England and Scotland.

The same day the Lords Voted his Majesty's Concessions a Ground for peace, and
forthwith adjourne.

Several Regiments of Horse and foot were quarterd in Black Friars, St Paul's
Church, and all the Houses adjacent.

On the ninth of December, a Petition was presented to the Council of War at
White Hall, by the Officers and Soldiers of diverse Regiments, That the Grand
and Capital Enemies of the Commonwealth may be speedily brought to Justice.

The Committee fitting in White Hall, order a Representative of 400 persons to
be chosen throughout the Nation, for the settlement of the Kingdom.

December 13. the Remaining part of the Commons House Nuld and Vote for his
Majesty's Concessions, and order the General to take care of the King.

The Council of War were orderd to sit to draw up a Charge against the King,
and accordingly orders were Issued out for his removal.

December the 10th, his Majesty came from Hurst Castle, dined at a Ladies, and
that night came on Hors-back to Winchester, where he lay all night; The next
night to Farnham, attended by Colonel Harison, and a Guard of 2000 Horse; the
next day he came to Windsor, and was delivered up to the Governor, who had
Instructions not to permit him to be spoken with, nor visited by any, but by
special order from Parliament or General.

Diverse of the secluded Members were discharged by the General.

on the 23 of December, The Commons order a Charge to be drawn up against the
Capital offenders of the Kingdom, and amongst the rest the King was named.

December. 28 an Ordinance was brought into the House nominating diverse persons to
try the King, which being tenderd to the Lords was refused.

Major Pitcher an Active stout man for the King, having his life Granted on
promise to go out of the Land, was apprehended and shot to death in St Paul's
Churchyard.

The Commons seeing the Lords averse proceed themselves, and agreed to the
Commission brought in for Trial of the King, and order the Commissioners to
meet on Monday in the painted Chamber, to consider of manner, time, and place.

January the9th, the Lords Vote that the King could not commit Treason against
the Commonwealth, and order a Declaration to be drawn up of the Grounds and
reasons of their rejecting the Commission for trial of the King; and another,
That no Act of the Commons is binding, without the consent of the Lords.

The Queen sent a Letter to both Houses, craving leave to come over to visit
her husband, but it would not be Granted.

The Ministers of London (though now too late) came to the General at White
Hall, to declare their dislike of the proceedings, which begat a High contest.

The Commons Adjourne part of Hillary Term in order to the Kings Trial.

Some Judges for dissenting from the Kings Trial are displaced.

Jan. 17. The Commissioners for Trial of the King meet in the painted Chamber,
and debated whether they should have in Court the Mace and Sword, and
accordingly it was Resolved to have both Mace and Sword; the Sword alone being
too terrible.

The Commons upon the Kings request Order Dr Juxson, Bishop of London, to
attend him as Chaplain.

Proclamation was made in Westminster Hall, and the Old Exchange, for witnesses
to come in against the King.

Friday the 19 of January, the King was brought from Windsor Castle, and was
met by a Regiment of Horse four miles from London, and that night lodged at St
James's.

The Kings Bench-Bar and Chancery were appointed for the Commissioners to sit
in, which were Rayled and Scaffolded; in the midst was placed a Crimson Velvet
Chair for the President, with a Desk before him, on which lay a Crimson Velvet
Cushon; The Seats all Covered with Red; Beneath was a Table with a Turkey
Carpet for the Carkes.

On saturday the 20 of January, the King was brought with a strong. Guard of
foot through St James's Park to White Hall, and from thence was convay'd by
water to Sir Robert Cottons House, with a Guard of twenty Partesons.

The President Sargeant Bradshaw, with his Train held up, before whom was
Carried the Sword by Collonell Humphrys, and the Mace by Sergeant Dandy; after
whom came seventy Commissioners; the Council was Mr Ask, a Lawyer of the
Inner Temple, Dr Daureslaus a Civilian, and Mr Cook of Grays Inn was
Solicitor Genenerall for the business.

The Court being sat, the Commission by which they sat was Read, together with
the Commissioners names.

The President commanded the Sergeant at Arms to fetch in the Prisoner, who
immediately brought the King (attended by a Guard of Partezons) and placed him
in a Chair; He was no sooner sat, but with a stern Countenance he viewed the
Court, Looked up toward the Galleries, and rising from his Chair, turned
himself to behold the vast multitudes of Soldiers and others that were in the
Hall.

It was further observable, that at his Majesty's first coming into the Court,
the top of his staff fell off, which none stooping for he took up himself.

Silence being Commanded, the Lord President told the King they were assembled
by the Authority of the Commons of England, to proceed to the Trial of Charles
Stuart King of England, who had betrayed the trust reposed in him by the
people, and Commanded the Charge to be read in Open Court, which was to this
effect:

That the said Charles Stuart being admitted King of England, and Entrusted
with a Limited power to Govern according to the Laws, for the good and benefit
of the people, and preserving their Rights and Liberties, yet nevertheless,
out of a wicked design to uphold himself by a Tyrannical power according to
his will, thereby to overthrow the Rights and Liberties of the people, yea
thereby to make void the foundation thereof; he the said Charles Stuart for
accomplishing such wicked designs, and for the protecting himself and his
adherents in his and their wicked practices, has traitorously and maliciously
Levied war against the present Parliament, and the people therein represented.

Particularly upon or about the 13 day of June 1642 at Beverly in the County of
York, and at or upon the 13 day of July in the year aforesaid in the County
and City of York, and upon the 24 of August in the same year at the County of
the Town of Nottingham (when and where he set up his Standard of War) and on
about the 23 of October in the same year at Edg-hill and Keinton field, and
upon or about at 13 day of November in the same year at Branford in the County
of Middlesex; and at or upon the 13 of August 1643 at Cavesham bridge near
Reading in the County of Berks; and at our upon the 13 of October in the same
year at or near the City of Gloucester; and at or upon the 30 of November in
the year last mentioned at Newbery in the County of Berks, and at Crepida
bridge the 13 of July 1644, and the third of September in the same year at
Bodmin and other places, near adjacent in Cornwall; and on the 30 day of
November in the year last mentioned at Newbery aforesaid; and on the 8 of June
1645 at the Town of Leicester, and also on the 14th day of the same month in
the same year at Naseby field; at which several times and places, or most of
them, and at many other places in the Land, at several other times, within the
years aforementioned, as also in the year 1646 He the said Charles Stuart
has caused many thousands of the people of the Nation to be slain, and by
divisions, parties, and Insurrections in the Land, and by Invasions from
foreign parts, endeavored and procured by him, and by many other evil ways
and means, He the said Charles Stuart has not only maintained and carried on
the said war by Land and Sea, during the years aforementioned, but has also
revived, or caused to be revived, the said war against the Parliament, and the
good people of the Nation this present year 1648, in the Counties of Kent,
Essex, Sutry, Sussex, and Middlesex, and in many other Counties in England and
Wales, and also by Sea.

And particularly He the said Charles Stuart has given Commissions to his Son
the Prince for that purpose.

By which cruel and unnatural war by him the said Charles Stuart Levied,
continued and renewed, as aforesaid, much Innocent blood has been spilt, many
families have been undone; The public Treasury wasted and exhausted; Trade
obstructed and decayed, Vast expense and damage to the Nation incurred, and many
parts of the Land spoiled, some even to desolation.

And for further prosecution of the said evil designs, He the said Charles
Stuart, does still continue his Commissions to the said Prince and other
Rebels and Revolters.

All which wicked designs, Wars and evil practices of him the said Charles
Stuart, have been and are carried on for the Advancing and Upholding of the
Personal Interest of Will and Power, and pretended Prerogatives to himself
against the Public Interest, Right Justice, and peace of the Nation, by and
for whom he was Entrusted as aforesaid.

By all which it appears, that He the said Charles Stuart has been and is
the occasioner, Author, and contriver of the said Unnatural War, and thereby
Guilty of all the Treasons, Murders, Rapines, burnings, spoils, desolations,
damage, and mischief to this Nation, acted and committed in the said Wars, or
occasioned thereby.

And the said John Cook, does for the said Treasons and Crimes on the behalf
of the people of England, Impeace the said Charles Stuart, as a Tyrant,
Traitor, Murderer, and a Public and Implacable Enemy to the Common wealth of
England. And therefore prays that the said Charles Stuart, King of England,
may be put to answer all and every the premises, that such Proceedings,
Examinations, Trials, Sentences, and Judgments, may be hereupon had, as may
be agreeable to Justice.

The Lord President Replied, Sir you have now heard your Charge Read, and in
the Close it is prayed in behalf of the Commons of England, that you answer to
your Charge; The Court Expects your Answer.

The King, I would know by what Power I was called hither; I was not long ago in
the Isle of Wright, how I came thither is too long to relate, or then I think
now to speak of; there I was in treaty with both Houses of Parliament, was as
much public faith as its possible, we were almost come to the Conclusion of a
Treaty; I would now know by what Authority, I mean lawful, for there are many
unlawful Authorities in the world, thieves and robbers by the high way; but I
would know by what Lawful authority I was brought from thence, and carried
from place to place, and when I know by what Lawful Authority, I shall answer:
Remember, I am your King, and what sins you bring upon your heads, and what
Judgments upon this Land, think well upon it; I say, think well upon it,
before you go from one sin to a greater; Therefore let me know by what Lawful
Authority I am seated here; In the mean time I shall not betray my trust, I
have a trust committed to me by God, by old and Lawful descent, I will not
betray it, by answering to a new and Unlawful Authority.

Lord President, If you had been pleased to have observed what had been hinted
to you by the Court at your first coming hither, you would have known by what
Authority. Which Authority requires you in the name of the people of England,
by which you are Elected King, to answer them.

The King, No Sir, I deny that.

Lord President, If you acknowledge not the Authority of the Court, they must
proceed.

The King, I do tell them so, England is an hereditary and not an Elective
Kingdom, and has been so near 1000 years; therefore let me know by what
Authority I am called hither; I stand more for the privilege of my people, than
any that are seated here; still urging to know by what Authority he was seated
there, and he would answer; otherwise not.

President, Charges the King with Interrogating the Court, which did not
beseem him in that condition.

The King told him, he was brought from the Isle of Wight by force, and he did
not come there as submitting to the Court, professing to stand for the
privilege of the House of Commons, still urging a Legal Authority, warranted
by the Word of God, or the Constitution of the Kingdom, and he would Answer.

President, Seeing you will not answer, the Court will consider how to proceed;
in the mean time, you are to be carried away by them that brought you hither.

The Court desires to know whether this is all you will answer.

The King, Sir, I desire you would Give me and all the world satisfaction in
this, its no slight thing you are about, I am sworn to God for the peace of
my Country, and therefore you would do well to satisfy God, and then the
world by what Authority you do this, there is a God in Heaven that will call
you and all that Gives you power to account.

President, The Court expects your final answer; you desire satisfaction of
their Authority, it is upon Gods Authority, and that is our present Work.

The King, That which you have said, satisfies no reasonable man.

President, That Is in your apprehension, we think it reasonable that are your
Judges.

The King, Neither your apprehension nor mine ought to decide it.

President, Commands the King to be taken away.

And accordingly he was conveyed back to St James's.

Two days after on the 22 of January, the Court meet in the painted Chamber;
where they order that the King shall not be sufferd to argue the Jurisdiction
of the Court, and that in case the King should again dispute their Authority,
the President is to let him know, that the Court has considered his demands
the last day, and that he ought to rest satisfied with this answer, That the
Commons of England assembled in Parliament have constituted this Court, whose
power may not, nor shall not be disputed against by him.

Further, That in case the King shall not answer, the President is to let him
know, that the Court does take it as a contumacy, and record it, and in case he
answer with a saving notwithstanding of his pretended Prerogative above the
Jurisdiction of the Court, the President to refuse his protest, and require his
positive answer whether he will own the Court or not.

And in case the King shall continue in his contempt, The President shall
command the Clarke to demand of the King them; Charles Stuart, King of England,
you are accused in behalf of the people of England, of diverse high Crimes and
Treasons, which Charge has been Read to you; The Court requires you to give
your positive answer, either to confess or deny.

And forthwith the Court assembles in Westminster Hall, where after their Names
are called over, the Captain of the Guard is commanded to fetch the King, who
being brought and seated, as before, a Great shout was made by the people;
Soliciter Cook again accuses the King as before, the Charge being Read, he
required he might give a positive answer, which if he refuse, the Charge to be
taken pro Confesso, and the Court proceed to Justice.

President, Requires the King to give a positive answer, and either confess or
deny, it is offered in behalf of the Kingdom to be made good against you, for
the Authority of the Court they avow it, and the whole Kingdom are to rest
satisfied with it, I therefore require your positive answer.

The King persisted in his former protest against the Jurisdiction of the
Court, and that a King could not be tried by any superior Jurisdiction on
Earth, and told them that pretend what they would be stood for their
Liberties; for if Power without Law may alter the fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom, what subject is he that can be secure of his Life or Estate; and
going to show reasons why he could not allow them a Court, he was Interrupted
by the President, who told him they would not allow him to dispute the
Authority of the Court, desiring a punctual and direct answer.

The King, I understand Law and reason, and therefore under favor I do plead
for the Liberty of the people more then you do, and therefore if I should
Impose a belief upon any man without reasons given for it, it were
unreasonable. The President again Interrupted him, telling him he might not be
permitted to speak of Law and reason there; The Vote of the Commons of England
assembled in Parliament are the reason of the Kingdom: Sir, you are not to
dispute our Authority, and it will be taken notice of that you stand in
contempt of the Court, and your contempt will be recorded.

King, I do not know how a King can be a Delinquent by any Law, I ever heard
of, I demand to be heard my reasons, if you deny that you deny reason.

President, Sir, Neither you nor any man shall be permitted to dispute the
Authority of the Court; further telling him that if he demurred to the
Jurisdiction of the Court, they sitting there by the Authority of the Commons
of England, he and all his Predecessors are responsible to them.

The King, I deny it.

President, You ought to disturb or Interrupt the Court in speaking; They have
considerd of their own Jurisdiction.

King, I say, Sir, The Commons of England were never allowed a Court of
Judicature.

President, Sir, you are not to be permitted to go on in these discourses.

Then the Clarke Read as was Ordered in the painted Chamber, requiring the King
to answer; Upon which the King promised to answer, so soon as he knew the
Authority of the Court.

President, If that be all you have to say, then take away the Prisoner; To
which the King replied, I require to give in my Reasons, which the President
would not permit; The King urges again to give in his Reasons, but the
President told him his Reasons were not to be heard against the highest
Jurisdiction. To which the King answered, show me the Court where Reason is not
to be heard.

The President again commands the Prisoner to be taken away, who was
accordingly conveyed back to S James's.

The President ordered to record the default.

On the 23 of January, 1648. The Court met again according to the usual
manner, and the Prisoner was brought with his Guard, and seated in his Chair;
Soliciter Cook made a formal Speech, addressing himself to the President,
and in the Close craved Judgment to be pronounced against the Prisoner.

The President addresses himself to the King, and tells him, That it was not
for him to dispute the Jurisdiction of the supreme and highest Authority of
England, from whom there is no appeal; and further to let him know, that the
Court was sensible of his delays, and that they ought not to be thus trifled
with, and that they might in Justice take advantage of those delays, and
proceed to Judgment against him; yet nevertheless, by direction of the Court,
I require a positive answer whether you are Guilty or not Guilty of the
Treasons laid to your Charge.

To which the King replied, when I was here last I did desire to speak for the
Liberties of the people of England, but was Interrupted, I desire to know
whether I may speak freely or not.

President, Sir, I must let you know from the Court, that you are not to be
permitted to run out into any discourses, until such time as you have given a
positive answer to the matter that has been Charged upon you.

The King, For the Charge I value it not a rush, its the Liberty of the people
I stand for, I that am your King, and sworn to maintain the Laws, for me to
acknowledge a new Court that I never heard of; here he was Interrupted. Sir,
you ought not to Interrupt me; How I came here I know not, there is no Law for
it, to make your King your Prisoner.

President, Sir, you must know the pleasure of the Court.

The King, By your favor Sir.

President, Nay Sir, by your favor you may not be permitted to fall into these
discourses; The Court once more demands your positive answer.

Here the Clarke Read the same as before.

To which the King replied; To give satisfaction to the people of the
Clearenesse of my proceedings, not by way of answer, but to satisfy them that
I have done nothing against the trust that has been committed to me, but to
acknowledge a new Court against their privilege, or to alter the fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom, you must excuse me.

President, Sir, This is the third time you have disownd the Court, and put an
affront upon it; how far you have preserved the privilege of the people your
actions have spoke it; men's Intentions are known by their actions, you have
written your meaning in bloody Characters; but Sir, The pleasure of the Court
is, that the Clarke Record your default, and you Gentlemen that take Charge of
the Prisoner, take him away.

Who was Immediately conveyed back to St James's as accustomd.

On the 27 of January, 1648. The Court met again in Westminster Hall, being in
all seventy eight.

Whose Names were: John Bradshaw, Sarjeant at Law, President. Oliver Cromwell,
Lieutenant General. Commissary General Ireton. Major Gen: Skippon.


Lords. Thomas Lord Gray of Groby. Philip Lord Lisle.

Colonells. Edward Whaly. Thomas Harrison. Isaac Ewer. Thomas Pride. Rowland
Wilson. Richard Ingolshy. William Purofoy. Henry Martin.

Hewson. Edward Ludlow. Robert Titchburne. John Huchinson. Owen Row. Adrian
Scroope. Robert Lilburne. John Harrison. Richard Deane. John Okey. John More.
William Goffe: John Desborough. Edmond Harvey. Francis Lasseley. John Venne.
John Downs. Anthony Stapeley. George Fleetwood. James Temple. Thomas Hamond.
Thomas Wait. John Barkstead. Godfry Boswell. Matthew Tomlins. Herbottle Morley.

Knights. Sir Henry Mildmay. Sir John Danvers. Sir. William Brereton. Sir.
Miles Livesey. Francis Thorpe, Sargeant. Aldermen of London. Isack Pennington.
Thomas Atkins. John Fowkes. Thomas Scott. Thomas Andrews.

Esquires. Gilbert Millington. John Blackstone. William Heinington. Cornelius
Holland. Miles Corbet. Francis Allin. John Carme. John Jones. Peregrine Pelham.
John Gowden. Thomas Chaloner. John Aldred. William Say. Dennis Bond. Henry
Smith. Gregory Clement. Humphry Edwards. Henry Smith. James Chaloner. John Fry.
Abraham Burrell. William Cowley. Nicholas Love. John Lisle. Vincent Potter.
John Corbet. Thomas Blunt. Thomas Boon. John Lawnes. Augustine Caranell. John
Down. John Dexwell.

Silence being Commanded at the Kings coming into the Court, there was a great
Cry made in the Hall for Execution, Execution.

The King desired to speak, and hopes he shall give no occasion of
Interruption.

President, You may, but you must hear the Court first; the King presses to be
heard before Judgment, to which the President promised he should.

Then the President began his Speech, addressing himself to the Court, how
that the Prisoner at the Bar has been several times Charged with Treason in
the name of the people of England, and required to answer; That he has been so
far from obeying the Court by submitting to their Justice, that he began to
offer reasoning and debate unto the Authority of the Court, and being required
to answer, he was pleased to be contumacious, and refused to answer; whereupon
the Court have thought fit to take the matter into their consideration, and
have considerd of the Notoriousnesse of the fact Charged upon the Prisoner, and
upon the whole, are agreed and resolved, of a sentence to be pronounced on this
Prisoner, but in respect he desires to be heard before sentence, the Court are
resolved to hear him, provided he meddle not with the Jurisdiction of the
Court, but if he have any thing to say in his own defense, the Court is willing
to hear him.

The King tells them, a hasty sentence once past, may sooner be Repented then
recald, desiring he might be heard in the Painted Chamber before the Lords and
Commons. I cannot be Judge of that I have to say, but if it be reason, and
really for the welfare of the Kingdom, and Liberty of the subject, I am sure
it will be well worth the hearing before my sentence be past, therefore I do
conjure you, as you love that you pretend, I hope its real, the Liberty of the
subject, and the peace of the Kingdom, that you will grant me a hearing before
you pass sentence; to which the President Replied, that it was a further
declining of the Jurisdiction of the Court.

The King craving pardon for his Interruption, endeavored to clear it, that
it was not a declining of the Court, although he could not own it.

The President told him they had with much patience waited his leisure as to
an answer, and that what he had offered tended to a delay, and such delays
neither the Kingdom nor Justice could admit of, but the Court is content to
withdraw for a time, and you shall know their further pleasure.

The Sarjeant at Arms declares from the Court, that the Prisoner was to be
withdrawn, until such time as they should send for him.

After half an hours space, the Court being set, The President Commands the
Sarjeant at Arms to send for the Prisoner, who being brought, The President
told the King, that the Court had withdrawn pro forma Tantum, that they had
considerd of what was offered, and of their own Authority, which was founded by
the supreme Authority of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, and
that they had acted according to their Concession, but the return that you are
to expect from them is, that they have been too much delayed by you already,
and Judges are no more to delay then to deny, and notwithstanding what you have
offered, they are resolved to proceed to punishment and Judgment, and this is
their unanimous resolution.

The King, Sir, It is in vain for me to dispute, I know you have power enough,
but it would have been for the Kingdoms peace, if you would have shown the
lawfulness of your power; it is not my own good I look at, but the Kingdoms
peace, and welfare; I do put at your doors all the Inconveniences of a hasty
sentence, I confess I have been here eight days, its but a little delay of a
day or two more that may give the Kingdom peace, whereas a hasty Judgment may
bring on that trouble and perpetual Inconveniency to the Kingdom, that the
child unborne may repent it, therefore once again I desire to be heard by the
Lords and Commons in the painted Chamber.

President, You have already received the Resolutions and Judgment of the
Court in it, they desire to know if you have any thing more to say before
sentence.

The King, If you will grant me this delay, I doubt not but to give some
reasonable satisfaction, therefore I require you as you will answer it at the
dreadful day of Judgment, that you will consider it.

To which the President replied, If you have nothing more to say, we must
proceed to sentence.

The King, I have nothing more to say.

President, The Court has something to say to you, though it will not be
acceptable to you, dilating upon the Charge, and the several particulars
whereof the Prisoner was Guilty, Illustrating his speech with diverse examples
sacred and profane, that the people have deposed, nay executed their Kings for
mis-government. In the Close of which the King desired to be heard (before
sentence) concerning those Imputations Charged upon him. The President Replied,
that his time was now past, and he was not far from sentence. The King again
moves to be heard concerning those Imputations; but the President told him
that he not acknowledging them to be a Court, they could not admit of what he
had to say; and further, Insisting upon his guilt, minding him what the
Scripture says, For to acquit the Guilty is of equal abomination as to
condemn the Innocent: We may not acquit the Guilty, what sentence the Law
denounces to a Traitor, a Murderer, and a Public Enemy to the Country, that
sentence you are now to have read unto you, and that is the sense of the Court.

O yes, and filence Commanded, the President appoints the Clarke to read the
sentence, which was;

That whereas the Commons of England in Parliament assembled, have appointed
them a High Court of Justice for the trying of Charles Stuart King of England,
before whom he had been three times Convented, and at the first time a Charge
of High Treason and other Crimes and misdemeanors was read in behalf of the
Kingdom of England, etc. Reading the Charge. To which Charge he the said
Charles Stuart refused several times to answer.

For all which Treasons and Crimes this Court does adjudge that the said
Charles Stuart, as a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and a public Enemy, shall be
put to death by severing his head from his body.

The sentence being read, the President told him, The sentence read, and
published, is the Act, Sentence, Judgment, and resolution of the whole Court;
Upon which the Court stood up, assenting to what the President had said.

The King would have been heard, but the President told him he was not to be
heard after sentence, and forthwith commanded the Prisoner to be carried away,
who was conveyed to White Hall.

The Reasons why he could not consent to the Court, are as follows, which he
Intended to deliver on Monday Jan. 22. in writing, but was not permitted.

Having already made My protestations not only against the illegality of this
pretended Court, but also that no Earthly power can justly call Me (who am your
KING) in question as a Delinquent; I would not any more open My mouth upon this
occasion, more than to refer My self to what I have spoken, were I alone in
this case alone concerned. But the duty I owe to God in the preservation of the
true liberty of My people, will not suffer Me at this time to be silent: For,
how can any freeborn Subject of England call Life, or any thing he possesses,
his own; if Power without Right daily make new, and abrogate the old
fundamental Law of the Land? which I now take to be the present case.
Wherefore when I came hither, I expected that you would have endeavored to
have satisfied Me concerning these grounds which hinder Me to answer to your
pretended Impeachment; but since I see that nothing I can say will move you to
it (though Negatives are not so naturally proved as Affirmatives) yet I will
show you the Reason why I am confident you cannot judge Me, nor indeed the
meanest Man in England; for, I will not (like you) without showing a reason,
seek to impose a belief upon My Subjects.

Hereabout I was stopped, and not suffered to speak any more concerning Reasons.
There is no proceeding just against any Man, but what is warranted either by
Gods Laws, or the municipall Laws of the Country where he lives. Now I am most
confident, that this days proceeding cannot be warranted by Gods Law, for on
the contrary, the authority of obedience unto Kings is clearly warranted and
strictly commanded both in the Old and New Testament; which if denied, I am
ready instantly to prove: and for the Question now in hand, there it is said,
That where the word of a King is, there is power, and who may say unto him,
what do thou? Eccles. 8.4. Then for the Laws of this Land, I am no less
confident, that no learned Lawyer will affirm, that an impeachment can lie
against the King, they all going in His Name; and one of their Maxims is, That
the King can do no wrong. Besides, the Law upon which you ground your
proceedings, must either be old or new: if old, show it; if new, tell what
Authority warranted by the fundamental Laws of the Land has made it, and
when. But how the House of Commons can erect a Court of Judicature, which was
never one it self (as is well known to all Lawyers) I leave to God and the
World to judge: And it were full as strange that they should pretend to make
Laws without King or Lords-House, to any that have heard speak of the Laws of
England.

And admitting, but not granting, that the people of Englands Commission could
grant your pretended power, I see nothing you can show for that; for certainly
you never asked the question of the tenth man of the Kingdom, and in this way
you manifestly wrong even the poorest ploughman, if you demand not his free
consent; nor can you pretend any color for this your pretended Commission
without the consent at least of the major part of every man in England, of
whatsoever quality or condition, which I am sure you never went about to seek;
so far are you from having it. Thus you see that I speak not for My own right
alone, as I am your KING, but also for the true liberty of all My Subjects,
which consists not in sharing the power of Government, but in living under such
Laws, such a Government as may give themselves the best assurance of their
lives, and propriety of their goods. Nor in this must or do I forget the
Privileges of both Houses of Parliament, which this days proceeding does not
only violate, but likewise occasion the greatest breach of their public Faith,
that (I believe) ever was heard of, with which I am far from charging the two
Houses: for all the pretended crimes laid against Me, bear date long before
this late Treaty at Newport, in which I having concluded as much as in Me lay,
and hopefully expecting the two Houses agreement thereunto, I was suddenly
surprised, and hurried from thence as a Prisoner, upon which account I am
against My will brought hither, where since I am come I cannot but to My power
defend the ancient Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, together with My own
just right; Than for any thing I can see the higher House is totally excluded.
And for the House of Commons, it is too well known that the major part of them
are detained or deterred from sitting, so as if I had no other, this were
sufficient for Me to protest against the lawfulness of your pretended Court.
Besides all this, the peace of the Kingdom is not the least in My thoughts,
and what hopes of settlement is there so long as Power reigns without rule of
Law, changing the whole frame of that Government under which this Kingdom has
flourished for many hundred years, (nor will I say what will fall out in case
this lawless unjust proceeding against Me do go on) and believe it, the
Commons of England will not thank you for this change, for they will remember
how happy they have been of late years under the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, the
King My Father, and My Self, until the beginning of these unhappy Troubles,
and will have cause to doubt that they shall never be so happy under any new.
And by this time it will be too sensibly evident, that the Arms I took up were
only to defend the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, against those who have
supposed My power has totally changed the ancient Government.

Thus having showed you briefly the Reasons, why I cannot submit to your
pretended Authority, without violating the trust which I have from God, for the
welfare and liberty of My People; I expect from you either clear Reasons to
convince My judgment, showing Me that I am in an Error (and then truly I will
readily answer) or that you will withdraw your proceedings.

Sir Hardresse Waller, Harrison, Deane, and Okey, Colonels, with Lieutenant
General Ireton, are by the Court appointed to consider of time and place for
executing the King, who resolve that the Open street before White Hall is a
fit place, and that the King be there executed the next day being the 30 of
January 1648. and that the scaffold he covered with black.

January 27. the King lay at White Hall, the next day being Sunday, the Bishop
of London preached before him in his Chamber; The same day all the Members of
the Court kept a fast in the Chapel at White Hall.

Monday his Children were permitted to visit him at St James's, but staid not
long.

Tuesday the 30 of January, the fatal day, he prays and receives the
Sacrament, and at ten a Clock attended by a Regiment of foot, and his Guard of
Partisons, with Bishop Juxson on one hand, and Colonel Tomlinson on the other,
walks afoote through the Park; as they were going he bids them go faster,
telling them he now went before them to strive for a heavenly Crown with less
solicitude, then he had oftentimes bid his Soldiers to fight for an earthly
Diadem; he goes into his Cabinet Chamber at White Hall, continuing in his
devotions, refusing to dine, but about twelve a Clock he eat a bit of bread and
drank a glass of claret wine; near one of the Clock he was conveyed through
the Banqueting House, and past through the great window upon the scaffold
covered with black, where he beheld two Executioners disguisd with vizards, the
Ax and Block ready, which nothing affrighted him; he addressed himself to
Colonel Tomlinson as follows.

I Shall be very little heard of any body else, I shall therefore speak a word
unto you here: Indeed I could have held My peace very well, if I did not think
that holding My peace would make some men think that I did submit to the guilt,
as well as to the punishment: But I think it is My duty to God first, and then
to My Country, to clear My Self both as an honest man, a good King, and a good
Christian.

I shall begin first with My innocence, and in troth, I think it not very
needful for Me to insist long upon this, for all the World knows that I never
did begin a War with the two Houses of Parliament, and I call God to witness,
to whom I must shortly make an account, that I never did intend to incroach
upon their Privileges, they began upon Me; it is the Militia they began upon;
they confessed that the Militia was Mine, but they thought it fit for to have it
from Me; and to be short, if any body will look to the dates of Commissions, of
their Commissions and Mine, and likewise to the Declarations, he will see
clearly that they began these unhappy troubles, not I; so that as for the guilt
of these Enormous crimes that are laid against Me, I hope that God will clear
Me of it: I will not (for I am in charity) and God forbid that I should lay it
upon the two Houses of Parliament, there is no necessity of either, I hope they
are free of this guilt; but I believe that ill Instruments between them and Me,
have been the chief cause of all this bloodshed; so that, as I find My self
clear of this, I hope (and pray God) that they may too: yet for all this, God
forbid that I should be so ill a Christian, as not to say that Gods judgments
are just upon me: Many times he does pay Justice by an unjust sentence, that is
ordinary: I will only say this, That an unjust Earl of Strafford.
sentence that I suffered for to take effect, is punished now, by an unjust
sentence upon Me; so far I have said, to show you that I am an Innocent man.

Now for to show you that I am a good Christian: I hope there is Poiating to
Dr. Juxen B. of London.
a good man that will bear Me witness, That I have forgiven all the World; and
even those in particular that have been the chief causers of My Death; who they
are, God knows, I do not desire to know, I pray God forgive them.

But this is not all, My charity must go further, I wish that they may repent,
for indeed they have committed a great sin in that particular; I pray God with
St. Stephen, That this be not laid to their charge; and withal, that they may
take the right way to the peace of the Kingdom; for My charity commands Me not
only to forgive particular men, but to endeavor to the last gasp, the peace of
the Kingdom: So (Sirs) I do wish with all My Soul. Turning to some that wrote.
(I see there are some here will carry it further) that they may endeavor the
peace of the Kingdom.

Now (Sirs) I must show you both how you are out of the way, and put you in a
way; first, you are out of the way, for certainly all the way you ever have had
yet, as far as I could find by any thing, is in the way of Conquest; certainly
this is an ill way; for Conquest in My opinion is never just, except there be a
good and a just cause, either for matter of wrong, or a just Title, and then if
you go beyond the first quarrel that you have, that makes it unjust at the end
that was just at first: For if there be only matter of Conquest, then it is a
great Robbery; as a Pirate said to Alexander, that he was the great Robber,
himself was but a pety Robber, and so, Sirs, I do think for the way that you
are in, you are much out of the way.

Now Sirs, for to put you in the way, believe it, you will never go right, nor
God will never prosper you, until you give God his due, the King his due (that
is my Successor) and the people their due; I am as much for them as any of you.

You must give God his due, by regulating rightly his Church (according to the
Scripture) which is now out of order: and to set you in a way particularly now
I cannot, but only this, A National Synod freely called, freely debating among
themselves, must settle this, when every opinion is freely and clearly heard.

For the King, Indeed I will not, the Laws of the Land will clearly instruct
you for that; therefore because it concerns My own particular, I only give you
a touch of it.

For the people. Truly I desire their liberty and freedom, as much as any body
whomsoever; but I must tell you, That their liberty and their freedom, consists
in having Government under those Laws, by which their Lives and their Goods may
be most their own. It is not in having a share in the Government, that is
nothing pertaining to them. A Subject and a Sovereign are clean different
things; and therefore, until you do that, I mean, That you do put the people
into that liberty as I say, certainly they will never enjoy themselves.

Sirs, It was for this, that now I am hither come: for if I would have given
way to an Arbitrary way, for to have all Laws changed according to the power of
the Sword, I needed not to have come here; and therefore I tell you, (and I
pray God it be not laid to your charge) That I am the Martyr of the people.

In troth Sirs, I shall not hold you any longer; I will only say this to you,
That I could have desired some little time longer, because I would have put
this that I have said in a little better order, and have had it a little better
digested, then I have done; and therefore I hope you will excuse Me.

I have delivered my Conscience, I pray God, that you do take those courses
that are best for the good of the Kingdom, and your own Salvations.

Bishop of London. Will your Majesty (though it be very well known what your
Majesty's affections are to Religion, yet because it may be expected, that You
should say somewhat) declare your self for the Worlds satisfaction in that
point.


KING. I thank you very heartily (my Lord) for that I had almost forgotten it.
In troth Sirs, My Conscience in Religion, I think, is very well known to all
the World; and therefore I declare before you all, That I die a Christian
according to the profession of the Church of England, as I found it left to Me
by My Father; and this honest Pointing to the Bishop.
man, I think, will witness it. Then turning to the Officers, He said, Sirs,
excuse Me for this same. I have a good cause, and I have a gracious God; I will
say no more.


Bishop of London. There is but one Stage more, This Stage is turbulent and
troublesome; it is a short one: But You may consider it will soon carry You
from Earth to Heaven: and there You shall find a great deal of cordial joy and
comfort.


KING. I go from a corruptible to an incorruptible Crown, where no disturbance
can be, no disturbance in the World.


The Bishop. You are exchanged from a temporal to an eternal Crown; a good
exchange.

Then the King, after some short and servent ejaculations in private, with
hands and eyes lift up to Heaven: immediately stooping down, laid His neck upon
the Block: And then the Executioner appointed to give the fatal blow, putting
His hair under His Cap, the King said, Stay for the sign.


And after a very little pause, stretching forth His hands, the Executioner at
one blow severed His Head from His Body, and he changed a troublesome life for
a quiet death.

His body was put in a Coffin covered with black Velvet, and from thence
carried to his House at St. James's, where it was put in a Coffin of Lead, laid
there to be seen by the people. On Wednesday the 7th of Feb. his Corpses was
delivered to two of his servants to be buried at Windsor; whether the next day,
The Duke of Richmond, the Marquess of Hartford, the Earls of Lindsey and
Southampton, together with Dr. Juxon, and diverse others repaired, where with
much difficulty they find a Vault in St. Georges Chapel, where King Henry
the Eighth was formerly buried: which being prepared, a small piece of Lead,
some two foot long, and two inches broad was provided; on which was inscribed;

King CHARLES 1648.

which was sawdred to the breast of the Corpse: all things being in readiness,
the Corpse was brought to the Vault by the Soldiers of the Garrison, over
which was a black Velvet Hearse-Cloth, which was supported by four Lords, the
Bishop of London stood weeping by, then was it deposited in silence and sorrow,
the Hearse-Cloth being cast in after it.

FINIS.
A Table of the principal things contained in this BOOK.
A. BIsnop Andrews death. 15 Sir Robert Anstruther sent Ambassador into
Germany. 25 Lord Audly Arraigned and condemned. 26 Bishop Abbots death. 27
Articles of the Church consented to in ireland. 30 Articles betwixt the Scots
and English. 38 Arms atrive from Holland for the King. 69 Armies Declaration,
133 Their second Declaration, 167. Their reasons for secluding the Members. 169
Petition for Justice on the Capital offenders. ibid

B. Buckingham accused of Treasen by Gondamore, 4. Sent into Holland, 10.
accuses Digly. 12. His Voyage for Relief of Rochell. 16. 1s stabd by Felton.
19. Interd at Westminster. 20 Judge Barkleys aresting in the Kings Bench. 47
Bucking ham shire Petition for Mr. Hamden. 60 Blake executed for treachery. 79
Bransord fight. 80 Browns successes at Abbington. 97 Brereton Victorious. 105
Barwick surprised. 142.

C. King Charles borne, 1. Created Duke of York, ib. Goes into Spain, 2.
Arrives safe home, 3. Proclaimed King of Great Britain. 6. Espousd to
Henneretta Maria. 7. Summons a Parliament. ibid. His Speech, 8. Adjournes the
Parliament to Oxford, 9. In want, ibid. And dessolves them, 10. His Coronation,
11. Calls a second Parliament, ibid. His Speech in the House, 12. Dissolves the
Parliament, 13. Assists the French, 14. His speech to the Queens attendants,
ibid. Summons a third Parliament, 17. Grants the Petition of Right, 19. Speech
in the Lords House, 23. Dissolves the Parliament, 24. Visited with the small
Pox, 27. Goes into Scotland, ibid. His care for the service of God in Scotland,
28. Sends an Army to suppress the Scots, 36. Summons a fourth Parliament, 39.
He addresses himself to the City for money, 41. Rayses a second Army against
the Scots ibid Speech to the long Parliament, 44. Speech in the Banqueting
House, 46. He breaks the Dutch match to them, 47. Passes the Bill for
Trieniall Parliaments, ibid. Vindicates the Earl of Strafford, 49. Goes into
Scotland, 54. Appoints Essex General, ib. Returns from Scotland, 55. Charges
the five Members with high treason, 57. Goes to the House to demand them, 59.
Goes to Hampton Court, 61. Thence to Dover, 62. Comes back to Greenwich, thence
to Theobalds, 62. Sends to the House of his Intentions for Ireland, 64. Demands
Hull, 65. Speech to the Gentry of Yorkshire, ibid. Sends out Commissions of
Array, 69. His speech to the Nobility and Gentry at York, 70. Besieges. Hull,
ib. Hepublishes his Grand Declaration at York, 72. Sets up his Standard, 73.
Sends a Message from Nottingham, ibid. Sets up a Mint at Shrewsbury, 75.
Summons Gloucester. 86. Summons a Parliament at Oxford, 90. Receives the
Sacrament at Oxford, 91. Sends a Message for peace, 93. Dissolves the
Parliament at Oxford, 94. Flies to Leicester, 104. Sends Propositions for
peace, 109. Flies disguisd to the Scots Army, 110. Sends a Message from
Newcastle, 114. Comes to Holmbey, 116. Desires to come to London, 118. comes to
Newmarket, 119. Removd to Causum, 120. Thence to Woborne, 121. Removd to
Hampton Court, 122. Flies to the Isle of Wight, 126. his Letter to the House,
150. Sent a Letter to the General, 133. Letter to the Lords, 134. He earnestly
presses a personal Treaty, 135. is discontented, 139. sends an answer to the
Parliaments Message, 150. sends a Message to the House, 157 conveyed to Hurst
Castle, 168 brought to Windsor, 170. brought to St. James's, 171 His first
days Trial, 172 second days Trial, 179 third days Trial, 181. last days
Trial, 183. sentence, 188. his reasons against the Court, 189. Committee
appointed to consider of Execution, 191. Jan. 30. 1648. appointed for his
execution, 193. His speech on the scaffold, 194. He Is executed, 198. Interred at
Windsor, 199 Cades Voyage. 10 Mr. Cooks Insolent speech in the House. 11 Mr.
Crew sent to the Tower. 40 County of York petition the King. 64 City of London
set up Chains and Posts. 76. Petition the Parliament. 141 Cirencester for the
Parliam. 81 Covenant Taken throughout the Kingdom. 87 Countess of Darby holds
out Latham House. 91 Coruish Hugg. 92 Lieutenant General Cromwell continued,
97. is Victorious at Ipslcy bridge, 98. Takes Blechingdon house, ib. Routs the
Club-men, 107. Takes the Devises, 108. Takes Langford House, ibid. Takes
Winchester, ibid. Orderd to suppress Poyer and Lang borne, 144. Takes Pomfret
Castle, 148. Goes against Hambleton, 148. Enters Scotland, 164. Takes Carlisle,
and Barwick, 165. Returns from Scotland. ibid Cornet Joice seazes the King. 118
Committee of Darby House. 137 Chepstow Castle surprised for the King, 140.
retaken 145 Colchester surrendered. 158 Commissioners go to the Isle of Wight.
160 City in danger. 165 Countries Complaint of free quarter. ibid Charge
against the King. 173

D. Dutch Ambassador arrives in England. 10 Digby accuses Buckingham. 12 Sir
Dudly Digs sent to the Tower. 13 Diverse Members of the Commons House Committed.
24 Dispute about Ship Money. 31 Dutch Ambassador Treats of a Match betwixt the
Kings Eldest Daughter, and the Prince of Orange. 47 Drums beaten up in London.
71 Dutch Ambassador mediates for a peace. 94 Sir Lewis Dives took Waymouth for
the King. 96 Drums beaten up in Colchester for the King. 142

E. Englands Coasts Infested by Pirates. 28 England happy if ever. 31
Episcopacy turned out of Scotland. Earl of Haddington blown up. 42 English
Nobility petition the King. ibid. Earl of Strafford sequestered the House, 45.
Trial in Westminster Hall, 48. His speech at his Execution. 52 Earl of
Warwick gets possessiof the Navy. 65 Earl of Bedford General of the Horse for
the Parliament. 71 Essex Chief Randevouz at Northampton, 75. Befieges Reading,
81. Relieves Gloucester, 87. Surprises Cirencester, 88. Laid aside, 97. His
death and burial. 112 Edg-Hill Battle. 77 Earl of Northumber land made
Governor of the Kings Children. 97 Essex men Petition for a personal Treaty,
143. Secure the Committee men. 146 Ewers made Governor of the Isle of Wight.
167

F. French King requires Aid. 13 The French require satisfaction. 15 Felton
stabs Buckingham, 19 He is araign'd and Executed 20 The Fleet sets forth from
Porchmouth. ibid. A Fleet set out to scour the Seas. 31 Five Members
Impeacht. 45 Lord Fairfax and his Son takes York. 94 Sir Thomas Fairfax made
General, 97. Relieves Taunton, 99. Takes Bostoll house, 101. and Gaunt house,
ibid. Takes Leicester, 104. Relieves Taunton, 105. Takes Bridgewater, 106.
Takes Bath, ibid. Takes Sherburne Castle by Storm, 107. Takes Bristoll, ibid.
Takes Exeter, 108. and Dartmouth, ibid. Takes Tiverton, ibid. Received in state
at Leicester, 116. Enters the City of London, 123. Goes into Kent, 146. into
Essex, 153. Sends a Letter concerning Colchester, 159. Comes to London. 168
Lord Francis killed. 147

G. Gundamore Ambassador for England. 2 Pope Gregory dies. 3 Gentlemen of the
Innes of Court their mask. 28 Sir Richard Gurney sent to the Tower. 72 Goring
Lands at Newcastle. 86 Great seal broken. 112 Glenham secures Carlisle for the
King. 148

H. Mr. Hollis his Insolency in the House. 22 Mr. Hollis Accuses the Earl of
Strafford. 45 Sir John Hotham denies the Kings entrance into Hull. 65 Sir John
Hotham his son declares for the King, 83. both seized prisoners, 84. beheaded.
96 Hopton in the West for the King. 77. is Victorious in the West. 100 Horton
Routs the Welsh. 144 Hambleton made General of the Scots Army, 144 Enters
England, 148. is beaten, 154 Holland Routed and fled. 147 Major Huntington
leaves the Army. 150

I. King James Inclind to peace, 2. His speech to the Parliament, 3. His death
and Character, 5. Burial. 6 James Duke of York born. 28 Dr. Juxon Bishop of
London made Lord Treasurer. 30 Irish Rebellion brake out. 55 Innes of Court
Gentlemen tender their service to the King. 60 Judge Jenkins sentence at the
Bar of the House. 138 Insurrections in Cornwall. 14^ Judges displac't. 171
Bishop Juxon ordered to attend the King. ibid.

K. The Kingdom big with Expectation of Parliament. 44 King and Queen meet at
Edghill. 84 Kentish Insurrection, 145 Muster on Black heath. 146

L. LONDON visited with the plague. 7 Dr. Layton sentenc't. 26 Bishop Laud made
Archbishop of Canterbury. 28. He gave order to Romove the Communion Table, 31
Revives the Ancient Ceremonies of the Church, 39 is assaulted by the multitude,
40. Accas'd by the Commons, 46. Condemned and Executed. 95 Lessly defeats the
English. 41 Lords House complain of breach of privilege, 45 Their Votes
concerning the King. 170 Lord Keeper Littleton goes after the Seal to the
King, 68 Lindsey General for the King, 75 Loves unadvised Expression, 96
Langdale Routs the Lincolashire Horse, 96. He is defeated, 109. Rayses forces
in the North. 145 Lawhorne declares for the King. 140 Sir Charles Lucas for the
King, 147. is shot to death, 158 and Sir George Lisle. ibid.

M. Montrosse discernes the deceit of the Scots. 44 Members of the Commons
House made long speeches, 45 Members go to the King at York. 67 Massey made
Governor of Gloucester, 76. Summons Malborough. 92 Prince Maurice besieges
Exeter, 85. Takes Evisham by storm. 100 Marston More fight. 94 Members of the
Commons House Impeacht, 120. They discharge themselves. 121 Massey flies into
Holland. 123 Mayor and Aldermen of London Impeacht of high trea son. 123 Mutiny
at Bury. 140 Maidston Retaken. 146 Members secluded the House, 168

N. Northern Counties suffer by the Scots. 46 Earl of Newcastle in the North.
80 Newbery Battle. 88 Earl of Northampton Routs the Northampton Horse. 97
Naseby Battle. 103 Newcastle and Hull sortified. 141

O. Overtures of a Match with France. 4 Ormond sends over forces for the King.
88 Oxford besieged, 101. more straightened, 109. Surrendered. 111 Sir John Owen
Rayses forces for the King. 147

P. Parliament require an account of the Princes journey into Spain, 4. Break
off the Match. ibid. Parliament petition concerning Religion and Grievances, 9.
They Article against Buckingham, 13. The third Parliament supply the Kings
wants, 18. Remonstrate against Buckingham, 19. They dissolve themselves, 23.
Parliament in April 1640. 29. dissolved, 40. Another Parliament in November
1640. 43. Long Parliament began, 44 Relieve distressed Ministers, 45. discharge
Burton, Prin, and Bastwick, ibid. Petition for a Guard, 56. Petition for the
Militia, 61. Send a Message to the Queen, 62. Order the Rigging of the Navy,
63. settling the Militia, ib. Petition the Magazine at Hull be brought to
London, 64. Issue out Commissions for the Militia, 67. Petition the King, 68.
Order bringing in money and plate, 69. Vote an Army to be raised, 70. declare
against the Commission of Array, 72. Vote the Counties to associate, 76.
solicit the Scots, 79. Vote an Assembly of Divines, 83. a new great Seal,
ibid. Articles of high treason against the Queen, 84. detain the King and
Queens Revenue, ibid. Require the assistance of Scotland, 87. Vote it Treason
for any Member to desert the House, 92. make proclamation concerning the King,
110. Vote the King to Warwick Castle, ibid. send Commissioners to Newcastle 111
Vote Presbytery to be set led, 112. Vote 400000 l. for the Scots, ibid. Vote
the Confession of Faith, 113. Vote the King to come to Holmbey, 114. Vote the
disbanding of the Army, 117. Vote the City be put in a posture of defense, 121
Vote Propositions be sent to the King, 124. Votes concerning the Kings flight,
139. Vote a personal Treaty, 132. send Commissioners to Scotland, 134. Votes
for non-addresses, 136. Lords consent to non addresses, 137. Null the Votes for
nonaddresses, 142. Vote the Scots entering England Enemies, 149. Vote the King
to come within twenty miles of London, ibid. Nominate the Isle of Wight for a
Treaty, ibid. Null the Votes for non addresses, 151. Appoint Commissioners to
Treat, 159. sit all day and night, 168. The remainder of the House continue
sitting, 169. Null the Vote for Concessions, 170. Vote a Charge against the
King, ibid. The Priests Impose a penance on the Queen. 14 Petition of Right. 18
Proclamation against Papists, 27 Prince Charles borne and dies. 24 Prince
Charles his birth, 25 Goes for Scille. 109 Peace betwixt England and Spain. 26
Princess Mary borne. 27 St. Paul's Church began to be Repaired. ibid Old Par
brought to London. 30 Prince Elector comes to London. ibid Princess Elizabeth
borne. ibid Princess. Anne borne. 32 Prin, Bastwick, and Burton sentenc't.
Prince Henry borne. 41 Alderman Penington petitions against Episcopacy. 46
Princess Mary married to the Prince of Orange. 50 Prince Rupert and Prince
Maurice arrives. 74 Plot for betraying London. 82 Plot for betraying Bristoll.
ib. Proclamation against the Covenant. 88 Pomfret Castle taken. 106 Prince
Maurice for the Hague, 112 Pendennis Castle surrendered. ibid Poyer and Powell
declare for the King. 140 Pomfret Castle surprised. 147 Surrender Pembrooke
Castle. 148 Proclamation for witnesses against the King. 171

Q. Queen arrives in England. 7 Queen Mother comes for England. 36 Queen
arrives from Holland. 81 Queen goes for France. 91

R. Rumors of a plaster applied to King James his wrist. 5 Rotchell besieged.
17 Prince Rupert arrives in England, 74. Summons Gloucester, 82. Besieges
Litchfield, 83. Routs the Buckingham forces. 84. Besieges Bristoll, 85. takes
Leicester by storm, 100. goes for France. 112 Ragland Castle surrendered. 112
Representative orderd. 169

S. The Treaty of the Spanish Mateh dissolvd. 4 Statutes against Recusants. 11
Ship Money. 29 The Scots hatch mischief. 30 Scotch Service Book revisd 32
Scots petition against the Common prayer book, 34. They Arm, 35. Their
Propositions, 43. a cessation, 44 Their deceir, 45. Scots Army enter England,
90. Besiege Newwark, 107. Carry the King to Newcastle, 111 desire the King to
take the Covenant, 192. Scots unreasonable demands, 112. Their threatening, 113.
quit Newcastle, 116. are sensible of the Kings imprisonment, 126. Letter to the
Parliament, 132. raise an Army for the King 141. Scots Declaration. 143
Star Chamber Voted down, 53 Scarborough Castle taken, 106 Sherburne Castle
taken. 107 Surrey petition for a personal Treaty. 144 Seamen Revolt from
Warwick. 146 Scarborough Castle for the King. 150

T. Term at Reading. 11 Tunnage and poundage complained of. 21 Tumults at
Westminster. 50 Tumult in the Isle of Wight. 135 Tinmouth Castle revolts and
retaken. 150 Treaty in the Isle of Wight. 161

V. An Uproare in Edenborough at the Reading of the Common Prayer Book. 33
Uxbridge Treaty. 96

W. Bishop Wren accused by the Commons. 26 Secretary Windebank flies. ibid
Worcester secured for the King. 75 Winchester for the Parliament. 81 Lord
Wilmot defeats Waller in the West. 85 Waller takes A undell Castle. 89.


