THE RIGHTS OF THE CROWN OF England, As it is established by Law.

Written in the time of the Late King, By Edward Bagshaw Esquire, an Apprentice
of the Common Law.

Ad Conservationem Jurium Coronae nostrae, eo nos decet studiosius operam
adhibere, quo ad hoc astringimur Vinculo Juramenti, Regist. fol. 61. b. Antiqua
Maneria Coronae annexa; Regi non licebit alienare: sed omnis Rex Coronae suae
alienata revocare tenetur, Fleta lib. 1. cap. 8. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for
Simon Miller at the Star in St Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

TO THE KINGS MOST Excellent Majesty.
Most great and most gracious Sovereign,
DVring my long Imprisonment in the Kings Bench and other places, for my
adherence to the Cause of my late Sovereign (your most pious Father, and Gods
most glorious Martyr) accounted at that time High Treason, and upon that score
I was committed Prisoner to the Kings Bench, June the 29th 1644.

I had then leisure to bethink my self what that Treason was; which I could not
find written in Books of Law, but on Banners of War; not amongst men of the
Gown, but men of the Sword: a Sword sharpened by them at that time for the
cutting down of Monarchy and Hierarchy, and thereby to engross to themselves
the rich Crop of the Kings and Bishops Lands, which they had no possibility to
bring about, but by making the one Tyrannical, the other Antichristian.

Whereupon I adventured in this my restraint, to run the hazard of writing
three Books: The first defending the Revenues of the Church in Tithes and
Glebe. The second maintaining the Doctrine, Liturgy, and Discipline of the
Church of England, as they were established by Law. The last asserting the
Rights of the Crown of England.

The two former were long since Printed; this last I made ready for the Press,
and left it in the hands of Doctor Ouldsworth for that purpose, Dedicating it
to your Majesty's most Royal Father: but that sudden and barbarous blow which
fell upon him, and in him upon the whole Nation, to the astonishment of men and
Angels, confounded the Press, my Book, and me; a fact so transcendently horrid
and monstrous, that it filled me as much with amazement that it could be done;
as with sorrow that it was done.

This Book brought to the birth, and thus dispoyled of its Royal Patron,
waited long for the support of a Sovereign Power, and now humbly supplicates
your Princely Patronage, for strength to bring forth; which in justice your
Majesty cannot well deny, you being as well an inheritour of your Fathers
Virtues, as of his Crown: nay more, a happy restorer of it when it was fallen,
by your accession to it the 29th of May last (being your birthday) when you
were received with such Gallantry of the Nobility and Gentry, and with such
acclamations and shouting for joy by all the people, that I who have lived to
see the glory of your Royal Father and Grandfathers Reign, never saw the like
to that triumphant Entry, which (I fear) I should lessen, should I attempt to
describe.

I am only able to liken it to the Inauguration of King Solomon; there were
then such blowing of Trumpets, such piping with Flutes, such huge shouts of all
the people, with God save King Solomon, that the earth rent with the sound of
them; and there were such rejoycings in the City of Gihon, where he was
anointed King, that the City rang for joy: so did the City of London, when you
our Solomon entered it on that day.

For my own part, such was my joy, that I thought it satisfaction and comfort
enough, for the sufferings I had undergone for above sixteen years, in Body,
Estate, and Profession; in that God has heard my constant Prayers for the
restitution of your Majesty to your Crown; the Church of England to her
Religion; the Law of England to its ancient Glory and Splendor; and the people
of England to their Magna Charta-Liberties.

So that according to your Fathers prediction, I have seen you Charles le bon,
Ekon asil Sect. 27.
and Charles le Grand. And I doubt not, but Almighty God who has done such
wonderful things for you, will so continue you to the end.

I here conclude, humbly begging leave to pray for my Lord the King, in the
language of a King (your blessed Father now with God) I pray God bless you, and
establish your Kingdoms in Righteousness; your Soul in true Religion; and your
Honor in the love of God and your People. And this shall ever be the Prayer of

Your most loyal and humbly devoted Subject Edward Bagshaw.

ERRATA.
Page 7. line 18. for etc. read and. p. 8. l. 16. for Recorders r. Records. p.
10. l. 14. for quellet r. avellet. p. 22. l. 4, 5. for Queen Mary's Injunctions
read Queens Majesty's Injunctions. p. 28. l. 4. for that King r. this King. p.
43. l. 3. for fortious Act r. tortious Act. p. 45. l. 7. read by some of the
common people. p. 47. l. 21. read does the word King intimate. p. 48. l. 19.
dele so.

THE RIGHTS OF THE Crown of ENGLAND as it is Established by Law.
TO persuade a People armed with a violent Sword, to cut out to themselves
their own Government, to embrace Monarchy (lying under many disloyal
reproaches, which it has received from Pen and Pulpit,) as the best Form of
Government, to make them happy; may seem rather the work of an Angel, than of a
man. But yet it will be no hard matter to persuade English men to embrace
Monarchy, under the name and notion of the Crown of England, when it shall be
made apparent to them, that in the peace thereof consists their peace, and by
the splendour and majesty of the Crown, they receive Ease and Justice, the two
darling delights of the People.

If men did but consider the glory and beauty of the Crown of England, as it is
in it self, and as it stands in relation to the people, in those two lovely
properties of Justice and Mercy, it would draw all hearts to love it, all hands
to defend it, all pens to write for it, and all tongues to plead for it. For
what is it else, but that Supreme Sovereign power, Description.
given by God the founder of it, to the King, and so acknowledged by the
people; annexed by Law to the natural body of the King; and unto it united and
incorporated, for the Government of all his Subjects in peace and safety,
according to the Laws of the Land? This is briefly the description of it, which
I will now fortify with some Reasons and Authorities.

And for a more succinct proving of all the parts of this description, I shall
make good these six conclusions according to Law.

1. That the Sovereign Power belonging to the Crown of England, is, according
to the Law of the Land, given to the King by God, not by the People.

2. That it is so assented to by the People of England; and this their assent
openly declared by diverse Acts of Parliament.

3. That this Sovereign Power, is by Law inseparably and undividedly united to
the natural Body of the King, and makes in him but one Royal Person.

4. That this Sovereign Power is over all the Subjects of England, as well in
a Collective Body, or Representative, as over every singular Subject.

5. That this Power is given to the King, as well for the preservation of
Himself, as for the Government of all his People in peace and safety.

6. That this Government is to be according to the Laws of the Land, not by an
Arbitrary Illegal Power.

For the more sincere handling of all these, I shall endeavor to avoid these
two Rocks:

First, Flattery of the King, a vice which King James calls, Basi. l Doron.
lib. 2.
the pest of all Princes, and wrack of Republics.

Secondly, Injury of the People, (the unruly ringleader of all Sedition and
Rebellion:) and truly to state the Praerogative of the King, as it relates to
the liberty of the people, in joining them together in marriage (as the Law
has joined them) with an indissoluble knot.

Concerning the first Conclusion;

Though the Law of Reason be the Dr and Stu. lib. 1. cap. 5.
first Ground of the Law of England, and from thence I might insist upon that
Argument mentioned by those two Patriarks of Philosophy and Policy, Plato and
Aristotle Plato lib. 3o de Leg. Aristo. 1o lib. Pol. cap. 30.
(the Master and the Scholar) That the chiefest person in every household is in
nature of a King; and when numbers of Families joined themselves in civil
societies, Kings were the first kind of Governors; and from thence enforce
this Conclusion:

That as the Fathers of Families have (by the consent of all Opposites to
Monarchy at this day) their Government immediately from God, so have the
Fathers of their Countries. But because nothing has been more tortured upon
the rack than the Law of Reason, I will only hold my self for the proof of this
point, to the positive Laws of this Kingdom, from the first Christian King of
it, to this very day.

I will begin with King Lucius, who after he had received the Christian faith
almost fifteen hundred years agone, by the means of Eleutherius then Bishop of
Rome, (the most pious Father of the the Church then living) he writes to that
Bishop to send to him the Roman Laws (then famous over the world) whereby he
might the better Govern the People of England. The good Bishop writes to him
an Epistle back again, Lamb. inter. Leg. Edw.
Anno. Dom. 169 (as I find it printed amongst the Laws of the Saxon Kings, put
forth by Mr Lambert) and styles him in that Epistle, Vicarius Dei in Regno suo;
Gods Vicegerent in his own Kingdom: and advises him to reject the Laws of
Caesar, and to choose a Law ex utraque pagina, from the Old and New Testament,
and by that to Govern his People. Now the Laws of England are more agreeable
to the Laws of God, than the Laws of any Commonwealth, Grecian, Roman, or
other, etc. though without much difficulty it might be proved; yet being not to
the Point I have in hand, I will pass it by, and only prove this; That
according to that style of Eleutherius, The Kings of England have by the Laws
thereof, and by the constitution of this Kingdom from that day to this, been
accounted Gods immediate Lievetenants, and to have the Supreme Sovereign
Power from God in their Kingdoms, and not from the People.

The Laws of England from the days of this Lucius, and the succeeding Kings,
till the days of Edward the Confessor, were cut in pieces by the sharp Sword
of Civil War, which continued here in England for diverse hundred of years,
(that of the Danes alone continuing two hundred and thirty,) and divided into
the Laws of the Mercians, called Marchen-leg, into the Laws of the Danes, Leg.
Edw. c. 1.
called Dane-leg, and into the Laws of the West- Saxons, called Westsaxon-leg.
This good King Edward, (for so the Recordors of that time call him) out of the
broken pieces of these Laws, chose twelve of the most learned men of the Law
within the Realm, to compile one entire complete Body of the Law, and
Customs of the Kingdom; charging them upon an Oath, that they should perform
it justly and truly, not turning to the right hand or to the left; Nihil
praetermittentes, nihil addentes, nihil mutantes, as the words of that Law are:
which they did accordingly; and that King Enacted it to be used commonly
throughout the whole Kingdom, from whence it had the appellation of the Common
Law; and not upon that ground given by a Member of the Commons-house, in the
beginning of this Parliament; Hen. Martin.
That Common Law was nothing, but Common Reason; and therefore he saw no cause
why a Gentleman in a short Cloak, might not declare what was the Law of the
Realm, as well as a Gentleman of the long Robe.

The words of my Author are these, Ex immensa legum congerie, quas Brittani,
Romani, Angli, Daci condiderunt, optima quaeque selegit, ac in unam coegit,
quam vocari voluit Communem Legem. These Laws and Customs are set down in
several Chapters vulgarly called, St. Edwards Laws, which are in substance the
same with our Magna Charta, and which the Kings of this Realm heretofore at
their Coronation swore chiefly to observe, Vet. N. bre. fol. 164. Juramentum
Regis. Leg. Edw. c. 17.
in these words; Praesertim Leges, consuetudines, and libertates a glorioso
Rege Edwardo, clero populoque concessas, as it is at large expressed in the
Oath of the King at his Coronation in the M. Charta, Printed Anno. Dom. 1656.
in the 17. Chapter of that Law, under the Title, de Officio Regis. The King of
England is styled, as in the days of Lucius, Vicarius summi Regis, the
Lieutenant of the highest King. The words of the Law run thus; Rex autem quia
Vicarius summi Regis est, ad hoc est constitutus, ut regnum terrenum and
populum Domini and super omnia sanctam Ecclesiam ejus regat, and ab injuriosis
defendat and maleficos ab ea quellet and destruat and penitus disperdat. These
Laws are much refined by King H. 1. the Conquerours Son surnamed Beauclerke;
but much more by H. 2. his grandchild, who wrote a book entitled, pro
Republica, Leges: of which there remains not any fragment at this day: only
the book of Glanvile Lord Chief Justice of England, and a Book called Regia
Majestas, both written in King H. 2. days, of the Customs of England, do both
of them make the Sovereign Power of the King of England to be immediately from
God.

King H. 2. compiled also an other Book, called Statuta Regalia, which to the
punishment of this Kingdom was unhappily lost. For by want of setting down the
particular Rights of the Crown, chiefly in the Laws of the Forest, most
grievous to the Subject, and over liberal to the Crown, by reason of those
great afforestations made by himself and his two Sons, Rich. 1. and King
John, grew those long bloody and rebellious Wars (for so do Historians call
them) of the Barons, lasting about sixty years in the days of King John and H.
3. Chapter de For. cap. 1. and 3.
for the settling and confirming the great Charter of Liberties, and the Charter
of the Forest, agreed unto by King John, in the 17. year of his Reign, and
Enacted by Parliament in the 9. year of H. 3. while he was in his minority; and
solemnly afterward confirmed in Parliament, when he was of full age. And yet
notwithstanding these Civil Wars, Bracton a learned Writer of the Law in
those troublesome days of H. 3. Stat. de Marle. cap. 5.
and a Judge of the Realm, and one that professes of himself, that he did
with exceeding labor and pains search out diligently antiqua Justorum
judicia, (for so he styles the Laws of England, the ancient judgments of the
just) does style H. 3. in the time of the Wars against him by his Barons,
according to the style given before to Edw. the Confessor, Vicarius Dei; His
words are these, Rex autem cum sit Dei Vicarius in terra, separare debet jus ab
injuria, aequum ab iniquo, ut omnes sibi subjecti honest vivant and nullus
alium laedat; Potentia omnibus sibi subjectis debet praecellere, etc. Which
words are in themselves a notable Confutation of those two seditious
distinctions, lately sprung up against the Crown of England, by some Divines
and worse Lawyers; That the King is the Supreme Person, but not the Supreme
Power. That he is, singulis major, but universis minor: whenas the words of
Bracton are full, That he has a Sovereign Power over all his Subjects
universally; and if so, then over them all, as they are united in one Body, as
over every singular person. But these two disloyal distinctions I shall have
occasion more particularly to refute, when I come to prove my fourth
Conclusion; and then I shall make them as irrational as they are illegal.

Britton, Brit. fol. 1.
another ancient Writer of the Laws of England, says thus of the King; That he
is ordained of God, that the Peace be kept, Co. 11. Rep. 72. Plow. f. 115.
and therefore he is called by latter Authorities, Gods Lieutenant, the
Fountain of Justice and of common Right, the most excellent Person in the
Realm, and to have the most excellent things that are in the Earth and in the
Sea.

By reason of this Ordination from God, F. N. br. 21. Plow. 234. Plow. 238.
Plow. 242, and 243. stat. 27. H. 8. c. 1. H. 7. 4. Plow. Dame Hales Case. Plow.
177. 1. H. 7. 10.
he is said in Law to have diverse divine resemblances; as ubiquity, to be
present in all his Courts, and in all places of his Kingdom; a kind of
Omnipotency in the Attributes of Justice and Mercy, distributing them to all
his People, whereupon he is counted in Law the Fountain of Justice and Mercy.
Nay he is reported by Plowden to be the chief Head of the Law, fol. 242, 243,
and 502. Immortality, in that he never dies, has no infancy, no folly, no
corruption of blood, etc. The King says Plowden, a learned and famous Author
of Law, is a name of continuance, which shall always endure, as Head and
Governor of the Commonwealth. Many more Authorities may be cited in this
nature, which for brevities sake I omit. I will only add one Authority more,
and conclude with it, because it fully proves my first Conclusion. Bracton in
his first Book, handling on purpose the Sovereign Power of the King, has
these words, Ipse autem Rex non debet esse sub homine, Bract. lib. 1. cap. 8.
sed sub Deo, A King (says he) ought not to be under man, but God; and he
gives a notable reason for it: For if the King should be dependant upon men,
those men must have an equal Power with the King, or a Superior Power; if an
equal, then the King should have no Power, for (says he) Par in parem
potestatem non habet, one equal has not jurisdiction over his Companion; if a
Superior Power, then should he be no King, but a Subject, and so without
Sovereignty. And therefore as a man expert in the Laws and Customs of the
Realm, he sets down the Constitution of the Crown of England that all are
subject to him, but he to none but only to God; Omnis sub eo, and ipse sub
nullo, nisi tantum sub Deo.

But it is here objected by the People: Ob.
It may be true that you say, that this is the Law of England concerning the
Sovereign Power of Kings; but how does it appear that this Law was not
imposed, or enforced upon the people? If you can prove it, say they (and so I
have heard some speak) that the people of England have assented to this Law,
God forbid that any should be so wicked as to oppose it, and so execrable as to
resist it, contrary to their own consent, but to trust God with the Issue and
event of things in whose power it is alone to loose the bond of Kings, and gird
their loins with a girdle (as Job speaks) and who will punish their faults
the more severely, Ser. Dr Jo. Burgess 19. Junii at Hampton Court. An. D. 1604.
because none can do it but he: as a learned and pious Preacher spoke before
King James in the behalf of all the Nonconforming Ministers then in the
Kingdom, the very next year after the conference at Hampton Court.



England, and this their assent openly expressed and declared by diverse Acts of
Parliament.

For the proof whereof I shall make good these two things.

1. That the People of England have assented to this Law by a tacit and
employed assent.

2. By an open and manifest assent in sundry Acts of Parliament.

As concerning the first, it is to be known that the People of this Realm are
Governed by three kinds of Law.

1. Common Law. 2. Customs. 3. Statute Law, or Acts of Parliament.
Common Law, which stands upon diverse ancient Maxims, and Principles of Law
admitted and consented to by the people.

Customs, which are either generally allowed throughout the Kingdom, as
Gavelkind, Borough-English, Copyhold, etc. or by prescription in certain
Counties, and Towns, which are likewise incorporated into the Body of the
Common Law upon this Maxim, Consuetudo ex rationabili causa facit Jus. Now
these two Laws do much exceed that which we call Statute Law, as being more
constant and fixed, less mutable, and more incorrupt; as might abundantly be
proved, were it incident to the point in Question. It is by this Common Law,
before any Statute was made, that the Crown of England is not dependent on any
other than God alone (this kind of Independancy the Law does allow, but not some
other:) I say, by the Common Law, which has this Privilege above all humane
Laws, (the Laws of the Grecians and Romans not excepted) That no man could
ever stand up, and say, that he was the first Lawgiver to this Nation, (like
Lycurgus and Solon amongst the Greeks, Papirius and Sempronius amongst the
Romans:) For neither did the King make his own Prerogative, nor the Judges the
Rules and Grounds of Law; nor did the people prescribe unto themselves their
own Rights and Liberties; but what Liberties and Customs had been by long
tract of time assented unto, approved and enjoyed by Prince and People, not
disagreeing to the Laws of God, that ever was, and is still, the Common Law:
Amongst which Liberties and Customs, this of the Sovereignty of Kings from God
over the people, is by Glanvile, Bracton, and the Mirror of Justices, (a Book
treating of the Customs of England before the Conquest) made to be one.

2. I will now come to the second thing, and prove this Sovereign Power of the
Crown immediately from God, to be expressly and openly assented to by the people
in sundry Acts of Parliament.

I will first begin with the Act of Parliament of 16. Rich. 2. c. 5. 16. Rich.
2. c. 5.
because it took its rise from the humble desires of the Commons of England, as
appears by the Preamble of that Statute, wherein they all make an
acknowledgment in these very words, That the Crown of England has been so free
at all times, that it has been in no earthly subjection, but immediately
subject to God in all things touchin the Regality of the said Crown, and to no
other. And so was it accordingly enacted by the Statute of 25. Hen. 8. 25. Hen.
8. c. 31.
All the Commons of England (at whose humble suite that Law was made) do there
declare it for a Maxim and Ground of Law, That the Realm of England recognizeth
no Superior under God but only the King. Which authority also the whole Clergy
of England recognized in their Synods and Convocations, as appears by that
Statute.

But in the Parliament of 28. Hen. 8. 28. Hen. 8. c. 10.
there is a more full expression, where it is declared by the whole Parliament,
That the Kings Majesty is the only Supreme Head of the Realm of England, and
that this Right, Honor and Pre-eminence is due unto him by the Law of God. And
in this manner did the Crown of England sit upon the Head of Kings Hen. 8. and
King Edw. his Son, 1. and 2. P. and M. c. 3.
till Queen Mary, loving the Popes Crown better than her own, repealed some of
this power, and placed it in the Pope, which Queen Elizabeth in the first year
of her Reign took away, 1. Eliz. c. 1.
and restored it in the same plight as it was in the days of her Father King
Hen. 8. only changing but a word, Supreme Governor for Supreme Head; the same
in substance, though a fitter expression in regard of the Honor she bare to
her Savior, to whom she thought the title of Supreme Head, in respect of the
Church, more properly to belong; Whereupon she altered the two Oaths that were
made in Parliament An. 26, 26. Hen. 8. c. 1.
and 28. of the Reign of her Father, to the Oath that now is taken throughout
the Kingdom, and which every Parliament is to take, 28. Hen. 8. 10.
by the Statute of 5 Eliz. 5. Eliz. c. 1.
ere he can sit in the House of Commons, or have a vote there. As namely, That
our Sovereign Lord King Charles, is the only Supreme Governor of this his
Realm, and of all other his Highness Dominions and Countries, 1. Eliz. c. 1.
as well in all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical things or causes as Temporal, etc.
Which general words touching the Kings Supreamacy, are now to be expounded by
those Statutes of Hen. 8. which I mentioned before, and do contain within them
these three Properties;

1. That the Kings Supreme Power is immediately from God.

2. That the Realm of England has no Superior under God (whether they be any
or many persons, for the word Superior includes both) but only the King.

3. That this Honor and Pre-eminence of the King, is due unto him by the Law
of God.

And that this is no exposition of mine, but the true genuine exposition of
Law, It is provided by the Statute of 5 Eliz. 5. Eliz. c. 1.
that the Oath of Supreamacy made in the first year of Queen Eliz. shall be
taken and expounded in such form as is set forth in An Admonition annexed to
the Queen Mary's Injunctions published in the first year of her Majesty's
Reign: That is to say, to confess and acknowledge in her Majesty, her Heirs
and Successors, none other Authority than was challenged and lately used by
the Noble King Hen. 8. and King Edw. 6. And that Authority, together with all
Dignities, Regalities, and Preheminences belonging to the Crown of England, are
by the Statute of Recognition of 1 Eliz. c. 3. 1. Eliz. c. 3.
declared to be as rightfully and entirely Vested in her, as they were in the
late King Hen. 8. and King Edw. 6. as by that Statute may at large appear: Some
of which Regalities were, that the Crown is dependent on God alone, and subject
to no Superior under him; And this to be due to him by the Law of God.

I might add more Statutes to prove this point: I will only conclude with one
Statute more, enacted within my own remembrance, and the best in that kind that
ever was made in my days, and the most emphatically penned. It is the Statute
of Recognition made in the first year of King James by the whole Parliament, 1.
Jac. cap. 1.
which I will write more largely, because there are many memorable things in it.

First, They acknowledge the blessing of God upon this Kingdom, in the Unions
of the Houses of York and Lancaster, especially of the two Kingdoms England
and Scotland, under King James, and thereby free from bloody civil wars.

Next, They testify their unspeakable joy for his Majesty's most happy
Inauguration and Coronation.

Then they agnize upon the knees of their hearts (it is their own expression)
their most constant faith, obedience and loyalty to his Majesty, and his Royal
Progeny (of which our now Sovereign Lord King Charles, was then an Infant about
three years old.)

Afterward, in most lowly and humble manner, they beseech his most excellent
Majesty, That (as a memorial to all Posterity amongst the Records of his High
Court of Parliament for ever to endure, of their loyalty, obedience, and hearty
and humble affection,) it might be publicly declared and enacted in the High
Court of Parliament; That they (being bounden thereunto by the Laws of God and
man) did with unspeakable joy, recognize and acknowledge, that immediately upon
the decease of Queen Elizabeth, the Imperial Crown of the Realm of England, and
the Rights belonging to the same, (of which this point of the Sovereignty of
the Crown from God was a principal one,) did by inherent Birthright and lawful
succession, descend and come to his most excellent Majesty, as next and sole
Heir of the Blood Royal of this Realm. And to this Recognition we do (say they)
must humbly and faithfully submit and obleige our selves and Posterities for
ever, until the last drop of our blood be spent. And we do beseech your
Majesty to accept the same, as the first fruits in this High Court of
Parliament, of our Loyalty and faith to your Majesty, and to your Royal
Progeny and Posterity for ever. And in the conclusion of the Act, they have
these words; Which if your Majesty shall be pleased (as an argument of your
gracious acceptance) to adorn with your Majesty's Royal assent (without
which it can neither be complete nor perfect; nor remain to all Posterity,
according to our most humble desires, as a memorial of your Princely and
tender affection toward us) we shall add this also to the rest of your
Majesty's unspeakable and unestimable benefits.

In which Statute these things are observable:

1. That this Act of Parliament does not give any manner of Title to the King
or his Posterity, to the Crown of England, but this Right and Title to the
Crown, is expressly said to be by the Laws of God and man, by inherent
birthright, and lawful sugcession: And therefore they humbly desire, this
their Recognition may be accepted of him, as a testimony of their constant
faith and Loyalty to him and his Posterity for ever.

2. They do not subject the Crown of England to any forefeiture to the people,
or to any conditional Limitation in Government, by way of preservation of
Religion, Laws, Liberties, etc. but leave it pure and free according to the
Laws I cited before, without any condition, which the wisdom of the Law does
not admit of; as I shall more fully show in the proof of my fourth Conclusion.

3. As they put no conditions upon the Crown, so they put no conditions upon
their own Obedience and Loyalty, but freely and absolutely oblige themselves
and their posterities for ever, to this their Recognition to King James, and
King Charles his Son, and to their Posterity, to the spending of the last
drop of their bloods.

4. Though the two Houses of Lords and Commons, with one unanimous consent
(nullo contradicente) agreed upon this Act of Parliament, and though it was for
the public peace and tranquillity of King and People, yet they acknowledged
that it was not complete or perfect, or could remain as a Law to Posterity,
unless the King did give his Royal assent to it. The new light and new Law of
making Laws in Parliament, binding to the people, without the Royal Assent,
were not known to this Parliament, though as wise and as learned men were of
it, as ever were either before or since.

5. That though it was an Act of public concernement, yet they do not desire
the King should pass it out of duty, which he could neither will nor choose (as
the late Language has been) but that he would pass it as an Act of his grace
and ten der affection to them; And what is of grace is not of duty and right.

They lastly desire, it may remain amongst the Records of Parliament, as a
memorial to all posterity for ever to endure, of the Loyalty and Obedience of
them and their Posterity, to that King and his Progeny for ever; And how this
Recognition, according to this Obligation, has been observed by them and their
Children; to that King and his Posterity, I had much rather weep, than speak in
it: The Lord of Heaven add it not to that measure of iniquity in this
Kingdom, pressed down and running over with blood.

And as this is the Law of the Kingdom of England, concerning this Sovereign
Power in the Crown; So it is the Divinity of the Kingdom, as may appear by
the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the 37. Article of Religion, in these
words; The Queens Majesty has the chief Power in this Realm of England, and
other her Dominions, unto whom the chief Government of all Estates of this
Realm, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all Causes does
appertain. By which the King of England is made to have the chief Power,
against that seditious and newfound distinction infused into the head of the
People, by some as ignorant of Religion as of Law: That the King of England is
the Supreme Person or Governor, but not the Supreme Power.

I will shut up all I have more to say upon this Point, King James Remonstrance
against Card. Peron.
with the only Authority of King James in his most learned Defense for the
Right of Kings, against Cardinal Peron; wherein he unanswerably handles this
Point against Bellarmine, Mariana, and other Jesuits; and against some
Protestants (whetting their Swords against Kings at the forge of those
Philistims:) Of which exquisite Piece I may say with Solomon upon another
Subject, What can the man do, Eccles. 2.12.
that comes after the King.

My third Conclusion is this; That

The Person of the King is by Law made up of two bodies, A natural body,
subject to Infancy, infirmity, sickness and death, And a politic body,
perfect, powerful, and perpetual: These two bodies are inseparably and
individedly united together, and consolidate in each other. Plow. Duchy of
Lanchasters Case. 2 13.
Corpus corporatum (says the Law) in Corpore naturali, and Corpus natural in
Corpore corporato; So that you may distinguish them, but not divide them. This
union is like that between the Soul and the Body; The Soul it animates, it
quickens, it beautifies the body; so this politic body dignifies, or (rather
to speak in a Law-phrase) it magnifies the natural body of the King, Plow. 213.
by greatning it with a threefold greatness.

1. Of Perfection. 2. Of Power. 3. Of Majesty.
1. Of Perfection, By freeing the person of the King from infancy, folly,
infirmity, impotency, etc.

2. Of Power, By giving him a command over all his Subjects, and by Ruling and
Governing them, and and not they him.

3. Of Majesty, By making him the Fountain of all Honor, of all Justice, and
of all Mercy within the Realm.

Three the most orient and flagrant flowers of the Crown, and which no Subject
can challenge; for all Subjects put together, are but as the Trunk of the body
in man to the Head, which without the Head, can no more Rule and Govern the
Members of the body in Order and Honor, than the least finger or toe; And
therefore if they should all presume to join without the King, to confer
Honor, Justice, or Mercy upon any of their Fellow Subjects, that Honor is
accounted in Law but a Tumor, the Justice they should distribute is but
Tyranny, and the Mercy they bestow is but a specious Injury. A notable Case in
proof of this, is that of King Hen. 7. who when he was Earl of Richmond, was
with many Lords and Commons that took his part against Rich. the 3d (a King in
fact, but a Tyrant in Title, says a learned Historian) attainted of
High Treason in the days of that King. At the battle of Redmore-downe, Bal.
Hist. Hen. 7. fol. 1.
near Bosworth in Leichestershire, on the 22. day of Aug. 1485. the Earl got
the Victory, slew Rich. 3. in the field, and on the same day took the Crown
upon him, and assumed the style of a King; and in September following (and
before his Coronation) summoned a Parliament to begin the 7. day of November
following.

On the first day of this Parliament, the Judges were all met together in the
Exchecker Chamber, to resolve a very rare and perplexed Case, and such as had
not happened since the Conquest, 1. Hen. 7. fol. 4, 6.
viz. What should be done about the reversall of the Attainders of the King,
and of diverse Lords, and many Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses that were to sit
in Parliament that day. This Question (the Kingdom at that time being in such
exigence) had been of no difficulty, if those learned Judges had been Conusant
of any such Law, That an Ordinance of the two Houses without the Kings actual
assent, had been as effectual as an Act of Parliament. But neither they nor
their Fathers ever heard or read of such Law, and therefore they fell upon this
Resolution; That as concerning the Lords and Commons that were attainted, they
advised not to sit in Parliament, till an Act of Parliament was passed by the
other Lords and Commons not attainted, and assented to by the King for the
reversall of those Attainders, and after the reversall, then all of them to sit
in the Houses; For that it was not convenient, that any should sit as Judges in
those Houses that were attainted. And as concerning the King they thus Resolved
(says my Author) That the Crown takes away all defects and stops in blood,
Bac. Hist. H. 7. p. 13.
and that from the time the King did assume the Crown, the Fountain was
cleared, and all attainders and corruption of blood discharged. But yet for
honors sake it was Ordered by Parliament; That all Records wherein there was
any memory or mention of the Kings Attainder, should be defaced, cancelled, and
taken off the File. But King Hen. 7. thought it not convenient any Act of
reversall should in any wise pass concerning him, as knowing that the Title to
the Crown of England had its dependence on God and the Law, and not on the
people; And therefore the grace of pardoning such Offenders as took up arms
against him, being an Act of Mercy belonging to the Crown, he would not pass by
Parliament, that thereby he might the better impropriate the thanks to himself:
And published his Royal Proclamation to that purpose in that Parliament;
likewise he did of himself and of his own grace confer the Honors of the
Lord Brook to Sr. Rob. Willoughby, of Lord Dawbeny, to Sr. Giles Dawbeny, and
of the Earl of Bath, to the Lord Chandos, without the assent of Parliament.

Thus have I by this one single Case, without need of adding any more, fully
proved, that by the accession of the Crown to the natural body of the King,
his Royal Person partakes of many, high pre-eminences of Perfection, Power and
Majesty, in the Acts of Justice, Mercy, and Honor (without any dependence or
contribution from his people,) by calling of Parliaments, by pardoning
Offenders, and advancements in Nobility, all of them Acts of Majesty and
Sovereign Power.

This Conjunction of the Office of the King with his natural body, does draw
to the Person of the King, the Obedience and Ligeance of all his Subjects. 7.
Rep. Calvin's Case.
Now Ligeance is nothing else in Law but the true and faithful obedience of a
Liege-man, and Subject to his Liege-Lord and Sovereign. Not that Ligeance is
only tied to the Kingly Office, without relation to the natural Person of the
King, which was the traitorous and seditious distinction of Hugh Spencer the
younger; for which and other his Treasons he was condemned by two several Acts
of Parliament; Vide Stat. in Vet. M. Chapter 1556.
the one called Exilium Hugonis de Spencer, the other 1. Edw. 3. cap. 1. For by
this damnable Doctrine (for so the Law calls it in Calvin's Case) if the King
should not be thought by his Subjects to Govern according to his Kingly
Office, 1. E. 3. c. 1.
the Subject is no longer tied to obedience, but may rise up in arms against
him, which cuts in sunder all the bonds of Government, as well in Families as
in the Commonwealth. And so Children may rise up against their Parents,
Servants against their Masters, Wives against their Husbands, and plead for
themselves the ill government of their Superiors; and so parties shall become
Judges, and Subjects Sovereigns, and the world by this means turned into a
worse estate than the first Chaos.

But the Law of England, which is a Law of order and decency, and not of
confusion and deformity, is quite otherwise: for the Ligeance of the Subject is
tied principally and properly to the natural body of the King, susteyning and
supporting the Royal Majesty, and in which it does inseparably inhere, as in
its proper Subject. For Ligeance being a corporeal Service, is to be done to a
visible, corporeal, and local Person; not to a thing invisible, incorporeall,
and not circumscribed to any place (as is the Royal Dignity.) This appears
plainly by the old Oath of Allegiance, taken by all the Kings Subjects, above
the age of twelve years, in the days of King Edw. 1. and long before, and is
at this day given in Court-Leets, which being by Britton set down in
Law-French, Brit. fol. 74.
I will truly set down in English, You A. B. shall swear that you shall be
faithful and Loyal to our Lord King Edward, (at this day King Charles) and
his Heirs, and faith and Loyalty you shall to him hear of life and member, and
of earthly Honor, and you shall not know of any hurt or damage to be done to
him, which you shall not resist to your Power; So help you God. By which Oath
it appears plainly, that Ligeance is a corporeal service, whereby the Body,
Life, and Honor of the Liege Subject, is engaged to his Sovereign, named by
his proper name King Charles, a name given to his natural body, capable of
Baptism only (and to his Heirs) words proper to his natural body, as the
word (Successor) to his body politic (and for the preservation of his Person
from all hurt and damage) things incident only to his natural body, for his
politic capacity, viz. his Kingly Office is incapable of beating, wounding,
killing, or any other hurt, being a thing invisible, incorporeall, impassible.
Hence it is that the Ligeance of an English Subject is called natural
Ligeance, and the King is called his natural Liege Lord, insomuch as to
compass the death of the King, or to levy War against him, which are acts of
violence against his natural Person, are in all Inditements of High Treason,
Call. Case. 7. Rep.
said to be done, contra ligeantiae suae debitum, against the duty and bond of
Allegiance. This old Oath of Allegiance, is by the Steward of Leets to be
tendered to all men of the age of twelve years and upwards, upon a Fine to be
laid on his head, 43. E. 3. fol. 27.
that shall refuse it; and Pledges to be found for him, that he be of the good
behavior; Which Law was so strictly observed in the days of King Edw. 3. 1.
E. 3. fol. 26.
that a Master for reteyning a man in his service, not being sworn to the
King, was presensented for it in the Leet, and Amerced. By this excellent Law
in Court- Leets, this Realm was kept in such tranquillity and peace by King
Alfred, (for so ancient are these Courts) that this King caused chains of Gold
to be hanged up in the high ways, and none durst take them away. The words of
my Author are these, Guliel. lib. 1. de Reg. Ang
Armillas aureas juberet suspendi quae viantium aviditatem irritarent, dum non
essent qui eas abriperent. Which is the more to be credited, in that it does
appear, that stealing and theeving were so rare in this Kingdom in those
times, That the punishment of theft was not made capital till above 200 years
after, to wit, in the third year of the Reign of King Edw. 1. West. 1. c. 15.
Which Court Leets had they been to this day duly kept by men learned in the
Laws of the Realm, as they ought to have been, (for so are the words of Fleta,
Fleta. lib. 2. cap. 6. Co. 9. rep. 48. b. 6. rep. Bulleus Case. fol. 77.
Provideat sibi dominus de senescallo fideli, etc. qui in legibus and sub
consuetudinibus provinciae, and jura domini sui in omnibus tueri affectet,
quique Ballivos Domini in suis erroribus and ambiguis sciat instruere, etc.)
And not turned over to Sollicitors, Proctors, Serving-men, etc. as at this day
(by which means scarce a shadow of the ancient Jurisdiction of this Court does
remain) this Kingdom had not so often and inwardly bled, by many bloody civil
Wars, to the endangering of the Commonwealth: Like as it is to the natural
body of man, when the blood falls into the body extra vasa, and keeps not in the
proper veins, as Physicians observe.

This faith and Ligeance to the Royal Person of the King, so adorned with
Honor and Majesty by the Common Law, does leave as natural an impression of
duty and Loyalty in a true born Subject to his Prince, as it does in the heart
of a Child to his Father, or of a Servant to his Master. For the Commandment
of Honor thy Father and thy Mother, etc. does belong unto Kings, and was ever
so expounded, or else it is no where to be found in the Decalogue. Now the
subjection of Children and Servants, is to Parents and Masters, whether good or
bad; and so the Apostle Peter declares the Law, not only (says he) to the good
and gentle, but also to the froward: 1. Pet. 2.17.
for this is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience sake toward God, 1 Pet.
2.18.
endure grief, suffering wrongfully. And the like subjection is to Kings,
whether good or bad, in the judgment of the best Expositors that ever wrote
upon the 13. Chapter to the Romans. This made Hubert De Sancta Clara, receive
the Arrow shot against King Hen. 2. into his own bosom, to save the life of
his Liege Lord: and this made Tho. Howard Earl of Surrey, son to John Duke of
Norfolk, to fight stoutly for King Rich. the 3. (as horrid a Tyrant as ever
trod on English mould) against King Hen. 7. and being asked the reason by the
King, he answered, ( That Rich. 3. was then his Crowned King, and did he see
the Crown set upon the stump of a Thorn, (a fit resemblance for the King he
fought for) he would fight for that stump, and so he would fight for King Hen.
7. now he was his King, which he valiantly performed to his Son King Henry
the 8, at the battle of Flodden-field.

And although amongst the multiplicity of new Sects that are sprung up at this
day, the traitorous opinion of the said Hugh Spencer be revived (if Treason may
be called a Sect,) That the Allegiance of the Subject, is only tied to the
Office of the King, not to his Person; yet there was none that ever I could
hear or read of, pleaded this Plea at their arreignment for Treason. But the
ordinary and common excuse has been, of the persons Indicted, that they never
intended hurt to the Kings Person, but only to remove evil Counselors from
him, or the like, which were the pleas of the two Earls of E. and S. in the
latter days of Queen Eliz. and yet adjudged to be High Treason. Hill. 43.
Eliz. Co. 3. Insti. p. 12.
But the reason is not reported by Sr Edw. Cook, who cites the case in the 3d
part of his Institutes. But by a private report which I have seen, was thus
delivered by Sr John Popham Chief Justice, That the Law construeth Treasons by
Acts, and by those Acts judges of Intents, and the levying of War by them
without the Kings assent, Glan. lib. 1. cap. 2. Bract. lib. 3. fol. 1. Co 3.
Insti. p. 9.
being a sortious Act at the first, (for that no Subject can levy War within
the Realm without authority from the King;) That the levying a War to remove a
Counselor of State, is to levy War against the King, and so High Treason.
For what did let but that the same violence which prevailed to remove the
Counselor, might have prevailed, if not only to have removed, but to have
imprisoned, deposed, and destroyed the Queen, being all of them Acts of High
Treason.

I will conclude all with a story of old Father Latimer, told by him touching
the Lord Darcy, the Lord Hussy, and Sr Robert Constable, Lat. Sermon at
Stanford. fol 56. Edit. 1635.
presently after the Rebellion in the North, temp. H. 8. I will barely relate
it in the words of that godly Bishop and renowned Martyr, and leave the
application of it to others.

I will go further with you, I have traveled in the Tower my self by the Kings
Commandment, and the Counsel, and their was Sr Robert Constable, the Lord
Hussy, and the Lord Darcy; and the Lord Darcy was telling me of the faithful
service he had done the Kings Majesty, that dead is. If I had seen my Sovereign
Lord in the field, (says he) and seeing his Grace coming against us, I would
have lighted from my horse, and taken my sword by the point, and yielded it
into his Graces hands. Mary (quoth I) in the mean time, you played not the part
of a faithful Subject, in holding with the people in a commotion and
disturbance. It has been the craft of all Traitors to pretend nothing against
the Kings Person; they never pretend the matter to the King, but to others. But
Subjects ought not to resist any Magistrates, nor ought to do any thing
contrary to the Kings Laws.

That this Sovereign Power is over all the Subjects of England, as well in a
Collective Body as Representative, as it is over every particular Subject.

I have before showed the Nature and Constitution of a King of England; I shall
now show the Universality of his Power. And because in this last and worst age
of the world, there is some opposition against this by the common people, who
delight in change, by parting with truth for error, and receiving error for
truth, from a New-Light, proceeding from the old Prince of Darkness: I will
therefore in the first place Explain this Conclusion. Secondly, I will show
what the Law of the Land, and the Constitution of the Kingdom is in it.
Thirdly, I will show the Reasons of the Law in the same. Fourthly, I will
Answer all Objections against it.

For the first, It is not questioned by any, but that the King has a Sovereign
Power over every particular Subject, and therefore I will pass over that. But
question is made, whether the King has a Sovereign Power over all the people
in a collective Body, congregated together in one place from each corner of the
Land, from Dan to Beershebah, Judges 20.1.
as the Israelites were in Mispeh; which I say he has; and that they all put
together, are but this Politic Body, of which he is Head, and therefore has
the Sovereign Power over it, as the Head has over the Natural Body, and not
that a Power over the Head: for then should the Head be the only Subject in the
Kingdom, and the People Sovereigns. The like I say for the Representative Body
of the People, which is nothing else in Law, but a calling by the Kings Writ,
of all the Nobility and People of the Land represented in Parliament, by
certain Heads of the People, chosen by them upon their own free Elections;
(otherwise it is no Representative Body, as appears by the Statute of 1 Jac. c.
1. 1 Jac. c. 1.
and is there so explained.) Over this Representative Body, distinguished into
two Houses of Lords and Commons, Co. 3. Insti. fol. 3. D. and Stud. fol. 43.6.
the King has likewise a Sovereign Power, being called in Law Caput
Parliamenti.

Which Conclusion thus Explained, I shall in the next place prove by the Law
and constitution of this Kingdom, That the King has a Sovereign Power over the
whole Body of the People, as well collective, as representative.

Two Greek words for the Name King, do aptly express the Nature of it in our
Law; asileu, Co. 4. rep. in praef.
so was our King Edgar called Anglorum Basileus, quasi asi to la, the
foundation or support of the people. And Homer calls the King, poimen laon, the
Shepherd of the people. He is not Head of a particular man, but of a whole
people; He is not Shepherd of a single sheep, but of a whole Flock. And
therefore he is called in our Law, not the Head of one man, but of the whole
Commonwealth. 1 H. 7.10^
And so much does the King intimate, derived from the Dutch Koennen, signifiing
Power, because his Power extends over all his People. Bracton declares it more
fully and exactly, by handling it on purpose in the 8th Chapter of his first
Book, where having showed the Reason of the Kings Superiority over his
Subjects, he then positively declares the Constitution of the Kingdom in these
words; Sunt sub Rege (says he) liberi homines, etc. reckoning up there the
Degrees of all the Subjects, both Lords and Commons; and then adds these
words; Et omnis sub eo, and ipse sub nullo, tantum sub Deo. There are (says
he) under the King Freemen of all sorts, Bract. l. 1. c. 8.
both Lords and Commons, and all under him, and he under none, but only under
God. Omnis and Nullus, are in Schools called, signa universalitatis,
comprehending the whole Species of men collectively, as well as every singular
Individuum: and so is it there necessarily so understood. For having reckoned
up before the heads of the mixed people, he concludes, Omnis sub eo, ipse sub
nullo; which is to say, That all of these are under the King, and he not under
them: And then presently raises an Objection, which is made at this day. If
the King be over all his people, and he in no case under them, in case then
that the King deny to do this people justice, he presently makes this answer,
Locus erit supplicatoni quod facta sua corrigat and emendet; quod si non
fecerit, satis sufficit ei ad paenam, quod dominum expectet ultorem: That is,
you must Petition the King to amend his faults, which if he shall not do, it is
a sufficient punishment to him, that God will be revenged on him. The like he
speaks in another place: Rex omnes potentia praecellit, etc. Bract. lib. 2.
cap. 9.
The King exceeds all people in Power; But yet (says he) his heart is in the
hand of God, least that power should prove Tyrannical. So by the Oath of
Supremacy, the King is said to be the only Supreme Governor within his
Dominions, in all Causes, 1 Eliz. cap. 1.
etc. without exception, which particle Only, excludes all coordinate power
with him by his Subjects, much more a Superior Power. And Exclusio firmat
regulam in non exceptis, as they say in Schools, The 37th Article of Religion
is more fully confirmed for Law, by the Statute in the 13. year of Eliz. which
says; The King has the chiefest Power in this Realm of England, Art. 37.13.
Eliz. cap. 12.
unto whom the chief Government of all Estates of this Realm does appertain,
etc. which is as much to say, as that he has the chief Government of all the
people of the Realm, whether in a collective or representative body, comprised
under the Estates of Nobility, Gentry, and Commons. This made Sr. John Markham,
Lord Chief Justice of England tell King. 1 Hen. 7.4.
Edw. the 4. that he could not Arrest any man for suspicion of Treason or
Felony, as any of his Subjects might, because that if he did any of his
Subjects wrong, they could have no Action against him, in that all original
writts are in the Kings name and he cannot sue himself. But a fuller proof for
the Law, and constitution of the Kingdom in this point, is the Statute of 24.
Hen. 8. cap. 2. 24. Hen. 8. c. 12
where the Realm of England is acknowledged to be an Empire, and so has been
accepted in the world, governed by one Supreme Head and King, having the
dignity and Royal estate of the Imperial Crown of the same, unto whom a body
politic, compact of all sorts of people, divided in terms by names of
spiritually and temporalty, been bounden over to bear next to God a natural
and humble obedience; where it is showed.

1. that England is an Empire, and so was King Edgar styled, Totius Angliae
imperator: And Empire and Emperors hold their Tenure next under God; Colimus
imperatorem tanquam a Deo secundum, and solo Deo minorem, says Tertullian. Co.
4. rep in Praefat. ex Chart. Edgard. Tertul. ad Scap.


2. That the King of England is head, not of single people, but of a body
Politic, Collective of all sorts of people; Representative, of degrees of
people, the terms of spiritualty and temporalty.

3. That this Collective and Representative body, do owe to the King as a debt,
a duty, not a courtesy, all natural and humble obedience without putting
conditions on it.

Hence it is that the two Houses of Parliament, being the Representative body
of the Kingdom, do in their Bills of Parliament tendered to the King, 1. Eliz.
cap. 4. 1. Jac. c. 1. 2. Jac. c. 2.
style themselves sometimes, your most humble, faithful, and obedient
Subjects; sometimes, your most humble and loyal Subjects; and sometimes, your
most loyal, faithful, and true-hearted Subjects. And it is impossible, most
humble, faithful, obedient, loyal, and true-hearted Subjects, should have a
coercive, coactive, and punitive power, over their Liege-Lord. With this Law
the prayers of the Church of England do agree, established by three several
Acts of Parliament, and used in the times of four Princes, King Edw. 6. Queen
Eliz. King James, and King Charles; by which the Ministers of England, in
behalf of all the people do acknowledge, that God is the King of Kings, and the
only Ruler of Princes; that King Charles is their gracious Lord and Sovereign;
And that having Gods authority, they prayed that they may faithfully serve,
honor, and humbly obey him; that God would endue him plenteously with heavenly
gifts; that he would grant him in health and wealth long to live, strengthen
him to vanquish and overcome all his enemies, and after this life attain
everlasting joy and felicity. And I am peaswaded, That if these Prayers for the
King, and that of the House of Commons by their Speaker (that God would so
unite the hearts of King and People, that they might never be divided,) had
been still used, we had not seen such miserable days. But the fullest of all
and unto which I will add no more authorities, is the positive Doctrine of the
whole Church of England, confirmed by Act of Parliament, in these words, 3 Hom.
of obedience. Artic. of Rel. 35. Stat. 13. Eliz. cap. 12.
This is Gods Ordinance, Gods Commandment, and Gods holy will; That the whole
body of every Realm, and all the parts and members of the same, shall be
subject to their Head, their King.

And though this Law so universally consented to, and not disagreeing with
Right and Justice, is a sufficient ground to cause every good man to believe
and obey it, according to that of the Poet, Vir bonus est quis?
Qui consulta patrum, leges qui juraque servat.
Yet I will in the next place give some Reasons for it.

Sun rules the day; the government which God instituted in Paradise, when he
created Adam, making him a Man and a King at once, giving him the Command over
all creatures, especially his own family, in which the Kingship continued in
him, and the Primogeniture of his Family for above 2000 years; So that Kingly
Government, and that of Families, having their original together, differ not
in nature but in extent (Kingship being nothing else but an orderly rule over
multiplied families, under one governor in chief) Now the Law of England being
34. Hen. 6.40. 12 Hen. 8. 2. ^ol. 7. Hen. 8. Ket. rep. D. and St. cap. 6.
founded on the Law of God, resembles the Sovereign Power over Subjects like
that of families; and therefore the King of England is called in our Books of
Law, 11 Rep. f. 20.
Parens patriae and paterfamilias totius regni; the father of all his Subjects,
and the whole Kingdom to be but the family, of which he is the Head. And
therefore what the blessed Apostle observes of his Israel, I may observe the
same of our England, We have had (says he) the Fathers of our flesh correcting
us, Heb. 12.9.
and (instead of resisting) we gave them reverence; But who ever saw children
beating their parents, but with horror and amazement: the like may be said of
Subjects fighting, beating, and deposing their Kings; And howsoever by the
judgment of God, and as a plague upon this Kingdom, such abominable Acts have
been done by Parliaments, witness those tragic examples of the two second
Kings of their name, Edward and Richard, colored under a misshapen form of Law,
by two traitorous and perjured Judges of the Realm, Trussell and Thirning,
(the worst of their name, and the indelible steine of their profession) yet
what became of the prime Actors in that bloody scene, and how God revenged the
blood of those Kings upon the whole Kingdom, I refer my Reader to the
learned Pen of the most famous Historian of our time, (...) W. Raul. Praf.
for a large and exact relation of so sad and bad a story.

11 Rep. f 20. Hen. 7.
esteeming him the Head of the Law, and the Fountain of Justice, and calling
him Capitalis Justiciarius totius Angliae; Now both Law and Justice, should ill
provide for the King, if they should leave him to the correction and punishment
of his own Subjects; For then it would be impossible for him to be safe,
whether good or bad; Nay good Princes would hereby be in the worst condition.
For this being true, that far the greater part of the people are wicked, and
wicked people do naturally hate good Princes, even for their goodness, (as
David, a King and a good King speaks of himself, Psalm. 38.20. They also that
render evil for good are my adversaries, because I follow the thing that good
is,) it will consequently follow, that good Princes are in the worst condition,
if it should be in the Power of the people to punish them. For it has been
found true in all ages, that the best of Princes have had the most rebellions
against them: Infinite examples might be produced, I shall name but two or
three. David we know was a King after Gods own heart, and yet as good as he
was, he was not free from many treasons and rebellions against him; Whereas of
Manasses a most wicked and Idolatrous King, and who Reigned much longer, we
read not so much as of on treason or rebellion against him all his long Reign
of five and fifty years, My next instance shall be nearer home; Those two
matchless Princes for piety and virtue, children of one Father, King Edward,
and Queen Elizabeth, scarce a year in either of their Reigns passed over their
heads without some treason, rebellion, or insurrection, plotted or acted
against them by their own Subjects. And for this cause it is that the Law has
left the King to the judgment of the highest judge. For if the Subject should
judge him, it must be by some process of Law, which is altogether in the Kings
name, and it is absurd to think, that the King can either sue or judge himself.
And therefore in the Writ of Assize of Darreyn Praesentment, Fitz. not. brev.
31. F.
which in the case of the Subject runs thus; Rex Vicecom'. etc. salutem, si
A. fecerit te securum, etc. tunc sumon'. per bonos Cummonitis, etc. But in the
Kings case, the words si, etc. fecerit te securum, are left out, in that the
King, for the dignity of his person, cannot find pledges, for then he might be
amerced or punished for want of them, which is against the nature of royal
Majesty: Besides how is it possible the King should be tried, he having no
Peers, when all Trial in Law is per paeres, Bracton.
Monarchy and Peers being as incompatible and inconsistent as order and
confusion.

nature of the people, impatient of the yoke, and apt to quarrel with
government, be it never so good, Plutarch.
Omni enim populo inest malignum quiddam and querulum in imperantes: And
therefore it is that the Law of England has exalted the Thrones of Kings above
the reach of the people, and submitted them to God: And it is for the benefit
and safety of the people it should be so, Co. Instit. 1. part f. 64.
Imperii majestas est tutelae salus (says the Law) the dignity of the Prince
is the peoples security; And so it has fallen out in all ages, that so long as
the people upheld the Majesty of the King, so long they have been happy; But as
soon as they forsook it, they themselves have been crushed to pieces under the
fall. So it fell out at Athens, one of the most flourishing Commonwealths in
the world: The people weary of the Government of their hereditary Kings, first
expelled them, and then set up Decennimicall Governors in their rooms; After
that their Olygarchy of four hundred Commoners, And after them their thirty
Tyrants, who brought their Commonwealth to utter ruin; And thus it was with
poor England in the days of King John and King Hen. 3. his son, when the
Lords and Commons waged war against these Princes, assumed the Government of
England to themselves, and deputed it into the hands of twenty four
Commissioners; took King Hen. 3. and Edward his son, and kept them Prisoners
in Killingworth Castle for almost two years. But what was the issue of this
glorious misrule, which lasted first and last almost threescore years? what
good had the people by it? I will tell you in the language of Tacitus, Auferre
trucidare, rapere pro imperio habent, atque ubi solitudinem fecerint, hoc pacem
appellant; to rob them, to spoil them, to kill them, was all the justice they
had; And when they were stripped of all, and their possessions laid waste and
desolate, that was accounted there Peace. And what these Lords of misrule
gained by it, the Statute called Dictum de Killingworth tells us. V. M. Chaste.
Anno. 1556. 51. Hen. 3.
They were all glad to compound with that merciful King for their fines and
ransom, at that very Castle where they kept him Prisoner. Hence it came to
pass, that the poor Commoners of England (so made, by the low and dejected
state of the Crown, in the days of King Rich. 2.) joined with the Lords by
Petition in Parliament to the King: Rot. Par. 14. R. 2. n. 15.
That the Majesty and Prerogative of his Crown might be maintained and kept,
And that all things done to the contrary might be redressed, knowing that men's
private estates are not safe, when the Crown is not secure: And therefore the
spirit of truth commands us in the first place to pray for Kings, That under
them we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty; 1 Timothy 2.2.
Intimating, that when the Crown is disturbed, no quietness, no peace, no
godliness, no honesty is to be found in that Kingdom. I will shut up this in
the observation of Comines, a great and wise Statesman, That he never knew a
man in all his life, that sought to put in fear, or hold his Prince in
subjection, that ever came to good end.

4. These amongst diverse more are the Reasons of Law in this point, touching
the Supremacy of Kings. I come now to the Objections, all of them consisting
upon distinctions, which often argue a galled conscience, as if conscience told
them this to be true, but were willing to be cheated into error by a
distinction, and then it falls out to be true, what was spoken by a judicious
Divine, Hooker Eccl. Pol.
That obedience accompanied with unwillingness to obey, is no better than
disobedience.



England makes no such distinction, as I have said and proved before, Et ubi
lex non distinguit, nec nos distinguere debemus. Neither could I ever read,
that any Monarchy in the world was so founded. For as for that of the Ephori
amongst the Lacedaemonians, and the Demarchy, amongst the Athenians, which are
commonly objected, for the power they had of the coersion of Kings: It is well
known, that they were both of them usurpations, and contrary to the first
foundation and constitution of the Government of those famous Cities, Athens
and Sparta.

But they say, though the Law have

etc. being ordained by God, to govern their flock, their wives, their
children, and servants, in godliness and honesty, shall severely answer to God
for breach of this trust committed to them by him if they govern amiss.

Pet. 2.13. Submit your self to every ordinance of man, etc. whether to the
King as Supreme.

Hammond and others. I shall for the present only content my self with that
brief one of Piscator, who expounds it, Ratione subjecti non ratione causae,
That is, Kings are said to be the Ordinance of men, as they exercise their
Authourity amongst men, not as men are Authors of their Authority, for that
only belongs to God; and therefore the King is called Romans 13. the Minister of
God; and the words of that Text intimate so much, that this subjection should
be unto Kings, Dei causa, for the Lords sake, for only by him Kings Reign,
Prove. 8. Like as it is of Ministers of the Gospel, they have imposition of
hands from men, and preach to men, but their function and authority is from
God, and therefore they are called, Ministers of God, and of Jesus Christ.

4. It is objected, that the King is not King till he be Crowned, and then at
his Coronation he promises by Oath to his people three things, says Bracton.
1. Bracton Lib. 2. Sanf. pl. Cor.
To see the peace of the Church and people be kept. 2. To repel all force, and
keep his people from wrong. 3. That in all his judgments he exercise Justice
and Mercy; Now if he perform not these Conditions, the people are free, and
not bound to obey.

C. 7. Rep. Calvin's case.
for Kings are absolute Kings before they be Crowned, for Coronation is not
essential to the King, but only ornamentall: Edward the 4th called his
Parliament before he was Crowned, so did King Hen. 6. call diverse, being not
Crowned till the 10th year of his Reign; and it was adjudged in the Case of
the Lord Cobham, Cok. 3. Inst. 1. Hen. 7.
Sr Walter Rawley, etc. 1. Jac. that to conspire the death of the King before
his Coronation was High Treason.

2. The Oath he takes at his Coronation to perform those recited promises to
his people, is not Conditional, neither does any clause in it sound like a
Condition, unless they will have it to be in the conclusion of the Oath, which
then also makes against them; for the words are, Ita me Deus adjuvet, Let God
deal thus and thus with me, if I perform not the Oath made to him: It is not,
Ita me juvet populus, Let the people do so and so to me. And the Perjury of
Princes is tried at Gods Bar, not at man's.

singulis major and universis minor, infused into some people, have made them
swell at this day till they are ready to burst; which being strictly examined,
will prove nothing else but bulla bullata, a blown bubble, which experience
tells us, is nothing till it be blown, and quickly blown into nothing: And
therefore I will give it a twofold answer.

Major and Minor are terms of quantity, magis and minus are terms of quality.
Now in things of quantity, the distinction of singulis major, and universis
minor, holds true; but not in things of quality, (quantity and quality being of
several natures, and belonging to several Predicaments,) as for example, a
Schoolmaster of a School is for the most part in respect of quantity of body
greater than any Boy of the School, and less than all put together; But that
man deserves to be whipped that will affirm, that in respect of power and
authority, he is not greater than all the Boys in the School put together, he
having power to correct them, not they him.

So, and much more may it be said of Kings and Princes, that they are in power
and dignity universis majores, greater than all the people joined together, in
that the whole people make but one body Politic, of which the King is the
Head, and has as much power and superiority over that Body politic without
check or control, as the head of any man has over the natural body, for so
is the resemblance of Law.

Secondly, I answer, the Kings Supremacy does not as other Powers receive their
efficiency from natural and inferior Causes, for his preferment does not
spring from the dust, but from him who styles himself the King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, who removes Kings, and sets up Kings, as Daniel speaks. Dan.
2.21.
And therefore the Kings Authority being from him, it cannot possibly be
subject to any inferior Magistracy which derives it self only from the Prince;
for not only all single-Persons within the Realm, but all Corporate and
Representative Bodies derive their dignity and power from him, and acknowledge
in their entire and universal capacities, to owe unto him all humble
obedience, as it is expressed in the Statute of 24. Hen. 8. 24. Hen. 8. c 12.
And then it necessarily follows according to that Maxim in Schools, Quicquid
efficit tale, illud magis tale, He that as Head gives power to his Subjects,
cannot himself be subject to that power he gives.

The sixth and last Objection, and Briareus, are derived from two new coined
distinctions from new men, and of a new Mint, viz. A Subordinate Power to the
King, and a Coordinate Power with the King; An actual power or presence of
the King, and a virtuall power or presence of the King: and upon these two
distinctions the Objection stands thus. When the King, Lords and Commons meet
in Parliament, they meet as three Estates, The King the first, the Lords the
second, and the Commons the third. These three (say they) in the passing of
Bills have a Coordinate power. So that if the Lords and Commons do pass a Bill,
and the King refuse it, yet it shall pass as a Law, by virtue of two
Coordinate powers against the third power, and so the King shall have no
negative voice. And in case the King shall be absent from Parliament, whereby
he cannot assent, then by reason of a virtuall power of a King, which in case
of his absence is vested in the two Houses, the consent of the two Houses shall
include his assent, and so shall pass as a Law by way of Ordinance: So that in
both cases, the scope and drift of the Objection is to exclude the King from
having any Negative voice.



For the first; If the King and Lords which (as they say) are two the greatest
Estates in Parliament, (though in truth the King be more than an Estate) should
agree upon a Bill, and the House of Commons should refuse to agree to it; yet
if this should be true, as is objected, then the two Coordinate powers (as
they speak) of King and Lords assenting to the Bill, should overruled the
third, not assenting to it, and so the Bill should pass as a Law to bind the
whole Kingdom, without the House of Commons: Or put the case the House of
Commons should absent themselves, (Speaker and all) as it is not time out of
mind that such a case has been, yet the two other Coordinate Powers, in this
case of absence, might by the like reason, by a kind of virtuall power, (I know
not from whence) pass the Bill as a binding Law for the whole Kingdom, which
how absurd these Conclusions are from the two former distinctions, I leave to
all the Commons of England to judge of: Eadem est lex, ubi par ratio; nay the
reason is much stronger in the Kings case. For if the Lords and Commons which
are the lesser Powers, may exclude the Kings negative voice, which is the
Supreme Power, much more may the King and Lords being the greatest Powers,
exclude the Commons which is the least. And if so, then what need is there of
their presence in Parliaments; And if that, then what need of Parliaments? So
endless are the absurdities that follow upon conclusions, that arise from
brainless distinctions.

Secondly, It is irrational; for how can it be thought reasonable, that the
King who has the sole right of Calling Parliaments at his will and pleasure,
to give him counsel and advice touching those weighty affairs, for which he
calls them, should not have liberty to assent or disassent to what both Houses
advise, be it good or bad? Otherwise it will follow, that if they shall tender
him a Bill for the taking away the Rights of his Crown, which by his
Coronation Oath, he is bound to maintain, or tender him a Bill for his
deposition or dethroning (as they did to those two unfortunate Princes, Edw. 2.
and Rich. 2.) he must yield his assent to those Bills, in that the concurrence
of the two other Coordinate Powers (as they call them) had taken away his
Negative voice. What had become of our Religion at this day, if this had been
either Law or Reason in the first year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, when
the Lords and Commons of that Parliament would never have abolished Popery and
the Mass, had it been in their Power by Law, to have excluded that religious
Queen of her Negative voice? But the Judges of the Realm (though all of them
at that time Popishly affected, and) as learned men as any were either before,
or since, knew no such Law, as by two illegal distinctions (as they are
applied) to deprive the Crown of its most ancient Prerogative.

3. But thirdly and chiefly, The two distinctions of Coordinate and
Subordinate Power, Actual and Virtuall Presence, as they are applied in the
Objection, are against Law.

Co-ordination as well in Logic as in Law, are of things of the same rank, of
the same dignity, and of the same order: As for example, four Judges of the
Kings Bench are said to be Coordinate in Power, because they are men of the
same rank, of the same dignity, of the same power; and the like of the four
Judges of the Common Pleas, and the Barrons of the Exchequer. And the Kings
Commission under his own broad-Seale (not any other) which gives them their
dignity, is alike to them all. But it is otherwise in the high Court of
Parliament; the King sits there as the Supreme Power, the Lords sit beneath
his Throne all uncovered before him; the Commons stand bare at the Bar; and
both of them in all their public Acts, where they speak of him, acknowledge
themselves his humble and dutiful Subjects. So likewise, between the Lords
House, and the Commons House, there is a great difference in point of rank and
order. For the Lords House is by diverse Acts of Parliament, 33. Hen. 8. cap.
21. Co. 5. rep. 14. a Crompt. Jurisd. tit. Parl.
and Book-cases, called the upper, or higher House; The Commons House is
called, the nether or lower House. And when these Houses send to one another,
the Commons send Members of their own, on the message; the Lords send no
Members, but only Attendants on their House. No Lord comes to the Commons
House, much less stands at the door, and waits as the Commons do. And when
both Houses meet at a Conference, the Lords sit with their Hats on, the Commons
stand before them with their Hats off, with many more differences of rank and
order, disproving a Co-ordination between them, which for brevities sake I
omit. The truth is,
that in passing of Bills there is a joint concurrent agreement of the King, and
two Houses of Parliament, which may be properly called a Co-agreement, arguing
a Co-assent of will, but by no means can it be called a Co-ordination,
intimating a sameness in rank, dignity and power.

For the other distinction of actual and virtuall presence, or actual and
virtuall power, as it is applied in the Objection, it is alike illegal, which
will thus appear.

Before the Statute of 33. Hen. 8. cap. 21. never any Bill passed in Parliament
for a Law (the King being within the Realm) by the Lords and Commons alone,
without the Kings personal assent in Parliament to the Bill, as he that gave
life and being to the Law; And therefore their ancient Statutes ran in the
Kings name alone, as the principal Agent and efficient in passing a Law, as
the Statute of Mag. Charta, 9. Hen. 3. though made with the assent of Lords and
Commons, yet it runs in this form, Henricus Dei gratia, etc. Sciatis quod Nos
intuitu Dei ad exaltationem Sanctae Ecclesiae, and emendationem Regni nostri,
spontanea and bona voluntate nostra dedimus and concessimus, etc. has
libertates subscriptas, etc. So the Statute of West. 1. in 3. Edw. 1. runs
thus; 41. Hen. 3. 52. Hen. 3. West. 2. c. 3. 28. Edw. 1. c. 5. 1. Edw. 2.
Ceux sont le establishments, le Roy Edw. fitz l' Roy, Hen. faits a
Westminster. The like is said of the Statute of York, 12. Edw. 2. and many
more, which for brevities sake I have quoted in the Margin.

Neither can any man alive give me one instance since Parliaments began in
England, that while the King was within the Realm, in what condition soever he
was in, that ever any Act or Ordinance of Parliament passed as a Law without
his personal assent. I put the case of the Kings being within the Land. For
when he was necessitated to go out of the Land, as Edw. 1. into the holy Land,
Hen. 5. into France, they made by their Commissions a Custos Regni, which
supplied the Kingly office, as William Longchamp Bishop of Eli, was made Custos
Regni, to Hen. 5. and the reason of the Law was plain in it, for while the
King is in England, he ought to Act as a King, by personal assenting to Bills,
one of the highest Acts of Majesty which he is to enjoy by Law.

But the Statute of 33. Hen. 8. cap. 21. Stat. 33. Hen. 8. cap. 21.
made a little alteration of the Law in the manner of passing of Bills, which
Statute was made at the humble desire of the Lords and Commons in Parliament,
upon their impeachment of Queen Katherine Howard, (King Hen. 8. wife) of
High Treason, where they humbly beseech the King, ( for fear trouble should
arise to his heart, and unquietness to his mind, to the shortning of his
days, if he should appear in person in the Parliament, and assent to the Bill
of her Attainder,) To grant his Royal Assent to the Bill of her Attainder, by
his Letters Pattents to be Signed with his own hand, and to be put under his
Great Seal, and so to be notified and published in the Higher House, etc.

Higher House (so it is there called) to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and
Commons, there to be assembled; and such assent by the Letters Pattents of the
King, is declared to make a perfect Act for the Attainder of that Queen; and
that no scruple might be made hereof in time to come, concerning this
particular, a general provision is there made for all future Parliaments in
these words following.

Be it declared by Authority of this present Parliament, that the Kings Royal
assent by his Letters Pattents under his Great Seal, and Signed with his hand,
and declared and notified in his absence to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
(and to the Commons Assembled together) in the higher House, is, and ever was
of as good strength and force, as though the Kings person had been there
personally present, and had assented openly and publicly to the same.

In which Statute (which I have diligently perused) these things are very
observable.

1. That before this Statute, the Kings personal and open assent to Bills in
Parliament, was so requisite that they could not pass without it; which was the
cause that made the Lords and Commons in those dismal Parliaments, in the
days of those two unfortunate Princes, Edw. 2. and Rich. 2. to require their
personal assent to their own deposition by Act of Parliament, before they went
to execute the sentence of deposition against them, which they like two weak
Princes yielded unto, especially the latter, who had he had but a piece of that
Lion-like heart of the first of his name, King Rich. 1. called Ceur de Lion.
he would never have assented to an Act of the Renunciation of his own Crown;
and not only so, but to swear to it upon the Gospel, never to impugn it in
thought, word or deed, (so says the Record of that Parliament) and after to
subscribe to it with his own hand; and further in Confirmation of it, pulled a
Gold Ring off his finger, (being his Privy-Signet) and put it on the finger of
his usurping Successor, the Duke of Lancaster. All which things he so tamely
yielded unto, Rot. Parl. 1. Hen. 4. n. 13, 13, 15, 58, 59, 60.
and when Chief Justice Thirning (too bad a man for so good an office) upon
that renunciation pronounced the sentence of deposition against him, the poor
King gave him this pitiful answer, That he looked not after rule, but only
hoped his Cosen would be a good Lord to him.

Had this virtuall power of passing Bills by the two Houses, without the
personal assent of the King, been taken for current Law in those days. The
Judges of those times would not have advised Hen. 4. to obtain a personal
assent especially of an imprisoned King.

2. And therefore the vanity of this virtuall power was well discerned by the
Lords and Commons in that Parliament of 33 Hen. 8. as may appear in this; That
because it was not thought convenient the King should personally assent in
Parliament to the Attainder of his own Queen, yet they devised a way by that
Act, whereby in substance he should do (in effect) the very same thing; for by
his Letters Pattents he was to assent to the Bill, and that virtuall assent was
to be Signed with his own hand, and the Commissioners appointed by the Letters
Pattents to signify his assent to the Bill, were to notify it to the Lords
and Commons Assembled in the Higher House, not as their own, but as the Kings
assent. What needed all this ado and caution, if this new device of the
virtuall Power in the two Houses would have served the turn.

2. The second thing observable in this Act of 33. Hen. 8. is this, that the
manner of assent to Bills by the Kings Letters Patents, seemed by that Act to be
a doubt and ambiguity to the Lords and Commons, who thought that after-ages
might confirm it so; And therefore they made a general provision by that Act,
that for all time to come, the Kings Royal assent to Bills, by his Letters
Patents Signed with his hand, and notified by his Commissioners to the Lords
and Commons, should be of as good force and strength as if the King had
personally appeared in Parliament, and openly assented: Which strongly implies,
that out of those two cases, no Bill in Parliament could pass by the Kings
assent. From whence then should this virtuall power and presence proceed, when
neither given to the Houses by the King, nor created by Law, it is not easy to
be imagined, unless from some turbulent brain, like that of a Monosyllable
Judge in the days of King Edw. 2. (the worst kind of Judge, when opposite to
the Crown) called Judge Inge, who delivered it for Law, that the Lords of the
upper House without the King and Commons might make Ordinances, displace
offices, etc. and had a joint regiment with the King, in the Government of the
Kingdom; etc. for which opinions notwithstanding his great skill in the Law,
he obtained among the Commons no other reputation, than of a learned Traitor.

3. The third thing observable is this, That as it is a just privilege of the
Lords and Commons in Parliament, to assent or disassent to Bills in Parliament,
though never so beneficial to the Commonwealth, so it is likewise an undoubted
prerogative in the King, being the Highest Estate in Parliament to have that
power and privilege. And therefore the Lords and Commons do in that Parliament
humbly desire the King, that for the entire love and affection he bears to
the Commonwealth, for the conservation of his own Majesty, and for the peace
and unity of all his Subjects, he would pass that Act of Parliament, which
plainly shows, that the King had a negative voice as well as they, and might
assent or disassent at his pleasure, and an undoubted right of his Crown, as
might be proved by infinite examples in all times.

4. The fourth and last thing observable in that Act is this, That when an Act
is passed by both Houses of Parliament, yet it is not perfect, nor can be put
in execution as a Law, till after the Kings royal assent, and so is the
expression of the Lords and Commons in that Act of Parliament, That his Majesty
would grant his royal assent to that Act, that so after that, it might stand
as a perfect Act, and be put in due execution accordingly. And so was the Law
ever taken by those two famous Lawyers and Parliament men, the Lord Cook, and
Mr Plowden, Plow. fol. 79. Co. Com. Lit. fol 90.
in their learned writings of the Law. But concerning this negative voice of
the King, I shall have occasion to reserve it hereafter for a longer discourse,
concerning the Privileges of the Estates in Parliament, what belongs to the
King as he is King, and the Supreme Estate in Parliament; What belongs to the
Lords called in sundry Acts of Parliament, the Higher House and what belongs to
the Commons called in these Acts the lower House, a work not done by any, and
yet not much difficult to be done But I cannot yet perform it, till I can
recover those Notes and Collections I have made out of diverse Records of
Parliaments, which are now by these unhappy times divided from me, and I from
them.

And thus have I endeavored to answer the main Objections against this
Sovereign Power of the Crown of England, and cleared it from the Disloyal
aspersions of undutifull men; And therefore shall now in the next place handle
the exercise of this Sovereign Power in the two last Conclusions, and so make
an end.

The fifth Conclusion is this, That England, does furnish him with the power of
the Sword, and annexeth to his Crown the Sovereign Command of the Militia, and
therefore he is by our Law called, the chief Captain of all Chivalry within his
Dominions. This unquestionable Prerogative of the Crown, Plow. Com. fol. 268. a.
I could prove by many Arguments derived from the Law of God, the Law of nature
and reason, the Law of Nations, and most abundantly from the Imperial Laws,
digested into a complete Body by Justinian, out of a vast confused heap of
former Laws. From these Laws does the common Law of England borrow many grounds
of Law, in so much that in diverse things a man cannot understand the depth of
the Laws of England without some insight and knowledge in the Civil Law; and it
is well known, that our ancient Lawyers, such as Glanvill, Bracton, Britton,
etc. were well studied in the Civil Law. But I intend a compendious discourse,
and not a volume, and therefore shall prove this point sufficiently by the
common Law without the help of any Ground or Maxim taken from the former Laws,
but only of such as are incorporate into the common Law of England.

In the very beginning and in the very first words of Justinians Institutes,
(an exact Compendium of the fifty Books of his Pandects) it is thus said,
Imperatoriam majestatem non solum armis decoratam sed etiam legibus opus esse
armatam: ut utrumque tempus and bellorum and pacis recte possit guhernari; This
Text of the Civil Law is admitted by Chief Justice Fortescue, De Laud. Leg.
Aug cap. 1. fol. 4.
to belong by the common Law to the Crown of England, and therefore as to the
first part concerning the Militia, I will first prove it by ancient and sound
authourities in Law. 2. By many Acts of Parliament. And 3. I will give the
Reasons of the Law in both, and so conclude this fifth Proposition, reserving
the latter part concerning the Laws in the sixth and last Conclusion.

Chief Justice Glanvile Glanvil in Prolego.
in his learned Book of Law, Written in the time of Hen. 2. has these words;
Regiam Majestatem non solum armis contra rebels and gentes sibi regnoque
insurgentes oportet esse decoratam: Reg. Ma. in Praef.
sed and legibus ad subditos and populos pacifice regendos decet esse ornatam.

Regia Majestas, A learned Treatise of Law Written at the same time thus says;
Regi duo sunt necessaria, Arma quibus hosts debellet, leges quibus subditos
pacifice regat.

Lib. 1. in Princip.
Bracton, A learned Judge of the Land, in the days of Hen. 3. thus Writes; In
Rege qui recte regit necessaria sunt duo haec, viz. Arma and Leges; Cat. br.
fol. 113.
quibus utrumque tempus bellorum, and pacis recte possit gubernari.

The Natura brevium, A Book of high esteem in our Law, lays down this for a
Ground, Et est a entendre que le roy, doit de droit sauver and defender son
Reaume verse la mere comme verse enemies, q' il ne soit surround, ou degaste and
de provider remedy pur ceo. Cook. 2. Rep.
It is to be understood, (says that Book) that the King ought of Right to save
and defend his Realm, as well against the Sea, as against enemies, that it be
not surrounded and spoiled, and to provide remedy for it.

It is likewise resolved for Law in Wisemans case, that to give Land to the
King in consideration that he is head of the Commonwealth, preserves his
people in Peace, and repelleth the enemies of it, is no consideration in Law to
raise a use; because the King by his Office ought to do all this. And the
reason of all these Authorities is upon this ground. The Law which trusts the
King with the end, viz. the preservation of his people in War and Peace,
trusts him with the means to do it, viz. Arms and Laws. Many more
Authorities might be cited, which for brevity I omit, and come in the second
place to the Acts of Parliament.

And the first and most ancient is that Law of King Canutus, Inter leges
Canuti. c. 10. Cook 2 Instit. fol. 701. Lamb. 135. Cook. 1. Instit. fol. 75.
which was before the Conquest; Qui pensionem ad oppida pontesve reficiendos
denegabit* Militiamve subt^rfugerit, dabit Regi si Anglus fuerit 26 solidos;
where it appears, that the Subject was bound as well to contribute to the Kings
Militia (for that is the word there used) as he was to contribute to the repair
of highways and Bridges; which strongly inferres, That the King has as much
Soverign Power over the Militia of the Kingdom, as he has over highways and
Bridges.

Amongst the Laws of King Edward the Confessor, it is thus provided in these
words: Debent enim universi liberi homines secundum feudum suum and secundum
tenementa sua arma habere, and illa semper prompta conservare ad tuitionem
Regni and servitium Dominorum suorum juxta praeceptum Domini Regis explendum
and peragendum.

And William the Conqueror confirmed that Law in these words: Statuimus and
firmiter praecipimus, ut omnes comites, and Barons, and Milites, and
servientes, and universi liberi homines totius regni nostri praedicti habeant
and teneant se semper in armis, and in equis ut decet and oportet, and quod
sint semper prompti and parati ad servitium suum integrum explendum and
peragendum cum semper opus adfuerit secundum quod nobis debent de feudis and
tenementis suis de jure facere, etc. By both which Laws it plainly appears;
That all Earls, Barons, Knights, and Freemen of England, (and such were all
those that were not villains, Sockmen, or Copyholders) were to be in arms
upon the Command of the King, and defense of his Kingdom (for so he calls it,
because King and Kingdom are Relatives, and that man that loves not the one
loves not the other, let his pretense be what it will) And not only such
Freemen that held their Lands by bearing arms, but all others, as the exigence
of the Kingdom should require, which appears in this, That the King before the
Statute of Quia Emplores terrarum in 18. E. 1. Litt. l. 2. c. 8. Cook. Instit.
fol. 75.
might create tenures by bearing of Arms; nay more, by creating the greatest
Officers of Arms in the Kingdom, as to be Marshal of the Kings Host, to be high
Constable of England, and Earl Marshall of England, etc. By which means it grew
to be a usage and custom in the Crown of England, 30. October. 7. Ed. 1.
to have the sole command of the Militia in the Kingdom, as appears plainly by
the Statute of 7. Ed. 1. where it was agreed by the Prelates, Earls, and
Barons, and Commonalty of that Parliament held at Westminster.

That it was the Kings right, and belonged to him of his Royal Seigniory, to
defend all force of Armor, and all other Force against the Peace, at all times
when it shall please him, and to punish them which shall do the contrary
according to the Laws and usages of the Realm; And hereunto the people are
bound to aid the King as their Sovereign Lord at all seasons, when need should
be.

And the same King Edward the first, to show his chief Power and Command in
this matter of the Militia, given to him by the ancient Laws and Statutes of
this Realm, about six years after, viz. in the 13. year of his Reign, does by
the Statute of Winchester provide in this manner, That every man shall have
Harnes in his house to keep the Peace according to the ancient assesse. That
ancient assesse is thus explained, Stat. de Winchester, 13. ^. 1. cap. 6.
that is to say, Every man from fifteen years old to forty, shall be assessed
and sworn to armor according to their quantity of Lands and Goods, to wit,
from fifteen pound Lands, and forty marks goods a Halbert, a Brestplate of
iron, a sword, a knife, and a horse: and from ten pound Lands, and twenty marks
Goods, a Halbert, a Breast Plate of Iron, a sword and a knife: and from forty
shillings Land to an hundred shillings of Land, a a Sword, a Bow and arrows,
and a knife, etc. And so downward, as appears more at large in that Statute:
Wherein it is likewise provided, that two Constables in all hundreds should be
chosen (now called high Constables) for this purpose, that twice every year
they should take view of the Armor, and present to the Justices such defaults
about Armor, as they should see in the Country.

It is true, 4o and 5o. Phil. and Mar. cap. 2.
that at the Parliament of 4, 5. Phil. and Mar. this Statute was repealed, not
as to the power of imposing Arms, but as to the Quantity and proportion of
Arms, (the manner of Arms being at that time changed, and the value of Lands
increased, whereby a greater proportion was assessed) this may appear by the
third Chapter of that Parliament, where the power of mustering of men, and
levying a number of them for the Kings service in his wars, is placed wholly
in the Crown. And therefore that Statute of Repeal is warily penned, for it is
not a repeal of the common Law concerning Arms, but of such Statutes only as
concern the keeping and finding of Horse, horses, or Armor: which Statute of
Repeal was afterward repealed by King James, so that it necessarily follows,
that either the Statute of Winchester is still in force, and stands for Law,
or else if it be repealed, the common Law of England concerning finding of
Arms, is in force at this day. Many more Statutes there are concerning this
Royal Prerogative of the Militia in the times of the succeeding Kings between
Ed. 1. and Q. Mar. especially in the days of E. 3. a martial Prince, and a
great Soldier, which for the great number of them I shall omit, and come in
the last place to consider the reasons of the Law in thus placing the chief
power of the Militia in the Crown.

And the first Reason is taken from the Office and Duty of a King, mentioned by
Plowden in the case of the Information for Mines; where it is said, Plow. Com.
fol. 315. b.
That the King is the Head of the Commonwealth, and the Subjects are his
Members, and the Kings Office to which he is appointed by Law, consists in
two things; to wit, in Armor to defend them against all hostility, and in good
Laws. And therefore it is that Lipsius makes military Prudence a necessary
requisite for a Prince for the defense of his own Person, his Crown and people,
5o. lib. Pol. c. 2.
which would not be so necessary, if the power of the Sword did not properly
and peculiarly belong unto him. And therefore thus is laid down by him,
Tolosanus, Bodine, and Bozerus (famous and learned Politicians) as a maxim most
essential to royal Majesty, Solius est Principis bellum suscipere, decernere,
indicere, and administrare. It is only proper to a Prince to denounce War, to
undertake it, to order and determine it, which they largely prove; I shall only
but quote the places in the Margin. Tolos. l. 9. c. 1. Bod. l. 1. c. 10. Bo^er.
de Jur. Belli c. 4. Lipsius l. 5. c. 4. Cook. 3. Instit. fol. 9.
And agreeable to this is the Law of England; No Subject says Sir Edw. Cook
(an Author of an approved Authority) no Parliament, can levy War within the
Realm without Authority from the King, for to him, says he, it only belongs.
And therefore he puts these cases, That if Subjects (in the Plural number)
shall levy War to expulse strangers, to deliver men out of prisons, to remove
Counselors, or against any Statute, or to any other end, pretending
Reformation of their own heads, without warrant, they are (his own words) says
he, a levying of War against the King. And hereupon it was resolved for Law
in the days of King Edward the 4th, 19. E. 4. fol. 6. b.
That if the King of England do make a league with the King of Denmark, and all
the Subjects of England will make War against those of Denmark, if the King of
England assent not to it; It shall not be accounted a War. For none in
England can raise War, but by Authority from the King, as was said before.

The second Reason is drawn from the Office and Duty of Subjects, which is to
be obedient to Authority, and to fear and honor their Princes. It is the
speech of God from the Law of Nature, Mal. 1.6.
If I be a Father, where is my honor? and if I be a Master, where is my fear?
Kings are both, and therefore honor and fear do naturally belong to them. And
can the King have either, if the Sword should not be in his hand? It is the
very argument of the Apostle, to persuade Subjects to be afraid of committing
evil, Romans 13.4.
because the King bears not the Sword in vain, but is Gods minister, to
execute wrath upon him that does evil. A King without a Sword is like a Father
without a rod, the child incorrigible, the Subject rebellious. The true duty of
Obedience to a Prince, is a sweet mixture of fear and love; they are loved for
their mercy, they are feared for their Justice, of which the Sword is the
proper Ensign.

Smite the Shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered. Kings are smitten, when
they are deprived of their Swords; and we have seen the sad experience of it
with our eyes. Since our Shepherd has lost his Sword, what a scattering there
has been of all his people, of all sorts, of all Countries, of all Cities,
Towns and Families, breach upon breach, worse than that scattering in Israel,
when there was no King: And which will never be happily pieced again, till the
people be reduced to their obedience, and the King restored to his honor.

Fire we know, when it is held from ascending to its proper Element, by the
obstinacy of a thick Cloud, how it rends the Heavens in pieces by horrible
thundering and roaring: Such is military power withheld by the Subject from
the Crown, till it return thither again, it causes the pillars of a Kingdom to
shake and tremble: It turns Law into Lust, Justice into Oppression, Kindness
into Cruelty, Liberty into Slavery, and a well composed Commonwealth into a
rude disorderly Camp.

My third and last reason is taken from the constitution of the Commonwealth.

The world (of which all orderly Republics, are but so many handsome pieces)
is named in Gteek Ksmo, signifying Order and Ornament; the obedience of Heaven
and Earth to that Law of Nature God has set them in the stay of the whole
world, and makes it at this day so lovely and beautiful: For should the Sun
and Moon wander from their beaten ways (as a Reverend Divine elegantly
expresses it) the times and seasons of the year blend themselves by a
disorderly and confused mixture the winds breath out their last gasp, the
Clouds yield no rain, the earth be defeated of heavenly influence, the fruits
of the Earth pine away as Children at the withered Breasts of their Mother; what
would become of man, whom these things now do all serve? The like I say in a
Commonwealth. If Kings should yield up their Crowns unto their Subjects,
whereby Servants should ride on Horseback, and Princes walk like Servants on
the ground, which must needs so come to pass, if the Chivalry should be in the
people, what confusion and deformity should we then behold in the Commonwealth?
It would be as monstrous and ugly a sight in that Politic Body, as in the
Body Natural; To see the Head become the Foot, and the Foot the Head, from
whence Anarchy and Desolation must needs follow, when the King by this means
shall become the only Subject in the Land.

Many more reasons may be added, but these shall suffice, and I shall in the
next place handle the second weapon of the Crown, by which the People of the
Realm is governed in the time of Peace, viz. The Laws of the Land, by
discussing the sixth and last conclusion, which is this.

That this Kingly Government be according to the Law of the Land, not by the
Laws of lust, but by the Laws of the Land; by legal, not by arbitrary power;
and this makes the King of England the greatest and most complete Monarch in
the world. That the Crown of England is incorporated, and interwoven with the
Laws of the Land. For it is the gross ignorance of those men, that make
Monarchy to consist in Exemption from Laws; such a Monarchy is rather to be
called Dissolute, than Absolute; Impotent, than Powerful; Tyrannical, than
Regal. I have many learned Authors to warrant this; I will only instance in
three, Rex (says Bracton Bracton l. 2. c. 9
) dicitur a been regendo, non a regnando; quia Rex est dum been gerit, Tyrannus
autem dum Populum sibi concreditum violenta opprimit Dominatione, says Sir Jo.
Fortescue. Chapter Just. of Engl. Fortes. de laud. leg. Ang. c. 37.


Quis enim (Rex) potentior liberiorve esse potest quam qui non solum alios, sed
and seipsum sufficit debellare; quod potest, and semper facit Rex politice
regens populum suum?

But above all is the Testimony of King James, as great a Prince in Learning,
as in Power; A King, says he, governing in a settled Kingdom, leaves off to be
a King, and degenerates into a Tyrant, as soon as he leaves off to rule
according to his Laws. Therefore all Kings that are not Tyrants, or perjured,
will be glad to bound themselves within the limits of their Laws, and they
that persuade them the contrary, are vipers and Pests both against them, and
the Commonwealth. And afterward declaring to the Lords and Commons his opinion
of the Common Laws by which his Realm was governed he thus speaks, First as
a King I have beast cause of any man to dislike the Common Law. For no Laws can
be more advantageous for a King, and extends further his Praerogative than it
does. And for a King of England to despise the Common Law, it is to neglect his
own Crown.

And how apt and convenient a Law it is for the people as well as for the
Crown, he expresses it in another speech to the Parliament, I must needs
confess, and I think I am able to prove it, that the grounds of the Common Law
of England are the best of any Law in the world, either civil or municipall,
and the fittest for this people. Upon all which it plainly appears, as I said
before, that a King of England governing according to his Laws, is the most
absolute and free Monarch of the world; For this is true freedom in a Prince,
to be loved at home, and feared abroad, to be able to defend his own people at
home from oppression and violence by his Laws, without the help of an Army; to
keep and conserve all his Subjects in happy peace, by a sword made of Parchment
and Paper in his Laws, and not by a Sword made up of Iron and Steel in his
Armies. This is excellently and at large declared by the same Sr John
Fortescue, Chap. 35, 36, 37.
in his book of the praise of the Laws of England, where in three several
Chapters he sets down the differences betwixt the English Government by the
Laws, and the other Government by Arbitrary power (misnamed Regal Power) and
there makes the Comparison betwixt the Government of England, and that of
France; That they are poor Peasants, we a rich people; They are so pilled and
polled with Taxes and Impositions (especially that of Salt) that they are not
able to supply their King, if he should need their succor, we are able to
succor him in War, and to relieve him in want; No Soldiers (in time of
peace) can come by Law into our Houses, spoil our Goods, and eat us out with
Free Quarter as they do there; Nor are we privily executed by Martial Law,
without open and ordinary Justice as they are, with many more grievances which
he there relates at large, and unto which I refer my Reader. So that no
Nation under Heaven is more happy under Kingly Government, than we are here in
England, were we a thankful people, or rightly prized our own happiness, For
the Crown of England is so encircled with good Laws, that it is scarce possible
for a King of England to fall into Tyranny, 8. Hen. 4.19. 8. Hen. 6.20. 2.
Rich. 3.11.
for he neither speaks, nor acts, nor judges, nor executes, but by his
Writ, by his Laws, by his Judges, and Ministers, and both these sworn to him
to judge a right, and to execute justice to his People. For the King does
nothing in his own Person. Fortes. de de Land Leg. cap. 8.
If he sit in judgment as he may do in any of his Courts, as King Richard 2.
King Edward 4. and King Henry 8. did in the King's Bench, King Henry 7. and King
James in the Star Chamber, yet he pronounces (...) not judgment himself
upon his People, but it is left by him to the proper Judges of that Court under
him, which is the reason why it is said in our Law, that the King can do no
wrong; for if the Subject here in England be wronged, it is by some Judge,
Officer, or Minister, etc. under the King which has wronged him, and for which
the Subject may have his proper remedy in Law, in which justice cannot be
denied him, or delayed by the Judges, 9. Hen. 3. c. 29. 5. Edw. 3. c. 9.
who are required by their duty and Oath, not to stay or stop Justice, 2. Edw.
3. c. 8.
either for the Great Seal or Little Seal, which are the highest Commands of
the King. The words of the Statute are more Emphaticall, Item, It is Accorded
and Established, 18. Edw. 3. Oath of the Justice.
that it shall not be commanded by the Great Seal, nor the Little Seal, to
disturb or delay Common Right; And though such commandment do come, the
Justices therefore shall not leave to do right in any point.

But above all the Statute of 20. Edward 3. is remarkable, which has these
words, We Command all Our Justices that they shall from henceforth do equal
Law and Execution of Right to all Our Subjects rich and poor, without having
regard to any person, and without omitting to do Right for any Letters or
Commandment, which may come to them from us, or from any other, or by any other
Cause. Let the Judges do right, and the Kings of England, as they can do no
wrong; so are not they willing to do it, as may appear in the examples of King
James and the King that now is, T When I was a Reporter in the Common Pleas
about 12o Jac. There happened in that Court a Suit in a Quare Impedit, Between
Sr Edward Pincheon, and one Harris the Kings Incumbent, which Suit after a long
and tedious delay in Chancery, came at last to receive a Judgment, in the
Court of Common Pleas; At the day appointed for giving of Judgment, The Lord
Hubert Chief Justice of that Court, produced a Letter out of his Pocket from
King James, for deferring Judgment, which he showed to the rest of the Judges
of that Court, Warburton, Winch, and Nicolls, desiring their Advice what to do:
Justice Nicolls Puisne Judge of the Court, and first to Argue, spoke openly in
this manner; My Lord, This Cause has had many delays, It is our duty to do
equal right to all his Majesty's Subjects, and that we ought not to delay
Justice, neither for the Great Seal, nor the Little, and much less for a
Letter; And therefore for my part I will go on and proceed to Judgment, which
he then gave for Sr. Edward Pincheon, and the rest of the Judges followed
according to their turns and did the like. How this wrought with King James the
Consequence will show. For about a year after, when Officers were to be chosen
for the Prince his Son, the King that now is, then newly made Prince of
Wales, The Highest Office being the Office of Chancellor, had diverse great
Competitors, the Lord Hubert, and Sr. Francis Bacon then Atturnay General and
some others. The King rejected them all, and of himself chose Justice
Nicholls, that neither sought it, or thought of it, sixty miles off at his
house in the Country, being in the long Vacation; and I was sent for from the
Temple to convey his Patent to him into the Country, which I did accordingly;
and about a Month after, going up at Michaelmas Term, he was presented to the
King, who scarce ever saw him before. The King told him, That he took notice of
him for an honest and a just Judge, and one that would take no Bribes, and
therefore had made choice of him to serve his Son in his Highest Office, etc.

The like I have heard of his Majesty that now is, by another Judge a Successor
of his in the same Court of Common Pleas, who did Execution of Justice
notwithstanding the Kings Letter, whereupon he was sent for to the King, who
grew angry with him for doing contrary to his Letter; The Judge acquainted him
with that high command that was laid upon him by the Statute of 2o Edward 3, to
do equal Law and Execution of Right to all his Majesty's Subjects, and by his
Oath to the King to perform it; telling his Majesty, That his Throne was
established by executing Justice, and much Honor redounded to him thereby, and
many other words delivered in better Languge than I am able to express,
whereupon the Kings heart began to melt, telling the Judge he was well pleased
with him, and bade him go on in the ways of Law and Justice, and he should
have his favor in stead of his frown. And hereupon I heard the Judge deliver
this opinion of him. That he thought he would make the justest Prince upon
Earth, had he Ministers about him answerable to his goodness. Thus are good
Kings sooner brought to sed their Errors in the quiet and still ways of
Justice grounded upon the sincerity of impartial Laws, than by the Councels of
public Persons, when they are prosecuted in a violent way. And such a
natural Inclination to the love of Justice does possess the spirits of
Princes, that they seldom miscarry in their duties, did not their Ministers
under them, whom they entrust with their Laws, first fail in theirs. And
therefore I do affirm and maintain, that since the bloody contentions about
Magna Charta, which were begun and continued in the Reigns of King John and
Henry 3, and happily quieted by King Edward 1, who redeemed his Captive Father
out of Prison, vanquished the rebellious Barons, and confirmed the great
Charter, the Oppressions of the People of England, have been chiefly caused by
their fellow Subjects, not by their Princes. And therefore the Arms taken up
against them for that cause were utterly groundless and unlawful, as were the
Arms taken up against those lawful, but very unfortunate Princes Edward the 2.
and Richard 2. which brought on their Deposition, and Murder afterward (the
most traitorous and bloody acts that ever were committed by Englishmen against
their Soverign) none of which acts do the known and established Laws of England
allow, in Subjects against their own lawful Sovereigns.

A short touch of which Laws, joined with an expression of the form of their
Oaths, taken at their Coronation, (not commonly known, and less understood by
the People) I will in the next place handle, and so end this my sixth and last
Conclusion. The whole frame and Body of the Common Law of England, is aptly
divided into these two parts: 1. Jus Regium. 2. Jus Populi.


1. The Law which concerns the King, being an essential part of the Common Law,
the Subject of England is bound by his Allegiance and Oath to observe and keep,
as strictly and exactly, as that Law which concerns himself, which every
religious and conscientious Subject will readily do. For I do not find in all
the Book of God a more certain mark of an irreligious man, than a despiser of
the just Government and commands of his Sovereign.

2. The Law which concerns the People being another essential part of the
Common Law, the King of England is tied by his Oath at his Coronation, as much
to maintain, defend and keep, as he is the Rights of his Crown. So that the Law
makes a Marriage between these two Rights, as well in respect of the Prince, as
of the People.

The Jus Regium belonging to the King is divided into 1. Jus Majestatis. 2. Jus
Praerogativae.


Jus Majestatis is that which belongs to him as King, common to him, with other
Princes, by the Law of Nature and Nations; as for example, to have the Supreme
Power in making Laws, the chief command of the Militia, by which he bestows the
Degrees of Knighthood, the coining of Money, the giving of Honor, the
pardoning of Offenses, the sole making and disposing of the Great Seal, the
dispensing with penal Laws, the making of Judges and Officers, with diverse
more.

The Jus Praerogativae, is that which belongs to him as King of England, and
given to him by that Law alone, which is very large, and of which the Statute
De Praerogativa Regis made 17o E. 2. is but a piece.

The Jus Populi is that, which by the same Common Law belongs to the People,
divided into two parts, Clergy and Laity; the one called Jus Ecclesiae, the
other called Jus Regni, and so distinguished in the Parliament Writ. These two
Rights of King and People make up the Body of the Common Law of England,
chiefly consisting in Customs, Liberties, Privileges and Immunities belonging
to Prince and People, and by them approved of, as good and profitable to both,
by an immemorial prescription, which makes the best Law of all, as most fixed
and immutable. For other Laws which are not so tried by long tract of time, are
much subject to change and fluctuation, which is the reason why the Laws of
England have at this day the honor above others, in that they consist upon
such ancient and unshaken Principles. But this is a great misery which has
befallen this Kingdom, and which we feel at this day, that the People of
England have been very industrious, to know their own Rights, but are very
ignorant in the Rights of the Crown. Though by their Oath set down in the
Statute of 1. Elizab. they are bound to know them in what they swear, That they
shall to their Power assist and defend all Privileges, Preheminencies and
Authorities granted, or belonging to the Kings Highness, his Heirs and
Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. The
ignorance whereof, has, I fear, to the crying sins of this Land, added the
Luod cries of Perjury and Rebellion. And herein those of our own Profession are
not without blame, in that I find many Tracts of Law, touching the full Rights
of the People; but not one complete Treatise of the whole Prerogative of the
King. One Judge Stanford has learnedly written upon the Statute of
Praerogativae Regis, made and enacted 17o. Edward 2. consisting chiefly in
Wardships and Tenures; but what is that to the large Prerogatvie of the King,
extending to other things? Had that been well done, things had not been so ill
done at this day.

The Laws of England, as well those which concern the Kings Prerogative, as
those that concern the People, are both of them so united to the Crown, that
the one cannot be without the other: insomuch as the safety of the one, is the
safety of the other; and the hurt of the one, is the hurt of the other: of
which many instances might be given, and some of them not written in Ink, but
in Blood; whereby a man would think it impossible for a King of England to
govern otherwise, than by his Laws. And therefore for preventing that
possibility, and all jealousies and fears touching the same, the King takes a
solemn Oath at his Coronation to maintain them all, which I will set down
verbatim, as it is to be found in an old Abridgment of the Statutes of H. 8. in
these words,

THat he shall keep and maintain the Rights and Liberties of the Holy Church,
Oath.
of old time granted by the righteous Christian Kings of England: And that he
shall keep all the Lands, Honors and Dignities righteous and free of the
Crown of England, in all manner whole, without any manner of minishment. And
the Rights of the Crown, hurt, decayed, and lost, to his power shall call
again into the ancient Estate: And that he shall keep the Peace of the Holy
Church, and of the Clergy, and of the People with good accord. And that he
shall do in all his Judgments, Equity and Right, Justice with Discretion and
Mercy. And that he shall grant to hold the Laws and Customs of the Realm,
and to his power keep and affirm them, which the Folk and People have made
and chosen: And the evil Laws and Customs wholly to put out: And steadfast and
stable Peace to the People of this Realm keep, and cause to be kept to his
power. And that he shall grant no Charter, but where he may do it by his Oath.

In which these things are shortly observable,

1. That the King ought by his Oath, under the pain of Perjury, to maintain the
Rights of his Crown, as well in time of War by his Sword, as in time of Peace
by his Laws, without any manner of diminution: And this belongs to him to do
so, as an essential part of his Office, mentioned in the Laws of St Edward, in
these words, Leg. Edw. cap. 17. de offic. Regis.
Rex quia Vicarius summi Regis esse, debet de jure omnes terras, and honores
omnes, dignitates Jura, and Libertates Coronae Regni hujus in integrum cum omni
integritate, and sine diminutione observare, and defendere, etc.

2. That if the Rights of the Crown be hurt, decayed or lost, the King is
bound as well in duty as by his Oath, to the uttermost of his Power to
endeavor the restitution of them to their ancient estate; And this is to be
done, as well for the safety and benefit of his people, as for his own honor
and dignity, as may appear by the Petition of the Lords and Commons in the
Parliament of 14o Rich. 2. in whose Reign the Crown suffered much loss and
damage; Rot. Parl. 14. R. 2. n. 15.
where they desire, That the Prerogative of the King and of his Crown may be
kept, And that all things done or attempted to the contrary might be redressed,
and that the King be as free as any of his Progenitors were.

3. That the King is to keep and maintain the Rights and Liberties of the
Church and Clergy of England, consisting not only in their Functions and
Jurisdictions, but in their Lands and Revenues.

4. That the Laws and Customs of the Realm, which the people have made and
chosen, are to be understood only of those Laws and Customs then in being at
the time of the taking of that Oath: For these Reasons;

1. The words are in the Preterperfect Tense, which the people have made and
chosen, not in the Future Tense, which they were hereafter to make, and which
the King could not swear to keep, till he knew what they were.

2. The words are chiefly meant of such Laws and Customs which lay in usage
and immemoriall prescription, which have their essence and life from time past;
For no Customs can begin by Law in time to come.

3. They were such Laws and Customs which the King at the time of the taking
of this Oath had a Legal power to judge of and determine, whether those Laws
were good or bad; for the evil Laws and Customs he was wholly to put out,
which must of necessity be referred to the time past or present: for of future
things he could possibly have no knowledge; Where also by like necessary
consequence it follows, that the King has a Supreme Vote in all Laws
whatsoever, to judge whether they be good or evil, for his Crown, his Church
and Kingdom, and accordingly to assent or disassent, or else it will be
impossible for him to avoid the Crime of Perjury.

5. The King shall grant no Charter but where he may do it by his Oath; Now the
Charter there meant, is the Charter of Pardon, granted by the King in the Cases
of Manslaughter, Robberies, 6. E. 1. Stat. de Gloc. c. 9.2. E. 3. Stat. de
Northton. c. 2. 4. E. 3. c. 13.10. E. 3. c. 2.14. E. 3. c. 15.
Fellonies, and other trespasses against the Peace; And what in these Cases
shall be done according to the Kings Oath, and what not, is resolved and
determined by diverse Acts of Parliament, which I have Quoted in the Margin.

So that by all I have said it plainly appears, that the King in respect of his
Duty and Office, in respect of his Oath, in respect of the Dignity and Honor
of his Crown, and the good of his People, is to Govern them by the Laws of the
Land. And so have I made good my sixth and last Conclusion.

THE CONCLUSION TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
FOr so I hope I shall find you in pardoning any error or mistake which may
happen in this Discourse against my will; when I shall acquaint you that it was
Penned in the time of my Imprisonment, and my Chamber, Study, and Books in the
middle Temple Sequestered from me.

In that very time when the greatest Monarch of all Europe, even the King of
Great Azor. Tom. 2. l. 11. c. 5. Col. 1668.
Britane was become a Prisoner, Great by Extraction of Birth, being legally and
successively descended from above an hundred Kings; Great in the abilities of
his mind, but Greatest of all in Piety, Patience, Wisdom, Fortitude, and other
lovely Graces and Virtues, etc. In the loss of whose Liberties I evidently saw
the loss of the Peoples: for the which, I had not long before suffered by
defending their Liberties against the Usurpations of the High Commission.

I hereupon thought it incumbent upon my soul to defend the Rights of the Crown
of England; the huge supporter of the Peoples Liberties, unto which, I held my
self bound in Duty and Conscience by a double Caution; First to my Prince by my
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, which I had taken five times; part of which
are to assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Praeheminencies and Authourities
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm.

Next to my Borough of Southwarke, where I was freely chosen their Burgess for
that Parliament, and maintaining theirs and the whole Peoples Liberties annexed
to that Imperial Crown; part of which Jurisdiction is to maintain their
Rights. Of which, that blessed Prince gave a signal testimony, by professing
at the time of his death, That he died a Martyr for the Liberties of his People.

After whose death; I saw with grief, what I ever feared would come to pass
with Horror; Liberty, Truth, and Peace, so much cried up and contended for,
quickly turned into Licenciousness, Lies and War: their Liberties confirmed to
them by above thirty Parliaments, and holden for diverse hundreds of years by
the Great Charter, they at that time held them by no other Tenure, than the
sharper Sword, and the stronger Arm.

Me thinks good Reader I still hear in my ears the woeful cry of the People
of England at that time, much like that in the Lamentations of Jeremy, The
Crown is fallen from our Head, the breath of our Nostrils is gone: woe unto us
that we have sinned. And this we long continued amongst us, and had done so
still, had not God who gives salvation to Kings, and by a miracle of Mercy
sent us a Deliverer our now gracious Sovereign, whom like another David, he
had often saved from the hand of Saul, and from his hurtful Sword. And
therefore you, and I, and all the people of England, as we have wonderful
cause to praise God for him; so have we cause mightily to pray for him. That
Almighty God who has appeared to him like to another Moses, as well in the
Flags as in the Bush, and delivered his soul from death, and his feet from
falling, would bless him with such a spirit of Government, that Judgment may
run down as Waters, and Righteousness as a mighty stream in all the parts of
his Dominions. And likewise would bless all his People with such a spirit of
Obedience, Isai. 2.4.
That they may beat their Swords into Plowshares, and their Spears into
Pruning Hooks; and that they may not learn War any more. But that instead of
the deformity of War, the Beauties of Grace and Glory may ever dwell in our
Land.

FINIS.
The Rights of the Crown.

Courteous Reader, These Books following, are Printed for Simon Miller, and
Sold by him at the Star in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Small Folio.
DOctor Lightfoot his Harmony on the New Testament, which will shorely be
reprinted with large Additions.

Astrology restored; or an Introduction to the language of the Stars in four
Books, by William Ramsey Gent.

The civil Wars of Spain in the Reign of Charles the fifth, Emperor of Germany,
and King of that Nation, wherein our late unhappy differences are paralleled in
many particulars.

A general History of Scotland, from the year 767 to the death of K James, etc.
By David Hume of Godscroft.

The History of this Iron Age, wherein is set down the true state of Europe, as
it was in the year 1500 also the causes of all the Wars and Commotions that
have happened to this present time; with the memorable sieges and battles;
together with the lively Effigies of the most renowned persons.

Mr Paul Baine his practical Commentary on the whole Epistle of Saint Paul to
the Ephesians.

The most pleasant and profitable History of Francion, wherein all the vices
that usually attend youth are plainly laid open, that the misfortunes of some
may teach others to abandon vice, done into English by a person of honor.

Eighteen Books of the Secrets of Art and Nature, being the sum and substance
of Natural Philosophy, first designed by Doctor John Wecker, and now much
enlarged by Doctor R. Read.

The Queen of Arragon, a Play in folio.

In Quarto large.
Jo. Barklay his Argenis, Translated by Sir Robert le Grise Knight, by his Late
Majesty's special Command with Figures or without.

Quarto Small.
An Experimental Treatise or Surgery, by Felix Wortz.

Abraham's Faith, or the good Old Religion etc. By John Nicholson Minister of
the Gospel.

The Anatomy of Mortality: By George Siroad.

Three T^eatises: 1 The Conversion of Nineveh, touching Prayer and Fasting. 2.
Gods Trumpet sounding to Repentance. 3. Sovereign preservatives against
distrustful thoughts and cares: By Will. Attersoll Minister of Gods Word at
Isfield in Sussex

Aynsworth on the Cantic.

Paul Baine his Diocesans Trial

Gr lle against Appolonius.

A Treatise of Civil policy etc. By Samuel Ru^herford Professor of Divinity of
St Andrews in Scotland.

Politic and Military Observations of Civil and Military Government,
containing the Birth, Increase, Decay of Monarchies, the carriage of Princes
and Magistrates.

Mr Pinchin his Meritorious price of man's Redemption, cleared.

Astrology Theologized, showing what nature and influence the Stars and
Planets have over men, and how the same may be diverted and avoided.

Wells his Souls Progress.

Christ tempted, the Devils Conquered; Being a plain Exposition on the fourth
Chapter of St Matthews Gospel: By John Gumbleden Min. of the Gos.

The Saints Society.

D. Stoughtons thirteen choice Sermons, with his Body of Divini y.

The Reasons of the dissenting Brethren concerning the Presbyterian Government,
together with the answer of the Assembly of Divines.

The Doctrine of man's Redemption by Edward Holioke

Camdens Remains.

O^ th doctrine of the Church of England, sweetly harmonizing with the
Confessions of Faith of all the Protestant Reformed Churches.

The Philosophical Touchstone; or Observations upon Sir Kenelme Digbye's
Discourses of the nature of bodies, and of the reasonable soul, by Alexander
Ross.

The Saints Triangles of dangers, deliverances, and duties, by Nathaniel
Whiting Minister of the Gospel.

The Confession of Faith, of all the congregational Churches of England agreed
upon at the Savoy, 1659.

The Description of the Universal Quadrant, etc. By Tho. Stirrup Mathem.

The whole Art of drawing, painting, limning and etching: collected out of the
choicest Italian and Germano Authors, by Alex Brown Practitioner.

Large Octavo.
A Treatise of the Divine Promises: By Edw. Leigh Esquire;.

The Rights of the Crown of England, as it is established by Law, by Edward
Bagshaw of the Inner Temple, and Apprentice to the Law.

Florus Anglicus, with the Lively Effigies of all the Kings and Queens, since
the conquest, cut in brass.

The Reconciler of the Bible, wherein above two thousand seeming contradictions
are fully and plainly Reconciled.

Evidences for Heaven, containing infallible signs, and real demonstrations for
Assurance of Salvation, published by Edm. Calamy

The Life and Reign of King Charles, from his Birth to his Death, by Lambert
Wood.

The Night-search, the second part: by H. Mill.

A view of the Jewish Religion, with their Rites, Customs and Ceremonies.

Useful Instructions for these Evil times, held forth in 22. Sermons, by Nich.
Lockyer, Provost of Eaton College

The Nullity of Church-Censu^es, or Excommunication, not of Divine Institution,
but a mere humane Invention: Written by the famous Tho. Erastus, and never
before Englished.

Small Octavo.
Ed Waterhouse Esquire; His Discourse of Piety and Charity.

Panacea, or the Universal Medicine; being a Discourse of the Admirable Nature
and Virtues of Tobacco: By Dr. Everard and Others.

A view and Defense of the Reformation of the Church of England, very useful
in these times.

Mr. Pet. du Moulin, his Antidote against Popery; published on purpose to
prevent the Delusions of the Priests and Jesuits who are now very busy among
us.

Vinditiae Gratiae Sacramentalis duobus Tractatulis comprehensae. 1. De
efficacia Sacramentorum in genere. 2. De efficacia Baptismi, quantum ad
parvulos quibus praefigitur.

Epistola Reverendissimi Patris Johannis Davenanti nuper Episcopi
Sarisburiensis.

Herberts Devotions, or a Companion for a Christian, containing Meditations and
prayers useful upon all occasions.

Rare verities; or the Cabinet of Venus unlockt, and her secrets laid open.

Extraneus Vapulans, or the Observator rescued from the violent but vain
assault of Haman Lestrange Esquire;, and the back-blows of D. Bernard an Irish
Dean: by P. Heylin D.D.

Ovid de Ponto, in English.

The Loves of Clerrio and L^zio a Romance.

Mr. Knowles, his Rudiment of the Hebrew Tongue.

A Book of Scheams or Figures of Heaven, ready set for every four Minutes of
times, and very useful for all Astrologers.

Florus Anglicus, or an exact History of England, from the Reign of William the
Conqueror to the death of the Late King.

Lingua, or the Combat of the Tongue, and five Senses for Superiority: a
serious Comedy.

The Spirits Touchstone; being a clear discovery how a man may certainly know
whether he be truly taught by the Spirit of God, or not.

The poor man's Physician and Chyrurgion.

Physical Rarities, containing the most choice Receipts in Physic and
Chyrurgery, for the cure of all Diseases Incident to man's body: By R Williams.
To which is added the physical Mathematics: By Hermes Tris-Megiston.

The Idol of Crowns, or the Relation of Wat Tiler's Rebellion.

The Christian Moderator, in 3 parts.

The Ra^onian Catechism in English.

The life of that incomparable man, Faustus Socinus ^enensis, described by a
Polonian Knight.

The Golden Fleece, or a Discourse of the clothing of England.

Dr. Sibbs his Divine Meditations.

Vigerius Precepts of Idiotismes.

Grotij Poemata.

Three Books of M. Matthews Minister at Swansey in South Wales.

1 The Messiah Magnified by the mouths of Babes in America; or Gaius and
Gamaliel, a helpful Father, and his hopeful Son, discoursing of the three most
considerable points. 1. The great want of Christ. 2 The great worth that is in
Christ. 3. The good way that is chalkt out by Christ

2. The New Congregationall Church, proved to be the old Christian Church, by
Scripture, Reason, and History.

3. The Rending Churchmember Regularly called back to Christ and his Church.

A physical Dictionary.

An exact History of the several changes of Government in England, from the
horrid Murder of King Charles the first, to the happy Restoration of King
Charles the second, with the Renowned Actions of General Monck, by F. D.

Duodecim.
Dr. Smith's practice of physic.

The Grammar War.

Posselius Apothegmes.

Fasciculus Florum.

Crashaw's Visions.

The Juniper Lecture.

Helvicus Colloquies.

The torments of hell shaken; or a Discourse with many proofs, showing that
there is not a punishment after this life for any to endure that shall never
end, by Samuel Richardson.

The understanding Christians duty, often to commemorate the death and passion
of our Lord and Savior Jesus; with the necessary preparatives thereunto.

The Christian Soldier, his Combat with the three arch-enemies of mankind,
the world, the flesh, and the devil.

Seasonable advice to the Apprentices of the Honorable City of London,
touching their duty to God, and their Masters.

Heinsius de Crepundi^s.

The History of Russia, or the Government of the Emperor of Muscovia, with the
manner and fashions of the people of that Country.

Drexeliu's school of Patience.

Drexelius his right Intention of every ones action.

A School or Nurture for Children, or the Duty of Children, or the Duty very
useful for all that intend to bring up their children in the fear of God.

Viginti Quarto.
The New Testament.

The third part of the Bible.

Sir Richard Bakers Meditations and Prayers for every day of the Week.

Plays.
The Ball.

Chawbut.

Conspiracy.

Obstinate Lady.

The London Chanticlers: a Comedy foll of various and delightful Mirth, never
before published.


