GOOD COUNSEL FOR EVIL TIMES.

OR, A PLAIN SERMON Preached at Paul's in London, April 16. 1648.

By EDW: BOWLS M. A. of Katherin-Hall Cambridge.

Printed by the desire and Order of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of that famous
City.

Psalm. 34. 12, 13, 14. 12. What man is he that desires life; and loves many
days, that he may see good?
13. Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile.
14. Depart from evil, and do good: seek peace and pursue it.
LONDON: Printed by F: Neile for Samuel Gellibrand, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's Churchyard.

1648.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD MAYOR, To the Aldermen and Common Council of
the City of LONDON.
GIve me leave to join You together in an Epistle, and may it be a pledge of
Union in all things that tend to an happy and speedy establishment of Truth
and Peace. The Kingdom is very sensible how considerable You are in the
welfare of it, especially as it now stands. And according to the influence you
have upon the public good or evil are the endeavors of the Enemies of our
reformed Settling to distract and divide you, for they see no other means to
destroy you, and those with you, whose welfare is bound up in yours. And in
this you are a resemblance of the Kingdom of whom a great Politician says,
that it is Magnum Animal neque interit nisi a seipso: and according to this
Axiom have the Enemies of our Religion and State framed their designs. The
zeal of Spain and Rome carried them on indeed at first to furious attempts, as
in 88. and Powder Treason; but when they saw they were not able to prevail that
way, they put on the Foxes skin, and have most studiously raised and fomented
jealousies and differences betwixt the King and Parliament, betwixt the
Parliament and Kingdom: not to mention those subdivisions lately stirred, which
I would not be so far guilty of keeping alive as to name them. So has it
fated with your renowned City, you have been to the Reformation and Liberty of
this Kingdom, what this Kingdom has been to the Protestant Religion in other
parts, a great support. The opposing party as impatient of such an adversary
(you know) directed the first fruits of their strength and malice against you
they were indeed interrupted in their way by the battle at Edgehill, but as
soon as they were recruted and recovered, how eagerly they pursued their former
purpose, Brainford can witness: but the next day when the City appeared so
unanimously, and heartily, for their own and the Parliaments defense, they saw
it was necessary to take another course, and try if they could become your
masters by design and fraud, and bring you to a cheaper ruin by making you
destroy one another. To this purpose several courses have been taken, and not
altogether without effect. But so long as there was a Common Enemy appeared,
there was a diversion of the humors, which since our late semblance of Peace
have broken out into violent and strange diseases, which have already
distempered the health, and go on to endanger the life of that famous City. The
best expedient to remedy this great evil, were doubtless a reconciliation of
those persons and parties who are now distant, but were in the best estate of
the City affectionate and unanimous. This is not only policy but piety, as by
a serious perusal of Jam. 3. from the 13. ver. to the end may appear.
Experience witnesses the hard task and fate of reconcilers, who lie betwixt the
extremes as corn betwixt the Milstones: But yet I must profess my self one of
them, and I had rather they grind me then one another.

To the accomplishing this great work, a special portion of the wisdom that is
from above, which is mentioned, Jam. 3. ult. is very necessary, which let us
beg on the behalf of all Christians, especially those whose influence into
public affairs requires a greater measure. A probable expedient hereunto may
be this, that extremities on both hands be laid aside, and persons that drive
them on. For of each party there are some parts so heterogeneous, that there is
little hope they should ever mingle together, neither is it beneficial that
they should while they so remain, for they tend to distraction, that is, to
destruction. And give leave to him that has many faults to complain of one:
That is, that those who have and might have agreed, have put so little trust in
God, and so little mutual confidence in each other, that they have chosen
rather to support and strengthen their factions (for that it is come to) with
persons less desiring their welfare then themselves of one another. And
therefore whatsoever persons* principles, or practices tend to bring us under
old revenges, or new confusions, should carefully be avoided.

There is hardly any man who is not in reason convinced, that the continuance
of this distance and opposition betwixt good men will certainly expose them to
the power and revenge of them who equally hate both, and yet how few are there
whom passion or faction will suffer to act accordingly. You will pardon the
mention of this odious word Faction, it is of mischievous consequence, and
deserves to be branded, for it will undoubtedly ruin both sides, especially
when there is a third to wait the advantage, and the issue. And he that would
be free from this evil, must not inordinately affect his own opinion or
interest, which will expose him to that inordinate course of making parties to
maintain it, but be content to have all his Propositions fairly examined;
neither must he look at persons more then things, as weak and angry men are
wont to do, having some men's persons so in admiration, as they most cry up, or
at least justify or excuse all their ways; and others in such detestation, as
to undervalue, blast and blemish all they say or do. It Is hard to find either
a man so good, as in some things he should not be declined: or so evil, that
there may not be some use of him: and if we could abstract from persons, and
let things and actions take their own demerits, much injury and misery might be
prevented. There have been many vicissitudes of late, and those that have been
highest have still lost themselves, and endangered others by extremities.
Moderata durant.
It Is now come to your turn again, and unless God grant so much wisdom,
self-denial, and forgetfulness, as may dispose toward moderation, it will
not, it cannot last. I add no more but an excuse, first, for this Epistle, if
plain dealing need one: and 2ly, for the Sermon, which when I composed, I was
so far from thoughts of the Press, that I never thought of a London Pulpit: it
has been a month delayed in hopes of an excuse. But since you will have it, I
submit with a homely but hearty complement, Much good may it do you. And the
God of peace give you peace always by all means: The Lord be with you all. So
prays

York, May 15. 1648. Your welfares faithful Servant, EDW: BOVVLES.

The Sermon.
EPHESIANS. 5. 15, 16. See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as
wise, Redeeming the time, because the days are evil.
THe Apostle Paul, a most eminent pattern to all Christians, 2 Cor. 11. 28.
especially Ministers, as he professes, that the care of all the Churches lay
upon him: so he peculiarly makes it good to the Church at Ephesus, to whom this
Epistle was directed. For besides that pains he took among them, and hazard
that he run for them, of which we read, Act. 19. foreseeing the dangers that
were toward them, he gives them a fair and faithful warning by the Elders,
Act. 20. 17. etc. and not content with that, when he was now prisoner at Rome,
he writes unto them this excellent Epistle not drawn from him by special
necessities and emergencies of error, as most of his other Epistles
particularly to the Corinthians and Galatians, but flowing from those natural
affections that he had to the Name of Christ, and the good of the Ephesians:
containing a most full and useful summary of the Gospel, which is digested
into two main parts.

First, a blessed discovery of the Doctrine of free grace and salvation by
Jesus Christ, handled principally in the first Chapter, additionally in the 2d.
and 3d.

Secondly, an earnest and pressing exhortation, to walk as becomes that grace
which is revealed in Christ Jesus, with particular directions thereunto, which
is the scope and substance of the latter part of the Epistle. And herein has
he left an imitable pattern to all those who would approve themselves able
Ministers of the New Testament, who must be equally careful to preach
salvation by Christ, and sanctification through him.

To preach grace without duty tends to Libertinisme, to press duty without
discovering the mystery of the Gospel, which is justification and salvation,
the righteousness of another, scil. Jesus Christ our surety in the Covenant
of grace, leads to formality, and the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees which is short of the kingdom of heaven. We must declare the whole
counsel of God, which is to live in Christ by faith, and to Christ by
obedience; and it is wisdom to unite them in the same discourse as much as may
be, in regard that men are so subject to disjoyne them. And we may learn from
this blessed Apostle, as our matter, so our method, which is to lay the
foundation of all holy obedience in the doctrines of faith and justification,
Matthew. 12. 33.
which tend to make the tree good by transplanting it from the degenerate into
the true Vine, and that must be done before the fruit can be indeed good: the
moulding of men by the force of outward rules and precepts, into a kind of
Gospel conversation, is not acceptable or lasting, unless the heart be
inwardly changed, and renewed by spiritual ingrafture, to which Evangelicall
dispensations are most serviceable, always supposed the necessity of
convictions of sin and misery. The doctrines of free grace without
superstructures of holiness, are but a foundation without a building, which is
ridiculous: the accumulations of duty and service without the foundation of
faith and regeneration, 1 Cor. 3. 10, 11
are a building without a foundation, which is but ruinous. The Lord make us
wise builders to lay the right foundation, and build proportionably thereupon.
Non prosunt singula juncta juvant.

Thus much I thought fit to premise, that I might not break in upon my Text,
which falls to be in the latter part of the Epistle among the exhortations and
directions unto holiness. In which, because the brevity of an Epistle would
not suffer an exact enumeration of particulars, the Apostle lays down some
general and comprehensive rules, and gives many precepts in few words, as in
the text, Walk circumspectly, and redeem the time, are not single, but
comprehensive instructions; which the Apostle urges from a double argument.

The first precept concerning circumspect or exact walking, is enforced from
the consideration of the condition of the persons, as we find by retyring to
ver. 8. Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord* walk as
children of the light. Time was when you were not only in the da^k, but
abstractly darkness; and then your stumblings and uneven goings, though they
were not to be warranted, yet they were not to be woundred at; but now you are
in the light, and the light is in you: therefore make use of your eyes, and
walk circumspectly.

The second concerning redemption of time, is persuaded by consideration of the
conditions of the times, the days are evil: opportunities of doing or
receiving good are rare, and transvolant, therefore watch them, and improve
them. The explication of the words shall be interlined in handling the
Propositions, to which I now proceed.

And the first I shall mention is rather a supposition then a proposition,
which yet will take up most of the time: and it is this.

There are some days fitly termed evil days. Prop. 1.
There need be no doubt made of this expression, or the sufficient ground of
it, when it is used by the Apostle Paul, the great Master of Language, or
rather by the holy Ghost, the wisdom of God speaking by him.

The method I propound to my self in improving this position, is this.

1. To show in what respect times are or are called evil.

2. To make an inquisition whether these present times are not so.

3. To adventure upon some essays and overtures at least, of bettering these
evil times.

To the first, and that by way of remotion.

1. Times are not naturally evil, nothing create, or concreate as time is said
to be, is so; God looked upon time for distinguishing and measuring whereof he
appointed the Sun and Moon, Genesis 1. 14. and saw it good.

2. It is not morally evil: nothing is capable of moral or sinful evil, but
the rational creature endued with understanding, and will, and subjected to
some moral rule. God has made those creatures obnoxious to this greatest
evil, whom he made capable of the greatest good, as men and Angels.

3. It is not Astrologically evil, as some men who would be wise beyond
sobriety vainly pretend; influences of heavenly bodies upon the earth, and the
fruits of it must be granted, but that is rather good and ill weather (to which
if our Almanac men would keep themselves, they would have enough to do) then
good or evil times; but that such and such positions and conjunctions in
Planets, should infer what the dispositions, actions, events of rational and
free men should be, is easily said and hardly proved by Scripture or reason, I
mean in words at length, and not in figures. What a quick and cross revolution
of the heavens was there when Jacob and Esau were born, that men so near in
birth should be so distant and different in manners and events? What secret or
unknown box is there, wherein those strong impressions at nativity are
conserved, notwithstanding the mutations in heaven and earth, the bodies and
minds of men? The holy Ghost indeed mentions signs in the Sun, and Moon, and
Stars, Luke 21. 25. but those are extraordinary, and such, as these pretenders
have little to do with. And indeed that trade had failed long since, had it not
been upheld by two rotten props, superstitious credulity on the one hand, and
fallacious ambiguity on the other. But I dismiss them with this character,
that they may justly be accounted fools among wise men, as they are accounted
wise men among fools.

To speak positively. Times are evil, though not naturally or inherently; yet
adherently and concomitantly Times are those vessels which contain all actions
and accidents, and are denominated according to what they are filled with;
sometimes pleasant, and sometimes such wherein there is no pleasure. They are
good times in which good befalls, evil in which evil: and this appears by
Scripture expressions, where the day of evil and an evil day are used
indifferently; I^^ 17. 17. 18.
and good days is all one with days to see or enjoy good: as appears by
comparing Psalm. 34. 12. with 1 Pet. 3. 10. For the more full understanding of
this expression, it is best to consult with Scripture, and see how it is there
used, and I shall mention three places to that purpose. Genesis 47 9.
First, that of Jacob, who in the account that he gives of himself to Pharaoh
says, Few and evil have the days of the years of my life been: that is,
troublesome, full of labor and sorrow; for the word rendered evil, though it
signify both evil of sin and punishment, yet must be taken rather for penally
evil. And who so reflects upon Jacobs pilgrimage, and considers his banishment
from his fathers house for fear of Esau, before whose envy he could not stand,
his hard entertainment with his Uncle Laban, the vexations of his wives, the
stupration of his daughter, the slaughter of the Sichemites by Simeon and Levi,
the defiling his concubine by Reuben, the selling of Joseph, the parting with
the staff of his age Benjamin: I say, he that considers these things, may well
bear with that expression of Jacob, Evil days. And in this sense is it used
also, Eccl. 12. 1. where old age being a bundle of infirmities, which are
reckoned up in the beginning of that Chapter, is called, The evil day.

Secondly, it is used, Ephesians. 6. 13. where we find mention made of an evil
day, which is the day of tentation, the time wherein Satan taking advantage (it
may be) of some outward evils, applies himself with all his strength and
subtilty to disturb and destroy a poor soul; and this is a worse day then the
day of affliction: for afflictions many times drive from sin, but tentations
have a tendency to it, and the nearer sin the greatest evil, the worse may any
thing be justly deemed.

Thirdly, there is another expression concerning times, 2 Timothy 3. 1. where the
Apostle speaking of the last days, says, there shall be (...), perilous,
difficult, or dangerous times; and declares wherein the peril of them should
consist, se: in many corruptions there enumerated, which must necessarily bring
many snares and punishments along with them. So that out of these places laid
together, we may more then guess at the Apostles meaning in this mention of
evil days, which seems to be this: the days are evil, that is, made up of a
complication of sins, snares, and miseries, which the word (...) imports, which
signifies not only ungodly, but unquiet, and troublesome; which by the way
intimates the restlesnesse that attends wickedness so c^ose, that one word holds
them, and one world must.

Of that which has been said, I shall make no other application then to take
notice of the difference betwixt the Theological and Astrologicall distinction
and judgment of times. Diviners say, that unhappie conjunctions in the Stars
produce ill times, cross accidents and occurrents: but Divines, Quanto
^^ctius, that not conjunctions, but corruptions in men are the causes of evil
times: and he that can take heed of sins, need not fear stars. Etsi fractus
illabatur orbis.

But I proceed to the second thing propounded in the prosecution of this point*
and that is a disquisition whether the times we live in may not justly be
called evil times. And this is a work not unnecessary, because there are many
duties that depend upon a right understanding of times; men know not how to
order their prayers, praises, services, to the best advantage, unless they
have some inspection to the times. It is not expected that every man should
have a political knowledge of the times, but a prudentiall and practical
knowledge is very expedient: the former frequently produces but a serving of
the time; but the latter a saving and improving time. 1 Chronicles 12. 32.
It was the commendation of the men of Issachar, that they were understanding
in the times, and knew what Israel ought to do.

If therefore inquiry be made, whether these times are evil, or not, the
verdict may be returned without going from the bar, the case is so evident
that they are evil, whether evil be taken with respect to sin or punishment.
But the question is of that moment, that a general answer is not sufficient;
let it therefore be considered wherein the evil of these times especially
consists.

And because the determination of this question is liable to much exception, in
regard of the different thoughts of men, who make the evil of the times to
stand in things that cross their own opinions and interests: I shall take a
safe and impartial course, and steer by the infallible compass of Scripture,
and have a more especial eye upon the 24. Chap. of Mat: wherein our Savior
makes a description of evil and dangerous times that were to fore-run the
destruction of Jerusalem, and the dissolution of the world.

1. Times abounding with errors and corruptions in doctrine may justly be
called evil times; goodness and truth are nearly allied, so also are evil
and error, which renders this position true, that erroneous times are evil
times. And I choose to begin with the mention of this kind of evil, because it
is the foundation of diverse other, many distractions and corruptions arising
hence. And this (how slightly soever some may think of it) is the most
remarkable evil our Savior takes notice of in that Chapter mentioned, Matthew 24.
where we find it three times taken notice of, viz: v. 5. Many shall come in
my Name, saying, I am Christ: and shall deceive many. v. 11. And many false
Prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many. v. 24. There shall arise false
Christ, and false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders: insomuch
that if it were possible they shall deceive the very elect. And if this be an
evil, which no good man doubts, these times must needs be evil, in which we
have not only many ordinary mistakes, and differences of lesser consequence
arising from diversity of light, incident to the best Churches, but there are
also Cavendae tempestates, 1 Timothy 1, 19.
and flenda naufragia: many dangerous departings from the faith, and shipwracks
concerning it; we meet not only with strong gales that scatter our ships, and
make them steer different courses, though they meet in the Haven at last, but
black and violent storms which bring some to wreck and ruin, and this must
needs be ill weather. For besides the Antichristian and superstitions dregs
which we have derived from the Apostasy of the Western Church (from whence we
are risen, but as Lazarus with our grave-clothes about us) from which we are
not yet thoroughly drained, the bold and dangerous errors and heresies which
long since infested the Eastern Churches concerning the Trinity, the natures of
Christ are raked up out of the ashes again, and offer to outface the daylight
of the Gospel: Vain Philosophy perks up again, and affronts Divinity concerning
the immortality of the Soul, as an handmaid that is heir to her Mistress. Not
to mention the Socinian, Arminian tenets, things not long since zealously
thrust out at the foredoore, but now slipping in again at the back-doore, and
would be looked upon as quite other things, because brought in by other
persons. And as if it were a small thing for us to be the common sewre of other
Countries, in which the confluence of strange opinions should meet, unless we
add something of our own. I believe we have added some which other places and
ages scarce ever dreamed of, though it be a dream, that all Churches are
dissolved, Ordinances lost, and not to be expected or recovered till new
Apostolical missions and commissions drop down from heaven among us. Which
opens a door for any man to be any thing, till at last he come to be nothing.
So that in this respect our times are undeniably evil.

2. Enormities and corruptions in manners render times very evil; this is also
mentioned by our Savior, Matthew. 24. 12. where it is said, that iniquity shall
abound, and the love of many wax cold. Sin is certainly the greatest evil, it
has no epithet bad enough to be joined with it, but one of its own make,
which is sinful: sin (...), it is the foundation of all miseries and
calamities which are but the spawn of it, and hell it self the fruit. Where sin
therefore with its retinue (which always follows it, sometimes at the heels,
sometimes at distance) abounds, the days must needs be evil. And if so the
days wherein our lot is fallen must submit to the censure of evil days, was
there ever any time that iniquity more abounded then now adays? was there ever
more prodigious swearing, more profane Sabbath-breaking, more abominable
uncleanness, more frequent murders, and thefts, beside that filthiness of
spirit, pride, malice, covetousness daily discovering it self, as much as
ever, and that is more then ever, because we have had more means to reclaim us;
the vanity of apparel deserves to be taken notice of among the rest, the naked
shoulders of women portend a scourge. We are fallen into the dregs of times,
and the dregs of wars are fallen among us. And all these evils are aggravated
by this among other circumstances, that as wicked Ahaz (whom the holy Ghost
points out as a man remarkably evil, and says, this is that King Ahaz) in the
time of our distress we sin yet more against the Lord, our old wounds are yet
unhealed, deep scars remain upon us, new dangers threaten us, and yet how few
are there who answer the Lords expectation, who hearkens after the fruit of all
this, but hears not us reflecting upon our ways, and the issues of them,
saying, what have I done? Many Orders and Ordinances there are tending to
Reformation, which meet with so much corruption, and so inveterate malice, that
they produce little effect, but the irritation and drawing forth the rage and
mischief that is bound up in the hearts of men. And these kind of evils are
very hardly restrained, and therefore like to go on till the measure of
iniquity be full, and that can produce nothing but desolation. In some cases
we want Laws, and Courts of trial, as matters of uncleanness, and the shelter
thereof. Clandestine Marriages, which are also diverse other ways pernicious:
and, by the way, it were worth the taking notice of by those in Authority, that
no things in the room of old and abused things, is not Reformation, nor any
friend to it, but makes the people, not altogether unjustly, cry out for their
rags again rather then go naked. And further, which is fundi nostri calamitas,
where we have Laws, we want Magistrates, or at least Magistrates want wisdom,
will, courage, fidelity, or something necessary to put them in execution. We
have many who in respect of calling are Gods, Psalm. 82.
but in their carriage are Idols; they have eyes and see not, ears have they,
and hear not; neither speak they right things, but rather hate him that
reproves in the gate, and abhor him that speaks uprightly* which is an evil
time, as you may find, Amos 5. 10. 13. Never had any poor Kingdom greater
occasion to complain in the language of the Church, Micah 7. 1, 2. Woe is me,
for I am as when they have gathered the summer fruits, there is no cluster to
eat: the good man is perished out of the earth: The best of them is as a brier.
v. 4. and this is our perplexity. And lastly, that which makes the times evil
in this respect, is, that in some places where there are Laws and Magistrates,
the spirit that works in the children of disobedience is broken so loose among
us, that open contempts and aff^onts are offered to them, of which you have had
too late a testimony in this famous City, which I am loath to keep in memory by
mentioning of it. And these things render the times exceeding evil.

3. Days may be called evil, in respect of wrath and punishment measured out
in them, as in explaining the point appeared. And our Savior also takes in
this, Matthew. 24. 7. And ye shall hear of wars, and rumors of wars, Nation shall
rise against Nation: there shall be famines, and pestilences, etc. Or as Luke
expresses it: Men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those
things that are coming on the earth: these are ill times, these are our times.
True, it is something better with us, then when our high ways were unoccupied,
our Cities besieged, our houses laid waste, and when God suffered evil and
unreasonable men to ride over our heads; but yet besides the deep impressions
of former blows which will be long wearing out, even in times of tranquillity,
besides the extraordinary burdens which present exigents bind upon our
shoulders, intrenching upon our plenty and liberty, we lie under fears and
rumors of wars, and of such as are like to be worse then the former, if it may
be; for now are men's spirits more exasperated, and their rage and discontents
boiled up to a greater height then formerly; and also it is Gods wonted method
to proceed from lesser punishments to greater, from whips to scorpions; Levit.
26.
and if men will not be amended, to punish them seven times more for their
fins. We have reason to suspect that our preservations not being seconded with
Reformation, may prove but reservations to greater evils. So that in respect of
evils felt and feared, our times may be called evil, Micah 2. 3.
as the Lord speaks by Micah, Behold, against this family do I devise an evil,
from which ye shall not remove your necks, neither shall ye go haughtily: for
this time is evil.

4. I may add one thing more which (as I may so speak) renders these times
completely evil, and that is the distractions and divisions of them. Dissension
is a mixture of sin and punishment, and in every respect renders times evil:
This also (that I may be true to my intention) we find mentioned by our
Savior, Matthew. 24. 10. Many shall be offended, and shall betray one another,
and hate one another. Times full of offenses and scandals are woeful times,
according to that speech of Christ, Matthew. 18. 7. Woe unto the world because of
offenses: these are days wherein many offenses are given, but more taken; many
cast stumbling blocks before others, few take care to remove them, but rather
aggravate them. We have already had one great division betwixt the friends and
enemies of Reformation, betwixt men that loved their own liberty, and those
loved the public liberty; and we thought the times bad enough in regard of
that difference, and the fruits of it, war, and the miseries attending on it.
But that fire though it was hot, yet it was natural, it tended to separate
things heterogeneous, and congregate things and persons of the same nature and
interest. But the divisions under which we now labor, are a more unnatural
fire, that separates things of the same kind, a fire from hell, that has much
heat, but little light with it, to direct what to do. Psalm. 55. 14.
Men that fasted, prayed, that have took sweet counsel together, and walked to
the House of God in company, that have lived, loved together, and been willing
to dye together, are become strangers, nay enemies to each other. And this
adds much to the heap of our sins and punishments; for envying and strife are
not only evils, but fruitful evils; Iam. 3. 16.
where ever they take place, they bring in confusion, and every evil work. If
love be the fulfilling the Law, and all obedience be comprised in it, certainly
the want of it is the sum of all disobedience: if Charity be the bond,
uncharitableness must needs be the bane of perfectness. And as it is a
punishment in it self, so it opens a gap to further, it exposes both parties to
the derisions and designs of a common Enemy* it makes the Philistines
rejoice, and the daughters of the uncircumsised triumph in expectation that
they shall have a cheap way made to the satisfying their lusts upon us, by
getting in at our own breaches. Let us therefore bewail the burning which the
Lord has kindled among us, and take heed of p^uring into these flames the oil
of false report, credulity, suspicion, mis-interpretation; but tears rather,
for the quenching of them.

Thus have I dispatched the former part of my work which is far the easier, The
way to better evil times.
and demonstrated the evil of these days: the latter and more difficult yet
remains, which is to hold forth some expedients or remedies for these great
evils: and let me endeavor to show you what is most likely to better these
evil days. And before I speak positively, let me in a word declare what is
not like to do it, or any thing toward it.

1. Negatively.
Murmuring, complaining, evil speaking, especially of those that are in
Authority, is not like to mend the times: Ill words corrupt good manners, and
ill manners hinder good times. ^ Pet. 3. 10.
The Scripture is clear in this case. He that will love life, and see good
days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no
guile. And this is seconded by the Apostle James, Chap. 3. who seems to refer
to days like ours, and begins, My brethren, be not many masters, etc. and
proceeds to show the licentiousness and exorbitancy of language to be the
cause of manifold mischiefs; he calls it a fire, a world of iniquity: that sets
on fire the course of nature, and is set on fire of hell. These times are a
sufficient comment on this text, especially if pens be taken in as well as
tongues, which are the worse of the two, because more permanent, Litera scripta
manebit. And if it were to any purpose, I could vehemently inveigh not so much
against the authors of our daily merry mischiefs, to whom that of Solomon is
appliable: As a madman who casts firebrands, arrows, and death, so is the
man that deceives his neighbor, and says, Am I not in sport? as against
those whose duty it is, and care it should be, to suppress them; if they
regard the honor of God, and the Kingdom, whose shame, besides their own,
these raging waves continually foam out, Hae nugae seria ducunt. But to return
to my intendment. What gained the Israelites by murmuring in the wilderness
upon every jealousy and discontent? surely nothing but displeasure from God,
and the loss of a good Land, which we are hastening to. And more particularly
the evil speakings, swellings, tumults against the Parliament and their
proceedings, is the most unlikely thing in the world to better the times: for
howsoever it must not be denied there are with them, even with them also
iniquities by us to be bewailed, by them amended; yet to traduce, calumniate,
and asperse them with evil language, now grown as common as brown paper and
packthreed in every shop, is in a great measure unjust; and where it is not
unjust, it is unwise. It is unjust, for howsoever they have not improved all
opportunities (which who is there that slips not) of establishing truth and
peace among us, howsoever there are many things wanting which should, and it
may be might have been done; yet many good works have they done, and for which
of these shall we stone them? I know it will be answered, For a good work we
stone thee not, etc. But consider their distractions, their tossings to and
fro, the manifold designs upon them to divide and destroy them, beside the
personal infirmities and allowances of every man, it may allay the spirits of
them who ever had any good opinion of them, or affection toward them; 1 Samuel
24. 1,
(as for others, I say nothing but what says the Proverb of the ancients,
Wickedness proceeds from the wicked). It is the fault and folly of men to
think that Magistrates, because they are called Gods, should be without
infirmity, though themselves lie in iniquity. They are indeed called gods, but
must dye like men, and they do live and walk like men too. The best of them
that we read of, Nehemiah himself desires to come off with a pardon, Lord
remember me for good, Neh. 13. 22.
and spare me according to the multitude of thy mercies. Let us deal with our
titular gods, as our only true God deals with us, who rejects not any good for
the evil, and infirmities that cleave thereunto; Ier. 2. 2.
but picks out integrity out of the midst of our infirmity, and remembers the
kindness of our youth when we grow worse, Mal. 3 17.
or at least weaker by age, who spares us as a father spares the son that
serves him.

2. And where this evil speaking is not untrue, yet it is very unpolitick (if
it be fit to use such a word here) and unwise; there may be ground for evil
reports, yet there can be no good fruit of them, especially as things now
stand. He is a very great stranger to this Nation, and the good of it, who
knows not how much it is concerned in the power and reputation of Parliaments,
what an high way were made to our ruin in their dishonor and destruction* to
make them vile, is but to pave a way to our own villanage, it were just such a
piece of policy, as for a company of men who live upon the Sea coast, and pull
down those banks which are their defense from the waves of the Sea, Psalm 65. 7.
and tumult of the people. It beasts were not beasts, they would never bark or
root up the tree that shelters them; let not men be beasts and do so: It is the
temper of people to love things past, to hate things present, and earnestly to
expect changes, accordingly we are very unsatisfied with our present condition.
But suppose a man stand upon a ragged rock where his feet are pained, will he
not consider where he is like to light before he leaps down? Let us be so wise
and know, that upon our demolishing this present structure, howsoever ruinous
enough, we can expect little better then what the Lord threatens to a people,
of whom he declares he would have no pity. Zach. 11. 6. the place may be
perused, and considered at leisure. But oh that while I plead for Magistracy,
Magistrates would plead for themselves, not by words and writings, but real
amendments, for nothing else will do it; and leave off faction, partiality,
private interests, and those things that tend to nothing but mischief and
misery, that would much better the times.

2. New commotions and wars are no way like to better the times, this also is
evident, Psalm. 34. he that would live many days to see good, let him seek
peace and ensue it; if ever it need ensuing it is now when it is flying so fast
from us. We have seen and felt what a big-bellyed evil War is, how fruitful
in the twins of sin and misery. What through the dissolution of Courts, and
dissoluteness of camps, it makes iniquity overflow like a common deluge. We
see how dearly that little good that is gotten by war cost us; we cannot have
Religion settled but there must first be no Religion, or twenty religions as
they are called: We cannot have Law, but by breaking Laws; nor Liberty, but we
must first be (as it were) slaves. Who so thinks by new stirs to prevent
errors and oppressions, exceedingly mistakes; for error is kept up by
confusion, as mud by stirring the water which would settle to the bottom after
a little quiet. Who gains any thing by war, but he that has nothing to lose.
Believe it before you feel it, the little finger of the next war is like to be
heavyer then the loins of this (though broken) Peace. Those that now so
studiously foment new broils, suppose they should prevail, yet doubtless our
fate abides them, which is mutual animosi ies and divisions: for if they have
not as many ends to bring together as other men. I am much mistaken; but taking
in the certain hazard with the uncertain event, the people had better learn to
pray without book to be prepared for the Sacrament before they receive it, to
submit to Church Discipline, and Taxes also for a time, then further new
commotions, which will be bitterness in the end, beside the ruggedness of the
way.

3. The opening of a back door for the receiving in again of old Offices,
Orders and Ceremonies in the Church is not so hopeful a way to better times as
many imagine: It is indeed a question whether the abolition of them might not
have been more graduall, that the hearts of people might have been prepared to
the Lord; but the dispensations of providence, and the Authority of Reformers
having so ordered things, that they are abrogated; to resume them stands
neither with prudence nor piety: as for the matter of piety, sure there was
little in them, neither is there so much in any external thing as may be
supposed before it is tried. Their nature must be very much abstracted from
their practice, Matthew. 15 13.
or they must necessarily go in the number of plants which our heavenly Father
never planted. Neither in prudence is it hopeful, for if not more, yet more
considerable persons to the true welfare of the Kingdom will be disengaged by
the retaining those forms and formalities, then by rejecting them: and my
reason is this; Those that assert them do it ordinarily more out of faction
then conscience, for I perceive many ready to fight for a Common Prayer book,
who never made any conscience of hearing it, but would leave the Priest and
Clerk almost desolate, and faction or humor, though very busy and earnest for
a time, yet is easilier satisfied then conscience; and the fruit of readmitting
such things would be in probability this, a fire would break out of those
brambles to consume the Cedars of Lebanon.

4. As not the opening a back door to old Superstitions, so neither the
setting wide a pair of broad gates to a new Toleration would contribute
hereunto; if it should produce some present peace, yet that peace would be both
miserable and short; it would be miserable, because of the loss of Truth,
which is the foundation and beauty of peace in all Christian Kingdoms; at the
best it would but render our Kingdom, as the French speaks of a beautiful
harlot, a Paradise for the eye, but a Purgatory for the soul. And were it
sweet, yet it could be but short, for where Religion is so much taken to heart
as it is in this Kingdom, and not so much swallowed up in worldly interests as
in some other, it would be very hard to conserve peace in the middst of so many
differences. I speak not, as if there might not, or ought not to be a mutual
forbearance among Christians who hold the head, and walk as becomes the Gospel,
and disturb not the public peace and welfare of the Church, seconded with an
endeavor of restoring one another to unity, in a spirit of meekness; for that
men should in all points agree, is rather to be wished then hoped, it is
reserved for the happiness of heaven, and not allowed for the lot of this
pilgrimage; and if differences were wisely distinguished, we should have more
peace, and never the less Truth among us. But that way should be given to a
licencious, lawless, boundless, Vorstian, libertas Prophetandi, as its
called, that every one whose brain is big of some new conceit, or the
transmigration of an old error, should have the Midwifery of a Toleration to
produce and propagate it, how soon would it turn both Church and Kingdom into
a Babel of confusion. The fruits of this practice have been found in Poland,
and Transylvania. And whereas it is usually objected, that some place nearer
hand flourishes, notwithstanding this: I answer, or rather ask in what they
flourish, is it in the life and power of Religion, or in other things only?
And let it also be considered, whether this indifferency and connivence there,
has not given advantage to a secret and subtle enemy, to undermine the very
foundations of their liberty; the issues whereof may too soon appear. Where all
Religions, or all things called religion are exercised, the product is commonly
no religion, or a prevalency of the worst. Therefore never let us think to
establish our selves with those things, for which other Churches have been
threatened, and probably wasted, as of Thyatira and Pergamus, Rev. 2. 14. 20.

5. To these I may add a fifth consideration, and its this. No violent or
sudden change of Civil Government according to the Idea's and chimeraes in the
minds of more witty then wise men is likely to better these times. If things
could be acted as easily as imagined, and compassed as soon as contrived, it
were another matter. But revolutions of times and States are the fancies of
men, but the works of God. It is said indeed of some, that they shall think to
change times and Laws, Dan. 7. 27. but it is the power and privilege of the
most high to change times and seasons, to remove Kings, and set up Kings, Dan.
2. 21. The weight of Kingdoms is too great to be turned by the weak engine of
humane invention; God uses to suit providence and spirits of men to great
works when he intends them; and it is he that makes agreements of people, and
not a few of the many. And those dreams of parity in Civil affairs is unequal
and impossible. Philosophers say of natural bodies, Non datur temperamentum ad
pondus: because that body could consist no where were there not a predominant
element to determine it. It Is as true of civil and politic bodies. Those that
now are for equality while they are inferior, would be for superiority when
things were equal; if the Vine and the Olive were taken away, the Bramble
would rule over the trees: for some body will. Thus we see what will not do the
business so much desired: let us briefly consider what will. And to this
purpose know in one word, Reformation would do the work: and that,

1. In Religion, the settling the affairs of which would have a very great
influence into an alteration of times for the better. For not only men that
have the power, but even all that have the form of it will be ill at ease till
it be established. And more especially it being acknowledged that the God of
heaven has the sovereignty of times and seasons in his hand; this must
necessarily be granted, that to procure better times, must be to comply with
that which the Lord looks upon as his main interest (if I may call it so) which
is the ordering the affairs of his Church, and that in Doctrine and Worship.
Truth is a glorious beam of the Sun of righteousness, I mean Gospel truth, the
Word of truth, the Gospel of salvation, which God is very choice of, Ephesians. 1. 13.
how slightly soever men may esteem it, and toss it at their pleasure; the
foundation of that stately structure was laid in the blood of his Son, and has
been raised by the blood of his Saints: and who so would have the eye and heart
of God to be toward them, must have theirs to his truth. To the bettering
therefore of these days, how useful and acceptable would it be, how pleasing
to God, and profitable to men, if the more gross injuries and affronts offered
to the truth of God were more discountenanced, and punished; especially if
pertinacy and contumacy be added thereunto. And so to make a graduall progress
to a more full vindication of it by a mixture of power and means of
information. There are some damnable heresies, that bring swift destruction to
persons and places, and there must not be delay in them, there are opinions and
practices against the light of nature, and evident light of Scripture, that
have been broached in these licentious times, which can hardly pretend to
conscience, which should be carefully repressed. Let not men be afraid of
endangering peace by asserting truth. If it were so, Prove. 23 23.
yet it were no just plea, because we are bid to buy the truth, but not to sell
it, no not for peace; though that be a pearl, it is not the pearl of price: but
it will not be so, beside the meraphisicall relation of verum and bonum, Zech
8. 16. 19. Isa. 39. 8.
you will find a frequent connection of them in Scripture, Truth and peace.

So for Worship, much has been done by Authority that way, for the draining of
it from the muddy mixtures of humane ceremony and invention. Only the
coldness of inferior offi^ers trusted with execution of Laws, together with
the corruption of men addicted to the easiness of externals in Religion, have
rendered them in a great measure unprofitable; so tha^ men are left still
halting betwixt God and Baal, saying (...) after a new fashion, and holding the
people in hand that there is yet hope of a re-establishment of former customs
whereby an intolerable envy and mischievous prejudice is raised against them
who practice Reformation. And that God may be pleased in worship, you must look
not only to avoid superstition, but formality also, the usual bane of
Religion in places where it is much professed. Remember that God is a Spirit,
bare words and externals hold no communion with him, he will be worshipped
sutably, that is, in spirit and in truth. I doubt the quarrel mentioned, Isa.
29. 13. is executed upon us, and upon the same ground; we have in our ordinary
and extraordinary duties too frequently honored God with our lips, when our
hearts have been far from him; and therefore is the wisdom of the wise men
perished, and the understanding of the prudent hidden.

And as a fence to both these, how necessary also were it that Government were
settled, according as the most considerable part of Godly men have advised. Let
it not be looked upon as too rigorous, it is not found so in other places where
it is exercised, remember whose language it is, Let us break their bands in
sunder: but lest this Scripture should be misapplyed, let men take heed of
putting of their own rules under the notion of divine precepts, and in some
circumstantials rather be content with the undoubted title of Christian
prudence, then the questionable tenure of divine right. It may be said we want
matter for this new building; it is too true, but better an hedge with some
unsound stakes in it, then none at all. But to prevent this great mischief, how
necessary were it that more then ordinary care should be taken for removing
scandalous and insufficient Ministers, and enemies of Reformation: for as
things now stand in many places, some Presbyteries would be looked upon as
knots of good fellows, and others as conspiracies of disaffected persons. It
was once a ground of commendation laid by the Jews on the behalf of the
Centurion, He loved our Nation, and built us a Synagogue: but how much more
commendable would it be in any that give us reason to say, He loved our
Country, and sent us a faithful Minister? Let us walk by this principle,
which is certainly that the saving of Kingdoms, as well as souls, depend upon a
good Ministry. And let me add one thing more, 2 Chronicles 11. 17.
that is, a tender regard to such as are indeed Saints of God, who are very
dear to him: If they be really so, they will not put us to much expense of
charity or patience, Matthew. 25 45.
let them have what is fit and necessary. The Lord will take it very kindly at
our hands, and he is able to requite us, for the King of Saints is also King of
Nations. Let no man think that ^lacking Reformation, and gratifying the
back-friends of it i^ retarding it, can be a safe way to settle us. That one
instance of the Jews returning from Captivity, may be a sufficient caveat for
men to give up a begun Reformation, notwithstanding all opposition. They took
their interruptions for sufficient excuses for not going on with the Temple
work, but it would not be so taken; for all their outward advantages, to which
they addicted themselves, were blasted by that neglect as will clearly appear
to him that reads Hagg. 1. 6, 7.

2. Reformation in matters of justice is exceeding necessary to better these
evil days. Scripture, reason, experience tell us so, Amos 5. 15. Establish
judgment in the gate, it may be the Lord will be gracious to the remnant of
Joseph. We have the same God to deal with who said it, and changes not. Hear ye
the Word of the Lo^d ye house of David, execute judgment in the morning, and
deliver him that is spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor, Ier. 11. 12.
lost my fury go out like fire, and none can quench it, because of the evil of
your doings. It is highly pleasing to the Lord, to see men follow that which is
altogether just. Deuteronomy. 16. 19, 20. And as in Religion it is so, so in reason it
must be so; Justice which is a giving to each their due, has a natural and
necessary tendency unto establishment, it settles the spirits of men. It is
therefore called by the holy Ghost, The judgment of truth and peace, because
of its influence thereunto: Zach. 8. 16. Nothing has done more mischief to
present Authority, then the unequal distribution of rewards and punishments,
and the wretched partialities which factions, favors and relations have put
men upon. Whereas if we could follow justice, or that which is altogether just,
we might live and inherit the Land which the Lord has given us. But yet let
men take heed of seeking justice by violence, lest we give occasion to the old
sad complaint, Proh quanta injustitia in quaerenda justitia.

3. To this must be added personal reformation; let men frame and fancy what
new moulds and devices they will for bettering the times, till men and manners
be better it will not be; times are always alike in themselves, they have no
evil but by concomitancy, and reflection cast upon them from the evil of men.
Therefore let not us wander in untrodden paths and ways not cast up; but ask
for the old way, and the ancient paths that we may find rest; and what are they
but the prescriptions of the Lord? 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. If my people shall humble
themselves, and pray, and turn from their evil ways; I will hear in heaven,
forgive their sin, and heal their land. Walk by this rule; Unholy men make
unhappy times. Let none say to the prejudice of the Kingdom and his own soul,
What can my leaving my profaneness, covetousness, uncleanness do good to the
Nation? Yes, it may. God does not power out his indignation upon a people till
the measure of iniquity be full: it is not indeed for one man, or a few, to
empty the vessel of sin in this Nation, but yet they may keep it from being
full. But howsoever, if thou can not save a Kingdom, yet it is a good way
toward the saving of a soul to repent and reform, if withal the heart be
sprinkled with the blood of Christ, Heb. 5. 9.
the price and author of salvation to them that obey him. Never doubt of the
fruit of amendment, Prove. 11. 18.
for he that sows righteousness has a sure reward. It is no small matter to
be brought under the protection of those precious promises made to righteous
men, Psalm. 112. 4.
as that light shall arise to them in the midst of darkness; that in the days
of famine they shall be satisfied; that their very enemies shall be at peace
with them when their ways please the Lord: that he shall not be afraid of
evil tidings. Psalm. 112. 7.
And let Magistrates, masters, parents, according to their double engagements,
bestir themselves herein; it must be confested they are upon much disadvantage
in these loose and lawless times, Psalm. 32. 9.
when men are grown as the horse and mule, whose mouth must be holden with a
bridle: but yet there is no sitting down, nor giving way to the torrent of
iniquity. The Waterman going against wind and stream, does not because of the
difficulty lay down his Oars, and suffer himself to be carried down into the
Ocean; but plyes his work the harder, and redoubles his strokes: so must those
in Authority not suffer themselves to be carried down by the floods of
ungodliness risen up among us, but redouble prayers and pains, and use more
vigilance and courage then ever, lest they be carried down to the waves of the
sea, and madness of the people. And oh that London would look to Reformation,
and do it is first works, take heed of profaning the Lords day, and opposing the
vindication of it; that they would avoid and abhor that frequent drinking
healths, not so much of good fellowship, as of faction, which were wont to be
confined to Taverns, but are now got into private houses, Ier. 13. 13, 14.
and public streets, and are ready to fill us with drunkenness, and dash us
one against another. The reckoning of these drinkings is like to be very sharp,
unless we be more sober and vigilant.

Lastly, all this must be accompained with humble, and hearty, frequent and
fervent prayer; it is evident enough, that as nothing has been done, so
nothing can be done to the happiness of this Church and Nation, and the
bettering of these evil days, but by the hand of God, which he is pleased to
lift up on every occasion, though many will not see it; and therefore if we
would engage the Lord, who works all our works for us, we must take the
course that deals most immediately, and effectually with him, which is prayer;
and how happy news were it to hear that the spirit of prayer and
supplication, which in so eminent a manner rested upon this City 7 years, since
were powered out afresh upon it, the hand of the Lord is not shortened, let not
our hearts be straightened: his ear is not heavy, let not us be silent: If we
would have him stretch out his hand for us, let us stretch out our hands toward
him. Do not think the Lord will forsake his wonted method, of which we read,
Ezekiel. 36. 37. and Jerem. 29. 11. 12. and let this great duty be performed
aright, and to that purpose it is a useful caution, that men look to the matter
of their prayers, that they be according to the will of God, and not the
imaginations of our own hearts; many cross Petitions are put up to heaven,
because men make their opinions and wishes the rule of their prayers, instead
of the holy and unchangeable will of God; it were sometimes good that men were
more general in their prayers, and not limit the holy one of Israel as they
do, its possible to be too particular in prayer, as well as too general in
preaching. And also remember that as prayer is a Chariot, in which the soul
mounts up to heaven; so it must be a fiery Chariot, a fervent prayer, 2 Samuel 24
24.
it is not a lazy, God send Peace: or a cold, God save his Church, that will
avail; God will not be served with that which costs us naught, it must be the
fervent effectual prayer of the righteous that must avail; and if we would
have our prayers speed, we must look they be well spirited, to that end let me
intimate to you 4 wheels of this fiery Chariot.

1. A spirit of faith; it is the strict injunction of the Apostle, that we ask
in faith, nothing wavering: which we are very subject unto, Iam. 1.
especially in these distracted times. The Sea by reason of its unquietness is
hardly ever still but working, but much more in a storm; so is it with us, we
carry an evil heart of unbeleife within us always unsteady, but especially in
evil times when the winds raise waves. Unbeleif unsettles as the spirits of
men, so their estates also. Isa 7. 9. It was unbeleif that kept Israel out of
the Land of Promise, and made them wander in a wilderness forty years; Heb.
3. 17. 18.
and as our punishment is like theirs, we spend our days in vanity, that is,
in a fruitless tossing to and fro, and our years in trouble: so our sin is
like theirs also, we believe not for all the wondrous works of God. Psalm. 78.
32. 33.
As God gives promises to ground faith, so he adds providence to build it up;
we have had many of these, and yet are very low: take heed of distrusts and
despondencies, they disadvantage us both in heaven and earth.

2. A spirit of humility: and this is no way inconsistent with the other: a
heart may be raised in faith, and yet abased in humiliation; these two graces
mutually cherish one another. The Lord expects at our hands that our own sins
and his chastisements upon us should lay us low, that we should say with the
Church, I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against
him. He hearkens what we say in these evil days, and its to be doubted few
speak aright, or say what have I done. Cognitio reflexiva, est facile
deflexiva: We are ready enough to say, what has the Parliament done? What has
the Army done? But who says, what have I done? Oh, beloved, let us lie down in
our shame, and be covered with confusion. Ier. 3 25.
Let us give glory to the Lord our God, before he cause darkness, and our feet
stumble upon the dark mountains; those that do it shall find that expression,
Ier. 13. 16.
Job 22. 29. made good unto them, when men are cast down, they shall say, there
is lifting up; for he shall sav^ the humble person. Descendendo coelum
ascenditur.

3. A spirit of love is necessary, as in general with regard to the times, so
particularly with respect to prayer: for the Apostles bids, that pure bands
without wrath, as well as doubting, be lifts up to God; 1 Timothy 2. 8. envy and
uncharitableness, strife and division force the spirits of men, and render
their services unsavory unto God; it is not quarrelling and questioning will do
the thing we would have; The wrath of man works not the righteousness of
God. Jam. 1. 20. Wisdom and mecknesse go together, Jam. 3. 13. They that are
wise must be meek and gentle to those that are otherwise, and give soft answers
to hard questions, Prove. 15. 1.
that wrath may be prevented and pacified. To further this so wanting, and so
necessary disposition, consider,

1. That envying, strife, hatred, variance, and such like, are fruits of the
flesh, as well as adultery, fornication, and uncleanness: Gal. 5. 19, 20. And
you that would think it an horrible disgrace to your se^ves, and dishonor to
God, to be found guilty of the latter: take heed of the former, which is part
of that filthiness of spirit we are bid to cleanse our selves from, as well as
filthiness of the flesh. 2 Cor. 7. 1.

2. That most of the things contended about, will hardly be found worth the
contention; and that many quarrels are upon mistakes, rather then real
differences: and consider how earnestly the Apostle obtests the Corinthians to
love and unity. 1 Cor. 1. 10. and so the Philippians, 2. 1. places which we
read not, or mind not.

3. That God has now given a fair intimation of union and love among all those
who love his truth and Gospel, and the Nation they li^e, in, by suffering a
common Enemy again to appear among us, and against us; and if we will not take
notice of it at the first, he will undoubtedly bring us to union in affection
by communion in ^ffl^ction: for whatsoever designs men have, this is likely to
be one of the designs of heaven upon his own people, by fair means or foul to
bring them to some better compliance and correspondence, and to eat out that
spirit of bitterness and malice, humors so unbecoming the Gospel, and the body
of Jesus Christ.

4. To these three must be added a spirit of thankfulness, which is very great
advantage to prayer, and to the times, as the Apostle intimates in his
direction to the Philippians, Phil. 4 6.
Be careful for nothing: but in every thing by prayer and sit plication, with
thanksgiving, let your requ^sts be made known unto God. If we consult the
catalogue of sins, that renders the last days perilous, we shall find
unthankfulness among them. Ingratitudo est ventus urens and exiccans: it is a
dry and parching wind from the wilderness that blasts and wastes all our
mercies. It Is true the days are evil, but yet they are not so bad but they
afford matter of praise, if we did not want hearts more then mercies. These
times are like those mentioned. Zach. 14. 6. neither clear nor dark, night nor
day. If we would have it light in the evening, set not unwholesome and
unthankful vapors ascend from us. Our times are checkered with white and
black, let not us by unthankfulness blot our the white, and make them worse.
There are mercies in our Parliament, in our Armies, in our Liberties, in our
degree of Reformation, if ill humors were not fallen into our eyes so as not to
see them; when the miseries which these mercies yet in some measure prevent, 2 Chronicles 15. 3
we shall find and confess them so. Blessed be God, we are not in so ill a
condition as Israel in the first days of Asa, when they were without the true
God, without a teaching Priest, and without Law: We have the knowledge of the
true God dispersed among us more then ever, more preaching Ministers, more good
Laws then formerly, though it is true that E^ror has crowded in at the same
door of Liberty where Truth entered: yet let us not d^own all our deliverances
in discontents, the degrees of mercy that are vouchsafed us let them not be
swallowed up with murmuring, and impatience; let us not so requite the Lord,
like a foolish people and unwise, lest he withdraw his hand from our
protection, and leave us to eat the frut of our own ways, which is a
forfeiture of favor by our follies. If our prayers could be carried on with
these wheels, there might be good hope they should be as the sword of Saul, and
the bow of Jonathan which returned not empty.

And thus have I detained you with these plain though not impertinent truths;
and lest I should shut up without any thing of the main Proposition in the
text, give me leave at least to explain it, and let your wisdom and goodness
apply it. The Truth is this.

That it becomes and behooves a Christian to walk circumspectly, Prop. 2.
and redeem the time in evil days.

It would here be enquired, what it is to walk circumspectly: the word in the
original is (...), which Etymologists say may be derived from (...), to go to
the utmost or height, to be accurate or exact: and I think it may contain three
things.

1. To walk to the utmost of the rule, to the very corners and extents of the
word of God, without making any willing dispensations in sin to commit, or duty
to omit. This David speaks of himself, Psalm. 119. 108. I esteem all thy
precepts concerning all things to be right: and I hate every false way. And
herein was Jehu defective, 2 King. 10. 31. he was exact in destroying Ahab and
Baal, but he departed not from the sin of Jeroboam; therefore it is said, he
took no heed, he was not circumspect to walk in the way of the Lord. Not to
walk exactly in this, gives the Lord occasion to complain as of the Church of
Sardis, I have not found thy works (...), perfect, or filled up before God;
there are gaps or spaces in thy obedience.

2. It is to walk (...), the utmost in respect of strength, that is, in doing
that which is commanded to lay out the ut most of those parts, gifts, graces
that God has given us. A Minister walks exactly in his Ministry, when he
obeys the precepts of Paul to Timothy, 1 Ep. 4. 13. in meditating on divine
things, and giving himself wholly to them. A Christian then walks exactly, when
he does not only pray, and read, but do it diligently, watchfully. A man
cannot live at the height of his estate, nor walk at the top of his natural
strength, it will waste him soon, because those things have defectible
principles, but it is otherwise in spiritual things, which we derive from an
abounding and abiding life hid with Christ in God: a Christian may run and not
be weary, because in the Lord he has righteousness and strength. Let us
therefore do our best, and we shall do better. Be not slothful in business:
but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord: Romans 12. 11.

3. To walk circumspectly, or accurately, seems to imply something more, and
that is walking wisely; the two things already mentioned make up honest
walking, as when we walk to the utmost of the rule for the matter, and the
utmost of our spiritual strength for the manner of our obedience: but wise
walking is aliquid amplius, that is, there are diverse circumstances attending
actions, as time, place, company, person, and such like, which have a strong
influence into actions, sometimes to alter the very nature of them. Now he that
would walk circumspectly, or accurately, must look so to the circumstances of
his actions, as to set them off with the best advantage as may be: and
therefore that which is here called walking circumspectly, is called, Walking
wisely toward them that are without. Col. 4. 5. It is the part of wisdom to
reduce knowledge to profitable and seasonable action. And happy is he that can
walk thus circumspectly: for howsoever the vain world brands exact walkers with
the title of precise fools, yet the holy Ghost passes a contrary censure, and
declares circumspect walking, wise walking: and indeed the loose walker will be
found the greatest fool, a fool at his latter end. Jer. 17. 11.

Know therefore that it becomes us all to walk circumspectly; it is our credit,
and the credit of the Gospel that we do so. Then shall we not be ashamed when
we have respect to all the Commandments: when we do the great things of the
Law, Psalm. 119. 6.
and leave not the lesser undone. Matthew. 23. 23, 24.

And also it behooves us, it is for our profit as well as our credit; it tends
exceedingly to our peace, which is most worth looking after in times of
trouble: it will be a great support in the evil day to say with Paul, 2 Cor.
1. 12. This is my rejoicing, the testimony of my conscience, that in all
simplicity and godly sincerity, not according to fleshly wisdom, but the grace
of God, I have had my conversation: As young lusty men laugh at others who
have paid dear for their intemperance, when they see them cautious in their
diet, and hit them in the teeth with the Proverb, Qui vivit medice, vivit
misere: but when gouts and rheumes come upon them they blame their own folly.
So will it be with carnal and careless Christians, who laugh at them that are
scrupulous, and make conscience of things which they so easily swallow, they
will find them bitterness in the end. Let us therefore walk circumspectly.

A word also of the last redeeming the time or opportunity, (...), which
imports three things likewise.

1 A price, for it must be bought. 2. A loss, for it must not be barely
bought, but redeemed. 3. An use, for what we buy, or redeem, it is to be
supposed we buy it for some use. The practick hereof is this. That whereas
every man is guilty of loss of time, and has morgaged a great part of this
precious treasure to sin, Satan, and the world; let him be careful to redeem
it, to buy it out of their hands, though with the loss of ease, pleasure,
profit, plenty, or any other thing: and having so redeemed it, to employ and
improve it to the honor of God, with whom we are so infinitely behind in point
of service, and the working out our own salvation with fear and trembling.

Let not therefore men talk idly of driving away Time, which the Apostle
speaks of redeeming: when did you ever meet with any man so wretchedly unthifty
as to say, What shall I do with my land, with my money, it burns in my purse?
Yet such, and worse is the madness and folly of those unthrifts, who talk of
driving away time, which is more precious then gold and silver, which passes so
swiftly, slily, and irrecoverably, especially in such dangerous and tickle
times as these are, when our times, liberties, and opportunities hang
continually in doubt before us. Whatsoever vain men say now of passing away
time, if God awake their hearts, it will be one of their greatest troubles that
they have so spent it, and one of their most earnest, though vain, wishes to
recall it. Know therefore that, as Solomon says, to every purpose there is a
time; so to every time there is a purpose; there are no ferie, in idle days or
hours in the Calendar of heaven, but God has appointed every day and hour to
be filled up with something that is either work, or tends to it. Labor
therefore so to improve time, as you confidently look over unto eternity, Rev.
10. 6.
and not fear when the Angel shall stand on the earth, and lift up his hand to
heaven, and swear by him that lives for ever, that time shall be no more.
Lord, teach us so to number our days, as to apply our hearts to wisdom: 2
Pet. 1. 10. 11
and to give all diligence to make our calling and election sure; that so an
abundant entrance may be administered unto us, into the everlasting Kingdom of
our Lord and Savior.

FINIS:

