MEDICINA MAGICA TAMEN PHYSICA: Magical, but Natural Physic. OR A Methodical
Tractate of Diastatical Physic.

Containing the general Cures of all infirmities: And of the most radical,
fixed, and malignant Diseases belonging, not only to the Body of Man, but to
all other Animal and Domestic creatures whatsoever, and that by way of
TRANSPLANTATION.

With a Description of a most excellent Cordial out of Gold, much to be
estimated.

Published by Samuel Boulton, Salop,

Ars non habet inimicum nisi ignorantem.

London, Printed by T. C. for N. Brook, at the Angel in Cornhil, 1656

TO The Right Honorable The Marquess of DORCHESTER.
My Lord,
THE Candor of your affections to these Aesculapian Mysteries, by diverse of my
acquaintance frequently related unto me, together with the promptitude of your
Genius to those sublime and inestimable treasures occulted in Spagirical
operations, Hermetically performed, have pressed on my presumption to this
Dedicatory Epistle, without your Honors consent or license first obtained.
Horace had his Maecenas, and Virgil his Augustus; and it is the accustomed
manner of our modern Writers, always to palliate themselves under the
Protection of some worthy Patron. I question not but that harmonious temper of
your well-disposed nature will accept in good part the rash attempt of your
well-meaning, and yet unknown servant. I confess it is unworthiness to stamp
the impression of your Honors Title upon such an abortive; and could I imagine
the child in the future would become the least disparagement to the dignity of
the Godfather, I would even now strangle it in the Cradle. Vouchsafe then (most
gracious Lord) one smile from your serene countenance upon this tender Infant,
cast out into the wild world, ready to be devoured with the dupilicated teeth
of Zoilian Sharks. The shadow of your Honors wings is the only Solace it can
expect, to whose tuition I only commit it for protection, humbly imploring your
Lordships favorable construction of this my incivility, I take leave, and rest

Your Honors truly devoted though most ignoted servant SAM. BOLTON.
Pridie nonas Maii 1646.
To the Reader
Courteous Reader,
IT is an English Proverb, that Good Wine needs no bush; and the Latins say,
Veritas non quaerit angulos: And it is my opinion, that Books that are true in
their Theorick, and beneficial in their Practick, can want no buyers. The truth
in this small Tractate I conceive undeniable, and the benefit inestimable.
Truly I have locked it up fast for this ten years space in the most secret
corners of my Closet, ever jealous lest any of the dearest of my acquaintance
should have cast their eyes upon it, tendering it as an unvaluable Jewel, that
was too precious for the worlds acquaintance and public Surveigh. The reason
of my Publication now, I assure thee, is not for ostentation sake, nor the
ambitious thought of vainglory or self-end: But God having lately visited me
with, though a short, yet violent fit of sickness, considering upon my
recovery that this was the greatest talent that I estimated amongst the
treasures of this life, and having written a great part of it in loose papers
in quarto, and some of that in Characterical figures, only for occultnesse
sake, and the residue I had transcribed into several places of a small
Manuscript in octavo; with other matters (for the cause aforesaid) interposed
and inserted; so that I am confident, had I then died, it had been either
utterly lost, or by the confused and occult writing never been digested into
any methodical order. This (I confess) was the greatest and most material
cause that induced me to this Publication. I ingeniously confess it is not all
from mine own Minerva, I was beholding for some part thereof (which occasioned
the whole) to a worthy Gentleman of Kent, one Mr. M. B. a dear friend of mine,
who had some loose papers of an unknown Mr. but by us supposed to proceed from
that late worthy and Reverend Chemist Dr. Everard. If a friendly and courteous
acceptance hereof be perceived, it may in a short time occasion an addition of
some more of the very depth of this Art to ensue this Tractate. In the interim
I shall bid thee farewell with this advice, Lege frequenter, and relege
diligenter; and so those things that at first seem difficult and intricate,
will become facile and manifest.

London pridie nonas Maij. 1656. Vale S. BOULTON.

MEDICINA MAGICA Tamen Physica.
BEfore I come to treat of the Practical part of this Art, it is very requisite
something should be spoken concerning the Theorical grounds thereof: and that
for diverse causes.

First, it will be an occasion to clear the Title of this Book, and manifestly
declare, that as it is really Magica, so is it truly (...): though some
obstreperous Ignorants, and other pragmatical Opinionists, through the little
knowledge in the Principles of true Philosophy, and less judgment in the
grounds of occult Physic have, and still (I question not) but will bend all
the strength of their wilful misty knowledge against the truth hereof:
inconsiderately crying out, Away with it, it is Diabolical: Away with it, it is
superstitious: when as if these and the like Ignoramus'es will but with the eye
of Modesty weigh the ensuing conclusions, they cannot in truth deny the
original of this Art to be grounded of nothing but true (yet sublime) natural
causes, and therefore all the effects and operations thereof to be tied and
depend upon no other but the same causes; requiring not so much of implicit
faith from any party, in any of the Cures, as Hippocrates himself requires in a
Patient, concerning a mere Galenist or any other though but an Empirical
Professor. And that is, that the Patient ought to have a good conceit, both of
the Physician and the Medicine, the which will greatly further the Cure, as he
says.

This is now an absolute binding of an implicit faith, and the force of
imagination will work wonders, as is well understood of all those that know how
rightly to use and make application thereof; but of this we shall have occasion
to speak more hereafter.

Secondly, as the said Theorical Conclusions will vindicate and clear the
Title of this Book from suspicion of Diabolical Magic, so in the next place it
will open a fair and large gap to many rare and singular Experiments, which the
true Sons of Art will in time bring to light, having no small taste but very
great encouragement from these fundamental Principles: indeed they are Pearls,
and therefore ought not to be cast to swine, for truly the world is scarce
worthy of them, (for next the Divine truth which concerns our salvation) there
is no truth more inestimable, nor no secrets more sublime in all the Treasury
of Nature. A taste of three of these unvaluable Experiments you shall find in
the conclusion ensuing, in very short but significant words.

Thirdly, as the aforesaid Theorical conclusions will not only clear the Title
of this Book, but also open a gap to many singular secrets; so in the last
place it will be the main guide and light of the practical part, by profound
consideration whereof the Practice will appear very easy and manifest. I deny
not but diverse Authors have heretofore written of the same subject, and under
the name of Medicina Diastatica: as Paracelsus something, but very occultly,
and Tenzelius likewise, but very obscurely: So Dr. Floyd, and some other late
Writers; but all that I have seen have so wrapped up the quintessence of the
Art in such Aenigma's and clouds of obscurity, that little or nothing can be
gained from them, rather discoursing thereof, and declaring there is such an
Art in natura rerum, then teaching any thing. Only I confess the Weapon-salve
has been the most secret in this Art divulged: and that has been published by
Oswaldus Croilius in his Basilica Chymica, under the Title of his Vulneraria:
likewise the Sympathetick powder made from the body of Vitriol, and also the
water has been known to some few, the residue of this famous Art has been
closely concealed from the vulgar: and so I conceive it still fit to be, for ne
suitor ultra crepidam, and truly I confess I have not so clearly drawn the
curtains that all may apparently be discerned: But what I have wrote I writ to
the Sons of Art, and ingeniously confess it is the plainest and most
methodicallest discourse of this Art, that hitherto is extant. But to return
ad Propositum, our first Conclusion shall be this Exordium.

CONCLUSION I. That the Soul works without or beyond his proper body so called.
NO true Philosopher will dissent from this Tenet. The Peripatetticks
themselves, together with Aristotle, do confess that the soul executes some
actions without the body: neither has there been wanting some Divines which
have attributed a certain kind of ubiquity to the souls affirming to be
present where it works: Certainly that the imagination works without and
beyond his own being, I take it to be manifest, and Experience will convince
any one doubting thereof, for it works on the Embryon, otherwise how could
fascinations be performed? and what is imagination but the handmaid of the
soul, by which it works without the body? But to come nearer to our purpose, I
must tell you that the soul must necessarily be wheresoever the vital spirit is
found, for this spirit is the medium or bond by which the soul is tied to the
body, or rather is the undivided companion thereof, and here it is never
extended further then the soul it self, without which the spirit cannot
subsist: then if a man's body work something without it self, surely it works as
informed by the soul: And shall it not then work vitally, and produce vital
actions? but how shall it produce them? without doubt in and by the virtue and
power of the form, which is the soul; but except I be deceived, there can
nothing work in the power of another, and not be partaker of it; therefore the
active beams that produce such effects without the body, must needs be
partakers of the soul by which they work; and I think no man can be so
senseless to deny actions extrinsecal, or without the body, to man, the most
noble compound, and yet grant them to plants and stones: for from whence
proceeds their virtues but from their specific forms? or how came their
virtues to be discovered but by their signatures? Vide Oswaldum Crollium in
lib. de signat. rerum: but that operations depend upon forms, it has always
seemed true to the most Learned. Some also are of opinion that the Seed does
beget the Embrion in the virtue of the Father, which it could not do, were it
not upholden and furnished with the presence of the fathers soul: But I hear
some whisper this objection; that this opinion can no way be consonant to
truth, because that then if the Father should dye as soon as he had begotten a
child, his soul, being freed from the bonds of the body, goes to his
appointed place; how then can it work in the Embrion? But to him that
judiciously contemplates this matter, it will appear no great difficulty
whether it be said that the soul is not utterly and absolutely free so long as
any vital spirit remains safe and unaltered, for there it sticks and abides as
long, and until its subject be quite converted into another thing: And then
because it wants organical instruments (as in an Appoplexy is very apparent) it
cannot perform any sensible action; or else whether it may be said rather that
soul is necessarily present at those operations by a certain presence, and yet
not hindered but that in another place it may perform other works; for being
that the soul does by wonderful and strange means produce diverse things in
the body, and is after diverse manners in diverse places; why shall it not when
it is free from the body do the same things, or the like? for it wants not its
instruments of its proper natural heat, which is only fit to produce an
effect. Now out of what has been said the cause is evident, why about the
graves of them that die a violent death, there appear often Spectra's, and
many times Apparitions are visible: for the spirit and natural moisture being
not quite dissolved, the soul sticks and gives sometimes the exhalations
impregnated with this spirit, the form of a man, and sometimes in Churchyards
the like are seen: And from the same reason a corpse slain bleedeth at the touch
or presence of the Murderer, for the sage and vital spirits, or both, must
needs produce these effects. Now if the soul do and can (without the body)
act; (for the soul in its essence includes act) and therefore cannot but act,
it operates therefore according to the organs informed, or according to the
manner of information, seeing it communicates a form to the subject: and
peradventure it may be esteemed more agreeable to naked and pure truth to call
the soul not the form, but the giver of form. Hereupon it seems that Plato
placed in man a threefold distinct form, yet depending upon the common soul:
It is true, that to these inferior forms the name of soul is sometimes
given, but how truly and properly, let them answer, who only accustomed to
speculation, have learned to separate the vital actions from the soul, which
only proceed from it; but omitting all these difficulties, we will be content
to use the common names, which will serve our occasions sufficiently.

Obj. But here some may take an occasion to make this Objection, That if the
soul be and work without the body, or besides it, by informing the natural
heat, and that proceeds without it, and is inherent in his beams, then those
beams must needs be living creatures consisting of a soul and a body, and so
consequently men; and this Objection may seem of some moment to those who are
but little perspicacious or be but Infantulae in natura rerum, as I may so term
them. But now I answer,

Answ. First, that it is as absurd, for ought that I have said, to call these
beams creatures, and so by consequence men, as to call the feet and hands men.
Secondly, Every bare information does not make a man; for it is requisite that
a reasonable soul do inform an organical body, and that by means of the
form it be made fit for organical operations; for if the soul inform any
compound only vegetable, or some other inferior thing by another way to us
not known, it cannot therefore be called a man; for the soul informs according
to the merit of the matter, as the Platonists hold: or more clearly it informs
according to the portion of the vital spirits that is present; for every
portion of this is not fit for operation: And hence it appears, that though
the soul do for some time inform a corpse with a certain form (as we see in
dead carcasses, the vegetative faculty does after death for a time exercise his
power, which cannot be done without the soul) yet that corpse cannot be called a
man; for being deprived of sense and reason, it has lost that dignity; but it
is most certain, that the soul being present only according to the vegetable
power, may work elsewhere: for when it was tied to the body according to all
the ways of vicallity, it did perform many other operations: Why then when it
is altogether free from these bonds, or least tied with them, should it not
work things proper to it self? there is no reason known to the contrary: It
may therefore according to the will of the Creator enjoy pleasure, or be
tormented with pain, (although it be as yet tied to the dead corpse in the
manner aforesaid, seeing that in the vegetative faculty it shall suffer nothing
till it be again united to an organical body: But after what manner the soul
does suffer, when it is freed from the organical body, we shall leave to
Divines, for it is most proper to leave such Theological discourses to them
which it most appertains to, desiring only leave to dispute natural things
naturally. But it is now full time we proceed to our second Conclusion, which
we will state as follows.

CHAP. II. CONCLUS. II. From every body flows corporal beams, which the
Soul makes by its presence, and distributeth to them Energie and power of
working; and these beams are not only corporeal, but also of diverse parts.
THe first part of this Conclusion will easily appear to them that consider the
operations of natural things, and the impediment of those said operations; for
what reason can there be demonstrated, why bodies more solid then the nature of
things do require, work not so freely as bodies less compact? Is it not
because the pores of those bodies being shut and more closely conjuncted, the
corporeal beams cannot find a due egresse. And now unless they were
corporeal, no affection that is merely corporeal could hinder them: And nothing
but the change of the form could destoy the faculties of things; but we see,
that though the form remain, the operations are hindered. Moreover, unless
these beams were corporeal, their operations would proceed to any distance,
and not be hindered by any bodies. If you answer, it is by an accident by which
things work at a distance; why then that accident must needs be in a subject,
and must needs work by the virtue of that subject in which it is: for I take it
to be certain, that no accident, barely considered in it self, can have
activity; and therefore except such beams be granted, nothing can work at
distance by any means, therefore those accidents must be placed in corporeal
beams, possessing all manner of virtues of that body from whence they proceed:
But I would not any one should suppose I am a maintainer of accidents, who
could never as yet discern any thing in nature but substance; unless any man
will go about to constitute the positions and manners of things something
really distinct from the bodies; but here I speak out of supposition, granting
something that peradventure some would gladly ask at my hand. But besides what
has been said for our beams, we may add, that adventitious heat does promote
and adjuvate the operation of things; and how could it do this but by stirring
up more plentiful beams to issue forth? for example sake we may perceive in
Amber, how being heated by rubbing, attracts the chaff to it more forcibly, and
many other the like things, that will not operate so strongly without they be
heated, which heat does more plenteously exhale those corporeal beams, and
adds a dexterity to their operations: Moroever, solidity and closeness would
not keep the power of things unhurt, but that it hinders the dissipation and
spending of the beams: Again, unless the beams were corporeal, they would
pierce and work through the most compacted bodies, the contrary whereof
experience manifestly testifies; though in truth some compounded bodies send
out so thin and subtle beams, that may pierce through the the pores of all
bodies. But to what end do we conceive Nature did ordain pores in bodies, but
that they might be the doors by which these beams might issue in and out: Also
the senses could never perceive things sensible, but that there proceeds beams
from the bodies affecting the senses, as appears in smelling, for odor
perishes with age, and that for no other cause then that the beams perish
which conveyeth the odor to our nostrils; so from all bodies there issues
subtle thin rays, carrying with them the shapes of things, which is possible
to be perceptible to the eyes in a dark place by the help of a translucid
connex glass: Again, unless these beams were corporeal, let any man tell me
how they could affect the senses; but I have rather wondered, how being mingled
with so great a confusion in passing though the glass, they can severally
explicate themselves. But let us proceed yet to another strong argument, and
more agreeing to our purpose, to prove what we principally intend, namely, that
such beams or rays do in a continued motion issue out of the bodies of all
wights; which we shall easily perform, if we consider the common natures of all
wights; for every creature or wight, that it may live any space, must
necessarily be nourished with food, neither can it live long without it,
because the continual issuing out of the beams would otherwise too much alter
the body from its natural disposition, and induce more vacuity and emptiness
then nature has appointed for such a body: Now that which in food is dry,
restores the solid parts of the body, that which is moist, the humors; and
why has Nature need of this restoration? because every day, nay every moment,
these corproeal beams do plenteously issue out from the body, yea and from
every part thereof; for if this were not so, then living creatures would grow
to an enormous and monstrous greatness: And this is also the cause why
creatures decay and fall to destruction, and are not so long lived as stones or
trees, or some other of the more compacter and more solid sort of bodies; for
the vital spirits, and natural heat being in creatures free and more at
liberty, operate more powerfully, and produce more plenteous exhalations;
whence it comes to pass that they are propagated to the greatest distance, the
soul all the while connecting together, lest they should be utterly
dissipated; for otherwise they coul by no means hold the specific virtue of
the body, neither could they work, except the soul informed them; for in it
lies the natural heat, as hereafter shall be showed, which produces a
sufficient disposition to receive information from the soul. But here some may
say, we have spoken all this while much, and many things concerning the soul,
but have not declared what it is, or so much as given a bare definition
thereof; therefore for their satisfaction, and to illuminate the ensuing
Discourse, we will in the next Chapter speak something thereof before we
proceed any further.

CHAP. III. CONCLUS. III. First what the Soul of man is: Next what the souls
of beasts and other living creatures are. Lastly of the powers and properties
which the Soul of man has common with the souls of beasts and plants, which is
only proper and peculiar to our Discourse, and this ensuing Art.
ANd first we will declare the opinions of Galen, Plato, Aristotle, with some
other of the most Learned Philosophers of the Ancients; who speaking of Man,
have often called him a Great Miracle; and so indeed truly contemplated, he
will appear; especially in the particular contemplation of the Soul, which is
truly Man: But to return to our purpose; Galen, a great adorer and profound
searcher of Nature, durst not peremptorily determine what the reasonable soul
was; yet for that which is commonly called the vegetative or nourishing, and
the sensitive or sensual soul, he boldly affirmd it to be no other thing then
either the natural and vital spirits, or the temperament: But as for the
reasonable soul, he leaves it in doubt whether it be of a corporeal nature,
or some other which is not corporeal, and which subsisteth by it self, being
separated from the body; neither does he conclude any thing otherwise, but that
it is either a shining substance and an Ethereal body, that is to say, of a
more pure and celestial nature then any of the Elements; or else that it is of
a nature that is not corporeal, but yet has this body (by which he means the
animal spirit) to be as a chariot to carry it. Thus much for Galens opinion.

Next for Plato, who thus defines it; or rather indeed Alcinous ex ipsius
Platonis sententia, (...), etc. quae omnia hoc sonant: Nam cum singula anima
discernamus, merito omnium rerum principium hanc appellavit, ut quicquid unquam
occurreret ex cognatione quadam recognoscentes rebus consonam illius essentiam
adhiberemus, Ergo dico essequandam intelligibilem subst untiam and indivisilem,
etc. Voluit igitur animam esse essentiam quandam quae se moveret. Thus much for
Plato.

Next, Aristotle he comes, and he calls the soul by a new Greek name (...), id
est, actus, which is as much as to say, a perpetual motion, and says that it
proceeds from a fifth nature and beginning, which he calls Heaven; yet he
delivers not himself so plainly, that a man might judge his opinion, what he
thinks of the reasonable soul in man, whether it be mortal or immortal;
nevertheless he confesses that there is a great difference between that
power of the soul which we call more specially by the name of spirit, and
between the other twain, which he calls the nutritive and sensitive powers:
for he uses this word powers, and affirms that these two first proceed only
from the body, and are bred there; and that the vegetative soul and power is
more in the seed and burden, then the sensitive. But as for the third, he
says plainly, that it only comes from without elsewhere, and that only this
is divine. And thus for Aristotle. For the rest of the Ancient Philosophers, in
brief, Pythagoras called the Soul Harmoniam. Hippocrates, Spiritum tenuem per
corpus omne dispersum. Possidonius, Ideam. Asclepiades, Quinque sensuum
exercitium sibi consonum. Heraclitus Ponticus, Lucem. Heraclitus Physicus,
Scintillam stellaris essentiae. Zenon, Concretum corpori spiritum. Democritus,
Spiritum insertum atomis. Critolaus Peripateticus, constare eam ex quinta
essentia dixit. Hypparchus, Ignem. Anaximenes, Aerem. Empedocles, Sanguinem;
with whom agrees Critias. Parmenides, Ex terra and igne conflatum quid.
Xenophontes, Ex igne, aere, and spiritu mistam speciem. Philolaus accorded with
Pythagoras, calling it (...): of which see more in Philosophiae naturalis
Epitom. ex universis Physicis Aristot. decerptum, Simone Broserio Authore, Lib.
7. de anima. The same Brosserius in the beginning of the same said 7th. Book
defines the soul thus: Anima est principium quo vivimus, sentimus atque
movemur. This definition does appear to be taken from her proper passions of
living, perceiving, and moving. But there is another definition more essential,
taken from the substance of the thing, that is, as Aristotle also has it;
Animus est primus actus perfectioque corporis potentia vitam habentis. Where by
the word actum, intelligit substantiam esse: Also whereas he says, Corporis
potentiae vitam habentis, intelligit omnia corporis munia ita dependere a
forma, ut nisi per eam nihil facere possit. Thus you see the opinions and
definitions of the Wise and Ancient Philosophers, who by the light of nature
only, ascribed great faculties and power to the soul, thinking highly thereof,
though plainly they could not conclude any certainty, nor truly search into the
depth thereof, not any mentioning the immortality thereof: Let us therefore see
whether we can produce a true and real definition thereof according to our
promise in the Title of this Conclusion: Then take it thus. The soul of man is
a spiritual, invisible, and immortal substance, endued with power to understand
and will; but the power thereof it not of and from it self; therefore it must
needs proceed from another cause, which is from power, wisdom, and
understanding it self, and that is God. Yea, it tota in toto corpore, and tota
in singulis partibus: And as the before cited Brosserius has it; Estque anima
hominis eadem and vegetativa, ab officio vegetandi, and sensitiva ab officio
sentiendi, and rationabilis ab officio rationandi. And thus far for the soul
of Man. Now let us proceed and clear the other part of this third Conclusion,
and show what the Soul of beasts and other living creatures is: And this point
the Philosophers agree very well amongst themselves, and say that it is of the
same matter that their bodies are compounded of. Whether it be derived and
taken from the same, or whether it be the propriety of the matter; and
therefore they understand it to be the vital spirit only therein that gives
life unto them, which is of a corporal matter and substance; or else they
conceive it to be the temperature or temperament of the whole body generally,
which is the propriety of the matter; And so the soul in beasts shall be the
life it self, of which the vital spirits, or the temperament, are the
instruments thereof: which seems to accord with Moses saying, Genesis 9.4. and
Lev. 17.14. That the soul of the flesh is in the blood thereof (id est) the
life. And although we see not with the eye how these vital spirits, or the
temperament of all the parts of the body do give unto it that life which it
has, yet we may judge, and have some knowledge thereof by things we see in
Nature, which have some agreement and resemblance therewith: For we may well
conceive how the flame of a Lamp is nourished by the oil and wick: where we see
two sorts of matter different one from another joined both together. Besides,
we may perceive how that by the means of this conjunction, and of the
temperature and agreement that these two things have each with other, the flame
being once kindled in them, is nourished and preserved by them. So likewise we
propound the vital spirit in the bodies of living creatures, as a thin flame
engendered of the blood, by virtue of the heart, which distributeth it self
throughout all the parts of the body, giving unto it vital heat, which
quickens it, and endueth it with that virtue by which it has motion and
sense, and exercises all its actions so that every member does its office: Now
we see well in this comparison the matter that is in the Lamp, and the
temperature and agreement that is between the parts of it, and how the flame is
fed and maintained after it is lighted; we may understand also from whence this
flame is brought to the lamp, and how this matter is lighted, and that neither
the matter, nor the agreement and temperature bred this flame of themselves,
but that it is brought from elsewhere. In the same manner we may conceive of
that which has been spoken of the vital spirit, and of the blood whereof it is
bred, and of the virtue and power of the heart in the generation of it. But
here it may be said, that there is a great difference between the comparison of
a Lamp and his flame, and between that which we have spoken of the generation
of the vital spirit, because this flame, which we call the vital spirit,
springs of the self same matter by which it is nourished and preserved, and
is kindled there. And therefore it is requisite that we should further know
what is the cause of this, as also why the life and motion that are therein,
are enflamed by this vital spirit, and not by any other means whatsoever,
whether it be the blood, or the flesh: And yet this spirit is as well of a
corporal and bodily matter, as all the rest of which the body is compounded; so
that it has his original of the self-same Elements from whence that matter is
derived, out of which it springs. But of such Inquisitors I may likewise
demand from whence the Heavens, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, have their motion,
light, and properties? It is certain, they can yield me no other true cause,
but that God has created them of that nature, and that he has so constituted
them, and that he always preserves them by the divine virtue and power of his
providence. And this shall suffice for the nature and matter of the sensitive
and sensual soul, which we attribute to beasts. Now for the last part of this
Conclusion, of the powers and properties that the soul of man has common with
the soul of beasts and plants, it has been, in short, but significant words,
declared above, where it was said out of Brosserius, Eadem est anima hominis
and vegetativa ab officio vegetandi, and sensitiva ab officio sentiendi, etc.
So that here it is plain that it has the vegetative quality, which is common
with Plants ab officio vegetandi: and also its sensitive power and quality ab
officio sentiendi: And hereupon they that say every living creature has but
one soul, say well; but there are diverse powers thereof in certain creatures,
in some more, in some less; therefore we call that of Plants by a more special
name (Vegetative) because it has no more but this bare office and virtue of
vegetation, from whence proceeds the name. And albeit the soul of beasts has
the same virtue also, yet we call it not by the same name, but only sensitive,
under which we comprehend also the vegetative soul that is in Plants, as a
power and property thereof: So likewise, although the soul of man has both
these faculties together, yet we call it not either vegetative or sensitive,
but only reasonable, and that, as before is said, ab officio rationandi; under
which we also do comprehend the vegetative soul in Plants, and the sensitive
soul of Beasts, which is sufficient for clearing this Conclusion: And this
vegetative and sensitive power and properties will peculiarly sit and serve our
occasions in the ensuing discourse, and the manifestation of the whole Art we
treat of.

CHAP. IV. CONCLUS. IV. Every compound consisting of matter and form, has in
it its own proper natural heat, which is derived and propagated (not from the
Elements, but) from Heaven and the influence thereof.
FRom this Conclusion, it is apparent that nothing can subsist without some
manner of heat; for heat is the bond whereby the form is tied to the matter,
which lying hid in a viscous Mercurial moisture brought with it from Heaven,
gives increase and seeds to every body: It is also the instrument which the
form does use to produce actions, and it is the immediate cause of the
aforesaid beams, spoken of in Conclusion the second; which beams it never
forsakes, but accompanies in their motions perpetually. Now this said heat,
if it decrease, the body tends to destruction, the beams being fewer and
weaker; and though the form be not united to the matter, but by a certain
manner of heat, which is so required, as proper to all things, that it yet
varies in every species of things, yet it has in every species some latitude;
so that you shall scarce find amongst the individuals that which is altogether
one and the same thing, because the heat is sometimes more, and sometimes
less, which may be the cause of the variety of operations, not only of things
of the same species, but even in the same individual it is often changed, till
at last by corruption it ends in that which is altogether another latitude; for
the matter being not sufficiently tenacious, holds not this heat fast enough,
but lets it (being volatile) wander abroad, which, according to the impressions
of Heaven, applies it self variously to the matter, whence depends the whole
variety and change of sublunary things. But now it is time to come to the body
of Man, the proper subject of this Discourse, and ensuing Art.

And in the first place, it shall not be amiss to explain our selves, what we
here mean by heat; to which end, let us consider, the concordance and mutual
relation which the heart of man has with the Heavens: For as the Primum
mobile, or first motion of the whole world begins by the Heavens, of which
all the other motions that are in nature do depend; so the heart is that
member in the body of man which first receives life and motion, and which is
the wellspring and fountain thereof; whereupon it is said to be Primum vivens
and ultimum moriens, and is continually in motion, without any intermission of
ceasing: And therefore some Authors are of opinion, that the Pericardium, which
is called the little closet of the heart, is of such a capacity, that it is
severed from the same on every side as much as is requisite, that its motion
might not any wise be impeded. And some think that there is some water within
this vessel, or some moisture like a dew, to the intent it should water the
heart, that it should not consume or dry it self up by its perpetual moving.
Now the heart is the root and fountain of natural heat, dispersing abroad by
the Arteries over the whole body, and administreth the life to every part
thereof: For although the instrumenes of respiration serve the voice, yet they
were principally created for the hearts sake, that the natural heat which is in
it might be refreshed, increased and fed by them; and for this cause the Divine
Providence has made the lungs to be as it were the shop of respiration, to the
end that the air without be sent even to the heart, for the reasons aforesaid;
for the air that is to be brought to the heart, is first prepared in the
lungs, to the end it might moderate the heat of the heart and spirits, and that
it should not enter in either too hot, or too cold, or in too great abundance,
whereby it might be damnified, or quite choked up.

Aristotle, and his followers, make heat the cause of the hearts pulsifick
motion; others will have the soul, and others the vegetative faculty; but I
incline to Aristotle's opinion; for the soul works by its faculties, and these
by heat; so that heat is the immediate cause of this motion, and the souls
instrument, yet not such an instrument as works nothing, but by the force of
the principal Agent; for the heat works by its own natural force, though it
be directed and regulated by the soul; the heat then of the heart rarifying
the blood into vapors, which require more room, dilates the heart; but by
dispelling some of these vapors into the Arteries, and receiving also some
cold air by the lungs, the heart is contracted, and this is called Systole,
the other Diastole. And as heat is the efficient cause, so also it is the end
of this motion; and therefore does heat move the heart, that it by this motion
might impart heat to the body: But I understand not heat here for a bare
quality, but that which is called calidum innatum; the heart being, as
appears, the fountain of heat, whose action is the first, and the most common
of all the actions in the body; for without the action of heat there can be no
nutrition, motion, sensation, nor understanding, as it works by the fantasy.

And because in this Treatise we have, and often shall have occasion to speak
of the vital spirit, we will now declare what we mean in this Art thereby: And
whether after the manner of the Galenists and Physicians, we mean that which
the Schools call by that name, or some other thing of another nature: Truly, we
suppose not the common and received opinion of spirits, animal, vital, and
natural, to be disconsonant to truth; yet being not so material for our
purpose, we meddle not with them; and therefore here we speak of another manner
of spirit. Here some may object, and ask, what new spirit then is this brought
into Physic, or by what Authority was it introduced? Surely for answer, I am
not so supercillious, as to affirm it done by my Authority, I am indifferent,
let it not be brought in at all, I only desire that I may be spared the use of
that name, whereby to express natural heat and radical moisture both together;
and my reason is, because they are never actually separated: And so I call them
spirits, because of all corporal things, they come nearest the nature of a
spirit, both in original and power: And I call it also vital, because by
mediation of it, life flows, and is propagated into the body; and therefore
here I thought it convenient to declare, that wheresoever in this Treatise you
find the name of vital spirit, understand it there as it is before nominated.
Now this aforesaid spirit flourishes in the aforementioned beams; and this
spirit also flows from the body, and this cannot be denied by any wise man;
for if it flowed not from the body, then the body would last for ever; and
consequently the things that have most power to fix this spirit, have most
power to prolong the life of man; for it is volatile, and every moment some
part and portion of it goes forth; and certainly it is most likely, that it
goes out with the parts of the body resolved into beams; for to what end
should it leave the beams going out, and insinuate it self into bodies
indisposed? there can be no reason given, nay it seems utterly impossible: And
that the beams have a disposition to hold it; for that it goes out with them,
it is plain, because the beams, as is aforesaid, retain the disposition of the
body from whence they go out; and by this reason I take it, that dogs, and
other creatures of prey, in their hunting, when they have lost the scent of the
footing on the ground, peradventure by other creatures, in treading in, or
crossing the same footsteps, do then hold up their noses in the air, searching
after these beams, to recover the lost scent, these beams flowing and
reflowing to and from the wight, as Atoms in the Sun; nay, if this spirit were
not there, the beams could not do as they do, nor work in the power of the
soul; for of it this spirit is an instrument: And either therefore the body of
men shall work at no distance at all, or to that distance, whatsoever it be,
this spirit must needs reach and proceed, and by virtue of a more potent soul,
in the very beginning and principium of life, the body of man (as of all
wights) is ordained to natural actions, as other natural bodies are, by the
seminary virtues which are in the forms. This spirit then accompanies the
beams, disperseth their actions which are propagated; and when they grow
faint, as rivers from their heads, they are supplied by and from the bodies.
And this shall be sufficient for to terminate this Fourth Conclusion.

CHAP. V. CONCLUS. V. That the Excrements of the bodies of living creatures
retain a portion of the vital spirit; and therefore we cannot deny them life,
and this life is of the same species that the life of the creature is of, and
propagated from the same soul.
THis Conclusion will manifestly appear, if we consider that these excrements,
having lurked long in the body, they imbibe this spirit, and so conjoyn it to
themselves, intercepting the beams issuing from the noblest parts of the body,
yea, having gotten at the least some digestion, they are made liker the bodies
in which they were concocted, and therefore do greedily attract the beams
with the spirits, and the spirits do more willingly insinuate themselves into
them, then into any body not partaker of the same. And this may be convinced by
common experience; for you may easily perceive, that the too much flowing of
any excrement, brings and begets grievous Symptoms, weakness, and in the end
death it self, and that not so much by expelling the nourishment, as by
exhausting the spirits; otherwise in them that have the Dropsy, how could the
too much flowing of water out at the Orifice of the part infected cause death,
but that the water being impregnated with these spirits, carries more of them
with it then the body can bear in so short time? and so in all inward
abscesses, when great store of purulent matter has filled the breast, if by
the negligence or ignorance of the Chyrurgeon the matter flow all at once, it
is, for the same reason, followed with death, or dangerous debilities and
symptoms; for unless the body be every where (according to the proportion
requisite) stored with these spirits, it cannot long subsist: And this spirit,
as long as the body consists in his due symmetry, is nourished from heaven by
the mediation of the air, and by the vital spirit of the aliment; therefore
all things that proceed from the bodies of men men or beasts, after what manner
soever, whether naturally, or by force of diseases are impregnated with the
same vital spirit that the body has; and therefore because they are liker the
bodies whence they came, then those things that never were in the body, they
quickly imprint the qualities drawn from the body, upon another like body;
which ought to occasion great care, that neither excrements, matter,
corruption, or any of those things which came from infected persons, be left
unburied, for the great mischief that may come by them, either naturally, or by
Art, if they should happen to come into the hands of skilful, but indisposed
persons: And hereupon a wise man will be cautious of conversing and coming too
near sick and infected persons; the rather, if he feel himself disposed to the
like disease; for a body so disposed, does more vehemently attract to himself
those beams, and is sooner changed; and also bodies between whom there is a
similitude in complexion, and an affinity in nature, do sooner sympathize one
with another, as Brothers, Sisters, and Cousins, do sooner take diseases one
from another, because of their radical likeness inherent in their bodies, by
which likeness the infected beams are drawn, and the body more speedily
changed: And though the burning of dead carcasses, after the ancient accustomed
manner, be not now in use, or permitted; yet great care ought to be had and
taken, that all dead carcasses be speedily and very deep buried, and that, if
conveniently, in moist places, and far remote from the feeding of cattle;
for, from shallow and superficial graves, arises often unspeakable mischiefs:
And, I suppose, this has been one of the greatest naturallest causes why the
Plague has so furiously raged in London, and many great Cities in times past:
For I fear, they to whom the care and charge of burial was committed, were
then, as they are still, too negligent and careless. Truly the funeral fires
of the Ancients (in this regard) was much to be commended; but another custom
having now prevailed, it were but little to our purpose any further to make
mention thereof: only I conceive it fit to advertise Magistrates of populous
places to be very careful in a matter of so great concernment. It is also more
observable, that Witches, and those that deal with diabolical Arts, cannot
prejudice any thing at all, without the parts of dead bodies, and the
excrements of him whom they desire to mischief: Of which, read Wyerus de
prestigiis Daemonum, and Cardamus de subtilitate. And as the Magistrate ought
to take good care of burials; so every man, especially if he have enemies, I
would advise to have a great care of his excrement. But to return to our
Conclusion, which affirms these excrements to live also: which at first sight
appears a little harsh, yet to him that well contemplates the matter, it is so
far from being unreasonable, that it is impossible it should be otherwise: Nay,
what if it be said that the hair and nails do live a certain life propagated
from the soul? It may be answered, that is, because they are as certain parts
of the body; but if I say, when they are separated from the body, they live
with the same soul they did before, this would be thought more strange: Well,
this I will only say of the life of the Excrements, that unless they lived
with the same life that the wights do in a certain manner, certainly they
would want the vital spirit, of which, we have spoken of before. Moreover, who
can deny that the nails and hair have life, that has observed in them the
augmentative or assimulative faculty? at least who can deny it unto them, so
long as they remain fastened unto the body, though they want sense, as the
bones, and some other parts of the organical body does? Now if they live while
they are joined to the body, though sense be wanting; they shall live likewise,
being separated from the body, as long as they are hairs and nails, keeping the
same form they had before, and until they be converted into another species;
witness the accidents, or substantial moods, which abiding still the same,
depend upon the same fountain from whence they flowed; and no man can deny,
but that the very form or figure flowed from the soul, draws thence its
life, which is propagated by the presence of the soul, by mediation of the
vital spirit: And a man also may thus argue for any excrement. All excrements
in the body, by means of some manner of digestion, have changed the form they
had before that digestion, and put on another; as may be known by their
operations and faculties, which are altogether changed, as for example: The
excrements of a dog heal the diseases appertaining to the palate and throat,
which flesh and bones, his natural food and nourishment, in their own substance
before their conversion, by what manner of way soever you prepare them, cannot
do; nay, though they have been stinking and corrupt; which comes nearest to
the nature and condition of excrements: And further, this curative faculty from
whence and by which they effect this healing, they obtained no where else but
from the soul of the dog; and therefore being introduced and brought in by
that, it it wholly depends of the soul, and consequently cannot be void of
vitality or liveliness, which seems obscure and unperceptible to such as are
ignorant in the Centers of things; which will be more expedient to a
Philosopher to search after, then to suffer himself to be transported with the
spirit of contradiction, which is nothing profitable to any ingenious Art. And
thus we will pass our fifth Conclusion.

CHAP. VI. CONCLUS. VI. Between the body and the spirits there is a certain
concatenation of spirits or beams, though they be never so far at distance: The
like is also between the blood and other parts of the body, though separated
from the body at any distance.
IF we consirm and demonstrate this Conclusion, the greatest difficulty in this
Art is cleared: For herein lies the very quintessence of all our Secrets; the
which being established, there is laid a foundation whereupon all the precepts
of this Art are built: And indeed, if what already has been propounded, abide
sure and unshaken, the ensuing difficulty will not much trouble us.

But here it may be enquired of us what concatenation here we intend?

For answer, when we affirm a concatenation of spirits or beams between the
body and the excrements thereof, we understand thereby a perpetual flux of
beams, proceeding after a peculiar manner from the body, and terminated as in
a body, after a sort of kin and like unto it; as also very procally flowing
from the excrements to the body: That there are such reciprocal Emanations, is
easily showed; for the flux of beams being granted, and the impregnation of
excrements by the vital spirit, for the reasons before mentioned, it must
necessarily follow that both the beams, that is, both of the body and the
excrements, are as not differing in nature and quality; so terminated upon one
another, by the aforesaid means, rather then by any other: yea, if the form
both of the body and excrements depend upon the same soul, as before is proved,
it will not be absurd to call the excrements (until they have utterly lost the
form they have got in the body) either a part of that body, or something
subordinate to the body; and therefore the vital spirit being affected in the
excrements, is also affected in the body, which cannot be performed without
such a concatenation. But here this general note is to be observed, namely,
that the excrements of any part are peculiarly allied, and tied to that part
whose excrements they are; and that the beams that flow interchangeably from
these, do by a peculiar love embrace those that flow from the excrements of
the part whose it is and via versa; for out of that part it has drawn more
plenteous spirits, and therefore has greater affinity with it, which may be
proved by experience: for if thou put exulcerating materials prepared
artificially into the ordure of the prodex, it will be affected with extreme
pain: It is not therefore to be doubted, but that the excrements are by
reciprocal beams concatenated with the body, especially with those parts out of
which they last proceeded: And upon this concatenation depends all magnetical
Physic, which being well considered, there will be no great obscurity in the
practical part; it further concluded, that the farthest distance does not break
this concatenation, which is so true, as it is that the virtue of the soul
extends it self most largely, so that it is scarce contained in the place; for
this concatenation depending upon the soul, must needs be extended according to
the virtue of the soul, besides the other reason of this extension, where it
was said, that there do most plentiful spirits flow from bodies, because of the
great plenty of vital spirits which appear, in regard they need so great store
of aliment, to the end, that what was spent in propagating beams, may, by the
conduct of the dispensing spirit, be renewed in the body, the fountain of them:
There is therefore no small store of these beams, because being thin, subtle,
and easily dissipated, they need such store of food to the continual reparation
of them. They extend themselves likewise very far, and work diversely (we not
perceiving or knowing of it) and diversely are we affected in the hurting of
them, being full ignorant of the causes of our diseases: And therefore in all
sicknesses, the same spirit is to be rectified, comforted, and multiplied; and
so may all diseases be easily cured, which we propound especially for
Physicians to note and consider. And now there is no man will deny, but that
what we have said of the excrements, does also agree to the parts separated
from the body, as also to the blood; for there is the same reason in all,
unless peradventure in the blood it appears more evident, because it is
called in holy Scripture the seat of the soul or life, as having greatest
store of vital spirits, and hurting most easily by the much flux of it. Amongst
all other things that confirm this concatenation, that famous sympathetical
unguent, commonly called the Weapon-salve, and also the Sympathetical water,
does by manifest experience clearly prove it; in despite of the vain and
obstreperous Divines, that proclaim it diabolical and superstitious, whom both
many others, and especially the learned Helmuntius has put to everlasting
silence. Nor did the wrangling Libanius, though he proudly railed after his
manner, write any better against this, then he did of and for the Philosophical
Stone; how ignorantly and audaciously he carried himself in both, to the
infinite prejudice of the Hermetical Commonwealth, none know so well as they,
that have learned the true knowledge of things from the things themselves; but
of this enough.

Now of the parts of the body separated, he that doubts may read in the same
Helmuntius a strange story; I will give you his words. A certain man of Bruxels
says he) being at Bolognia, did in a fray lose his nose; and going to
Tayliacoza, a Chyrurgeon living there, to consult how to have a new nose; and
fearing the cutting a piece out of his own arm, he hired a Porter for a good
sum of money to have one cut out of his arm; which being done, and the cure
performed, the man of Bruxels returned home: About 13. months after, he felt
his nose suddenly grow cold, and within a few days after, it rotted, and fell
quite off: And he, with many others, wondering at the strange chance, enquiring
of the cause, it was found, that just at the same instant that the nose grew
cold, the Porter at Bolognia died; the truth whereof, as Helmont writes, many
at Bruxels will testify. Thus far he. The like story I have heard from a
Doctor of Physic, a friend of mine, who protested deeply he was an
eyewitness thereof. Is not all our Doctrine here then confirmed clear as the
light? was not that infitious nose as animated at first, so still informed with
the soul of the Porter? neither had it any thing from that man whose nose it
was now made, but nourishment; the power of assimilation which it had from its
own proper form, it took not from the soul of him, but from the soul of the
Porter, of whom it was yet truly a part, and who dying, the nose became
immediately a dead nose, and began to tend to corruption. But who does not see
here most evidently our concatenation? Our Assertion therefore is concluded
true by undoubted experience; from whence, as from a plenteous Spring, diverse
fair Rivulets do flow. Hence arose that glorious miracle of Nature, whereby a
man may in an instant open his mind to his friend, though they be ten thousand
miles distant, by means of a little blood, spirit, and flesh, a secret no
ways to be divulged to the multitude: Hence arose that lamp of life, which at
any distance shows by its light the disposition of the body; and its voluntary
going out, the death of the body, whence it was taken: Hence also proceeded
that salt of blood, by its color showing the same thing that the lamp did by
its light: And hence also arose all natural philtres by means whereof the
affections are moved, and after a certain manner tied, merely and truly
natural. But of this enough.

CHAP. VII. CONCLUS. VII. This vitality, or liveliness, lasts until the
Excrements, Blood, or separated parts be changed into another thing of a diverse
species.
ALl things which have their original from the Elements, after they are come to
their perfection, do straitway go back again to the principles from whence
they took their beginning; for it is established by the Providence, that what
is begun by motion, shall never be partaker of state or rest: Yet does not the
thing immediately cease to be in that species wherein it is, until another
form be introduced into the matter, which also brings with it new moods, and
new operations. I speak not here of subordinate forms, which are known to be
common to any species; the change whereof is not always required in natural
changes or corruptions: Of the absence, or presence of forms, we can no way
judge, but by the moods and faculties of the subject; we say therefore, that
vitality does so long last in the excrements, blood, and separated parts, as
they are not changed into other things of a diverse species; which being clear
of it self, and by that which is abovesaid, needs no proof: yet this is to be
noted, First, that things have more virtue and energy in their state, then in
their declination; and the nearer they are to their absolute change, the less
they work. Secondly, that every change of the substance does not change the
forms in things, where only the superfluities are taken away, leaving the
essences (that I may so say) which lurk in a sufficient matter, well disposed
and digested, and are full of the vital spirits of things; there the form is
not only changed, but also more free then it was, and works more powerfully.

Moreover, we see that some corruption is necessary to the furtherance of some
operations; though this kind of corruption, if we will give it the true name,
is rather to be called fermentation, for that by it the spirits are stirred up,
and made more able to show their powers: But [est modus in rebus sunt certi
denique fines, Quos ultra citraque nequit consistere virtus.] There is a mean
in things, and certain bounds, beyond which truth cannot consist; therefore we
must proceed very warily, while we labor to stir up the spirits; for while we
digest them, and labor to make them more spiritual, we may utterly put the
spirit to flight, which I have seen often happen in this Art, and in Alchymy.
And then men, when they have erred through their own ignorance, they blame and
calumniate the Art, making the saying true, Ars non habet inimicum nisi
ignorantem.

CHAP. VIII. CONCLUS. VIII. One part of the body being affected, or
ill-disposed by hurting the Spirits, all the other parts do suffer with it.
I Conceive this is a common and received opinion, by all Physicians allowed
and confessed to be true; and therefore needs little proof: so that we shall
only say thus much of it, That the cause of this compassion flows neither
from the body, nor from the particular form of the part, nor from the likeness
(unless likeness be so far forth considered which flows from the same or the
like proportion of the spirit) but from the vital spirit, which goes through
the whole body, and is resident in every part thereof: For a disease
terminatively is not of the body, but of the spirit; for there is no disease of
the body, howsoever it comes, which happens not by the weakness of this spirit;
neither can any distemper of the body last long where this spirit (by which all
evils of the body are amended) flourishes and is strong. This spirit is that
nature whereof Physicians ought to be helpers, and upon which ground the
Universal Medicine is built: And unhappy are those Physicians, and unhappily
speed, who either neglecting or wronging this spirit, destroy all things by
their violence, while they think to cure diseases, and which by opening a vein
exhaust this spirit, and by purging the body from hurtful humors by rank
poisons (which kill this spirit) thrust with those humors the soul many times
out of the body. And there are they, that by their villainy and ignorance, have
dimmed the glory of Physic, which being given over to vain, contentious and
unprofitable disputes, have erred from the simplicity of nature; which though
they be honored of the giddy-headed multitude, because of their rich
clothing, and popular applause; yet by the sons of Art (which by great labor,
with prying into the Centers of things, have found that nothing is to be
attempted against natures will) they are esteemed no better then as the
excrements of Physic, and so to be cast into the vault of perpetual infamy;
but stultorum plena sunt omnia. But we turning to our purpose, say, that not
only the other parts suffer with the parts diseased; but that if any disease,
of what part soever, do last long, the whole body will be at length affected;
else how could death follow upon a particular disease? The vital spirit is but
one continuate through the whole body, and propagated through every part of it,
that if it be hurt in one part thereof, it is hurt in the whole, as it follows.

CHAP. IX. CONCLUS. IX. If the vital spirit be fortified in any one part, it is
fortified by that very action in the whole body.
THat which in the foregoing Chapter we said of diseases, we say here of Cures;
for there is the like reason of both; and this Conclusion put for no other
purpose, then to show caeteris paribus, that there is no odds whether thou
apply the medicine to the part affected, or to another, provided by thy
medicaments thy intent be to fortify the vital spirit: For if this spirit be
fortified in any one part, the whole is fortified; because being of a fiery and
heavenlye nature, that strengthening is quickly found in the whole latitude
thereof; for it is impossible that so subtle, active, spiritual, clear, and
ethereal a thing, should suffer any thing in any part, which it shall not very
speedily suffer in the whole: The experiment whereof we see in outward poisons,
which infecting the nearest spirits, straitwayes, unless the spirit be
fortified, infecteth the whole spirit in the body; for it is impossible, that
by the sting of a Scorpion in the foot, the substance of the venom should (as
some dream) come to the heart; but because one part of the spirit being
powerfully infected, the infection of the whole must needs speedily follow: So
by the inflammation of any part, immediately follows a Fever, though the part
inflamed be never so far from the heart. And as of Diseases, so we may conclude
of Remedies: But that remedies applied to the part affected, do more good, and
more speedily help, it is long of frequent egression of spirits in that part,
the cause whereof look for in the following Conclusion. It is very necessary
therefore that thou choose a part fit for thy purpose; for except thou do so,
thou will be deceived and ashamed; for thou shall not work everywhere alike:
And therefore ponder well the following Conclusion.

CHAP. X. CONCLUS. X. Where the Spirit is more bare or naked, there it is
soonest affected.
THis Conclusion being most necessary for Practice, is of it self manifest,
and follows upon the Premises; for doubtless the more intimately any Agent
is joined with the Patient, the operation is more speedy and better; for what
can hinder action, but undue approximation? which impediment we here must study
to avoid, seeking the vital spirit in his nakedness, that it may be the sooner
affected by a due and convenient application, and may the more speedily be
freed from things hurtful and extraneous, and so quickly change and rectify
the whole body slipped into distemper: For, if where it is most naked, it be then
freed from extraneous things, because it is not so fettered and clogged with
evils, then certainly there (if one know the right subject) and use the right
instruments, may it be made sooner to free the whole body from distempers: For,
being fortified in one place, it will straitway be fortified throughout: For,
as a disease is never truly, but when the whole spirit is affected with a
sickly disposition (for till then it is but some spark in fier^, in the making
or breeding) which disposition, at the beginning, affected but one part, and
that affection not hindered, corrupted the whole; so must we also Philosophize
concerning the recovery of health. But here are two things requisite; First,
that thou cease not the application, until the disease be fully cured: For, if
thou leave off before that time, the part that is yet infected (if the
infection be strong) will again infect and corrupt the parts thou had made
whole, and so leave thee to begin the same labor. Secondly, that one part
answer another; for he that will happily cure diseases, must begin at the root:
And if the root of the disease be in the head, then cure the vital spirit
proper to the head; if in the stomach, to the stomach, etc. For although the
vital spirit confidered in it self, have no heterogeneal parts, but be
everywhere, and whole, like the light, like it self; yet as it is in the body,
it is varied according to the parts of the body by certain adjuncts which are
very considerable: And therefore the rays or beams proceeding from the head,
do in that disposition contain the spirit, as the head does, as by the things
already said may be gathered: The naked spirit therefore, affected with the
dispositions of the head (if the root of this disease be in the head) is to be
taken, and remedies applied to that. But before we proceed to other things, it
will not be amiss to confirm the truth of this Conclusion by experience.
There Is no man doubts but that in the blood the spirit is most naked; therefore
the Physicians know that the naked spirit in blood is sooner infected with
poison then the spirit of any other part; for venom being put into a vein,
does sooner dissolve and loosen the whole frame of the body, then twice so much
taken in meat and drink inwardly; yea, although it be taken fasting, and
without any vehiculum, which confirms the truth of our Conclusion. I shall
speak little more hereof, lest evil should ensue by those who are wickedly and
maliciously inclined; only give thee this caution, that God is the revenger of
all secret and wilful veneficiators.

CHAP. XI. CONCLUS. XI. In the Excrements, Blood, etc. the Spirit is not so
deeply drowned, as in the body; and therefore in them it is sooner affected.
UPon this Conclusion the whole Art is grounded; and this being false, all
fails; therefore remember well what has been said: For he that well
understands this Conclusion, will find no difficulty in the whole Art;
therefore it had need to be confirmed with some reasons; whereof the first is
this: The spirit is not so deeply drowned in the excrements, blood, and
separated parts, as it is in the body, because in them it ranges abroad, as
more at liberty, in that it does not so much intend organical operations; for
these organical operations do violently snatch the spirit inward, that being
congregated, it may work more powerfully in secessu. But all organical
operation being far from the excrements, blood, etc. there is no need that the
spirit should drown it self so far, and so inwardly: Moreover the beams
coming from the body in excrements, blood out of the veins and parts
separated, stick about the superficies, surface, and outside, and are not
allured and drawn internally, because that, as tending to destruction, the
spirits address themselves, and make some stay in the superficies, where also
the beams join themselves to their fellow-beams, and there rest, until at last
the excrements, blood, etc. becoming clean another thing, are apt, either to
receive those beams and the spirit that accompanies them, or to retain them
when they have received them: Again, the spirits are more naked in these,
especially in the blood, because when it was in the body, it had the spirits
more naked, and scarce tied to the body, as appears evidently in blood. But
some may ask how this reason agrees to parts cut off? for what privilege have
they above other parts of the same kind? I answer: It is to be considered that
now the door is opened, by which a more free egresse is granted to the spirits,
which now having broken their fetters, begin to wander abroad more at liberty:
Again, some may object, that if this were true, then by applying things to a
wound, we may cure internal diseases? To satisfy this, we must consider three
things: First, that in every wound there is not only solutio continui, but also
in the part wounded is an exotic and strange quality introduced, by means
whereof the vital spirit is hurt. Secondly, those things that are applied to
the wound, have no power to change the vital spirit, laboring of another evil
disposition; yea, the Physicians expectation is satisfied, if one thing do
perform one defired operation, and therefore they are content with the cure of
the wound. Thirdly, if a thing good for another disease, whereof the Patient
peradventure is sick, should be applied to the wound, it might perhaps hurt
this more then it would help that; now reason persuades that we should first
succor that which more urges. From these things the answer to the objection
is manifest; for the spirit then laboring of a double distemper, Art commands
first to cure that which most urges; therefore we principally attend the
wound, lest Sideration should follow, or somewhat else bringing assured
destruction; and for the same reason we apply not unto it things good for the
other disease; yet I will add this, that it is manifest by experience, that
many men by wounds have been freed from great diseases, and so that they never
relapsed; namely, when the part affected being wounded, the things proper for
the disease could also perform the cure of the wound: As if the head laboring
of a Chronical disease, should be wounded, and the wound could be cured by
Betony and Sage, there is no doubt but the spirit now naked, being cherished
and refreshed with these remedies, would perfectly heal both the head and the
whole body. Here also is to be noted, that they who dig the body with
Cauteries, and keep the wound open a long time for the purulent matter to run,
are ill advised that they do not apply unto the wound remedies proper for that
disease for which they made the issues; for this being done, the Patients would
without doubt in short time feel great ease, if the wound were made upon the
part principally affected; especially if all the other things were accordingly
done diastatically, and the matter that issues out were also used as Art
commands. By this means it is certain, and found by experience, that the
Gout in the hands, and feet, and other parts, may most happily and easily be
cured. But returning again to the excrements and blood, etc. we say that this
art uses these rather, and with better success then the whole body that is
hurt; because the vital spirit being free and naked, easily receives and
takes impressions, especially from things agreeing with it. Therefore the
Inventors of this Art mingled such things, though taken from other bodies with
their medicines, (as in the common weapon-salve is to be seen, where they
mingle with the ointment the flesh, blood, and fat of men, for no other cause
then that being imbrued with these medicines and qualities of medicaments, they
may the more easily help the hurt spirits: [This flesh, blood, and fat, is
comprehended in the word Mummy] for by their likeness they do easily draw the
spirit; according (...) Crollius.
and being drawn, do change it according to the quality acquired: But it is
not always necessary that the Medicine be mingled with those things that are
taken from the body; for we see that the sympathetical water alone, and simple
without any mixtion, will cure all wounds by the means of the blood of the
wounds. But especial care must be taken, that you make choice of those things
which do cure, not by qualities, but by their whole substances (as they use to
speak) that is, by the signatures of their Celestial influences, or else
ordained to such effects by the seminary reasons of the soul; otherwise you
may easily miss the mark; for that fimilitude dispensed from their influence,
because it passes the like spirit, does much advance the effects; and without
this, hardly any good is to be expected.

CHAP. XII. CONCLUS. XII. The mixture of the spirits causes love and
compassion; from that compassion love takes its original.
THis Conclusion little or nothing availes to the curing of diseases, being
rather directed to induce diseases, and procure love: It is also the foundation
of all implantations; for where commixtion and compassion is, if that which is
sound, draw unto it self that which hurts another, without question that
from which the hurtful thing was drawn, will be helped and cured with the loss
and prejudice of that thing that so attracteth and draws it. And this
Conclusion needs no long proof, neither will I make many words about it,
because of the dangers that may probably arise from hence; for from this
fountain flows the transplantation of diseases from one man to another, and
from the dead to the living: It may also do harm, it giving cause to too much
exorbitant lust, and the means to fulfill it. Now if this Conclusion were fully
and publicly known, (which God forbid) fathers could not be safe from their
daughters, nor any man from any woman, nor woman from any man, nor brothers
from sisters, nor sisters from brothers; for the world would be turned upside
down with philtre^s; and therefore I will say no more in this place; for to
them that are curious and diligent searchers of nature, that which has been,
and shall be said hereafter, is enough. But before we come to handle the
precepts of this Art, let us for an Epilogue to these Conclusions, and for the
better understanding of what follows, advance one more Proposition, and that is
this: The vital spirit is more powerfully drawn out of the whole body by those
things that have the signature of the whole body, or have a sulphur like the
sulphur of man's body: But from a part for a particular operation, those things
do more vehemently draw: And when it is drawn, sooner communicates the spirit
to another, which has the evident signature of the part. This I say, to the
end that by thine own industry thou may find Magnets for every particular
operation, by means of this general rule. This therefore I think good to tell
thee; of all things proceeding from the body, the blood and the sweat are most
stuffed with vital spirits: Of the seed, I will say nothing, because without
great incivility it cannot be had: But of one thing take especial heed, that as
soon as they proceed from their bodies, they be committed to their proper
Magnet; for as the common Loadstone is fortified, and, at it were, fed with
iron, so are these Magnets, which apprehend and keep the vital spirits, until
they commit the care of them to another thing; for if you will strive to keep
them without their proper and due Magnet, two inconveniences will follow:
First, they cannot endure any considerable time in their estate, because every
moment they lose somewhat of the spirit. Secondly, without a Magnet they do not
work so mightily, because for the most part the Magnets do much conduce to
transplantation and communication, as we know by perfect experience; for in
philtres thou will do little or no good without a Magnet, except perhaps
somewhat may be done by means of fermentation of the blood and seed, and then
either is to other in stead of a Magnet: But in other things, though happily
thou may find a virtue; yet thou will never find so powerful operations, as
if in thy work thou use Magnets: Choose them then convenient, and apply them
the right way, and thou shall perform wonders: But of this sat sapienti. And
now of more sublime things, having put an end to our Conclusions.

CHAP. XIII. Of the things necessary for a Physician before he undertake this
part of Magnetic Cures.
THere are many things necessary for him that intends to undertake upon him the
practice of this Art, and to do good by it. First, he must know diseases; for
how else can he cure them? It is true, the ignorance of the disease is not here
so dangerous as in common Physic, because we here use external Medicines, and
always comforting; and there internal, and for the most part not void of
poisonous qualities; but though it be not dangerous to the Patient, yet it may
be a shame to the Physician. He then that is well seen in the knowledge of
diseases, let him next seek the part first and principally affected; for if
this be unknown, he shall never do any thing to the purpose. He must also have
absolute knowledge of Simples, and know as well the internal as external
signature of things, whereby th simples are signed, as well to the parts of the
body, as to the diseases; for we use none but signed things to this Art: But
signature being double, to wit, External and Internal, we will use those
Simples that are externally signed, as being best known to us, except
Experience, which is always to be obeyed, be to the contrary. He that knows
the nature of Simples, cannot be ignorant of the time fit for the sowing and
gathering of them: But this Science cannot be thought sufficient without
Astrology; our Physician must therefore be skilled in the Planetary diseases
and Plants, that so he may oppose those with these; yet so, that to diseases
(whether strong or remiss) he be sure to oppose a Plant of a superior degree:
In a word, he must well understand the secretest natures of men and simples. I
deny not, but one day this Art may be manifested, and very easy; but as yet it
is in its cradle, and lies lurking in the secret deske of some men; and
therefore he that will attempt it, must of necessity, from the aforesaid
Conclusion draw some particulars; yet I would advise all men by the way, that
in the interim they would minister inwardly such things as are comforting,
proper for the disease, that so the cure may be safelier, sooner, and more
pleasantly done; yea, if peradventure sometime in some diseases there must more
violent things be given (which we must ever avoid as much as we can) yet this
comfort we have from this Art, that by it nature is strengthened and kept from
being overthrown by violent things; which consider how much it imports.
Moreover, I would persuade, that until safer purgations be found in this Art,
thou would be content to use these following, or the like, as the disease
requires; for these do not much travail the vital spirits, and work without
nauseousnesse and gripings: Hitherto I have kept them secret.

CHAP. XIV. Of Purgers and Purging.
IN as much as the vital spirit being fortified, can by its own power free the
body from noxious humors, it may be doubted whether in cures done by this Art,
Purgation be to be premised: But for the further and speedier dispatch, we will
admit to begin with Purgation; for the oppressed spirit is relieved, and is
made fitter, being helped by our Medicine, to do the other things; and when it
is free, it is more easily changed and reduced into its former estate; for
there are some of the Philosophers, which before they give a Dosis of the great
Elixar, first think fit that the cure may be more easy to free the body by
purgation; how much rather then in this Art? Now whether it be best to do it
by the common and ordinary ways, or by Diastatick, it may be doubted: Well,
first it is to be considered, that there are very few Simples violently
purging, that do not hurt the vital spirit by their great proportion of
venenosity. Secondly; there is not yet found any medicine purging magnetically
(except some ointments commonly known) which utterly wants all venomous
qualities; and therefore I would have them quite forborne, because they may be
cause of more mischief, then if they were given inwardly: But unguents or oils
may be commodiously used, if the disease lurk in the stomach, intestines,
meseraicks. I will give an example of one that does gently loose the belly:
Take Aloes hepatick, lb. Myrrh 5. pour half a pound of the gall of a Bull
upon them, and draw off the oil in a retort, which thou may use per se, or
in form of an unguent, anointing the stomach, and all about the navel
therewith; and afterward, covering it with a sponge, wet in the oil, or
ointment, and thou shall have a benign and harmless purgation, that works
without all nauscousnesse or gripings. There is much speech of an herb in the
West-part of Ireland, called by the Natives Mackenbuy; and from men of credit I
have heard it reported, that if any man carry this herb about him, it purges
him strongly enough, without any gripings: But that it does not this by way of
corroborating the spirit, it appears in that, if one carry it too long about
him, it breeds a dangerous flux. There are that ascribe the same power to
Petum, or Tobacco, if it be tied to the flank: So the milky juice of Tythimale,
mixed with salt, and put into the new excrements of the belly, does violently
loosen, but not without pain; yet these things must be warily used, neither is
it safe to apply any medicine that purges vehemently, to the vital spirit
nakedly, either by excrement, blood, or any other means.

We will therefore prescribe some things to be taken inwardly, which are
benign, and agreeable to nature, till better may be found out. The first shall
be the Specifical Purger of Paracelsus, which is good almost for every disease,
whether the operation be according to Crellius, Hartmannus, or Tenzelius: Also
you may use Mercurius vitae; if for a vomit, precipitate the powder by common
water; if by siege only, then precipitate it by oil of Tartar, and after
precipitation, wash it well: If afterward it be sprinkled with oil of common
salt, and so left in digestion three or four days, and then once or twice
washed, it purges gently and universally, which is an high secret in the
Dropsy: Moreover, if common vitae be well ground with common decrepitated
salt, and again washed, and this work be thrice repeated, it leaves much of his
violence: Also our Specificum purgans of our own invention, is of no small
moment; for it draws the humors sweetly out of the whole body, and opens
obstructions. Angelus Sala his Chrystallum lunae, freeth the body benignly from
all waterish humors, and wonderfully helps the Dropsy: Our coelestis of all
Minerals most benignly purges the belly, it is fit for every one; it opens
obstructions, and freeth the head from humors, it strengthens the stomach;
neither are there any symptoms to be feared, as there is in all other als. The
preparation is thus: Take of common precipitated white, dulcified with often
washing, and dried as much as you will, of oil of vitriol as much as will make
a paste of it, and put them in a glass, and set it in the Sun for 14. days;
then take it out, and dry it, and sprinkle it with oil of Tartar, as before;
then take it and dry it again, doing as before the third time; then wash it to
a pleasant tartness, dry it and keep it for thy use: The dosis is from 6.
grains to 15. according to the age, disease, and habitude of the body. It
purges only by siege; neither is there fear of salivation, though necessity
force thee to use it often.

The glass of Antimony, purging only by stool, is a most noble remedy in all
melancholy diseases and affects of the head; neither is it far from a special
Purger, and therefore may be safely used in every disease that requires
evacuation: It is made of the powder of vitrum Antinoonii, made by it self, by
irroration of the oil of Vitriol, even almost as our Coelestis was made in
this manner.

Vitrum Antimonium 1. of oil of Vitriol as much, mingle them well in a
glasse-morter, and dry them by the fire; this do seven times, each time drying
them well; at last, the powder being dry, have in a readiness a spirit of wine
made thus: Mastick 1. very good spirit of wine lb 1. digest them together four
days; then decant the spirit of wine, and macerate the prepared powder of
Antimony in it for three days; then put altogether in an earthen pot; make it
hot, and kindle the spirit of wine, ever stirring it with a spatula, till the
flame cease, and dry well the powder that remains. The dose is from four
grains to six. But now I will show thee the best preparation of Stybium that
ever was; it is an universal medicine, curing all diseases; and if any thing
can stand in stead of Aurum potabile, this may, though it be somewhat weaker: I
have written it in dark words, lest the unworthy should meet with it: It is
made of Hungarian Stybium by the multiplied fire of nature, calcined into most
white powder. Take heed of the fume, which will be much; but if by this
calcination thou do not find the weight increased, thou have erred;
therefore put it into the fire again, until it increase in weight; then is the
calcynation done. Take of this powder 1. of the spirit of the highest vegetable
lb 1. mix them, and digest them twenty days, or a month; then decant the
liquor: The dose is from II to III, and so to s: A profound secret in all
diseases. If thou have a mind to make use of the powder remaining, then calcine
it as before; the calcination is soon done, and the powder will be increased in
power and weight; so have thou a perpetual mineral of health. I have said much
to thee, if thou understand me; neither dare I speak more clearly; use it to
the benefit of the poor: If thou understand the sense rather then the words, I
have shown thee the way to greater matters. Further thou may use our mineral
Panchymagogon in all Obstructions, Dropsies, and the like affections: It is
made of vitae, vitrum Antimonii prepared as before, ana II: coelestis III: Let
them be well mingled, and then with the spirit of common salt saturate with
gold, let there be made a paste, which dry, and sprinkle again with the spirit
of salt; do thus thrice: at last infuse this powder in the spirit of wine,
digesting it three or four days; then heat it so that the spirit may take
fire, and stir it with a spatula till the flame cease; then dry the matter and
pour on it spirit of wine, and do as before three times; then dry the powder,
and keep it: The dose is from six grains to ten, as seems good. In some
diseases this may be mixed with the resina Scammonii, so will it neatly purge
all the humors of the body: These are taken out of the family of Minerals,
then which there can be no better given; out of the vegetative family many
things may be taken: The chiefest I use, follow. I cannot too much commend the
Resina Scammonii, whether it be taken by it self, or with Tartar vitriolated,
or Chrystalline in a convenient dose, or whether you add unto it Antimony
purging downwards; but then you must use less Crystal of Tartar; as for
example: In an intermitting Tertian Fever, the body being indifferently
disposed to Purgation, give the resina Scammonii 12. grains; of the glass of
Antimony purging downwards 2 or 3 grains; of Crystal of Tartar 6 grains, thou
shall certainly cure all Fevers: But this medicine must be given before the
Paroxysm, that Nature and the Physic may work together: If need be, let it be
repeated; besides, thou may vary the dose according to thine own judgment:
This does likewise cure continual burning-feavers, if it be given the first and
second day while the Patient is yet strong; thou may, if thou will,
afterward use some Diaphoretical, especially of those that procure sweat, not
by colliquation, but confortation, as the aforesaid preparation of Antimony.
Out of what has been said, thou may learn to make a Panchymagogon, if thou
know how to vary the dosis of the ingredient according to the variety of the
humors: Thou may also use the extract of black Hellebore for all
melancholic diseases made by white wine, especially in the suppression of the
Menstrua's, and all diseases arising from thence: And thou may add to these
the rosen of Scammony: so shall thou both hasten the operation, and take away
the nauseousness which often proceeds from the Hellebore: That which is by
Rulandus called the golden spirit of life, is good for many diseases: It is
made with a strong spirit of wine, drawn from the Trochisques of Alhendale, or
the tincture: The dose of the tincted liquor is from sem1. to 1: Thou may
also in all diseases of the Liver or Meseraicks use with good success our
extract of Rubarb: It is made with the water of Cichory, whereunto is added the
oil rectified from his salt, together with the salt thereof, all digested till
they be united: It is given in water distilled from the extract, or in
Cichory-water, from the quantity of 2 to 1: Steep some Rubarb in
Cinnamon Water, which press forth, and still in a glass limbeck inbalneo,
till the phlegm be drawn off; the substance remaining like honey, keep close
stopped, good for Cramp, Gout, or Melancholy, Park. 159.

Also our spirit of health helps many diseases, especially in diseases of the
Spleen, Hypochondriack passion, and all melancholy diseases, windiness, as
well of the stomach as intestines, and in the diseases of the Mother, which I
have used with great success; it is thus made: Take of the strongest spirit of
wine lb 1. Sennae Elect. 2. Black Hellebore prepared according to Hartman 6.
Oleum anisi and faniculi ana a few drops. Bruise the Senna and the Hellebore,
and macerate them in the spirit of wine, putting often upon them the said oils
for 14. days space; then take them out and press them, and put as much of the
new species as thou did at first; digest them and press them again and
again; put new as at first, doing all things as before: After the last
expression keep the spirit for thy use: The dose is from ss to 1. I have
likewise used Caryostinum chymically prepared very happily: The chemical oil of
Anniseed taken in broth or in wine three or four drops at a time, at the most,
heals the same diseases: The Extract may also be used made thus; infuse the
seeds bruised 24 hours in the spirit of wine; let it stand as long in balneo,
then press it forth, and distill it in a glass, the residence keep for use
against the Epilepsie, Spasm, yea Madness; Park, cap. de Aniso. The chemical
oil of Rosemary is commended for many griefs, but one drop or two at once:
Also an oil made by insolation thus; the flowers, and put them in a strong
glass well stopped, and digest them in hot horsedung 14 days; which then take
out, and unstop it, and lay a fine cloth over the mouth, which put in another
strong glass, and an oil will distill, which is a most sovereign balm for
benumbed joints, consumption, tisick, the whites, pestilence, jaundice, dim
eyes, obstructions, wind, hypochondriack passion, indigestion, etc. Park. 77.
Lavender also is commended for many griefs: Make therefore according to the
former directions, either an extract or oil: It is good for Apoplexy,
Epilepsie, Sppor, Convulsions, Palsies, Syncopes, and strengthens the stomach,
opens the liver and spleen, provokes the menstrua's, good against the Colic;
but the oil must be sparingly used, because of its fierce piercing spirits.

For Vomits, I use the common ones, necessity forcing; but I prefer that aqua
benedicta Rulandi, described by Hartman in his Chymica Praxi: It is made of
Antimony and Vitriol ana, and twice or thrice as much of Sal Niter into Crocus
metallorum, which being exquisitely sweetened, is given by infusion 1, or
somewhat more, as the sickness requires in 3 of whitewine. The Vomitorium
Conradinum Crollii is not to be despised. The coagulated Asari described by
Hartman in the diseases of the stomach and meseraicks, when there is need of
vomiting, is very good: The cold Purgers of Angelus Sala, in continual and
burning Fevers, is an excellent remedy: vitae both vomiting and purging in
rebellious diseases, is excellent also whilst the party is strong: Also the
extract of white Hellebore given in a convenient dose, cures all pains in the
head that arise from the stomach or the lower parts. And so much for Purging.

CHAP. XV. Of Phlebotomy.
FIrst understand, that whatsoever Medicine may be used in other Physic, may
also be used here. And as for Phlebotomy, first to them that contemplate the
depths of Nature, and behold the inmost causes of things, it may seem too
frequent Phlebotomy came into use amongst Physicians: Especially if the opinion
of them be true, that say blood does not putrify, which is true both in reason
and experience: For blood corrupted, cease to be blood, and degenerateth into
unnatural humors, which are to be purged, not by letting of blood, but by sweat
or purgation, as the matter requires. But perhaps they will say they do it to
cool the body; yet it is scarcely agreeable to reason, that blood should be a
cause of a feverish or preternatural heat; unless peradventure the spirits
that have their seat in the blood, be stirred up by fermentation, which is
seldom done (...) neither lasts it, except choler be joined therewith; which
being purged away, the motion and heat are presently quieted and allayed: or it
may be, because sometimes too much blood grieveth the body, and so begeteth
Fevers: But to that I answer, that such are not to be cured by Phlebotomy,
because a Physician must ever follow nature, and never stray from her laws:
And Nature has showed another way, that does not trouble the body like
Phlebotomy, and that is, to want nourishment; for whiles the body is not
nourished, the blood is consumed, if it be not repaired by Aliment; therefore
take away Aliment for the time, and nature will consume the blood, without
either troubling the humors or the body; and therefore sage Hippocrates
prescribed slender dyers. But if thou say the body cannot now be nourished
because of the malignant humors that infect the blood, thou say nothing;
for why do not thou throw them out by purgation? It may be thou will say,
there appears no concoction; yet Hippocrates purges the turgid and swelling
humors. But who sees not how much ado may be made about the concoction of
humors in Fevers? What if I affirm, with P^racelsus, that there can be no
Fevers at all without fermentation of the humors, which is as it were the
very top of concoction: Do I not speak reason? For what else but fermentation
could breed such a heat, and stir up such troubles in his body? Choler, if it
be an humor, yet it cannot grow hot, but either by external fire, or
fermentation. Some prattle that putrefaction can stir up heat, but this is a
trifle: Let them tell me how putrefaction, which is a certain corruption, can
cause heat; and whether this effect agrees to all putrefaction? They dare not
say so, for sense would convince them; for it agrees only to moist things
when they putrify, and yet not by reason of putrefaction; neither is that the
adaequate cause, but Fermentation causes heat: For look how much it
putrefieth, so much the heat decreaseth, as it is plainly seen in all moist
things putrefying; and the reason is, because look how much corruption
prevails, by so much fermentation is extinguished: But let us hear these men's
definition of putrefaction; it is (say they) the corruption of proper and
natural heat in every moist thing by a strange heat, as of the ambient; or
according to Galen, it is change of the whole substance of the body, putrefying
to corruption by external heat. The first supposes that the proper heat of a
thing can be dissipated by an external heat: But then let them tell me how
heat, as heat, can work upon heat; what if it do not first dissipate natural
heat, but consume radical moisture? For the property of heat is not to work
upon heat, but upon moisture its passive quality: Now if it work upon moisture,
it dries; but drying hinders putrefaction. Again, if it first work upon
moisture, proportionally with the moist it consumes that which is hot, or heat
it self; therefore there is so much heat lost, as the moisture left requires:
And so it seems that external heat is not the cause of putrefaction. Look
upon other things that putrify; does not heat by drying hinder putrefaction?
and does not natural cold sometimes advance it? yea, and surely it ought to
cause it, if it consist in the corruption of heat, and that in moisture; for
what can destroy beat in a moist body, where there is nothing but moisture
left, except but cold? Moreover it seems that putrefaction cannot proceed from
the corruption of proper heat. For if this were so, then the more the proper
heat should decrease, the more the putrefaction prevails, and so would be
perfected when the heat were driven clean away: But who sees not the contrary,
that putrefaction cease when heat is clean gone? do not those things that
have the least portion of this heat, last longest without putrefaction? But
that we may come to that heat that takes its original from putrefaction (as
these men would have it) of which is now all the controversy, let any man tell
me how external heat can stir up a greater and more intense heat? How do
dunghils putrify (I speak after their manner) in the wintertime, and have
more heat then either the proper heat declining, or the ambient can stir up?
Nay, they putrify sooner in the Winter then in the Summer, if they be laid in
great heaps: And whence is that great inflammation in Fevers? not from the
internal hear, says Galen, but from a strange adventitious heat; but whence it
comes, or what it brings into the putrid matter, neither he nor any else can
tell. But from the definition it is clear, that putrefaction cannot be the
cause of heat, because it destroys heat, and is introduced from an external
heat: That which is putrid is only then the subject of the heat, which
presently passes away according to the intention or disposition of the matter:
neither lasts it longer then the cause is present; and how these things agree
to Fevers, let them look. Now as to Galens definition, I wonder why he so
unadvisedly and ridiculously made the body putrefying to be the subject of
putrefaction? whether in the bringing in of all putrefaction is there a
putrefying body necessarily prerequired? And therefore that which is once
sound, is for ever free from putrefaction. But external heat is by him called
the cause of putrefaction; and therefore it shall be the cause of heat in that
that putrifieth: But putrefaction it self cannot be called the cause of heat;
yet I would fain have some of them tell me how moist things can putrify
without fermentation going before? and where shall the putrefaction of humors
at length stay but in corruption? And therefore that which is truly putrified,
is not the same that it was before putrefaction finished, but is changed into
another thing of an inferior order, because of the heat that is gone: And so
choler putrefied is not now choler, but another thing colder then choler; and
therefore cannot cause a Tertian, which depends of choler, as appears by the
excrements. Besides, putrefaction is always accompanied with stinkings (by
which I do not understand that odor which is to us unpleasant; but that which
agrees not with things in their proper state) but who ever saw stinking choler
avoided in Fevers, except it were mixed with some things that did truly
putrify? whereas the faeces of the belly, though they had an odious smell
before, yet being putrified, they have a most pleasant odor, as experience
testifies; and therefore the putrefaction of humors is not the cause of
Fevers, but fermentation; which being the height of concoction, does always
(other things requisite being present) invite to purgation. In sum, I would
fain ask those supercilious Masters one thing, what concoction they expect in a
putrid humor? Can Nature bring a thing back from corruption? Can it ever be in
better state then now it is, if it be putrified? Is it not natures work to
perfect the work begun, unless her intention be led aside, or be hindered? The
truth is, these men are too subtle to see the simplicity of nature. But now,
how if all the strife be about the name? and how if Fermentation be by them
called putrefaction? I will not stand upon this, if so be they confess that
concoction in Fevers need not be expected; and that by timely purgation they
provide for the life of the Patient, which is often lost by needless letting
of blood: But of Fevers more in another place.

To return to Phlebotomy, whence we have long digressed, against which some do
further urge, that considering the whole latitude of nature, they find no
medicine that draws blood; whence they infer, that if blood-letting had been
necessary, provident nature would have ordained somewhat to that purpose, who
labors rather to keep the chariot of life with the body: Moreover, they ask
how any man dares be so bold to draw blood from a cacochymick body, seeing
themselves grant truly that blood is the bridle of the humors; they will say
that nature being disburthened, will the speedier rise up against the humors;
but foolishly: as if one should take away a soldiers weapons, and then bid him
to set upon the Enemy, promising him by this means the Victory, would you not
think him mad? How much less is he, that robbing nature of her Arms, bids her
make head against the enemy? yea, but many have amended upon letting blood. I
deny it not; but that was not the cause of the recovery, but natural heat, or
the vital spirit stirred up by motion, set upon, and conquered the disease;
which heat by any other motion, might have been better stirred up, especially
by Purgation at the beginning, when there was strength; by which means there is
not only induced a motion exciting the spirit, but also the cause of the
disease being partly taken away, the part is much relieved. Thus you see the
madness of them that are so forward upon every occasion, time, and age, to let
blood; whereupon, how many dangers follow, I appeal to Experience. And this is
the true cause why Fevers are so seldom cured.

But is Phlebotomy wholly to be condemned? Is it not in some causes lawful for
a Physician that follows nature, seeing that she in some cases (as by bleeding
at the nose, etc.) expels blood that is troublesome? Yes, it is at sometimes,
and upon some occasions needful; but the conditions ought to be observed, that
are fetched out of the cabinet of nature. First, that it be never done but in a
sanguine body not too much filled with preternatural humors. Secondly, that it
be done whilst the strength is constant, under which condition is comprehended
the age, sex, time of the disease and year, which when they weaken forbid
Phlebotomy: Thirdly, that it never be done successively, that is, two days
together, let Avicen say what he will; for a double motion is too great, and
operates too violently, especially in Fevers, and troubles nature very much.
Fourthly, in particular irruptions, either in their making or already made, you
may do it more freely. Fifthly, in diversion, if the disease require it.
Sixthly, In Fevers, when nature shows the way by bleeding at the nose, or at
other passages, provided if she do not evacuate enough of her own accord.
Seventhly, if the natural flux of women be stayed, it is permitted (until
nature can by fit medicines be brought to her course) for the avoiding of
diseases; but there must great care be taken to open the passages; for nature
knows better how to govern her self then we do. And in these cases, and upon
these conditions, it is permitted; but except in a case where a particular
irruption urges, as sometime in a Pleurisy and a Squinancy, I would always
prefer Fasting before Phlebotomy; yet before this, if the indication command, I
would free the body from the humors; for so nature would naturally be eased: I
would Physicians would follow nature, and leave off one to swear himself a
slave to Galen, another to Avicen, a third to Paracelsus: These men were great,
but when they strove to defend their own Opinions, they often erred. So much,
etc.

CHAP. XVI. Of Cauteries.
CAuteries are used of many, that either know not, or consider not why they use
them: And this manner of evacuation of all now in use is least natural,
especially when it is used by way of preservation; for it weakeneth the member,
it opens a way for the vital spirit to go out; it alters the whole body by
wasting the natural heat; so that almost all that use it, are either of short
life, or else growing fat, and disabled for the duties of life, and fall sooner
then they should into old age: For whereas nature thought good at first to make
so many Emunctuories for the body of man, these men by making more, stir her up
too much: Has not God given medicines to purge the nocent humors by natural
Emunctuories? and we to make others for our selves, is this to follow nature,
or to go quite contrary to her? They will say they do it to evacuate humors,
which else would cause a disease: And have not we other means in imitation of
nature to do it? But if they be once evacuated, they will come again, they
will indeed, if thou know not how to fortify nature: They are fools, that
intending to cure a disease, are constrained to make it far worse: For my part
I never saw any one by this means soundly cured; I have seen many weakened. But
are these Fontenellae, as they call them, utterly to be condemned? Surely if
the humor be impact in a member not extremely weakened, peradventure I would
admit them; likewise to intercept a humor coming to a weak part until the
part be fortified: Also in aversion thou may use them for a time, but warily,
but it is better altogether to forbear them. If thou will follow the trivial
ways, then do it not in a weak body, nor in a child, except for a short time,
nor in a weak member, nor in a body extremely cacoochymical: But if thou do
use them, then handle the purulent matter that comes from them according to the
precepts of this Art, and apply to the wound those things that are especially
proper to the disease, and then thou may do wonders: The same is to be
understood of blood drawn by Phlebotomy, by which thou may do great matters,
as shall be said in the Chapter of Blood.

CHAP. XVII. Of Confortative Medicines.
IT is a goodly thing to proceed to a work with consent of all nature; and to
that end we have first and briefly spoken of the best and most famous
evacuations: now of Cordials the which are inwardly to be taken, it being
impossible, but that the disease should be cured if the vital spirit be duly
fortified as well within as without: we will therefore lay down some most
secret and universal things: And first the true Bezoar is to be admired, which
without any preparation yields a singular cordial, comforting the heart and
principal members; yet experience shows us that it is much better when it is
reduced to a Magistery; the dosis is from 4. grains to a. The same judgment is
to be given to the natural white Balsome of Peru, of which Monardus has
discourst at large, whom thom may safely follow: The not vulgar preparation
of Coral and Pearl we will hereafter speak of, in the interim take some
compounds. And the first shall be a Diatherion, commonly called by the
Inventors name ( Gascoynes powder) which secret he sold to the Bishop of
Worcester for 300 l. I will give it freely. the toes of Seacrabs boiled; beat
them to powder, which must be done the and being in Cancer: Of this powder take
i. of the Magistery of Coral and Pearl ana ii. of the true Bezoar i. make rolls
with the jelly of vipers skins, or if thou will, of the flesh of the whole
vipers, which is as good; and being dried, let them be made up again, and dried
with the same jelly, the oftener you do it, the better: The use of it is to
beat it into powder, and to give from i. to ii. almost in any disease repeating
it often: In poison thou may give from i to ii. But if thou know how to
calcyne the Crabs claws, Coral, Pearl, and Bezoar with the fire of nature, it
would be an admirable Alexiterium indeed, and far more precious then any gold:
The second Cordial shall be our precious Diarrhodon. of pile rose-leave as much
as thou will, bruise them well in a mortar until they be in an even mass; and
to every ounce thereof put of the extract of Cinnamon made by Rosewater, and of
the extract of Cloves and. Mace made by the same water ana i of the extract of
Musk and Amber made together, so that the Amber be three times as much as the
Musk ii. (This extract is made by means of a very strong spirit of wine drawn
off in a gentle balneo to the consistence of oil) Of the salt of Coral and
Pearl ana iiii. of Aqua magnanimitatis ss: of the burning spirit of Roses iss:
let them all be well mingled and insolated in a glass vessel, and stopped all
the rest of the Summer; about the end of September put them in balneo for a
month; then separate the faeces, and thou have a Kingly Medicine: The dosis is
from s. to i. It does miraculously strengthen all the bowels, defends the
health, strengthens the seminal powers, and brings them to a fruitful
disposition. But to proceed from the flowers of Caltha loortensis (marigolds
and the darkish red clove-gilly-flowers, there is made a special Cordial,
especially if you add the third part of the Extract of Saffron; let them be all
drawn by a spirit of wine Cariophilate, according to Art. Paracelsus his great
Confortative good against most diseases of the body, is so and described by
Crollius, with a long relation of the virtues. The preparation of Queen Eliz.
rectified Amber is this, viz. of the best Ambergreese i. elected Musk not
sophisticated i. of the whitest Sugar s. pulverize them according to Art,
imbibe them with the burning spirit of Roses, and grind them together till
they be in a reasonable soft past. Put them in a close vessel to digest in the
sun till it be dry, then imbibe them as before and dry it, the oftener the
better and stronger will the Medicine be; the dosis the quantity of a great
Pease in distilled water of Satyrion impregnated with his own salt; it comforts
all the inward parts, it moistens the body by increasing the radical moisture;
it increases the power of generation, and cures them that are barren of
either Sex: The spirit of Soot is of great force also rightly prepared; the
manner how is extant in Hartman, where he speaks of Confortatives in his
Chymica Iatrica, about the beginning: And though the power of these be not so
great as to deserve the name of universal Medicines, yet experience shows
their power to be very great, and that they are always used with good success
But to enrich this new Art with an unvaluable Treasure, we will teach the
calcination or dissolution of Herbs, Stones, Minerals, and Metals, wherein
every thing may according to his own nature become an universal Medicine, and
being exalted, work according to its subject; so that they shall equal the true
Aurum Potabile, which appears springs from the same root. And here Reader know,
that our words are not otherwise to be interpreted, then out of the Books of
genuine Philosophers; but not like Quercitan, who though otherwise a great
Scholar, speaking of Theriaca in his Pharmacopaeia dogmaticorum restituta,
calls the spirit of wine the fire of nature, and the salt of the Earth, the
salt and sulphur of nature; as if nature did use the spirit of wine to the
generation of all things, and played the Chymick in the salt of the Earth. I do
not deny but the whole Earth, and principally the salt, is the receiver of the
sulphur and Mercury of nature, yet has it no more then is sufficient for it
self; and as soon as it has it, it immediately gives it to another: We have
nothing to do then with the salt of the Earth, the spirit of Wine, or any
vulgarly known salts and spirits whatsoever. It is far another matter, which
the blind, that are hindered with many operations, cannot see: Now how this
calcination works miracles, I will tell thee: When here at London I did
lahour about the calcination of Coral in a naked fire, in a strong
reverberation four days and nights, and could by no means get them to be
red, I gave it to the Glasse-makers to keep it a time in their fire; and when
they had tried it four days in their fire, found it only a little yellow on
the outside, having in taste a little saltish sweetness: Whiles I was troubled
at this, comes to London the most learned and ingenious Sir Hen. Mer. and
complaining to him of my Coral, he told me that in 8. hours space he had
calcined 8 s of Coral into a reddish color, which putting the spirit of wine
to, yielded a yellowish tincture, whereas mine yielded no tincture at all;
which when I heard, I told him the secret was better then Aurum Potabile: And
thence forward I gave my self to natural calcination, trying the several
Families of things and learned to multiply the fire by art; whereas before I
had only known (and that not long) the calcination of natural gold; so by
trying many things, Experience taught one thing after another. If therefore
thou know nature, I will show thee her naked, as I have often, to my great
content and happiness, seen her; yet I dare not be so irreligious toward her,
as to prostitute her to the view of the ignorant and unworthy, an offense never
to be expiated: But to the studious and lovers of truth, I will show a
spectacle, that shall not like Diana transform men into Hearts, but into
Angels: Two things only must be supposed, as foreknown, viz. the Philosophers
fire of nature, and water of life, which though to many unknown, yet to the
punctual followers of nature, will demonstrate themselves out of the context.
Then to understand this natural and abbreviated calcination, two instruments
are necessary for us, if we mean to gain time. The first is a great pair of
bellows; if thou know the fire, thou can not, except thou be very stupid,
but understand the bellows by which thou may extremely increase the fire:
The second is a collatory vessel, artificially composed of Asbestinum, alias
called Pili Salamandrae, vel Pili Diaboli, which is easy to be procured: But
though this be also unknown; yet in many things thou may operate without it;
but in that second preparation of the salts of Herbs, by which the Species does
manifest it self in a glass after calcination of the Plant, it cannot be
wanted, as also in the whole preparation and calcination of gold it must be
used, if any good end be desired. And now we will descend to the practice,
beginning with Plants; and because they are prepared all after one manner, one
Example will be sufficient. Thus then may be composed a truly noble and most
excellent Cordial of Roses, viz. Take Roses gathered in their Balsamic time,
either bruised or unbruised it matters not; put them in the colatory vessel,
the orifice well closed as with Hermes seal; then hang them three months in a
digesting fire, take heed thou spoil not the materials with too much fire:
After the third month bury it in the belly of a great horse for six months
space; after digest it again till the gross and impure substance be separated
from the pure; so have thou a royal cordial indeed, whose virtue yet if thou
please, thou may augment thus: Take a good quantity of Roses, dry them at our
fire, at length increase the fire till they be calcined to pure white ashes;
then with water extract the salt, evaporate the water, then put the salt in a
colatory vessel, whose mouth must be surely sealed up; let it remain three
months, as thou did the above mentioned Roses themselves (then bury it in
dung, which must be new every fortnight or 3 weeks at the furthest) for the
space of six months; then take it out, and put it again to the fire of
digestion, till the species begin to appear; which will assuredly follow, if
thou know how in the calcination and evaporation to keep both the volatile and
fixed spirit; without which, nothing can be expected concerning the Idaea; and
mix a sufficient quantity of this with the other clyssis of Roses; so shall
thou have a more excellent Cordial, exceeding good for all hot diseases, and to
restore the radical moisture. And thus may thou make the true clyssis of all
Herbs, every Extract working according to the nature and true intention of that
herb from which it was taken; yea, their virtues be by the above specified fire
of nature and freedom from their Faeces wonderfully multiplied and enabled;
neither can they be purged from their impurities, but by our fire.

Next we will come to middle Minerals and stones, which all yield their
extracts after one and the same manner; let Coral be the example: Then as much
Coral as thou please, sprinkle it on a calcinatory vessel to the thickness
of a straw, put it to our fire, and stir it up with our bellows as much as thou
can, and so multiply the fire till thou see the color changed; but look that
the surface be equal, the calcination will be the sooner effected, and so
suddenly beyond expectation; thus do 3 or 4 times, for so it will sooner let
fall his tincture into the wine; which when it has done, and that it does give
no more, repeat the calcination as above, and with a new spirit draw off the
tincture, or with the same till it be extremely red; then mix all the spirit of
wine wherewith thou have drawn the tincture together, and draw them to the
consistence of oil: And thus may thou draw the tinctures from stones,
middle minerals, and salts, infinitely increasing their strengths: And Pearls
thus calcined will truly cure an Hectic Fever. Now we will proceed to
Metals, and propound for Example the true Aurum Potabile, so much magnified
amongst the Philosphers; to effectuate which, we must begin also with
calcination by our fire, as before expressed; then briefly thus: of Mercury
made menstrual by calcination, and subtly prepared by sublimation, that it
may become sharp and piercing, 12 s. of Solis refined by frequent fulmination,
and drawn into thin plates one. upon which in a glass vessel pour some of the
Mercury, about the fourth or fifth part; set this glass shut up close that
nothing fall in or out of it when it is stirred or inclined in a lukewarm heat
in the first degree of heat, and let it stand for 15. or 20 days; during which
time, a part of the Sol will be dissolved into the Mercury, by reason of the
internal fire and corroding acrimony thereof; then pour off that menstrual, and
keep it, and pour on again another part of the same, doing as is said before,
and let that stand 8 or 10 days, and thus do till the Sol be all dissolved
into the Mercurial water; which after the commixtion and resolution of the Sol
into it, the Mercury (which before) was menstrual, now is of another temper,
and is called lac virgineum, Aqua vitae, etc. and by many more names amongst
the Philosophers: Now put all this lac virgineum in the glass with the
aforesaid degree of heat, for 8 or 10 days, and then will appear a black
superficial substance, partly emergent above, and partly subsident: The which
(the water, or lac virgineum being first poured off) must be collected so often
as it appears, and is to be kept for the next work, which is Coagulation: And
this black substance is called Caput Corvi, sulphur Auri, sed crudum and nondum
fixum.

Now to proceed to this Coagulation: Put this sulphur Solis into a vial glass
close stopped, and set in the first degree of heat for 8 days, till it be
almost exficcated with the humidity of lac virginis that was left inherent in
it; and then open the glass, and pour thereon as much of the lac as is the
weight of the Caput Corvi, and mix it well, and let it stand one or two days,
till they both be coagulated in one, and become almost dry: And do thus till
all the lac be drunk up, which will be about the space of 90 daes more or less,
as the matter is of activity. Now then the matter being thus coagulated, it
must go on with the second degree of heat for one months space, and then
there will appear Gauda pavonis, that is, a variety of colors, and at length
it will turn to a white color, called corpus album, sulphur album, terra
Philosophorum, etc.

Now from this coagulation you must proceed to fermentation thus. Take as much
of purified and laminated Sol as answers to the third part of the aforesaid
coagulatum album, alias corpus album, and of Menstrual Mercury four parts of
the weight of the Sol; Amalgamize them, and put them in the viol on a lukewarm
heat for 15 days, till the Sol by the Mercury be reduced into a subtle calx;
then amalgame in a marble mortar all the aforesaid corpus album with the calx
Solis, and menstrual Mercury, and then put altogether in the viol, and set it
for a month in an heat of the 3d. degree, and let it so continue a good space,
till it become an hard white heavy mass, and from thence to an yellow color,
and from thence to an orange, and after incline to a reddish color; from which
mass, if by the spirit of wine thou extract the tincture according to Art,
thou may perform admirable cures in all desperate diseases: I will yet show
another more brief way to the lovers of Art, which take thus: Put foliated gold
into a vessel well sealed with Hermes seal; put it into our fire till it be
calcined to ashes; then sublime it into flores, having his caput mortuum, or
black terra damnata in the bottom; then let that which is sublimed be with the
same degree of fire united to the same caput mortuum, that it may be revived by
it; so that all may be reduced into an oil which is called Oleum Solis; The
dose hereof is 2, or 3 grains: And out of this Mercury of Sol thou may also
by the spirit of wine extract an high redness, which will contain the cure of
all diseases curable in nature, which is a true Aurum potabile, and much to be
estimated: And by the same way thou may make any other metal potable. I
ingeniously confess I have spoken more plainly of this subject then ever any
hitherto; and if thou understand not what has been said, then thou art utterly
ignorant of nature and her operations; and therefore I advise thee to study and
contemplate her better before thou meddle with these secrets: Oswaldus Crollius
in his Basilica chymica, under the title of his Cordialia, describes a way, but
yet imperfect, as he confesses, of extracting this quintessence, or making of
an Aurum potabile; which I deny not but may give an Artist some light in the
aforementioned way: And first he dissolves refined Sol in Aqua Regis, and then
precipitates the Sol by a wary and soft instillation of good oil of Tartar,
made by resolution from a marble in a cold cellar; or for want thereof, he
takes the salt of Tartar dissolved in Aqua nubis, by which he makes his
precipitation; then he dulcifies the powder precipitated 4 or 5 times, and
dries in Balneo Maria, or in a stone very carefully, in respect of the danger
thereof: Then he takes some 20 Mensura's or thereabouts of urine of a sound man
that uses to drink wine altogether, or for the most part, and puts it into a
glass Alembick, and evaporates 19 of these measures in Balneo: The one measure
that remains, he distills in sand; at last increasing the fire strongly, then
it sublimes a little; the salt that remains in the bottom, he takes away, and
rectifies the spirit in Balneo, and so proceeds to a tedious distillation, and
coagulates this spirit of urine with the spirit of wine, and then uses the
spirit of salt, and pours it on the calx solis, and goes on to a laborious
work, as in his said Book more may at large be seen: A true Philosopher out of
these things compared and well contemplated, cannot choose but find a ready path
to sublime and arcane Secrets: Concerning the Laudanum's, it is not much
material here to be spoken of; many descriptions are extant everywhere. In
Tenzelius there is an express form of Laudenum opiatum, and in Crollius: And
in Hartman, of that which is is not opiate. A true Physician knows how to vary
the proportion of things to his own intent and the nature of the disease. And
doubtless he that knows how to effectuate the work of calcination by the fire
of Nature, may perform excellent matters. And thus far for Cordials and
Confortative Medicines.

CHAP. XVIII. Of those Medicines that ought to be chosen in this Art.
NOw we have declared our minds sufficiently of those things that are helps
unto this Art; we will proceed further, and demonstrate what Medicines are to
be chosen therein, that we may the better understand the matter of our Physic:
And here take dilgent notice, that those things are principally to be chosen
that bear the signature of the disease, and of the part principally affected:
For the knowledge whereof, I would advertise thee to be conversant with
Crollius, and diligently to peruse his Book de signaturis internis rerum, vel
de signaturis plantarum humanamembra similitudine repraesentantium: In the mean
time surely, if thou know the Specificals (though the signatures do not
appear) yet there needs no doubting of them, for they have either such an
external signature, as we do not perceive lying hid perhaps in their motion,
number, etc. or an external one unknown unto thee because thou art ignorant of
the Anatomy of them.

If thou therefore know any specificalls, contrary to any diseases, apply them
diligently, according to this Art to those diseases whereto they are proper; in
the manner as shall be taught.

Those that help by any known quality, are not so much worth as to be taken
into this Art, for the matter of our Medicines, unless it be when they have
asagacity (Mark well what I say) for these things ought to be precious to thee;
for then if any external quality hurt the body or the spirit most violently,
thou must use these sagacious plants endued with a contrary quality, which have
more spirits. And those herbs and plants we call sagacious, which know how to
avoid their enemies and embrace their friends; as for example, the Olive tree
is a friend to the Vine, and the oak is an enemy to the Olive; likewise the
Colewort is the Vines Enemy: of which see Levinus Lemnius de occultis naturae
miraculis, Lib. 40. Cap. 10. and also Bapt. Porta in his Magia naturae, lib.
10. Cap. 90. de Sympathia and Antipathia. Now these sagacious herbs and plants
have a signature against diseases which have some property contrary to them; so
the Salix or Willow is signed to a dry Hectic, for it has the power to grow
apace, and though torn or cut from the trunk; if yet it be pricked into the
ground, it dies not, but grows presently into a tree and gets roots of his
own: Likewise the Oak dies not of a long time, and therefore that is to be used
when and where diuturnitie of time is required: and so of all other: now you
see that such herbs are to be chosen, as have in them the signature both of the
member and the disease; but because it is somewhat difficult to find one that
has both the signatures, thou may take two of a diverse species and so it
will operate the same effects, if thou be cunning in the application. This one
also more I shall advertise thee of, as the greatest secret in this Art, namely
that the medicines taken from men's bodies, if they be rightly used will perform
the greatest matters. Therefore search with the most diligence what parts or
excrements of the body, conduce to the disease; for thou must have a due
composition thereof, if thou mean to effect any good therewith: Take Example by
the weapon salve, by means whereof wonders are performed in Surgery. If
thou can imitate the composition thereof, and can mix together such, or the
like ingredients, fitting other affects, thou will admire the wonderful
operations thereof! And because I would not have thee ignorant thereof, I will
give it thee here even in Oswaldus Crollius, own words in his Basilica Chymica
under the name of his unguentum Sympatheticum seu stellatum Paracels^ and under
the Title of vulneraria.

Adipis verris aprugni, Vrsini, ana lotones oct. i.e. 4 s.

Quo seniora animalia, eo melior adeps; tamen non ultra septennium:

Vtriesque animalis adeps prius in vino rubro per dimidiam horam lento
igneibulliat; postea effundatur super aquam frigidam and cochleari colligatur
pinguedo innatuns; quicquid fundum petit, abjiciatur; postea Lumbricorum ex
vino vel aqua lotorum sextarios duos; nam in affectibus nervorum magnum usum
habent; torrefiant in^ollae tecta in furnace pistoris; cavendum tamen ne
adurantur; postea terantur in pulverem.

hujus pulveris Cerebri aprugni siccati, Citrini, Sandali odoriferi, Mummiae
Communis Egyptiorum, Haematitis ana 1.

Demum accipe usneae e Cranio hominis violenta morte perempti abrasae, Luna
crescente and in bona domo existente, Veneris si fieri possit, non Martis aut
Saturni, ad pondus avellanarum duarum circiter, hoc est 1. Ex omnibus tritis
and invicem mintis cum adipe aprugni and ursi secundum artem fiat unguentum in
vitro clauso vel pyxide diligenter adsuos usus reservandum: Paretur unguentum
sole in Libra existente, hoc est in Autumno.

The use of this famous Sympathetical unguent follows, with the effects and
virtues.

By this salve are cured all wounds, by whatsoever weapon they are made; either
by blows, thrusts, falls, if the weapon may be but had that made the thrust,
or struck the blow, though the party wounded be many thousand miles distant,
so it be a curable wound in nature, and tha^ none of the three principal
members be hurt, nor the nerves nor Arteries, neither being duly applied will
suffer or permit any noxious symptoms to abound, because it is conglutinative,
suppurative and renovative; then take the use of it thus.

Annoint the weapon with the which the party was wounded, once a day, if the
wound be great, or necessity compel; otherwise but once in 2 days, and lap it
up with a clean cloth, and in a warm clean place, but not too hot; keep it so
lapped, take heed no dust fall on it or cold winds blow on it, for it will
much offend the party though never so far distant. And this is sufficient to
stop the mouths of those Calumniators that contemn and despise this famous
diastaticall unguent, injuriously saying it must be but a small wound or hurt;
and then nature it self by but only wrapping it from the air will in a short
time effect the cure. But to such I make answer, that whatsoever wound is in
nature curable by the hands of any expert Surgeon, the same may be done by
this famous salve (except before excepted) But better to clear these scandalous
speeches; and to stop the mouths of these ignorant, but malicious detractors,
Let them in the smallest wound, make this experiment. viz. after they have
artificially dressed the knife, sword, rapier or instrument whatsoever, that
made the said wound, let them a little after wipe clean away the said anguent,
and instead thereof apply some Corrosive to the weapon, as aqua fortis,
Arseniall powder, spirit of Vitrioll, or the like, and then let them tell me
how the Patient fares, though never so far from them, and let them mark then
what pain is procured to the patient thereby, and what symptoms follow if
speedily careful remedy be not suddenly used; and and this I hope is
sufficient to stop the defamatory tongues of illiterate inveterate Zoillans who
carp at all things that are out of the reach of their shallow capacities. But
to return to our unguent. Now before you annoint the weapon and wrap it up, you
are to consider whether the wound was made by the point only; for then you need
to anoint no more then the point, or so far as it entered into the flesh,
neither need you here to stich up the lips of the wound, but only to bind it up
with a fair linen cloth first either dipped in the Patients Urine or in warm
wine: and that day that one annoints the said weapon, let him abstain from
Venery. Also observe that as soon as the weapon is anointed, the bleeding will
cease of its own accord, bleed it never so fast before. In the fractures and
ruptures of the bones you must add somewhat of the powder of Comphry the great
or of the herb Osteocolla, or of the roots of black Hellebore. Next if thou
having the weapon thus anointed, desire to know whether the Patient be about to
dye or to recover of the said wound, then hold the weapon so anointed, over hot
coals so long till thou can but only suffer thy hand to touch it, and then
sprinkle the fine powder of red Sanders and the bloodstone upon it, and if it
sweat or show drops of blood, then the patient is in great danger; otherwise
not.

Also if thou can not come to the weapon that hurt the party, then take a
Willow-stick and open the wound gently and put the stick into it till it bleed
a little, and after the blood is dried, not either by the sun or fire, for
those exhale the spirits, but of its own accord, then dress this stick as the
weapon, or put into the box where the unguent is, leaving it there till it be
fully cured.

If the wound be deep or great, then every day in the morning you must cleanse
and lap it up with a fresh fair linen cloth, using no other extraneous oil or
unguent: But to every new wound you must observe to use a new willow stick: To
cure the toothache herewith, Take a penknife or other instrument and scarifie
the gums till they bleed, and then dress the knife with the unguent and
presently the pain shall be gone. Also if a nail be run into the foot of man
or horse, first pull it out, and then anoint it as above, and it shall
instantly heal it without suppuration. And thus we may cure all living
creatures that have flesh and bones. For further satisfaction to all the
opposers of this our Hepliotrick or Traumatick unguent I refer them to the
learned notes of Hartman, upon Basilica Chymica Crollij under the title of his
vulneraria before said. But it is now time to return to our purpose; only this
digression I thought good to insert here that the true and diligent enquirers
after natures secrets may be encouraged to go on cheerfully, till they have
attained their desired ends.

CHAP. XIX. Of the time as well of gathering as the application of these
medicines in general.
ANd for this purpose we shall suppose the influential elections of the heavens
not to be here impertinent; for indeed herbs and plants do not at all times
possess the same virtues; but sometimes more, sometimes less. But the most
profitable, and best for our use are those having signatures; and which are
then gathered, when the signature is most apparent, and the moon in the sign
that governs the member signed, especially the planet that is lord of the
plant, being in his essential dignities, and beholding the moon favorably And
let the moon and the Lord of the plant be both free, the Moon having then
dominion of the plant, or Jupiter in the sixth house, and take heed the Moon
be not joined to any ill planets that are retrograde. And here note that those
things that have their signatures in their roots must be gathered in Autumn.
But if they have the signature of the disease they must be gathered when the
planet lord of the disease is weak, and in a cadent house, and the lord of the
planet fortified. The medicines taken from men, receive as soon as they come
from the body, and keep them in vessels well shut till the time you mean to
use them; but yet if thou can fit the Moon and the planet that is lord of
the part, if thou intend it for a particular operation, do. But for a general,
make Libra fortunately ascending, and Jupiter in the sixth house if thou can,
or at least let him have a friendly aspect to the sixth; but especial heed
must be taken whether they be excrements or blood or ought else, that they be
not corrupted before thou use them; yet mistake me not as though I should
dislike fermentation, which in this Art is most necessary, the which some call
corruption though falsely. But if at any time thou will use Mumny in this Art,
take it if possible from a body living, or next to life, or else it will not do
so much good as the warm blood, and how ever anoint the Mumny with the warm
blood, and set it to dry in the shade, but be sure it does not corrupt before
the drying; to avoid which, cut it in little square pieces like dice, for so it
will sooner dry: If thou can not have it from a living or warm body, then it
must be often anointed with warm blood, or steeped in it, and left there for a
time and curiously dried, and so it will be fortifyed with the spirits drawn
from the blood. And if at any time thouintend to work by fermentation, as soon
as the blood, excrements or the like are out of the body, put them up in a
close vessel well shut, and mix with them such things as are to be mixed, if
any addition be required, as in some experiments there are, and then set them
todigest in a gentle heat, not passing the heat of the body from whence they
came; note also you must not use the same vessels always, but sometimes
glasses, sometimes things taken from living creatures. As for example sake. If
thou would digest ones excrements for to stay the flux, the straight gut, or
gut of the fundament of an hog is the most convenient vessel. If thou would
stay vomiting, then the stomach of a swine is best to digest in, etc. But where
thou intendest Implantation, then in all putrefactions to this purpose, glass
vessels are the best, though I would use an eggshell in some cases; as in
digesting blood by it self, or mixed with sweat. Now if thou require the time
of application, generally take it thus: All Application of these remedies, be
it in Implantation, or a simple apposition of things convenient, ought to be
done the Moon in a sign convenient and fortunate, and Jupiter in the sixth
house, as aforesaid, and the Lord of the Plant or Herb exalted above the Lord
of the disease; yet if all these things concur not exactly, neither forsake or
procrastinate the cure; but so fit things, that when the residue agree, thou
may begin anew; for if there be a due application of things, though the
Stars do not exactly accord, the cure though prolonged, yet the effect will
lnot be altogether frustrate; for note this well, that if thou observe the time
and the progress of the work in the cure, and so set upon the disease afresh,
applying new instruments of health, thou can not but effect thy desires: for
in this lies the wisdom of a Physician. But because we have spoken concerning
the gathering of these plants in their most vertuals time (viz.) when the
Plannet that is Lord of the Plant is in his essential dignities. It is meet
briefly to run over the 7 Planets, and demonstrate some particular Herbs that
each Planet does govern, or is Lord over; and what diseases they also have
dominion over. And first for Saturn, he is Lord over Angelica, Box, Bythwind,
Bearefoot, Clotbur, Ceterach, Cummin, Dragon, Fumitory, Fern, Horstaile,
Hemlock, Hellebor, Moss, Mandrake, Nightshade, Poppy, Spinnach, Shepherds
purse, Sage, Tutsan, Wolfbane, Parsnip, and many more the like. The Plants and
Trees are Cypress, Hemp, Savine, Yew, Willow or Sallow, Polipody, Seen, Rue,
Pinetree, Tamarisk. The diseases peculiar to his Government are Quartane Agues,
Teeth, Leprosies, all melancholy distempers, Consumptions, Palsies, black
Jaundice, Dropsies, Gouts, Apoplexies, Appetitus Caninus, etc

Secondly, Jupiter he is Lord over these Herbs, Plants, Trees, and Drugs
following; namely, Strawberry, Bettony, Centory, Organy, wild Marjoram,
Rhubarb, Borrage, Bugloss, Selfeheal, Piony, Dasie, Saffron, Clove-gillyflower,
Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, Sugar, Balsome herb, Mastix, Wheat, and Violets.
Cherry-tree, Birch, Mulberry, Oak, Olive, Almond, Ash tree, Pear Tree, Hazel,
Beech, Barberry, Coral, Mulberry Gooseberry, etc. The diseases that he reigns
over, are infirmities of the Liver, inflammation of the Lungs, palpitation of
the Heart, Cramps, pain and ach in the Backbone, diseases in the Arteries,
Veins and Ribs, Plurisies, Squinancies, Windiness, Blood putrisied, and all
Fevers proceeding from the abundance thereof, etc.

Thirdly, Mars lordeth over all caustic, corrosive, and penetrating herbs and
plants; such as the Nettle, all Thistles, Restharrow, Brambles, Pettyspurge,
Onyons, Scammony, Garlic, Mustardseed, Pepper, Ginger, Leeks, Red Sanders,
Radish, Arsesmart, Tamarinds, Castoreum, Assarum, Carduus Benedictus,
Cantharides: All pricking trees, as Thorn, Chestnut, and many more, etc. The
Diseases Tertian and pestilential burning Fevers, Plague, Megrims, Ringwormes,
burning Blisters, Phrensies, yellow Jaundies, bloody Flux, Fistula's, all
wounds and diseases in the Genitories, the stone in the Reins and Bladder,
small Pox, all hurts by Iron, Shingles, all choleric diseases, with many
other, etc. as Tetters, Wounds, Carbuncles.

Fourthly, Sol rules the following Plants and Trees: The Laurel, Pomcitron, the
Vine, Marigold, Rosa Solis, Rosemary, Hypericon, Amber, Musk, Cinnamon,
Spikenard, Cellandine, Eyebright, Aloes lignum, Balm, and all flowers of good
odor inclining to a yellow color, Enula Campana, Barley, Flos Solis. Of Trees,
the Orange, Limmon, Myrrh, Frankincense, the Cedar, Palm, Laurel, and many
other, etc. The Diseases are rotten Fevers, Cramps, infirmities of the Eyes,
pimples and heat in the face, diseases of the brain, mouth, stinking breaths,
Catarrhes and Rheums, Syncopa's, Tympanies, with many other the like, etc.

Fifthly Venus, and she predominates over those herbs that have white flowers,
and of a sweet savor; as the Lillies, white and yellow, Satyrion, Maidenhaire,
or Capill. Veneris, the white and yellow Daffodil, the Myrtle, Ladies Mantle,
Sanicle, Vervin, Thime, Coriander. Trees: The sweet Apple, the white Rose, the
Fig, the Sycamore, Turpentine, Walnut, Almonds, Apricocks, Plums, Raisins, etc.
The Diseases are all such as belong to the Matrix; and to the members of
Generation; and to the Reins, Belly, Back, French Pox; or any that springs from
lust, as Priapism, Impotency, Hernia's, Diabetes, etc.

Sixthly, Mercury; and he triumphs over all such that bear their seed in the
Husk or Cods; as Beans, the Nut, Elder, Adders tongue, Dragonwort, Anniseeds,
Cubebs, twopenny grass, Lungwort, Marjoram: Of Drugs, as Theriaca, Hiera,
Diambra, etc. The Diseases are Vertigoes, Lethargies, Madness, Ptisick,
imperfection by stammering in the tongue, fantastic imaginations, all the
defects of Memory, dry Coughs, Hoarsnesse, Dumbness, all diseases of the
Tongue, snuffling in the nose, etc. with an infinite of the like.

Lastly, Lady Luna her Domination is over Belly-akes, Collicks, Menstrua's,
Dropsies, Sciatica, Worms in children, Convulsion-fits, Falling Sickness,
Measles, Kings Evil, Apostumes, etc. And for her Plants and Herbs, they are
Cabbage, Colworts, Melons, Gourds, Pumpions, Lettuice, Rape, Endine, Mushrooms,
and all herbs which have shading and spreading leaves; and such as delight in
watery places. And this will suffice to a reasonable Artist by the nature of
these Plants, etc. and diseases before specified, to find out many more of the
same kind by considering the natures thereof; and so by the similitude to use,
and apply them to his own use and benefit.

CHAP. XX. Of the means whereby this Art applies the Medicine to procure
health.
THere are many ways and means whereby this Art applies Medicaments to the
naked spirit; but for Methods sake we will contract them into two in general:
The one we will nominate, and call Transplantation; the other naked
Application. Now Transplantation is when by means of the diseased Mummy, we
put the disease into a Plant, or into another living creature, and so procure
the Patients recovery; for when the plant or creature has drawn to it self
the evil complexion that troubled the spirit vital; then the spirit is thereby
freed, and made sit, and enabled to exercise his due functions: But the
creature or herb into which the disease is planted, languisheth, and at the
length, unless it be cured, dies: And now here this caution is to be
diligently observed, that we strive not in vain for to transplant the disease
into another creature which has too strong a spirit; for the vitat spirit
being sometimes very strong, resists vehemently, and then all the preparation
does no good. But into Plants never strive to transplant the disease, unless
it be in some property contrary to the disease; especially take heed lest it
have any occult quality contrary to the nature of man, or might by its too much
violence (after it has attracted the disease and as it were digested it)
attract more then it should: For by transplantation, not only the evil, but the
good is sometimes attracted, and communicated to another: And from hence it is
manifest, that they that transplant hair into a Willow to make it grow, and
leave it there longer then they should, do weaken the head, and dim the sight;
for the Willow draws the spirit out of the head too violently: And from hence
it appears that a true Artist may obtain to himself a surpassing strength out
of an horse, or bull, or the like strong creatures, if he know the right and
ingenious use of this Transplantation. To proceed, this Transplantation is
twofold, Immediate, or Mediate: The Immediate is that which is done to any
living creature by Mummial things; for so the thing whereunto it is applied,
appropriates unto it self, and converts into his own nature the good or evil
quality of the Mummy; and either freeth the spirit from such a quality, if it
be evil; or appropriates to it self the spirit, if it be hurt by no evil
quality, and sortifies it self by this spirit, by means whereof it can bring
in the qualities and temper of the body into the thing whereunto it is applied:
And that thing, by means of these qualities, unites the spirit into it; and by
that, and in the virtue of it, can work many admirable things: And lest you
should here be deceived by the word Mummy, understand that it is whatsoever is
impregnated with the vital spirit, and can exhibit it nakedly: Others have
called the vital spirit it self Mummy; but I conceive it not so distinct.
Next, Mediate transplantation is that which is done by immediate
transplantation; as if any quality be transplanted into an herb convenient, and
that herb given to an animal; then the quality, or the spirit transplanted into
that herb, will be transplanted into the Animal to whom it is given: And by
these means wonders may be performed: But take heed of abusing this profound
knowledge by acting evilly: And here also note, that due putrefaction does
excellently prepare the aforesaid Mummy; so that any quality may be introduced
into Animals; and experience finds, that blood does best admit of such
putrefaction.

Now the other part of this Art, called Naked Application, is nothing else but
the applying those things to the Mummy which can either correct the evil
quality, or can draw the vital spirit off it; by which last means also
immediate transplantation may be done as in some amatories it is manifest: And
in this Application especial regard must be had; First, that nothing endued
with any venomous quality be applied to the Mummy; for then the spirit being
and living in the Mummy, and being prejudiced by that means, does easily
communicate its hurt to the whole: But if thou follow the former method
concerning Signatures, thou can not easily err.

Secondly, Take heed lest by evil diet in the time of Application, thou destroy
not the whole work.

CHAP. XXI. Of Transplantation, and of the diverse manner by which it is
effected.
THere are six manners of Transplantations; viz.

1. Insemination. 2. Implantation. 3. Imposition. 4. Irroration. 5. Inescation.
6. Approximation.
1. Insemination is when a Magnet impregnated with Mummy, is mingled with fat
Earth, wherein the seeds of Herbs agreeing to the disease are sowed; for the
earth being sifted and mixed with the Mummy, and put in an earthen pot, and the
seeds sowed therein, and watered with the washings of the diseased member, or
of the whole body, if it be all affected; so in time convenient all the disease
shall be transplanted into those seeds, provided, as is said above, the said
seeds be agreeable and proper to the disease: If time and occasion require it,
they are to be watered every day with the said washings of the part, or the
whole, as above is directed. This being done, watch when the seeds begin to
sprout; and when it is time, transplant them into the like earth, and so thou
shall perceive, as the herb increases, the disease will decrease. Some use
when the herbs are at their maturity, to pull them up, and either hang them to
dry in the smoke, or throw them into a running River: Now if it shall happen
that the Mummy wherewith the Magnet is impregnated be not diseased and
infected, then the Plant will be impregnated with the vital spirit of him whose
Mummy it was, wherewith strange secrets may be accomplished: But be thou sure
to elect herbs fit for thy purpose; for every one is not fit for all occasions,
each having his peculiar gift; for otherwise works the spirit joined to
Vervain, then to Carduus or Angelica, etc.

Implantation is in a manner almost effected as Insemination, but that here the
herbs are to be taken with their Roots, or the root alone and implanted in the
like earth and so prepared and watered, now here it is best if the roots have
no other water but the washings aforespoken of; so they will be as it were
constrained to attract and appropriate the Mummie with the greater violence,
which also you may observe in insemination provided the condition of the herbs
require not otherwise, but in all let experience be thy guide, for experientia
Magistra Artium. Yet one thing in both these ways is to be noted that if the
herbs, plants, or Roots dye, having attracted some ill quality before the
disease be fully cured, then another of the same kind must be implanted in the
same or rather the like earth.

3. Imposition is thus. Take the Mummic of the diseased member, or the
excrements, or both, and be sure to take as many as thou can get, and put
them in a tree or an herb, betwixt the bark and the wood, or else put them
into an hole made with a piercer, and stop it with a pin of the same wood, and
put upon it clammie earth: or if thou put it betwixt the bark and the wood,
cover the place with the bark and with earth as is done in inoccultation, and
leave the Mummie there, and thou shall quickly perceive the effect. But yet
understand that some diseases are sooner cured by insemination, as the fixed by
one, the vollatill by the other. And these ways are not burdensome to nature.
Also this imposition may effectually be used in preservation against some
diseases and in every imposition this is to be noted, that where thou desire
a durable effect thou make use of long lived trees, and where a speedy effect,
use them that grow a pace, but remember the caution before mentioned in those
that are of celerous growth (i.) that as soon thou have thy desire, to take out
all thou putest in, lest two much attraction of the spirits hurt the patient.

4. Irroration this is done, that by it transplantation may be perfected: so
that every day thou shall water fit and convenient herbs, or a tree, until the
disease be cured with the urine, sweat, order, or the washings of the member,
or whole body as occasion requires, either severally or all mixed together,
which is best; and this I would rather use as an help to the other, then alone.
And here observe as soon as irrigation is performed, that thou cover all the
earth so irrigated with new earth, lest the Air do dissipate the Mummial
virtue before the plant attract and receive it.

5. In escation is, when we give the Mummie to creatures for food; for then the
vital heat of the creature unites the Mummie to it self, and corrects it;
appropriating to it self the evil quality by which the spirit was diseased,
and so restores health to the body from whence the Mummie was extracted. But if
the patient be not fully cured when the creature is infected and killed; then
you must give another beast a portion of the like Mummie, and reiterate the
operation till the party be whole. And in this case blood rightly putrified, or
to speak more properly, fermented, is especially to beused: and yet there is no
doubt but the same cures may be done with the Mummie, extracted by the Magnet.
Some have used to give the blood, being warm from the vein, with good success
to a dog or a swine, which though it happen they be not infected with the
disease (because the spirit is therein too fast locked up and fettered) yet it
is confirmed by experience that it has much adjuvated and furthered the cure.
And by this operation natural Philtres are performed, and yet I know that love
may be procured by mere application: But I dare deliver no more of natural
Philtres; for though to men of upright conversations they may work honest and
lawful effects, yet evil disposed persons may convert them to abufive uses.

6. But by Approximation, transplantation is effected, which is performed, if
to the sick person such things be applied which can attract the vital spirits
and active beams, and having so attracted them, can unite them to themselves,
and correct them; and this is done either by application of plants, and their
parts, or of beasts, birds or the like. As if you should lay a Cowcumber by an
Infant that has a fever when it is asleep, the Cowcumber will wither and the
child will be cured; so some use to apply young whelps to the feet of
children, sick in their Cradle; so doves cloven in the midst, and applied hot
to the soles of the feet, do by attraction rectify the preternatural heat
diffused through all the body, and remove all pains, being after the same
manner applied to several parts. So the fundament of an hen plucked bare, and
applied to the biting of a viper, freeth the body from the venom, and the hen
swells (and if not cured) dies sooner then if she had been bit by the Viper.
All which things are done by no other means then Magnetisme. Moreover
experience tells that some diseases infect by approximation; for the spirit
insinuating it self into the body communicates an evil disposition to its
brother spirit. And we may easily perceive how love is begotten by
approximation, especially between them who by sweat communicate their spirits,
and lying in the same bed by a long Circulation as it were of spirits lead
almost the same life. But that this does not always happen, is long of the
reasonable soul which commands the affections as superior to them: yet this
hinder not our Art; but here I forget an objection of some validity; for it may
be said, If diseases may be so cured by approximation, how then happens it that
he that gives the infection to another is not cured himself? for answer,
firstit is to be considered what, and what manner of diseases they be that are
most communicated to men by infection; neither would I say that every disease
may by transplantation be communicated to every beast; I desire here but to
search what diseases of themselves and their own nature are fitted for it. And
such diseases are of three kinds; the first consists in a subtle
preternaturall heat, not venomous, which when it can quickly and suddenly
insinnate it self into bodies, in the least moment of time it will alter the
body, and adds unto it an evil complexion. And these properties are here
ascribed unto heat in respect of the subject in which it lies hid; yet this
carrying the heat of the vital spirit, because of the sudden alteration, is
not strongly freed.

The second kind consists indeed in preternaturall heat; but such an one that
lies occult in subtle venomous breathes; and this kind works more soon and
more vehemently, as in the Pestilence.

The third kind does not consist in a mere quality, nor in the mere
fluctuating humors nor lurketh in any part peculiarly, but changes all the
habit of the body and subverteth all the operations, or at least disposes them
otherwise then man's nature requires. And this kind does infect by sending forth
an halitus, or vapor altogether infected, and in no part sound, which though
more gross then the two former, yet has an insinuating power upon a near
approximation; and does in some measure of time (though not suddenly) overthrow
the temperature of the body; and of this kind is the Leprosy and French Pox.
Now having laid this ground, I say that in the two first kinds why the body
infecting another is not thereby released it self, this is the cause. The
infection suddenly communicated does in an instant change the body that
receives it, and being wholly infected, it cannot correct another, but rather
hurts it. And therefore we see when many are sick of the Plague in one house,
hardly one escapes; for the disease is strengthened by being circulated from one
to another, whereas if there be but one infected, there is more hope of his
recovery. And therefore that care and custom is much to be commended, that
allots a several house to every particular person infected. But it is contrary
to in Fevers; for it has been observed that if one be infected by another,
the infector is often and presently freed, and so it goes successively through
the house till it comes to the last, who seldom escapes and very hardly. And
this confirms our doctrine very much. And it happens thus, when the weakest
body falls sick first. As to the third kind, the reason why the body infecting
is not always cured (besides what has been said) is this, because those
confirmed diseases have so changeed the whole habit of the body, that it is
very difficult, nay almost impossible to restore it; but in the beginning, that
some (though impiously) have been freed from these diseases, as is known by
experience and the confession of diverse that have transplanted them, as in the
French Pox, by lying with many women. But these are detestable ways, yet they
strengthen and make good our Art:

CHAP. XXII. Next of the means by which naked application is performed.
NAked application is two ways performed; either by imposition or application.
Imposition is when some thing agreeing to thine own intention either in
quality or signature, is put in the Excrement, blood etc. or contrarily when
they themselves are put into some agreeable Composition, and there left to
remain till thy desire be accomplished. And such composition ought to be made
in a fit vessel, of which something has been formerly delivered. But if the
Mummiall things be to be kept in some convenient composition, then earthen
vessels will serve thy turn. If the matter be liquid, then let them be mingled;
if otherwise, it is sufficient if but struck in; now application strictly
taken, is when liquid things signed, are outwardly ward applied to the body or
to the part affected, or when the cure is intended to be done by physical
appensions or by wearing things about one. And these are called Zenextons,
Amulets, or Sigilla's, of which vide Baptist Porta in Magia naturali, lib. 4.
and Oswaldus Crollius in his Basilica Chymica under the title of Pestilentiale;
of these there is no want amongst the common Authors and professors of Physic,
which are extant in a copious manner, though they being altogether or for the
most part ignorant of the causes, do ascribe unto them I know not what, first
and second qualities, never seeking further into the true reasons thereof. Also
the time of gathering of herbs and plants for this application is necessary to
be observed; for if thou gather herbs, roots or plants for Amulets, experience
tells us that certain rules can hardly be set down; only this I will add
that if thou gather herbs for the diseases or pains of the head, thou must not
gather them as thou do herbs for the lower parts, but contrary, as thou do
Asarum for a purgative; but much of this must be learned by experience. Note
also if any one would cure wounds by magnetisme and that by apposition, it will
be in vain, unless he first suffer the Magnetic herbs to putrify in the
ground; for that means frees the virtue, and makes the operation powerful. And
look that in no operations thou use dry herbs, if thou can procure green
ones; but if necessity do constrain thee to use dry; then remember to macerate
them in their own water before thou use them. And also observe further that it
is not always necessary to make application to the part affected; but
sometimes near it, especially if the part be pained by consent, or by
contagion of another part; for example if the stomach be the cauve of the pain
in the head or send any noisome fumes or vapors up unto it, then let the
medicine called the Amulet be hung about the neck; but if the stomach be of it
self diseased, then its best to make naked application, next now we will
proceed to the Magnet that is to be used in this Art.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Magnet in this Art; the description of four, whereof two
have hitherto been unknown to the world.
THis is the profoundest secret in this Art, and of greatest use; for many
things that seem impossible in nature are easily by this accomplished. I need
not a praeambular recommendation thereof; for he that knows any thing in this
Art, must needs acknowledge that not only we, but nature her self works
magnetically in the greatest part of her sublime operations: though we be so
coecutiated that we perceive her not. But to our purpose, know then that I am
not ignorant, that there may be diverse magnets; all tending to one and the same
end. I will set down first two principal ones, then add a third most
consonant to reason: and lastly a 4th found out by my own experience.
Tentzelus out of some of Paracelsus words has made one not to be contemned. He
took the ordure of a sound man, and dried it in a shady place; for so it lost
the stench and excrementitions moisture; a portion of the spirit aforesaid he
kept, which he by a word apt and significant enough calls sulphur; which being
dried he kept for his use. And this matter or the preparation thereof cannot be
denied; for a magnet so prepared does copiously attract the spirits; neither
will we enviously deter any one from the practice thereof because it is not
of our invention. For the second, It is nothing else but dried man's flesh; the
which was a long time preserved and concealed closely by Doctor Flood, which as
he said, being applied to the region of the heart, would so violently attract
that it could not long be endured; but it must be taken from the body of a man
that dies a violent death; and if it be possible, whiles he is warm. But this
being something difficult to obtain, I will for the third show you a better,
and to be had with no such cruelty. Take then the blood of a sound man or men,
as much as thou can get. It is not material whether you take it all at one
time or at many; permit this blood to congeal, then pour off the water swimming
alost, and keep it; and when it is coagulated, dry it in the shade, and then
irrigate and moisten it with the same water poured off it, and so dry it, doing
so till the dry blood has drunk up all the water, and then being dry, keep it
for thy use. For the Fourth, which in a manner does comprehend the whole body
of man, Take therefore a great quantity of man's Ordure, but of a sound man, and
with the urine of the same man bring it to the consistence of a Pultice; add to
it as much sweat as thou can get, taken from sound bodies with linen cloths
or a sponge; put them altogether in a clean place in the shade till they be
dry; then add as much fresh blood to them, and incorporate them altogether,
and set them to dry again; and if any water swim on the top, decant it, and
keep it in a vessel very well shut; and when the aforesaid materials are dry,
imbibe them again with this decanted water, and so dry it; and repeat this so
often, till the mass have drunk up all the water. This Magnet thus prepared,
keep in a vessel very well closed up for thy use: And thus have thou a Magnet
of great effect, being the Epitome or Compendium of man's body.

CHAP. XXIV. The use of the Magnet in this Art.
BEfore we come to the use of the Magnet, you must understand that though the
beams before spoken of do always flow from the body, yet there are some
parts out of which they flow more copiously: And, in a word, they are the
Emunctories, by which the body is as it were cleansed, and the spirit
accompanying those superfluities (because those parts are naturally more porous
and spungy) wandreth out more freely, finding a larger egresse: Therefore for
the use of the Magnet, apply it to the Emunctory of the place grieved, and
procuring the Patient to sweat, which is best done by some diaphoretick Cordial
fitting the disease) leave there the Magnet till it be impregnated with the
vital spirit; then remove it and immediately use it, according to the precepts
given in the Chapter of Transplantation; but be sure to do it speedily, for
fear the spirit be dissipated by some external and more powerful cause; for
then Transplantation will be in vain attempted.

And if the Patient be not cured at the first, do it again, and so thou shall
have thy desired effect; and mark well that Chapter of Transplantation; for
very strange and incredible secrets may thereby be brought to pass. Let not
then ignorance reproach this Art; for if what has been before delivered, be
well and rightly understood, many rare experiments will easily be attained. And
this shall be sufficient for the use of the Magnet.

CHAP. XXV. Of the means whereby cures may be done in this Art without a
Magnet.
INdeed sometimes strange and admirable matters are in this Art performed, not
only with the Magnet, but many times they are with better success accomplished
without it then with it; and that is when the thing it self that carries the
spirit nakedly is applied to another thing disposed to receive it; but this
must be strictly regulated according to the precepts aforegiven; and for the
most part here is required fermentation, that by means thereof the spirit
being freed and loosed from its bonds, may more easily insinuate it self: And
by these means, for the most part, particular diseases are more happily cured,
because the active beams do more partake of the part whence they proceed. And
experience confirms it, that the blood, because it is the seat and chariot of
the vital spirit, if it be rightly, and according to Art used and applied,
cures the greatest, and almost all diseases of the body; and so by the
excrements of the belly are all the diseases of the Intestines cured: And so by
the urine those of the bladder and reins, and sometimes other diseases,
because of the affinity it has with the veins, liver, and stomach; so by the
spittle that is coughed up may the diseases of the Lungs be cured, and by sweat
the parts from whence it is taken may be helped: And so by the nails the
diseases of the hands and feet; by the hair the diseases of the parts from
whence it is taken; and sinally by the blood all the diseases of the body as
aforesaid. Note, that if all the things which belong to any part, be taken
together, they will be the sooner and easier performed: We will therefore run
over them all severally, but briefly, yet so that we shall not condemn the
joining of two or more of them together; but rather persuading so to do, as
being most beneficial, if the rules of Art be kept, followed, and observed.

CHAP. XXVI. And first of the Ordure or the Excrements of the backdoor.
BY these Excrements, we said a little before, are cured all the diseases of
the Intestines; the body also may be purged, or brought into a flux; diseases
of the fundament are both cured and procured, and many other things, which
Experience will manifest. And when they are applied, they cure old Ulcers,
Carcinomata, Fistula's, etc. yea, which is concealed as a great secret, they
may supply the place of Vnguentum Sympatheticum without any great preparation;
but you must understand they must be chosen from a sound man, and a strong
body, lest the preparation hurt them that are weaker: And by these faeces mixed
with wholesome herbs, much good may be done by Transplantation; and truly this
may be some cause (together with the fresh Airs salubrity) why Country people
are of a sounder constitution, and live longer then Citizens; for the Citizens
permit and suffer their Excrements to putrefie in leistals, or cast them into
unwholesome places; but the other Countrymen committing them to the earth, most
commonly amongst wholesome herbs, and so by means of an occult Transplantation,
lead their lives more free from diseases: And before we have given a caveat to
take heed of the excrements of diseased persons; but now we do here more
particularly advise, that you be very careful not to vent your Excrements in
places where diseased people do theirs; for much mischief may proeeed
thereby; and likewise to avoid the smell also; nay I have known one get the
flux by going to the same stool where a party had newly been that had that
disease: Also take heed that you do not your Excrements upon herbs that are
malignant exulcerating, or violently purging; for hence many times, the cause
being unknown, proceeds a dangerous dyssentery, which, until those herbs be
quite putrefied, will hardly yield to any Medicine: Finally, it is not sase to
leave these Excrements in any place where thine enemies can come to them; for
if he know but very common things (the which I dare not name for fear of
instructing evil people) he may much prejudice thee, much more if he be an
Artist; therefore be cautious, and wisely prevent these things, if thou respect
thy health and safety. Thus much shall serve for the Excrements of the back door

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Urine.
URine is an Excrement of the second Concoction, done in the Liver, or rather
in the Veins, from whence by the emulgent veins it is sent to the reins, yet
mixed with blood, out of which by the Uriters it is as it were percolated and
strained, and so sent to the bladder, where also it abides a while, and then
is by its passage cast out: Hence it appears that the urine has a great
communion with most part of the body; for it has great affinity with the
Liver, Reins, and Bladder; for by these parts it passes, and thereupon
Physicians judge by the urine of the diseases of these parts; and moreover it
has no obscure consent with the whole body, having been once joined with the
blood; therefore the Hectic Fever, a grievous disease of the whole body, is
no way better cured then by the urine.

So whatsoever diseases are usual in this Art, may all be cured by the urine,
though the better if there be other preparations particular.

Now as in the Chapter of the Ordure, so here it shall not be impertinent to
add some Cautions: And first take heed you use not to let your children piss
in the fire; for it is a constant received opinion amongst Nurses, that by such
means they get the Nephretick disease, or the stone and gravel. Secondly, that
they do not piss upon sharp and venomous herbs, or such as by their occult
quality do violently provoke urine; for from hence proceeds the exulceration
of the Reins and Bladder; neither would I willingly make water in a chamberpot
where any man infected with any loathsome disease of those parts had made his
water in before, or suffer my urine to ferment with his; for to a weak body
much hurt may come thereby, and to the sick as much good, nay health, if there
be any specifical added against the disease; therefore more safer by the urine
of some beast fitting the disease may the cure be effected, with the addition
ofermentation, which ought to be done in the bladder of a beast of that kind,
adding those things that have both the signature of the disease and the member
And so much for Urine.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Sweat and insensible Transpiration.
SWeat is not only an Excrement of the third Concoction, but it may also be as
it were taken for the melting away of the whole body; for no otherwise does the
body tend to destuction then by resolution, caused either by natural or
adventitious heat; for except every part should lose something of his substance
and greatness, the bodies of living creatures would grow infinitely; for by
continual nourishment there is always some thing added unto them; nay if this
resolution were not, creatures would not desire nourishment at all: Sweat
therefore, and that which Physicians call insensible Transpiration, is not
only excrementitious, but carries with it the resolved particles of the body:
Hence it comes, that in Magnetic or Diastatiak Physic, the sweat becomes of
very great use; for by it marveilous wonders are performed, while diseases are
as well caused as cured, passions both of the mind and body are changed and
procured: By these a wise Physician may do much good, and a poisoning witch
may act much evil, and cause madness, anger, and overthrow all the goods of
the mind, nay even cause death it self to ensue. This is that Devil, or
familiar spirit, by which they are thought to have done wonders: Hence it is,
as appears by their own confessions, that without this and the like excrements
they could never hurt the bodies of any, nay the devil himself cannot
constrain nature, who, if he does wonders, he does them only by the
application of actives to passives, and no otherwise; for though these poor
silly deluded wretches (defiled with superstition, feign many things, and mix
much folly and lies with the truth, through the devils delustions, which was
also done by the Ancients, from whom they took their traditions, holding this
opinion, that a Deity being present, their imaginations would operate more
violently, and so all nature conspiring, the effect might be produced) yet
whatsoever they did, they did it naturally. For, as abovesaid, the Devil could
not constrain nature; so I here say he cannot operate supra naturam, sed in
natura; and no mervail if his works appear admirable to us, that in respect of
him know nothing, who has had the full knowledge and contemplation of Nature
and her operations for this 5000. years and odd; besides his Angelical
knowledge, the which he still retains, so that by this natural knowledge it is
easy for him, or his scholars that he instructs, to move the passions of the
mind, to alter the habit of the body, and to infer diseases, seeing we in this
Art with that small spark of knowledge can operate beyond expectation, even to
admiration it self: But it is time to return to our purpose. Well then, I say
that by this insensible Transpiration, fixed in a body, or a subject sitting,
all diseases of the body may be cured, whether they be radically fixed, as the
Leprosy, Gout, French Pox; or merely volatile, as Scabs, Morphew, and Scurf,
and the like superficial and curaneal diseases of the outmost parrs; and truly
without this sweat we can do but little good in this Art: By this the Hectic
may be cured, the body may be long preserved strong and able; the passions of
the mind may be stirred up, and as much good may hereby be done: So to prevent
mischief, take these Cautions: It is not unknown that almost all infection
flows from this insensible Transpiration; for it being impregnated with much
spirit, and holding it fast (according to the disposition thereof) it works
violently; and therefore beware that we partake not of the sweat or exhalations
of an unsound body, nor that we lie not in the sheets so impregnated, nor put
on the clothes, stockings, gloves or the like, of such unsound persons, but
especially that we be not bed-fellowes with them: And here we may conjecture,
nay be fully assured, that it is very wholesome in the Summer time to sleep, and
lie upon sweet and wholesome herbs, as Rosemary, washed Sage, Thyme, Betony,
Balm, etc. and to make beds for sick folks of such herbs that are good for
them, according to their several infirmities; for from thence may by the body
be exhaled excellent Confortatives: It is also good for weak bodies to use the
company and garments of strong and able persons; for from thence flow such
spirits as will fortify weak nature: But in no case let us permit our garments
to be worn by diseased persons; and that we cast not our clothes impregnated
with our sweat, into stinking and unwholesome places, nor let them come into the
hands of evil disposed people; for there is much (though invisible) matter
occultly hid in them, of which Paracelsus, though obscurely, makes frequent
mention of. And this shall serve our turn for insensible Transpiration.

GHAP. XXIX. Of the Hairs.
OUt of almost most parts of the body hairs proceed and grow; and they are
made, not only of that dry and viscous excrements of the third Concoction,
growing in the pores, which by addition of new matter grow in length, as some
falsely imagine; but they take not the least part of their matter from the
resolved parts, as appears by this experiment in this Diastatick Art. If thou
would increase hair by means of a Willow tree, if thou suffer the medicine
to continue longer then it ought, thou will bring a weakness upon the part
from whence the hair was taken, which can be by no other means but because of
the violence of the Medicine, the parts being resolved further then Nature can
permit, are injured* add to confirm this truth, that hairs are known to grow
long after death, when as there is no Concoction; and therefore they must needs
proceed from the body resolved, which resolutions are added to the hairs by
the vital spirit, which is still there remaining; for by any other means this
addition cannot be; whence also our Assertion of the remaining spirit is
confirmed; and hence appears how great agreement hairs have with the body;
and hereupon we use them as instruments in this Art: It is well known to many
what strange things were effected by the Ancient Magi by the means of hair;
why may not the like now be done? Report has told us how Love has been
procured by means of hair burned in a candle Astrologically made; which though
I question not but it was mixed with a deal of superfluous and superstitious
fopperies, yet I that ever was accustomed to reduce such operations within the
confines and possibility of natural causes, do absolutely conclude that those
superstitions were nothing but diabolical delusions, and nothing pertinent nor
prevalent to the production of the effects: Likewise we have known many
diseases (otherwise incurable) cured by hairs, especially being taken from the
parts affected, being duly putrefied, and mixed with things signed, and so
implanted into Plants; so if the hairs be taken from the principal
Emunctories, no doubt, being well prepared, they will cure all, or most
diseases: Then for advice, I would have you to be more careful, and not so
carelessly to scatter your hair up and down, which may do much wrong, nor yet
to burn them; for Experience will show you that burning of them does much
impedite the growth; but bury them in some wholesome ground if they be any
quantity, adding to them things good to strengthen the head, which will much
conduce to your health.

CHAP. XXX. Of the paring of the Nails and Teeth.
THe Nails as well as the Hairs have their matter from the Excrements of the
third Concoction, separated from the nourishment proper to the bones and the
more solid parts, and therefore they obtain the hardness we see, and they grow
not but in their uttermost extremities; for the body does not very plenteously
exhale such matter as proceeds not but from the most compactest parts thereof:
The Ancients have used the paring of the nails against some most rebellious
diseases, because it is undeniable but that fixed diseases lie and lurk in the
most sixed parts of the body; and therefore wise Antiquity used these, as we
may also prescribe against Quartane Agues, Leprosies, Gout in the feet and
hands, etc. and the like diseases; but we have altered the manner of their
proceeding; for they hanged about Beasts or Fishes, and so let them go alive,
which seems too raw to have any Transplantation effected; therefore we advise,
that some Specificks may be added, and that Fermentation may be used, the
sooner and more effectually to make good our operations: And for the Teeth, you
may also use as you do the parings; but they rather seem to have in them a
prevention of cure; for they are produced and made of a most solid strong
substance, as we may see by them that have been long buried, whose teeth are
sounder then any other bones; and therefore they issue out but few spirits, and
hardly multiplyable by Art; yet because they last long sound, and always send
out some, though some small portion of the spirit, they are fit for durable
effects, which require no great quantity of spirits. And here we will leave off
concerning the nails and teeth, and proceed to the Spittle and Excrements of
the Nose.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Spittle and the Excrements of the Nose.
SOme there are that make a threefold Spittle; for either it falls, say they by
distillation, from the head to the palate, or else is brought by coughing up
from the Lungs; or lastly, by nauseousnesse from the stomach, and so spit out
at the mouth; but indeed that which is vomited up, deserves not the name of
spittle; and that which comes from the Lungs, has even the same original as
that of the head; for by distillation it slides from thence upon the lungs; and
being digested there a while, is at last spit out. I am not ignorant also, that
sometimes from the lungs proceed blood and purulent matter, and these must be
referred to the Chapter of Blood and Matter: But here we speak of Spittle,
which is the crudest part of the meat and drink which Nature cannot concoct
into good and convenient nourishment, sent first from the stomach to the head
by vapors, and then distilling again from the head to the inferior parts, and
so sent out by the mouth, and called spittle: Also sometimes comes a waterish
and undigested matter, which is sowrish, and immediately proceeds from the
stomach to the mouth, which contains some parts of corrupted nutriment, which
some will have to be a species, and of the kinds of spittle. All these, because
they have made some stay in the body, do according to the former doctrine,
carry some of the vital spirit with them; and therefore we may use them in some
light diseases, according to the portion of the spirit they hold: And so of the
Excrements of the Nose the same may be said: But always be mindful that thou
use them to the diseases of the part whence they come: And of this I advertise
thee, that there is nothing that proceeds from the body more weak then these,
or that holds less spirit; which partly proceeds from the little stay that
they have made in the body partly from the few places they have gone through,
and partly from the indigestion; yet take some heed of them, if they be newly
avoided, and the diseases be in those places (as of the other Excrements you
were advised:) But more especially take heed of the some coming from
Epilepticks, and of the froth of a mad dog, or of one bitten by a mad dog; for
here by violence of the disease the humors are thrust out infected: But by a
due use thereof, according to this Art thou may overcome that contumacious
and deplorable disease. And this may suffice for the Spittle and Excrements of
the Nose.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Blood and putrefied matter.
OVitting these many disputes concerning Blood, which makes not to our purpose;
as of the original Circulation, etc. and the like, so far forth as does
concern this Art, I say that blood is the principal chariot of the Spirit: And
if the spirit, as is said, be the bond by which the soul is tied to the body,
then where the spirit most resideth, there shall the soul most powerfully
work: The blood then, if it so plentifully possesses the spirits, and
communicates them to the body, is certainly the fittest instrument to cure
diseases, and to effectuate all the other operations that appertain to this
Art; for in the blood the spirit is free, and not bound up, as elsewhere;
therefore in the blood the spirit is soonest affected, because there it is
naked; yet we must not immediately conclude that it may be taken and used
strait as it comes from the body, without any fermentation or putrefaction; for
they are useful, and of great concernment: But this take heed of, that thou
corrupt not the blood with too much fermentation; for so the spirit will be
driven away, and nothing will be effectual that is therewith attempted: And
that you may not be deceived in Fermentation, meditate well this secret: Let
the blood, with the most excellent parcels of the body, before spoken of, be
joined in a due proportion, and put into a natural vessel, well closed, and
left or put under an hen to hatch in her broody time, and thou shall have a
Magnet, performing by a true Artist many miraculous secrets, nay even the
coagulated mass will not differ much from the best of Paracelsus Homunculo's;
yea, the oil or liquor swimming about it, being mixed with the proper sweat,
changes and metamorphoseth the mind of man, even, as I may say, by the very
touch.

Many more most rare and profound operations may be by blood performed, which
are better concealed, then to the ignorant, wilful, and malicious world
divulged. Follow Nature, and diligently mark her operations, and be acquainted
with her footsteps, and sublime things will be facile unto thee. In the interim
take these ensuing Cautions. After the blood is drawn, thou must be very
careful how thou usest it; for suddenly there may both good or hurt be done
thereby: Some have thought it convenient to put it in the ground, which I also
allow, so it be done in a clean place and mixed with wholesome herbs; for if it
should be buried in an unwholesome and infectious place, it may prejudice the
body from whence it came: Some will give it to dogs or whelps which I dislike
not; for it may perhaps transplant the disease, and cure it wholly, or at least
help the Physician: But it would be far better it were given warm, but best of
all being putrefied in a close vessel with a temperate heat: And indeed here I
can hardly pass by the villainy of some Empyricks, who with execrable boldness
dare presume to give blood, yea the menstrual blood for a Philtre, not
considering the ensuing mischiefs issuing from thence; for blood, though never
so pure, is an enemy to the stomach, and before it will be digested, is
corrupted and turned into putrefactive matter; and then it must needs be
extremely offensive and dangerous: Besides, here lies not that loving force
and virtue which they seek after; for there must be another manner of
preparation before thou can come to that; for it must be loosed, that the
spirit may work more freely to incline the mind, and that because of the will
ruling; so that there is a great force requisite, and the conspiring together
of many causes, which they that are ignorant of can never attain the truth; and
so for want of true natural knowledge, and sound judgment, calumniate and
vituperates the Art. And albeit the blood, of all other things in the body,
contains the loosest and freest spirits; yet being digested (experience has
taught us) it is more available, and operates more mightily in every respect:
But here I do foresee an Objection. It may be said, if the power of love lie
in the blood; then how happens it that ravenous beasts that do so greedily
drink blood, and so well digest it, are not brought to be in love with those
things that they eat, the same reason being of the individual and the species?
I answer: First, in particular operations of the whole species to the
individuum, or of one individuum to another, there is not the same reason.
Secondly, they eat unprepared blood, which is not so powerful to change nature;
but it is most certain, that by blood duly fermented and prepared, any
individuum may be reconciled to another; as this dog to that hare; this cat to
that mouse; this lion to that lamb, etc. Thirdly, the beast being filled with
the commotion of an angry spirit, and retaining always the nature thereof,
does rather incite revenous beasts into rage, and whet them on to the
destruction of others. And hence take this general observation, that it is
altogether impossible and repugnant to the law of nature, by any preparation
whatsoever, to procure love by means of blood that is violently shed: It is
more likely by far to cause hatred; and therefore the Ancients in their
Reconciliations never drank the blood of one another forehead-vein before
perfect and undoubted amity appeared: And here note, that the salt of blood, if
it be dissolved in the Menstruum of the world, and Philosophically handled, it
is the most excellent medicine in the world. And as for matter, or
putrefaction, which is nothing else but blood corrupted without the veins, of
flesh loosed with rottenness, you may dispose on, as of blood aforesaid,
saving that it has lost much of his spirits (which are in the sound blood) by
its putrefaction; yet by means of it, ulcers and old sores may be cured with
the Sympathetical unguent or water. Some will anoint the inside of a nutshell
with Balsome, and then put the purulent or sanious matter into it, and so hang
it up in the dry air, and so cure ulcers. And here is to be noted, that this
matter may be diversely considered, according as it is found in the body; for
either it simply arises from blood by means of putrefaction, corrupting
without the veins, as aforesaid; or else it arises from some venomous quality
of some foul disease, as in the French Pox; or else it is infected with some
simple diseased quality, as in the Phthisis; and from these (experientia test)
much prejudice may arise. But if thou intend by the Sympathetical water or
unguent to cure any such ulcers, the extraneous qualities show that there must
be some Alexipharm acum, or Specificks added agreeing to the disease; for you
must remember the qualities must be taken away before the ulcers can be cured:
Of such things that are cast up by vomit we need not speak much; for we may
think of them, as of other Excrements, using also the same Cautions; but if the
Vomit proceed from Nature, and not procured by Physic, it will be more
convenient for our purpose; yet if it be by Physic, it is not altogethe
unprofitable: But regard must be had to the quality of the vomitory Medicine;
which if it be not contrary to the disease, must be corrected, and things
signed added to it. And thus we have briefly, yet sufficiently handled the
Theorical and Practical Principles of this Art.

CHAP. XXXIII. Now because we have heretofore spoken of the necessary use of
Signatures in this Art; I hold it here very convenient briefly to add
something of signed Herbs and Plants, the more to illustrate the same: And we
will begin then first with the Head.
Head.
FOr the diseases of the which, we find that Poppy does something represent
the head; and thereupon we use the decoction thereof for many infirmities of
the same.

Also Walnuts have the whole fignature thereof.

Also the Sea-onyon called Scilla, the which is much commended in all
Epilepsies.

Hairs.
The Moss of Trees represent the hair, whose decoction is effectual in the
falling of the hair.

Maidenhaire likewise is much commended for making thick, fair, and curled
locks.

So the Herb Thapsia is applauded much by Avicenna in the disease Alopecia.

Ears.
Next for the Ears; who is so stupid that does not perceive the shells of
Oysters to be their signature, and much by Crollius used against deafness?

Likewise Assara baccha, or Folefoot, the flowers whereof conserved, and so
eaten, much avail the hearing and memory.

Eyes.
To the eyes is signed the Marigold, which helps the dimness.

So Agrimony, or wild Tansy, whose name is so called from helping the disease
of the Eye called Argema; the nature of which disease is such, that if it be in
the black of the eye it appears white, but being in the white of the eye
shows red. Also Anemone or Celandine, also Scabious, both good, and signed
for the eyes.

Nose.
So Mentastrum Aquaticum, whose leaf somewhat shapes out the form of the nose,
the extract whereof is exceeding good for the smelling lost or decayed.

Gums.
Likewise Sedum minus, or Prick-madam, being signed to the Gums, is very
effectual in the Scurvy.

Teeth.
The receptacle of the seed of Henbane, being the signature of the Teeth;
therefore the oil, or the juice expressed, or the decoction of the root with
Arsmart boiled in vinegar, and being hot, to wash the teeth and gums, does help
the toothache.

The Pine nut does very well counterfeit the representation of the teeth called
incisores; and thereupon we use the decoction of Pine-leaves or branches in
vinegar, to assuage the pain of the Teeth.

Throat.
The herb Vvularia, or Horstong; also the herb Cervicaria, both good for
Gargarisms.

Liver.
Who is ignorant of the herb Liverwort, how nature has signed it for the
Liver-infirmities?

Also the Mushrome of the Oak or Beech-tree, the powder whereof sprinkled upon
blood violently issuing at the nose or wounds, does even after a miraculous
manner stanch it.

Heart.
The Quince, Myrabblane, Pomecitron, Limmons, Orenges, all good and cordial,
and signed to the heart.

Lungs.
To whom is Lungwort, called Pulmonaria, unknown for his signature? the
decoction whereof is much available in all the impediments that do in any wise
appertain to the Lungs.

Paps.
Also for the evil affects of the breasts of women, the Specula (or eyes as I
may term them) in the tail of a Peacock, as they give an exact signature and
resemblance thereof; so physically used, prepared, and administered in drink,
has great virtue to heal the impediments thereof.

Spleen.
So the herb Scolopendrium, which the Apothecaries call Ceterach: And
Harttongue, and Lupines, all very good for the diseases of the Spleen.

Stomach.
Gallingale, Ginger, and the leaves of Cyclamen, effectual.

Intestines
Callamus aromaticus, and Cassia fistula, of profitable use.

Bladder.
The herb Alkekengi, called Wintercherries, signed to the Bladder, and of
excellent virtue against the stone in the Bladder.

Also the bushy Tree called Staphylodendros, which bears cods like round
bladders: So Solanum and Collutea, all effectual against the diseases of the
bladder.

The Genitals.
Likewise Aron, or Cuccowpintle, which some do conceive to be the true
Satirion of Paracelsus.

Also all the kinds of Dragon-wort, as Dracunculus major, the great Dragonwort
or Serpentine: So Drancunculus minor, less Dragon-wort, or speckled Aron;
Dracunculus palustris water, or Marsh-dragon; Dracunculus hortensis, Tarragon,
or biting Dragon-wort. Moreover Beans, which by their flatuous quality are
very provocative, and inciting lust, and therefore condemned and the use
forbidden by Pythagoras to his followers: Also the meal of Beans being made a
Pultice, and applied, is good for the inflation of the Genitals.

So the Acorne has the signature of the Preputium.

Testicles.
All Bulbous Roots, but especially Gandergoose or Dogstones: So Satirion, and
that kind thereof called Tragorchis: So Satirion Erythronium: So the Leek, all
inciting and provoking lust.

Matrix.
Aristolochia rotunda: So Mace including the Nutmeg, as the womb incloseth the
Embryon.

Savine has the signature of the veins of the Matrix, and therefore dissolves
the tartarous humor thereof.

Reins.
Purslane is properly signed to the Reins, and their peculiar diseases.

Backbone
Filix foemina, or the female Fern, agrees with the signature of Spina dorsi,
which manifestly represents the effigies thereof.

Bones.
That gravelly stone called Ossisana, seu lapis sabulosus, found about Spira
and Darmstad, does wonderfully operate in the conglutination of broken bones by
his magnetic signature.

Nerves and Veins.
Plantane has the whole signature of the veins and nerves of the hands and
feet: Also Savine is signed to the Veins.

Pores of the skin.
Hypericon, or St. John's wort, with its perforated leafes, is good for
obstructions and evil sweats of the Pores.

Hands.
Palma Christi, and the Fig-leafes are signed thereto, and are available
against the articular impediments. And this shall suffice for a taste of the
signatures and signed herbs to the aforenamed particular parts of the body.

We will yet for some further satisfaction add the signatures of the diseases,
and demonstrate what herbs are signed to some peculiar diseases.

CHAP. XXXIV. And first of the Apolexy.
Apoplexy
THE Lilly of the Valley, whose Flowers do hang like drops, is of great use in
this disease: So the Carpstone, being of a halfe-moon form, is herein
commended.

Sto^^.
As the Crystal, Flint, lapis Citrinus and Judaicus, Lincis, and all which
drive out the stone, are Magically signed.

So Saxifrage Roots, and Calculus Microcosmi, Lithospermon: Lachryma Jobbea:
fructus Alkekengi and Ononidis; and many more things that have their magnetic
signatures.

Cancers.
Lunaria, which Carrichter affirmed that he cured all the Cancers of the
Breasts thereby. And Ros Solis, etc.

Colic.
Convolvulus, or withwind and Anguilla, etc.

Dysentery
Acorus Aquaticus, having a yellow root, and dug up in May, is a most
singular Amulet, being appensed on the region of the belly; for it has both
the color and signature of the Excrements.

Erisipila's
Oxylapathum, the seed whereof is most efficacious, being decocted and drunk.

Also the Cholchotar of Vitriol strongly calcined and dissolved in Plantane
water, and outwardly applied.

Epilepsie.
Viscus Quercinus: and Piony seeds. Paracelsus commends a sparrow in the
Falling Sickness, etc.

Excressences.
Agarick, and such Excressences of trees, which grow upon the boughs and leafs
above the natural order, do heal these turbercula's.

Exanthemato.
Rapeseed and Lentils are very effectual, and signed both for the small Pox.

Ficus any.
The herb Scrofularia, either the decoction used, or hanged for an Amulet about
the orifice of the stomach, is excellent in this disease,

Fistula's.
Juncus Aquaticus has its signature; and therefore the salt thereof
artificially extracted, and given inwardly and applied outwardly, is a sure
remedy.

Hernia's and Ruptures.
In Ruptures and Hernia's you will find very prevalent the Root of Aron, and
Oak-apples gathered in May, and hanged in glasses in the Sun till they convert
to a liquor, and so anoint the Hernia's. And it is observable, that all
creatures that extend and contract themselves, are Magically signed for these
impediments: as the Tortoise, whose calcined powder does much prevail; also
the Proboscis, or mout of an Elephant.

Flux of Blood.
Red Sanders boiled in Tent, or stiptick red wine, does stay them mightily: So
the root of Tormentil: Also the Haematite Cornelian Coral, if any of them be
held in the hand.

Especially calcined Vitriol of a blood color, wonderfully stays blood out
of the breast or head, etc.

Hemorroids.
The downy substance of woolly herbs and plants do by an occult sympathy stay
Hemorroids, or Pyles so called.

Dropsy.
The Bryony root has the signature of this: The Extract whereof does draw
forth the water; so does Radix Miohoacae.

Yellow Jaundice.
Saffron, and Celandine, and radix Cucurmae, many other the like, etc.

The flesh of Vipers prepared, does much conduce to this disease. Leprosy.


The Strawberry has the signature of this infirmity; and therefore the
distilled water thereof does make pale a red, pimpled and leprous face;
whereupon Raymund Lully in libro de quinta essentia, does highly commend the
use of Strawberries steeped in spirit of Wine. Plurisie.


Carduus Benedictus by his pricking leaves shows his signature to this
discase; so does Hippoglossum or Horsetongue; and so does Consolida Regalis,
wild Cummin, conduce properly hereto.

Phantasma's.
Hypericon, or St. John's Wort, is mighty prevalent in obtunding Phantasms, the
name denoting the virtue (...), (i. e.) super imagines and spectra dominium
habens. Likewise the Latins call it fuga daemonum. Also Amirrbinum has
potency, etc.

Panatitia.
Archangel, which bruised and put upon the disease of the loose skin at the
root of the nails, presently cures.

Plague.
A Toad is signed hereto, and a Lizzard extracts the Eschar of the Carbuncle:
And so is the Tubers, or Mushroomes of an Oak, either new, or poudred, and put
upon, does operate effectually, etc.

Kings evil
The herb Scorfularia, or dead nettle, i^ properly hereto signed: and the Fig,
which swells like it.

Squinancy.
The Mulberry, whose juice, and also the leaves, and the juice of them, is very
efficacious for gargarization in this impediment, etc.

Cramp.
The Snail is signed hereto, and efficacious herein, etc.

The Herb Arsmart is hereto singed. Stripes black and blue. Urine. retained.


The Medulla in the concavity of a goose-quill, dried and pounded, and given in
wine, extremely drives forth the urine retained.

Also the soul of an herring, as the vulgar call it, powdered and given, has
the same effect.

Poison and venom.
Dracunculus minor, or speckled Aron, which by an occult and sympathetical
quality in nature does appear out of the Earth as soon as any serpent begins to
creep abroad; for till that appears above the ground, no Adder, Snake
venomous, or Serpent will be seen, premonishing us as it were to beware of
them. Bistorta is also effectual for the biting of vipes or serpents. And all
such Plants that have the speckles or marks like to the skin of adders, etc.
are found to be signed by nature against their poisons and venoms.

Wounds.
Hydropiper being signed naturally, as by the bloody spots is demonstrated that
appear upon the leaves, which cures new wounds, etc.

And also Hypericon being perforated as it were with a needle, is profitable to
all the external and internal imperfections of the skin.

And so Millefolium, and Betony, and all perforated Plants, have their
signatures and prevailing potencies in wounds.

He that desires further instruction in these signatures, and more ample use
thereof, must acquaint himself with Paracelsus, or at leastwise with Oswaldus
Crollius in the latter end of his Basilica Chymica, as before, is advised where
he may receive more ample satisfaction and judicious instruction. And this
shall suffice for the present concerning this Art.

Ne nimium Boltone precor, precor, Artis amice;
Quod prius est dictum sit dictum sat sapienti.
Nam jam summa procul villarum fulmina fumant,
Majoresque cadunt altis de montibus umbrae.
Vive, valo Lector; siquid scis vectius Artis
Candidus imperti: si non, his utere mecum.
FINIS.
Reader, These Books following are printed for Not. Brook, and are to he sold
at his shop at the Angel in Cornhill.
1. TImes Treasury, or Academy for the (...), for their accomolishment in
arguments of discourse, habit, fashion; summed up all (...) Character of
Honor: By (...) Esquire;

2. B. Morton on the Sacrament:

3. That excellent piece of Physiognomy and Chiromancy, Metoposcopy, the
Symmetrical Proportions and signal Moles of the Body, the subject of Dreams: to
which is added the Art of Memory: By R.

4. Theatrum Chemicum Britanicum, containing several Poetical pieces of our
famous English Philosophers, which have written the Hermetick Mysteries in
their ancient language: By the truly noble Elias Ashmole Esquire;

5. Chiromancy: or the Art of Divining by the Lines engraven in the hand of Man
by Dame Nature, in 19. Genitures; with a learned Discourse of the soul of the
World: By Geo. Wharton, Esquire; and gathered out of Scripture, Councils; and
ancient Fathers, in answer to D. Vanes lost sheep returned home: By Edward
Chisenhale, Esquire;

7. Tactometrica, or the Geometry of Regulars, after a new manner, in Solids:
with useful Experiments, with new Experiments, never before extant, for
Gauging; a work useful for all that are employed in the Art Metrical: By John
Weyberd, Dr. in Physic.

8. An Astrological Discourse, with Mathematical Demonstrations, proving the
influence of the Planets and fixed Stars upon Elementary bodies: By Sir Chr.
Heydon, Knight.

9. Magic Astrology vindicated by H. Warren.

10. Catastrophe Magnatum: By N. Culpeper.

11. Ephemerides for the year 1652. by N. Culpeper.

12. Judicial Astrology vindicated, and Demonologie confuted: By W. Ramsey,
Gent.

13. The History of the Golden Ass.

14. The painting of the Ancients, the beginning, progress, and consummating
of that noble Art.

15. Wilsfords Arithmetic, made plain to the easiest capacity, in two books,
viz. Natural and Decimal; being most useful for all Gentlemen. Merchants,
Shopkeepers, all others; by Tho. Wilsford, Gent.

13. Adam in Eden, the Paradiseof Plants, Description of all our English
Plants, wild or otherwise, with their signatures applied to the parts of the
body of Man, with their Physical use, that a man may be his own Physician, the
Ingredients being to be had in every field and garden; made public by W.
Coals, M.D. for the benefit of all English men.

These Books will he published speedily.

15. The Perfect Cook, A right method of the Art of Cookery, restoring the
whole practice to a more refined way then was ever before extant.

16. Castellus Lexicon medicum, being a Dictionary explaining all the terms,
both in Physic, and Chyrurgery, Translated by J.D.

17. Timothies vade mecum, or a pocket companion for the sons of the Prophets,
wherein are Treated of matters appertaining to Ministers, and such as intend
for the Ministry; by T. Crave.

18. The Treasury of the soul.

19. Frambesorius, His scholia Medica; also the Treatise of seavers made
English, by J.D.

FINIS.

