ZEAL FOR GODS HOUSE QVICKNED: OR, A SERMON Preached before the Assembly of
Lords, Commons, and Divines, at their solemn Fast July 7. 1643. In the Abbey
Church at Westminster.

EXPRESSING The Eminency of Zeal requisite in Church Reformers: BY OLIVER
BOWLS, Pastor of Sutton in Bedfordshire.

It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing, Gal. 4.18.
Published by Order of both Houses of Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Bishop for Samuel Gellibrand, at the Brazen Serpent
in Paul's Churchyard, 1643.

Die Iovis 27. Iulij 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That Mr. Bowls has hereby
thanks given him, for the great pains he took in the Sermon he made at the
Fast for the Assembly of Divines in the Abbey Church, Westminster, on Friday
the seventh of this instant July: And is hereby desired to cause his said
Sermon to be forthwith Printed and published.

Io. Brown Cler. Parliamentor.

To the Right Honorable the House of LORDS: AND The Honorable House of
COMMONS, Assembled in PARLIAMENT: AND To the Learned and Religious DIVINES
called by them, and now assembled to consult about matters of RELIGION.
Right honorable and most worthy,
OVt of your vigilant care for the common good you have found out a way amidst
your many distractions to convene an Assembly of grave and learned Divines,
with whom you might advise concerning the settling of Doctrine, Worship, and
Church Government.

You saw cause which might move you so to do in respect; first, of those
licentious spirits, who took occasion, as to vent their own fancies, so to
attempt any thing in matter of Doctrine and Worship; secondly, in that for want
of an established Church Government, we were and still are in danger to fall
from a Tyranny to an Anarchy; thirdly, In that evil minded men, seeing no
effectual means provided to suppress such variety of Sects as did start up,
were ready to censure you, as the fautors of such opinions. What you have done,
has been done with much prudence in that you have given way for the admittance
of Divines of different Judgments to be chosen, to whom a liberty is not
denied to plead every one for his own party: And not only so, but you have
further embodied diverse of your worthy Ones of both Houses, as Members of our
Assembly: by which privilege, we have many and singular advantages. When this
Assembly, for the greater part, was by your summons gathered together, you were
pleased, out of a due consideration of the weighty affairs to be transacted,
to appoint a solemn Fast to be kept (chiefly) by the Members of the Assembly:
And when you had so done, your pleasure was to lay your command upon my self,
though the unworthiest of many, to be employed in the service of that day.
Surely, it was not but that you had your choice of many other most able and
worthy Divines, only it was your pleasure, that days and multitudes of years
should speak. ^^b.


The Grace I chose as most meet to treat of, was that of Zeal, as conversant
about Gods House; first, for that it does directly oppose Lukewarmnesse, the
most dangerous and yet the Epidemicall disease of our time; secondly, for that
no one grace does more promote the work of Reformation, (as will appear in the
subsequent discourse;) thirdly, for that among all other ornaments, there is
none that does more beautify a Reformer in the eyes of God and man. Prove.
There are many creatures, said the wise man, that are comely in there going;
but none so comely as a Zealous Reformer. Accordingly then (you Parliamentary
Worthies) go on and prosper, cease not to carry on your Work, which is Gods
work, with Zeal and Courage. It is Perseverance alone that will both crown
you, and perfect your endeavors. What encouragement have you had, in that the
Lord, amidst your greatest dangers, has been mightily seen in the protection
of your persons! No weapons of war that have been formed against you, have
prospered; the tongues of men that have risen up in judgment against you, has
he condemned. Has not the same God assisted you to do many glorious works,
whereby his name has been honored, his people unspeakably benefitted? How
has the Lord kept you together until this day! notwithstanding the endeavors
of all the Devils in hell, and wicked men on earth, to scatter you, to divide
you! What a foundation has the Lord laid of your continuance together till
your work be done! Surely, it is for that he has yet some great things for
you to do. If you (which God forbid) shall faint, and out of by respects
withdraw your selves from the service, be sure God without you will accomplish
his work, but tremble to think what will become of you and yours. How would it
be a thing much to be bewailed that you (Noble and brave spirited Patriots;
who have hitherto borne the heat of the day, the brunt of the business, so
far denied your selves, as to run the hazard of all that you are, have, or
might expect) should now by failing in your last act, loose your crown, forfeit
your reward from God and man!

And now for you (my Reverend and much Honored Brethren in the common work of
the Ministry,) Who can but bless the Lord, for that degree of his spirit, (no
doubt, it is the effect, as of your own prayers in the day of your solemn
humiliation, so of many of the prayers of his people) which he has showred
down upon you! Not only do your learned debates, your exact and judicious
Scripture-discussions, your Scholasticall disputes, the discovery many of you
have made of your exact knowledge in Antiquity, show that God is among you, as
he that has fitted you for the work: but further your sweet amicable converse,
your following of the truth in love, your differences in judgment carried on
without alienation of affection, do not they all say that God is with you? God
forbid, that either the Devil, or wicked men, should break asunder that sweet
bond of Amity, wherewith God has lincked you in one. Be encouraged then
(dearly beloved in the Lord) from one whom God was pleased, though the
unworthiest among you, yet to make his mouth to you, to go on as carried along
with a Spirit of indefatigable zeal in the pursuance of the work you are
called unto. Behold it is soule-work, and that of nearest concernment, that God
has put into your hands to be transacted. Is not your work a Counter-work to
that great and long plotted design, whereby Popery should have been
re-advanced, Gods saving truth been suppressed, his worship substantially
corrupted, and utterly destroyed? Is it not a work of the largest extent, as
that which concerns all other Reformed Churches, whose happiness or misery
will be involved in ours? Yea, ages to come will either bless or curse you,
as you shall follow or neglect the opportunity.

And now for my self, be pleased to take notice that my strength and voice
failing me by reason of my weakness, I have made bold to make a supply of that
which at the time of the delivery I could not enlarge: Further, (this being a
fixed rule to me, Inter concionandam emineat ver^un Dei.
That Gods Word should in preaching have the preeminence,) wonder not, that I
allege Authors, in such cases wherein the al^egation of them does not
prejudice Scripture: As first, when an Historical truth is to be made good;
for though the Scriptures do only determine, Quid verum, quid falsum, What is
true and what false; yet for the information of our selves, Quid novum, quid
antiquum, we must have recourse to the writings of men: Secondly, if God
himself, when he would shame men for their evils, sends them to learn from
the creatures, 2 Ierem. 10.6. Prove. 6. 1 Cor. 1^.14.
why may not we send men living in the days of light to learn of darker
times? Thirdly, when being to reprove the evils of the time, for removing of
prejudice, we deliver our reproves rather in the words of Antiquity than in
our own. Facile patimur reprehensores qui remotiori feculo vixere. So the
Papists did embrace many things in the writings of the fathers as Catholic,
which they condemned in Luther as Heretical.

And now what remains but that we all humbly pray the God of all truth and
peace, who alone is able to facilitate all difficulties, to direct and guide
you, Honorable Senators, to pour upon you that spirit of wisdom and
courage, that you may go with a settled resolution, never to give over, till
you have established truth and peace in our borders; and the same God magnify
his power in our weakness, and multiply the gifts of his Spirit upon us, whom
you have been pleased to call together, to advise with in the great affairs of
the Church, that we may so discharge our duties, that God may have glory, and
his people the good that they expect and pray for, and your and all our enemies
may have their faces covered with shame,

So prays Your servant in the Lord Oliver Bowls.

A SERMON Preached before The Assembly of LORDS, COMMONS, AND DIVINES. Upon
their Fast, July 7. 1643.
JOHN 2.17. And his Disciples remembered that it was written, The zeal of thy
house has eaten me up.


THe Prophet Malachi prophesying concerning the Lord Christ, that he should in
due time come to visit his Church, sets him out as a Refiner, as a Purifier of
silver, tells us that he should purify in special the Sons of Levi, purge
them as gold and silver, Malach. 3.3
that they might offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness. And as an
accomplishment of this prophecy, the same Lord Christ gives a Specimen, in the
story immediately preceding my Text, by that heroical fact of his in whipping
the buyers and sellers out of the Temple (an evil which the Priests for their
gain had somented.) I call it an heroical fact, for that it was done by a
special spirit, in its kind not imitable by us. The which act of the Lord
Jesus being carried on with an eminent and remarkable zeal and magnanimity,
gave the Disciples an occasion of calling this to mind, The zeal of thy house
has eaten me up. Of which his zeal we have a remarkable discovery in these
particulars.

1. In the weakness of the means whereby he did both attempt and effect the
work; in that the persons but few in comparison, and those despicable in the
eyes of the world, Christ and his Disciples, not armed with any weapons that
might carry dread and terror with them, at most but with a whip made of a few
small cords, which probably were scattered by the Drovers which came thither to
sell their cattle; and to some of them with his voice only, Verse 16.
he said to the money changers, Take these things hence, and it was done.

2. In the strength that the opposite power did hold out, which makes the
encounter so much the more dangerous: (...). in ^oc^m.
As first, a garrison of Soldiers in Arce Antonia ready at hand to appease (as
it is probable) occasional Tumults. Secondly, the temper of the men's spirits
with whom the business was, they were men set upon gain, the worlds god.
Thirdly, the great confluence of the people, it being the most solemn Mart of
the Passover. Behold then the greatness of Christ's zeal, when neither the
weakness of the means on the one side to effect it, nor the greatness of the
power on the other side to hinder it, did at all dismay him, or cause him to
desist from this attempt of reforming that so apparent an abuse of the Temple,
the house of God. Learn we hence, that

Heb. 5.2. Esaias 30.21 John 16.13. Ier. 15.20. Esa. 26.12.
if we can procure him to fit as President in the Assembly: If he be there, he
will heal our ignorances, he will clear up all our doubts, he will guide us
by the spirit of truth, he will be as a wall of Brass against all our
adversaries, he will work all our works for us.

I do ingenuously confess, that when we do consider and view the difficulty of
the work of Church reformation, and our weakness, who are summoned to be
advisers in the work, it may amaze us: but when we look upon the Lord Almighty,
the great Jehovah, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, to whom nothing is too hard,
who has broken through gates of Iron, and Bars of Brass, which we could
never have dreamed that they had been perviable, this again may raise up our
spirits, and give us hope, that if we seek the Lord in his way, he will
certainly be found of us. Zach. 4.6.
It is all one to him, whether by an Army and by power, or by quickening the
spirits of his, raising them above themselves: Verse 10.
whether by a day of small things, or by doing terrible things that we looked
not for, Isai 64.3.
he bring about his Churches cause. Zach. 4.7.
It is nothing to him to make Mountains plain: Who art thou O great
Mountain? The Lord by the Prophet speaks in a holy scorn of all the enemies
the Jews had in rebuilding the Temple and City. We accordingly, by a grant
from the Right Honorable the two Houses of Parliament, with so many of them as
have been pleased to embody themselves with us, are assembled this day to
afflict our souls in Fasting and Prayer before the Lord, that we may seek of
him a right way in these great and important affairs to be treated on, that he
would give us such a frame of spirit, such an assistance from on high, such a
clear light, as may raise us above our selves, fit us for that work whereunto
we have no sufficiency as from our selves. ^^ya 8.21.
Thus did Ezra and the Jews out of a conscience of their own inability to
help themselves in their passage from Babylon to Jerusalem: So we being now
upon a further progress, not from Babylon (as some have unjustly slandered us)
but from the remnants of Babylon to the new Jerusalem; our work is (the Lord
assisting) to humble our souls before him in a more then ordinary way. Oh that
the Lord would put us into such a posture of abasement as might make both our
persons and services acceptable before him, so should we not doubt but the Lord
Christ would be in the midst among us.

The words read unto you are for the latter part taken out of the sixty ninth
Psalm, uttered by David as a type of Christ, as appears by this application of
them. Consider in the verse, first, the Scripture alleged: secondly, the
means whereby it came to be alleged. For the latter, it was an act of a
sanctified memory in the Disciples calling to mind what was written, whereunto
the fact done did serve as a remembra^cer. Observe,

be attended with seasonable remembering: That is conscionable reading, when we
take up reading the Scriptures in the several seasons which the Lord commands
as an act of obedience unto him, this shall have seasonable remembering; for so
is the promise of Christ, John 14.26
The Comforter shall bring all things to your remembrance.

How industrious then should we all be in frequent search of Scriptures? Are
not they the Paradise of God, wherein grows the Tree of Life, Ambr. Ep. 42.
and the leaves are good to heal the Nations? Are not Scriptures as that Poole
whereunto God has promised a vertuall power, wherein we may wash and be
clean? Scriptures are that golden Mine wherein we may dig riches that may make
us rich to God, that enrich us to life eternal. Luther in Genesis 19.
So zealous was Luther to have the Scriptures read, that he professed, that if
he thought that the reading of his Books would hinder the reading of the
Scriptures, he would burn them all before he died. But thus much of these
things briefly; the Scripture it self alleged being that which I intend
principally (by Gods help) to insist upon. And in this Scripture alleged in
the Text, three particulars offer themselves.

1. The grace, Zeal.

2. The Object whereabout it was conversant, Gods House.

3. The Degree wherein it seized upon David and Christ, they were eaten up with
it.

Zeal?

Zelus est intensus gradus purae affectionis: It is not so much any one
affection, as the intended degree of all. Affections are the motions of the
Will, as carried out to the prosecution of good, or avoiding of evil: They
are, as the Philosopher speaks, exitus animae, the outgoings of the soul.
What the Wheels are to the Cart, the Sinews to the Body, Wings to the Bird,
the Wind to the Sails spread, such are the Affections to the Soul, implanted
by God to carry it hither and thither as the objects do more or less affect.
Man lies like a logge, the soul moves not, but as the Affections stir.

For their order they are so placed in the soul, as that they are subservient
one to another; the irascible to the concupiscible. When the desiring faculties
flag, grow remiss by intervenient impediments, then comes in the irascible
faculties, as removens impedimenta, as taking away the impediments; and is not
this that which is properly called Anger? This made Luther to say, Ira suo loco
est optimum Dei donum.

The second thing is the Object, Gods House; the house of God under the Law,
was all the external pledges of Gods presence, the Altars, Temple, Tabernacle,
Ark, etc. The house of God under the Gospel, is (as the people of God
elsewhere, so) the Ordinances of God here.

The third thing is the Degree, has eaten me up; a metaphor taken from men
that receive nourishment, and the meat after its several concoctions, is
assimilated into the nature of them that receive it. Zeal does totally
surprise us in what concerns God, we so mind the things of God, as if we
minded nothing else. What was said of Peter, that he was a man made all of
fire: and of Saint Paul in respect of his sufferings, that he was a spark of
fire burning in the middle of the sea; Flamma inextinguibilis in medio mari.
that may be much more said of Christ when he was upon the work of
Church-reformation.

The Text thus opened, this proposition offers it self.

Church-reformation does call for utmost zeal. Our love to promote that work
must be such, Can. 4 12.
as many waters cannot quench: Our desires must be enlarged, Ps. 119 20
as those which break through all impediments, admit of no denial, give me my
request or I die: Verse 171.
our hope must be more longing, our endeavors full of activity, our hatred of
the opposites more perfect, our anger in removing the hindrances more violent.
These stirrings of the Spirit expel Lukewarmnesse, induce Zeal. Zeal sets on
work the whole tide of our affections; Psa. 87.7.
All my springs are in thee: in promoting the good of Gods Church, David had a
springtide of his affections, they all ran in that channel. To what dangers,
hazards, and censures did Christ here in the exercise of his zeal expose
himself in the case of Church-reformation! David's zeal for the settling of the
Ark, how did it make him deny himself in his most necessary refreshings, I
will not go into my house, etc. Psa. 132.3.
his house was no house, his bed no bed, his rest no rest; so in his worldly
credit, I will yet, for my Gods sake, 2 Samuel 6.22
be more vile; So in those innumerable heaps of gold and silver, 1 Chro. 29.3
which out of his earnest zeal he had prepared and set apart for the building
of the Temple. Nehemiah that Emblem of Reformers, what a measure of zeal did
he discover in leaving all his Court preferments, putting himself in his own
person upon a hazardfull and tedious journey, in the encounters and oppositions
both open and secret he met withal, in his expensefulnesse and that to
prodigality, as it may seem, for the common cause, in his unwearied persisting
in the work till it was accomplished. How iron-like was the spirit of Elias?
how did he out of a spirit of zeal against the Idolatry of Baal set his face
against Ahab, Iezebell, and all the Priests of Baal? how was he driven to fly
for his life? (some Geographers compute his journey at many hundreds of miles;)
How great were the exigences he was put unto, even near affamishment, to a
weariness of his life. John the Baptist of what an invincible spirit he was,
his encounter with a generation of vipers, his bold and daring (for it cost him
his life) reproof of Herod for his Herodias, his turning of Mountains into
Valleys, his making of rough ways plain, do all witness. The want of zeal
in the people in Iehosophats time, 2 Chronicles. 20 33.
they having not prepared their hearts to seek the God of their fathers, kept
up the high places; 2 Chronicles. 29.36. and 30.1
but in Hezekiah's time the zeal of the people plucked them down; the work
was done suddenly, for the people were ready: of such moment it is, that where
Church-reformation is in hand, a spirit of zeal should run in the veins of
the Reformers: No such unbesceming evil as, when the cause of God lies at
stake, for men to be cold, lukewarm Neuters, warping sometimes one way,
sometimes another.

In the further prosecution of this truth, three particulars do present
themselves.

1. Convincing reasons must be rendered, why zeal must be present in
Church-reformation.

2. What influence zeal ought to have in Church-Reformers.

3. How Zeal must be qualified, that it may be kept within its bounds; zeal
not confined is as wildefire.

For the first of these, three Reasons do offer themselves as arising from the
nature of the work in respect of its

1. Excellency.

2. Difficulty.

3. The destructive nature of Church-evills, if not reformed.

The excellency of the work I argue three ways.

Esaias 1.25.
When after the Churches sad sufferings, he would do his people a special
favor, he tells them that he will purge away all her dross, Esaias 54.11, 12,
13.
and take away all her tin. So when the Lord would express himself in the
greatest declarations of his love to his Church. Ver. 13.
Oh thou afflicted and tossed with tempest, I will lay thy stones with fair
colors, thy foundations with Saphires, etc. God will set up his ordinances in
a more glorious way; all thy children shall be taught of the Lord. Accordingly
in this latter age of the world, what is the great work, for which the Church
blesses God with the song of Moses, and the song of the Lamb, is it not the
victory over the beast, his name, mark, etc. all done by Church-reformation:
Rev. 15.3, 4.
Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, etc.

2. The excellency of the work is argued jointly from the relations betwixt God
and his Church, and the office which Reformers do. Cant. 4.12.
The Church is Gods Garden, which being planted with all variety of flowers is
apt to be overgrowne with weeds, that not only mar the beauty of it, but eat
out the good herbs: Reformers, their work is to weed the Lord his garden, throw
out all those noisome herbs which would have spoiled all the good ones. Verse
13.
The Church is the Lords Orchard, wherein trees of all kinds, both for fruit
and and medicine, grow upon the banks thereof: The Master of that Orchard is
impatient of any such trees that cumber the ground, and after many years bear
no fruit; Reformers, their work is to root out the plants that God never
planted. H^^. 3.6.
The Church is Gods house, where he delights to dwell; Reformers are to cast
out all the dirt, dross, and garbage that was odious and irksome to the Master
of the house; they sweep down all the cobwebs wherein the Spiders did build.
The Church is Gods Spouse, Cant. 4.12.
in whose beauty his soul delights; that she should be deformed with strange
attire, ornaments borrowed from notorious strumpets, the Lord cannot endure;
Reformers they strip her of all her harlotry attire, take off all her
Iezabel-like paintings, and render her to Christ in her native simplicity. The
Church is the Lords Vineyard, Cant 8.12.
which he keeps and waters every moment; Reformers their work is to take the
Foxes that destroy the Vines. How welcome should the feet of such be? Cant.
2.15.
and how should the precious nature of the work in relation to God, draw out
all our strength?

3. That the excellency of the work may be yet further evidenced: consider it
in the objects whereabout it is conversant; that is, either Things, or Persons.
Things are Doctrine, Worship, and Government; Doctrine is a ray or beam of
supernatural truth issued out from God as a special favor to his people,
tending to inform them in right notions and apprehensions concerning God,
Christ, our souls, and the whole way of salvation. This is called the word of
life, the wholesome word, the word of salvation; how useful is this word, 2
Pet. 2.1.
since men do as surely perish by damnable heresies, as by moral vices.
Doctrine is as the waters of the Sanctuary, how great a sin to puddle or
poison these! was it not capital among the Romans to poison the common
springs? How noisome was that plague to the Egyptians to have all their waters
whereof they should drink, turned into blood? was it not much more (as the
soul is more excellent then the body) pestilentiall to have all the maine
Articles of our Religion (not that of Justification excepted) to be all, This
Petit. with R^monstr. exhibit. in Parl. in Ian. 1640.
or the most, desperately corrupted, as may be seen in the Ministers
Remonstrance exhibited, together with their Petition for Reformation.

The second particular, whereabout Reformation is conversant, is worship;
whereby God and we have communion one with another, we do in a holy manner
trade with God and he with us. This is as Jacobs ladder, The Angels of God
ascend and descend by it; our prayers ascend, Gods blessings descend. The
ordinances are those golden pipes by which the golden oil empties it self
into the hearts of Gods people; They are the Churches breasts from whence her
children suck nourishment; They are the Churches barn and her Wine Press:
They are on Christ's part the kisses of his mouth, the mutual embraces betwixt
God and the Christian Soul; Dry up all the breasts in such a City as this, how
great will the cry of the Infants be? This mischief by the putting down of
Preaching, and strange Innovations brought and urged upon us in our most solemn
worship, had in a great part seized upon us, and will yet certainly prevail if
the Reformers do not seasonably and strongly oppose.

The third particular is Church Discipline or Government; all Societies, and so
the Church, is upheld by ruling and being ruled. This amongst other benefits it
will yield, That it will preserve the honor of Gods censures and ordinances,
that great censure of Excommunication, which is no less then the delivery up
of a man to Satan, and (next the day of judgment) it is judicium maxim
tremendum, it shall no longer Lackey up and down for Duties and Fees as it has
done amonst us, and as it did in the darkest times of Popery as Gerson
complains, Gers. lib de defectib. Ecclesiast^cis. Quid est qued, etc. Ezekiel.
22.26.
Lib. de Eccles. defect. Quid est, quod Gladius Ecclesiae, scilicet
Excommunicatio, extrahitur pro re nihili, ut pro re nummaria? This once
established, will direct us to put a difference betwixt the holy and the
profane, the clean and the unclean, for want whereof the Lord challenges the
Priests. Has not this been, and is it not yet in a great part, remaining upon
us, as one of our land destroying sins; the promiscuous thrusting in of
scandalous and ignorant persons upon the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, to the
horrible profaning of the same, and no power that would hitherto be allowed
as legal, no not for making stay of such? Misunderstand me not, I mean not,
that men should be cut short of that latitude which the Laws of Christ allow;
only let that hedge and mound of Discipline be erected, whereby holy things may
not be indifferently administered, as well to men egregiously profane, and that
after conviction, as to the Lord his holy ones.

Thus of things now of persons; These be as all Church Officers, whereof a
ground in Scripture, so more specially, the Ministers of the Word, the
Dispensers of holy things; These, if good, are the best of men; as, who are one
of a thousand, Ioh. 33.2^. 2 Cor. 5.19.
when others at the utmost but one of four or five hundred; to these God has
committed the Ministry of Reconciliation even of God with men; these the Lord
has betrusted with the power of opening and shutting Heaven, when the like
Commission is not given to the Angels themselves, for to which of the Angels
did God ever say, Whatsoever ye bind on Earth is bound in Heaven, etc. These
worthily styled, Saviors, John 20.23. Obad. 1.21.
and of such as these, Reformers hold out a hope; all their endeavors are and
ought to be, that the Churches, those who have sat in darkness and in the
shadow of death may be furnished with bright shining lights. Now as these who
attend at the Altar, if good the best, so if evil the worst; for as it is
among the Mariners who see the wonders of the Lord in the deep, they either
are the best or worst of men; the best, if what they see, works for the best;
or the worst, if not bettered: so we Ministers, whom God acquaints with the
depths of Scripture, come off from that privilege either as most profane, or
most holy. If Salt has lost its favor, what is it good for, but to be cast to
the dunghill. What hope of salvation for such, where remedies are turned into
loathing and poison, as Qualis spes salutis esse poterit ubi quae suerint
remedia convertuntur in nauseam and venenum, Gerson tract. de vita Cler.
Gerson. And hence is that of Chrysostom hom. 40. in Math. Qui^ unquam vidit
Clericum cito respiscentem.
Chrysostom, Who ever saw a Clergy man easily brought to Repentance. And does
not that work, which will thus reserve all honor to Gods ordinances, keep them
from the profane ones, furnish the Church with faithful watchmen, and rid
us of such burdens as are of all other most insufferable, require our utmost
zeal?

Gebal, Ammon and Amaleck, the Philistims and them that dwell at Tire, and they
have consulted together with one consent, etc. Pope, Spanyard, French, and the
whole generation of the English-Jesuites, Papists, and Prelaticall Faction, and
Libertines, all looking upon the work of Reformation, not only as hindering
their design, their good work in hand as they call it; but undermining their
Kingdom: How industriously vigilant are they in laying out themselves, their
heads, hands and purses? They leave no stone unremoved, that may hinder our
work or promote their own; Does not all this challenge our utmost zeal?

Secondly, in respect of the prevailing nature, the close adhering of
Church-mens (as they are called) sins, with whom Reformers must contest:
These are sensuality, ambition, and idlinesse. It was the Monks bellies, and
the Cardinals Caps, which (as Erasmus observed) did create Luther his greatest
trouble. Sensuality is a sin where ever it seizes maximae adherentiae, of the
greatest adherence, as the School speaks: Prove. 23. last v
I will though smitten says the drunkard, seek it yet again; and of sensual
sins it is said, Prove 2.19.
They return not again; The Philosopher could say, (...).
The intemperate man is seldom a penitent man: The guise of such Churchmen an
old Writer deciphers as those which did turn their Petr. Blessensis, Ep. 7.
scribere into bibere, and their codices into calices: Such the Prophet
describes Isai 55.12.
Come, say they, and we will fill our selves with wine, and to morrow shall be
as to day: Fran. Duarerus de Beneficiis.
Another describes them as patinis magis quam paginis incumbentes: Such
belly-gods as these Bernard Sermon. 30. in ^ant.
another says of them, no dainties suffice them; as if to be judged rather by
their complexion then their profession: Against such evil beasts and
slow-bellies, not only the Ancient Council. Laodic can 24. Council Carthag.
tertium. Synod. Turonensis.
Councels and Synods, but even Julian himself shall rise up in judgment: He
perceiving that the Christian Faith did grow and increase by the sobriety and
abstemiousnesse of their Ministers, gave command to his Arch-Flamine Arsatius,
that his Priests should not drink in a (...).
Tavern, if any should do so he should be removed from his Priests Dignity;
and for that horse-leach humor of ambition, which has so eaten up the vitals
of our Clergy-Masters: May we not see a picture of them in Balaam, who that he
might have been capable of Balack's great perferments, how does he wind and
turn himself every way that he might curse Gods people, Number. 22. and 23. How
lively does Bernard decipher them, Curritur in Ecclesiastica, etc. learned and
unlearned run ad curas Ecclesiasticas ac si sine cura victuri cum jam ad
curam pervenerint, as if men were to live without all care when they came to a
charge: The same author tartly derides them when he speaks on this manner
Festina mu^t^plicare praeb^ndas, inde evola ad Archidiaconatum, d^in as^ira ad
Episco^atum, nec ^bi requ^e^^ habiturus, quia sic ^t^r ad astra? Q^o
progrederis m^ser Bern. i^ Sermon. Ec^e reliquimus ^^nia.
, Hasten to multiply Prebends, from thence fly to an Archdeaconry, at length
climb up to a Bishopric, not satisfied with that, because this is the way to
Heaven? Whether do thou post o miserable man? So a forenamed Petr Blessensis,
Ep. 13.
Author who lived in the twelfth century, Hodie per fas and nefas, etc. By
right and wrong, unhappy men, who run to the Pastoral Chair and observe not
that it is to them a Chair of Pestilence.

As for the idleness of men in the ministry, may we not justly take up the
complaint of the Prophet, They have eaten the fat, Ezekiel 34.3.
clothed themselves with the wool, but they have not fed the Lord his flock:
May we not say, as sometime a Canon of Christ-Church, in the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth her reign, when men were backward in preaching, spoke by a
prosopopeia to the Pulpit; Oh good Pulpit how have thou offended the Canons of
Christ-Church, if thou were an ambling Palfrey, they would ride on thee, if a
Table well furnished, they would feed on thee, if a bed of down, they would
sleep on thee, if a goodly garment, they would wear thee, alas good Pulpit,
what have thou done that none of them will preach in thee! Might we not well
compare sundry of our Clergymen to Lepidus in the Orator, Tull 2. de Orat.
who when he lay tumbling in the green grass, cried out, Vtinam hoc esset
laborare, I would this were to labor; This is the humor of many of them, who
when they do swagger, haunt Taverns, play the Epicures, even then they say,
Vtinam hoc esses pascere gregem: I would this were to feed the Lord his flock;
had not those need be men made all of zeal, that shall encounter with men on
whom not only these vices have deeply seized, but they are armed with wit and
parts to plead for themselves.

The third particular that puts a difficulty upon the work of this present
Reformation above former: Heretofore Reformers have had to deal with the
gross thick cloud of Popery, the Duncery of the Monks and Friars, with such
palpable corruptions, as many of them were discernable by a common light; But
now the work lies with men, many of whom retain the same fundamentals with us,
are come out of Babylon in respect of the foggy part of it, yet retain many of
the dregs of it which may in time prove pernicious and help to carry us back
again into Egypt; These, many of them, are learned Gamaliels, men renowned for
worth and parts, whom for my own part, I love and honor; but yet in such
things wherein God has hidden from them what he has revealed to others, I
say, as once Augustine said of his friend, Ille hoc non vidit, ut aliquid
amplius videret; It is possible that the Lord has revealed greater things to
them, given them a clearer light in many of the greatest mysteries of Religion:
Here is the zeal of Reformers, that they refuse to swallow any thing that is
unsound, because it is offered as countenanced with Authority of men famous for
their learning and esteem in the Churches; zeal knows no respect of persons
in doing her work.

The fourth particular that makes the work difficult, is Demetrius and his
whole train that follow him, who cry out, Sirs, you know that by this craft we
have gotten our wealth, I mean our Chancellors, Commissaries, Officials,
Registers, Proctors, and these, what mighty piles of wealth, what large and
rich estates have they heaped together! These have been as those canker-wormes
and cater-pillers, who have eaten up almost all the green things of the Land,
they have formerly picked our purses, scratched our faces, vexed our spirits,
hurried us from Court to Court, and all this has been practiced under a
pretense of Reformation: But what have they indeed done by all their specious
visitations, have they been any other to us then like the Juglers Feast, who on
a time invited his friends to a solemn Banquet, whereunto they came in great
expectation to have their bellies filled, a Table was richly furnished with all
variety of Cates, they all set about it, but when they put forth their hands,
they brought back nothing but air, rose and departed as hungry as they came;
so has it been with us in our most solemn visitations: Or may we as Gerson
in Sermon. habit. in Conc. Rhemens.
Gerson did sometimes compare the Visitours of this kind to the Cat, which
being by the good Housewife, put in the Dairy-House to save the Cheese from the
Mise and Ratts, does more harm then they all. Yea, where the greatest pretense
of good was held out, what have all our Visitors and Reformers done more then
the Popes Cardinals, whom he sent out in Luthers time to blind the world with
a pretense of Reformation? as they, so ours, may well be compared to the Foxes
tail which raises the dust, but carries none away.

The fifth difficulty is a potent Army of Nonresidents, whose glory has been a
Polygamy of Benefices. An evil which we may well wonder at, that Gospel light
being so far advanced as it is, learned and modest men should not be ashamed
of it, when as the most learned Divines in the Council of Trent did generally
protest against it, as appears by their feverall Tractates Earth. Caranza.
Dom. a Soto Card. Cajetan. Fran. Torrensis ^ac. Naclantus vide Biblioth.
Colleg. Eman. vbi tractatus by amnes in unum volumen compinguntur.
. I might urge these men with variety of Scriptures, with arguments of diverse
kinds; but I refer the Reader to Caranza his Tractat. de non residentia, who
speaks so fully in this argument, as if his book were translated into English,
he would be deemed a Puritan that wrote it. I will only use one argument, which
I thus propound; Every command of a duty does necessarily imply all the
necessary ways and means whereby the duty is to be effected, else the Lord
should contradict himself, if he should command a duty and dispense with that
without which it cannot be performed. But residence in or near the place where
the duty is to be done, is evident by the light of nature.

Who ever made question, whether the Porter, to whom the care of opening and
shutting the door is committed, should reside at the door: or whether he that
governes the ship should sit at the Helm; or whether Watchmen are not to
attend upon the Tower over which they are set as Watchmen? This is Bellarm. in
Ep. ad Nepot.
Bellarmin his own argument, which upon occasion he makes use of. And whereas
men are apt to plead the discharge of their duty ordinarily by another, the
unlawfulness thereof I thus evince.

1. For that the Lord himself quarrels not only with such deputies as were
uncircumcised in heart, for that is but an aggravation; but with deputies as
deputies. You have set others to take the charge of my Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 44.8.
and have not your selves kept the charge of my holy things. So do our
Non-residents lay the Ark, as Vzza and his fellows did, upon the Cart, when
they should have carried it on their shoulders.

2. If deputies would ordinarily serve the turn, why then does the Apostle cry
out, 2 Cor. 2.16.
Who is sufficient for these things?

3. Electa est industria tua, non alterius, Caranza.
Such as are chosen to the work of the Ministry, are chosen for their special
gifts, not for that they can chose others.

4. No man to whom a trust, with respect to his fidelity is committed, may
devolve his trust to another, unless it be so expressed in his Grant; a ruled
case among the Civilians: But no such liberty granted by Christ.

5. Why should Christ admit of that in those to whom he commends the care of
souls, that no master of a family will admit in any of his servants, that when
he has hired them at such a rate to do his work, they shall ordinarily serve
him by those whom they hire at a lower rate.

But may it not make Non-residents blush (if they have so much modesty as my
hope is some have) if they look upon it, first, in the original of it:
secondly, in the indirect shifts whereby it was upheld in the Council of
Trent: thirdly, in the expressions concerning it, as they have been uttered by
Friars, Cardinals, and Popes themselves. For the original of it, Qui p^ura
cupit de origin non residentiae c^^sulat authorem hist. Conc. Trid. lib. 2.
Bucer de vi and usu Sacr. Minist. Franc. Duaren. de benef. l. 5. c 7:
among many other grounds not now to be insisted upon; was it not at first
brought in to maintain the Pope his magnificence, who having gotten large
territories to himself, when he would advance himself above all the Western
Monarchs, saw it necessary (that he might not be as an owl among the birds) to
make great his Cardinals by a wordly pomp. This that he might effect, he
challenges to himself, as the Math. Paris ^en. 3.
privilege of Peter, the collation of all Ecclesiastical Dignities: and to
the end he might enrich his Cardinals, and make them Princes fellows, he gave
dispensations to several men to hold Nic. Clemang. de corrup. fla. Eccles.
ducenta, trecenta, quadringinta, and quinginta Beneficia etc. This made a
great accession to his Greatness, when those of his Conclave were able to
maintain such a State.

Secondly, for the carriage of the cause in the Council of Trent, know we
must, that the several Popes who lived in the time of the Council, gave it in
special charge to their Legates, That among other things to be reformed in the
Court of Rome, they should be sure that Non-residence should suffer no damage;
and accordingly when that business came in question, the Legates found out a
diversion at least six several times. And in the issue, when the Spanish
Divines did press the cause so far, as it could not be avoided, but a Canon
must be made against it; the Gentiletus in Exam, Conc, Trid, l. 4. f. 23.
Pope creates forty titular Bishops, sends them to the Council, and by that
means was the cause carried so, that though a Canon was made against it, yet
with such Proviso's, as makes it to be of no effect.

Thirdly, for the expressions of the Popish party, Nihil absurdius neque mag^
p^rnit^ su in Ecclesa fue it (abassumpto C^ri^o) excogitatum and nunc vix enim
a^ius a^usus qui magis vexat Eccles. Christi quam iste de ^luralitate Eccles.
Caranz.
one says, Since Christ's ascension, no greater evil in the Church then
plurality of Benefices. Caj^t. in tract. de non Residen.
Another says, That but that it is supposed they have the Churches absolution
at their death, they ought not to have the Benefit of Christian Burial. A^th
hist t^id. l. 2. p. 218. A. 629
Another calls the distinction of Residence and Non-residence, a distinction
never enough to be detested. Dom. a Soto
Another says, that anciently men were admonished to be resident, but it never
came under dispute. Caran^n^suffocaremus ratione^ nobis indita^ nemo enim tam
coecus qui de residentia dubitaret etc. c. 11.
One of the former counts the justification of this evil to be a choking of
the light of nature, a shutting of our eyes in Luce meridiana. We read of two
Popes Vide Extrav. Clem. 5. Omn^s quascunque de absen^ia pastorum factas
dispe^sationes de caetero re^ocamus, c^ssamus, anullamus.
Clement the fifth, and Vide Francis. Torrens. districte mand ^^us omnes
epis^^^os v^rt^te sa^c^ae obedientiae omnino re^edere and bona fide ad
Eccles^^^ prosicisci.
Gregory the eleventh, who being visited by the hand of God, did, out of the
sense of their sin, make void all their dispensations for Non-residents. What
a measure of zeal is required to reform them, whom all this shames not!

The sixth difficulty that will exercise a Reformers zeal, is the multitude
adhering to their old customs, idolizing their formalities. We may see the
Genius of the people in this regard in those, Ierem. 44. What thou have spoken
to us in the name of the Lord we will not do, but we will do so and so; in
Indges 18.24.
Micah, who when the Danites had taken away his idols, he makes after them with
hue and cry; they demanding, what ailes the man? he makes this reply, Have you
taken away my gods, and do you ask me what I aile? You see the prevalency of
old customs in the people called Hircani, who when their King went about to
alter a Heathenish Custom of casting their dead to Mastives in stead of
Burial, he had like to have lost both his life and Crown: This impatience of
the people to have any thing altered, the Papists will shame us; for who in the
times of Paulus tertius, and Pius quintus, though they profess infallibility
in their way, yet have they yielded to have their Breviaries twice changed.

And thus you have the second Reason, why Zeal is of great use.



The destructive nature of those evils, which if Reformation remove not, will
be the ruin of Kingdoms. As the wickedness of Ministers: when the Lord calls
for all the beasts of the field to devour and spoil Jerusalem, the
sore-runner thereof was the wickedness and idleness of the Priests, Ier.
23.15.
Does not wickedness go from them into all the land? Thy watchmen are blind,
Esaias 56.10, 11.
they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark: they are greedy dogs, Lam. 2.15.
they all look to their own way, every one is for his gain from his quarter.
So when Jeremiah mentions the cause of Ierusalems destruction, he inserts this,
Thy Prophets have looked out for thee vain and foolish things, They have not
discovered thine iniquity, to turn away thy captivity, etc. Vide Cent. 10.
Magdebu^g.
So in the tenth Century, which was most barren of all good writers, and
fruitful in all manner of wickedness, wherein the Pope got up on horseback,
What says a good writer of the Clergy of that time, What do we Ministers who
are so much the more inferior to others in holiness of life, as we are more
eloquent in words, who stirring up others fall asleep our selves; Ansb. in
Apoc. lib. 5. c. 11.
holding out light to others, are so much the more darkened in our selves. So
when did Antichristianisme and Mahometisme grow to their full maturity, An.
Dom. 1300. Hug. in Ps. 104
was it not then when the Prelates became I doll shepherds, when the Pastors
became Wolves, and the Angels of the Churches, Devils? Was not the wickedness
of the Priests a principal inlet of the Saxons to expel the Britains out of
this land? Brittany, Vide Gild. a p. 58. ad finem.
says a good Author, has priests, but foolish ones, they understand not;
Pastors as they are called, but indeed Wolves, ready to slay the souls of the
people, not seeking the good of the people, but the fullness of their own
bellies etc. So for matter of Doctrine, when the Saxons invaded this land, Beda
lib. 1. c. 7.
the Pelagian heresy had with a filthy contagion defiled the Britains faith.
Should not zeal bestirre it self, when such evils as these overspread a State.

The second Head to be considered, is what influence zeal ought to have into
Reformers.

First, Zeal will and must do her work thoroughly: It is Gods work, men must
not halve it, there is danger least corruptions grow again, unless pulled up
by the roots: Experience has taught what sad persecutions, a partial
reformation has made way for: What hope does such an imperfect proceeding give
to the enemies, that we will come on to them again.

Secondly, Zeal must and will summon all the powers of soul and body, and all
that we can prevail withal, to further the work: God delights in men of
activity, he cares not for the dull Ass to be offered in Sacrifice, the neck
of it was to be broken: It was earnest Baruch that had the praise above the
rest: The twelve Tribes did serve God, (...). Neh 3.20. Act. 26.
What should we be earnest for, if not for God and his cause? Will thou be
earnest for thy friend, thy profit, thy pleasures, and cold for thy God?

Thirdly, Zeal after she is convinced of the justice of the cause, over-looks
all dangers though never so great. So Caleb, when he heard of the
difficulties, resolves, Let us go up at once: So Esther, If I perish, I
perish: So Saint Paul, What do you, weeping and breaking my heart? It also
treads under foot all allurements, all hope of great things; God does now as
good as say, That which I have planted, Ier. 45.4, 5.
I will pluck up, and seek thou great things for thy self? 2 King. p. 26.
Is it now a time to receive money, and to receive garments, and Oliveyards,
and Vineyards, and sheep and oxen?

Fourthly, Zeal helps a Reformer against the tentation of being alone; This
prevails much, especially where the devil and our carnal friends carch us at
an advantage, and amplify the discouragement: How have the mighty been here
overthrown? Zeal takes notice, for the support of her self, of Joshua his
resolution, Choose ye whom ye will, but I and my house will serve the Lord: So
of Elias his complaint, that he was left alone: 2 Timothy 4. Vnitos est
fundamentum numeri.
So of Paul, At my first answering no man assisted me: Zeal takes notice that
numbers begin in one, and had there not been one first, there had never been
two.

Fifthly, Zeal commands perseverance, and holding out in the work: Many begin
in the spirit, but end in the flesh; how many brave worthies that blossomed
fair, come on as promising great things, yet have split them upon the rock of
an unfound heart, withered away, if not in the end proved false to God and
their Country; worthy Patriots for a time, but their hearts failing them, they
prove (...), such as relinquish their station. In Christianis non initia sed
fines laudantur; He only receives the Crown that overcomes. That heat in a
Reformer that is from heaven will hold out, not that which is merely
adventitious, set on work from outward causes.

The third Head, how zeal must be qualified.

1 It must be founded in knowledge, the understanding is the eye of the soul:
As metal is dangerous in a blind horse, so zeal when not directed by a
judgment well informed; zeal, as fire, must have light as as well as heat. It
is Hell where there is heat and no light but utter darkness.

The mind, and so zeal, cannot be good without knowledge: The Jews zeal,
defective in that, not according to knowledge: This zeal must not be
conjecturall, Romans 10.1.
probably seeming, such only as we have received from others without
examination. Nothing more ordinary then plentiful allegations of Scripture to
carry a cause; it matters not how specious and frequent quotations of Scripture
there be, as what they prove upon found trial: You whom God has betrusted
with this work take not all for gold that glisters.

2 It must be ordered with wisdom, zeal must be wary, as well as warm:
Fire is good, but in a wise man's hands, that will not put it into the thatch;
fire is good in the Chimney, but if it catch the rafters of the house it sets
all on fire: Sapientis est videre, non quid debeas solum, sed quid possis: In
the encounter with vice to be Reformed, wisdom will not have a Reformer to
set upon the Reforming, Quando necesse id, ut sit impar vitio, that will but
enrage vice more: Many mischiefs men that mean well are subject to even their
good endeavors, Eccl. 10.
but wisdom is profitable to direct. Beware here of that overwary discretion
that destroys reale.

3 It must be tempered with love, zeal is apt to be harsh, but love lines
the yoke and makes it easy to be borne: fit zelus, said my Author, but non
immoderate saeviens, August. in 6. Galat.
etc. Love takes us off from all bitterness to men's persons; Dilige and dic
quod voles, love and say what you will: Love allows us to be warm, sharp,
home in our reproves, but not scalding hot: The stomach admits not that which
burns the lips, nor the ear that reproof that is contumelious: Love calls
upon us as to be zealous for the truth, so to make it our work to endeavor to
keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace Ephesians. 4.3. What should rend
and divide us one from another, whom the Lord has united with so many bonds,
as to meet in one God, one Christ, one Spirit, one Faith, one Baptism, one
Heaven?

Far be it from us, on whom the Apostle has laid so many charges; if any
consolation in Christ, Phil. 2.1.
if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and
mercies fulfill my joy, that ye be of one accord and one mind. Do not our
Adversaries studdy to make rents among us, shall we gratify them, weaken our
selves? Do not they cry out that if they can but devide us they shall conquer
us? It is memorable what is reported of Julian, Amian. Marcell. de Julian, lib.
22.
that he did nourish dissentions among Christians, ut non timeret postea
unanimem plebem.



First, If it want a true light, There be false lights that mislead men over
bogges and dangerous places; we are exceeding apt to be misled when prejudiced
by men's persons, their learning or holiness, antiquity, or novelty, as if we
were necessarily to receive a thing because ancient, or to reject it because
new Inter iuvenile Iudicium and s^nile praejudicium perit veritas
, by a hasty engaging of our judgments before we be able to judge, and an
unwillingnesse to retract when we have judged by an Non tam an licet, quam ut
liceat.
undue enquiry, when we rather seek that things may be lawful, then whether
they be lawful or not, when transported by self conceitednesse of our own
opinion; it is only the eye salve of the spirit by the Word must guide us, To
the Law and to the Testimony. Esaias 8.20.


Secondly, If it suffer not it self to be ordered by wisdom; This takes in
right means as conducing to a right end; there is a precipitaney in zeal
whereby he that hastes in his matters, sins. There is a spirit of
deliberation and counsel; consider, consult, then give sentence, Eccl. 10.25.
then practice. A good cause often miscarries by indiscreet bandling, The
labor of the foolish wearieth every one of them, because he knows not how to
go to the City; Ignorance of the right means, tires out men in their
endeavors to no purpose.

Thirdly, If it easily fall into wrangling and quarrels: Love, that is and
ought to be the orderer of zeal; suffers long, 2 Cor. 13.
bears all things, endures all things: love knows that a little breach will
quickly be a great one, It prevents them or speedily makes them up, It gives
the water no passage, no not a little; zeal for God, is tenderly respectfull
of men's persons; It is wildfire and not zeal, Dan 5.15. Acts 26.24.
that casts firebrarnds and arrows, and deadly words, and says, I mean no
harm, Prove. 26.18, 19.

Fourthly, If zeal be right, she will not bate ought of what lies under the
command of God, no not a hoof; its false zeal that cries, neither mine nor
thine, but let it he divided, that makes nothing of small matters: True zeal
drives on the work of Reformation so as it leaves not the least remnants of
Baal, removes all high places, as considering that great persecutions, have
been raised upon small matters, and that conscience is a tender thing, as the
eye, the least moat troubles it.

Fifthly, If our zeal be only flashy, (like those unnatural heats that come
and go by flushings) it is not right, we have many that begin well, are hot
and eager while in such a company, while they have such props, while carried on
by such hopes, while not assaulted with such-tentations, while they thought the
cause would go thus they were hot and eager in the work of Reformation, but as
things alter from without, they alter from within, even to the total remitting
of their zeal.

Sixthly, If true zeal, as that which has the cause of God in the eye, then
tract of time, multitude of discouragements, falsenesse of men deserting the
cause, strength of oppositions will not tire out a man's spirit: zeal makes men
resolute, difficulties are but whetstones to their fortitude, it steeles men's
spirits with an undaunted magnanimity.

those former unsufferable profanations? How have superstitious monuments been
defaced, secret Idolatries suppressed, Seducers of the people been banished the
Land; For all these, and many more, everlasting honor shall be upon the head
of you our Reformers, Go on and prosper (You Noble Parliament Worthies) do
worthily in our Ephrata, and be famous in our Bethlehem, so shall the Lord make
your names as a savotry ointment, crown you with his best blessings, make your
Families flourish when you are dead and gone, remember you according to all the
good you have done for Gods cause: But above all, that you have found out a way
in these distracted times (wherein Religion it self, groans under the
wantonness of our people, loathing the Manna, and hunting after Novelties,
under the uncouth and irreligious opinions crept in among us, under the bitter
divisions that overspread City and Country) to call an Assembly of able and
Worthy Divines, with whom you might advise for the settling of Doctrine,
Worship, and Discipline. (Oh that this work had been sooner in hand) Not only
have you found such a way, but you have embodied many worthies from among your
selves with us: Have not we a double benefit hereby; first, you by this your
association, put honor upon us who should without you in the eyes of many
carnal men have been very despicable; secondly, by this happy conjunction, you
both help to order us who are ignorant of the nature of such meetings, and
withal by a seasonable interposall may stay divisions among us. Only we have
a double suit to you.

1 That you would not suffer the work to be either spun out beyond what is
meet, or yet hastily slubber'd over. Not the first, for that the enemy is
sowing tares, and much harm may be done while we are consulting; Errors may
enter so deeply, that they may prove incurable. Nor yet let it be done
negligently: first, for that it is the Lords work, to the negligent doing
whereof belongs a curse: secondly, Ier. 48.10.
in that it is to us of near concernment, all our wealth goes in this bottom:
thirdly, for that many eyes are upon us from abroad, both of friends who will
praise God for what we do well, and of foes who watch for our balting.

2 Our second suit to you is, that when the Laws of Christ, for the due
administration of his ordinances, shall be discovered, you would be pleased to
account it your greatest honor to submit to them. Christ's government is the
only liberty, thraldom to your lusts is the only true bondage; If you honor
God, he will honor you. It is his Gospel that has clothed you with scarlet,
put ornaments of gold upon you, put every precious stone in your garments. Be
not jealous, as if Christ's Government would eclypse your greatness. Christ's
rule and your honors are not incompatible, the Lord Jesus tells us his Kingdom
is not of this world, he commands that Caesar have his right. It is the style
of the spirit of God that calls you (...) dignities (with respect to which the
School allows that outward Pomp which Magistracy is honored with;) Reges and
Principes quos in reverentia a subditis haberi oportet pretiosioribus vestibus
ornentur, and ampliores habitationes possidear^t Aqu. 1. 2^ qu. 102.
and the same spirit mentions the pomp of Agrippa, when he came to sit in
Judgment, without dislike, Acts 25.23.

Secondly, as it sets out the unspeakable good of a zealous Reformer, and what
a blessing such a one is, so it points out to us what that is, which of all
other does most unbeseeme a Reformer, viz. the want of Zeal, which will render
such whom God has called to this office, most odious to him, most abominable
to men; ages present will count themselves unfortunate in such, ages to come
will curse such, the opportunities which God afforded them, and which they for
want of zeal have squandered away, will rise up in judgment against them.
What might such have done, if a spirit of zeal had eaten up their spirits, they
might have saved the Churches at home and abroad, given Antichrist that blow
that should have thrown him as a millstone into the middle of the sea,
delivered liberties, laws, and inheritances to posterity, saved City,
Country, the lives of millions of men, they might have finished the work they
began, all succeeding ages might have blessed God for them, their own works
have praised them in the gate. Now if zeal be wanting, they will undo all the
Churches of Christ, as much as in them lies; they will uphold tottering
Babylon, destroy flourishing England, deliver up their posterity to absolute
slavery, make themselves the monuments of shame and ignominy to all that know
or shall hear of them. Oh tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets
of Askelon, etc. Must it not needs be so when so necessary a correquisite as
zeal is wanting? for what is a Reformer without zeal, but as a body without a
soul, a Be without a sting, a soldier without his weapon, a Bird without
wings, salt without savor. Oh then you Noble Senators, who are under God the
Chariots and Horsemen of our Israel, what ever you part withal, part not with
your zeal, let this be your honor and crown, and as a diadem upon your head,
that yet you be zealous for your Religion, your Country, your Laws, and
Liberties: shall you but remit your former zeal, a spirit of lukewarmnesse
(which God forbid) seize upon you, sell truth for peace; you will live and die
without honor, and render your selves and us the most miserable Nation under
heaven.

to cloth your selves, out of respect to the work in hand, with zeal as with
a cloak, to fall upon the business you are designed to, toto animi impetu, you
are called out to contend for the truth that was once given to the Saints,
which has been sealed with the blood of Martyrs, has been justified by the
learned pens and disputes of all the Worthies of this Kingdom, without
interruption, for above this 80. years, but of late, by a cunning, ambitious,
and corrupt party, we had almost been cheated of it, even of that truth which
ought to be dearer then our lives.

Blessed be our God who has given a turn, and made a stop of their
proceedings, whose work was, as to put out the eyes of the people of the land
by Ignorance, so to have leavened them with Heterodox Opinions: and were we not
indeed gone almost as far as Rome gates in a declining way? Our work is a
noble work, it is servare depositum, to be Feoffees in trust for that saving
truth, that pattern of wholesome words, which has been derived to us, as from
the pure sountaine of Scripture, so also by the Channel of purer Antiqui^y
comes with Letters of commendation from the sufferings of Gods choysest
servants; such they were whom the world was not worthy of. I beseech you in the
bowels of Jesus Christ, we may quit our selves like men, do our utmost, that
we may vindicate the truth of God from all the aspersions of evill-minded men,
clear it from those ambiguities wherewith ungodly men have perplexed it, and
do such further work, in worship and discipline, as shall by God and Man be
required of us. What would our Ancestors, those glorious lights of former
times, have given to have had such a price put into their hands, as we unworthy
ones at this time have? May we not justly think, that what opportunity we have,
is but the effect of the fervent prayers, the many tears, and sad sufferings
of our sage and Reverend Predecessors, that are now with the Lord? Are there
not already upon us in this work for which we are assembled, the eyes of our
Brethren of the Reformed Churches, as expecting the issue of this business?
Nay, is not the whole Nation in expectancy of what this meeting will produce?
What manner of persons ought we to be, in humbling of our souls before the
Lord, crying mightily to him who alone keeps the key of the Cabinet, unlocks
the secrets of his will, opens the eyes of our understandings! Luke 24.
Can we look backward, to the many brave excellent-spirited and well-parted
men, who have turned some to Justinian, some to Galen, some to Litleton, others
betaken themselves to a retired Privacy, which long ago might have sat in
Moses Chair, had there not stood the fiery blade of corruptions in worship and
government to keep them out? How many silver Trumpets, that might have made
sweet melody in Gods house, have been hanged upon the willow trees, and all
because this work was not done? How many hundreds of worthy, learned,
soule-saving Ministers, men excellently fitted for the work, have been driven
out of our Land? (the Lord lay it not to our charge.) No small affliction to be
put upon the disserting of ones native Country, and all those Charitates which
under God are the life of our life, and further to be cast upon foreign
Countries, those sometimes unwholesome for our English bodies, placed among
inhumane people, put upon wildernesses, wild beasts, savage people, and
unknown necessities, because by reason of our sins this work has not been
yet effected, they saw no hope of it. Oh the swarms of godly men, that like
Noah's Dove, could find no rest for the soales of their feet, being hunted up
and down, hurried hither and thither, and wasted with vexatious suits, to their
utter undoing, who have been in the end forced, they and their whole families,
with heavy hearts, and some with poor estates, to bid farewell to dear
England, as never to see it again? these would have been content to have
lived in a smoaky house, and a mean condition with freedom of conscience.
Yea, they have been put upon it to commit themselves rather to the merciless
rage of the tempestuous Seas, to a long, tedious and irksome Sea-journey,
wherewith they were utterly unacquainted, rather then to endure those sad
impositions which were charged upon their consciences: and now the Lord puts it
into the hands of you the right Honorable that sit at the stern in point of
reformation utterly to remove. What shall I say to those millions of souls, who
have perished through the negligence, insufficiency, scandalous and corrupt
proccedings of that order of men, Bucer inopus. In tractatu de vi and usu
minisleris, p. 191.
which it is to be hoped, if our iniquities do not hinder, will be rectified
by that clericalis disciplina, which learned Bucer did so often call for, in
King Edward the 6. days.

To this end I once again do humbly beseech you, Men, Brethren, and Fathers,
that you would take up the practice of such holy duties, as may conduce to this
so pious, so necessary a work.

2 Timothy 1.6.
let it be frequent, fervent, and full of faith: you know the efficacy of
prayer, Esaias 45.11.
it sets God on work, and that with a holy kind of command, it has an
omnipotency with it, it never went of any arrant and returned empty. Be
confident if God do but stir up our hearts in prayer he will come in and
help us in the work. What if we be weak? Psalm. 10.17.
yet he is strong. What if we want, in our own apprehension, those abilities
fit for the work? he can lift us up above our selves, and supply us with help.
What if we want that quickness of understanding, activity of parts we see in
others? yet if we can but assist and encourage others, God will accept. Only
resolve of this, never any man a successful reformer without a spirit of
prayer. Elias and Luther tell us so much. To encourage us, Gods promises stands
sure, ler. 33.3.
Ask of me and I will show thee great and hidden things, Prove. 25.
which thou know not. If thou seek for wisdom as for silver, etc. if
thou cryest after knowledge, etc. then shall thou understand the fear of the
Lord, the knowledge of God. We attain not truth only by disputing, Lact. lib.
7 c. 2.
but by learning from him who only knows, said one of the Ancients. Luther.
And you know who said, that prayer, reading, meditation, tentation, do
complete a Divine.

Psalm. 25.
his secret is revealed to such) let our study be to be doers of his will. If
the Glass be clean and soil not the clean water that is poured into it, we
pour in more; if otherwise, we hold our hands: so the Lord does with us that
be ministers, he will not pour the sweet water of truth, but into the
sanctified heart. If any man, John 7.27.
says the Evangelist, will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine,
whether it be of God or no. Many perplexed disputes, much difference there is
among Brethren, whether this be the form Christ has left, the distractions
are sadly to be lamented: Would we be able to wind our selves out of these
Labyrinths of disputes, see the good and right way God would have us to walk
in, take notice of that promise in Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 43.11.
If the house of Israel shall be ashamed of their iniquities, and of all that
they have done, I will show them the form of the house, etc. only here we
must beware, we dare not to offer to Gods people such a form, as has not its
ground out of plain places of Scripture, but such only as are Typical and
Allegorical. Allegorica Theologia, (unless the Lord himself make the
application) non est argumentativa: It is our error that often times we do
afferre sensum ad Scripturam non refer: we are often times in fancying forms
of government, like that Sect of Philosophers, who having drunk in this
principle, that all the world was made of numbers, where ever they went, they
thought they saw numbers. If the Lord shall but behold us lothing our selves
for our ways that have not been good, disallowing our sins, personal and
national, Luke 24.
setting our hearts in a right frame, then will he open our understandings that
we may know the Scripture.

Thirdly, that God may so far delight in us, as to make us Instruments of
such a glorious work as this is, let us take all occasions to dispense the
holy truths of God to his people: the more we pour out, the more God will
pour in; the oil in the Cruse increased by pouring out; the bread wherewith
Christ fed his followers multiplied in the breaking. It Is true that this duty
has been looked upon of late as that which had neither form nor beauty. Sess.
5.
Was it not our shame that even Bellarmine, yea the Council of Trent it self,
should style Preaching Praecipuum Episcopi officium, the chiese duty of a
Bishop, when we suppressed it, put gaggs in the mouths of the Preachers, cast
all scorn upon it? The Lord be blessed, who has in a degree restored it to
its pristine dignity, opened the mouths that were stopped, encouraged the
faithful Preachers. Oh that our sins may not make the shadow of the Dyall to
go back! A maine danger here may be from those that will thrust in upon this
work that are not fit for it, that will be Canales before they be Conchae,
Bernard is Cant. Sermon. 18.
Channels to let out before they be vessels to retain. There is in many an
effusion before infusion. Cum ^daedificium arbasta succidim^s etc. Greg. Ep. 95.
Excellently spoke that Father who said: We cut not green wood to build
withal, but we first season it, lest it shrink and deceive us.

Why observe we not, that such are not to be admitted to the Ministry that are
Novices 1 Timothy 3.6.
. It was the complaint of Greg. Naz Orat, in Laudem, Basil. That though no man
could obtain the name, no not so much as of a Painter, but he must first have
mingled many colors, yet men are easily found fit for the Ministry. As the
Poets fained the Giants, we make them Saints one day, and we bid them be wise
and learned men another day, which have learned nothing, nor brought any thing
to the Ministry, but only their Velle. And now my dear brethren, whom I love
and honor, give me leave to remember you of the Prophet Ezekiels sad
threatening, and Saint Paul's deep charge. If the Watchman see the sword come,
and blow not the Trumpet, and the people be not warned, their blood will I
require at the Watchmans hands. Who, says one of the Ancients, Quis tam saxeus
tam ferreus quemsententia haecnon percellat Prosp. lib. ^. de vita
contemplativa, c. 20. Fulminasunt, non verb. Eras. Eccles.
so stony so iron hearted a man as whom this Scripture would not amaze. And
Erasmus says of these words, they are rather thunderbolts then words, such
thunderbolts which the Judge of all the world will dart against negligent
Pastors. Blond-guilt is a sad sin, but guilt of soulebloud is more dreadful
and inexpiable. We may have many sins, but beware we add not this to all the
residue. No such remarkable plague fell ever upon any Family, as upon that of
Eli for the wickedness of Hophni and Phinehas, who made people to abhor the
offerings of the Lord. 1 Samuel 3.
The wickedness of Eli his house shall not be purged with sacrifice or
offering for ever. As for Saint Paul's deep charge upon Timothy, weigh it
thoroughly. 2 Timothy 4.1, 2.
I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick
and the dead, in that his appearing and in his Kingdom, preach the Word, be
instant in season and out of season. At other times it suffices to urge Gods
Name, here the sweet Name of the Lord Jesus, that is honey in the mouth,
Music in the ear, a joyful shout in the heart, is pressed; At other times
the Name of Jesus Christ suffices, here he sets it on by an argument taken from
the glorious and last appearing of Christ, and that to judge the quick and the
dead, which will be a day of terror, and such a day where in Christ will cast
it in the teeth of every idle Minister, Perditam non quaesivisti, thou have not
sought the sheep that was lost, read rationem villicationis, give an account
of thy stewardship. Ibisid est, in die judic it) Petrus cum Judea, by Paulus
conversum mundum post se ducens apparebit, etc. Ibi omnes dominicae gregu
arietescum animarumlucris apparebunt, nos miseri, etc. qui pastores hic vocati
sumus and ibi gregem non ducmus, Gregor. hom. 7. livan.
How heavy an account will that be to those to whom the Lord has said, Occupy
your talents till I come, when the Lord shall call them to a reckoning, and
every one come in and say, Lord here be the souls thou have given me; and
thou an idle or scandalous Minister, who have built with one hand and destroyed
with another, have nothing to offer but a poor lean ignorant starved Flock,
when others bring in large harvests. How sad will thy account be! If terror
will not affright us, then let the glorious crown that abides every faithful
Minister work upon us, for such there is laid up a Crown of Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8. a Crown that withers not, 1 Pet. 5 4. an Euge enter into thy Masters
joy, thou have been faithful in a little, I will make thee ruler over many.
Shall not they that win many souls unto God shine as stars for ever? Dan.
11.3. Do not all the contents that are apt to Byas us from our work, fall
short of that eternal weight of glory? Why consider we not, other men have
other ways to go to heaven, Magistrates if they rule well, rich men if they
distribute liberally and give to the poor, private men by diligence in their
Calling, but a Minister can go no way to heaven but by faithfully attending
the Lords flock. Yea, if it could be so that there should be no reward that
abides a zealous faithful Teacher (which notwithstanding is surely laid up in
heaven) yet the very comfort that arises from the diligent doing of our duties,
would abundantly recompense all our pains. Ecquod gaudium, Erasmus Ecclesiast.
ecquod tripudium, etc. Is there any joy, any dance can more cheer up a man's
spirit, then the comfort of a soul won to Christ? Let other men enjoy their
fat and rich preferments, hunt after dignities, be called of men Rabbi; as for
us, if we can say, here be the children the Lord has given us, it suffices.
Let others say, who will give us such a Bishopric, such a Deanery, such a rich
Parsonage; a good Minister will say, as the King of Sodom said to Abraham,
Give me the persons (so many Converts) take thou the goods to thy self. Was
ever Caesar more glorious in his Diadem, when he put down whom he would, and
set up whom he pleased, when he rode in triumph before whole Armies of
Captives, Romans 15.17.
then Saint Paul when he glories how he had spread the Gospel from Jerusalem,
and all the circumjacent Countries to Illyricum? I have whereof, I may glory
through Jesus, etc.

And on the contrary, is there any such wounding cross, is there any such
torturing fury that can so torment and eat up the heart, as when an unfaithful
Minister shall seriously and in cold blood weigh what heaps of souls he has
been a means to plunge for ever into the infernal Lake? Can his bravery, his
luxury, his good companions, his jollity? can the excellency of his parts and
learning, his applause in the world privilege him, when the hand writing shall
appear upon the wall? Surely when a Minister shall lie upon his deathbed,
nothing can uphold his drooping spirit, but the testimony of his conscience,
that he has fought a good fight, kept the faith; This alone must be our
Paradise.

Finally my Brethren, why consider we not that God has engraven our duties
upon our names? we are watchmen, shepherds, workmen, builders, the Lords
husbandmen, his soldiers, if we slack or forget our duties, we shall forget
our names. Nay, our names will be our accusers; the ground of the Lords
quarrel against us. That which of old was given in charge to a Roman Consul,
Pium nomen est reatus impii, Salv. de provid lib. 4.
Consul es praesta nomen, the same should every one of us enforce upon our
selves, Minister verbies, hoc age, pastor es, praesta nomen tuum. I conclude
with that of Hierome, In Ep. ad Nepot.
Read what your name is, and be what you are called.

And now, beloved, having endeavored to quicken you and my self to the duty
of preaching, give me leave to suggest something concerning the manner that it
may be done to the best purpose; the Lord requires not only that we preach the
Word, but so to preach it as that our hearers may be brought on to the Faith:
Acts 14.1. (...)
Paul and Barnabas are said [so] to have taught that multitudes believed. If it
be an advantage to a hearer in his work how he hears, is it not so to a
preacher how he preaches? That our Ministry may be successful;

We must preach zealously; that was the honor of John the Baptist, that he was
a burning light; John 5.35. Act. 7.16.
of Saint Paul, that with respect to the Idolatry at Athens, his spirit was
stirred within him; so of Apollos it is witnessed, that he was fervent in
spirit. Act. 1^.21.
This Zeal must show it self by a holy indignation against sin; Sozemen.
lib. 8. c. 2. (...).
It is reported of Saint Chysostome, that he reproved sin against God, as if
he himself had received an injury. It appears also by enlarged desires, that
the souls of the hearers may be brought to God; so in S. Paul, Romans 9.3. I
could wish my self accursed from Christ, etc. This Zeal in a Preacher will
put life and quickness into their expressions; Men of cold and dead spirits,
their words die in their mouths, and usually beget a coldness in their
hearers; Zeal is as Rosin to the strings of the musical Instrument, without
which it makes no sound. Only, as the good Huswises fire on the hearth is
enlarged or lessened according as the family occasions, so according to the
nature of the Offenses, as great or small, should the Preachers Zeal be
proportioned.

We must preach compassionately; what else is insinuated in those phrases,
wherein God is brought in, speaking (...), as putting on the bowels of a man,
Deuteronomy. 5.25. ^zek. 33.11. Os. 11.
and teaching us so to do. It is said of Christ, that he had compassion on the
people, for that they were as sheep without a Shepherd; Mat. 9.36.
and in another place speaking to Hierusalme, how compassionately does he
express himself, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem. Mat. 23.37.
how would I have gathered thee together, as a Hen gathers her Chickens; no
compassion greater than that of the Hen to her Chickens: How did he in the
foresight of her miseries approaching, Luke 19.
weep over her, and cry, O that thou had known, Heb. 5.2.
etc. The high Priest was therefore to be taken from among men, that he might
have compassion on them that were ignorant and out of the way. Is there any
object in the world that deserves more pity than a lost Soul, in the snare of
the Devil, blessing it self as if it were well, when it is poor, blind,
beggarly, and naked, and every hour liable to an insufferable, an eternal
destruction.

We must preach convincingly; First, there must be evidence of reason
convincing the understanding of that we would persuade men to. Man is a
reasonable creature, not drawn hither and thither by a thunder and lightning
of blustering terms, which at the utmost only starrle the affections for a
time, but afterward for want of a convicted judgment they return to their old
temper; Col. 2.2. (...).
This is that which is called, The full assurance of understanding.

2. There is also required a conviction of the consciance, whereby we evidence
to men, that they be guilty, convincing them that they are the men: That was it
that vexed the Priests, that the Apostle taxed them in particular, Act. 5.28.33.
as guilty of the blood of Christ, He intends to bring this man's blood upon us:
The Jews that stoned Steven, Act. 1.35.
were cut to the heart, when he charged them in particular as stiffenecked and
uncircumcised in heart. Men will endure much so be it you let their since
alone, or them in the practice of their sins, but if they be apprehensive that
your reprooses come home to them, they then are stined and filled with wrath.
Luke 4.28. 1 Cor. 14.25.
When the Preacher is manifest in the conscience of the hearers, then they
consesse that God is in him, they cry out, 1 King 22.8. Omnis actio fit per
contractum.
You prophecy evil to us. As the Philosophers say, that all action is by
touching, so all doctrine works by particular application; he that delivers
himself altogether in generals, seldom works upon the people: Ab usu
doctrina ad ejus applicationem descensus est quidam quasi a specie ad
individuu^ transitus. Zeppar. de habend. Concio.
It is the spreading of the Net (which is done by particular application) which
takes the Fish; Always provided that we must not decipher men by personal
circumstances or distinguishing Characters; this will take off the efficacy of
our reproof, in that the reproved will question the good affection of the
reprover, as not tendering his good name, while he does that openly, which
should have been done secretly; only, if any man's sin, or a known
circumstance of his sin do discover him, it is not the reprover. but the
offender does discover himself. Sins must not be passed over in silence
which declare themselves, because men complain that we particularize.

We must preach feelingly according to the nature of the Doctrine; we do so
when we preach as sensible in our own hearts of what we would have take
impression upon another: The best way to speak to the heart, is to speak from
the heart; 2 Cor. 2.4.
Saint Paul when he would beget in the Corinthians a godly sorrow of heart, he
writes unto them out of much affliction and anxiety of spirit, with many tears.
He that will make men sensible of wrath and damnation, or make men apprehensive
of the greatness of Gods love in Christ, must manifest the like affections in
himself: There Sunt multi clamosi reprehenso^^s, qui in vitia declamitando,
vel potius fu^minando mirum zeli ardorem prae se serunt. etc. Calv: in loc.
are many (says my Author) clamorous Preachers, who declaiming, or rather
thundering against other men's faults, carry a great show of zeal, and in the
mean while are very secure themselves, as if they did only, per lusum
exercere guttur and latera, sportingly exercise their Throats and Sides: But a
godly Pastor must weep himself, that he may stir up compassion in others,
and retain more sorrow in himself than he seeks to create in others.

When we preach frequently taking all occasions to dispense the Word; the
Apostle calls it, In season, and out of season. The peoples uncapablenesse,
their slownesse to believe, their aptness to be carried away with the torrent
of the times, the many ways whereby the Word may miscarry; all these, besides
the important nature of the work, as tending to bring men from the power of
Satan unto God, from hell to heaven, call for our redoubled pains. How constant
and assiduous are Merchants, Mariners, Husbandmen, in their attendance on their
earthly affairs, which notwithstanding they ordinarily find as they left them?
should not we be much more industrious in Soul-work, which we seldom or never
return to it but we find it worse than we left it? Of the Lords Watchmen it is
said, That they shall not hold their peace all the day nor all the night, Es.
62.6. of Christ it is said, He was daily in the Temple teaching, Lu. 21.37. of
the Apostles, That they were daily in the Temple, and from house to house
preaching the Gospel, Act. 5.42. The diligence of the Ancients, as Chrysostom. Hom.
3 in Genesis Hom. 10. in Genesis Hom 9. ad Pop. Antioch.
Chrysostom. Basil. Hexem Hom 2. ad finem. Hom. 7. Iam advesperascit, etc. (It
seems they preached in the afternoon.)
Basil, Aug. in ^oon. Tract. 9. Hesternoenim die distulimus in hodiernum.
Whence it appears he preached daily. Vid. etiam Tractat. 16.21.22. alibi.
Augustine, the custom of the Church whereof Eusch de Praepar. Evang. l. 8. c.
2. Vnus de senioribus legem recitat per totum diem septimum, (...) as. usque ad
vespertinum crepusculum.
Eusebius reports, ought to be as incitements unto us. If Hooper B. of Gloc. in
acconfession of ^aith, exhibited to K. Edw. 6.
fifteen. Masses in a day was not enough for the Popish Priests, shall one
Sermon suffice us, said learned Hooper. Therefore in the morning sow thy seed,
Eccles. 11.6.
and in the evening let not thy hand cease, thou know not whether this or
that shall prosper.

gravely, so as to preserve the honor of that God whose mouth we are in
preaching, of that Christ whose person we represent, 2 Cor. 5.
of the high nature of the things we treat about. We are to deal with men,
and that in the presence of God and his holy Angels, about the recovery of them
out of their damnable condition by nature, in setting our of the infinite love
of God in Christ, with all the advantages that belong thereto, the souls
salvation or destruction to all eternity: How ill does any thing that is
ludicrous tending to move laughter beseem discourses of so high a nature. All
our care should be to preserve the spirits of men in a serious temper, wherein
they are fittest to be wrought upon: Omnis risus in Ecclesia est a diabolo.
All laughter in the Church is from the Devil says Chrysostom: Jocular
Stories are from this ground to be banished from the Pulpit. A Minister must be
an example to the people in all gravity, Tit. 2.8.
this gravity must appear as in our whole conversation, so specially when we
stand betwixt God and the people as his Ambassadors.

And now having represented to you, my Reverend Brethren, the important and
pressing nature of your work, laid before you those general duties, by which
you may be fitted and made successful in the work, set on those duties by
quickening motives; what remains but that I commend you to God, and the Word of
his Grace who alone must enable you for it, and without whom all is done will
come to nothing. And for you, our Parliamentarie Worthies, you are (as things
stand) under God the breath of our nostrils, the light of our eyes, as a nail
fastened (as yet) in a sure place; if you go on to do the Lord's work with
wisdom and courage, God will certainly go along with you; if you refuse or
withdraw your selves (however our eyes shall be to the Lord, but) in the eye of
man we are but an undone Nation. The God of heaven who has his way in the
Seas, who alone fashions the hearts of the children of men, raise and keep up
your spirits, cloth you with Zeal, fit you for all encounters, make way for
you through all difficulties: So shall our Religion, our Laws, and Liberties,
be preserved to our selves, and transmitted to posterity; and we have cause to
praise God for you so long as the Sun and the Moon endures.

FINIS.

