THE QUAKERS Quaking Principles EXAMINED AND REFUTED In a brief answer to some
erroneous Tenets held forth by James Naylor in his Answers unto Mr Baxter, and
some others that have publicly opposed that black spirit in the deluded
Quakers.

Wherein is also included a serious Admonition, how we ought to behave our
selves toward the Ministers of the Gospel, in respect of communicating unto
them; and for giving to the poor, so as the Gospel requires: and to beware of
covetousness, and the effects thereof, least we be left of God, and delivered
up unto strong delusions, and a blasphemous spirit instead of the Spirit of God.

The heads of the whole Discourse are also premised.

Written by ELLIS BRADSHAVVE.

And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should
believe a lie, That they all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but
had pleasure in unrighteousness; see 2 Thessalonians: 2.11, 12. LONDON; Printed for
Lodowicke Lloyd, and are to be sold at his shop at the Castle in Cornehill.
1656.

TO HIS HIGHNESS THE LORD PROTECTOR Of England, Scotland, and Ireland, with the
Dominions thereof.
MAy it please your Highness, I have made bold, being advised thereunto to
presume so far as to Dedicate and commend this little Treatise to your
serious consideration; The which I should not have don, though advised to it,
being so mean a man, Had I not been persuaded that your Highness will approve
of the contents hereof, Or had I not also conceived that your approbation and
public owning and encouragement thereof, would much tend to the glory of God,
and the good of his people. And so by consequence also not only to the
fullfilling of your mind and desires being bent that way, but it will really
tend for your honor and advantage in many respects, which I could easily name:
One whereof is that though the Treatise is little, yet it has much in it, that
by the blessing of God may strongly tend, for turning of the hearts of the
fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children unto their fathers, as
Mala: 4.6. Least the Lord should come, and finding us divided, smite the earth
with a curse, I mean (for so we ought to apply it) for turning the hearts of
the Ministers unto the people, and the hearts of the people unto their
Ministers: Least the Lord finding us in a divided separated malignant posture,
each against others, should smite the earth with a curse for our sakes, instead
of causing the blessing to rest in our houses, and upon all that we have.

Now it is evident that Satan and all his instruments, especially the Quakers,
labor with all their might, and are too powerful quite to the contrary, as in
this Treatise it will appear, That it is the chief design of Satan in the
Quakers to render the Ministers odious to the people, that so he might make
their doctrines and labors utterly ineffectuall.

And I being confident that your Highness is not Ignorant of these things, nor
of the ends and devices of Satan: For I have not written to your Highness
because you know not the truth, but because you know it, and that no lie is of
the truth.

And again being also confident, that your Highness much desires, and is
exceeding glad of all opportunities and means to effect this accordance,
amongst all the faithful Ministers and people of God; which does much commend
the goodness of your spirit through the grace of God in the sight of all good
men that know your mind.

I have made bold to commend this Treatise, the more to engage your Highness the
rather to read it; Being a little jealous least your many and great affairs
should withdraw your mind to slight and neglect it before you know it.
Especially in regard here is included diverse pressing arguments, and that from
Scripture-grounds, such as cannot be reproved: To engage the people in love and
duty to their faithful Ministers, freely to communicate and make them
pertakers with them in all good things, so as the Gospel requires. Which love
and duties Christianly performed, so as really to prove the naturalnes of
their love; will doubtless engage the hearts of the Ministers unto the people;
It being the nature of true cordial affection, such love I mean as comes of
God, to be reciprocal.

And what happiness attends both the Ministers and people that are in such a
case; Especially in respect of the blessing of God, is clearly held forth;
Psalm: 133. Behold, says David, how good and how pleasant a thing it is for
brethren to dwell together in unity, verse. 1. For there the Lord has
commanded the blessing, even life for evermore, verse. 3.

And so the Apostle bids us, Be perfect, be of one mind, live in peace, and
the God of love and peace shall be with us, 2 Cor: 14.11.

Now what better means can we use for completing all this happiness to our
selves and posterities. Then to provoke one another unto love, and to good
works.

And one thing I dare say, that through the grace of God, here are diverse
Arguments and doctrines for provoking to good works, which have never yet that
I know of, been published before, either by word or writing, from
Gospell-foundations, but in this Treatise.

But it is not suitable for me to commend it, but let it praise it self, nor
should I have done it at all, but to engage your Highness not to neglect to
read it, and take special notice of such a serious buisinesse, so strongly
opposed, and of such high concernment to all our souls.

Thus hoping in God your Highness will grant me this desired favor, as with
deliberation to read it over, when time will permit; I Commit you to the
guidance and protection of God, and rest your loving, faithful, and obedient
Soldier.

ELLIS BRADSHAVVE.

The heads of the chief things herein prooved against James Naylor, and others
of his Accomplices, are;
1. THat it is not the Gospel, nor the Scripture in general, which is called
the letter by the Apostle Paul, Rom: 2.27.29. and Chap: 7.6. and 2 Cor: 3.6.
But the Law only, and that but in some respects. 2. That there is more lights
then one, yea then that within that are properly spoken of and called lights in
Scripture, which Naylor denies. 3. That there is more words of God then one,
and so properly called in Scripture; which he denies. 4. That the Scriptures
are the words and word of God, and properly so called in Scripture, which he
denies. 5. That there is no man justified by faith in Christ, but he loves
the Scriptures, and will own them as words of spirit and life, and that to
him; and therefore will not call them a dead letter and carnal, etc. as the
Quakers do. 6. The absurdity of Naylors directorie to a light within, and to
desert the Scriptures, and the teachings of men discovered. 7. That James
Naylor is not infallibly guided, but either grossly erreth through delusion,
or is obstinately wicked in maintaining such things as are herein named. 8.
That the Quakers are clearly under a degree of blasphemy, and in what
perticulars evidenly demonstrated. 9. That they are acted and moved by an
evil and malicious spirit, which is not of God, prooved from Scripture. 10.
That they shall bring upon themselves swift destruction, unless they humble
themselves greatly in the sight of God, and repent and turn. 11. That Naylor
for all his profession of perfection, and infallibility, and knowing of all
things; yet he teaches us nothing (except lies) but what we knew before: the
which is clearly Illustrated. 12. That James Naylor, and his accomplices, are
sent with strong delusions; and for what end and cause, cleared from Scripture.
13. That Satan has Commission to be a lying spirit in their mouths. 14. That
they shuffle up their lies closely amongst many known truths, to make them
feizible. 15. That if the Ranters doctrine had been feizible, the Devil would
never have transformed his Ministers so like to the Ministers of
righteousness: Though his design is the same in the Quakers as in the
Ranters, in some chief respects. 16. Some Queries proposed to Naylor,
Requiring Scripture-ground for what he asserteth, which he never yet gave, nor
can I suppose. 17. That Christ who is the true light, and inlightneth every one
that comes into the world, yet does not inlighten them all sufficiently by
immediate lumination, no not all the Elect themselves, so as to bring them to
salvation: But does it mediately by the Scriptures, and teachings of men, to
bring them to the knowledge of God, and of Christ, for the saving of their
souls. 18. That it is the same design of Satan in the doctrines of the
Quakers, which he had in the Popish Hierarchy, when they inhibited the
Scriptures to be read or known in their own mother-tongues to the Layitie, to
wit, to keep them in Ignorance, one of the chiefest policies that Satan has
to perpetuate his kingdom in the dark world. 19. That James Naylors
Directorie is quite contradictory to the Directorie of Scripture, And is as
much to some men as if he should expressly bid them to eye and observe and obey
Satan instead of the Spirit of God. 20. That yet they have not Commission to
deceive the Elect totally and finally, but such as received not the truth in
love. 21. That in the Judgment of charity we may well believe, at least,
that all those people are not obstinately thus lead, but Satan deceives them,
and makes them believe that it is no other but the Spirit of God that acts
and teaches them, when notwithstanding it is but himself. And how he
deceives them is showed at large. 22. An objection is answered, to wit, how
they come to be so spirited, and acted, and changed from what they were before.
If it be not indeed the Spirit of God. In answer whereunto is showed by what
stepps and degrees they attain these things. 23. A serious Admonition to
beware of the least of those stepps whereby they come to be delived up of God
to such strong delusions, and to be spirited and acted by that lying spirit,
instead of the Spirit of truth: which stepps are chiefly these. 1. Satan by
his Ministers works them up to a dislike of the Ministers of God, and of the
Christian professors. 2. Of all the Ordinances of God. 3. Of the Scriptures
themselves as all but carnal, and a dead letter, and vain unto them 4. To
Reproach and despise them, which is express blasphemy, and then he has
power to spirit them and act them at pleasure.
24. Here is also added a parallel List of some of the manifest contradictions
betwixt the teachings of that spirit in the Quakers, and the express teachings
of the Spirit of God.
A BRIEF ANSWER To some erroneous TENANTS held forth by JAMES NAYLOR, In his
Answers unto Baxter, and some others that have publicly opposed that black
Spirit in the deluded QVAKERS, to wit:
HE alleges that Scripture Rom: 10.8. The word is nigh thee in thy heart, and
in thy mouth. And further he says that this word of Faith the Apostles
preached, which was in peoples hearts.

All which in some sense is true; and he says further, that such were not
Ministers of the letter, but of the Spirit.

The which in some sense must needs also be true, for it is in the scripture.
But he says further, Nor did ever say the letter was the Word.

The which I utterly deny, if he mean by the letter any part of Scripture; the
which I shall make appear by the help of God from many Scripture grounds, which
he owneth in his Answers unto Baxter as truths of God, I mean the scripture.

But first, I must clear the meaning of those words of the Apostle, to wit; Not
of the letter, but of the Spirit, for the letter kills, but the spirit gives
life, 2 Cor: 3.6.

Now it is plain what the Spirit of God intends by it, if we read the Verses
following, to wit, 7, 8, 9. where the Apostle makes a comparison betwixt the
glory of the Law, and that of the Gospel, the ministration of Moses, and that
of Christ; and therein makes the Law as a ministration of condemnation, and of
death, but the ministration of the Gospel, the ministration of the Spirit, and
of Righteousness which is through Jesus Christ, and so of life.

So that his meaning is clear, to any that will understand that he does not mean
as though the Apostles did not Preach and ground their Doctrines from sacred
Scripture; but that by preaching of Faith from scripture grounds, they minister
life to those that were spiritually slain by the letter of the Law. For in
regard that no flesh can be justified in the sight of God by keeping of the
Law: in regard they cannot fulfill it in every point, and therefore lie under
death, and condemnation: spiritually I mean being condemned by it in their
souls and Consciences, and as it were bound over unto death and hell without
hope of recovery, and that unto all eternity in their own apprehensions in the
fight of God having transgressed the Law.

They so remain as it were without hope, and without God in the world; til it
pleases God to revive and quicken them to a lively hope and confidence in God;
by the ministration of the spirit of life, which is not ministered by Preaching
the works of the Law, but by the hearing of faith preached, see Gal: 3.2.

So that it is clear what the Apostle means, and intends to teach us, when
he declared that they were able Ministers, not of the letter, but of the
spirit, and that spirit within, if it be of God, does so apprehend it, and will
own it as a truth of God: And therefore James Naylor is either much mistaken
(and so is but fallibly guided,) or else obstinately wicked in drawing such
inferences from this scripture, as to account them no Ministers of God that are
Ministers of the letter, and ground their Doctrines thereon.

For the Spirit is ministered by the hearing of faith preached, as well as
sometimes immediately: both which administrations I own as true.

But I come now to his other main Tenent, which chiefly tends to the
disparagement of the Scriptures, and which chiefly ingageth men to oppose him
in it, as a work of Satan: And why should not I whiles I am in the world, what
in me lies endeavor to destroy the works of the devil, see 1 John: 3.8.

He says further in his Book against Baxter, speaking of the Apostles; that
they did never say the letter was the Word. And in his 7th. Querie in the end
of his Book he enquireth whether the word of God can be changed, or can it
admit of several meanings as to one particular thing?

A: I Answer that James Naylor may wrest the Scriptures to his own destruction,
and he is not so infallible but he may misunderstand the genuine meaning, 2
Pet. 3.16.

2. He enquireth whether it be visible or invisible.

A: I answer, the Word was made flesh, and dwelt on earth, and is now visible
in Heaven, and yet is here invisibly in spirit, in the hearts of his people;
but how the word was made flesh, James Naylor understands not.

3. He enquireth, is there any word but one? or whether was that word before
the letter, and shall be when the letter is turned to dust?

A. To which I answer, that Christ the essential word is but one, we own but
one Christ, who shall remain when the Quakers have burnt their Bibles, if they
will burn them, as some of them have said, it were all one to them if the Bibles
were all burnt, Foster by name has so expressed himself, and they say they are
all of one mind, then such esteem they have all of the sacred scriptures: which
we account of as not only the word of men, but the word of God: as so I shall
make to appear that it is not blasphemy (as they most wickedly assert) but our
bounden duty to own, and call it the word of God, and that it is blasphemy in
them to deny it, and call it carnal, and a dead letter.

And the Lord assisting I shall prove:

1. That there is not only one, but many words, yea words of God; so taken in
scripture.

2. That what God has spoken, is his word.

3. That whatever Christ has spoken who, is the essentia word, is also the
word of God.

4. That all scriptures given by inspiration of God; and all expressions of
men, unto which they are moved by the Holy Ghost, are the words of God, and
that it is not they that speak, but the spirit of their Father that speaks in
them.

5. That every word of God is pure, and also true, by whomsoever spoken, but
nor such lies as these of the Quakers: but they are the words of another
spirit, then the spirit of God: as I trust in God to make it manifest, as so I
ought.

And before I begin, for fuller satisfaction how they account of the
scriptures: take notice that I find it in a little Book called, The holy
Scriptures clearing it self from scandals, or an Answer to a Book written by
Richard Farnworth, who is commonly called a Quaker: written by Thomas Polard,
who had opposed them, by argum nt in a public way.

Which Thomas Polard says that they call the scripture carnal, and a dead
letter, and say it will never bring a man to the knowledge of God; but that all
that is gotten from the scripture is but brain knowledge.

And I find in a Book of Naylors against one Thomas Moore how he answers
this, to wit, being asked by Moore, whether the writing of the Prophets and
Apostles be a dead letter?

He answers that without the spirit it is, nor can any without that spirit
that gave them forth, understand them, or know the voices of Prophets, or
Apostles, aledging Luk: 24.45. Act: 13.27.

A: 1. But where does the scripture, or the spirit of God call the scripture a
dead letter, or carnal: and that it will never bring a man to the knowledge of
God, but that all that is gotten from it is but brain knowledge?

A: 2. Where is it said in scripture that the spirit of God, and the scripture
are separated?

The words that Christ has spoken, they are spirit, and they are life; and
Moses said unto the people, set your hearts unto all the words that I testify
unto you this day, which ye shall command your Children to observe to do all the
words of this Law: for it is not a vain thing for you, for it is your life, and
through this thing ye shall prolong your days, Deuteronomy: 32.46, 47.

And again the law is spiritual faith, says the Apostle, I am carnal, Rom: 7.
and Prove: 2. My son if thou will receive my words, and hide my Commandments
with thee; so that thou incline thine ear to wisdom, and apply thine heart unto
understanding, if thou seek for her as silver, and searchest for her as for
hid treasures.

Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God,
see v: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

See also Pro: 3.1, 2. My son forget not my Law, but let thine heart keep my
Commandments.

For length of days, and long life, and peace shall they add to thee: see also
ch: 4.1, 2, 3, 4. Let thine heart retain my words, keep my Commandments and
live. And ver: 13. Take fast hold of instruction, let her not go, keep her for
she is thy life.

Consider I say whether the wisdom of God so pathetically expressing her self
to us, if possible to persuade us to attend and hearken to the words of his
mouth, and to keep his Commandments, and instructions, and treasure them in
our hearts as words of life to our souls, and marrow to our bones, as in
another place; and that for this end we should teach them to our Children, as I
might be large upon any of these Texts. But whether I say does the wisdom of
God account the scripture as a dead letter, let all wise men judge, and whether
they have not in them more spirit of life and power, then the words and
writings of James Naylor, and whether they ought not rather to be observed, and
believed, and trusted in for eternal life.

Now it is evident that the directions of James Naylor, as a way to be
infallibly guided, and to attain unto life and peace, and rest for our souls,
is one thing, and these directions are another: his directions are to attend
and hearken to that spirit, and light within, though it be a question whether
it be the spirit of God, or a lying spirit; and a question whether there be at
all any light within, but gross darkness; and he that is in darkness knows
not whither he goes, til he be enlightened by the Word, and Spirit. But he that
hates his Brother is in darkness until this present time; it were wisdom
therefore for James Naylor himself to try his spirii and light by the Law and
testimony whether it be of God yea or no: for this calling of the scripture
carnal, and a dead letter, is not like the testimony of the spirit of God,
which calls it spiritual; and I rather believe that the Law is spiritual, and
James Naylor carnal, then the Law carnal, and he spiritual.

Now can I think that James Naylor was ever quickened, and received the spirit
by the hearing of faith preached, nor by the operation of the word and spirit,
jointly together as other believers: for then he would never call it but a dead
letter, and carnal, etc. if he had ever received spiritual life from it; but he
would love and own it above all other words, and also acknowledge that he has
received light and comfort from it.

But he says in his Answers to Baxter, that the scripture holds out but one
light and Word, which I say is not true: and therefore first I shall make it
appear from Scripture, that it houldeth out more light then one, and then I
shall prove my former assertions, that there is more words of God then one held
forth in scripture, and so properly called in scripture, which the Quakers call
blasphemy, but the blasphemy is theirs. And first for Lights, Christ himself
says who is the essential Light, and as it were the the original Luminary of
all inferior, or lesser Lights: in his Sermon upon the Mount, Ye are the light
of the world (speaking to his Disciples) and let your light so shine before
men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
Heaven; see Matt: 5.14, and 16. And again John was a burning and a shining
light, and ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his light; see Joh: 5.35.

And David says, The entrance of thy words gives light, it gives
understanding unto the simple, Ps: 119.130.

So that here is clearly more lights then one, and these held forth in
scripture, though all proceeding from that one fountain and see also 2 Pet:
1.19. We have says the Apostle a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do
well, that ye take heed as unto a light shining in a dark place, until the day
dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts.

But I suppose James Nailor will not acknowledge that he ever received any light
from that sure word of Prophecy, as from a ligh shining in a dark place: but
only some little brain knowledge of the bare letter: Else he would not so
reproach, and disparage those that do take heed to the sure word of prophecy,
til they be enlightened thereby in what they were dark, and did not understand.

For he intimates so much as though he never needed any scripture light, but
had all immediately, and that by voice or immediate inspiration, or both from
the spirit of God; all which if it were true, yet it would become him better
not to despise others that have it mediatly, and it may be at the second,
third, and fourth hand, especially some things that are hard to be understood
with men, that are dull of hearing, as some of the Saints were, to whom the
Apostle writes; see Heb: 5.11.

And lest I should seem to mistake his intimations: he plainly expresses
himself in his Book against Thomas Moore, page: 43.9, 10, 11 line, where he
says I witness against thee who have received the word from his own mouth, and
immediate calling.

And that he accounts their Ministry litteral, who know not what it is to
inquire at the mouth of the Lord.

These are his words speaking to Thomas Moore, to wit, he says he had reckoned
up the names of many of the Saints of God, which makes little for thy purpose,
who were all men that were taught in spirit, and need not to run unto a Book,
to seek their knowledge; but had the word of the Lord from Gods own mouth, and
there was the oracle whereat they enquired, which thou would make to be the
letter, (who never knew what it was to enquire at his mouth) whose Ministry is
litteral: see page: 28. line 16 to 24. Now these are his words: and I shall not
deny but even in these days there is such men as may truly say with the
Apostle, to wit, And truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ.

But not all in a like measure, the gifts and graces of God, and the measures
of them are various, as the Lord said unto Aaron and Miriam, Numb. 12.6, 7, 8.
to wit. Hear now my words: If there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will
make my self known unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream: My
servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all mine house, with him will I
speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches, and the
similitude of the Lord shall he behold; wherefore then were ye not afraid to
speak against my servant Moses?

From whence it appears there is different dispensations even amongst the
Prophets of the Lord, some have more apparent acquaintance and familiarity with
God; and those are such who are faithful in all Gods house: And some have a
more dark and hidden acquaintance with, and knowledge of God, as it pleases
him to communicate unto them in different measures and degrees, according as
they are different in measures and degrees of faithfulness. Now Moses was
faithful in all Gods house, but so were not Aaron and Miriam, nor the rest of
the Ptophets then living, though yet they were faithful in a good degree, and
were true Prophets of the Lord.

Now I never read that Moses spoke any thing at all to the disparagement of
those that were inferior unto him in acquaintance with God, though they spoke
against him as though he had assumed to much honor. Say they, Has the Lord
indeed spoken only by Moses? Has he not spoken also by us? And the Lord heard
it, and the anger of the Lord was kindled against them, and he departed. See
verse 2. to 16.

And the Lord himself vindicated Moses and was wroth with them; but Moses
being a meek man, in stead of being angry prayed for Miriam that the Lord would
heal her immediately, but it could not be granted till after seven days, so
that the Lord himself was more severe then Moses whom she had spoken against.

But I find little of this meekness in James Naylor, who accounts himself
the highest, and all below him either Dwarfes or nothing like unto Christians;
insomuch as if they have need of a book, either the Bible or any other, they
are despised by him as literal men in his book against Moore.

But Paul advised otherwise even to give attendance to reading, and to
exhortation and doctrine, and not only to a light within; and bids not
only to bring his Cloak, but the Books and especially the parchments. In all
likelihood then he himself made use of books and parchments. Nay Christ
himself disdained not to use a book, or to read thereon, and that in public,
which was the old Testament.

But James Naylor says, he may read all his life the Letter of the Scriptures,
and therewith come amongst the Parish Ministers, and never discern the voice of
Christ. See page 45. in his book against Moore.

To the which I answer, It is true that such who are none of the sheep of
Christ, may indeed read the Scriptures, and hear them read and preached all
their lives, and yet never know the voice of Christ in them so as to follow
him; but they will rather follow strangers, instance James Naylor.

But such who are his sheep they know his voice, and will follow him and not
the stranger: yea by what means soever he speaks unto them mediatly or
immediately; and they account the Scripture as the word of God himself, as if
he should speak unto them by an audible voice, and they know them to be written
for their learning, that they through patience and comfort of the Scriptures
might have hope.

And it is no disparagement to the Scripture, the Letter as he calls it, that
some despise it and regard it not, but undervalue it and let it slip: Nor to
the words of Christ himself and his Apostles, nor to his Ministers now,
because many people did not profit by them, nor do not know them in regard they
are not mixed with faith in such as hear them. For it is they that are of God,
they hear Gods word, and they that are Christ's sheep, know his voice, and obey
and follow him: But some therefore hear them not, because they are not of God;
and some obey not his voice, because they are none of his sheep, John 10 and
Chap. 8.47. But Naylor often produces the non-proficiencie of the people as a
ground of disparagement to the Ministers of the word, yea and to the word it
self, the Letter I mean, the which I shall prove to be the word of God.

And first, that there is not only one, but many words of God, and so called
in Scripture, it is plain to any rational Christian that knows the Scriptures.

1. Psalm 12.6. The (words) of the Lord are pure words, like silver tried in a
Furnace of earth, purified seven times

1 Arg. Now the (words) of the Lord are (words) of God.

2 Arg. And words in the plural number must needs include more then one.

Conclus. Therefore there is, as certainly as that the Scripture is true, more
words of God then one spoken of in Scripture.

2. Prove. v 30.5. Every (word) of God is pure, he is a shield unto them that
put their trust in him.

Now this word (Every) includes more then either one or two words, and that of
God.

3. 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. where the Apostle says, Because when ye received the word
of God which ye (heard) of us, ye received it not as the word of men, but as
it is in truth the word of God. From whence it is clear, that the word which
they heard of the Apostles, was in truth the word of God. Even that audible
word which they heard of the Apostles, yea heard them speak.

4. 1 Timothy 5.17. Especially them that labor in the Word and Doctrine.

5. 2 Timothy 2.9. But the word of God is not bound.

6. Heb. 6.5. And have tasted of the good word of God.

7. Jam. 1.18. Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth.

8. And verse 21. And receive with meekness the ingrafted word which is able
to save your souls. And verse 22. And be ye doers of the word, and not hearers
only, deceiving your own souls.

Quest. Can any of these be meant of Christ? How improper had it been to have
said, Be ye (Doers) of Christ, in stead of, Be ye doers of the word?

9. See Deuteronomy. 8.3. But by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

Obser. Observe how improper it had been to have said, Every (Christ) that
proceeds out of the mouth of God?

10. Psa. 68.11. The Lord gave the word; great was the company of those that
published (it) Observe (It) it is not said him, but It.

11. Isai. 2.3. For out of Zyon shall go forth the Law, and the word of the
Lord from Jerusalem.

12. Jer. 6.10. The word of the Lord is unto them a reproach, they have no
delight in it.

13. Amos 8.11, 12. A famine of hearing the words of the Lord.

14. Matthew. 13.23. He that receives seed into the good ground, is he that
hears the word and understands it. And Luke 8.11, 12.

15. The seed is the word of God.

Those by the way side are they that heard; then comes the Devil and takes
away the word out of their hearts, lest they should believe and be saved. Could
the Devil take Christ out of their hearts after once received, how absurd were
it?

16. John 5.24 He that hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has
everlasting life.

17. Acts 4.31. And they spoke the word of God boldly.

18. Acts 6.2. It is not meet that we should leave the word of God and serve
the tables. And verse 7.

And the word of God increased, and the number of the Disciples multiplied in
Jerusalem greatly.

Quest. Had it been proper to have said, That Christ increased?

19. Acts 8.14, 15, 16. Samaria had received the word of God, and yet the holy
Ghost was not come down upon any of them.

Conseq. So they had received the Word, but not the Spirit, and so not Christ,
by James Naylors account, if there be no more but Christ.

20. Act: 12.24. But the word of God grew and multiplied, Did Christ grow and
multiply?

See also chap. 13.44. and verse 46, 48, 49. And chap. 15.35, 36. And chap.
19.20. 2 Cor. 4.2. Ephesians. 6.17. All which are clearly meant of the teaching and
preaching of the word of God, and of the growth thereof.

Assertion 2. to wit, That what ever God has spoken is his word, or words:

The which I prove thus: it is written Exodus 20.1. And God spoke all these words
saying:

Conseq. Therefore when God speaks, his expressions are called words, or a
word. See Psalm 68.11. The Lord gave the word: great was the Company of those
that published it.

Arg. But if what God speaks is his word or words:

Conseq. Then it must necessarily follow, that all Scripture is the word of
God, and the particular words of it are words of God; and altogether they are
his word.

See Heb. 1.2. God who at sundry times and in diverse manners spoke unto our
Fathers in times past by the Prophets, has in these last times spoken unto us
by his Son whom he has appointed Heir of all things, by whom also he made the
wor^ds.

See also Chap. 12.25. See that ye refuse not him that speaks.

Also, Luke 1.69. As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets which have been
since the world began.

Observe he spoke it by the mouth of his holy Prophets, and of his Apostles,
and af his Son.

Therefore all such speakings and expressions are the words and word of God.

3 Assertion. To wit, What ever Christ has spoken who is the essential word,
is also the word of God.

Reason. First, because he is the Son and Heir, yea and even God himself,
and not only man: For in him dwells the sulnesse of the Godhead bodily. He
whom God has sent speaks the word of God. John 3.34.

Therefore what words he spoke, were the words of God, and therefore it was
truly said of him by the people, to wit, Never man spoke like this man.

Coloss. 3.16: And therefore it behooves us not, to let the words of Christ
slip, but to let it dwell richly in us in all wisdom.

John 3.34. For his words are the words of the word of God, He whom God has
sent speaks Gods words.

The words that I speak unto you they are Spirit and they are Life,

The fourth and fifth Assertion proved.

Romans 7.14. For we know that the Law is spiritual, but I am carnal.

Deuteronomy. 4.2. You shall not add unto the word that I command you, neither shall
you diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the commandments of the Lord
your God which I command you.

Observe that he enjoins them that they shall take heed unto the word which he
commands them; speaking in the singular number, as if it were but one word.

But when he shows them the end of this his Take heed, he expresses it in the
plural number, and makes that plurality the same in the conclusion, to wit,
That you may keep the Commandments of the Lord your God which I command you.

Clearly showing that that word which he commanded them in the singular number,
was the Commandments of the Lord their God in the plural number.

So that it is evident, that all the words and commandments of God in the
whole Scripture being the words of God, by whomsoever held forth, may properly,
and truly, and justly be called the word of God in the singular number.

Reason. For as God spoke those ten Commandments, and writ then upon two
Tables, see verse 13. so all the rest of the scripture is not only spoken but
written, and every part of it written or spoken by Holy men of God, as they
were moved by the spirit of God, that we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope.

And there is none that is ordained to eternal life, but if he read the
Scriptures, or hears them read or spoken, but if he understand them he does
believe them.

And there is no man justified through faith in Christ, but he loves the
Scriptures, and will own them as words of Spirit and Life, and not account them
as a dead Letter; but as the word of God, and as words of eternal life, in
which there is spirit and spiritual life communicative unto them; yea even
every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God, is as spiritual food and
nourishment, whereby they grow up unto greater degrees of spiritual life,
where it is begun, and whereby they press forward unto perfection.

Those precious promises therein contained, are the savor of life unto life
unto them, and they cannot but relish them as sweeter to them then the honey and
the honey comb. They cannot but with David love Gods Law, and it is their
meditation continually: they do esteem of the words of his mouth more then
their appointed food: they do account them as a Lanthorn unto their feet, and
a light unto all their paths; they grow thereby to be wiser then their
Teachers, because they keep them, and to have more understanding then the
ancients, because they keep his precepts.

His words are sweet unto their taste, yea sweeter then honey unto their mouth.

They vow and do resolve that they will keep his righteous judgments.

Read much of this Psalm 119. All that are men and women after Gods own heart,
have the same spirit of love to, and delight in, and belief of, and benefit
and comfort by and from the sacred Word, Law, Precepts, Judgments, Statutes and
Promises contained in the Scriptures: and therefore cannot but hate every false
way, or contradictious way, or way and works or words whatsoever that tend to
the disparagement or contradiction thereof:

And therefore it was that our dear Savior honored them so much as that he
kept all Gods Law, and fulfilled it perfectly, and witnessed also that Men
therefore erred, because they knew not the Scripptures, nor the power of God.

And he opened the understanding of his Disciples, that they might understand
the scriptures. And he opened the heart of Lidia that she attended to the
things that Paul spoke.

And it is enjoined unto Kings, that they shall write them a Copy of the Law
in a book which shall be with them, that they may read therein all the days of
their life, that they may learn to sear the Lord their God, and keep all the
words of the Law, and of the Statutes to do them, that their hearts be not
lifted up above their brethren, and that they turn not aside from the
Commandment, to the right hand or to the left, to the end that they may
prolong their days in their Kingdom. See Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19, 20.

Timothy was commanded to give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to
doctrine, 1 Timothy 4.13.

These and many such like which I might produce, are far unsuitable to the
Spirit and Doctrine of James Naylor, which directs only to a light within,
which in many is clouded with sottish ignorance, till they hear the Word which
is ordained of God, to save them that believe, and is the means which they
ought to use for getting that light and spiritual understanding which the
Fountain of wisdom holds forth therein; and does thereby communicate to his
poor dull ignorant creatures, his Spirit being with it, and as the Porter of
their understandings that they may understand them, and comprehend in measure
those internal hidden and secret mysteries therein contained.

The Apostle Paul had served God with pure conscience from his forefathers;
and yet his light within informed not his conscience, but that he thought it
his duty to do many things against the name of Jesus, insomuch as through pure
zeal persecuted the Church and wasted it exceedingly, til he was called to
from heaven. See 2 Timothy: 1.3. And that notwithstanding all his learnednesse in
the Scriptures, and blamelesnesse of life concerning the Law.

For the reason was not because he knew not the Scriptures, or did not search
them; but because he did not understand them aright: but according to the false
glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees, which had clouded them so to him, so that
he did not know them in their genuine sense and proper meaning, but under a
false gloss.

For else he should not have erred: for (says Christ) ye therefore err
because ye know net the Scriptures nor the power of God. And bids, Search
the Scriptures, for they are they that testify of me.

And the Scriptures are all to make us wise unto salvation, yea to make us
perfect and thoroughly furnished unto every good work through faith which is in
Christ Jesus.

And though it is true that the natural man understands not the things of
God, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned, to wit,
through an eye of faith: For the word does not profit unless it be mixed with
faith in them that hear it.

Yet the wisdom of God has appointed it to be taught to our children, and to
our Childrens children, as so it was to Timothy of a child. See for this Deuteronomy.
4.9 and chap. 6. and 6, 7 verses, and 2 Timothy, 3.15.

Now these premises considered, let any wise man judge what an absurd thing it
were to teach our children to look for a light within, and tell them that there
is a light within them, even in their consciences which they ought to obey and
follow; even that word and light which is in their heart and in their mouth,
and tell them that is the word and light, and the only word, and that there is
no word of God but one, and that word and light is within them, even in their
heart, and in their mouth. And that the Scripture is not the word of God; but
Christ is the word which is within them, And so utterly neglect to teach them
the scriptures; but if they do and will learn them, yet tell them they are but
a dead letter, and cannot profit them till they have the spirit to interpret
them aright; for whiles they are carnal they have nothing to do with
scriptures. I say, let wise men judge whether these confused contradictions and
lying doctrine were not more likely to make them mad, then wise unto salvation.

It is true that Christ is the true light which lights every one that comes
into the world. Joh. 1.9.

But this shined in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not. verse 5.

Now we must confess that Christ is able to enlighten little children, and to
make them capable of comprehending of it. And that so he does to so many
children as are his elect, and do depart this life in their childhood and
minority: for Jeremiah was sanctified in the womb, and John the Baptist was
filled with the holy Ghost from his mothers belly: And Christ himself was
qualified with the blessed Deity in the very seed of the woman.

And yet considered as Man, he did not in his minority comprehend all that
light which dwelt in him bodily. But considered as Man, he increased in wisdom
and stature, and in favor both with God and man, Luke 2.52. Yea though
considered as GOD, He accounted it no robbery to be equal with God; yet
considered as Man, he was ignorant of the times and seasons, which the Father
had kept in his own power.

Nay, after he was ascended, and sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on
high, when he gave forth the Revelation of St. John, he had it but at the
second hand considered as Man: For it is called the Revelation of Jesus Christ
which God gave unto him to show unto his Servants things which must shortly
come to pass: And he sent and signified it by his Angel unto his servant
John: So that John had it but at the third hand, though he had Christ the light
resident in him; as so had also the seven Churches of Asia, and the Angels
thereof, yet they had but this Revelation at the fourth and fifth hand.

From all which it is evident, that though GOD can and does when he sees it
good and necessary, communicate his light immediately by his blessed Spirit unto
whom he pleases.

Yet his ordinary way where means is to be had, is by the foolishness of
preaching (as so the world accounts it) to save them that believe.

And therefore such Doctrines as these which tend so directly contrary to the
use of means, are as absurd and wicked, as if they should teach their
children not to eat any meat because God is able to preserve them without it.
Nay, it is so much worse, as by how much the soul is better then the body; and
as it is more necessary to obtain and keep, and increase our spiritual life,
rather then our natural: For as new born Babes, we ought to desire the
sincere milk of the Word, that we may grow thereby if we be as babes: And if
we be grown up to be men of years, and of a tall stature in Christianity, yet
there is strong meat for us if we can digest it, and it may be stronger then
we are able to bear, or then we are yet capable or comprehensive of till
we be grown to more perfections: It was therefore the wisdom of Christ to
keep back many things at present from his Disciples, which he had to say unto
them, Because they could not bear them by reason of their infirmities: And so
did his Apostles after his example.

Yea, to the weak they became as weak, that they might win the weak, yea,
they became all things unto all, that they might win the more. And enjoined
others to receive the weak, yet not unto doubtful disputations. And tells
the strong, that they ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to
please themselves. And not to destroy their weak faith, for whom Christ dyed.

And he whomsoever that will be a faithful Priest or Teacher in things
concerning God, must follow Christ's example, who though he was equal with God,
yet took upon him the form of a servant, and was touched with a
fellow-feeling of our infirmities, that he might be a merciful high Priest:
and have compassion on the ignorant and them that are out of the way: he
therefore in all things became like unto us, sin only excepted. And who ever
they are that have not a fellow-feeling of their brethrens infirmities, but are
ready to Judge and condemn them as Reprobates, because they have faylings.
They are no Ministers sent of God, but proud boasting vainglorious
hypocrites, and shall be judged themselves, as they judge others, and condemned
also; let them look to it, for it is their sentence given by Christ himself.

And again, James Naylor professes himself to be perfect, and to be
infallibly guided by the Spirit of God: The which if it be true, it is the
better for him; and it is further then I have yet attained, though I press
forwards, and earnestly desire after the same things. But I find in my self
many infirmities, and failings, and many times when I would do good, evil is
present with me, so that I cannot do the good I would, nor avoyde the evil
that I desire; and I am yet ignorant of many secrets and mysteries of the
kingdom of God, which I desire to know, and I am much too ignorant of the
ways of God, and of the witnessing and meaning of the Spirit of God; Whether
he hears my prayers, and grants my requests yea or no, which was a thing
ordinary in the primitive times amongst the Apostles and Prophets: as the
Apostle says, that in every place the Spirit witnessed, that bonds and
afflictions abode for him: And Agabus signified the same to him. And in those
days it is said of some, that they were full of the holy Ghost and wisdom.
Steven being so full that his face shone, and Philip was caught away from the
Eunuch that he saw him no more; yet he was found at Azotus preaching the
Gospel. And the holy Ghost said, Separate Paul and Barnabas for the work
whereto I have called them. But I was yet short in these things, having not yet
attained so much acquaintance and familiarity with God. And I hardly know how
so to walk in the Spirit that I shall not fulfill the works of the flesh,
less or more. I have not yet attained to such a degree of faith, as to ask
what I will, and it shall be given me, though I have a promise for it of him
that cannot lie, but many times my faith fails, and I begin to sink, and come
short of attainement of what I earnestly desire, to wit, the best of things,
and the best gifts; and things needful and lawful to ask and desire after: I
have not yet learned so full as I ought to cast all my care on him, whom I know
cares for me, but am many times too much troubled with cares of this world: I
have not yet learned to keep my heart with such diligence, but the Issues
thereof are sometimes evil, I am too much troubled with carnal thoughts and
vain Imaginations, which sometimes produce Idle and vain words and actions,
of which I know I must give an account at the day of Judgment: I am too much
addicted to love the world, and the things in the world, though I well know,
that if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. And
though I allow not my self in any of these things, but desire and pray to him
that has power to help and deliver me in these Respects, that I may get
victory and full conquest, yet I have not attained it unto this day. And
whether the wisdom of God has so determined it that it shall yet be thus,
because his power is made perfect through weakness, as he said to the
Apostle, or it be because of the weakness of faith, or coldness of my desires
after this conquest, I cannot well determine, yet I am resolved by the grace of
God, to press on forwards, and to fight the good fight of faith, whiles I
shall remain in this tabernacle, but I will get victory through Jesus Christ
my Lord and life and only Savior, who alone is able to make me Conqueror in
these respects; for power belongs unto God. And I know him (in part) in whom
I have believed, and that he is able to give me victory. I shall not deny,
but he is fully able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him,
and to guide them infallibly, and lead them into all truth: But I will not
neglect either to read the Scriptures, or exercise my self in prayer unto
God, nor the teachings of men, but shall be glad to learn of the meanest
Christian that can teach me further then I have attained, I will not scorn to
learn at James Naylor, if he can teach me any truth of God, of which I am
ignorant, though he would much disdain to be taught by me, or by men
whomsoever, as so I cannot but judge in regard he blames and despises such
who run after men, and heap up teachers, as being resolved, for his part, that
he is infallible, and without sin or imperfection, having the Spirit of God
which is infallible, and of power sufficient to enable him fully to do the
will of God, yea to do it on earth as it is done in heaven. As so no man that
knows God, but will acknowledge his power and wisdom is all-sufficient, if
he so pleases.

And therefore the question does not lie, whether the Spirit of God be an
infallible guide yea or no: But whether James Naylor and others, be infallibly
guided by that infallible Spirit yea or no in all things that they do.

Now though I shall confess that what he speaks or writes, being moved
thereto by the Spirit of God, is infallibly true, and it may truly be called
the word of God, if the Spirit of God has spoke it by him. Yet when he
speaks or writes that which is not true, but quite contradictions to the Law
and testimony, and that I know it so to be: I shall never confess that he
was moved thereunto by the Spirit of God, but that he has done it
presumptuously out of the vision of his own heart, or by Satan's instigation.

And therefore when he dares be so presumptuous, as to disparage the
Scriptures, reproaching them that call them the word of God: And when he
directs men rather to the light within (which in some for the present is
clouded with darkness) rather then to the Scriptures for their guide, to
direct them to eternal life. I dare not confess he was moved thereunto by
the Spirit of God.

And so when he directs men still, to eye their light within, and to own it
as sufficient without any word at all of the teachings of men. And when he
blames Ministers of the word of God for taking of a Text, and preaching from
it, as sometimes Christ and his Apostles did, I shall not confess he was
moved thereunto by the Spirit of God.

And when he blames men for praising and singing of Psalms in the Spirit
unto God, as the Apostles did, I shall never believe he was moved thereto by
the Spirit of God, nor that he was ever so merry, I mean, in the Lord, as to
rejoice and delight so to express himself by singing of Psalms, as the
Saints of God are many times, and as for that end they were given forth and
ordained of God, and held forth by David and others.

And when he blames men so much for having a Law without, and morrall, as well
as the same Law written in their hearts; and for having light and a word
without, as well as that within: And a Church without, and a Christ without and
in heaven, as well as within, in their hearts: As so he does in his Epistle to
all the faithless generation of the world, and all that desire to know in what
says and hope they live, and what faith and hope they deny.

I can never believe that he writ this profession of faith, being moved
thereunto by the Spirit of God.

Nor can I believe that their refusing to give honor to whom honor is due,
and fear to whom fear, and showing love to whom love is due, is from the
Spirit of God.

Nor can I ever believe that their uncivil, uncourteous and brutish carriage,
and their harsh opprobrious disgraceful language, and dark and dismal
countenances, so far off from the least show of love and amiablenesse, is
from the Spirit of God.

Nor can I ever believe that their Engrossing of all the Ministers of God under
the name of Antichristian Ministers; if they own a Law without, and a light
without, and a word without, and a Church without, a Baptism without, Praises
and singing without, and a Christ without, and righteousness without as well
as within, as so they ought; is from the Spirit of God, but they do at
presumptuously.

Nor do I think it any less then under a degree of blasphemy against
Christ, so to vilify and reproach his Ministers, for so he accounts it; He
that despises you despises me, and he that despises me despises him that
sent me, etc.

And all such poor ignorant people as by their example and ministration are
persuaded to speak and act against the Ministers of God, in such an
opprobrious blasphemous manner, it is great marvel if the Justice of God do
not deliver them up to the power of Satan, to be acted by him, and to be led
captive by him at his will and pleasure, who like a roaring Lion walks about
seeking whom he may devour, or whom he may possess for the destruction of
their bodies, or their souls, or both, as the Lord in Justice shall give him
leave.

And if I be not deceived, it is so with some, their countenances bewray them
that they are acted and moved by an evil and malicious Spirit, which is not
of God. Those dark and stolen spirits that look through their eyes, I mean
of some of them that I have seen, are at the greatest distance from the spirit
of love, which is the Spirit of God, of any spirits that ever I discernd
through the eyes of men, where they are to be discernd or not at all, for
spirits are invisible, unless they assume a shape of some thing that is
visible, yet they are discernable through the eyes of men if well considered.
And the discerning of spirits is one of those gifts of the Spirit of God that
are given unto men to profit withal; see 1 Cor: 12.8, 9, 10.

But their rancorous and bitter carping and catching at every misplaced word,
or syllable, and following it so close and vehemently to the disparagement of
men's persons and professions what in them lies, by giving them hateful and
reproachful language, in stead of clearing up the truth by dint of argument:
And the vilifying of those whom I know to be Saints and servants of God, does
fully confirm me in this opinion, that they are not acted by the Spirit of
God, but by a wicked malicious and lying spirit; For the Spirit of God
reproacheth not his Saints.

But especially and above all, their under-valuing of the Scriptures, calling
them but the letter, as if they were not spiritual; and denying to own them
as the word of God, as so the Devil and the profane Ranters have done before
them, who were the first that ever I heard do it: Which cannot possibly have
any other end or tendency, but to persuade the people to slight and neglect
them, and to eye only what light they have already within them; that so if any
be possessed with a false and lying corrupt spirit, or if the Prince of the
air who rules in the children of disobedience be there already, he might
still continue, and not be cast out, but keep his credit, and power, and
dominion, which the knowledge of the Scriptures would discover and dissipate,
if they should attend and listen thereunto; For what other tendency can it have
to direct them so much to a light within, but to make men believe, that what
ever motion comes into their minds, is of the Spirit of God, and ought to be
obeyed, that so they may follow the ways of their own hearts, and the
vanities of their own minds, and so run headlong to destruction, without
trying of the spirits whether they be of God, as the Scriptures injoyne them,
and will direct them also for; how should they try them, but by such Rules as
are held forth in the Scripture, which was written for our learning, and not to
be slighted and laid aside as a dead letter, or as useless and unvaluable, or
like a nose of wax pervertible at pleasure; for though it is true that some do
pervert it, and wrest it for their own ends and purposes, yet it is, says the
Apostle, to their own destruction. As so do but mark the success of James
Naylor and all his accomplices, unless they repent and humble themselves greatly
before the Lord, if it does not bring them to destruction at last, 2 Pet: 3.16.
It is as dangerous to the soul, to wrest or pervert or disparage the
Scriptures, as kicking against pricks is to the body; he that undervalueth
and disparageth the Scriptures, does it to the Lord himself, whose word it is,
as has been clearly prooved. But I look for no other, but like Jannes and
Jambres, they should resist the truth: yet the promise I expect to be
fullfilled against them, that their madness and folly shall be discovered, and
made manifest unto all men, even as theirs also was; see 2 Timothy: 3.8, 9. Their
wrestings and turnings of devices shall be but as the potters clay: their bed
is too short, and their covering too narrow, they cannot wrap themselves: See
also 2 Pet. 2.1. the end of such ^^e teachers, who deny the Lord that bought
them, whether they shall not bring upon themselves swift destruction.

As so it is manifest James Naylor does, for he utterly denies the manhood of
Christ, who dyed for us, and who was in all things like unto us, sin only
excepted, and therefore he makes no account of a Christ without us, and at a
distance, nor one that is visible, having a visible body, which the heavens
must contain till all things be restored. And he shall appear again the
second time without sin unto salvation. The Scripture is clear, that the
Word was made flesh and dwelt among us, says the Apostle, and they saw his
shape as the shape of the only begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth.
But great is the mystery of godliness, God was manifest in the flesh,
justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, believed on in the world, and
received up into glory. It is indeed such a mystery as James Naylor
understands not, else he durst not slight it, and so undervalue the person of
Christ, or of his words either as now he does. But this is so gross and
palpable a doctrine, that he dares scarce expressly own it, when men of
understanding are present, there being thousands of Scriptures make it so
clearly manifest, both in the old and new Testament, which makes him dumb and
silent, when questioned in that point.

And yet he will needs be accounted infallible, and as some great Prophet, and
as though he had some extraordinary Revelations that no man else had known
before him. And yet he teaches us nothing (except lies) but what we knew
before. Who that is versd in Scripture, but he knows that Christ is the true
light, who lighteneth every one that comes into the world, with what light
they have of understanding and rationalitie.

And who knows not that Jesus Christ is in us, except we be Reprobates, by
his blessed Spirit in lesser or greater measure? And who knows not that the
word is nigh us, even in our heart, and in our mouth, to wit, the essential
word, which is Christ, by his blessed Spirit, if we be his Elect?

And who knowath not that the ministration of the Spirit is not by the works
of the Law, by which no flesh can be justified, but by the hearing of faith
preached, because the letter of the Law kills (spiritually) but the Spirit
gives life through faith and love, which are in Christ Jesus?

And who knows not that God is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and
in truth, or not accept it. But he will be worshipped with the body also? And
who knows not that men should sing with the Spirit, and with the
understanding? But what singing or praising of God is that which is not with
the mouth? I never heard such, nor shall do, I think, unless I hear the
Angels, which have not any proper mouths.

And what Church is that which is in the heart? our bodies indeed are the
Temples of the holy Ghost: and I read of the Church of the firstborn written
in heaven: but are these the Churches of the Saints, spoken of in Scripture,
which yet some of them had their failings?

And who knows not that all that are without God and his Righteousness, are
in the world, and strangers as yet to the Covenant of grace? And who will not
deny that faith and worship which God denies?

And who knows not that those who have an unction from the holy One, and know
all things, have no need that any man should teach them, but as the same
Anointing teaches them of all things; see 1 John 2.20.27.

But those who have this unction, will not follow James Naylor nor his crooked
and perverse doctrines, for those that go out from us are not of us; see verse:
19.

For a stranger will they not follow, for they know not the voice of strangers;
Joh: 10.5 But James Naylor is sent with strong delusiens (to some) that they
might believe a lie, that they all may be damned, that receive not the truth in
love, but have pleasure in unrighteousness

Qu: But how is he sent may we Imagine?

Ans: Not properly of God, nor by his Spirit, but Satan has got commission to
be a lying spirit in his mouth, and in the mouths of all his accomplices, as he
was in the mouth of all Ahabs Prophets, to deceive those who receive not the
truth in love, but have pleasure in unrighteousness. If he had a pair of
horns of Iron, such as Zedekiah the son of Chenana made, that he might
bring them to Fox, and tell him that with those he should push down all the
Ministers of God, till he had destroyed them. It is very likely that Fox would
believe him; yet so does not any Micaiah, any true Prophet of the Lord: though
James Naylor himself has prophesied so much concerning all the Ministers of
God in England, and elsewhere; yea even all the generation of them, who ever
they be, that will not receive and believe his lies: Which truly are so
palpably gross, that I verily believe that not one Minister that is sent of
God in all the world will own for truths, though he shuffle them up never so
closely amongst the truths of God, as in that art he is extreme cunning; and
it is no marvel if that old lying spirit has skill to teach him, and be in
his mouth, for he has long used that very art; and of all the arts that he
has yet learned, it is the most deceivable, and therefore he has used it
longest; he deceived Eve with it when she was pure from sin, and perfectly
wise: no marvel then if he deceive so many now that are laden with sin,
and lead with diverse lusts, and not so wise as she. But I hope it is his last
and chiefest Refuge, I cannot but rejoice to see him play this card, to
transsorme himself into an Angel of light, and his Ministers into Ministers
of Righteousness; I hope it will be to his loss in the end. If the Ranters
doctrine would have taken amongst us, he would never have owned so many
truths, and good things; but that not taking, he was glad to transform
himself and his Ministers in new suits of apparel, not all out of course,
but finer wool, and smoothly woven and dressed, yet the design and doctrines
against the Scriptures being not owned as the word of God: and in respect of
disowning the teachings of men as utterly needless, they being taught of God,
as they say, to love one another: They are just the same which the Ranters
used, Their design being clearly the same with the Ranters, to wit, to preach
down all preachings and teachings of men, though never so holy and spiritual
teachings: And why forsooth, but because there is a promise, that they shall be
all taught of God; using the very same Scripture-grounds which the Quakers do,
and quite perverting them for the same use, as the Ranters did, which any
spiritual understanding knows for certain that they were never given forth
by the holy Ghost for any such ends or uses, but quite the contrary, which were
easy to demonstrate, if it were needful.

But let me fall to question James Naylor a little, as he has done us.

First, Where the Scripture gives any such directories for attaining unto life
and power, etc.

To wit, That we should only give heed to that light within us, and utterly
desert all teachings of men, save only of themselves, who only direct us unto
that light, though it be but darkness in comparison of what we may learn
from Scripture, and from men likewise, who teach us from thence by the Spirit
of God.

Secondly, Where does the Scripture tell us, that he that is the light of the
world, and that inlighteneth every one that comuteth into the world, does
inlighten all sufficiently, and so as to guide them insallibly, or that he
inlighteneth all alike, and that immediately without the knowledge of the
Scriptures, or the teachings of men, so as that they need not to teach one
another, saying, know the Lord, because all do know him from the greatest of
them, even to the least of them. Is the case so now, that all know him, what
need is there then of the teachings of James Naylor and his accomplices, if their
light within them be sufficient, it can teach them all that he does, and all
that he knows, and how to eye it only, and to look within for light, and to
desert and despise the teachings of men, as so he does: and what else does he
teach which is not taught by men from sacred Scripture, and with more spirit
and power, then he teaches any thing, and far more rationally and
convincingly, in the clear evidence and demonstration of the Spirit. And does
he not herein teach men to despise his teachings also? Have all a like measure
of the Spirit and of power, and of understanding? But such who have more, both
can and ought to communicate it, and to administer it what in them lies to
such who want it, or have the less. But they that have it not, cannot possibly
administer it, nor obtain it neither, but as it pleases God to give it forth
unto them mediately or immediately. And have all the people a like measure of
light, or are they alike capable or comprehensive of it, though it be taught
them precept upon precept, and line upon line, here a little, and there a
little, as it were by drops distilled into them, let wise men judge.

Are there not some people spoken of in Scripture, that were a people of no
understanding, therefore he that made them would have no mercy on them, and
he that formed them would have no compassion on them?

And are there not some spoken of in Scripture, that are sensual, having not
the Spirit? Jude.

And is not the manifestation of the Spirit given to every man (to whom it is
given) to profit withal? and whom shall they profit, if all be alike
qualified, and need no teaching. And is there not diversities of gifts of that
self same Spirit, and all for edifying of the body of Christ, till we all
grow up to a full stature, which is not yet attained, no not by Naylor
himself, for all his boastings of his infallibility and pureness from sin.

And I do believe that he keeps within compass, and as free from any
notorious sin in the sight of men, as he possibly can, and that for credit
of his doctrine; And so without all question Satan is willing to cloak them
with any external righteousness, and with good words and doctrines, and fair
speeches to deceive the hearts of the simple, and especially on this condition,
that he may but stablish their doctrine, and draw men off from the use of
means and ordinances, and from the teachings of men, and to neglect the
Scriptures.

For this would still continue and increase his kingdom unto all generations,
for where the Scriptures are not known, nor the ordinances administered in
power and purity, his kingdom is in peace, and he rules at pleasure in the
children of disobedience, and persecuteth the Elect, and keeps them in
ignorance, as is well known to all that know any thing: What blindness, and
darkness, and sottish ignorance is in all places where the Word is not
preached, nor the Scriptures minded, and searched and known. So that give him
but the reception of this doctrine, and it is the best foundation for his
kingdom that can be laid. It is just suitable to that doctrine of the Papists,
to wit, that ignorance is the mother of devotion; and upon that they forbid
that lay people should meddle with the Scriptures in their own mother tongue;
which has been a means to keep them in such ignorance, that their Priests
have lead them and kept them so long in such gross Idolatry and superstition,
to their utter destruction both of their souls and bodies; do but paralle the
cases, and they are just the same, and from the same spirit and principles;
which is a black author: He well knows that where the Scripture is known,
and accounted of as the word of God, his kingdom must down in the hearts of
the Elect, and therefore it is that he would have it slighted, as but a dead
letter, and as unusefull unto them till they have the Spirit.

But the Scripture would teach them how to obtain the Spirit, and how to
obtain wisdom, if any man lack, namely, to ask it of God, which is none of
Naylors directions, but quite the contrary. I never heard nor saw it in any of
his books that ever he advised men that lack wisdom to ask is of God. Jam:
1.5, 6. nor men that lack the Spirit, or desire greater measures of it, to
ask it of God, though it is promised to them that ask him, etc. if they seek
him with all their heart, he will be found of them, Luke 11.13. and 1 Cor:
28.9. And this is the directory of the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot
receive

But he advises them to seek it within, before they have it, and to follow
and love that light within them, which yet for the present is but gross
darkness for ought he knows: A most gross directory; he might as well bid
some men follow, and observe and obey the Devil, for he rules.

Thirdly, And again in what part of Scripture is the Gospel called the
Letter, or the preaching of the faith, the preaching of the letter, answer if
you can, how much more is it not called a dead Letter?

Fourthly, And where is it said in Scripture, that God is not to be worshipped
with reverent gestures of the body, as well as in spirit and truth?

Fifthly, And where does the Scripture forbid praying, praising, and singing
with the mouth and voice, as well as with the heart, and with the understanding
and Spirit?

Sixthly, And where does the Scripture forbid the assembling together of the
Saints and faithful, for worshipping of God, and for spiritual ministration
in his sacred name of the Word and Sacraments, which Christ has appointed for
their edification, as the Churches of the Saints did in the primitive times,
and were so enjoined by the holy Apostles.

Seventhly, And where says the Scripture, that every one that comes into the
world has an unction from the holy One, and knows all things, and needs
not that any man teach him, but is the same anointing teaches him of all
things? Nay where says the Scripture, that all the Elect have it now for the
present, or at their coming first into the world?

But if none of these things be asserted in Scripture, how shall James Naylor
make his doctrines feizible amongst rational creatures, much more amongst the
Elect?

For he is not sent to deceive the Elect, but such only as have not received
the truth in love, but had pleasure in unrighteousness; as has been said
before: For it is not possible to deceive the Elect totally and finally; though
they may for a time be lead away with the error of the wicked, and fall from
their own steadfastnesse.

Eighthly, And let me inquire further, did not the Saints that were at Ephesus,
and the faithful in Christ Jesus, that were the Elect of God, chosen in Christ
before the foundations of the world: In times (then) past, to wit, before they
were quickened; I say, did they not walk according to the Prince of the power
of the air; the spirit that works in the Children of disobedience.

Ar: But if this be true, that the Elect of God before conversion be under the
power and government of Satan; as the most predominant and ruling spirit, then
within them.

Qu: What a directorie is this to them, to eye and observe that lying spirit
then ruling in them, and to love and obey and follow his motions and
instigations, and to look no further, but to obey the light there in their
consciences, whiles they make no conscience of any sin; but follow the lusts
of their flesh, and of their mind, being by nature children of wrath, even as
others; see Ephesians. 1.4. and 2.1, 2, 3.

What is it else but to advise them to obey Satan, and let him keep his hold
whiles he has it: And what better way to persuade them to it, can either Satan
or the Quakers devise, then to keep them from searching the Scriptures, or
getting knowledge thereby to discern of spirits, and so then to persuade them,
that it is no other but the Spirit of God, that works in them, and gives
them light: And what more politic way can Satan devise to make them so
believe, then to moove and incline them to forsake their gross sins, and
carry themselves in an humble selfe-denying posture, like holy men; for such
who have been educated where the Scripture is read, and the Gospel preached;
he can hardly deceive them any other ways, to make them believe that he is
not Satan, but the Spirit of Christ: But when he has once done that, he can
rule at pleasure, and act them at pleasure in all other respects, and puff
them up with spiritual pride, and imperiousness, and disdain of others, and
to think themselves the only spirited men above all others: after Satan has
wrought a change in them, and made them a little more active and spiritfull,
then formerly they were in their dead condition: But then what ever lies he
finds most useful for maintaining his kingdom, he easily persuades them
they are truths of God and inspired into them by the Spirit of God, which they
think is in them: For if ever he get them up to that conceit of themselves,
that they are infallibly guided by the Spirit of God, which is indeed
infallible, then they never care nor regard at all what the Scripture
witnesses, nor what any man says by way of contradiction to what they hold;
But are ready to cry out against them, as blasphemers and resisters of the
Spirit, that do but in meekness and wisdom from Scripturegrounds oppose
their doctrines and ways and blasphemies which they hold, and maintain, being
most implacably malicious against any that oppose them, and call them but as
they are a seduced people, turned after Satan, blasphemously reproaching the
Ministers of God, and all his Saints that approve not their doctrines, and
works, and ways: As has been showed before.

And how clear a blasphemy is it to father such wicked assertions on the
Spirit of God, and to profess themselves moved thereunto by the Spirit of
God; when if the Scripture be true, it is certainly true that they are wicked
lies, and therefore must needs proceed from the father of lies, and not from
God: And that they are lies, and that dangerous and blasphemous, is clearly
prooved already, and I hope satisfactorily to any rational apprehension.

Object: But it will be said against all this, that without all question there
is something in these men more then ordinary, and more then was in them before,
for they are so spirited for acting in their way, and to maintain their
doctrines and principles, and are found to be so quaint and witty, more then
what they were or had before, that it is clear they are acted by some spirit
or other, which they are persuaded is the Spirit of God, as appears by their
boldness and confidence, and coming to the light, and their zeal, and
self-denial, which for the most part is evident in them: And therefore how
can this be from any false or lying spirit, which makes them so bold and
confident, and that to come to the light that their deeds might be made
manifest, that they are wrought in God; And they are so expert in Scripture, as
few Christians are like them, and that as they think by inspiration from God,
they having not been so before, but dull and incapable, and such as could
learn nothing of that nature, but were utterly non-proficients in the School
of Christianity, and knew nothing at all, but were as deaf or dead men under
spiritual ministrations; And therefore how can this change come, and how come
they by this Renovation, and this Spirit, and zeal, and boldness, and
confidence thus above ordinary? And to plead for so many good things, and
sharply rebuke and reprove so many evil things: Is it possible that this
spirit should not be of God, but a deluding spirit? how can this be, or come to
pass?

I answer; That it can be no other but a deluding spirit, the which as I
conceive they obtain by such means and proceedings as I shall name; and I
desire they would search their own hearts, whether it be not so with them,
that so if they be deluded, they might forsake and renounce that deluding
spirit, and so deliver themselves out of the snares of the Devil, that are
taken captive by him at his will and pleasure.

And first let them but examine themselves, whether they were not of those that
had heard the Scriptures read and opened, and the truths of God held forth by
and from them, which now they own and witness too?

But whether they were not then of those that received not those truths in
love, but had pleasure in unrighteousness?

And if so, whether there be not cause of jealousy, least God has purposely
sent them strong delusions for that very cause.

And secondly, whether they were not first wrought up to an implacable
malignitie against the Ministers in general, and against the most part of
professors, in so much as they did speak evil, and gave forth reproachful
language against them, calling them hirelings, and Priests of Ball, and
covetous, and carnal, and such like language as they give them now: which we
do account as a degree of blaphemie; for he that speaks evil of the
Ministers of Christ, speaks evil of him: And what is blasphemy, but speaking
evil of God, or Christ, or of his word, or ways, or ordinances, or people?
But if so, and that they received that spirit within them upon acting according
to such principles, which they can never clear from a degree of blasphemy.
May they not well be jealous that God has delivered them up to the power of
Satan, to be spirited and guided and acted by him at his will and pleasure?

And is it not very likely, that it is thus with them, and that their
blasphemies are the cause why they are so deluded with a false spirit in stead
of the Spirit of God? And is it not just with God thus to give them up that
receive not his truth in love? And how certain is it that they never received
the truth in love, that love not the Messengers and Ministers of it, but can so
easily and bitterly Revile and Reproach them, and not them only, but all the
Saints and servants of God almost over all the world, accounting them all but
Litteralists (as has been showed in part, and is easily demonstrated from
diverse of their books) those of themselves only excepted?

And is it not always so with Satan in his trading with Witches, that before
he grants them a familiar spirit to be their servant, he ever ingageth them
under a degree of blasphemy, as to speak evil of God, or Christ, and of his
holy Spirit, and it may be to renounce and curse them in a fearful manner?
And then he knows that he has them sure as quite from under the protection
of God, and so ingageth them in covenant and league with himself in a mutual
way; for he knows his liberty and commission from God, and that he is
chained within such bounds and limitts that he cannot pass: For till the Lord
has delivered them up to his power and government, he cannot act them at his
will and pleasure: And he well knows that he must bring them under some
degree of blasphemy, or such a measure of sin, as will provoke the Lord to
deliver them up to his will and pleasure, else he cannot do them the least
harm at all, much less can he use them as Instruments for his own service,
and to make them his slaves and vassalls to do his drudgery and act for him in
things that concern his kingdom, yea and such things likewise as he could no
ways effect without their assistance: as I might instance in many examples
that I have read in Histories concerning diverse Witches, how it was with them
in that case by their own confessions, to which Histories I shall refer the
Reader.

But in my apprehension the case is just the same with these deluded people
called Quakers: For they being a people that believed not the truth, so as to
receive it in love, but had pleasure in unrighteousness; see 2 Thessalonians: 2.10,
11, 12.

Though they heard the Word both read and preached, and that with authority
and power, yet it did not profit them, because it was not mixed with faith. And
so could not possibly work them up to receive it in love, because they having
pleasure in unrighteousness, the word was unto them unsavourie, yea the savor
of death unto death, and therefore put away from them, and not believed and
embraced as they ought to have done. In so much, that not loving and receiving
the word of truth, they could not love and receive the Ministers and Messengers
of it, in regard they brought no glad tidings of peace unto them whiles they
loved unrighteousness.

Upon which occasion of advantage, Satan sent forth his Ministers, first the
profane Ranters, persuading them to forsake the teachings of men, and to
liften to that light within in their consciences, for they were all taught of
God to love one another, and that light within was the teaching of the Spirit,
and that of men was but carnal; nor the Scripture it self was but carnal and
a dead letter, and the Bible might be burnt, and bought and sold, and might be
read all their life without any profit or benefit to their souls; whereas that
light and spirit within them was of an eternal nature, and an infallible
guide, so that obeying that light, they could not err, but should be sure of
perfection, and of eternal life. Now these poor ignorant unstable souls
finding it true that they had not received any great benefit, nor life and
comfort by the word and ministrations of men in any other way or ordinance of
so long time; They immediately embraced and received their doctrine, and so
fell in with them to despise all ordinances and ministrations of men, and even
the Scripture it self, and fell to reviling them, and calling them carnal,
and hirelings, and traders with the Word; and such as looked only for gain
from their quarter; and such like language as is notoriously known.

But then their spirit within taught and lead them to such profaneness and
excessive open wickedness, as to commit adultery, and fornication, and to
father the same on the Spirit of God, as moved by him, which was outrageous
blasphemy, and such horrid impiety, that no man almost that ever knew what
belonged unto common civilitie, could for shame own them, or their ways or
doctrine, but cried out shame against them.

But Satan perceiving his doctrine and kingdom to decay, by reason of this
excess of wickedness; He put his Ministers into another garb, and also some
little refined his doctrine, in some inferior points, provided always that
his maine might stand, to wit, against the Scriptures, and the teachings of
men, and ordinances, etc. and that they should only listen to that light and
spirit within: For this they still preach and father blasphemously on the
Spirit of God.

But then for much of outward profaneness they cry out against as much as
possible, and as if they were indeed the Ministers of Christ, and plead
extremely for perfection, professing themselves to have already attained it;
And Satan has so far molded them, as to make some show of holiness, and of
humility, and righteousness, in external things, and has so far deluded
them, as that some of them think and are fully persuaded, that they are
perfect, and free from sin, and that it is certain that it is no other but
the spirit of God that has so molded them, and that dwells in them, and
acts and mooveth them, so that what ever they are taught, or moved unto by
that Spirit, they dare not disobey, nor cannot believe that it is not true or
just, etc. Nay though an Angel from he even should teach them contrary, in so
much that they are bold and consident in the maintenance of their doctrines,
and ceremonies, and ways, as if they were certainly witnessed by the Spirit of
God; as is publicity known. And so being deluded themselves, they are the more
powerful to delude others; for Satan acts them at pleasure, and they are
spirited by him to preach, and pray, and promulgate his doctrine in all places
where they come, and that with life and power, even subverting whole houses,
and beguiling many unstable souls.

First, By working them up to a dislike of the Ministers, and then of all
ordinances, and then of the Scriptures, as all but carnal, and dead, and
vain, and unprofitable unto them; as is easy to do with those who never
loved them: And then they bring them one step further, to wit, to reproach and
despise them, and speak evil of them, which is a degree of blasphemy.

And then they are left to the power of Satan, by the Justice of God; and so
are spirited by him, and familiarly taught by a spirit within, and acted and
moved at his will and pleasure, and yet do confidently believe it is the
Spirit of God that sometimes speaks with an audible voice, and they obey
accordingly.

And thus poor souls, they are led blindfold with the strongest and strangest
delusions that ever were known in the Christian world; by giving heed unto
seducing spirits, and doctrines of Devils, speaking lies through hypocrisy,
having their consciences seared as with an hott Iron. By which it is evident
that it is the last days; In which, says the Apostle, perilous times should
come, etc. noting them out unto us by almost twenty Epithets, which are all of
them verified in the Papists, and the Quakers; for what one comes short in,
the other compleateth: And we may still expect, that evil men and doctrines
shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived; see 2 Timothy: 3. Chap

And that there shall come false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show
great signs and wonders, so that if it were possible they should deceive, even
the very Elect, Mat: 24.23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.

Admonition.
These things considered, we ought to be seriously admonished, and persuaded
hereby, to take heed unto our selves, that we be not deceived by these
seducing spirits, these false Christ's, and false Prophets: Behold (says our
Savior) I have told you before; Wherefore if they shall say unto you, behold,
he is in the desert, go not forth, behold, he is in the secret chambers,
believe it not. For as the lightning, etc.

I say therefore, if the Quakers tell us, lo here is Christ, or lo there, nay
if they shall prevail so far, as the Lord knows how far he will suffer
them, as it may be to show great signs and wonders; yet let not us be
deceived; Behold he has told us before, that we might be forewarned and
forearmed. So that we are inexcusable if we be deceived.

And therefore that we might not be deceived with these seducing spirits, and
doctrines of Devils; Let us take admonition from the Spirit of God, and not
think our selves so steadfast and immovable, as that we may not be deluded
for even the Elect themselves may be so far lead away with the error of the
wicked, as to fall from their own proper steadfastnesse, though not totally,
nor finally; see 2 Pet: 3.17, 18.

And first then let us take heed least these seducing spirits provoke and
stir us up to a dislike of, and enmity against the Ministers of God, for
this is the first step that leads them to delusion; but let us love and
honor them, as Ambassadors of Christ; and let this love be without
dissimulation, not in word and tongue only, merely complementall, but indeed,
and in truth; and let it be expressed upon all occasions, especially who ever it
be that teaches us, and that administreth unto us spiritual things, let us
see and take care that they do not want of our carnal things: For according
as we sow liberally, or sparingly in these respects, the same shall we reap
from the hand of God. Let not the Quabers deceive us in these respects, God is
not mocked. And let us not account it as a matter of indifferency, for it is
our duty, and therefore it is called communicating; To do good, and to
communicate, forget not, for with such sacrifice God is well pleased; and let
him that is taught in the Word, communicate to him that teaches in all good
things.

Now communicating is distinguishable from distribution, or giving to the
poor, because of the poor we receive nothing in recompense, but from the
Lord only, neither do we expect it; Whereas in case of communicating, we
receive one good thing for another, yea and that many times more valuable than
all the carnal things that we can communicate.

So that we ought not to account it as a work of charity, but as a work of
piety and duty unto God; for the Ministers are his substitutes or Receivers.
And therefore we ought, as the Apostle Enjoined; Every first day of the week
to put apart by it self as the Lord has increased us, and give it in to the
Churches treasury, that there need be no trouble in gathering of it, and that
to be disposed to the Ministry, and to the poor, as may be thought most
needful and convenient by faithful men. I have heard of an English Lawyer of
late years, who was so conscientious of his duty to God in this respect, that
he put apart every tenth shilling that he got with his practice, and disposed
of it for pious and charitable uses, as he found occasion, and he so
increased, that he grew very rich and honorable, and so lived and dyed in
great esteem: And I doubt will rise up in Judgment to the condemnation of
many carnal and worldly professors, that make no conscience of their duty unto
God, and their faithful Ministers, nor to the poor neither in these respects:
And I much fear that the people of God themselves are much blameworthy and
neglective of their duty in these respects: And that it tends greatly to the
hinderance of the Gospel, and the disparagement of their profession; besides
their own detriment, which is very great, as I could largely instance, but
this is a subject deserves a whole Treatise.

Only this Item I desire we might remember, that if the Scripture be true,
he that in these respects sows sparingly, does and must receive but
sparingly if he be a Christian, and that both spiritualls and temporalls from
the hand of God; and he that sows liberally, does and shall and may
certainly expect to reap abundantly from the hand of God, both for this life,
and the life to come: The which is easy to confirm from many testimonies in
sacred Scripture, besides many examples that might be produced from experience
amongst us; to wit, of many professors of great estates going to decay, that
are provident enough for things of this life, if not too covetous; And the
reason is, because the Lord does not bless them in what they go about, but
blows upon their designs, and labors, and estates: And it is but just and
according to his Word: For professors ought to be as lights to the world, and
so to let their light shine, that they might see their good works, and
glorify their father which is in heaven; and as they excel in other graces,
so they ought to excel in this grace also.

And to exemplify true Christianity, and obedience, and subjection to the
Gospel of Christ in every duty both to God and men, that so they might also be
blessed of God, and increased accordingly, that so they may witness the truth
and verity of his promises and blessings, pronounced in Scripture in such a
case.

And for further satisfaction that it is a duty which God requires at our
hands, Consider with me these Scriptures, and Reasons, and promises also.

1. If we must communicate to those that teach us in the Word in (all good
things).

Conseq: That there is no exemption of any good thing wherewith the Lord has
blessed and increased us.

Rea: For all is a general word, and includes every good thing.

Instance, According to that Text, Serve the Lord with all thine heart, and
with the first fruits of all thine increase. So shall thy barnes be filled with
plenty, and thy presses shall burst with new wine, Prove. 3.9.

And that in Ezekiel 44.28, 29, 30. to wit, And it shall be unto them for an
inheritance, I am their inheritance, and ye shall give them no possession in
Israel, I am their possession. They shall eat the meate-offering and the
sinne-offering, and every dedicate thing in Israel shall be theirs. And the
first of all the first fruits of all things, and every oblation of all and
every sort of your oblations shall be the Priests: ye shall also give unto the
Priest the first of all your dough, that he may cause the blessing to rest in
thine house.

Object. But it will be objected, that these are all but Judaicall Ceremonies,
to which Christ put an end, and that these meate-offerings, and
sinne-offerings, and trespasse-offerings, and dedicate things, and all these
oblations of every sort, are nothing now that concern either us or the
Ministers of the Gospel. And therefore it is improper to make these things
exemplary for our direction.

Answer. I shall easily grant that all these Ceremonies and external
sacrifices and oblations are ceased, and not to be observed nor practiced by us
in the Jewish form.

But I cannot grant but that they are something to us in the times of the
Gospel; Else the Apostle was deceived when he brought that Instance, 1 Cor:
9.13. to wit, Do ye not know that they which minister about holy things, live
of the things of the Temple, and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers
with the Altar: From which he concludes, that Even so has the Lord ordained
that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel.

And therefore these Scriptures do concern us, and there is moral
Instruction and direction in them, though not so much as some would gather.

Reas For first, we must not only serve the Lord with all our hearts, but
with the first fruits of all our increase. That is to say, we must be ready
to distribute, and to communicate, as we have occasion, and are called of God,
as need requires, and that in all good things. We should think nothing too
good, or too dear, or too much, to communicate to our teachers, or give to the
poor; For the Lord accounts it is given to himself, or lent to himself, as
so he did, but then assigning over as it were his own portion, which he
expects from us by way of gratitude for his blessing of us, and as he has
increased us, to be given to the Ministers, as then to the Priests: For he
that gives but to them so much as a cup of cold water, because they are
Christ's Ministers, or Christ's Disciples, or because they belong to Christ,
shall in no wise loose his reward And some shall be condemned at the last day;
as not giving it to Christ, because they did not give it to the least of those
little ones that believe in him.

2 Rea: And secondly, they must do it, and do it liberally, if they will
expect to reap liberally, to the Ministers of the Gospel, as then to the
Priests; and for the same reasons, namely, That they may cause the blessing to
rest in their houses: And that they may reap liberally, that their barnes may
be filled with plenty, and their presses burst with new wine, yea, that he
may power them forth a blessing, that there shall not be room to receive it:
And that the very loins of the poor may bless them.

For we are but deceived if we sow sparingly, and yet expect to reap
liberally from the hand of God; For God is not mocked, but he that sows
sparingly, shall reap sparingly. And if we take not his word, but put it to
the trial, we shall find our selves mocked and deceived in it. And how
absurd a thing is it that God has given us his word, and we dare not take it,
nor do accordingly, but think all woone, and as it were treasured up that is
spared this way: And so that others do it, we think it will serve as if we
did it our selves: But it will be found when our accounts are cast up, that we
utterly loose, and that manifolds, what we spare this way.

Quest: But it will be demanded, to wit, If it be so that God requires of us,
That are taught in the word, to make them that teach, pertakers with us in all
good things; Then what part of that with which the Lord increases us, must we
Communicate?

Answ: I answer, that if I should set a stint under Gospell-dispensations, I
should make bolder than the Apostle did, or had a mind to do.

But I shall gather some resolves, that are clearly deducible from
Scripture-grounds, yea from the Law of God, which is the Law of Love, and so
pass it over.

1. And first the Apostle says; Let every man administer according to the
measure of his faith; And as every man wishes in his heart, so let him give.
From which I conclude, That if men have not faith, so as they can trust in God,
that he will not fail them, in case they give liberally, that they shall
certainly receive a reward suitable according to his promise, but are in fear
to want themselves: Then yet he hereby requires that they do communicate,
and that they do distribute, yea though they do it but sparingly.

2. And secondly, As there is no bounds for liberality in any case, so it be
freely, and in faith; so I dare not set bounds in this respect, concerning the
Ministry: But whether a tenth part, or a ninth, or the eight, or the half, or
all of that wherewith God has increased us.

Rea: For God is able to make all grace to abound, so that we shall certainly
reap as liberally from the hand of God, if we part with all we have, be it
what it can, more or less, according to his promise. The widows mite was all
her living, and she was commended for it; And they are likewise Commended in
the primitive Church, in that such as had lands sold them, and laid them down
at the Apostles seete, and they were distributed as every one had need.

Resolve. But this I resolve, that to give less then a tenth of that wherewith
God has increased us in any lawful way, in case when need requires for
supplying of the Ministry, and of the poor, the Churches poor especially,
and that occasion calls us to part with it, for any such ends as may properly
be called giving unto God, or lending to the Lord, or Communicating, etc. I say
less then a tenth is too sparing.

1 Rea: For it is less than Abraham gave to Melchisedecke before the Law was
given; And less than Jacob vowed; And less than God required and called for
as his due, for the donation of the land of Canaan to the Israelites.

2 Rea: And for us in times of the Gospel, to be more sparing under such
large, and bountiful, and free dispensations; Is a most shameful unfaithful
and ungrateful part, And will not be well accepted, if we justify our selves
in such poor degrees and measures of love, both to God and men.

3. For he requires fruit suitable to his tillage; as is easy to prove the
morality of such duties from the nature of love; as it may be I shall the Lord
assisting me.

4. But without all controversy, in such cases as abovesaid, to give more then
a tenth, yea if need require, to sell all that we have and give it to the
poor, or if called to it, even to lay down our lives for the brethren, which
is the most of all, yet it is nothing too much under Gospell-dispensations;
(for it was never so plainly and properly required of the Jewish Nation) for
it is commanded, even by Christ, and by his holy Apostles. And suitable
promises both of treasure in heaven, and a supply on earth, both to us and
ours, that we shall not want, nor have lack of any thing; As in the primitive
times it was really exemplified; They trusted God and obeyed his word, and even
made all things common; and his promise was made good, so that there was none
that lacked.

And this in all likelihood will be so again, when the hearts of the fathers
are turned to the children, and the hearts of the children unto their fathers;
Which is as much to say, as when the Spirit of God in the Ministry of his Word
takes a kindly Impression in the hearts of his people, so as to naturalize
them to himself, and the Ministers and people one to another, so as to make
them one as God is one, yea like the primitive Church, Of one heart, and of one
mind: For then they prove and exemplify the naturallnesse of the Law; For
then only, and not till then, nor but only with such who are so joined, can
it ever be expected, nor will it ever be suitable to have all things common,
nor could it else be expected, that none should lack, and be neglected. And
without all question, we ought to be one as God is one; as Christ has prayed
for us; and as it may therefore certainly be expected; for all his prayers were
effectual. And therefore we ought to endeavor after this unity in the
spirit, which is the bond of all (true) peace and amity.

And so often as we pray that the kingdom of God might come with power, (that
is to say) that the Spirit of God might Rule in our hearts, so often we pray
that the kingdom of God might come so with power to all his people, and that
we might be one as God is one, and that we might be one in him; see John
17.21. and ver. 22, 23. Nay, if it cannot be denied but that not only our
goods, but even our lives and all should be ready at hand to be offered up in
behalf of our brethren, and for the glory of God, in witness to his truth, if
we are called too it; And if the love of Christ, and the love of the brethren
should be so ardent in us as to make us willing even to part with our lives in
such a case, How much rather should it easily induce us to part with our goods,
and that not only a tenth, but all that we have. For as the Apostle John
affirms; Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he has laid down his
life for us, And we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.

But whosoever has this worlds goods, and sees his brother have need, and
shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in
him? My little children, let us not love in word, nor in tongue only, but in
deed and in truth.

Even so I also conclude this infallible resolve from the same ground.

Resolve. That whoever he be that has this worlds goods, and sees his
brother have need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him; There is
no sign of the love of God in that man.

But much more when they shutt their bowels from supplying the wants of their
faithful Ministers, who teach them in the Word, who come unto them in the name
of the Lord, and bring them glad tidings, good news, a rich treasure, precious
promises, blessings from on high, Christ's own Embassage, representing his
person, delivering his message, and blessing them also in the name of God and
the Lord Jesus Christ, yea in the name of the most high God, possessor of
heaven and earth.

Surely, I say it, and that without all peradventure, that neither the love of
God, nor the love of Christ, nor the love of the brethren, nor of his faithful
Ambassadors dwells in that man.

Rea: For if a man loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love
God whom he has not seen? yea the Invisible God, whom never man saw, neither
can see, but only in spirit, through an eye of faith, save only in man who is
his Image, when once perfectly renewed: And whom we ought to love and respect,
and honor accordingly, as we see his Image repaired in him, yea though never
so poor and despisable in the world, and in the worlds account. And therefore
to make it clear that these duties of Communication and distribution are
moral duties required in the moral Law of God, and that they are not
Ceremonial abrogable Laws, but must abide till all be fullfilled: Take these
further grounds.

1. They were not only Commanded in Horeb, but by Christ himself, and by his
holy Apostles; see 1 John 3.23. This is his Commandment, that we should
believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he
gave us Commandment.

Now the measure of that love which Christ has Commanded, is not a little, and
so away, but the measure is, Even as Christ has loved us.

But without all controversy, if the measure must be so as Christ has loved
us, Then it will engage us, if occasion require, even to lay down our lives
for the brethren.

But if it will engage us to lay down our lives, Then much more our estates,
as has been said, not only some but all, if need so require, for the glory of
God, and the good of the brethren, and for the furtherance of the Gospel.

Resolve. And therefore there needs no stinting, as in the time of the Law to
a tenth part, For where they are taught of God to love one another, with that
measure as they ought, it will naturally engage them, so as they cannot be
satisfied with giving a tenth, nor any part at all, if need so require, but
they will part with all, and their lives to boot, for the name of Christ, and
rather than any should lack that belongs to him.

And though a tenth was sufficient in the time of the Law, yet I cannot find
in all the new Testament any ground at all to build our faith, That a tenth is
sufficient in the days of the Gospel, nor any stint at all under all that we
have, if we find it needful for the supplying of the necessities of the
Saints and faithful, and more especially of the Ministers, if it may but any
way tend to the furtherance and glory of the Gospel of Christ. And therefore
give me leave to argue for the furtherance of the Gospel upon this occasion.

Ar: 1. If all that we have, yea our lives, and all be due unto God when he
calls for them upon these accounts before named.

2. And that he has not stinted us to any lesser part than all, as
sufficiently due and liberal, when need requires.

3. And if the primitive examples in giving all they had to the common stock,
whiles they did continue to be of one heart and of one mind, was spoken of as
a commendable thing, and that which was but suitable to the professors of the
Gospel.

4. Nay, if it was no more but what the love of God, and the love of the
brethren did naturally engage and induce them too, least there should be
amongst them any that lacked, either of the Apostles or brethren.

5. Nay, if God requires and expects fruit suitable to his tillage, And
therefore the more free and splendorous and glorious dispensations that God
holds forth in the dispensation of the Gospel of Christ, Even speaking to us
by his Son, whom he has made heir of all things, and by whom also he made
the worlds; see Heb: 1, 2, 3, 4. and to the end of the Chapter, wherein
appears that he is our Landlord.

6. And if we should give the more earnest heed to the things which we have
heard, least at any time we should let them slip.

1 Rea: Because if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every
transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward; Then we
cannot possibly escape if we neglect so great salvation, which at the first
began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard
him, God also bearing them witness, both with signs and wonders, and gifts of
the holy Ghost, according to his own will; see Chap: 2.1, 2, 3, 4.

2 Rea: Because it is dangerous to refuse him that speaks from heaven; to
wit, Christ, And more dangerous than refusing him that spoke on earth, to wit,
Moses; see Heb: 12.21.

3 Rea: Because we ought to consider, and to honor and obey the Lord Jesus
Christ, as the Apostle and high Priest of our profession, yea more and rather
and that by many degrees above Moses, by how much the more he that builds a
house has more honor then the house; and as he that is the Son has more
honor then the servant; see Chap: 3.1.3.6. Nay as he that has built all
things, has more honor then he that has built but some thing; see verse. 4.

7. And if Christ himself has commanded this manner and measure of love, to
be found visibly amongst his Disciples, That all men might know that we are
his Disciples.

8. And if this boundless love cannot, nor ought not, nor never was limited to
pay a tenth part, nor any under a tenth, but that it naturally produces all if
need so require.

9. And if we ought to prove and exemplify the naturallnesse of our love.

Conclusion. Then without all controversy or peradventure, when need so
requires, to give a tenth part of that wherewith the Lord has increased us,
is but a sparing due, in comparison of that which Christ has commanded, when
he commanded it as due: First, in the Law; To love God above all, and our
neighbor as our selves. And secondly, when he commanded such manner of love,
and such a measure also as he himself had really exemplified and showed to
us: And that we should show it forth not in word only, but in deed, and in
truth: Not in having of bowels of compassion, and shutting them up, but in
giving of those things that are needful and convenient, and that may express
our bountifullnesse, and not sparing spirits to be really in us, Else we do
not realize the love of God to be dwelling in us; see John 3.17.

And again says he plainly; This is my commandment that ye love one
another, as I have loved you.

And greater love then this has (...) then that a man lay down his life for
his friends; see John 15.12, 13.

And again, These things I command you, that ye love one another, verse. 17.

And again, as answering an objection which he foresaw in their minds, to
wit, That if they loved one another, and showed such peculiar love one to
another, then the world would hate them the more: The which he cutteth off
clearly, as altogether invalid; saying, If the world do hate you, ye know
that it hated me before it hated you; see verse. 18. and to the end.

And give me leave a little to ingrate upon the spirits of men, yea that
whoever reads or hears these Resolves, might consider with me, and so
freely acknowledge, as sure none can deny, but that these very words are the
words of Christ, and the commands of Christ; And therefore as we do know
them, and faithfully believe that they are his words.

Let us take heed, yea diligent heed, and the more heed also least we let them
slip; Even because they are (his words) whom we ought to love, honor, and
obey in all things And that not as man only, but as God himself, And
therefore let no excuses serve our turns, like them that heard the Law at
first, because they could not abide that which was commanded; see Heb: For we
must abide and obey also what Christ has commanded, we cannot be excused as
the Israelites were; For he likewise exemplified what he has commanded in his
own person, and in our nature: And therefore whoever he be that will not
hearken to the word of God which Christ has spoken in his name, God will
require it of him; see Deuteronomy: 18.18, 19.

And therefore let no man deceive us with vain words, For God is not mocked,
but we shall find that his words are true, when all men living on the face of
the earth shall be found liars.

And these are his words concerning such measure and manner of love as he
requires of us; let us take heed therefore least we let them slip, or least
we find excuses, as if we will give ear to excuses, we shall find too
many, and all but such as will not serve our turn, nor clear our consciences
in the sight of God.

1. And first beware of giving ear to the Quakers, For they tell us if we can
believe them, that our Ministers are carnal, and hirelings, and look only
for gain from their quarters, and much to that purpose, as has been showed:
And likewise that all professors are carnal, that frequent the Ordinances, and
have need of the teachings of men, or of the Scripture it self, and that all
Ordinances are vain and useless, and shall come to naught. But do not
believe them, I hope there has sufficient proof been held forth in this
little Treatise to prove them liars, and by what spirit they are acted; and
therefore their testimony will not serve to excuse our consciences before God.

2. And secondly, let them not persuade us to desert the Ordinances of God.

For unless we could think that the Quakers are wiser then the Lord himself
that appointed them, we have no ground nor reason to believe them: God never
appointed any Ordinances in vain, but they are profitable, if in the use
thereof we wait for him, and for his blessing upon them for the good of our
souls; he never fails them that wait for him And therefore if we do not
find them so spiritual, and so efficacious to us for the present, as we do
expect, let us rather blame the hardness of our own hearts, than the
Ordinances of God, or the Ministers of them, or much more then the holy
Scriptures; which are a spiritual word, and if they do not seem so to us, it
is doubtless because that we are yet carnal.

And to press us on to a full Resolution so to do, let us call to mind that
Parable concerning Dives and Lazarus, Especially the saying of Abraham unto
Dives, to wit, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them; see Luke
16.29. And note this, If they hear not Moses, and the Poophets, neither will
they be persuaded, though one should rise from the dead; see verse: 31. For
doubtless if the Ministers of God, and of his holy Word and Ordinances which
the wisdom of God has thought fit and appointed to save them that believe,
Be not effectual to the persuading of us, and saving of our souls; It is
without all question, because we are not ordained to eternal life. As it was
said in the Acts, that as many as were ordained to eternal life believed, Acts
13.48.

It behooveth us therefore to wait on the Lord in the use of all his
Ordinances, and not to think our selves wiser then he, least he gives us up
unto strong delusions and to believe a lie, and so prove our selves fools; as
so it is but just if we think our selves wiser then he.

3. And thirdly, let us above all things take heed that we be not provoked by
these delusive doctrines of the Quakers to reproach or speak evil, either of
the Ministers, or the Ordinances of God, or of the holy Scriptures; It is
without question a very heinous sin in the sight of God, so much as but to
think evil of them: But it is an high degree of blasphemy to speak evil of
them in the least degree. Now speaking evil of them, is when we speak any
thing tending in the least to the disparagement of them, to cause them to be
undervalued and disesteemed, as carnal, and vain, and useless, or
unprofitable, etc. And especially for the Ministers of God to call them Priests
of Baal, and hirelings, and Wolves in sheep clothing, and covetous, and such
like Epithets, as the Quakers give in general unto all that are not of their
way: Which can be accounted no less than speaking evil of him that sent them.

But least the Quakers should deceive us, and make us believe they are such
indeed, Consider with me, first, who they are, and by what spirit they are
guided and acted that speak so of them; As for that I shall only desire your
serious consideration of this little Treatise, and the Contents thereof,
whether it be not fully prooved, that they are acted by a lying and malicious
spirit to speak evil of the things they know not, and of many hundredths and
thousands of Ministers and faithful Christians which they never saw nor heard
of in their lives, either good or evil; and yet they damn them all as
eternally lost, and for the pit of hell. And let us not think it strange,
that Satan should threaten damnation to the Elect of God; for what in him lies
he seeks to destroy their faith, above all other graces, because when our
faith fails, we begin to sink, and to decay in love, and all other
graces, and so are laid open to his wiles and stratagems. And therefore when
we hear the Quakers call men damned and carnal, which they never saw before,
nor it may be never at all, we may well imagine whose spirit is in them; for
Satan would gladly persuade any man living on the face of the earth, save only
his deluded instruments that he has assured to him already, That there is no
hope of salvation for such as them at all, nor for any but such as are really
acted and guided by him.

And therefore knowing who they are that speak evil of them, we have the
more cause and ground to think well of them, and to love and honor them.

But it will be needful to answer some Objections, whereby they delude so many
unstable souls, to wit.

1. First, it may be objected, because it is true and well known that some
Ministers are carnal, and worldly minded, and covetous, and therefore to
maintain such is a sin.

1. I answer, first, that because of some we must not condemn all.

2. Secondly, we ought not to be uncharitable in judgeing or censuring any.
Now it is beyond the Rule of charity to judge or censure further then we
certainly know, and it is a great sign of malignitie against all, if we be so
apt to censure any further then we know.

3. Thirdly, we ought not to judge according to appearance, but righteous
Judgment. For we may see failings and humane frailties in the best, as so
there was also in the most of the Prophets and Apostles, and holy men of God,
that we read of in Scripture.

And therefore if we do not find them in a way of wickedness, let us take
heed of censuring them, least we condemn the generation of Gods children, as
David had like to have done. And therefore if we do not find in them any way
of wickedness, and know it for certain, let us judge and hope the best, and
forbear censuring.

2 Object: Secondly, it will be objected, that though we cannot clearly
condemn them for any way of wickedness, yet if we know them not certainly to
be godly and faithful Ministers, such as are sent of God, how can we so
freel, communicare unto them, as is required of us, and as we ought in case
when we know them such?

Answ: I answer, that if we be godly and faithful our selves, we shall
doubtless know them by their fruits, whether they be such or no; for so Christ
has promised; Ye shall know them by their fruits. But in case we are are not
able to judge and resolve our selves, whether they be so or no; Then let us
communicate freely and liberally unto them, in regard they are in place as such
appointed to be our Teachers through the providence of God, and are the best
we have.

And above all things, Beware of covetousness in this respect, for if that
sway us, it will make every little fault an excuse to hinder us from
communication. And therefore let us gather strong Resolutions, to take Solomon's
advise, to wit, to cast our bread upon the waters, In regard that after many
days we shall find it; And to give a portion to seven, and also to eight,
in regard we know not what evil shall be upon the earth. And the advice also
of our blessed Savior, to make our selves friends with the unrighteous mammon,
that when we fail they may receive us into everlasting habitations.

Now to cast our bread upon the waters, and to expect to find it after many
days, would seem very unlikely. But though our Communicating to the
Ministers, or giving to the poor, seem as unlikely as that in our
apprehensions for yielding us any return, yet we need not fear, the promise
of Christ is clear, we shall in no wise loose our reward, in regard we do
it in a good intent, either out of love to the Ministers, or compassion to the
poor, or in love and obedience unto Christ, or because they belong to him, or
for the furtherance of the Gospel, and the glory of God, yea though we be not
certain that they are any such men, yet if we be not certain to the
contrary, let us account it as our duty, and let not covetousness sway us to
the contrary, for it will be to our loss if we neglect our duties.

3 Object: A third Objection may be raised, to wit, That in many places the
Ministers are provided for by tithes and other ways, so as they need not to us
for any such communication, and the poor are provided for in another way,
according to equality, so as we have many of us that are Christians little
occasion at all to express our thankfulness to God for his increasing of us,
in these respects of Communication and Distribution: And therefore we may well
believe that our vocal and cordial thankfulness to God in such a case may
serve the turn.

Answ: I answer, that if we put apart by it self as the Lord has increased
us with a full purpose of heart to express our gratitude for such his mercies,
when occasion is offered for works of piety, or works of charity; The Lord
will find us occasions suitable for disbursing the same in due time; If he
that sees our hearts, see us willing, and obedient, and cordially thankful,
as we ought to be. And so will find us occasion to lay up our treasure in
heaven, where neither moth nor canker can corrupt, neither thieves dig through
and steal.

And there is one argument which might make us earnest and very diligent in
seeking occasions to distribute and communicate, if we were but as wise in our
generation as the men of this world: If we can believe what Christ has
promised us, and if we cannot, doubtless it is our shame, and will be too our
loss, And that is this, to wit, It is evident and needs no more proof that
the men of this world are earnest and diligent in seeking how to lay out their
moneys for gain and profit, and rather then let it lie rusting by, they will
be content with a very little, as six, or eight, or ten in the hundredth, and
that for a whole year: but in case they hear of a good bargain, either of
land or merchandise, how industrious they will be to buy it themselves, and to
prevent others, and sometimes to defeat and beguile their neighbors, to get it
before them, or take it out of their hands, and very injuriously, being so
covetous of it.

But Christ has promised us not only ten in the hundredth, but an hundredth for
ten, nay an hundredth fold in this present life, besides in the world to come
life everlasting, for what ever it be that we forsake or part withal for his
sake and the Gospel: And yet we are such fools in these respects, that if
occasions, and necessities, and it may be shame it self, do not find us out,
and almost compel us thereto, we seldom seek any such occasions, but are
likemeere unthrifts in these respects; In so much that our constant practice,
yea I may say of the generality of Christians, is as though we did not
believe any truth at all in these plain and faithful promises of our blessed
Savior; For else without question we should be more diligent in seeking, and
more glad in finding such occasions and opportunities of doing good, and of
communicating. And I am afraid it tends greatly to our detriment here, and in
the life to come: For the manifest wisdom of the men of this world in their
generation and things of this life, shall certainly rise up in Judgment
against us, and condemn our folly, for having a price in our hands, and
opportunities offered us, and neglecting to take them, whiles we have time. And
knowing also both the uncertaintie of riches, and of our time and lives, as we
cannot but know and see by experience. And considering also that we cannot
deny, but if we take it not, and be obedient and free and liberal in these
respects, we neglect our duties both to God and men. The Lord grant us more
solid wisdom in these respects, then is yet exemplified amongst the best of
Christians, else our reckoning will be poor when we come to account how we
have traded with our Talents lent us for this purpose; with direction how to
use them for the glory of God, and the good of men, yea for the advancement and
furtherance of the Gospel of Christ, and for the proof and exemplifying of
the naturallnesse of our love, and the truth and visibilitie of our
Christianity, and unfeigned faith and obedience unto God.

And let us consider a little further, to wit, What love and respects the
Ministers of the Gospel, both do and ought to exspect from us, and that not
in word, and in tongue only, but in deed and in truth, Especially considering
that we ought to account them as spiritual Fathers, whom we ought to love,
and to obey, and honor as such, if we be children spiritually begotten. And
it is but natural to us, that we should so do, so that we can hardly do
otherwise, if we be not bastards.

And we are necessarily engaged (if we expect their blessings of us to be
effectual) To make them savourie meat, that their souls may bless us; as
Isaac said to his son Esau; For it is not bare verbal formal blessings that
will be efficacious to cause the blessing to rest in our houses, and on all
that we have. But it must be their faithful cordial soule-blessings, that
can be effectual, or that we may trust unto, to be certainly efficacious, as
blessings indeed.

For how can we expect any such cordial soule-blessings from such whom we
make not any savorie meat, such as their soul loves, if we show no love,
either to God, or the Lord Jesus Christ, or his faithful Ambassadors and
servants? how shall they bless us in faith? how can they believe that God will
make their bleslings efficacious, and blessings indeed to such covetous
worldlings, who value their carnal worldly things above God and Christ, and
the furtherance of the Gospel, and things of an eternal nature? Nay, how can
or dare they bless such covetous men, whom the Lord abhorres, which is only
proper to wicked men? I say, it is only proper for wicked men, to bless the
covetous, whom the Lord abhorres; see Psalm: 10.3.

And what greater sign of covetousness can be exhibited, then the neglect of
this duty? And the love of money is the root of all evil, therefore how shall
any man expect any good branches or sprouts from it?

I am very confident, and not without many good grounds from Scripture, which I
can easily show; that this sin of covetousness does and may reign in
professors of Religion, and they not discover it in themselves, but may expect
salvation through Jesus Christ, till they depart this life, and yet be
eternally damned; see only for this, Mat: 25.41. to the end, where their
sentence is pronounced against them, altogether for their neglect of duty, even
to the least of those little ones that believe in Christ, and is really
accounted as a neglect of duty to him, to wit, I was hungry, and ye gave me
no meat, etc. The place is well known, I wish it were as well laid to heart
by all that profess Christianity. There would not so many go blindfold to
hell. One would think it sufficient to know these things beforehand, to warn
all men, as the Apostle does, to beware of covetousness, as the most dangerous
root of sin that can be, least growing in the heart of man: And the rather
because it has so many cloakes and covers, both to hide it self from our own
eyes, and the eyes of others, As frugalitie, good husbandry, providing for our
families, the examples of other men that are well accounted of for
Christianity, and the expectation of others that are nearer in relation for
doing such works as are required of us, and the faults discernable, or
suspected to be in the objects of our charity, or beneficence, or because we
have not enough for our selves, but that we may come to want it for our
selves, or ours, or we are not yet sufficiently rich in lands or goods, our
neast is not thoroughly feathered for our selves and ours, our ambition is not
satisfied; and such like many, which are easily produced they are so common,
and every one has them ready upon all occasions to hinder them from doing
good: the answering whereof would make my book swell to a great volume. But
this I say briefly, that if any of these, or any other bear sway in us, to
hinder us in the least from our duties this way, it is a great sign that
covetousness reigns in us for the present, and that so continuing it will
bring us to hell; one would think it enough to know that the Lord abhorres us,
if we be covetous; to make us to abhor our selves, and repent in dust and
ashes for the least token of it to be found in us; For whom the Lord abhorres,
we ought to abhor likewise; we ought to hate covetousness where ever we
see it in our selves or others: And where we see it reign in any man, we
ought to abhor such a man as odious and abominable, yea as a base spirited
and ignoble person, such as is not worthy of any Christian fellowship or
communion. The Apostle has enumerated covetous persons amongst such as are so
scandalous, as that they are not to be compared together with, if they be of
such as are called brethren; see 1 Cor: 5.11. And so do I likewise; if they
appear to be such, but these many cloakes do so hide and cover them, both
from themselves and others as Judas was hid from the Disciples under specious
pretenses and covers, to his utter destruction. That they are not easily found
out but go for Saints of God, and without so much as being suspected. And were
it not for swelling my book over great, it were easy to discover this odious
sin, and such in whom it reigns, and to make them appear odious, by
convincing arguments, and that from Scripturegrounds, such as no man can deny.
But it would require a pretty volume, I must not be so large in this Treatise,
but shall leave the further prosecution thereof till another opportunity.

A parallel list of some of the manifest contradictions, betwixt the teachings
of the Spirit of God, and of that spirit by which the Quakers are guided,
spirited, and acted, to wit:

1. Their spirit teaches them that there is no light but one spoken of in
Scripture, and that this light is within in every man's conscience, and so they
must turn their minds inward to look for light, and obey that measure of
light they find there, for it is sufficient to lead them into all truth, and
to guide them in all the ways of God, and is an infallible guide so that if
they obey that light within, they cannot eire, nor commit any sin, and that
if they have but the least measure of the Spirit of God it is sufficient, so
that they need not to search the Scriptures for attaining to the knowledge of
God, and of Christ, nor the teachings of men; for they have that within them
which will teach them sufficiently: And all have this light (they say) yea
every one that comes into the world, and this light is Christ the eternal
light.

But the Spirit of God teaches us, That there are more lights than one though
all from that eternal light.

For says Christ, As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world,
John 9.5 And, says he, Ye are the light of the world, speaking to his
Disciples, Mat. 5.14, 15, 16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may
see your good works, etc.

And John was a burning and a shining light.

Now these inferior lights are not lighted to be put under a bushel, but on a
Candlestick, that they may give light to the whole house, to wit, the whole
Church, they were lighted from that eternal light for that purpose, and not to
be covered: Nor shall their light held forth in Scripture be covered from the
true Church, but they do and shall give heed thereto as to a light shining in
a dark place.

Nay though Satan himself be transformed into an Angel of light.

They shall not believe every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of
God, seeing many false Prophets are gone forth into the world.

And by their fruits they shall know them, and find them to be Thieves and
Robbers, and shall detect them by the light of God held forth in Scripture;
which is a sure word of Prophecy, containing many sure examples and patterns
and commands, which are and shall be as a lantern to their feet, and a light
unto all their paths. And therefore they will give attendance unto reading,
and to exhortation, and to doctrine, and they will teach them to their
children, and to their childrens children; for so they are commanded by the
Spirit of God in the holy Scriptures. And to take heed to the Law and
Testimony, whereby they will try the spirits whether they be of God; for if
they do not speak according to these, it is because there is no light in
them, but the spirit of darkness, that Rules in the children of disobedience,
as is more at large in the book.

2. Secondly, their spirit teaches them to deny the Scriptures to be the Word
of God, and to call them carnal, and a dead letter.

But the Spirit of God teaches us, that every word of God is pure, and that
all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and that the words which Christ
has spoken to us are spirit and life to them that believe them, and receive
them in love.

3. Their spirit teaches them to speak evil of all men, that embrace not
their lying doctrines and ways

But the Spirit of God teaches us, to speak evil of no man, but to honor
all men, and as much as in us lies, to have peace with all men.

4. Their spirit teaches them to Revile and disparage the Ministers of God,
and to blame and Revile those that hear them and maintain them.

But the Spirit of God teaches us, to love and honor them, and to communicate
freely and liberally for their maintenance, that they may have lack of
nothing, nor need to labor and entangle them with the affairs of this life,
they being engaged in a spiritual warfare, against princiyalities and powers,
and spiritual wickedness, etc. For if it be true that God has so ordained
that they that preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel; Then it also
follows that such Churches or people whomsoever, that do not so ordain and
take care, or do not so communicate to those that teach them, as that they may
live of the Gospel, and have lack of nothing for themselves, or theirs, but
do enforce them to labor with their own hands, and to entangle themselves
with the affairs of this life.

They are not obedient to the Gospel of Christ, nor followers of God as his
dear children, neither do they walk in love, as Christ has loved us, nay
they are so far unlike Christians, as that they are worse then Infidells; for
if it were an unjust thing, and a work of cruelty, to mussle the mouth of an
Ox, that treads out the corn; How much more cruel will it one day appear
to mussle the mouth of a Minister and Messenger of God, that Rules well, and
labors in the Word and Doctrine. Are they not more in value in the sight of
God then many sparrowes, yea then many Oxen? Doubtless they are so in the
sight of God, and ought to be so in the sight of Christians.

But how much pressing will this point need before it be effectual, so as to
naturalize Christians like Christians indeed. I have much more in a Manuscript
that I writ long since concerning this point, which when the Lord sees good,
may likewise be held forth. But

5. Their spirit teaches and ingageth them also, and that upon pain of
eternal damnation, not to use the word (You) but ( thou, or thee) to a single
person.

But the Spirit of God never gave us any such charge, nor are we so limited by
any Rule in Scripture, but quite the contrary; For we are commanded to give
custom to whom custom is due, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor.

Now it is the Custom of all true Christians in our English Nation, to use
this word (You) when they direct their speech, either to man or woman;
especially if they be their superiors, or if but their equals, and that in
mere civilitie, as it is accounted fit: And is seldom otherwise amongst
civil men that have any breeding or humanity in them, and are not brutishly
Irrational and besotted in their minds, save only in case when men are
transported with passion as sometimes civil men may in case when provoked by
some injury or incivilitie offered them, and when they show their displeasure,
or it may be are ready to fight, they begin to (thou) each other, and to
Revile and reproach and miscall one another, just as the spirit of the Quakers
also acts them, but never at any time, whiles they are in love, and
friendship, and sobriety. And that is the reason, as I suppose, why the spirit
in the Quakers will not allow them to give us any civil language, because he
cannot love us, nor endure to be at peace with us, but must needs show his
wrath and malice against us, it is so implacable, and bitterly seated and
habituated in him; for there was enmity put betwixt the seed of the woman,
and the seed of the Serpent, even from the beginning. And therefore it is that
if the Quakers should love us, and give us civil language, he could not
endure to have any fellowship with them nor would he own and spirit and act
them, as he now does, if they did not obey him, in acting so maliciously and
opprobriously against the people of God, and against all Gods Ordinances, yea
against the Scripture it self; and so by consequence against the Spirit of
God, which gave it forth: But it is wonderful to me how he ever wrought them
up to such a height of exorbitancies in all these things: For it cannot be but
mere civilitie, and rationalitie, and their wonted customs of civilitie,
engaged them to be shie, and unwilling at the first, to use them, it being so
Improper a language, and carriage for children to (thou) their Parents,
servants their Masters, subjects their Majestrates, and inferiors their
superiors, of all sorts and Relations; and brings them into such a snare, as
that they are made incapable of living amongst, and conversing with men, or
occupying any trade, merchandise especially, and chiefly with strangers, who
cannot but think them either to be natural fools, or distracted persons, or
some angerie uncivil malicious men; which will make them afraid to have any
trading or dealing with them.

And the truth is this, their gross incivilitie does much hinder their growth,
and multiplying: And without all question, Satan would give them a full
dispensation in many of these things, if it were not so that he is forced
through his malice only to act with, and in such men as are really mal gniz'd
against the people of God, and are first really engaged to him in voluntary
obedience in something or other, that he well knows will work a separation
from the children of light, else he could not exspect to keep them in
darkness: But to keep them in darkness, he first persuades them that it is
their duty to God to observe the language held forth in Scripture, and the
examples of Christ and his Apostles, and upon pain of damnation not to vary
from it.

Now it is true, that (thee) and (thou) were commonly used in
Scripture Language; But for ought we know, not because the word (you) had been
a sin, for it is not forbidden in Scripture; and where there is no Law, there
is no transgression: But the reason was, because it was the customarie language
in those days; the which then to have aborated from, had been offensive, as
the contrary is now.

And then again he tells them, that it is Improper to use the word (you) to
a single person, and they stand much upon the propriety of the language ( thee
and thou) and think themselves wise, and all others fools that use any other.
Yet in case when they speak to more then one, they use the word (you) and do
allow it as orthodox in their Religion

Now if they will grant us this, we shall need no more to warrant our practice.

Rea: For we say with Solomon, Eccle: 4.10. Woe to him that is alone, for when
he falls he has not a second to lift him up.

And so also our blessed Savior said of himself, I am not alone, but I and
the Father that sent me, Joh: 8.16.

And I am one that bear witness of my self, and the Father that sent me
bears witness of me; verse. 18.

And in another place, I and my Father are one.

Now the Quakers believe, and are very confident, and boast much of it, that
the eternal Spirit of God which was in Christ Jesus, is in them also; and if
so, then they are not alone, but God is with them, as he was with Christ in
some measure. And as Christ said to his Apostles, It is not you that speak,
but the Spirit of your Father speaks in you. And the truth is, If any man
has not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his.

Now then if they be not alone, they are not merely single persons: And
therefore may properly use the word (you) one to another, which yet they do
not.

And suppose that others who have not the Spirit of Christ' have the spirit of
Satan in them, as the Quakers say that we have; Then yet such are not alone,
nor properly single: but the word (you) may be properly used to such also: and
therefore if they stick but upon propriety of language; if they will get a
dispensation from their spirit to use it to us, we have a dispensation from
that Spirit by which we are acted, to use it to them.

And I also believe that as Christ could truly say, I and my Father are one;
So also may some of them say properly and truly, I and my father are one.

For some men are as properly one with the Devil, as Christ was with God, and
are as properly guided and acted by him, and therefore are not alone in that
respect, but are two persons, united so together, as that they are properly one
in one sense, and properly two in another. And therefore the word (you) nor the
word (thee) or (thou) is Improper language to be spoken to any that is so
spirited.

So that the propriety of our language being cleared, If they cannot find it
forbidden in Scripture, we have not only a dispensation to use it, but do
account it our duty in regard it is the Custom of our Country, least we
should offend; For we must give no offense, neither to Jew nor Gentile,
neither to the Church of God.

And it is such gross incivilitie, and such an angerie kind of language, that
any stranger would believe that we are ready to fight them: And so in stead of
provoking one another unto love, and to good works, we are more likely to
provoke them unto hatred and wrath, and to do us some injury, in regard we
give them such disgraceful language. And by that means in stead of, As much
as in us lies, to have peace with all men, we should bring it about to have
peace with no man; And that for no cause but to please the adversary, the
accuser of the brethren, and his accomplices, the Quakers, whom he enslaveth and
befooleth in these and such like things.

6. And again their spirit teaches them not to put off their hatts, nor bow
their bodies in reverence or respect to any man at all, in what place or
Relation soever he be, nor in way of courtesy when they meet with friends;
neither to drink one to another in a modest and moderate way; for this they
call worshipping of men; and drinking one to another, they say, is to provoke
them to excess, etc. the which we deny; for they are not always used for
such ends.

But the spirit of God teaches us so clearly to the contrary, that we need
not to plead the custom of the Country, to excuse us in these; for they are
all included under this command of the Apostle, to wit, Be ye courteous and
tenderhearted toward all men.

And it were easy to prove that bowing of the body was the customarie
reverence in old time: But I need not, I shall rather ask them, what courtesy
at all they show to any man upon any occasion.

And that taking off the hatt is a proper Reverend duty to those whom we
honor, and do and ought to reverence, is easy to prove.

And we are commanded to honor all men.

So that if we know them to be duties, either of love, or honor, we are
bound to use them

Nay, if they be proper expressions of love or honor; and that we have any
spirit of love or honor in us, it will naturally engage us to use such
expressions one to another, if we were not so commanded; But there is
doubtless some men in these last days, are without natural affections,
accoring as was prophesied, 2 Timothy: 3.3. And those like bruit beasts made to be
taken, and to be destroyed, 2 Pet: 2.12.

From such it is not to be expected, no more then (love) for they should but
dissemble, if they should make a show of what they have not; And it were better
to be without, then to be deceived by their outward shows: And therefore by my
consent they shall never be persuaded to use them at all, till their cordial
love and respects engage them sincerely to it, which can never be till they
love us better. And we may not expect any love from them, whiles they are
acted and guided by our old adversary, the enemy of mankind, who hates any
thing in us that in the least resembles the Image of God; And wherefore is it
required that we should honor all men, but because there is at least some
Remnant of the Image of God excistent in them; For man is the Image and the
glory of God; as I might show at large, but I have been too long about so
clear a point; yet this further I shall make bold to assert; namely;

That where the Spirit of God dwells, there is also the Spirit of love; for
it is but the same; For God is love: And where there is love, it will act
courteously and tender-heartedly, (and that) toward all men.

And do but mark the Quakers, how many of those fruits of the Spirit of God,
Gal: 5.22, 23. you can find in them, or so much as the least show of them; and
then you may judge by whose Spirit they are acted.

But, says the Apostle, the fruit of the Spirit is love, Joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, against
which there is no law.

Now for my part, I see not so much as a show of any of these in them, but the
quite contrary are manifest in them; to wit, hatred, sadness of spirit and
countenance, no peace with any man, no long-suffering, but hasty rage, no
gentleness, but severe austeritie and imperious bitterness, no goodness; but
clear malignitie against all goodness, no says in God, but in a lying spirit
within them, whom they obey, and serve, and worship as God; no meekness, for
they are hasty, and angerie, and revengefull; no temperance in their tongues
and pens. And therefore every Law of God is against them; let them try
themselves by this, if they please, and try them who will, and they shall find
them such, and so far off from loving or honoring any man at all, in whom
the Image of God is in a great measure renewed, As that they do what they can
to disparage and dishonor, and to cause them to be abhorred; For if they
discover any fault, or weakness, or frailty in any man, they are ready with
all the wit and skill they have, to publish and aggravate the same to the
highest pitch. But I never heard them speak good of any man, unless of
themselves, nor took notice so of them as to commend them for their virtues in
the least degree; but the Spirit of God does otherwise, Rev: 2.2. though he
have somewhat against them, verse. 4. etc.

7. And again their spirit teaches them as much as in them lies to destroy
and pull down men's faith and hope, which they have in God, telling them they
see death in their faces, and that they are eternally damned, and such like
language, judging all men they meet with before the time; now the end of Satan
in this is to destroy their weak faith, telling them if they be not perfect
and free from sin, they are sure to be damned.

But the Spirit of God teaches us to judge nothing before the time, but to
edify one another in our holy faith, and not to quench the smoking flax, nor
break the bruised reed, but to support and strengthen one another, and to
comfort one another, by holding forth the promises, and that to sinners; for
Christ came not to call the rightous, but sinners to repentance; and if any if
any man says he has no sin, he deceives himself, and the truth is not
in him. And if any man sin, he is not presently damned by the Apostle, as
the Quakers would do, but he tells us, We have an Advocate with the
Father, etc. who is the propitiation for our sins.

And the truth is, if none must be saved but such as have no sin, there will
but few be saved indeed; I believe all the Quakers will come short of heaven:
For if those their doctrines and ways and practices, be not manifest sins,
there is no sin at all in men or Devils.

And what was the end for which Christ came into the world, but to save
sinners, they would make his blood of none effect; for if men could be saved by
their own righteousness, Christ dyed without a cause. And who ever is
justified by the Law, is fallen from grace; for it is not of grace, but debt,
if men be perfectly just of themselves; But if it be of grace, then it is by
faith, and that in the righteousness of Christ, which is not properly ours,
but by the application thereof through faith, which faith also is the gift of
God, and given freely of mere grace also, and that to whom he pleases, yet
it is given to all his Elect, and that in due time. And this will exclude all
the Quakers boastings, and trusting in themselves, that they are righteous, and
despising others, as Pharisaicall.

8. And Eighthly, Their spirit teaches them not to put off their hatts when
they pray unto God, or preach, and that in public Congregations, so that it
evidently appears, that they give no honor, or worship, either to God or
man, but only to to that lying spirit within them. And surely, if they think
themselves too good to worship or honor God, it is no marvel that they give
no honor or respect unto man, who is but his Image at the best when perfect.

But the Spirit of God teaches us, That every man praying or prophesying,
having his head covered, dishonors his head; see 1 Cor: 11.4. For a man
indeed ought not to cover his head, for as much as he is the Image and glory
of God, verse. 7.

9. Ninthly, Their spirit teaches them most profanely to call the Psalms of
David, David's Rimes, and Balads, and jeare toward us because we sing them in
meeter: Oh profane spirits! But the spirit of God teaches us, to sing them
with grace in our hearts unto the Lord; and bids us If any be merry, let him
sing Psalms, James 5.13. Coloss. 3.16.

They know not what it is to speak unto themselves in Psalms and Hymns, and
spiritual Songs, singing and making melody in their hearts unto the Lord; see
Ephesians: 5.19.

No such strangers as they shall intermeddle with the Saints Joy; It is too
unspeakeable and full of glory to be communicated unto them, Though they sport
themselves with their own deceivings sometimes: But it will not reach to such
a measure of Joy as to express themselves in singing of Psalms in praise unto
God, and thankfulness of heart, as he requires of us. Neither does any
enforce them, nor any other, till they do it heartily, as unto the Lord, yet
the Saints are commanded; see Psalm. 30.4. Sing unto the Lord ye Saints of his,
and give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness. But it is no marvel at
them in this, for where is there any ordinance of God, but they despise and
jeare them; and such also as observe and keep them in sincerity of heart:
Which makes clear to me, that they have no knowledge of God at all, but of a
wicked lying malicious spirit, that is an enemy unto all goodness.

But I have raked too long in these stinking puddles, that are so nautious to
the stomachs of all the truly godly, as that they will scarce read them,
much less will they daigne to answer them in every particular, accoridng to
their folly. Save only in regard that their mouths must be stopped, because
they subvert whole houses; see Tit: 1.11.

Yet the holy Ghost bids us answer a fool according to his folly, least he
be wise in his own conceit.

So that it is lawful and a duty also to answer such who are in folly, and
think themselves wise, in such their foolishness, that so if possible at
least their conceit of their own wisdom might be remooved; For a man once
wise in his own conceit, there is more hope of a fool then of such a man.

And such I conceive some of the Quakers to be, and therefore have little hope
of prevailing with them: Yet perceiving so many that are counted religious to
plead much for them, and rather incline to embrace their doctrine, being
seduced thereby, and too much deluded; I have taken some pains in searching
their books, to find out the bottom and tendencie of their doctrines, and
ways, and practices, and the depth of Satan, and his enterprises therein, that
some of them, at least, might be undeceived; and have endeavored to discover
them, and make them to appear in their own native colors, and from whence
they come, and whither they tend, committing the success and event thereof, to
the great Lord both of heaven and earth, the God of the spirits of all flesh,
to make it effectual as it pleases him, and to take impression on whom he
pleases, according to his infinite wisdom, and goodness, and mercy; To whom
be for ever ascribed as it is justly due, all the honor, and glory, and power,
and praise, for ever and ever, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

