GOSPEL ADVICE TO GODLY BUILDERS: For the pulling down of BABEL, and the
building up of SION.

For the most part written in three LETTERS, To be communicated to the REVEREND
ASSEMBLY OF MINISTERS IN WESTMINSTER.

By the unworthiest of all the Gospel Ministers, JOHN BRAIN.

Malachy 3.3. He shall sit as a refiner and purifyer of silver: and he shall
purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may
offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness.

(...).

LONDON: Printed in the Year. 1648.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable:
GOd having made you great among the People, in the great intrustments,
mercies, and deliverances he has lent you, expects a great return of all from
you in your doing good to his Saints, and exalting h^^ service in the Land: and
here I beseech you in all humility to have especial care, that no power by
Your Authority be set over the Family of God other then what God has set up of
himself; And I desire you to examine the foundation laid for the Presbyterian
Government, and I suppose there will appear sanctinesse, and not sufficiency
from the Word to uphold it. The fear of God, and des^re of your eternal
wel-being, move me to mind you of the Covenant You and the People of God have
made to God in the Land, and that in the matter of his worship, that it shall
be according to the Word as near as may be. Now I presume in this small ensuing
Treatise your Honors may see, a Reformation may be made for nearer to the
Gospel rule, then I conceive any is yet made; And then not only to God, but to
Gods people also in the same thing on which ground they thought their greatest
loss would be their greatest gain, in failing whereof, the Lords peoples
expectations dye, and hopes fail within them. And lastly, I presume to present
this to your Honors consideration, that until you find a way nearer to the
Gospel-pattern then Presbytery is, I fear you will find there will be but
little peace in the Land: the foundation whereof must be laid in God, or it
will not be good to you, nor those that love and serve You. Thus beseeching you
to try the truth, and trust no man, and to set up Christ among us, as the
Gospel sets out the way to set him up by only, then the People shall be
happy, and You high, and your Memory blessed in the generations to come. For
all which,

The unworthy, but willing Servant in the service of the Gospel, prays to be
heaped on You: JOHN BRAIN.

To you my Reverend Brethren of the ASSEMBLY.
LEt it not seem strange to you, that ye see that made public which was sought
earnestly at your hands to have been determined in private, because in my
second and third Solicitation I received this full Answer from a Reverend
Friend, and one of your Members, that the Assembly will not take that which is
once concluded into a second consideration upon any private motion. In which
case I think it my duty not to forbear the making of it public for the Truths
sake, as in the difference between Peter and Paul Galat. 2.5. And then
secondly, if I did come up to the Assembly to inquire into the Truth of the
Propositions, I should but lose my labor; so that there remains but this only
way for me to discover the Truth, that it be made public for all to judge, and
see how weighty and necessary a thing it is these things should be re-debated
and considered of in love, the things questioned being the substantials not of
government only, but worship also. Thus praying God to direct You to do what
is according to his will, and discover to you your failings therein, I rest,

Your unworthy Fellow Laborer in the Gospel, JOHN BRAIN.

To the godly and faithful READER.
IN the reading this little Treatise, I desire thee to observe, that the things
contained in the greater Letter were not sent in the Epistles sent to be
communicated to the Assembly, but are added to make things more full and clear
unto thee; I thought good to acquaint thee that for diverse Months since I have
finished a brief Treatise concerning the practice of the Primitive Church in
government, and how it fell by degrees, and how it may be set up in this
Kingdom, as my labors in my public Ministry, preaching four or five times a
week, will give me leave; but the maintenance allowed me by Authority being
detained from me, I am disabled for that and other works of like or greater
concernment, which God in his time, if it be for the promoting of his glory,
will give being unto. In the mean time I commend thee to God, and the Word of
his grace, beseeching thee in thy prayer to remember Sion, and those Saints
that sit by the waters of Babylon, who have hanged up their Lutes on the willow
Trees, not knowing how to sing the Lords song in a strange way; and that thou
pray for, and prepare thee, for the bringing forth the corner stone, that thou
give up unto it cries of grace, and show thy love to God thy Lord, that thou
may be thought worthy to be called to the marriage of the Lamb now ready to be
amongst us, in which God shall turn the sorrow of all his Saints into sweet and
saving joy; which shall make blessed the eye that sees it, and the ear that
hears it: such is the happiness God, our God, is about to reveal in this our
Land; in which our Earth and Heavens shall be new, and Sea shall be no more. In
the heaps of all which happiness the Lord make thee happy, and in that which
is to come.

So prays thy Servant in the Gospel, John Brain.

To all the MEMBERS of the Reverend Assembly of DIVINES at Westminster be grace
and wisdom multiplied, to the inabling you to the right understanding of all
Truths.
Reverend and beloved:
IN discharge of the dispensation of the Gospel of God committed to my trust, I
desire, that both you and I may comfortably meet together before the Lord Jesus
Christ at his appearing, and be able to deliver up our accounts at last of our
stewardship with joy, and not with sorrow at that day; and that we may keep our
Covenant made with God and his People in making such a Reformation in the
Church as shall be according to the Word of God. Now I beseech you lean to an
examination of your Propositions proposed to the high Court of Parliament, and
examine you them again, and what in them ye find not to be agreeable to the
Word, I desire you in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ to correct for the
truth, and for the Church sake, and for the comfort of your own souls.

First, I desire you to examine all those particulars concerning the Evangelist
as stated in my Letter, dated Aug. 21. The Evangelist being the first ordinary
Church Officer and Office.

In the Propositions the Evangelist is placed before the Prophet, which is
indeed an extraordinary monster, and the other but an ordinary.

1. Which is contrary to the form of sound words, Ephesians. 4.11. Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors.

2. Against the express command of Christ, who commands us to hold fast the
form of sound words: 2 Timothy 1.13. God requires we should be faithful in little
as well as in much.

3. It is against the express order and institution of Christ, to the
subversion of the Gospel government; he having instituted Prophets to be
second* Evangelist to be of the third, Who is now taken from his fellows, and
placed above his betters. Luke 14.8, 9, 10.

4. If you do it not, you will all lie liable to be excepted against; nor shall
we who have covenanted to make a Reformation according to the Word of God, keep
our Covenant with God we have made with him, if I and you in our several
places endeavor it not, nor with Gods people.

2 Thing pertaining to the Evangelist considerable in the Propositions is, that
they are ceased with the Apostles and Prophets, the Prophets and Apostles cease
in their personal presence, but their ministry there spoken of cease not in
the Church, Ephesians. 4.13. They are to be until we all come to the unity of the
faith which is to the end. For as the Jews had Moses and the Prophets in their
Church, so have we the Apostles and the Prophets in our Church, Luke 16.29.
compared with Ephesians. 2.20. As for the Evangelist the Officer in question, has
been thrust out a long time out of the Church by Antichrist, having had no
manner of ministry therein at all a long time, and so of these three only and
indeed cease.

3 Thing is that the Evangelist is an extraordinary office, against which in my
Letter was proposed, 1 Cor. 12.28. God has set some in the Church, first
Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers.

That the whole Church Ministry is contained in these, I think is undeniable;
yet lest it should be thought a conjecture only, I desire you to see Calvin,
whose judgment I know is highly esteemed of you, part of his words are these.
Non recenset omnes species, neque enim opu^ fuit, tantum enim voluit exempla
proponere quarto capite ad Ephesios plenior est enumeratio munerum quae ad
perpetuae Ecclesiae regimen requiruntur. But to the text.

1. In that he says, first Apostles, he shows that of this order or number
none are to be less then Apostles; and among whom, none are to be greater or
less then others.

2. Between the first and the second is no medium, and therefore no place for
an Evangelist to be placed in. In which second order only Prophets are placed,
among which none are greater or less then other in the Church.

3. Between the second and the third is no medium, Middle number or place to
place the Evangelist in, by which he may be greater then the Pastor or Teacher,
though less then a Prophet; but he must be of the third order, that is, of the
order of Teachers; among whom there is nothing extraordinary but an equality in
office, as the Apostles were all equal in their Apostolical office, though
not in gifts equal.

Objection that can be made against this only is, that the Evangelist is not
named.

Resp. Nor is the Pastor named, yet no man will deny him to be understood, and
comprehended here under.

2. He setting down the whole extraordinary Ministry above Teachers in the
Apostles and Prophets, is it to be thought he setting down the Ministry God
has set up in the Church, he would leave out any of the ordinary? therefore
surely comprehended them all under this word Teachers.

1. Showing all Church Ministers besides Apostles and Prophets under the Gospel
government are Teachers only.

2. They are of one rank or order, to show you that one had nothing more
extraordinary in him then the other.

3. The word (...), he here speaking of every particular Churches Ministry,
shows that there is, and ought to be, in every complete Church more Teachers
then one; and that it ought not to be governed or ministered unto by one only
man; God ordained not three for one to do it: Frustra fit per plura quod fieri
potest per pauciora. Thus far the Letter dated, Aug. 21.

Object. Have we not the Ministry of Evangelists as well as Apostles in the
G^spels of Mark and Luke?

Resp. The title (...) I take to be humane only. Luke calls his History (...)
only, and not (...).

2. Nor know I why it should be called G^spel more then Paul's Epistles: the
Lord is as evangelically held out in them, as in the Histories; and the
Apostle, Romans 2.16. calls his Epistles, Gospel. So that Tertius, Romans 16.22. was
no less an Evangel^st in writing the Epistle to the Romans, then Luke by his
writing the H^story of our Lord.

3. No^ was the Evangelists work, writing, but Teaching: Matthew and John were
not Ev^ngelists by writing their Histories of Christ, but Historians, differing
from Mark and Luke, in that they saw the things done. Luke wrote them from the
twelve, or some of the seventy; which of them the Scripture relates not, only
says they were faithful witnesses.

4. Philip who wrote no Evangelicall Story, is called Evangelist, Act. 21.8.
Luke that wrote it is not called an Evangelist, but a Physician: 2 Timothy 4.5.
(...). The Dutch, Doet dat werck eens Evangelishe^ predikers.

Object. The former Treatise (...), therefore Luke making it, it made him an
Evangelist. Act. 1.1.

Resp. All that he made of it is:

1. That whereas he received of several men several passages of the History
of Christ, he p^^t them in order the first part first, the last last. Luke
1.1.2, 3.

2. The word (...), r^^^ects e^^^cially in a business, the manufactorship of
th^^ whi^^ ^^re was w^^ng only.

I may exceed h^^^^ (...) having spoken more largely in a Tract called, The
Smoke of the (...) c^^red by the light of the Scriptures, printed, I forbear.

The second General w^^^e of to be communicated to the Assembly, was the
Contents of a better ^ated Sept. 5. 1648. concerning the Pastor, in the Pastors
section; the thing questioned was the use and application made (...) Jam. 5.14,
15. Scrip. (...). Let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray
over him. ^ral per lui, Beza pro eo.

The words in the Propositions, the office of the Elder, that is, the Pastor is
to ^ay for the sick in private, to which a blessing is especial, promised.

1. I commend to your consideration, if this be not a taking from the words of
this book con^^^ied of God, Rev. 22.19. If any shall take away from the words
of the book of this Prophe^^e, God shall take away his part out of the book of
life, and (...) of the holy City, and from the things written in this b^^k: yea
in this is a taking away from the letter, and from the sense of the Scripture
which is all the taking away there meant, as I conceive.

2. In this, all the Church Elders are reduced to one, That so we may set up a
government in the Church of our own by one, and pull down Jesus Christ's, which
is by a combination of Church Ministry by Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers.

3. In particular, the Pasto^^ the El^^^ you invest wholly and alone with this
ministerial office, (...) by the express words of the Scripture one Church
Minister i^ not more interessed in it then another, but all jointly, and
equally.

4. The work cannot ^^do^^ singly in a Gospel way; the sick is commanded to
send for more then one, and more then one are commanded to pray for him.

The p^omise it annex^^ to a duty when done only according to Gods w^y, and in
obedience ^o his command; if we fall, and that wil^^ully of our part, we dep^^
o^^ selves wholly of the comfort of the ordinance, and the grace o^ God added
thereunto, faith being not able to move an hair beyond the help it has from
the Word of God inabling him.

O^ject. We have but one Elder, that is, the Pastor.

Resp. Where is the Church then to which the sick are sent of God for this
comfort, in which are to be Elders in a Church combination, Teaching the people
in health, and praying for them in sickness.

To this next is considerable that in the Propositions, it is said, that to the
Pastors Prayer, especially is promised a blessing.

The Scripture says, Let them pray: and after the prayer of faith shall save
the sick, that is, their prayer made in faith. I think it to be beyond the
power of man to make a blessing thus, promised to the whole Church Ministry,
or many ordinarily to belong to one: nor do I think that ordinance as done by
one, to be done in a Church way, or according to the rule of the Gospel in this
place.

Object. We intend the Teacher also to be here meant, though the Pastor be
only named.

1. Resp. If that be granted, I suppose you yet come short of the truth; the
word in the text for Elders, and the verb for let them pray, being both formed
in the plural, and not in the duall number, compared with the general scope
of the other Scriptures, proves a plurality of Elders to be in the Church, and
not a duality.

2. If the Doctor had been understood by you to be interessed herein, you would
have cited this Scripture of James in his Section as well as the Pastors, and
applied the duty to him, as you did, 1 Tit. 9. Ephesians. 4.11. quoted and applied by
you to both Pastor and Teacher in both Sect.

3. I suppose you would not have so particularly invested the Pastor with it as
your expressions used imply you to have done, saying, the Elder, that is, the
Pastor. And so the Pastor as if all but he had nothing to do with the duty, but
were excluded.

The Conclusion of this second Epistle was this: God is my witness I write
these things unto you only as moved thereunto by love and fear; fear toward
God, and love to you and the Gospel; and not of contention: for who am I that I
should contend with the Learning, Ability, and Parts of the Assembly, but in
obedience to Gods command. Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy
heart: thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon
him: and in what wi^e can it be more Christianly done then in private writing,
which I desire may be as Christianly taken, that Christ Jesus in all may be
glorified* and the truth come to be discovered, to the edifying of the Church
in love; and I shall gladly wait to do you all the servi^^ I can in Christ: and
rest,

Yours, John Brain.
Sept. 5. 1648.

We come (...) the third G^n^rall, and the Particulars of the third Letter.

1. I desire you to consider where Catech^^ng, as by you applied to Hebr. 5.^2.
and placed (...) the Pa^^ors Section, be not the Teachers proper ministerial
work, teaching the beginnings of Christ; which together with Baptism I suppose
is that proper work which solely does constitute the Teacher in the Church, he
being the first and the beginner of the Ministry.

Catech^sing by Q^^stion and Answer was exercised without the Church among the
Catecumeni only, but the preaching the beginnings of Christ in the Church to
the ^^fants, as in this Hebr. 5.12. was only the Dr. ministry.

1. This appears in the Scriptures holding out the whole Gospel Administrators,
Ephesians. 4.11. beginning with the Apostles he is last, beginning in the Minister
(...) is first 2 Timothy 3.16. Scripture is profitable for doctrine, and reproof,
etc. So that he begins with doctrine, and ends with perfection. As a man is
first a child, and after a man: so first the doctrine for children, and then
for men.

2. Scripture 2 Col. 7. rooted built up in him, and established in these, are
held out the diverse of the Spirit: 1 Cor. 12.4. there is a diversity of gifts,
there is the spirits part. In this again is intimated the diversity of
ministrings, ver. 5. which the Lord Christ instituted in the Church; and then
the diversity of operations which God by these several Ministers works, v.
6. The first of which is Rooting, which is done by preaching fu^dament (...)
children in grace, and not age only. Much more may be p^^secuted you
concerning this.

But tha^ of Romans 2.20. clear^ it, where the Apostle calls the Teacher (...),
which is understood only and done in a carnal manner ^^^ng us, and not
according ^o Christ.

For Anti^uity, I now only trouble you with that of Ambrose on Ephesians 1.1 who
appreh^^^ing a necessity, ^o have all the Gospel Ministry in (...) Church,
should have in some way though never so corrup^, which cannot be by (...) means
done ^y us: says of the Doctor. Magis^^ (...) ist^ qi^^^ ^o^^^ (...)
^^mpos^^nt, and verberant inqui^^^ which is, (...) Teach^^^ ^re Exorcists,
because they quiet (...) ^ye^ But after to be^^^^ purpose.

Sive hi qui lectionibus imbuendi infantes solebant imbuere sicut mos Judeorum
est quorum traditio transitum fecit ad nos quae per negligentiam obsolevit. Or
those (says he) who were wont to initiate children initiated by reading, as
the custom of the Jews is, whose tradition he has caused to be passed over to
us Gentiles, which by negligence is grown out of use.

1. This could not be meant of the Catechist, that was not out of use in his
time, nor after.

2. If the Doctors Ministry in Ambrose time were antiquated, who can show in
whose time since it was restored to the Church again?

4. Passing by the other lesser things in your Propositions, I shall now only
trouble you with two general Positions of yours, contained in the Doctors
Section. In which you say,

1. That the differing gifs may meet in, and accordingly be exercised by one
and the same Minister.

2. That where is but one Minister in a particular congregation, he is to
perform as he is able the whole Ministry.

All which are only to hold up Parochial Congregations against the way of
God; and I dare affirm, that while they stand, the way of God can never be set
up among us according to the Gospel of God, nor to edification.

1. I desire you to try if ever any Apostle singly and ordinarily in any one
Church whatsoever, did the whole work of the Ministry alone: Which if they had
done it by an extraordinary call, were no warrant for us without some express
command.

2. Where the Scriptures naming fellow laborers, co-workers, and the like,
with the Apostles joining of others with them in their Epistles prove not the
contrary.

3. The Apostles, as in Peter, Act. 10.48. he commanded them to be baptized;
which shows the Apostles did not baptize when a Doctor was present that
ordinarily wrought with him in the ministry of the Gospel: and if at any time
he should have done it in the presence of his fellow helpers, it would be now
that the holy Ghost fell on them, and that it was to baptize the first
converted Gentiles, but all these move him not to do irregularly in the Church.
This appears in Paul also, 1 Cor. 1.14.17. v. 14. I baptized none of you but
Crispus and Gaius.

1. The Apostle was at Corinth the time of gathering that Church.

2. In the gathering of it he baptized few only of that famous Church: now
without Baptism they could not be of the Church, which clearly proves Paul had
some other ministering with him to the constituting of the Church there, unless
we say ^^^e were baptise^ (...) these (...) or three families in that City.

3. Ver. 17. ^^ewe Paul had his ministry there, but plainly tells us it was not
bapt^^^ng but evangelizin^, as a work distinct from it.

4. Should not we now in ^^ing all, do ^ore then ever any Apostle did do in the
Church ordinarily; Are we more able then they? shall we exceed our pattern? or
^o (...) we walk by an other rule then the Gospel? And if so, it were good to
c^^sider whose R^le we walk by, and what warrant we have for it.

Compare 2 Cor. 1.19. 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. the Son of God Jesus Christ who was
preached amongst you by us, even by me, and Silvanus, and Timotheus, (...), we
(...) to God a sweet savor, ver. 16. (...)

1. It may be applied to a particular man, what one man is fit for these things
which we three do: is there any dares do that alone that Paul himself dares
not? But I rather do conceive the Apostle means of every particular ministry no
man is fit for it, or else the aggravation were not so considerable.

Conclusion hence is, that (...) ^n since the Apostles had any call to
officiate all the several Church offices together; and therefore none do or
may officiate them by any warrant from the Gospel.

We come to the Scriptures set down in the Doctors Section, brought to prove a
single ministry, etc. Romans 12.6, 7, 8. twice quoted. 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. Ephesians.
4.11. 1 Cor. 12.28. 1 Pet. 4.10. These Scriptures make clear against your
single Ministry, as after all I shall, the Lord assisting me, show you how.
Others there are set down which seem to prove it, but I suppose rightly
understood, prove nothing less.

1. Scrip. 1 Tit. ^0 Holding fast the faithful word as he has been taught,
that he may be abl^ ^y sou^^ doctrine both to exhort, and convince the
gainsayers.

This text twice cited in this Section, and proves little, it respects not the
ministry as exercised in the Church among believers, but shows what sufficiency
is required to be in a Minister, having to do with adversari^^ of the truth
^ith^ (...) that he must hold the truth against those ^ould take i^ from him,
and be able, maintain it against those gainsay it be sound doctrine, that is,
by the Word, or sound and ^ndeny able conclus^^ ^y n^ there from, by which he
may be able to convince (...) opp^^^ (...) truth.

2. Scripture is 1 Timothy 6.^. In this Epistle I suppose Timothy was wrote t^ as
to a ^ea^^^ only; which place ^e supplied ministering to the Thessalonians,
Paul, Silvanus, Timothy working together. 1 These. 1.1. compared with 2 cap. 1.
ye know our entrance in unto you.

1 Timothy 6.2. And they that have believing masters, l^^ them not despise them,
because they are brethren: but rather do them service, ^e (...) they are
faithful, and beloved, partakers of the benefit: These things (...) and ^^hort.

That that is brought hence to prove a single Ministry is this, that it is
said, These things teach and exhort; and that Teach^^g, the Doctors office, and
Exhorting, the Pastors ministry, are joined both together, and are enjoined one
man.

Resp. 1. Here is exhortation indeed added to teaching, but is commanded only
in a particular case.

2. It is limited to these things, and proves it was not proper to the Teacher
in other cases and things to usurp the Pastors office, in using the public
ministerial exhortation of the Pastor. A particularibus non datur conclusio.
So that if in a particular case as this we conclude with the Philosopher, we
must conclude against the Proposition.

3. It was not such as the Pastors exhortation was; the Pastors was to exhort
good men to be better, as 2 Pet. 1.4.8. to a growth and increase of godliness;
this was to take men from evil to good; and consisted in matter of morality,
and so rightly fitted the Doctors ministry, it pertaining to work repentance
from dead works, Heb. 6.

4. The defect was in the Teachers society, and may be God stirred him up to
this, who thought it the Pastors duty only to exhort in this as in all other
cases.

3. Scripture brought to prove a single Ministry, 2. Tim. 4.2. twice quoted:
Preach the Word, be instant in season, and out of season, reprove, rebuke,
exhort with all or in all long-suffering and doctrine.

1. This Epistle I suppose to be written to him as Pastor, who, I suppose,
ministered that part of ministry with Paul at Ephesus, Act. 19.22. which was
another time then that, 1 Timothy 1.3. speaks of there Paul bids him stay here, he
sends him forth; and its clear was the last Epistle be wrote, and immediately
going before his death.

2. Tim^thy himself had not exercised the full Ministry, for ver. 5.
following, Timothy is bid do the work of an Evangelist, and bear the full
ministry. Now it is to be observed, that the Pastor assuming the Evangelists
place of ministry, the Doctor was chosen Pastor, and the Evangelist did no
more the work of a Pastor.

3. He then exercised the Pastors part of the Ministry only, the words before
are but an exh^rtation ^^r preaching an ordinary word given, all publi^^
^xercise (...) bounded and ^imited by that which follows, wh^^^ sh^ws wh^^^^
is to preach, ^^proof ^xhort (...).

T^^ (...) words followin^ prescribe the manner of doing it, as in the sig^^^^
^^^ve with all (...) ^^ffer^^g and doctrine: doctrine here sh^^ ^^is ^^pro^^
^^d ^^hortation should be taken from the Word only that it may av^^l.

Lastly, preach was to distinguish private reproof from public and pastoral.

The only Scripture you have set down to prove it by, is that of 1 Cor. 14.3.
^e that ^^^hefieth, speaks to edification, and exhortation, and comfort. In
which ind^^d are all the distinct operations of the Ministry. But,

1. The Ministry though consisting of several parts, is spoken of as one in
the Scripture, though the ministry of Apostles differ from that of Prophe^^
that of Prophets from that of Evangelists, etc. yet Act. 6.4. We will give our
selves continually to prayer, and the ministry of the word: he^e the ministry
of the word is spoken of as one particular work only, when the Apos^^^ ^^d at
several times and places all the parts (...) ministry.

2. As the ministry, so the Ministers are said to be one: 1 Cor. 3.6.8. v ^. I
^^ve planted, Apollo watered: ver. 8. Now he that planteth, and he that
waters, (...) now, they are o^^, that (...), Vnum minister^^m sed duo
ministri.

3. (...) in this place is conjunctio completi^^, and is put for pr^inde,
signifying and then the being thus to be read, He that prophesies does it to
edify ation, and then to exhortations and after it has effected its w^^k
sufficiently, then to consolation.

4 Ver. 6. following expounds it clearly, s^^th the Apostle, What shall I
profit you except I speak by revelation as a Prophet, by knowledge as an
Evangelist, by prophecy as a Pastor, by doctrine as a Teacher in an
extraordinary ^^e having a call to exercis^ all.

1. Hence he joins revelation an extraordinary with the ordinary.

2. To show ^^one by (...) ordin^^y call may da^e to do them, unless he could
do (...) extraordinary also as he could, or this is no pattern for any.

5. This is held o^^ cle^^ (...) ^^^^tion, v. 7. And even things without life
giving sc^^d, whet^^^ (...) except they give a distinction in the (...), how
shall be (...) that i^ piped or harped: v. 8 (...) if the (...) an u^^^rtain
found, who shall prepare him, etc.

1. Here are three Instruments signifying this threefold Ministry, Pipe, Harp,
Trump.

2. They must have sounds. Romans 10.18.

3. They must have distinct differing sounds according to their differing
Ministry; as now the Ministry is exercised, it is ^^t ^own what is piped or
harped.

6. To say one may do all, is to confound the whol^ frame of that discipline
Christ has set up in his Church; and is against the many Scriptures which
clearly hold out the differing ministeries, and sets Scripture against
Scripture.

For Antiquity, I only commend now unto you that of Tertullian, in his book,
de exhortatione castitatis, a man that knew better the Gospel discipline then
any now living, he being about the year 200. when the Church had some purity in
it: his words are these.

Differentiam inter ordinem and plebem constituit Ecclesia authorit^^, and
honor per ordinis cons^ssum sanctificatus; adeo ubi non est Ecclesiastici
^^dinis consessus, and Offers, and Tinguis, and Sacerdos es tibi solus: sed ubi
tres, Ecclesia est licet Laici unusquisque sua fide vivit, necest personarum
accepti^ apud Deum quoniam non auditores legis justificantur a Deo sed
factores, s^cundum quod Apostolus dicit. Igitur si babes jus sacerdotis in
temetipso, ubi necesse (...) habeas etiam ^portet disciplinam Sacerdotis,
Digamus, Tinguis, Diga^^^ Offers, quanto magis Laico digamo Capitale est agere
pro Sacerdote, cum ipsi Sacerdoti digamo facto auferatur agere Sacerdotem.

Object. Sed necessitati indulgetur inquis.

Resp. Nulla necessitas excusatur quae potest non esse.

For the understanding of this (1.) the cause of it was from Gods forbidding
the Priest under the Leviticall Priesthood of having two wives; which he
spiritually applies to the Ministers of the Gospel.

2. The terms are obsolet of Offers for the Evangelist, Tinguis the Teacher,
Sacerdos the Pastor.

3. That in Tertullians time, Laymen did usurp the Minist^^y, ^s he complains,
De praescrip. Haeret. and so here.

The sense of Tertullian I apprehend to be this.

The Authority of the Church makes the difference between the Mini^ery and the
People; and the honor is sanctified by the Confession of the ministry; so as
that where there is not a Conf^ssion of Ecclesiastical order, the Evangelist,
and Teacher, and Pastor thou art by thy self alone (that is, thou art not in,
nor of any tru^ Church society) but where these three are, there is a Church,
though each Laick lives by his own faith: nor with God is there any respect of
persons; for not the hearers of the Law are justified before God, but the
doers, as the Apostle says. If thou have therefore the right of a Pastor in
thy self (that is by calling) as it is necessary, it behooves thee also to have
the discipline of a Pastor, and doing any thing of the Evangelist or Teachers
ministry, thou art become the Priest having two wives: how much more capital
is it for a Laick to exercise several parts of the ministry, seeing it is
capital to the Priest himself, being for the like fact deprived of Pastorship.

Obj. But thou will say, it should be yielded to necessity.

Resp. No necessity is excused by that which cannot be.

Conclusion. Reverend and beloved Brethren, I the more earnestly seek these
things of you, because the way of God clearly known and held out, will unite
the spirits of Saints now strangely divided, and procure the assistance of God
to defend us and his truth, and give men encouragement to fight the Lords
battles against the Enemies of truth, and comfort them against sufferings; when
otherway many may think they fight for the truth, and fight against it: much of
all which lies in your hands to help. Which help, I, and our Lord Christ by me
with the Saints call on you; for in doing whereof, you shall make your name a
praise on the earth, and be called, The Restorers of the Lords paths to walk
in, and the blessing of the Nation shall fall on you. Of which, and greater
then all which, God make you fit for in your faithful doing the work of the
Lord ye sit to do.

So prays your unworthy fellow Servant in the Gospel. J. B.
September. 12.

But to the discovery of the mystery that it may appear plain, to the ending of
farther debates about this one main, and of all other most weighty work, by
which the rest are upheld.

The words of the Propositions. The Lord having given diverse gifts, and diverse
exercises according to those gifts in the ministry of the Word, though these
differing gi^ts may meet in, and accordingly be exercised by one, and the same
Minister.

The question is what is here understood by gifts: Here now that we may not be
mistaken, we will make use of the Propositions themselves, who allow of but two
ordinary Ministe^s, the Pastor and Teacher.

1. The gifts of the Teacher is, when he is more excelling in exposition of
Scriptures, in teaching sound doctrine, and convincing gainsayers, then in
application; then he has the Teachers gift.

2. He that is more excelling in Application then in Exposition, Teaching, etc.
he is the Pastor: in this kind every man will find gifts in himself for all
the ministry, if he may profit by it.

Here lies the grand mistake of all, Gods mind is of another thing then the
world dreams of.

1. The gifts only are indeed the differing ministeries of the Word
themselves, Ephesians. 4.8 (...). ver. 11. (...), Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors, Teachers.

Romans 12.6, 7, 8. (...): Having therefore gifts differing according to the
grace given to us, whether prophecy, ministry, teaching, exhortation.

1. The text is clear, these gifts were not proper for one man to exercise: for
the text says, given diverse gifts to us.

2. The Lord injoyns a waiting on each particular gift, whether it be teaching
or exhortation.

3. Here are two things in the text expressed, and to be diligently weighed;
the gift, and the grace.

1. The gift which is the ministry we are called to by the Church.

2. The gift is to be according to the grace which is given us of God.

3. We are not to minister by the grace without the gift. 1 Timothy 4.14. Neglect
not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by proph^sie, with the
laying on of the hands of the Presbytery.

1. The gift was given by laying on of hands, which was the Teachers office.

2. Not by laying on of hands of extraordinary Elders only, but of ordinary;
and to be ordinarily used in the Church to the end forgiving the gift.

3. It was given him (by prophecy) that is, by experience had of his parts in
preaching before ordination.

4. By laying on of hands they gave but one gift at once, which was either the
Evangelist, Pastor, or Teacher, after approbation had of his graces.

5. To that gift thus given him he was to give himself unto only, and take
care of, and not others.

Object. It is said, the gift in thee, and therefore grace is meant only.

1. Resp. The word is (...), with that Romans 12.6. 1 Pet. 4.10.

2. Before ordination the gift of the ministry is in the Church, after it is
in the Minister, and in that sense the Apostle says it is in thee; and so
Tertullian before: Si habes jus Sacerdotis in temetipso.

Now in my judgment the Reasons why each ministry is called a gift in the
Scripture are two. 1. In respect of Christ's giving them to the Church. Ephesians.
4.11. 2ly, The Church by election and Presbytery by ordination give it again to
particular persons, as a Church gift for the continuance of the public
ministry: which must be either the gift of Evangelist, Pastor, or Teacher
only: the Lord gave no other for the Church; nor can the Church give but that
Christ gave her to give.

3 Scripture quoted in the Doctors Section: 1 Pet. 4.10. As every man has
received the gift, so minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the
manifold grace of God.

1. The grace of God is manifold.

2. To this manifold grace are of the Lord appointed (...), stewards of the
Lords house proper to the public ministry; who must be (...), fair.

3. These stewards come to have their stewardship by gift, they usurp it not.

4. This gift they receive from the Church by the hands of the Presbytery.

5. One man has but one gift to minister only, which he is bound unto to
minister and wait on.

6. Gf that gift he has received only; he is steward as well as Minister.

7. The word (...) clearly confirms the combination of this ministry, in which
every one (and so more then one) has his proper gift, and is only enjoined
the ministry thereof.

8. Most sweetly one Minister must minister to another, not in teaching
themselves, but the ministry without the Church ministers to the Doctor, the
Doctor to the Pastor, he to the Evangelist, that is, fitting people by degrees
for perfection; the child under the Doctor is to grow under that ministry to
his youth, to be under the Pastor, etc.

1. Ap. This cannot be done by a single ministry (as now) this is no Church
ministry.

2. Nor by the Gospel may a Minister use more then one gift.

3. Nor can the Church give at one time to one man more then one to use at once
in the Church.

4. By grace a man may have some degree of fitness for any part or all the
ministry; but God allows no man to make use of more then one Church gift, and
that gift must be only that he has received: The men that lived in the
Apostles times had as much grace as we, yet exercised but one gift. 1 Cor.
12.4, 5, 6. Ephesians. 4.8.11, 12.

Compare 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. Ephesians. 4.8.11, 12.

1. Both begin with the gifts of the spirit, without which is no ministry to
be exercised.

2. The ministry that is diverse (as the gifts are) which Christ gave to the
Church.

3. These differings gifts and ministry, are given for diverse operations to be
wrought by them in the Church: which operations are clearly set down what they
are: Ephesians. 4.12. and may be particularly applied thus.

1. For edifying the body, which is the Doctor; called the edifying ministry.

2. Unto the work of ministry, or the working ministry, by which the
understandings of men are exercised to work in them an experimental knowledge,
and understanding of spiritual things: Hebr. 5.14. their senses are exercised
for the discerning things that differ.

3. Is the Evangelists ministry, called the perfecting ministry; being for
the perfecting of the Saints.

In conclusion, I beseech you in the name of God, my Brethren of the Assembly,
according to 1 Pet. 3.15. to give your reply hereto; and I desire you to do it
as such a thing ought to be done in the spirit of love and meekness: and do it
plainly, not equivocally. Not using your parts to keep under the truth by
fighting them against God, as 2. Tim. 3.8. But let us all make it our honor to
be overcome of truth, by which means we may come to serve God truly, and cause
all contentions to fall quietly and quickly in the Land, which should be the
study of you, and me, and all. But for us to strive against God, by setting up
in Gods house what he has not set up, will be quickly cast down like another
Dagon. I farther commend these following heads to clear the truth; which being
cleared, the other parts of the Propositions fall to the ground, and come to
nothing.

1. That all extraordinary officers are contained in Apostles and Prophets. 1
Cor. 12.28.

2. That all extraordinary are contained in the word Teachers, which are the
rest of the officers mentioned, Ephesians 4.1.

3. If all but Apostles and Prophets are Teachers, then all but they are
ordinary Ministers: for all Teachers of the Word are to be in the Church
ordinarily to the end, and there is the same need of, and of them, as of the
other. Ephesians. 4.13. Each Teacher fulfils his ministry by teaching one as well
as the other, without which is no Church.

4. If Antichrist be not called the abomination of desolation, because he did
make desolate the wall, separated the Church from the world, making them one,
pulling down the distinct societies of Saints, and there differing ministry
making all one and common.

5. Where the Church be not in that desolate estate, until the wall be
rebuilded, the Saints mansions and differing ministeries erected and set up in
the Church again, which are not yet.

6. The Apostles and Prophets in their names, gifts and works, made clear their
extraordinarinesse.

7. The other ministry of Teachers had nothing extraordinary in names, gifts,
call, or work they did in the Church, or were to do.

Timothy ^n eminent Evangelist of an ordinary one, as ever was or shall be, had
nothing extraordinary in him. 1. He had his knowledge by the ordinary way of
hearing, as all have: 2 Timothy 1.13. The Epistles are written to him to direct
him his life and ministry, as to other ordinary Ministers. 2ly, He had his
call as the least ordinary Church Minister is to have it, and yet he is to be
accounted an extraordinary officer: 1 Timothy 4.14. 3ly, Nor did he do any thing
extraordinary in word or deed, or did he leave a line of his to the Church,
which proves the Evangelist to be no more extraordinary then the Teacher is.

I cannot pass by Mark and Luke. 1. They were not Apostles, nor Prophets. 2ly,
Nor were they in the writing their Histories any of the Church Teachers. I
would God would cleanse our eyes of this Popish mist; this could not be an act
of Teaching, though it conduces to Teaching; they only were Historians: such
an Act as that Timothy the Evangelist and Church Teacher never did yet as an
Evangelist, as teaching only, the giving denomination to all the ordinary
ministry.

8. The Evangelist cease not, unless^ any will presume to ^aintain, that
Teachers cease in the Church: if not, then no ^ore the Evangelist then the
Pastor.

The Gospel Churches were by these set up and governed.

1. (Jerusalem) by James, Peter, and John: Galat. 2.9. (Rome) by Paul,
Aristarchus, Marcus, and Jesus, called Justus. Colos. 4.10. Paul an
extraordinary officer may by the Gospel pattern assume three helpers to
himself. (Thessalonica) Ep. 1. cap. 1. ver. 1. compared cap. 2. ver. 1. Paul,
Silvanus, Timothy taught the Gospel together there at first. (Ephesus) Paul,
Timothy and Erastus ministered, Act. 19.22. compared with cap. 15.40. cap.
16.36. (Colossus) I suppose Paul planted not; he says only he heard of their
faith, Cap. 1. ver. 7. he says, Epaphroditus had taught them the Gospel: Cap.
2.1. he speaks as if he had not seen their face; nor does the History of Acts
mention his being there, which would not have been left out, had he been there,
Epaphroditus was Teacher, cap. 1.7. Onesimus, cap 4.9. Archippus, cap. 4.17.
(Philippi) was founded by Paul, Silas, Timothy, Ast. 16.12. compared with cap.
17.1.4. compared with Philip. 2.22. cap. 4.3. they have Clement when the
Epistle was written, and other fellow laborers of the Apostle with them.

Antioch, Act. 13.1. are left to teach when Barnabas and Saul were sent forth,
Simeon, Lucius, Manaen, Tit. 1.5. ministering Elders were to be ordained in
every City: and lest this should be thought only proper to City Churches, Act.
14.23. they ordained Elders in every Church, not in Cities only.

I dare boldly affirm, there is no precept nor pattern in all the Gospel for a
single Church ministry; therefore I hope Magistrates and Ministers will take
heed what they do in setting it up in Gods house: I believe we shall never see
peace until the way of God be set up, and ways of error cast down. The Lord
therefore stir you up to quit you like men in the work of the Lord, and prosper
ye. So prays a poor unworthy Gospel Minister,

J. B.

FINIS.

