A Letter writ to Sir John Robinson Lieutenant of the Tovver,
By EDWARD BAGSHVVE, Close-Prisoner there.
SIR,
THough I believe you have no Remorse, yet I suppose you cannot but be
conscious, how unworthily you have used me; and because, whenever you do any
thing which is injurious and oppressive, you are apt to excuse your self by
your Orders, in the observance of which, especially when they are harsh and
severe, you pretend to a great deal of care and strictness; I desire therefore
to know what Warrant you had to commit me unto the Dungeon, and to detain me
there four days, under such Rigorous and Unchristian Circumstances, that none
could have been guilty of doing, but one, who, together with his Religion, had
put off all sense of common Humanity. You have told me indeed, and it is a
Position, not only false and damnable in Divinity, but utterly destructive of
our English Liberty, that The King has a Prerogative above the Law, by which
he may punish Whom and How he pleases: But were I willing so far to unman my
self, and to deny both my Religion and Reason, as to admit of that, yet I am
sure, His Jailer has no Prerogative, but stands upon the (...) Level with the
rest of his Brethren: And therefore it is my purpose to call you to an Account
for that barbarous, and, in a Christian State, never sufficiently to be
abhorred Action, unless you have the King's, or his Secretaries Hand to
authoririze you for the doing of it.

But, Sir, that saying, how unjustifiable soever, is but part of your Crime,
for when I advised You not to do any thing but what you could justify by Law:
You replied, that You had nothing to do either with the Law or Parliaments; and
You do daily manifest by your Lawless carriage, both to my self and the rest of
the Prisoners here, that you spoke as you thought. But, Sir, such an Assertion,
in persons who are entrusted with the Lives of others, is so Black and Horrid;
and the condition of those who are under your Power, is by it, made so Unsafe,
that I dare no longer conceal my knowledge, but intend forth with to signify
unto some Members of the House of Commons, what a Monstrous and Unnatural kind
of Offender you are; of which I thought fit to give you this private Notice,
that you might not be surprised, but prepare your self, either to defend, or,
which I rather wish, to expiate your Fault by Repentance.

Sir, It is possible you may think, that a just and due sense of my own
Unmerited and Illegal Sufferings, has excited me to seek for Justice upon
(...) Inflicter of them; but I can assure you, that, in t^^^ Action, I am as
free from Malice, as You, in yo^^ late one, was from Piety and Honor: It is a
se^vice which I owe, first to God, and next to my O^pressed Countrymen, who
are in Bondage under You, to discover unto the Parliament, what a wretched and
unworthy Task-master is set over them, who, though he is crept in to be one of
their Number, by whom Laws are made, and Grievances should be redressed, yet is
not afraid to profess, that he has nothing to do either with the Law or Them.

Sir, As a Friend, and one that is ready to forgive you all my Personal
Injuries, let me entreat you to bethink your self in time, and by a solemn
Retracting of what you then said, prevent your being brought upon the Stage: Or
if, in confidence of your present Power, you resolve to persist in the owning
of such Tyrannical Principles, and in Practices correspondent to them,
hereafter, you can accuse none but your self, if your sins (...)ut and hunt you
unto punish(...) (...)

Sir, Ready to serve you in all Christian Offices, EDW. BAGSHAVVE.
March 16. 1663/4.
POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
THe foregoing Letter had been delivered into your own hand, in the same
private and concealed manner which there is mentioned: But your Uncivil, as
well as Illegal, denying me the Use of my Pen and Ink, has forced me to send
it you from the Press, so that now it is no longer in my power to keep your
Counsel: But hereafter, if this occasions your being questioned for so Insolent
an Expression, I hope you will be satisfied that Guilt is a very Ill
Counselor, since the very means you designed unduly to silence my Complaint,
has made me find out another, which you will be less able to resist the
effects of. And now, Sir, that the World will take notice of your Absurd and
Ungodly Demeanor, never imagine that any thing but speedy Repentance can
secure you: And because I fear, that you have sinned even in your own thoughts,
so much unto Death, that you despair of any Recovery, I leave you to the
Anguish of your Conscience, till the Hand of Justice brings your Fears upon You.

FINIS.

