Heaven and Earth, Spirit and Blood, DEMANDING REAL Commonwealth-Justice: OR A
LETTER To the SPEAKER of the present House of Commons.

By Captain William Bray; From his Captivity in Windsor-Castle.

ROMANS 2.2, 6. But we are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth,
against them which commit such things; Who will render to every man according
to his deeds.

Imprinted at London, 1649.

Mr. Speaker,
I Did long since make my APPEAL in Parliament (as the fundamental, Legal
birthright of the People) for righteousness and justice, and might have
expected, that after such glorious and unparalled Declarations, Covenants,
Imprecations, Engagements, and actions; I should have had a Legal, righteous,
Christian, Parliamentary, and impartial hearing, between the General and Me,
according to the Ancient and just constitution of Authority in its first
institution in Scripture, Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17. and according to the many obligations
that lie upon you from the Commands thereof, Deuteronomy. 16.19, 20. Is not judgment
wrested hitherto, when instead of a hearing I have a prison, and an illegal one
too; contrary to the infallible and fundamental Rights of the people, and of
just Government.
Thou shall not wrest Judgment; Thou shall not respect persons: That which is
altogether just shall thou follow, 2 Chronicles. 19.6^7. The contrary is abhorred,
and judgment denounced against it, Esaias 1.23, 24 Jerem. 5.28, 29. and 22.16,
17, 18. and Amos 5.12. and 6.12, 14. Mich. 3.9, 11. Job 20.6, 7, 19. Though his
Excellency mount up to the Heavens, and his head reach to the clouds; yet he
shall perish for ever like his own dung: they which have seen him shall say,
Where is he, because he has oppressed, Acts 10.34. James 2.9.

You have cut off the late King, A just, substantial and irrevocable Covenant,
or Oath cannot be acted contrary unto, without the guilt of perjury and
unspeakable damage to the people.
so arbitrarily and forcibly, violating the Laws and Liberties of the People,
you have solemnly Sworn and Covenanted to sight for, and maintain the Laws and
Liberties of the people, and wished the wrath and vengeance of Heaven and Earth
to fall upon you if you did not maintain the laws and liberties, as I have
declared in my third appeal for Common-wealth-Justice, which remains dead in
your hands (as I hear) and he that delivered it to you ( viz. Cornet
Cheeseman) was imprisoned by Lieutenant General Cromwell, etc.

By Arbitrarinesse, lawlessenesse, power, force, strength or the sword (for it
will amount to no other as to men) the Lord Jesus the precious Son of the
Most High, and the head of Saints was Crucified, butchered and massacred in his
Liberties, Mat. 10.30.
Freedoms and Rights of his humanity etc. as appears by the whole Scriptures
of his Life, the confessions of his Judge, and his sufferings. God, the People,
the Laws and Conscience, Mat. 7.12.
are to be accounted unto for the loss of the meanest Member, or of any person
or persons unjustly destroyed; For the Lord and a just Law, tender innocent
Blood and the Liberties of his People; Christ the glorious Son of God
perfectly declared the Laws of nature and justice.

You profess your selves Christians, yet in this you live beneath the Common
principles of nature, and in the path of former Tyrants whose blood you have
spilt as water upon the ground; if you walk contrary to the Law of nature, by
power you justify the Crucifying, butchering and massacring of the Lord Jesus,
etc. and so fill up more and more the measure of bloody abominations.

I have not only been stifled in the rights of nature according to the reason
of God, If a man should complain to a Justice of Peace that such a man robbed
him or sought his life, would it be just that the Justice of Peace should
commit the accuser or complainer, and also to the Jurisdiction of him that
robbed him etc. What Law, Scripture, Principles of God or nature is for this?
and been dealt with contrary to the Scriptures, and sent to an unlawful
Prison, and to the Jurisdiction of him that has dealt cruel y, barbarously,
unnaturally, unchristian like, and tyrannically with me to my unsupportable
damage, loss and prejudice, as to humane considerations; But the Warrant by
which I am committed is contrary to Law, Generals being no crimes in Law; The
Lord Cooks 2 part of Inst. fol. 52, 53.315.318.511.615.616. 1 par. Book Dec.
pa. 38.77.20.845. and the Votes upon the impeachment of the eleven Members and
the Petition of Right the third of King C. and the Act that abolished the
Star Chamber. And I am also committed (by the words of the Warrant) during
pleasure; whereas if the Warrant had been legal it would and should have bin,
Til delivered by due course of Law (righteousness or justice.) And here, after
I have expended my self and wasted my precious days and time in the
Commonwealth in expectation of a glorious issue of the blood that has been
shed: I have been barbarously kept in prison without any humane consideration
all the while for my subsistency, far beyond the dealings of the late King, etc.

Sir, I have only this as my last unto you or your House (seeing I have been so
much neglected by you in the cause of Justice, and consequently of the people,
so that neither love to justice, nor importunity, has moved you from me nor
from others, neither for me nor for others) that you would move the House that
I may have freedom from my oppressive and illegal Imprisonment and bonds, and
have reparations for the same according to declared principles of the Almighty
God, Nature, Scripture, the splendid Declarations of your selves and my
Adversary, acknowledged reason, and the fundamental Justice, Law, and
Constitution of the Nation; and that I may have the undoubted freedom of a
Commoner, a Christian, and member of the People, to follow my Appeal in
freedom, temperance and judgment (which is certainly to come, at which Felix
trembled) and to have a lawful, impartial and public hearing, according to the
nature of Law, Righteousness, and the being and honor of Authority: and if
neither will be heard by your House, I desire you to acquaint them that the
Nature of Justice, and the aforementioned principles do requre a just respect
from them to me, and for my subsistency in prison (which the King himself
granted to his prisoners, and so was more just and merciful as to humane
considerations) I having not had any just allowance from them since my
barbarous and arbitrary imprisonment; knowing that I have been cruelly and
arbitrarily dealt with by the General, to my great damage, as my third Appeal
expresses. Which cruelty and injustice (considering my almost seven years
Service in the Wars, for the cause of the kingdom) is one of the manifold
occasions and engagements to an adamanine heart, much more to a true Patriot.
And therefore now I will (the Lord willing) shut up my mouth, if I cannot have
justice by this last Address, and will surrender up my Body, Spirit and Cause
to the high and mighty God, Judge, and Father, before whom all things are naked
and bare; and appeal to the next free Representative or Parliament, in whom I
hope there will be faithfulness, holiness, wisdom and justice. And however my
enemies may deal with my body, whether by murder, or otherwise (I being under
the illegal Jurisdiction of my Adversary, who has dealt cruelly and unjustly
with me) yet my Cause shall live in the presence of the Lord, and the
Generations present and to come, and shall be brought forth in the eternal
judgment, where my Adversary shall not appear in his gallant Equipage, and
where his large Sums and Lands of the Commonwealths, or being General of an
Army (which should be the Peoples) shall be found too light; and where he shall
have no Parliaments to terrify from the doing of justice.

And if they do murder me, I shall go before, The Grandees of the Army said in
Deel of the 14. of June, That Justice is one of the witnesses of God in the
earth. Beware.
and they will follow after. And moreover, let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, my
blood may as sensibly rise, as living blood in the hearts (if not faces) of
your House who have unjustly committed me to the Jurisdiction of my adversary,
who, its probable, thirsts after my blood, as well as to rob and deprive me of my
liberties and rights. But I trust, the Lord will make me willing to resign up
my blood as well as my Liberties to satisfy his pleasure as well as the cruelty
and inhumanity of Justice-enemies, for in a due and serious consideration it is
the Lords and the Peoples. Sir, I hope you will excuse me, that I speak what I
do, and consider that the Lord has given me an opportunity to hold forth his
Excellency and Sovereignty against one that is called Excellency; and nature
has given me an occasion, as to my Country, and my self, and also that the
Tyranny and cruelty I am under is no small force upon my spirit. So leaving you
and your House to the judgment of the great day of the Lord, and the Lords
faithful people in the Land, I take my last farewell, and rest,

Yours, If you will be the Nations, WILL. BRAY.
From my cruel, arbitrary and causeless Prison and Indurance (by that
everlasting (to be) accursed principle by which Abel, Naboth, and the Lord
Jesus Christ, and many in our late days were crucified and massacred.)
FINIS.

