BABELS FALL, In the Foolish Virgins Sleep.

Among which Presbytery lies, with Predictions of the great disputes to be at
the raising of the true Ministry.

Written by a Witness of the Truth, John Brain.

Ely to Samuel.

1 Samuel 3.17. What is the thing the Lord has said unto thee? I pray thee hide
it not from me, God do so and more al^o to thee, if thou hide any thing from
me, of all the things God has said unto thee. Samuel to Ely.

1 Samuel 3.18, 14. Samuel told him the in quity of Elies house shall not be
purged by Sacrifice nor offering for ever. The man of God said to Eli,

1 Samuel 2.35. God has said, I will raise me up a faithful Priest, which shall
do according to that which is in my heart, and in my mind, and I will build
him a sure house, and he shall walk before mine anointed, etc. Ely said to
Samuel,

It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. LONDON, Printed for T. B.
in Kings-street at Westminster, MDCXLIX,

To the Honorable John Lisle, one of the Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal.
Honorable:
AS David and the Apostles before me said, We believe, and therefore speak, so
I believing the truth of the Scriptures, did presume to write you of many
things strange before, but now evident since accomplished: I am once more bold
to write you from the Gospel of things shortly to be fulfilled, which will seem
strange, but will prove most true in its time, however, mine enemies are
stirred up to hate and oppress me for it, the day will come they will be
ashamed at it. Sir, I hope, I have deserved no other but your love, wherewith
you have loved me, and the love of those love God in the Country, and those
hate me do it without a cause, even for my standing for, and witnessing to the
truth of the Gospel, with which I am entrusted, which should occasion their
love, were they of God, and not hate, to the defense whereof you are called,
and blessed shall you be if you contend for it, and consent not to the
detaining of the discovery thereof, which the Lord preserve you from, and keep
you to immortality and life, and set you with Christ in his sight, to the full
enjoyment of himself for ever.

Is the hearty desire of your Servant in the Gospel, John Brain.
April 1, 1649.
TO THE READER.
THe predictions following are drawn from Prophetical Scriptures, and are no
Inthusiasticall Dreams, they seem strange indeed at first, but strong is the
Lord that does them, for has he said, and shall he not perform it? God has
foretold us when h^ shall build up Sion he will appear in his glory which sets
us now upon the expectation of glorious things, these are therefore written
that God may be glorified, Magistrates may be directed, Ministers instructed,
and the Truth reveal^d: Concerning all which, in much confidence I affirm, if
the Lord give me leave to live but a little while, I shall not be ashamed of
what is herein written. Thus leaving thee and them to the Lord, to declare
himself herein as he please, to the glorifying of himself for ever: And this I
dare affirm, so far off as thou see we are from seeing these things, so far
off are we from seeing peace and deliverance, and as men act against this they
act against their own deliverance, from which the Lord prevent us graciously.

I rest thine in the Lord, John Brain.

BABELS FALL, In the foolish VIRGINS Sleep.
The Kingdom of Heaven that is the state of the Church under the Gospel,
Administrations are usually set out by the Lord significantly in Parables, some
whereof have their allusions drawn from Marriage and Marriage-Feasts,
corresponding with the predictions of the Prophets foregoing, and in especial,
that of MAT. 25. from Verse. 1. to Verse. 11.
IN which ye have the estate of the Church, Ministry, and Government thereof
unto the end of the world, according to the wisdom of the infinitely wise God,
held out and commended unto us under the notion of a Marriage, in which Christ
is the Bridegroom, the Church is the Bride, and the Ministry the Virgins.

I know the Expositions extant of these are quite contrary^ Aug. lib. 83. Q.
59. Inter parabolos a Domino dictus solet quarentes multum exercere ista quae
de december virginibus posita est, and (...) quidem hinc multa senserunt, quae non
sunt praeter fidem, sed quo^^do partibus omnibus ejus conveniat expositio id
elaborandum est, He that has a mind to see the diversity of constructions
given by the Ancients of this parable, let him read Salmeron in parabolas, who
has taken the pains to collect them together.

Those that have written lately understand by the wise and foolish Virgins, the
several Members of the Church. In which are wise and foolish, from whence some
would confirm mixed societies.

But that this cannot be meant, is plainly evinced in this, that the
Church Members are to be understood in the Bride which is the Church, that is
the Lambs wife, and therefore the Virgins are such who are ministerially
employed about the Marriage of the Church to Christ.

1 And that which helps most clearly to open the Parable is this; That the
Lord mainly aims at the discovery of the state of the Church under
Antichrist, in taking the parable from a Night-Marriage.

2 And the restoring of the Church to its quendam primitive estate after his
tyranny.

3 And briefly shows what things were to happen concerning the Ministry,
both true and false, as the one related to Christ, and the other to Antichrist,
until the second taking of the Gentiles to himself again.

Object. Parables serve only to illustrate and prove nothing.

Reply. I know it is so generally conceived, but let me tell you, that the
Church practice, and many precious prophesies of the Church, are so laid up in
them, and to be proved from them, and so from them as from no Scripture like
them, the Lord sets not out the state of the Kingdom but by parables.

2 The Kingdoms Government is never to be clearly known but by them, and to
be proved thence.

3 The Lord declared the Government in parables, as being most fit to conduce
to the maine end of Gods hiding the Church from the world.

And this is plainly seen in the answer of Christ to his Disciples, Mat. 13.10.
to the end of ver. 15. who demand of Christ, why he taught in parables? who
answers, To you it is given, to them it is not given to know the mysteries of
the Kingdom, but to the parables it self.

1 The word (...), then, is a note of time, and relates to the predictions of
the former Chapter, ver. 15. the abomination of desolation, or time of the
tyranny of Antichrist. ver. 29. the darkning of the Sun of earthly glory, the
Moon shall not give her light, the sad estate of the Common People, and the
Stars shall fall from Heaven, the fall of Ministry, and the Powers of Heaven
shall be shaken; signifying the removing of the Church-Governments and
Authority then established. When the Lord of the evil servant, ver. 48. to the
end, that beat his fellow servants, and eat and drank with the drunken,
should be cut asunder, which is, that the Lord should deprive Antichrist of his
ministry, that evil servant, when the wise servant which gave meat to the
Lords household in due season should be blessed, restored and comforted.

Now the Holy Ghost relates to the then time, especially, showing in what
estate the Church should be in respect of the ministry thereof, set down under
the name of Virgins, that is, men exempted from all worldly employments to
Jesus Christ.

2 Their Employment or Ministry is set out in their Lamps.

3 Their Ordination in their taking their Lamps, by which lawfully they may
minister in the Church to Jesus Christ.

4 They are first summed up together ten Virgins, to show that in respect of
office calling Ministry, they did seem to be one, and agreed.

5 They went forth to meet the Bridegroom, a metaphor taken from marriages,
partly in use amongst us, so far as sufficiently to set out the mind of God in
this text. In that we see usually at weddings, young men, youth or Virgins,
accompany the Bride to the place of marriage, and present her to the
Bridegroom; which thing is most clearly held out and proved by that saying of
the Apostle, 2 Cor. 11.2. I have espoused you (French Approprier) to one
husband, that I may present you as a chaste Virgin to Christ. Hence the
Apostles are called the Children of the Bride-chamber, Mark^ 2.10.

1 You see what was done in Church-constituting.

2 That it was the Ministers office here called the Virgins, to present the
Bride or Church to Jesus Christ, proved from the practice of the Apostles, and
of the five wise Virgins here mentioned, ver. 2.

1 These ten Virgins are divided into five and five.

2 They are distinguished by their qualifications: the one five are said to be
wise, the other to be foolish: the wise are the true ministry, the foolish the
false Antichristian ministry.

3 In that they are divided into five and five, it shows that there should be a
representation in the false Antichristian ministry, of the true Gospel Ministry
of Christ, some way though not aright, as the Corinths begin with false
Apostles, so these, 2 Cor. 11.13.

The five Virgins that are said to be wise, or the true Gospel ministers, are 1
Apostles, 2 Prophets. 3 Evangelists. 4 Pastors. 5 Teachers. Now these
ordin^rily are ordained to present the Church, as young men, Virgins, the Bride
to the Bridegroom.

Now as the wise, so the foolish are also five in number, Antichrist having
that falsely in his false, Christ has in his true Church in truth.

1 To the 12 Apostles, the Pope set up in Rome 12 Cardinals, Anselme, Revel.
13. Antichristus habiturus est pseudos Apostol^s suos.

V^de P^tte^. Number of the Beast. cap. 14.
As there is a clear and eminent Antithesis between Jerusalem and Rome, so is
there also between Christ's Apostles and the Popes Cardinals: there being no
persons in the whole world, of what rank, order, or dignity soever, styling
themselves (...), vicem gerentes Apostolorum, as they do.

Idem ibid.
As the Apostles truly were and are the root and foundation of the Christian
Church, and all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, so the Cardinals falsely pretend
themselves to be, and so they truly are, and do in express words declare
themselves to be the very basis and foundation of the Romish Hierarchy, read
that that follows hereof. So that hence you see he proves that what the
Apostles were in the true, the Cardinals in the false. Hence the Pope sends a
Sapphire to the new made Cardinals, as foundation stones.

It is also a clear Note that the five foolish Virgins are signified in these,
because the Cardinals as the Apostles of Christ's ministry consists of
Archbishop Cardinals, Bishop-Cardinals, Presbyters, and Deacon Cardinals, that
as the Apostles executed the place of Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors,
Teachers, in the true, so these Cardinals falsely in the false. Now as the
Cardinals arose from Presbyters. First, so in the fall of Presbytery, and that
falls with them is the full fall of Papacy and Babylon, and from these five,
and not the five wounds of Christ as Mr. Potter, and so by five times five
multiply them, to 25 to make their Monks, Friars, and Mass Priests, to be the
(...), to them 1 Chronicles. Chap. 25. for what relation is there between Christ's
five wounds and 25 ministers. Potter Chap. 24. and the 25.

2 To the Prophet, the Pope constituted in his Church an Antiprophet, or Arch
bishop, which God remarkably, as it were to complete this Scripture, called the
Archbishop of this Kingdom by that name, Rev. 16.13. where some
Ecclesiastical person under the sixth violl, in which time we live, is called
by the name of a prophet, or Anti-prophet, he being to be in that place in the
false Church the true Prophet is in the true.

Object. Why do you allude this to the Archbishop of this Kingdom, more then
to others of other Kingdoms.

Reply 1 The first Archbishops of the world were set up in this K ngdome,
others took their pattern from hence, and ye know what honor Anselme had, in
being called Papa orbis, in a whole Council of Bishops at Barsnense, 1098. and
again ye know that the Archbishop of this Kingdom called the Image of the
Beast, ruled independently from the Pope, as supreme himself, etc. Which was
to be slain, Rev. 19.20.

3 The Bishop was understood in all ancient writings, which ordinary
Evangelists in Scripture, the first 200 years, as in my book called the
Resurrection of Churches appears.

4 The presbyter answe^s to the pastor in the true Church: hence the presbyter
usually uses the name Pastor, not Deacon as made first and inferior to
pastors.

5 The Deacon in the false Church was the Anti-teacher to the Teacher in the
true, who was the first minister of Antichrists Church, who had not as full
authority in Church affairs as the Pastor to administer Sacramentrs, nor the
Pastor as the Bishop to o^daine Ministers, but the Bishop with the presbyters,
as the Evangelist with the pastor and Teacher were to do, nor had the Bishops
that authority as the Cardinals had in the false church: as the Evangelists had
not that authority as the Apostles in the true Church.

Object. In the Hierarchy of Rome are 90 Orders, and more mentioned by Fox in
his Book of Acts and Monuments: and then what do you tell us of those five?

Reply There are so, but none of these preached the word, as is here signified
by the Lamps, but either as Bishops, or Pastors, Priests or Deacons: be their
Order what they will, and so still the teaching ministry of theirs are to be
red^ced to one of these five.

Object. What say you of the Patriarchs?

Reply They opposed the Pope most of them, or rather his predecessors, and
after the fall of the true Church, they fained four extraordinary Evangelists,
Matthew, Mark, Luke and John.

Now that the hiding of the Church may be accelerated hereby, they set up four
patriarchs in the World at the first, the patriarchs of Rome, Antioch,
Alexandria, Jerusalem, says one of the patriarchs, Hi quatuor principio fuere
Romanus, Antiochenus, Alexandrinus, Hierosolimitanus, postea translata
Bizantium Imperii sede additus est Constantinopolitanus. These indeed made way
to set him up, but when once up, Antichrist took care to take them down: they
being impediments to him, as it were eclipsing the Papal glory.

The general Note of this second verse is, that the wise are here set before
the foolish, not for that they are preferred before them only, but
prophetically showing that the wise, and part of that is said concerning them,
were in time before the foolish, and that the Antichristian ministry did
succeed them, and most of the things in o der set down of them.

Ver. 3. The foolish t^ok their Lamps, and took no oil with them.

1 Here is the ^^lly of the foolish Virg^ns notified, that they took their
Lamps* their call to the ministry without spiritual knowledge, or wisdom to
exercise their ministry by unto the world, as appears in some Cardinals that
have been Princes, others children, so some Archbishops, as A^bert Archbishop
of Mentz, who being at the Diet at Ausbourge, An. 1530. who finding a Bible on
the table, and reading some leaves thereof, where by chance he opened it said,
truly I know not what Book this is, but this I see it makes all against us.
Luther in Erphord Abbey, happening on the history of Hanna, in the first Book
of Samuel, not knowing what Book it was, wished that he were owner of such a
Book as that, this appears in the Letter of the Pope for Frederick of Lovania,
a ch^ld to be Canon in the Church of Lincoln, which occasion^d that exc^llent
Return of Grosted to Pope Innocent the fourth, cited by Fox: by which, as by a
Thunderbolt, the Pope and his Cardinals were smitten, (who say after all the
Bedlam fury of the Pope uttered against him for it.) It is but very truth that
he affirms, nor can we condemn him therefore, he is a holy man, more holy
and religious then we our s^lves of excellent wit, and excellent life, so as it
is thought among all the Prelates he has not his better, nor yet his like, and
thus having spoke wounderfully in commendations of him, advise him with this
Council (a way not out of use in these times) that he should dissemble and
wink at these things, as one not seeing, or regarding them, least otherwise,
perhaps, some tumult may arise and spring thereof, especially seeing this is
known and manifest to all, that once must needs come a disertion and parting
from the Church of Rome, Fox Acts Mon. in the life of Henry the third.

2 It is (...), their Lamps to show the call of ministers in the false Church
was differing from that in the true: the Lamps the foolish Virgins had were
properly theirs, they had not the Lamps of the wise, nor had the wise the Lamps
of the foolish.

1 It implies, their care was to have the ministry for the means sake, not the
service of the Gospel, nor the glory of God; this was not the least part of
their folly.

2 They took their Lamps never regarding whether the call they had were
Christian or Antichristian: they took it without any more ado, and glad they
had it. I do not write these things without self-conviction.

Verse. 4. But the wise took oil in their vessels, with their lamps.

Here the particle ^ differenceth the estate of the wise from the foolish, and
the lamps, or call to ministry from the others.

1 Signifying they were wise, and belonged to the true Church estate.

2 The call they had was Evangelicall.

3 They in their vessels had oil, being gifted with understanding in the
mind, with spiritual life in the soul, with experience and knowledge of God
and his way, being taught of God in the heart.

3 They had these and then took their lamps, showing these were not to be
divided, and that none were to be made Ministers but such as were thus
qualified.

4 In that they took their lamps, shows, they did not Minister in in the Church
without a call.

5 They took it being given them of the Church of Christ, as the lamps were
given the foolish in the Church, I cannot say of the Churches of Antichrist.

6 The wise Virgins are here put last, showing that the true Ministry shall
come again into the Church, after the foolish, as they were before ( verse. 5.
(...), but the Bridegroom tarying they all slumbred and sl^pt.

These words clearly hold out that the Lord had respect to the Churches
restoration, after the fall of Antichrist, and the Estate of the Church before
also, and that in the time of Antichrists Reign Christ absented himself from
the Church as it were.

1 The slumber of the wise was first, as they are mentioned first, verse. 2. In
which Prophetically was signified by Christ, that the time would come in which
the true Ministers, and Ministry, would be remiss in the Government of their
Church, and careless of their duties.

2 That this their spiritual slumber would proceed, or rather indeed make way
for their sleep, or extirpation by Antichrist.

3 Most sweetly intimating Prophetically in their sleep, that for a time 1260.
years near their would be an utter cessation of the true Gospel ministry in
the World.

4 In that they are said to sleep onley, it is also intimated that God would
again awaken them, restore them, and have their ministry again exercised in
the Church.

5 This we see verified, in that the true Church ministry slumbred all before
and slept since Antichrist, as in my book of the Churches Resurrection is set
forth, how by degrees this was accomplished.

Now as the wise slumbred and slept, the foolish they also before Christ
marriage shall and must also have their slumber all of them and their sleep,
for the text says (...), all and every one of them wise in their time and the
foolish in their appointed time likewise slumbred and slept.

It is true indeed, it would cost not a little panis to a man to find how,
when and in whom the wise Virgins slept, because it is long since done, and
monuments of Antiquity are lost, especially the chief, and those are left are
little worth. I cannot pass by that of Augustine, de moribus Ecclesiae, cap.
30. Tu puerilliter pueros fortiter juvenesque and senes, prout cujusque non
corporis tantum, sed animi aetas est, exerces and doces: this was but too
little purpose pressed in the time of the administration of a single Ministry:
and the Churches almost fallen estate.

But for the slumber of the false Church which is of later times, there is no
such obscurity in that.

1 The slumber of Cardinals was when they came from 12, ab^ut 423. in
Coelestines time, to be after 25, as Potter Numb. of the Beast, cap 19. where
he shows that Cardinals, Bishops and Deacons, were not originally in the
College of Cardinals, when their first number were decreed, but are rather
redundant extuberances of the Papacy built upon, and dangerously over-hanging
that ancient foundation of the Presbyter Cardinals: this slumber he makes to
begin to be the Number 25 (but I rather conceive at the Number 12) when
Alexander the third, in the year 1163, made Conradus Suenus Archbishop of
Mentz, one of the College of the Cardinals.

2 The sleep of the Cardinals in this Kingdom, was in the death of Cardinal
Poole, who died the next day after Queen Mary, of some Italian physic, as some
suspect, being the 18th. of November, 1558.

The slumber of the false prophet and Anti-Evangelist, was in the time of Henry
the Eighth, when they were made to acknowledge the Kings Supremacy and not the
Popes, in the year 1531. whose sleep was brought on the false prophet and
Anti-Evangelist, in the year 1644, in the making of that Ordinance appointed,
the taking the Covenant, the second branch whereof was, that without respect of
persons, we should endeavor the extirpation of Popery and Prelacy that is,
Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. which ended in William Laud,
Jan, 10. 1644.

The slumber of the Anti-teacher, was in that slumber, ^^il on the re^t 1531,
and is fallen asleep, and no man knows how, it being now apparent to all that
Deacons were not teachers in the Church as Deacons, but ministered alms to the
poor only, so that now there is none acknowledged: and so none awake but the
Presbyter that is the Antipastor.

Let me ask the Question, are they awake or do they slumber, sure heavens
thunder cannot keep them long from sleeping, me thinks, the Questioning
ministers calling, the not suffering the Presbyterian Government, to be Jure
divino, and the daily shaking of her foundations are very dangerous signs, she
is in a deadly slumber, she would else awake and speak for her self.

Object. Here it is questionless, o but in Scotland, it is awake. Here friends
I speak not of envy to any, but to glorify God in speaking the truth.
Presbytery must sleep in Scotland, as well as Episcopacy in England, Episcopacy
had as great friends and command here in England, as presbytery ever had in
Scotland, or can have, and had it is glory of longer continuance, and it is no
less ordained (...) God, that presbytery shall sleep then Episcopacy.

Friends, do you not consider, you that made that clause in the 2d. branch of
the Covenant, where we are to endeavor the extirpation not only of
Archbishops, Chancellors, Commissaries, etc. but all other Ecclesiastical
Officers depending on that Hierarchy? do not presbyters depend on that
Hierarchy? I do believe in time this will be made use of against presbytery, if
not, on what Hierarchy does it depend? Note it all ye to whom this Writing
shall come, that as certainly as ye have seen the sleep of Cardinals, Arch-bi
hops, Bishops, and Deacons, which are four of the foolish Virgins, so certainly
shall ye see the sleep of presbyters in this Land, the whole Earth shall not
hinder it, she being the fifth.

2 The time cannot belong, it precedes the marriage of the Lamb, as near as it
is, this is the last; o expect thy sleep.

Object. Why if this should be what shall we do for Ministers?

Reply God will furnish the Land with Teachers, for if he give the Word, great
will be the company of Preachers, and truly friend, I cannot write this, nor
think of it but with admiration of that work, most certainly God will do in
this Kingdom, when the scoffers of the times will be ashamed.

Verse. 6. At midnight a cry was made, behold the Bridegroom comes, go ye out
to meet him.

What the several Expositions here are of the day of Judgment and the like I
shall pass by as impertinent, and show you.

1 That marriages in those parts were often times celebrated in the night, when
the younger sort of people attending with the Bride, went to meet the
Bridegroom, and accompany him into the Brides chamber, but in that, it is said
to be at midnight, it may be imputed to the word delay before v. 5. which time
of delay, was the time of Antichrist, until his time of tyranny, and his
Government were ended, as expressed of the ill servant in the time of his Lords
delay, beating his fellow servants, and eating and drinking with the drunken,
Cap. 24. ver. 48, 49. When the Lord came, he cut him in two, etc. and the word
delay shows marriages were not usually made so late at night.

2 It may be he alludes to the first public notice of Christ's coming to his
Church, in Jerome of Prage, or Luthers time, which was but a little better then
the darkest time of Popery.

3 A cry in the teaching of the Gospel now is made of Christ's coming, he
being other ways held out in the doctrine taught now, then in that before
Luther.

4 They are called on to go out to meet the Lord, that is, to perform their
ministerial duty, in bringing Christ to the Church, and in presenting the
Church to Christ: this begins I suppose with Luther in some kind, because
Cardinals were sleeping, and Archbishops and Bishops slumbring: but indeed the
true time, or full time of the cry, will be when all are asleep: and it may
well be called midnight, when the ministry is all as it were true and false,
abolished the true by Antichrist, and Christ by his coming abolisheth
Antichrists ministry again. When God shall do this, what railing will there be
against Authority as if they overthrew it.

Ver. 7. Then all those Virgins arose, and trimmed their Lamps.

1 At this time when the foolish Virgins, and the Presbyter the last of them,
slumbers, God brings again, and awakens the five wise Virgins, the true Gospel
ministry.

2 Then there is much trimming of Lamps, that is, proving of calling, ministry,
and Government, by Archbishops, and Bishops, as Doctor Field, by presbytery,
Calvin, Rutherford, by the Gospel ministry, by him whose name is not meet to
be mentioned, in the day Christ's ministry shall be spoken for.

3 Indeed* I suppose, there may be yet a time after the presbyters sleep: in
which liberty will be granted to men for Episcopacy, and Presbytery to plead
their call freely and publicly, it may be before the supreme Magistrate,
sitting in judgment, as it were to determine that the controversy int^nated in
Daniel 7. ver. 13, 14.

4 In that it is said, they arose, it shows as men aw^k^d out of sleep, they
will come to this debate of all sides, rowsed up from the loss they before
had, or are like after to sustain.

Now the raising of all these are employed by the Apostle, Revel. 20. ver. 4, 5.
in which are two dead.

1 Those that were beheaded, a^luding to John the Baptist, by which means their
Ministry ceased, who had not worshipped the Beast, nor his Image, nor had
received his mark in their foreheads, or hands, they lived again, that is,
came again to exercise their Ministry in the Church, by their Successors.

2 They had not worshipped the Beast, but were before him, and extinguished by
him; nor shall those that are to be, be of him at all.

3 Its preciously alluded to John the Baptist, that Eliah which was said to
come in Christ's time, and now again in some other to come, as in Malachy the
3d. Turning the hearts of the fathers to the children, and children to their
fathers.

4 There are others dead which received the Marks, and they lived nor again
until the 1000 years were finished, which are the other min^stry opposed to
that lived, are the foolish and wise Virgins.

Ver. 8. The foolish said to the wise, give us of your oil, for our Lamps go
out.

Before this great time of Judgment, or trial of Ministry, the Ministry of
Bishops, Archbishops, and Presbyters, may be said to be blown out, that is, by
violence be made to cease: they indeed being by no means at the time of putting
out, otherwise to be put out; and shall we think Presbytery will not be put out
as the rest, and not go out until the time the rest do go out with her.

2 At this time of trial, they all will go out of their own accord; so that
there remains another way of causing the cessation of the past Ministry in the
Church, then any yet has been seen, which will be by the power of the Word,
proving the unsoundnesse of it, and so kindly and quietly cause it to cease.

3 The whole ministry goes out in this grand commotion, and none until now,
now men will acknowledge that their standing by Bishops, or by Presbyters, is
not Evangelical; they go out: There is much difference between blowing out a
Lamp, and the letting of it burn so long until it can burn no longer for want
of oil; when it goes out of it self, and there is no lighting of it again,
there being then left them no plea to minister by.

4 They say to the wise, signifying an acknowledgment or ingenious conviction
of them of the unsoundnesse of their ministry, even to the wise Virgins from
their own mouths.

5 Give us of your oil? which implies a great desire in men to have renewed
their Ministry, and signifies an honorable esteem, the faithful Ministry of
the Gospel, should have of others in that day.

6 An acknowledgment of the lawfulness of the Gospel Ministers Ordination,
however it shall be restored (which is to be thought to be as before, by the
Magistrates approbation) and thence desires to be ordained by them.

7 It may be by Give us your oil, may be meant a desire of the foolish, that
the wise would acknowledge them for true Ministers of the Gospel, and give
them the right hand of fellowship to minister in the Church with them. And this
seems fitly to suite with the words of the Text following.

Ver. 9. But the wise answered, not so, lest there be not enough for us and you.

1 Signifying that whether it be Ordination, or associtation, or acknowledgment
of their Ministry, or what ever else, they are denied it of the Gospel
ministry.

2 The Reason is satisfactory, viz. least there be not enough for us and you,
signifying this, they could not acknowledge their Ministry to be true, and their
own not be false, or if their own were true, then were the others false; Again,
the truth had acknowledged one true, in calling them wise, and the other false
in calling them foolish.

3 Hence it seems to me, that presbytery that so highly declared against,
Episcopacy, for Antichristian has it is day now approaching, to be declared
against in like manner, and I hope no man will be so vainly minded, as to say,
this Construction was taken of Master Lillies Astrology; for the future as some
maliciously have objected.

Object. A man may see by the coarse of things.

1 It is near two years since, I first affirmed this, since which there is more
likelihood then before, but is there any likelihood it falls in Scotland; are
not all for it? there is not a Schismatic allowed, it is long since I was
persuaded of its fall there, there are many in this Kingdom that have to show
it under my hand, as those letters may shortly in part show that I wrote to
several of the presbytery, who have spared no pains to plague me in name or
goods for it, as I intend to show at large hereafter; when I have done my
intended Exposition on the Revelations* if God permit, they provoking Authority
thereunto like another whore riding the Beast. The Lord knows I write not this
to offend any man, nor has any man cause to be offended, if it be truth, as
the Apostle Gal. 4. ver. 16. Am I therefore your enemy, because I tell you the
truth?

Ver. 9. But go rather to them that sell, and buy for your selves.

1 If the words were spoken sarcastically, then it is as if they should bid
them go to the Pope, who sold the ministerial calling.

2 Or rather they contain, an advice to them to adjoyn themselves to a true
Church rightly constituted, and from them to take a call thereunto, it being
delegated of God to them to give.

3 It is intimated, that in these times there will be much care had of keeping
the Gospel Government entire in the Church, and that nothing in her Government
shall be done irregularly, as in the times past they have been.

Ver. 10. While they went to buy.

1 They take the advice given, so that it should seem it was not spoken
sarcastically, if it had, they would have discerned it, I think they would not
have gone to Rome for it.

2 Christ is said to come, when there will again be a visible and sensible
difference of Christ's presence in the Ministry, and means of what there was
formerly: he was then absent, and as if not at all in prayer preaching, etc.

3 This coming or manifestation of God in the means, provokes the Ministry the
more to desire to be admitted to the exercise thereof.

Ver. 11. Those that were ready, entered with him to the Marriage.

1 At the Coming of Christ it is employed, some shall be ready, that is, shall
be endowed with gifts, calling and ministry according to the Gospel, who shall
be made use of to celebrate the Nuptials of the Lamb.

1 Before it is said, while they went to buy, the Bridegroom came.

2 See what hinders, the Lord will not come until their lamps be cut, and they
gone to buy.

3 This is the destroying Antichrist, by the brightness of his coming, he
consuming her by pieces and parts, now a little, and then a little.

The door was shut.

Notes the administration of the Gospel, would be kept pure against all means
that tend to defile them, and be other ways kept then before.

Ver. 11. Then came the other Virgins.

1 It is emphaticall, the Scripture calls them (...), the other Virgins, not
the foolish Virgins now, because they now seeing their former folly, laying
down their Call, seeking admission to be with Christ, ceased to be foolish and
began to be wise.

2 They had a mind to be with Christ, but it was unseasonable, it was after
the door was shut, the unwise man begins to be wise when it is too late.

They say, Lord, Lord open to us.

1 They desire admission to be a Church-minister, or at least a Churchmember;
at that time of plenty and power of the Spirit, which will be the most
desirable thing in the world.

1 Their earnestness is emplyed in their reiterated Cry of Lord, Lord.

2 Their expectation of favor more then others open to us, though thou open to
none, yet open to us, thou art our Lord, we are thy servants, we waited long
for thy coming to thy Church.

Applic. When the soul is sensible of it, it is then a sad thing indeed to be
shut out of Heaven from Christ and Saints,

2 In the right constituting of Churches Excommunication will have greater
effects on the spirits of men then in time past, Mat. 18 11, 12. And I say unto
you, that many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down with
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven. But the children of the
kingdom shall be cast into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth. When ye shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of God,
and your selves shut out, then ye shall weep.

Ver. 12. Christ answers verily, I say unto you I know you not.

1 None are to be admitted but by Christ's approbation, he is the door.

2 Christ denies their petition.

3 On this ground, I know you not, that is, scientia approbationis.

1 Now Christ makes known to the soul, that it is diserted of him, which
saddens the heart, and fills it with fear.

2 In that he says, I say to you it takes away all plea, or answer in the case
whatsoever, men indeed may plead against men, but against the Word of God is no
obj cting. Ver. 13. ye have the application of this spiritual Coming of his
before spoken of.

2 In it is prophetically foretold the last personal coming of Christ to
Judgment, saying, Watch therefore, for ye know not the day nor the hour,
wherein the Son of man comes.

Now that this forecited Parable respects the estate of the Church, and the
end of Antichrist as applied; I shall commend to your consideration the Parable
set down of Matthew, in Chap. 22. from Verse. 1. to Verse. 12.

1 The wedding is a wedding made in the day, setting out the estate of the
Church, before the Antichristian night came upon the World.

2 The present estate in the Apostles times, and after to the time of
Antichrist, is herein mainly intended.

1 From Verse. 2. to the 8 respects the Jewish estate of the Church, until their
captivity under Titus.

Verse. 2. The Kingdom and Marriage signify the Gospel Government set up, the
Apostles gathering Churches out of the Jewish Nation.

Verse. 3. The Apostles sent out to gather them, Mat. 10. v. 5. and the
prophecy fulfilled. Acts 13.46.

Verse. 4. He sends forth other servants, which were the 70, Luke 10.1. who were
other in their call and persons, or those sent out by the Apostles after Christ
and by the Church.

Verse. 5. and 6. The effects of the Ministry upon them is set down, some are
persecuting, other scoffing, Acts 12.2. and cap. 7.38. cap. 9.1.

Verse. 7. All this was to be done before the Lord did send the Roman Army and
before the desolation of their Cities.

Verse. 9. He proceeds to the call of the Gentiles, which succeeded the refusal
of the Jews, Acts 13.46. As for the Exposition of the rest of the Parable, I
understand it to agree with the Parable of the fish and tares. See the Smoke
of the Temple, about the latter end thereof.

Applica. This Parable precedes that of the Virgins, as the day precedes the
night, so the Gospel day did the Gospel night, and as where the day ends the
night begins, so do I conceive, that where this Parable of the Gospel day ends,
there the Parable of the Night begins, showing prophetically what would be
brought forth in the world, during that time of Antichrists reign unto the
time of the Lords Marriage; and after, as concerning the ministry and
government of the Church in its first constituting to the Parable of the night.

Applica. To take away the strange thoughts that the world, yea, good men will
have of the Parl. and their proceedings, though guided of God (and their
disaffection to the army) who will then cry out.

1 The Archbishops, then the Bishops and the Reading ministers, and the
scandalous ministers, and the malignant ministers, as they termed them must go
down. O! but now what do they mean? the good ministers as they called them,
those that preached for them, they put down them also? is this the reformation
they told us of in their Declarations?

2 They took down Common Prayer in our Churches, and then turned two or three
Churches into one, that we may have preaching, nor have we the Sacraments in
many places this six years, and now preaching is going away out of the Parish
also; and all this cried up for Reformation.

3 The Abbey Lands were took from the Ministry, the Bishops Lands, and now the
Dean and Chapters Lands, and the Tithes, they say, shall be took away also: and
it is thought the parsonage Houses, and Glebe Land will be took from the
ministry also, and at last, what will they do with the Churches?

Resp. I beseech you, take heed, and do not think hardly of the Parliament, if
ever ye see these things; they as little think of doing these things as you:
witness their Declarations.

1 God will have the flesh of Antichrist eaten, that is, all that maintenance
that comes to the Ministry by her means. Now these things all of them came by
her, be content, God will have it so.

2 God will have Antichrist in the more spiritual part, as it were the soul of
Antichrist, that cannot be eat to be burned in fire, which is the Polity or
Government of Antichrist, of which Presbytery is no less a part then
Episcopacie, together with the Antichristian doctrines of hers.

Object. O! but these are good men.

Resp. And who will say many of those under Episcopacy were not. If good men
stand in a bad place, they must be removed as trees, and planted into a better,
to this metaphor, the Apostle alludes, 1 Coloss. 13.

3 These men shall do those things doing Gods will, indeed, but it is in the
dark, and shows when they go about to do them, none shall hinder them, it being
Gods will it must be done: and let me say to all concerned herein as Gamaliel
in the Acts 5.39. If this be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be
found fighters against God.

4 Should you say to the Parliament as Elisha to Hazael, 2 Kings 8.12. You will
do this evil, take away all the maintenance and Ministry almost of the Kingdom
into (three or four) and then will ye not bring this brave flourishing knowing
Kingdom into deep darkness, Atheism, worse then Popish, like that of America,
etc.

I believe, the answer would be, Do you think we are Dogs that we should ever
do such things as these?

But where I may apply that of the Prophet, that God has showed to me, that
these things shall be done, I leave to the issue of things t^ prove.

5 Applic. Was there ever such trouble at the removing of these several
Ministers of the false Church, as in Cardinal Wolseys Praemunire; for Poole
was but as titular, and acted little as if dead: and in removal of Archbishops
and Bishops and their Praemunire: can we think though the Deacons fall quietly,
that the Presbyters fall will not cost much blood, especially in Scotland. Do
not we see what doings now there are in France? and how they are carried
against the first of the foolish Virgins, the Cardinal Mazarine, who have all
their work to do: but before any peace be in that Kingdom, will do all together.

Applic. To the Kingdom until you see these things, you can never see peace,
you can never come out of Babell, you can never see the Marriage of the Lamb,
nor behold the good days of God foretold in the Scripture: these things
forespoken of, make way for these to come amongst us: therefore know, as
contrary to thee, as they seem to be, yet they are according to God. And it is
most true, if we should consult with flesh and blood about these things, we
were utterly lost herein.

Applic. To Ministers, ye see what sad things are coming on us. I desire you
not to account me your enemy, because I tell you the truth, Gal. 4.16. Many may
be happy by it, that have hearts to make use of it; if this be not Truth, let
me then be accounted the Ministers public Enemy, whom surely in heart I have
not the least desire to offend of my self at all, but it seems to me providence
foretells you, you shall stir up the hatred of the Magistrate against you; and
then you will occasion him to eat the remaining flesh, and to consume the
remaining feces of Antichrists Polity amongst us.

To the Magistrate, Rev. 20.4. Thrones were set, and judgment was given to
them, and the souls of them beheaded, etc. and cap. ver. 5. This is the first
Resurrection. I suppose these things in a judicial way will be brought to
pass in the world, Dan. 7.13, 14. are at that time to be accompl^shed,
Scriptures, I believe when accomplished will plainly appear to have been very
strangely misunderstood, and mis-applyed, which I leave to time to evidence,
and the troubles that do succeed upon removing the Presbytery, and that
appertains ^hereunto, is that last Woe I mentioned in the Epistle dedicated to
his Excellency, the Lord Fairfax, General, before the Form of
Gospel-Government. I caused to be printed about January the 14th. 1648.

Object. You have spoken of Antichrists Ministry, as of a single Ministry: and
now come to compare the Ministry of Christ which are five in the true Church,
to Antichrist as having five also distinct in her false Church.

1 Bellarmine acknowledges, 2 Tom. de Cler. Cap. 16. That a Cardinal is but
as a parish priest in his own Title.

2 They were Presbyter-Cardinals, and so no more but chief Presbyters: they
having in their Churches but a Single Ministry: for as in their Churches a
Bishop ministered not to them, nor any Archbishop, or Presbyter, unless as
Curate, or Substitute: only Vide Potter, Numb. 666. Cap. 19. The five Gospel
Ministers being in every true Gospel constituted Church, the five false in the
Roman Catholic Church, or National. Forbs. Irenicu. Cap. 11. de Episcop.
Propos. 10, Quando Presbyter fit Episcopus, non desinit esse presbyter, etc.
Peculiarem habens Ecclesiam Parochialem quae ipsi sit Cathedralis, id est, ad
quam constanter resideat, etc.

Now for Presbyters and Deacons, they were practiced amongst us singly, which
is proof sufficient.

Which clears to us, That while Antichrist had his five false Anti-ministers,
he had them in a false way, and not as the true Church: each one doing in the
Church singly, as concerning the Ministry, and alone; which all the true Church
ordinary Ministry were to do together, there being no division of Members,
under the Cardinals, the Archbishops, or Bishops Ministry, more then in the
lowest Presbyters in that Hierarchy, nor did he any thing differ in his
administrations from them, as the Apostles did from Prophets, they from
Evangelists, they from Pastors or Teachers in the true Church, these in the
false Church, differed indeed in some things, in respect of their whole
Antichristian Babylonish Hierarchy, but not in particul^r Titles, or Parish
Churches.

Applic. To Scotland, In her is the Root of Presbytery, as Episcopacy was in
England: though that Geneva gave as it were first being unto it under Calvin:
for in Scotland, Nationally it was received and confirmed by one of the ten
Kings of the Roman Monarchy, etc.

1 They shall by the Presbytery be stirred up to war, and be overcome by the
Saints they war against, called Heretics, and Schismatics, the old Roman
way of proceeding against believers, they themselves are called so at Rome.

2 They will come in the end to hate the Presbytery, God will make them naked
have their riding the Beast, that is, the Temporal Authority of that Kingdom
opened to them, and their standing be made, appear not to be Evangelicall, by
which means the Kingdom of Scotland, shall come to hate them, and take away
all Authority and Jurisdiction from them, and take away their Ecclesiastical
preferments and tithes. etc. yea, make their Presbytery so desolate* as not to
leave a Presbyter of them to be a Minister; This friends* it seems to me God is
about to do in Scotland it self, and what will become of it in England? and
what shall we say if ever we see God do these things?

3 Though the War begin here, possibly if it do, this Army will then I
believe enter Scotland, and do for Presbytery there, as they did for Episcopacy
here, but with much more integrity: for as Episcopacy was to have its fall in
England, England being the Root of it, so Presbytery is to have its fall in
Scotland, the Root of it being there, this estate being the Philadelphian
estate, in which the love of Sister-Churches will appear.

O that the mind of God were enquired after at the Word, and that men would
endeavor the fulfilling thereof, so would there be a sudden ending of our
troubles, which we going against, God leads us into the wilderness about and
about: I could instance in many things in Parliament and Army, but I forbear,
praying God to direct Parliament, Army, and People, to set them in a right way,
to do Gods will willingly: by which means our losses, what ever to us
Ministers, would be repaired. Kings and the Nations would willingly give their
Kingdoms to Christ, people willingly take the course to be in communion with
Christ, knowing in all Christ seeks us, not ours, and repaires all loss with
wonderful advantage, giving a 1000 fold in this world, and in the world to
come eternal life with himself for ever.

I have thought good to conclude with these considerations.

1 That the three Woes spoken of, Rev. 11.14. had respect to the Wrath of God
causing by degrees the fall of the false Church, which fell utterly in the last
Woe, though I know usually men apply it to the last Judgment of the wicked,
which cannot be.

Now in the first Woe fell of the false Church ministry, Cardinals, and with
them Votaryes, Friars, Abbots, Abbyes, with their maintenance, and with them as
false apostles, the Apochryphall Scripture they had set up, with the golden
Legend, the Book of false miracles, Bulls, Indulgencies, etc. ceased with them
here.

2 Under the second Woe, fell the Archbishops, and Bishops, and with them
Chancellors, Commissaries, Deanes, Deanes and Ch^pters, etc. their Lands, etc.
and with them fell the Common Prayer Book, in which was the allowed Ministry
of the Land, with the Homily-Booke.

3 Under the third Woe, which is that I formerly spoke of, mentioned in the
Epistle I dedicated to his Excellency, the Lord Fairfax General, which is yet
to come, in which is the fall of Presbyters and Deacons, as the Root of
Antichrist, in whom falls the now preaching, maintenance by Tithes, Gleabs,
Church constitutions etc. It any more be in the false, when people come to see
they are in a Babble, that is, in a Confusion indeed, and there is then way made
for the Calling Ministry, and Church constitution of Christ, when the World
has nothing of the now, or past Ministry left then is that, and not before
fulfilled, That Babel is fallen.

Illustration this is understood, as I suppose by that Rev. 16.12. The sixth
Angel poured out his viol on the River Euphrates, and the waters thereof were
dried up, that the way of the Kings of the East may be prepared.

1 Many things in one part of the Rev. said to be done, under the sixth, in
another are said to be done under the seventh, because in one part of the
world, that is done under one, in another is done under another. Part of this
vision beginning under the 6, is ended under the 7th.

2 Here, by waters, I understand the Ministry of Antichrist, belonging to
Babel, as Euphrates did, which was that in the false, as the River of God
spoken of in the true, Revel. 2.12. Psalm. 46.5. There is a River, the streams
whereof shall make glad the City of God.

3 The great River that had that multitude of Priests, Friars, Bishops, etc. is
to be dried up, and taken clean away.

4 By which only the way of the Governors of the Sun rising is prepared
intimating that as men East of Babel could not come to Jerusalem for that
water, so the Gospel ministry of the new Jerusalem cannot come to it for the
water of Babel remains.

Object. How can you prove the Apostles of the true slept in the time of
administration of the false Church, especially under Presbytery.

Reply, 1 The Presbytery, and the rest before them say, the Apostles are
extraordinary Officers and are ceased: as in the Propositions of the Assembly.

2 They apprehend not that in excomunications, etc. Of Church Administrations
they were to do it with the Apostles and Apostles with them as that, 1 Cor.
5.4. Intimates we should do in doing it and so cease not.

So that Antichrist end seems to me thus to be brought about in the Lords
taking down Ministry means and Ordinances, these being not long to be
ministered by any Authority from or of Rome, when the Lord will decide that great
controversy of the calling of the Ministry, that now is, where it be of God
or not, when there will be no visible form of Church Government left, no more
then was in that time in this Kingdom, which was before the birth of Christ,
into which miserable estate of confusion or desolate condition Babell falls and
ends; who in her glorious estate was Babell, that is Confusion, but in this as
being that Jericho or City of the Curse devoted, with all within her to be
destroyed, not the gold or garments of Babell being to be left at all, for the
Lord Jesus now falling on her grinds her to powder: when if this prove true,
what will they say, that so bitterly speak of the false and reputed
Schismatic teachers, saying, God will pluck off the vizard of these persons:
and notwithstanding their pretenses, discover with what lying spirit they are
led, so that their madness shall in their destruction be manifested to all, to
the comfort of the people of God, and everlasting shame and confusion of their
own faces. O man* remember thy end, Babell falls, Revel. 18.10. In one hour
shall her judgment come; the Almighty God hastens her to her end, and she
cannot find rest but in the judgment aforesaid, in which God as in her
everlasting grave entombes her for ever: at which the Saints in Heaven above,
and on earth beneath, shall sing songs of praise and glory to God for ever.
Amen.

Now, that the glory of this truth may shine as the Sun in the threefold fall
of her triple Crown. See Revel. 16.19. The great City was divided into three
parts; so that as there were three woes fell on the Hierarchy of Rome, so it
shows why but three, because the great City, the mystical Rome was divided
into three parts; the first part subject to Cardinals, and the second part
subject to Episcopacy, and the third part subject to Presbytery: these are
divided in Judgment and Government, preaching one against an other, and are
three, and yet but one City, and do belong thereunto, and the City never falls
until all these parts are fallen, upon which falls the Cities of the Nations. O
London: fall to Christ, or thou will fall for opposing Christ in this very time
comes either thy greatest happiness or unhappiness thou ever had upon thee:
The Lord make thee wise in this thy day to know the things of thy peace, that
thou may find mercy and not in judgment, have them hid from thee. Luke 19.42.

Revel. 11. verse. 3. Mentions that Ministry which was ordained of God, to
supply the place of the true and fallen Ministry, of the Church, set out under
the name of two witnesses, who are ordained of God to prophecy, and thereby to
feed the Elect of God, during the time of the Churches hid estate, which is
computed to be by the Spirit of God, 1260 days prophetically years, Revel.
12.6. which is the full time of Antichrists reign, of whom I commend these
things to be considered of.

1 That the two witnesses, comprehend not the whole Ministry of any age, but
only such who in each age of the predicted time did oppose Antichrist,
maintaining the Gospel truth against his errors, in doctrine, discipline, or
Church Constitution, in the several times and ages they lived in, so that ones
witness may differ from another, according to the measure of knowledge God had
communicated unto them, in their day, one witnessing against his corrupt
doctrine of justification, etc. Others against his Idolatry, etc. Against whom
God had still some to oppose, and direct the Church to this day, this being a
part of that time.

2. Their witness is but for a limited time, even the time of the Churches
hiding, and then ends. Revel. 11.7. (...), There Testimony is not long before
it be fulfilled if not already, after which they shall teach no more, as they
have done before.

3 Consider but Him, that is to put an end to their Ministry* and then the time
is known, when this and by whom it shall be effected, Rev. 17.3. I saw a woman,
(that is the Papacy) sitting on a Scarlet colored beast, (that is the Roman
Empire) now here, Revel. 11.7. The beast that is some part of the Civil State,
of the Roman Monarchy, set down, Verse 13. By a tenth part of the City, which
England is being one of the 10 Kingdoms, of the Roman Monarchy, and a tenth
part of the City, gets up out of the bottomless pit, or Antichrists prison,
the Key whereof the fallen Star keeps, Revel. 9.1. which proves her authority
thereof.

4 The beast thus having broken the prison, makes war with the witnesses, by
questioning their ministry, the witnesses could not war with any other weapons
then the word, and then overcomes them and kills them, (not slaying their
persons but nullifying their ministry.

5 Into their carcasses, that is into their now dead ministry, comes the spirit
of life from God, that is God comes to restore, in their stead the true
ministry, into the Church again, now that this is meant of their successors,
not themselves, I desire you to observe.

1 Their ministry is fulfiled that is, that they were to do by their ministry,
they have done and are to do no more in the Church.

2 Their time being set is now accomplished, and are no longer to continue, and
if they then, sure the other antichristian Ministry, that is not of God, is
much more to end.

6 The spirit of life entering into their carcasses, is the right call and
abundance of gifts, God shall bless the succeeding ministry with.

7 That the successors of these, verse. 12. Are called into heaven, that is,
they are acknowledged by the Church, to be the true Gospel ministry.

8 On this the 10 part of the City falls, verse. In which a full and perfect
deliverance is given, to one of the ten Kingdoms, from the Antichristian estat
and not before.

Aplic. England see where and in what time thou art in, and what is to be done
in thee for thy cure, and how near thy comfort and Salvation is.

2 How contrary the actings of men, are to Gods mind, the sole cause of all
our troubles.

3 I cannot pass this by that the witnesses Prophesied in sackcloath, Revel.
11.3. And so did wear none of the Popes Scarlet, or the Bishops silks, or had
they the rule of States, with the Presbytery, but were during their whole time
of ministry, in a sad and suffering condition lamenting, their own and the
Saints calamities, being alw^ys under antichristian persecution for the truth,
and never having public Government in their hands, as Presbytery has had, at
all.

4 These witnesses rise again in the restoration of the true Gospel ministry
foretold of God, Revel. 20. ver. 4.5.

You shall see in this how God makes good the judgment written of her, when
shall be fulfilled on her that she did on the messengers of the Gospel, that
she may say as I have done, the Lord has requited me, Revel. 18.6. Return to
her even as she has returned to you. Now the word is verbum factivum* that
which God says here, Do, shall be done when the time is come, and people be,
to whom these words are written. For as the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.12. not to
themselves, but us they did minister these things, so these things are
ministered to those men that live in that t^me, God will have these things done,
when the Word shall fill their spirits with might to do the will of the Lord.

1 Who is to be returned unto, that is her, the false Church of Rome.

2 How she is to be rewarded, and that is as she has rewarded the true Church
of Christ.

3 He shows the Rule God will have observed in returning to her, which is, That
as she has done, she shall be done unto.

1 Now, consider by policy she first destroyed the Gospel Ministry, God will
take down hers by the purity and power of his Word again, and set up the Gospel
Government in her stead.

2 By cruelty and disgrace she destroyed these Witnesses, which taught the
Gospel of Truth in the time of her Reign, now to this the holy Spirit alludes,
as being the way of Gods judgment, in ^h^ch the Saints are to be execution^rs,
and to do to her (that is Antichrist) as she has done.

3 The thing God aimed at herein is to show Antichrists tyranny used against
those God raised up to preach the Gospel, by degrading them, as in the History
of John Huss at Constance, and of John Sawtrey the first English Martyr, the
History in brief being thus: The Bishops cause him to be apparelled in Priestly
Vestments, and to be brought to appear before them* when the Archbishop of
Canterbury Thomas Arundel 1399 says, I denounce thee William Sawtrey in the
Habit of a Priest, as an Heretic, I do condemn thee in the name of all my
fellow brethren the Bishops, etc. and of the whole Clergy I do degrade and
deprive thee of thy Priestly Order, in sign whereof, we take from thee the
Patent and Chalice, and do deprive thee of authority of saying Mass: we pull
from thy back the Casul, and take from thee thy Vestment, and deprive thee of
all manner of Priestly honor.

And then having proceeded in manner of pronouncing sentence against him (as
before) he proceeds, We put thee from the order of a Deacon, in token we take
from thee the book of the New Testament and the Stole, and do deprive thee of
reading the Gospel, and all dignity of a Deacon.

As a Sub^eacon they deprive^ ^^ of the Albe and Maniple.

As a Acolite they take away the Candlestick and Taper.

As a Exorcist, the book of Conjuration.

As a Reader they took away the book of the Church Legend.

As Sexton they took away the Keys of the Church door, and the Surplice.

And then raze his Crown, and put a Cap of a Lay person on his head, and
deliver him to the Secular power, and say, pray be favorable to him, who after
burns him (being called on by the Bishops) in the City of London.

Now you are to observe if a Cardinal, Archbishop or Bishop had proved thus
Heretical, other things had been done to him, in his Pale Crosier Mitre and
other fooleries, as in part was done on those Bishops suffered in Queen Maryes
days.

O! Friends, see is not the Surplise taken away, the Legend, the Book of
Conjurations, the Candlesticks, the Taper, the Alb, the Maniple, the New
Testament, and stole from the Deacon, I mean to exercise it ministerially, the
Paten and Chalice, the Casul, the Mass, the Mitre, Crosier and Cardinals Cap,
are not all in a little while, with many more gone out of the Kingdom, and
swept clean away as with the beesome of God.

4 Things are here done more to be observed.

1 Depriving of Priestly honor.

2 Razing the Crown.

3 Putting on a Laymans Cap, which we should be loath to have done on us.

4 The saying to the Temporal power, we beseech you to receive William
Sawtrey, favorably into your power, if ever God should do this, the Civil
power need to be favorable to us, for never men needed more favor of them
then we shall, the Lord grant some way may be found out to supply our families,
which are not the least in the Kingdom, and let not us Ministers if these
things are to be, not occasion the Magistrate to be straightned to us. Lord,
what a day is coming on us Ministers, sure, another day of judgment which we
cannot fly from. That Parable of the unjust Steward, Luke 16.1. to the end of
verse. 11. will be after more clearly understood then yet it is. But this is for
comfort, certainly, that after the true Church is constituted, the abundance of
blessings will be such I think, no man will lack.

I shall end this part with certain Predictions agreeable hereunto.

Walter Brute, about 1393. but if in time to come after this, those that be
Temporal Lords shall take from Ecclesiastical persons their Temporalties, let
him that desires to understand this, read Ezekiel. chap. of the Sheepherds of
Israel, and read the Apocalypse, of the fall of Babel, let him read the Popes
Decretals against Heretics, in these he shall find the Temporalties shall be
taken from the Clergy for the multitudes of their sins, Acts and Mon.

A Prediction of Merlinus Calcedenius, a Scot.

After a long tribulation of Christians and effusion of innocent blood, the
prosperity and peace of God shall come to a desolate Nation, I mean the
Christians for an excellent Pastor shall come, and rectify all things, and all
things shall be according to the form of the Primitive Church.

Joannes Wolfius cites a Prediction.

Europae genitus terra vir justus and aequus
Pastor erit, coeli claves non regna gubernans
Pax erit, and toto surget concordia mundo:
Una fides, unus regnabit in omnia princeps.
Saint Bridget says of the Pope, that a sword of God should pierce his body,
and run him throrough from head to heart, never to be pulled out, and after his
arms, his Vicars and Ministers their souls should be debarred the glory of
God, and their dignity and goods should be devolved unto others.

Joachim an Italian Abbot, in his Concord of the two Testaments, has written
many predictions, which accord with these.

Joannes de rupe Scissa, once Bishop of Paris, has foretold that the Pope^,
Archbishops, Bishops, and the whole Clergy of Rome shall be brought back again
to the Primitive form of Christ and his Apostles, with most sharp scourges, and
that all temporal principalities shall be taken from the Clergy.

Savanorala, that the Apostolical See should be removed from Rome to
Jerusalem, if hereby be understood the New Jerusalem it is true. And its
possible these Predictions, were for the most part taken from Scripture, as
Expositions only, as in the predicted place of Walter Brute, according to which
I have done mine, which none can quarrel at, unless he quarrel against the
Word, if it agree with the mind of the holy Spirit, if not reprove it, print
against it.

After part of the wrath of God contained under the sixth Seal, in which is a
fall of the ministry, Revel. 6.13. and demolishing of Church Government, in
rolling away of the Heavens, verse. 14. chap. 7.1. there is an endeavor by 4
Angels, that is, ministers to stop the Win^s or Gospel through discontent that
their ministry and government was abolished, it being given to them by the
Magistrate. It is liked not of God, because they are by the other Angel that
differed from them forbade to do it, it is like they will endeavor to peace if
their call to the ministry be false, there is none true, and so ought to be no
teaching at all, but the other Angel that ascends from the Sun rising, that is
he, that was of those Christ the Son of righteousness at first sent forth with
the Gospel, he opposes them who has the Seal that is the authority of the
living God to constitute Churches, and gather members into Gospel fellowship
with Jesus Christ by the word, setting men apart to God, thereby from the World.

Reader, one word of this Scripture is not fulfilled, but follows the things in
hand, time will shortly manifest them in another way then yet they are.

In the Ministry of Edmundsbury in the Celleners great Chamber window, in one
half of the glass was pictured the Apostle Paul, having in one hand a sword,
and with the other points to a picture, and the other side of the window, with
a triple Crown in a glorious Seat, holding the Globe of the World in his hand,
environed with Priests, Monks, Preachers and Friars, and having out of his
mouth an unclean spirit flying or fluttering about the same, his Crown was
compassed (is it were) with Sunbeams, and in three several places written
about it in short, Antichristus, and about the Apostles head, was written
Veniet discessio primum.

And underneath the Apostle Paul is pictured Malachy the Prophet, and written
above his head, Ecce ego mittam vobis Eliam Prophetam, Behold, I will send you
Eliah the Prophet, and he shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the
children, and the children to the fathers, least I smite the earth with a
Curse: and with the finger pointed at Eliah, pictured on the other hand, over
against him underneath the picture of Antichrist, as if he were preaching to
the Prelates, Priests, Monks and Friars, amongst whom some are represented, as
stopping their cares and nose thereat. Some as if they seemed sleeping, other
some at listening and assenting to that Elias says, Vide Maxwels History of
admirable prophecies.

I do not cite these, as if the Scripture were not sufficient to admonish us,
or that I use them as of any authority in a manner, but thus, that when all
knowledge was taken away from the people, God stirred up the dumb to speak,
and made the blind see the destruction of Antichrist to wonder and admiration,
so that Popes, Cardinals, etc. cannot say but they have been admonished of God
from Heaven, as it were of that destruction, most certainly follows. Now if
these, how much more should we from the word warn men and be warned, in which
they may see truth themselves spoken of God that cannot lie, and blessed is
that soul is not offended at it but made wise, and in it happy for ever, which
is it I only seek God is witness, and not of my self, the wrong or fall of any
enviously; but the admonition of all that are concerned here in love and in
peace, in God, and in Christ our Lord, according to the everlasting Gospel of
our blessed God and Savior, and who is he that came or shall be offended at it,
and not offend God; yea, try if it be the truth, if so, if thou believe not;
yea, if thou submit not to it, the enmity of this heart appears against, which
pray the Lord earnestly to give thee grace and mercy, that thou be not left
thereto for ever: whereto the Lord help all his daily evermore.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 1. r. parabolas, p. 4. l. 34. r. are in. p. 5. l. 2. r. Presbyter, p. 5.
l. 17. r. false prophet, p. 5. l. 23. r. alterius orbis, p. 5. 28, 29. r. for
the Evangelists p. 10 l. 16. dele that, l. 35. r. who are p. 13. l. ult. r.
association p. 19. at end of 20 l. 1 Cor. 3.15 p. 19. l. 4. r. as at.


