A PLEA FOR THE PEOPLES GOOD OLD CAUSE: Or, The FUNDAMENTAL Laws and Liberties
of England Asserted, proved, and acknowledged, to be Our RIGHT before the
CONQUEST, and by above 30 Parliaments, and by the late KING CHARLES; and by the
PARLIAMENT and their ARMY in their several Declarations in their particular
Streights and Differences.

By way of ANSWER To Mr. JAMES HARRINGTON his CXX. Political Aphorisms, in his
second EDITION.

By Capt. WILLIAM BRAY.

Acts 22.28, 29. And Paul said BUT I was FREEBORNE. Then straightway they
departed from him which should have examined him; And the Chief Captain also
was afraid, after he knew he was a Roman, and because he had bound him.

Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by J. C. and are to be sold by Francis Smith at the Elephant
and Castle near Temple-Barr. 1659.

I. AS to the first Aphorism, it is granted you, that the errors and
sufferings of a People, are from their Governors; But I desire you to
consider, and grant the Reason thereof which is, (as I conceive) because they
have laid aside the RIGHT RULE ( viz. the FUNDAMENTAL LAW) to be directed, and
governed by, and to govern others also by, in this grand and humane
concernment, as to LIFE, LIMB, LIBERTY and ESTATE, according to the 29th
Chapter of the great CHARTER of England.

II. As to your second Aphorism I averr, That the foundation of the Government
of England is LAW, and a sufficient unmovable Foundation, and is termed a
Fundamental Law, not only from the unknown Original of the great Antiquity of
it, (by mutual consent, agreement, and usage of the People (as is to be
presumed) upon mature and serious deliberation, without any violent imposition)
But because of the justness, peaceableness, and impartiality thereof, for the
provident means of conservation of all our Lives, Limbs, Liberties and Estates,
from illegal, and Arbitrary violence, and destruction, and to procure Justice
and Right in the Land of our Nativity; And for the Governors (being generally
but temporary, and subject to imperfection, death, and diverse humane
casualties) they are in the eye of the Law subordinate to the being, and
Excellency of the Law, neither did ever any wise and just person (as I
conceive) who loved his Country) in any age or time, (upon just and serious
consideration with himself (requisite in such cases of weight) endeavor to
alter it. And if any persons have labored an alteration (to gratify an unjust
Faction or interest, or for some other Reasons presented (though very
plausible) it has oftentimes proved very fatal to the Innovators themselves in
the experience of the People in the exercise of two of the senses, (viz.) of
Sight and Feeling, although you say in your 5th Aphorism, they cannot see but
feel.

The 29th Chapter of the Great Charter consists of these ensuing Particulars.

1. That no man shall be taken or imprisoned in the first Place; because the
Liberty of a man's Person is more precious to him then all the rest. 2ly. None
shall be disseissed (that is dispossessed of his Freehold (that is) Lands, or
Livelihood, or Liberties, or Free Customs, (that is) of Franchises, Freedoms,
and Free Customs, as belong to him by Free BIRTHRIGHT. Thirdly, None shall be
Outlawed made an Exlex, put out of the Law, (that is) deprived of the benefit
of the Law. Fourthly, None shall be exiled or banished out of his Country (that
is) no man shall loose his Country. Fifthly, None shall be in any sort
destroyed, unless it be by the Verdict of his Equals, or according to the Law
of the Land. Sixthly, No man shall be condemned at the Kings Suit, either
before the King in his Bench, or before any COMMISSIONER or JUDGE whatsoever,
but by the lawful Judgment of his Peers, (that is, Equals) or according to the
Law of the Land.
And further to manifest that it is to be presumed, that the people were
sensible that there was a possibility and probability of imperfection in a King
(as he was a man) what through himself on the one hand, or what through evil
advice on the other hand, which may surprise greatness and seduce it contrary
(peradventure sometimes) to their own inclination, suitable to that saying of
the Apostle 1 John 1.8.10. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves and
the truth is not in us. If we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar and
his word is not in us, Romans 3.9, 10. What then are we better then they? No, in
no wise: for we have before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all
under sin; As it is written, There is none righteous no not one. For no single
PERSON or PERSONS in the world that ever did or may Rule among men, can say of
himself or themselves as Paul in the 4 Heb. 15. said of CHRIST, who though he
was tempted yet was without sin; therefore it was necessary there should be a
Legal Supremacy in our FUNDAMENTAL LAWS and RIGHTS, and to manifest (as I
conceive) that there was like Knowledge, and necessary indubitable apprehention
in a King (in the days of many Monarchs) as well as in the People, that there
was such a possibility and probability of imperfection if the Law should not be
a Rule to the Governors (as well as governed) there is in the end of the said
29th Chapter these other and last ensuing Legal and necessary particulars, and
Obligations, to bind him from intermedling, and doing Acts of evil, or hindering
Acts of Justice or Right, and that the People in their Methodical Fundamental
way of Justice might distribute Justice, and Mercy one amongst another,
according to that RIGHTEOUS RULE 7 Matt. 12. Do in all things as you would be
done unto.

Seventhly, We shall sell to no man Justice or Right; So that Covetousness,
(which by the Reverend Apostles, and diverse Scriptures, is said, to be the Root
of all evil) was to be abandoned by this FUNDAMENTAL LAW, and no profit was to
stand in the way of Right to any man whatsoever.

Eighthly. We shall deny to no man Justice or Right so that the Law says, it
was not in the power or courtesy of Princes to give us Right as a favor, for
they were bound by the Common Law, which was our Right for many hundred years
ago before the CHARTER, and by the CHARTER, and by OATH, not to deny us Right,
yea impartial Justice or Right. And therefore William the Conqueror after he
had Conquered all almost, yet did swear to confirm, and defend our Laws, and
ancient Customs and Rights.

Ninthly. We shall deferr to no man justice or Right, so that thereby it is
apparent, there was no way for Evasion of this wise CHARTER of Confirmation or
Restitution of our Common Law, or to avoyde the enjoyment of our Fundamental
Rights (without which we cannot live) For it is a clear thing to all rational
men, that Justice or Right is not to be sold or denied to any, but if it be
neither sold or denied (in any visible Fact or Deed,) yet if it should be
delayed, it would be a lingering, and wasting spoil and Consumption, and as
destructive to the interest of the People, as if the two last precedent
Provisions and benefits, had no being at all, for the renowned Lord Cook says,
dilatio est quaedam negatio; And therefore I shall say as it is said by the
Translator to the Reader in the Book called the Mirror of Justices, (who
rationally declined the opinion of some) That our Common Laws as to the
generality flowed first out of Normandy) As Cicero was bold to derive the
Pedigree of his Roman Law from the great God Jupiter, so (says he) I hope
without offense, I may be imboldened in the person of our Common Law, to say,
That when the Laws of God and Reason came first into England, then came I in.
This I declare, and recite, to show the excellency of the Fundamental Law of
the Nation.

The Lord Cook in the first part of his Institutes in his Commentary upon
Liatleton, Lib. 2. Cap. 4 Sect. 108. Magna CHARTA is so called in respect of
the weightiness, and weighty greatness of the matter contained in it in few
words, being the Fountain of all the Fundamental Laws of the Realm, and
therefore to be presumed inviolable, and says he, it may be truly said of it,
That it is Magnum in parvo: It is in our Books called CHARTA LIBERTATUM.
COMMUNIS LIBERT AS Angliae, or Libertates Angliae, or CHARTA de LIBERTATIBUS,
MAGNA CHARTA confirmed above 30 times in full PARLIAMENT. And by the Statute of
the 42 Ed. 3 cap. 3. if any Statute be made against it; it shall be void;
whereby it does appear by the wise Act of our Ancestors (in former and
peaceable times,) that they did foresee that future Parliaments might possiby
endeavor to make this Fundamental Law ineffectuall, by making something or
other against it: And further he says (To demonstrate Parliaments are, and are
justly to be limited, and guided by it, so as to make no Act contrary to it,
or inconsistent with it) It is the FOUNDATION OF ALL OTHER ACTS OF PARLIAMENT:
And further he says (to manifest that this Law was common Law, and was before
the Charter in the peoples possession:) It is but a Confirmation or Restitution
of the Common Law, as in the Statute, made Confirmatio Chartarum. An. 25. Ed.
1. it appears by the opinion of all the Justices: And it is a Maxim in the
Law, No man ought to be wiser then the Law, and Ed. 1. for demonstrating his
affection to the excellent common Law of England had the honorable Title to be
styled Vindex Anglicanae Libertatis, as appears by Mr. John Bashawes Argument
of Law (in Parliament) against the Bishops Cannons: And likewise Mr. Solicitor
St. John's in his Argument of Law against the Earl of Strafford, says the
destruction of the Law dissolves the Arteries, and Ligaments that hold the body
together, and cites the Case of Empson and Dudley, who were beheaded for
executing that ILLEGAL ACT of PARLIAMENT, 11. H. 7. cap. 3. which gave power
to Justices of Assise as well as Justices of the Peace Without any finding or
presentment by Jury of 12 men of the Neighborhood being the ancient
BIRTHRIGHT of the subject, upon bare information for the King before them made
to have full power, and Authority by their discretions to hear and determine
all offenses, or contempts committed or done by any person or persons against
the order, form, manner or effect, of any Statute made, and not repealed: By
color of which Act of Parliament SHAKEING the FUNDAMENTAL LAW, viz: the 29.
cap. of Magna CHARTA it is not credible (says he,) what Exactions and
Oppressions were done to the damage of many People, both indicted at Common
Law, and by Act of Parliament 21 H. 8. both lost their heads. And the Lord Cook
in the 4th part of his Institutes, calls that ACT OF PARLIAMENT A MISCHIEVOVS
ACT, with a Flattering Preamble, The Color and Fraudulent pretenses (to avoyde
our ANCIENT BIRTHRIGHT, TO DELUDE, and amuze the People) were to avoyde diverse
mischiefs.

1. To the displeasure of Almighty God. 2. To the great Let of the Common Law.
3. The great Let of the wealth of the Land, as high pretenses as any (that
would make Innovation) can devise.
It was one of the Principle Treasons of Trisilian chief Justice for
dilivering his opinion in subversion of the Law, for which he was deprived of
his life: And the Lord Cook in his Proeme to the second part of his Institutes,
sets forth that Edward the first did ordain that Magna CHART A should be sent
under the great Seal to all Justices of the Forest as to others, and to all
Sheriffs, and to all other Officers, and to all Cities, and to all Cathedral
Churches, and read and published in every County four times in the year in
full County, 25 Ed. 1. cap. 1. and cap. 3. and 28 Ed. 1. cap. 2.17. And in the
Preamble of the great Charter, as the Lord Cook shows in the second part of
his Institutes, This ancient, this Common Law was assented unto, and confirmed
in these words in the CHARTER, viz. that the King did it spontanea and bona
voluntate, that so the King might not plead per duresse, as King John did, who
sought to avoid it upon pretense of Duress; And further says the Lord Cook in
his Proeme to the second part of his Institutes. The Common Law of England, the
great Charter cannot be avoided by the pretense and suggestion of the minority
of a King, because his pollitique capacity did always judge him to be of age
and no Minor, that no argument whatsoever might avoyde our Fundamental Laws
and Libertyes: And further he says that the only thing that has impugned our
Liberties, has been evil Counsel, Flattery, and Ambition, and cites the Case
of Hugo de Burgo chief Justice in Henry the 3d, his time, which is above 400
years ago, and Hugh Spencer, etc: for giving rash and evil Counsel to Ed.
the 2d, but their advice proved destructive to them, as the Lord Cook that
renowned and industrious PATRIOT, excellently shows and illustrates in the
second part of his Institutes of the Laws, of England in his Proem, and upon
the 29th, Chapter of the great Charter. All which (with friendly submission)
(although you are a stranger get to me) to your impartial, serious, and just
consideration, is of great use, and worthy your reading, and of extending your
abilityes, and understanding to manifest your affections, to those Fundamental
Legal Aphorisms therein contained, or to be naturally deduced instead of your
own Political ones.

And further to continue to manifest the Excellency of the being and supremacy
of the Law averred, and mutually confessed in the days of Monarchy, and by
honorable Parliamentary Counsel, you may see in Rastalls Abridgements of the
Statutes Title Justice and Right Justices, An. 2. Ed. 3. Cap. 8. By the assent
of the great men, and otherwise men of our Counsel, we have commanded all our
Justices that they shall from hence forth do even LAW and execution of RIGHT,
to all our Subjects Rich and Poor, without having regard to any Person, and
without letting to do RIGHT, for any Letters or Commandment which may come to
them from US, or from any other, or for any other CAUSE, suitable to this also
has all the Kings of England been obliged by the Sacred and inviolable
Obligation of an Oath, and therefore Saint Paul says, 6 Heb. 16, 17. Men
verily swear by the greater, and an Oath for Confirmation is to them an end of
all Strife, and that God (to show the immutability of his Counsel) confirmed
his promises by an Oath; And in the first Remonstrance of Parliament, dated the
15th of December, 1641. you may find what Particulars were declared as grand
evils, Encumbrances, Breaches, and Inconveniences done against the Righteous
ancient Laws and LIBERTIES of the People, which shows what the GOOD OLD CAUSE
was originally declared to be, in defense of which cause there has been shed
so much precious Blood, Destruction of FAMILIES, and many MILLIONS of Treasure
spent.

I have been a little tedious in this, partly, because I saw an ingenious Pen
take some just Cause of offense (as I conceive) from your Petition, directed to
the Parliament of the Commonwealth, page 4. cited by Mr. Rogers in his Book
called A CHRISTIAN CONCERTATION, etc: your words he cites are these, (viz) Your
minds are not settled in any known Constitution of Government, or Fundamental
Orders, according to which all LAWS should be made.

The late King Charles in his Declaration (published by advice of his Privy
Council, in the Book of Collections of Remonstrances and Declarations printed
by Edward Husbands by Authority of Parliament, page 28, 29.) says, That the
Law is the INHERITANCE of every Subject, and the only security he can have for
his LIFE, LIBERTY and ESTATE.

And in an answer to the Petition of the House of Commons, 28 Jan. 1641. page
61. he called God to witness that the LAW and LIBERTY of the Subject should
be as much his care, and industry as of his life, or of the Lives of his
dearest Children.

And in the said book of Declarations of Parliament, 19th, May, 1642. page
211.212. We are fully (say they) of the Kings mind, that he might rest so
secure of the affections of his Subjects, That he should not need of Foreign
force to preserve him from Oppression, and are very confident he should never
want an abundant evidence of the good wishes and assistance of the whole
Kingdom, especially if he shall be pleased to hold that Gracious resolution of
building upon that sure FOUNDATION the LAW of the Land. Then their Remonstrance
of Parliament May 26. 1642. page 263. That they would be tender of the LAW,
which they acknowledged be the Safeguard of all PUBLIC and PRIVATE Interests.
And page 657 and 666, That the Parliament raised the Army for their just
defense and LAWS NECESSARY PRESERVATION when an Army was marching toward them
to destroy them both. And in the Book of the Declarations of the Army Printed
by Matthew Simmons 27, Sept. 1647. After their then victory, they hoped to to
put an end to Tyranny and Oppressions, that Justice and Equity according to the
LAW of the LAND should have beee done to the People, That the meanest Subject
should fully enjoy his RIGHT, LIBERTY and PROPRIETY in all things which the
Parliament had made known to all the world in diverse of their Declarations, to
which they had so often bound themselves to perform by their OATHS, VOWS,
COVENANTS, and PROTESTATIONS, and the Parliament in the aforesaid Book of
Declarations, page 659, 666, 661, amongst other words declared that the Cause
was, That the Commonalty might enjoy (in the maintenance of their LAWS,
LIBERTY. RELIGION, their own BIRTHRIGHTS, FREEDOM and LIBERTY of the LAWS of
the LAND, being equally entitled thereunto, with the greatest Subject, yet we
hope (say they) this is far from any purpose, to raise malice and hatred
between them and the Gentry; but rather to knit and unite them more fast
together, and the late KING CAARLES in his Declaration in the aforesaid Book of
Declarations, page 768, 769. Confesses and averrs, That the LAW makes the
meanest Subject as much a LORD, of his own as much as the greatest Peer to be
valued, and considered as by the said several Declatations will fully and
largly (upon perusal) appear.

So that I have showed some of the chief FOUNDATIONS of our Government, which
is unchangeable. and which all personal authorities are subservient unto (their
greatest duty and care being to preserve the same inviolable) and the People
will be miserable if these FOUNDATIONS or any suitable superstructure to this
FOUNDATIONAL RIGHT, Government or Freedom be changed.

III. As to your third Aphorism, you would have done well to have informed the
People, and Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, wherein, or in what
particulars the Government by Laws formerly in the time of Monarchy were
imperfect, or ineffectual, that so they might have had some benefit by you, by
being made capable to know what you mean, and how to redress any Invasion upon
our FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS, but a general Charge (in the judgment of Law or
Reason) signifies nothing according to an apptoved Maxim in Law, Dolosus
versatur in generalibus.

IIII. As to your fourth Aphorism, It has been the Peoples misery that there
has been so many various Governments (as you call them) by Arms. But the use
of Arms in a generally professed and pretended, Christian and rational
Commonwealth, that has such excellent Laws (as we have) must be only as
contingent things and subservient to the Supreme Government the FUNDAMENTAL
LAWS of Justice, Peace, and Safety, and PARLIAMENTARY constant COUNSELS

V. As to your 5th Aphorism, Its hard to judge and averr, that the People
cannot see as well as feel, and it is much if the loss of many thousand
persons and Families (several ways) Millions of Treasure, Destruction of
Trade, and all other sad inconveniences and consequences thereof, should not
make them see. Indeed, if you had said that a party of the People whose eyes
have swelled with fatness, and have had more than heart can well or reasonably
wish, and who have had great and continual places of profit in the
Commonwealth, under every Power almost For these not to see because they have
not felt, I should have more approved of such a kind of Aphorism.

VI. To your sixth Political Aphorism I say, That the declared end of this late
sad intestine War, was that we might have our peaceable Government by Laws,
abhorring all things of Force; The GOVERNMENT by good Laws (as ours are) is
just, peaceable, and certain. The Government by FORCE, cannot properly be
called a GOVERNMENT, but ought to be subservient to the Supreme Fundamental
Law, and to the Supreme peaceable PARLIAMENTARY Legislators or CONSERVATORS of
that Law.

VII. To the seventh Aphorism, I say in agreement with you, That it is every
FREEBORN man's duty whatsoever, to endeavor to attain to that righteous end the
Government by LAWS.

VIII, IX. X, XI, XII, XIII. To the 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. I say in brief, What
the People of England may do, if not trusted with their Rights, I know not: or
if trusted, I know not, I cannot divine. I think it is only known to the
infinite wise God, who foresees all events; But I have showed you that our Laws
are sufficient, And by a Fundamental Constitution, and as a lawful means to
preserve our Rights, it is our Right to have our constant SUCCESSION of
PARLIAMENTS, 1 Rem. of Parliament 15. Dec. 1641. The Parliament declared. That
the Triennial Parliament for the matter of it did not extend to so much as by
LAW they ought to have required, there being two Statutes still in force for a
Parliament to be once a year. And the Lord Cook in the 4th part of his
Institutes, treating of the High Court of Parliament, cites 36 Ed. 3. cap. 10.
A Parliament every year, 4 Ed. 3. cap. Inter Leges Edgar Cap. 5. Before the
Conquest Parliaments were to be holden twice every year. Sithence good men are
rare, and also sithence you say, it is not Prudence to be sure of Assemblies of
good men, and that there is but a possibility of good in a personal security, a
Constant Succession of Parliaments would be a LAWFUL means to make men good, if
it were to be supposed, or uncharitably to be presumed not to be in conscience
and prudence; yet for fear of the evil, and infamy that may ensue to themselves
if they should destroy good Laws, and make bad ones. So that I hope that it is
clear, The nature of our form is good, and that it will require necessary
action and use, and I suppose your 13th does conclude with my opinion, viz.
Where the SECURITY is in the PERSONS the GOVERNMENT makes good men EVIL: where
the SECURITY is in the FORM the GOVERNMENT makes evil men GOOD, (especially if
the good Law or Form has its course without violent interruption or Fraud)
Hazael had a good opinion of himself 2 Kings 8.12, 13. when he asked the
weeping Prophet, Is thy servant a Dog that he should do this great thing?

XIIII, XV, XVI, XVII, XVIII. To your 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Aphorisms I agree,
That Assembly legitimatly elected by the People, are the only party that can
govern without an Army, and that the People are deceived by Names, and not by
things, and that the People are generally satisfied in a well ordered
Commonwealth, and where they are justly dissatisfied it runs to confusion, and
the sad consequences thereof.

XIX. To your 19 Aphorism, It were good you should endeavor to convince the
several parties of England, wherein they hold any thing inconsistent with the
Commonweal, that so they may know what you mean. That a GOVERNMENT to be
managed by a few or a party, is inconsistent with a Commonwealth, I agree
with you in this, for it is contrary to our ancient FUNDAMENTAL CONSTITUTION,
Lord Coke in his 4th part of his Institutes, upon his treating of the HIGH
COURT of PARLIAMENT I, 1 H. 4. M. 70. The high Court of PARLIAMENT to be
committed to a few, is against the Dignity of a Parliament, and no such
Commission ought to be granted.

XXI, XXII. To your 21 and 22 Aphorisms, It seems to me strange, that after all
this blood and misery you should plead for a National Religion or Ministry,
and to hold That any GOVERNMENT without it, is inconsistent with a
Commonweal; If your meaning be that the Magistrate, or any of the People, may
give a public voluntary indowment to any, out of their own Labors,
Proprieties, and Estates, I conceive they have that Liberty because they have a
Liberty of their own Conscience, and so the Magistracy may have an Inspection
into the Ministry, they being voluntarily (and according to their judgment and
Conscience) obliged one to the other, and so it is the MAGISTRATES MINISTRY;
But if you mean that a Magistrate shall impose a National Religion, and
indowment upon the People or upon any conscientious dissenting part, when no
man can justly give such a Power to the Magistracy, to Lord it over his
Conscience (which is tender) and to have dominion over his understanding (which
is only subordinate to God in point of Worship.) I am not of your judgment. For
that if the People, or any of the People shall be so void of Reason, to pretend
to give it, they pretend to give what is not in their Power to give, and the
Magistrate receives a pretended power which is unlawful, inconvenient and
distracting to receive, and indeed impossible (in manifold considerations) to
be well and peacably managed if it were given, or received, or usurped, (by
its being not given, as indeed it is not in FUNDAMENTAL LAW or Reason)
Therefore how barbarous, and irrational, as well as unchristian it is for a
MAGISTRATE that is mutable in his understanding (as most Ages and times have
showed) and not LORD of his OWN CONSCIENCE: (no more then any other man) to
impose upon another in Worship or charge that which is against his Spirit, when
the very command and imposition (if against Conscience) may cause the sin of
Hypocrisy, and make the Spirit boil and rise in unpeaceableness within himself
against the Worship, and Form thereof, as well as against the person imposed,
there being nothing but indisposition of mind both to Person, Doctrine, Faith
and mutual society, Whereas the reverend Apostle says, Whatsoever is not of
Faith is sin. And God himself does not value a worship if in Hypocrisy and
without Faith, and conviction; I might mention the miserable and great calamity
the endeavors of imposition upon the Conscience has occasioned, How grievious
and burdensome were the ways thereof (declared publicly to be offered) by
the Bishops to men of different Judgments who came to be distinguished by
Presbyter, etc. What calamities did they declare to suffer? And what change of
calamity came upon the flourishing Episcopacy? And how grievous and contrary
was it (a great while (and peradventure yet still remains) to the Conscience of
the Episcopacy, to subject to the Judgment, Form and Worship of the Presbyter,
and how difficult has it proved to the Presbyter to endeavor to intermeddle
with matters that concern the Conscience or Reason of any other men different
from themselves, I submit to your self, and ingenuous and impartial Readers,
Besides, if you take a view of the whole body of the Scriptures of the new
Testament you will find that the greatest part of the National Ministry, and
the special Prophets and Apostles of God, and of Christ were for the most part
contrary one to the other; and how that God by his Son Christ, and his said
special Apostles and Prophets brands them with words of infamy, as grand and
capital instigators to Kings and Princes, by advising them to show their
advantage and beoppressive to their great danger, cares, and trouble of mind,
perplexity of State and sometimes desolation, as well as the calamity of
multitudes of good People, and effusion of innocent blood. And indeed in our
late times, Mr. Bagshawe in his Argument of Law in Parliament (against the
Bishops Cannons) averreth, That the Liberty of Conscience is comprehended in
the Charter of our Liberties. And I also remember, I have read that the
Macedonians petitioning Jovianus the Emperor, for banishing of those who were
not of their judgment in matters of their Religion; The Emperor perusing
their Supplication gave them no other answer but this, I tell you trvely I
cannot away with contention, but such as do embrace Unity and Concord, I do
honor and reverence them: And I have also read, that it was the saying of
Maximilianus the Emperor, To seek to domineer over the Conscience, is
impudently to invade the Tower of Heaven; And how inconsistent it is with that
golden Rule, (which every man should endeavor actually to excel another in,
according to the saying of the Heathen Orator, Omnis virtutis laus in action
consistit, the praise of all virtue consists in action) 7 Matt. 12. Whatsoever
things you would have others do to you, do the same to them, 7 Matt. 2. Judge
not that ye be not judged, with what measure you mete, it shall be met to you
again.

And Mr. Alexander Hinderson (the great Scot) in his Paper to the late King
Charles about 1646. has this quotation I remember (says he) that the famous
Joannes Picus Mirandula proves by irrefragable reasons, which no rational man
will contradict, that no man has so much power over his own understanding, as
to make himself believe what he will, or to think that to be true which his own
reason tells him is false; much less is it possible for any man to have his
reason commanded by the will or pleasure of another. And further he confessed,
That,

It is a true saying of the Shoolmen; Voluntas imper at intellectui, quoad
exercitium non quod specificationem, Mine own will or the will of another may
command me to think upon a matter; but no will or command, can constrain me to
determine otherwise then my reason teaches me. See also Mr. Rogers his
Christian Concertation as to this point of Christ, his being King and Lord of
the Conscience, and Sir Henry Vane his Healing question, page 6. therefore let
me close up my opinion against your 21 Aphorism, with the force of your own
words in your 22 Aphorism, (viz.) To hold that there may be Liberty of
Conscience, and not Liberty of Conscience is inconsistent with a Commonwealth
that has the Liberty of her own Conscience, or that is not Popish.

XXIII, XXIV, XXV. As to your 23, 24, 25. Aphorisms I agree with you, that
where civil liberty is entire, it includes liberty of Conscience, and where
liberty of Conscience is entire, it includes civil liberty; They are the
inseparable RIGHT of the people. As to your 25th. Liberty of conscience must
have security under any GOVERNMENT; or else the opposers thereof will descend
into an inevitable Tyranny.

XXVI. To your 26th. Aphorism I have cited and declared unto you the great and
chief Foundations of our Government, which are GOOD ANCIENT LAWS, and
SUCCESSIVE PARLIAMENTS; so that you need not put your self to the danger of
introducing Government, or waving Prudence, and committing things to chance.

XXVII. To your 27th. Aphorism, I shall only say in addition to what I have
already said, That our aforesaid Fundamental Laws, and Government of England,
made and confirmed legally by our good and peaceable Ancestors, goes
Universally upon natural principles, and so is not inconsistent with
Scriptures, the said laws of England are grounded upon the Laws of God and
Nature Doctor and Student, and Fineux and Priset former chief Justices in
England (in the days of Monarchy) said the Laws of England are founded upon
the laws of God.

XXVIII. To your 28th. Aphorism I agree, that the wisdom of man in the
Formation of humane Government, may not go upon supernatural principles,
because they are inconsistent with a Commonwealth, upon many and diverse
considerations, too tedious and too impertinent at present to treat of,
considering we have such righteous Fundamentals already laid, better then which
we none can lay, which foundations no men upon any pretense can justly destroy.

XXIX. To your 29th. Aphorism wherein you aver and say in these words. viz. To
hold that (Hirelings as they are termed by some) or an endowed Ministry to be
removed out of the Church is in-consistent with a Commonwealth. I conceive I
have sufficiently answered this in answer to your 21, 22, 23, 24. Aphorisms
wherein the people have their lawful liberty, and the endowed Ministry have
their lawful liberty to receive the Contribution (if voluntary) of either
Magistracy or others, and to expect more is a violent imposition and
intrenchment, upon the natural and Christian Rights of the People, which
judgment I confess I shall be of, unless I shall be rationally satisfied in
answer to what I have already said; and unless it can be also made appear to
me, that the incomparable PERSON CHRIST, and his Apostles did advise
Magistracy, to compel persons to violent actions to constrain maintenance to
them, or any other of their successive Min^stry, Matthew. 10.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Christ bids his Apostles preach to the Lost Sheep of the house of Israel,
commands them freely to give because they had freely received; and orders them
neither to provide Gold, nor Silver, nor Brass in their Purses, nor scrip for
their journey, nor two Coats, nor Shoes, nor staff, and if the House, City,
or Town, was not worthy or should not receive them or hear their Word, they
were to depart, and shake the dust off their feet, agreeing with Luke 9.2, 3.
and Luke 10.3, 4. He told them he sent them as Lambs amongst Wolves, and to
the end they (in their loving and Christian kind nature, as examples for
others) might not scruple eating and drinking such things as were freely set
before them. They were approved in accepting thereof, because the Labourer is
worthy of his hire. And 2 Cor. 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Paul commends the Churches of
Macedonia, that they were willing of themselves to be bountiful, and to make
entreaty to the Apostle for his acceptance of their liberality, and yet not as
he hoped for it, He was so far from using arguments or FORCE and Violence to
Magistracy inducing them to compel others to their subsistency. And I must
confess if you can prove that the endowed Ministry at this day (many of whom
are Learned and Wise men) can safely entitle themselves to be the Lineal
descent, and especial Ministry of Christ, yet it will still remain to prove
that they can legally extend their Authority, or desire the Sword of
Magistracy to extend his strength higher or in another way, or method, (upon
any pretense or dispensation) then either Christ or his Apostles did: I presume
there may be given a thousand-fold more reason and Evangelical apparent
arguments (against such an Innovation) then for it.

XXX. XXXI. To your 30, and 31, Aphorisms (viz.) That nature is of God, and
that some part in every Religion is Natural, You should explain your sel^ how
it may be said to be of God, and what part in every Religion is Natural; if
you would have another know your Judgment, and be convinced by you; In order to
which I shall commend unto you an excellent little Treatise, entitled Natures
Vindication, by Capt. Robert Euerard.

XXXII, XXXIII. To these Aphorisms I agree at present, That an universal effect
demonstrateth or may demonstrate an Universal Cause, there being a Reason for
it in your 33 Because a Universal Cause is Nature it self.

XXXIIII. XXXV, XXXVI, XXXVII, XXXVIII, XXXIX, XL. I agree to the 34, That
every man has some sense of Religion in him (if you mean by it, an
acknowledgement of God, which is presumed to be in his understanding) and for
your 35, I shall not disagree to it, if the rational Principle be not
destroyed, upon color or pretense of Religion; For your 36, I agree with you,
That Government is of humane prudence, and humane Prudence is adequate unto
man's nature; But humane Prudence and man's nature, will never destroy a Legal
ancient Government of a Nation, (grounded upon humane Prudence, and the Law of
Nature, (as ours is) For your 37, A Prudential Government (if you mean by
Prudence, true Wisdom) cannot be regardless of true Religion; for thereby it
would be dissatisfactory unto man's nature; But yet on the other hand, there may
be a Religion National or Public, or a Public leading, (terms in your 39, 40,
and 41 Aphorisms) That may be directly against God, Law, Nature and Nation. As
to your 39, It does not prove, or infer a public leading in Religion to be
good, because the Major part of Mankind, gives up it self unto it, and
therefore you had no reason to make such an Aphorism as your 40th, wherein you
say, There must be a National Religion, that there may be a Public leading,
Witness the days of Q. Mary, etc.

XLI. XLII. XLIII, XLIIII. XLV. XLVI. I agree with your 41, and 42 taking what
I have already said in this Point before and what you have already granted in
your 22, 23, 24, Aphorisms* That if either Major or Minor part in a Nation,
deprives the others of Liberty of Conscience, it is Tyranny. To your 43, and
44, The great pretense of the National Ministry is, That they are Ministers of
Christ, and not relating to the Priesthood before Christ: so that to endeavor
to attain to maintenance by Violence and Imposition, is against that Christian
Apostolical example. And as for abolishing the National Religion, none can or
ought to endeavor to do that but the National Magistracy if he see Just cause,
because they are the Magistrates particular endowed Ministry, the Magistrate
having the liberty of his own Conscience, So that there is no rational
Foundation, for the unconverted Jews (your own terms) to take away the Liberty
of Conscience from Christians, For equal Justice and Conscience being observed,
there would be no disturbing one another; Therefore if you are for such an
impartial Liberty of Conscience, you may have such a National Religion or
endowed Clergy.

I though to have treated more upon this subject, but I leave it to some other
occasion, only I shall commend unto you the excellent Treatise of John Osborne
Esquire, in his Book called an Indictment against Tithes, or Tithes no Wages
for Gospel Ministers, (which is a Title pretended to in these times) which Book
was Printed for Livewel Chapman at the Crown in Pope's Head Alley London.

XLVII, XLVIII, XLIX, L. LI, LII, LIII, LIIII, LV, LVI, LVII, LVIII, LIX, LX,
To all these particulars, I only say in short, they are things determinable by
SUPREME PARLIAMENTARY COUNCELS, and our Nation is built upon the Foundations of
Just Laws, and Liberties already, and our stedfastness unto that would be a
means to promote our welfare, and save us from destruction; but to tell us of
any thing that savours of Innovation, of the Presidents of the Athenians the
Romans or the Uinted Provinces, etc, can be no more pleasing or safe to us,
then (I conceive) it would be pleasing to them for us to foment Innovation
amongst them.

LXI, to the CXX. To these I only say, that I know not what Sir George Booth
(if he had prevailed) would have done or introduced, whether a Commonwealth or
a King, I leave it to those that were privy to it, and to his Council (if any.)
But if Monarchy should ever be restored, I believe it would find a great
inevitable encumbrance and affliction to it self, if it should Govern without
LAWS and PARLIAMENTS. For it is no pleasant thing to Govern by Arms, neither
to the GOVERNORS or GOVERNMENED and if the Fundamental Laws and Constant
Parliaments be not observed inviolable the people are miserable, and the common
interest of the the people will be laid aside inevitably, and we shall thereby
fully declare, That we will fully slight and undervalue that peace and
tranquillty that we may possess as some fruit of that blood and treasure which
has been consumed in this Nation. So that I say and aver by the requirable
just application of your XCII Aphorism, to lay aside our Fundamental Laws and
CONSTANT constitution of PARLIAMENTS (as most probable Conservators of our
FUNDAMENTALS.) We leave our our selves and our Posterity to a further purchase
of that which we may prestntly enjoy, and hereafter leave to our Posterity in
peace and glory, not to be taken away from them. As our Ancestors have left
them unto us not to be taken away from us. I hope I have already proved that
the Fundamental Laws and Government of this Nation is so just and of known, and
approved good in the enjoyment whereof neither Monarchy Aristocracie, or
Democracy can justly hurt us, by any invention, or judgment. And although you
say in your CXVII Aphorism, That it is not below the Dignity of the greatest
Assembly, but according to the practice of the best Commonwealths, to admit of
any man that is able to propose to them for the good of his Country, Yet I
conceive it is not convenient for a Supreme Legislative Council to admit any
man wilfully to propose any thing (apparently Innovating) to subvert a
Fundamental Law and Liberty, many having (upon peaceable and prudent judgment
of our Ancestors) been highly discouraged therein and felt their indignation,
as I have already urged and proved.

The Rechabites obedience may be applied (as I conceive) in this case, who were
commended of God for denying his Prophet to drink Wine, because their father
commanded them to the contrary. Although the Record says, The WORD came unto
Jeremiah FROM THE LORD, in the days of Jehoiakim, son of Josiah, King of Judah;
saying: Go to the house of the Rechabites, and speak to them, and bring them
into the house of the LORD, into one of the Chambers, and GIVE them WINE to
drink, Jer. 35.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. 18, 19, verses. And indeed if we should
admit Innovations upon our FUNDAMENTAL LAWS received as I have said before,
from our Ancestors, we should make an illegal President to subject our selves,
not only to the destruction of the good being of them, but to a thousand other
Innovations, as often as the Moon changes, or occasions, or discontents, arise,
or power prevails, or as often as any person or persons whatsoever may suggest,
whereby to introduce an inevitable dangerous ARBITRARY POWER, contrary to all
the Declarations, Promises, Vows, and pretenses, and what the consequences of
that may be, lies only in the breast of the Almighty.

An Innovation it self, (if by any party) contrary to a FUNDAMENTAL LAW is
ARBITRARY. And Arbitrariness is contrary to NATURE, LAW, AND PEACE.

The PARLIAMENTS long Remonstrance of Grieviances 16 Dec. 1641, vindicated the
PETITION of RIGHT in full Parliament, Counseled the People against Arbitrary
Power, violating the Law, and breaking the Priveledges of Parliament, calling
it a bold and presumptious Injustice of such Ministers, as durst break the
Laws, and suppress the Liberties, The Book of Declarations printed by Edward
Hushands, and page 484. The Parliament declared themselves offended that the
Kings party did endeavor to possess the people that they intended to take away
the Law, and introduce an Arbitrary Government, a thing which every honest
moral man abhorrs (say they) much more the Wisdom, Justice and Piety of both
Houses of parliament. And page 709, It is well known, say they, The Laws of
holding PARLIAMENTS once a year LAY ASLEEP for a long time, yet the practice
was NO ARGUMENT AGAINST the RIGHT. And page 574, 575. They complained, That the
Kings party were laying a Foundation of an ARBITRARY GOVERNMENT,

In the late KING CHARLES his Declaration page 768, 769. are words to this
effect, viz.

That the RULES of an unlimited ARBITRARY POWER, are inconsistent with the
least pretense or shadow of that property it seems to defend. And in the said
KING CHARLES his Speech and Protestation made 19 Sept. 1642, page 614 are these
words (viz.) I do promise in the presence of Almighty God, and as I hope for
his blessing and protection, etc. To maintain the JUST PRIVILEGE and FREEDOM
of PARLIAMENT, and to Govern by the known Laws of the Land to my utmost Power,
and particularly to observe inviolably the Laws consented unto by me this
PARLIAMENT.

In the Book of the Armies Declarations page 38, in 1647, Printed by Matthew
Simmons.

That they were not a mere mercinary Army, to serve an ARBITRARY POWER of
State, That they took up Arms in Judgment and Conscience, for their own and the
Peoples just Rights and Liberties, To assert and vindicate the Just Power, and
Rights of the People in Parliament, against all ARBITRARY Power, violence, and
Oppression against all particular parties or interests whatsoever. And page 41,
That they could not wish to have an ARBITRARY POWER in any in whom they, more
confided, or who were most of their oipinon or Principles, or whom they might
have most personal assurance of, or interest in. I have read that when
Bassianus had slain his Brother, and Coemperour Geta in his Mothers Arms, he
entreated Papinianus a famous Lawyer to plead his excuse, whose noble answer
was, and is to be be commended, (viz.) Non tam facile est excusare quam facere
fratricidium; It is not so easy to excuse, as to commit a fratricide, so I may
say in this Case, It may be easier to endeavor and to introduce a hundred
Innovations then to justify one.

Thus I have given you my thoughts of your Aphorisms, in general intending to
your own satisfaction (as well as others, and the discharge of my own
Conscience) For some things which I conceive do chiesly belong to PARLIAMENTARY
COUNCIL I wholly omit; But only in love to my Country (in which I have bin 11
years a very great sufferer) I put in my mite, without intended disrespect to
you (you being a stranger to me) And so I shall cocnlude with subscribing my
self,

24 October. 1649. Your friend and Countryman. W. BRAY.

FINIS.

