THE NEW ARMY regulated.

Wherein is set forth, what Officers which are now allowed, are unnecessary,
and the disaduantages that has and may arise, by the same if not reformed.

As it was presented to the Honorable Houses of Parliament by the Author.

Life and all For the truth


Imperial honor attend thy loyal Soul,
Dispensive Gifts thou have thy nam's in roll,
Among Angels in Heaven which makes thee seem as rare,
As is the brightest Commet in the air,
Retarding nothing, that might make thee seem,
Divine in Heaven, on Earth to have esteem,
Among those who stands for Christ, and for his cause,
A terror shall thou be, nay make them pause,
Secretly that labor to eclipse thy honor,
Shine forth like to the Sun, display thy Banner.
London, Printed by John Hammond, 1645.

The the Right Honorable, the LORDS and COMMONS assembled in Parliament.
Right Honorable,
THe unfeigned zeal I bear to the public, has emboldned your daily Orator to
compile this indigested fragment, though I know it will not suit with the
affections of some in these our times: yet it is not intended to distaste any: I
wish it may safely arrive to the view of some candid and judicious Auditour,
whose knowing virtues may be a covering to my imperfections: the serious
consideration whereof has moved me, though the most unworthy to present your
Honors with my worthless Labors: And the rather, when according to my duty I
deeply pondered the sad distempers, and dangerous maladies now in the bowels of
my dear Country: I held my self the rather obliged to employ that talent
which I have received from divine Providence, partly to satisfy my own
conscience, in what becomes a faithful subject, for the welfare of his
distracted Country, and for the future encouragement of al, who are in
necessary places of honor in our Armies abroad; and those who are under their
commands, to the end they may the more courageously fight under the banner of
truth: and truly Right Honorable, my humble Request is, that you will cast
your eyes on it, Vultu sereno, that so your Honors may rightly understand you
must not expect here fited Phrases, or oyled terms, but field language: For I
never was a Court-flatterer, nor Time-server: but what I have here presented to
the world, is only to show what unnecessary Officers in an Army, though allowed
by a State or Kingdom, prove disadvantagious to the same.

Wherefore if you daigne to cast an eye on this my reformed Army, although it
be not so exactly proportiontble, as you perhaps expect: yet here you shall find
that it is possible to fight an Army consisting of never so many Brigades of
Cavelrie and Infantrie, without those Officers whom here I have excluded: but
thought I it would be taken ill for my boldness in discovering plain truth, I
should bury my thoughts in silence, and stifle my poor Babe in its conception,
rather then it should be borne a son of discontent: But Right Honorable, its
your favors only that I crave, which if I may be so happy to attain, I shall
be doubly obliged, as in all duty ever to remain,

Your Honors most humble, and faithful Servant, JOHN BRANDON,

To the Reader.
Friendly Reader,
THere being a fatal necessity that compels the State to keep several Armies
on foot in the bowels of this sad Kingdom, for the public good in the
conserving of our Religion, from the Popish and Delinquent crew. I conceive I
could not do God, and my country a better service, then by prescribing,
according to my slender skill, a direct and eassie way to bring them in to such
conformity, as the Officer and Soldier being duly paid, the States service
may be by them duly and truly performed, the crying sins in our Armies severely
punished those heavy judgments impendent, and iminent removed: and our
intestine enemies now in open Hostility against God, Religion, Law and Liberty
rooted forth, to his glory, his Churches welfare, the setting up of the
unspotted Gospel of his Son in full Majesty in the 3. afflicted parts of our
Princes Dominions, for the establishing of our King with comfort in his Throne,
with his faithful Parliament now resident at Westminster, and to the never
dying comfort of all his posterity, and faithful subjects: thus desiring thee
with patience to read, but however thou art pleased to censure, I wish thee a
contented life, and an honorable death.

The new reformed Army, etc.
IT IS that which has encouraged me to attempt this subject, for that I have
formerly had command in several Brigades, At Southam, and Worcester twice,
Edgehil, Banbury, Branford, Hereford twice, Cirincester, Burford,
Shewdly-Castle, Malmsbury, Gheltnam, Highnam-house, Little-deane, Rosse,
Covert, Mendiffe, Froom, Clarken-down, Lands-down, and Toghil, Ambury, the
Vise, Cherington-downe.
which are now abroad, and truly have much grieved to see the neglect has
been in some Officers through discontent twixt each other in contestation,
about their several duties in their places; wherefore now I shall present unto
you these following considerations.

First, What Officers are necessary in an army, or one particular Brigade.

Secondly, What Officers may well be casheered, which as yet are allowed.

Thirdly, What revenew will be saved, which may be converted and employed to
better uses.

Fourthly, What disadvantage has, and may rise to the State by means of such
unnecessary Officers, over pouring Uotes in Council of War.

Fifthly, what can be alleged for the allowance of such places of Honor, and
the difference between these our uncivil wars, and those in other Countries.

For the first of this, there is necessity of a Captain General over the
whole Army, consist it of never so many, or few Brigades, for they are all to
be Commanded by this Captain General, and no more: and in his absence his
Leiftenant Generals Command is to be obeyed, as if the former were present,
and so by Consequence but one Major General, a Commissary General, one
Quarter-Master-Generall, and a Scout Master General to the whole Army, raised
by the State or Kingdom. A Lieutenant General to the Ordnance of the whole
Army not to be excluded.


I conceive there is no necessity of more Generals, but that every particular
Brigade be assigned to a Commander in chief, whom the Captain General shall
know to be an able Soldier, or the eldest Major of the Brigade, and for the
Commanders in chief of every Regiment to be no other then Majors by Commission,
whether of Cavalry or Infantry, It is his place by succession.
a Captain-Leivetenant Cornet, or Ensign, With Cannoneers, Gentlemen to the
Ordnance Metrosses, etc. Fire-Mr. with his necessary attendants, as Wagon-Mrs.
pyoneers, etc.
a Quartermaster to every Troop of the Cavalry, and to every Regiment of the
Infantry, three Corporalls or Sergeants, with Trumpet and Drum; and for the
Leivetenant Generals assistant to all the trains belonging to the several
Brigades, that may officiate his place, he being in the Captain Generals own
Brigade. Thus have I showed briefly what places of Command are absolutely
necessary in an Army; and to give thee better satisfaction I shall lay down
some special reasons to prove the same.

First, for that unless there were a Captaine-Generall, All manner of Officers
ought to be mightily indewed with patience, humility, sometimes, to have a
severe hand over such as are of a mutinous disposition, to the end he may have
them all in general at Command when need requires.
there could be no superiority in places of Honor, and so by consequence they
could not be so valiant, did not the hope of preferment spur them forward unto
noble actions, neither generally would they endure those extremities which are
incident to their callings, neither could they have that command over their
Soldiers as necessity requires; But its matter of encouragement to all that
fight under the Banner of a grave Heroic, and politic General. To which end
he that is created such is well known by that State or Kingdom that elects him,
to be a man of great birth, an able Statesman, and expert Soldier, whereby he
is enabled to discharge so great and high a trust: we have many examples in
sacred Writ of their Chieftaines, who always had power above al others in
their several Hoasts to constitute Laws, for punishing the offenses of their
Soldiers.

This president we have imitated and had not there been an overpowering command
to be obeyed by all in our Armies, As of Iefta Judge of Israel, and diverse
others.
be it spoken to the everlasting Honor of His Exellency, the Earl of Essex,
we should not have had so many deservedly executed for thefts, rapes, mutinies,
treacheries, and other outrages, as has been by virtue of those Martial Laws
set fotrh by him at his entering into that high place of Honor, Or in case he
be Commanded to present his Generals person with any of the other Brigades
which are not resident with the Captain General, there he takes place from
the other Commander in chief.
which he so faithfully has performed.

Secondly to prove the necessity of a Leivetenant-Generall which consists in
representing the Person of the General in his absence and when the army is
engaged to secure the Person of his General by engaging himself, for it is
very unfit that a General should engage himself in any fight, further then to
view how his enemy lies, thereby to take his best advantages for ground, to
fight his men, to place his Artillery and Carraiges, and to give al possible
encouragements, and to order when they shall charge, and in what nature, to
retreat or pursue, all which is performed by the judgment, fidelity, and
valor, of the Major-Generall, after orders received from his Captain General
which proves the necessity of his place of honor in the field. Because he
draws up the whole Armies in Battalia and fights the body answerably.
And by succession a Quarter-Master-Gen: who receives orders for the quartring
of the whole Army, either in field or town, as occasion shall require; his
charge is great, he ought to be a man of great judgment and experince,
especially in the knowledge of al countries, with the passages, Yet to do
nothing without his judgment, agree with his superior Officer, and to receive
order from them
and inlets thereunto, the safety of the whole Army: it being to be quartred
lies in his wisdom and fidelity, which shows there is a duty by him to be
performed: so by consequence his place of honor is necessary.

The Scout-Master-Generalls place is very necessary, but dangerous, his duty is
to discover all passages, and results amongst the enemy to his General, but to
hold no correspondence, This Officer may easily betray his trust, wherefore it
requires great care in the choice of him.
but to discover their strength and intentions; and to give intelligence of
their advance toward any of their Quarters, or elsewhere, in such time as they
may make themselves ready to circumvent their enemies intended policy. I desire
to be excused if I fail in ranking their places of honor, according to
succession, for the necessity of a Lievetenant-Generall to the train of
Artillery; I have not yet urged; his Office is of great concernment, This
Officer ought to be such a man as is not used to drink much wine, not to be
familiar with his attendants but very circumspect what Officers he has about
him.
he ought to be a well-grounded Engineer, a man well knowing in all
ingredients, for Peetares and Grenades, as well for the Mortar, as the hand,
also for the travising the ground he is to play upon, there is many other
things in duty belongs to his place, which causes it, appear necessary so much
may suffice to be spoken of the necessary Generals in an army. he ought to be
a man or an undaunted spirit.

It is only for form fake and not of necessity, but to distinguish his place
of Honor by way of title from the rest.

yet its thought more proper for him that shall have the command of a Brigade
then for he who has the Command but of own Regiment.

Which is 5. 6. par die or 18. s. 6. d. for the other.

He ought to be a very moderate man and of exellent judgment. That is Major
Generals to the same, commissary Gen: Quarter-Master-Gen: Scout-master-gen:
Colonels and Livetenant Colo: Adietant Gen: and Auditor Gen: to the whole Army,
the benefit these to latter make of their places is unknow.




Now I come to show the necessary Officers requirable in a particula^ Brigade.
The first is, a Commander in chief, who ought to be the eldest Major in the
said Brigade, whether of Gavalry or Infantry, so he be a knowing man, and an
able Soldier: and if it shall so please that State whom employ him, to honor
him so much, as with the title of Colonel, but to have no more in the same
Brigade: so by succession the next Major in the same Brigade to have the second
place of honor in the same, and to have a Commissary, who shall both muster
and pay, as assistant to the Commissary General: Also the eldest
Quartermaster to this Brigade, which shall receive orders from his supreme
Officer, and to deliver them to the rest of the Quartermaster of the same, and
to receive pay, as Captain to Infantry, or Livetenant to Cavalry: but not as
Quartermaster General: and for the train of Artillery, to have an able man
to depute the place of the Livetenant-generall to the Ordnance, with all other
Officers under them to officiate in every Regiment: and for every Regiment to
be commanded by its Major, whose duty is to draw them up in Battalia, and no
Officer else, and to fight it in that form and manner, as he shall think fit
after orders received from the superior Officers, he giving to every Captain
his charge: and so consequently every inferior officers charge under them for
the maintaining of the Battle, without whose assistance the business could not
be performed: wherefore these places of Honor necessary, and what Officers are
over and above these which I have expressed are superfluous.

The next thing that falls into my hands, is the consideration of what Officers
they are that are now employed, and yet unnecessary in our Army, or a
particular Brigade in the whole Army, the Auditour General, and the Aditant
General may be excluded: For the first of the two the Commissary General being
both to muster, and pay is bound to cast up the several debentors, which
appertains to every officer, and soldier of the said Army, or Brigade for his
own discharge, that being the only work of the Auditour General: but being
performed by the aforesaid Commissary, I conclude that his place as Auditour
General may be excluded. As for providing necessarys for their soldiers, when
they are in Garrison, and keep continual outgard or watch for it is the duty
of him that is the Captain of the watch for to ride or walk the rounds, to
see that his guards be safe, and his men prepared with things answerable to
their charge whether he be Major Capta. or other, and not the particular duty
of the adietant, if it be well weighed it will plainly appear to be a great
benefit to the State.

It is a bear Titile without a duty.

Which may as well be done by the Major and as much for the Soldiers
encouragement.




For the second, which is the Aietant General, I conceive his duty is no other
then what is performed by every Major, Captain, and Quartermaster, being they
are particular duties in their places: and for those Officers which are
unnecessary in a Brigade, consisting of never so many of the Cavalry, or
Infantry, is first a Major General, for that the eldest Major by succession
may perform the duty of a Major General: but some will say who shall
officiate his place in his own Regiment, its answered by way of objection, who
executes the duty of a Colonel, to those two or three Regiments, that some
Major General have under command as Colonel: besides their Major Generals
place, but either their Livetenant Colonel, or Major, and why not in this case
for the benefit of a State or Kingdom, the eldest Captain of a Regiment
perform the duty of his Major, whilst his Major executes the duty that is
performed by those Mayor Generals, who are employed in these our times:
Wherefore, I conceive the Mayor General to a particular Brigade may be
excluded, but I shall leave it to the considerations of better Judgments then
my own: and for Colonels of Cavalry, and Infantry, I conceive there is no use
of them at all, otherwise then as they charge in the head of their Regiments,
is matter of encouragement to those whom they have under their command, if they
do ought else as to receive orders from the Commander in chief of the same
Brigade, or party, either for pursuit, or retreat, or in what manner or form
they must charge their Enemy; it is that which is the absolute duty of the
Majors, and not theirs: Presidents for any of these Officers which I have
excluded to be employed in any Army we have none, but what have been of very
late years: but if we look upon Valerius the Roman Emperor, we shall find
that his field Generals, though his Army consisted of never so many Legions,
were no more then three; and they are conceived to be no other then a Captain
General, Livetenant General, and Mayor General: there is no nomination of
any more Generals, neither of Colonels, or Livetenant Colonells, but that all
their Legions that were above the number of three were commanded by no other,
then by such as perform the duty of Majors in these our times, It is to be
admired that any should be so ambitious, as in a Regiment to expect any step of
Honor, to be raised to other then Majority in the same. Can we think the Major
is as Minor, to Colonel and Livetenant-Colonell: it ought to be considred
whether they be not new Vpstart Titiles of Honor.

And this is the absolute duty.

This has been common but might now be reformed. As to be drawn forth, to make
good such a place, or to be a reserve to such a party etc.

This is worthy of note, and not to be looked on as a fantasy.

It concerns all faithful Subject.


that Mayor that has the command of a Brigade, the Enemy being drawn up in a
Battalia in perfect view, it his duty with his Assistants, as the eldest Major
next himself, provided his judgment be answerable to his place of Honor,
with is his ablest Quartermaster, to ride or go on foot, to survey their own
ground, viewing their Enemy, how they lie and answerable to the same form or
figure: the Enemy is drawn up; so to travise their own ground, so as they may
draw up their men in Battalia for their best advantage and to consult in
counsel of war, when they return unto their body in what nature they shall
fight, upon what disadvantage, retreat, how to make it good: and whether this
being done; the orders are first given by the Commander in chief to all the
Majors in the said Brigade, and every one of them to perform their duty of
their place, which is to draw up the men according to their orders received and
to sight them answerablely.

And truly for the Colonel, and Lievtenant-Colonel that shall have command, it
may be they may attend upon the Commander in chief, leaving the charge of their
Regiment unto the Major, whilst they ride to and fro, and see fashions and
fighting, of which sort we have to many in our Armies: there superior Officers
seeing of them by chance, certifies them of some duty that must be performed by
their Regiment, they presently ride or send to their Major, and acquaint him
with the orders which are performed by the said Major, so by consequence there
is no duty properly belonging, either to Colonel or Lievtenant-Colonell:
otherwise then what is performed by more necessary Officers, as being their
absolute duty in their several respective places, now the next thing we are to
consider: is the revenewes that may be converted to better uses, for I conceive
there is more need of private Soldiers, then of superfluous Officers, and this
will be a means to encourage men to adventure their lives, hazarding
themselves in greatest dangers to see such great and unnecessary sums deducted
and their pay more constant, it being a means by which the Army is
strengthened, and kept full and complete, imagine there be but forty Colonels
in the whole Cavalry now employed by the Honorable Houses of Parliament, their
pay amounts to per annum 73000. l. this revenew being expended for the payment
of the private Soldiers of the Cavalry would be constant pay for 1200. at 2 s.
6 d. par die a piece, Ye must understand its at the rate but of 5. l. per die
for every Colonel of horse. 45000. will pay 1200. horsemen constantly year, to
year, and there will be 28000. remaining out of the 40. Colonells revenews to
pay Officers that are necessary. The Livetenant Colonel of horse his pay will
maintain 600. with constant pay, and if I be not much mistaken the overplasse
will be about 16 or 17000. l. par annum, which will do very well toward other
charges. If we look back, we shall find an Army constantly paid out of that
which has bin allowed to uneccessary Officers, it consisting of 1800. Horse
and 4000. foot. Here we shall find a fair beginning for a recrute to the
former, 17520. l. per annum is the full some of eight Major-Generall, pay at 6.
l. par die a piece.
for 45700. is a just yearly means, for 1200. so many Lievtenant-Colonells
being 40. in munber, amounts to 40000. l. par annum, or therabouts which if
deducted will maintain about 600. Horsemen as for Colonel and
Lievtenant-Colonells of Infuntry, being both in number 200. their yearly
revenews amounts to on 169910. l. par annum which may maintain private
Soldiers of the Infantry about 4000. paying them constantly, 8. d. by the day
a piece, all which being thus proved there ought to be a serious consideration
whether there be any particular duty to be performed by these Officers before
mentiond, which is not performed by more necessary Officers, as being their
duty in place, for a Major General under any Commander in chief of a Brigade,
unless in the Captain-Generalls, but as Major-Generall Potly was to Sir
William Waller. I conceive there is no necessity, for their duty may as well
be performed by the eldest Major of the Brigade and their pay converted to
better uses. If there be but eight Major-Generalls in all our Armies, they
receive pay, if I be not exeedingly mistaken, both as Major-Generalls and
Colonells, either of Horse or Foot, which amounts to great sums, let pay day
come never so seldom, it comes too often for the service they do as it being
their proper duty in either of those places, by above 9. pay days in 10. their
revenews will maintain 1500. of the infantry with constant pay, the Major
Generals pay at 6. l. per die a piece does amount for eight of them to 17520
per annum, there are other Officers whose revenews will arise to a great matter
in the year, as the Commissary to every Brigade, the word General being
excluded, and assistant added, there will be somewhat remaining toward the
payment of the army and themselves well satisfied: for the play master there is
no use at all of him (...) the Commissary Generals assistant be faithful and
industrious, we have examples hereof in these our Armies, to mine own
knowledge, where the Commissary has both mustred and paid, but my fear is he
has received pay for both Offices, which is most unfit: for their pay is
great, I verily believe, if the Auditor General were exempted, and al
Commissaryes of the several Brigades receive pay only as assistant to the
Commissary General to the whole Army, so that in case these Officers be
casheered their several revenews will maintain 2100 of the Cavalry, and 5500
of the infantry There is necessity of reformation in these particulars as ought
else, considering the great charge the Kingdom is at the proceeding of our war
being not answerable to those in other Countries, though it is a true our
fights are more desperate but maintaind in no form for that they are not pitched
buinesses by consent.

For this very reason if they allow of these Officers in their Armies, yet they
are not useful to us.


there would be a sufficient remainer out of what I conceive their revenew does
amount to for maintaining 500. of the cavaltry, and make their places more
benefitial then is any Captains place of the Infantry, the next thing we are to
consider is, the disadvantages that have and may arise to the State by reason
of the over powreing notes of unnecessary officers at Councels of war as for
this point I need not stand much upon it considering we have had so many sad
testimons in these our times, (how many towns have bin treacherously delivered
up to the mercy of the enemy,) nay I believe more had bin, had not the
multiplicity of inferiors even pressed down the over pouring votes of some
superfluous Officers, which though it may seem contrary to all good manners,
yet it was most befiting sound judgment to contradict the humors, of
indiscreat effeminate Commanders: the next thing we are to consider is of what
can be said for the allowing of such places of Honor: and the difference
between these our uncivil Civil Wars, and those that are and have been in
other Countries, some will say why should there not be such places of Honor in
our armies here in England, since we have other Countries for our president
viz. Germany, Sweedland, Neatherland, France, Spain, etc. certainly they
being such absolute Soldiers as they are, both for judgment and valor, they
would not allow of such Officers as the Author here excludes, unless there
were a necessary duty to be performed by them, as in satisfaction to this
point. It is the Authors desire that any German, French, Sweedish, or other
Commander of them al will be so pleased as to dispute this duty which they
conceive properly to be performed by no other then those Officers, or at least
out of courtesy to inform his judgment what duty it is that any of them
performs under a Commander in chief of a private Brigade: for that I have
been sometimes a Soldier, and as yet know of no duty at all that properly
appertains to them, why then to be allowed in our Armies, is it for form sake
because they are tolerated in other Countries, is it possible the example of
Foreign Nations should prove a president so remarkable as we can no way show
them one more noteable. It is my desire that as this Honorable Parliament have
done so many worthy acts to their never dying fame, as makes them seem like so
many glorious stars fixed in England Firmament to the view of the whole World and
almost to the astonishment of Romes Stumpet so that now they would be pleased
to view this new reformed Army, drawn up in batalia by the judgment of a
Loyal Subject, and faithful Servant.

I imagine this Army consist of 100000. horse and foot they are Commanded in
chief by a Captain-Generall, who according to all presidents has a Life-guarde
for his security of his own person, to be in number 200. or 150. at least of
such Gentlemen, as shall forth of love to the said General adventure themselves
to attend his person and to lead the Van of that part of the whole Army, which
shall at all times be resident with the said General: he is also to have one
peculiar Regiment of Horse, and two of Infantry, his Lieu: General to command
in chief two Regiments; the one Cavalry, and the other of Infantry: the Mayor
General to have answerable those several Regiments to be commanded underthem,
by no other, then Majors: Every Regiment of Cavalry to consist of 600. and
every of the Infantry a 1000. at least: That is to say in His own Brigade.
And for so many more Regiments as shall be resident with the said Captain
General, then what is before mentioned, to be commanded by no other Officers
in chief, As Canoneers Gentlemen to the Ordnance Conductors, Muntrosses,
Pioneers, etc.
then as above, unto the same there must be a Livetenant General unto the
train, with all necessary Officers thereunto belonging: A Quartermaster
General, a Commissary Gen: and a Scout-Master General, as to the whole Army,
but are always to attend the Captain General: and if they have any command
in the said Army: besides, It may be a means to cause them neglect their more
necessary duties.

That is to be understood as need shall require.


these aforementioned Offices, it ought to be in the Captain Generals own
Regiment; but for their having other command: I know no necessity, by reason
the other places are of great trust, and requires great vigilance in the
performance thereof: all which being drawn up, and commanded as aforementioned,
and under them those inferior Officers without whom a Battalia cannot be
maintained against an Enemy: And for the other Brigades, which are to make up
the number of 100000. though severally d^sposed into diverse parts of the
Kingdom, yet to be commanded in chief by no other then the eldest Majors of
the same Brigade; and so answerablely every Regiment by no Colonel, nor
Livetenant-Colonell, and yet may perform what by them shall be undertaken in a
more gallant and honorable way to themselves, and with less charge to the
State, who employ them by a 100000. l. par annum, then ever before, when they
had all the unnecessary Officers to command them: yet I will not be my own
judge in this matter, but I leave the Consequence to the considerations of whom
it most concerns, desiring the GOD of Heaven, the chief Captain of our Hosts
to bestow upon our Commanders, who are conceived to be necessary in our Armies,
faithful hearts toward himself, As many have done but look upon the cause in
it self.
and to the Cause they undertake, so as they may take no place of honor upon
them for any by or mercinary ends, but to joy in that God has pleased to make
them Instruments as in maintaining his Cause, and to be Circumspect as they may
do no unjust act, under the mask of that just Cause: and with all sound
Judgment, so as they may understand their duties in their several places,
valor to go on in the performance of their duties, with undanted Heriock
Spirits, humility, so as they may win the hearts of their Soldiers to be in an
equal balance with their own, and conjoine together with all love, judgment;
fidelity, and courage, against all which are now in Arms against God,
Religion, Law, and Liberty. Wherefore I now shall desire every Officer
seriously to consider their own duties in their several places, before such
time as to receive their charges.

After which they shall find, It points out that they are weighty Charges they
undertake, wherefore they must not so look on the honor as thereby to be puffed
up with pride as it shall cause them to wave their, duty for sure it is every
Officer has under GOD the charge of his Soldiers Lives more or less
according to his trust committed to him, when he receives his place of Honor.
that for as many of those men as shall be under their several Commands and
loose their Lives for their want of judgment, fidelity, and valor, or through
their neglect of duty in their several places they must give a strict account
for those men's lives at the last day, and further they will see that there is
no necessary duty to be performed by those Officers which in this my weak
Esayes I have excluded.

FINIS.

