Breach of Covenant, A RVINATING SIN. As it was preached at Clare in Suff.
November. 3. And now published for the good of adjoining parts, especially those
of Hinkford Hundred in Essex. By a Country Minister.

Imprimatur

Edmond Calamy,

London Printed by Tho. Pain, for Edward Blackmore. in Paul's Church Yard, at
the sign of the Angel. 1648.

Decorative title page border.

BREACH OF COVENANT, A Ruinating Sin.
Hosea 10. chap. 4. ver. 7 They have spoken words, swearing falsely in making a
Covenant: Thus Judgment springs up as Hemlock in the furrows of the field.


THe Lord discovering his purpose to smite the people of Israel, and to ruinate
them, does, for the clearing of his justice, by the Prophet discover their
sins, which provoak't him to do this thing: this, through the whole former
part of this prophecy.

In the beginning of this chapter, the Prophet from the Lord gives in charge
against them diverse sins.

1 Ingratitude toward God, manifested in their self-seeking, and
self-confidence, ver. 1. Israel is an empty vine, he brings forth fruit to
himself. The people are nothing for God, nothing for goodness, Gods worship,
his ways and will, they are all for themselves, their own fancies, vanities,
etc. or else, Though the Lord go about to strip this people bare, yet they
think by their Idolatries to secure themselves.

2. Division, heart-division. ver. 2. Their heart is divided, divided from God,
from goodness, yea amongst themselves one from another through pride,
peevishness, envy, malice, coveteousnesse, one for this way, another for that
way, etc. One heart with God, for God, in God is a great blessing, and that
which God imparts only in a day of love; but a divided heart, a double heart is
a great curse.

3 Abuse of policy, of Magistracy, of lawful government, verse 3. (For now
they shall say) we have no King, etc. This they did two ways.

First, In an overvaluing way, looking too much to their King, trusting in him,
and setting him up in the room of God. Oh a King shall save, a King shall help,
etc. thus as the words are here translated, God will break this their staff,
and bring down their high looks in this regard; Now they shall say we have no
King, etc. the time hastens wherein the Lord will overthrow their government,
take their King away, make them slaves to strangers, and then they shall be
forced to confess, that because they feared not the Lord, their King could do
nothing for them to secure them, to settle them.

Secondly, in an undervaluing way slighting government, and contemning it,
setting light by their Kings; thus, as the words are translated in the present
tense. For now they say, we have no King: for we fear not God, what then has
a King to do with us? Having cast off the fear of God, they did cast off all
fear of Government; they would not have their Kings command them, they would
command their Kings; they claimed a lawless liberty every man resolving to do
what he pleases, and would no further regard their Governors nor their laws
then as they suited with their lusts. This is evident in the history of those
times.

4. The fourth sin given in charge against them is mentioned in the text;
wherein we have two parts.

First, the sin it self, plainly expressed, this is perjury, breach of
Covenant. They have spoken words, swearing falsely in making a Covenant.

Secondly, the fruit of this sin wrapped up under Metaphors. Thus judgment
springs up as hemlock in the furrows of the field. This fruit is two fold
according to the diverse interpretation of this latter part of the verse.

First it brought down judgment from God, awakened wrath in him, and caused
him to set himself against them, and to follow them with his plagues; it caused
God to bring down judgment upon them.

1. Certain and sudden judgment. Thus judgment springs up, Gods judgments
come in upon them when they think not of them, they increase insensibly, Gods
hand is out against them day and night, their judgment slumbers not, slacks not.

2. Banefull, and bitter judgment. Judgment springs up as Hemlock, a banefull
weed; as Wormwood, a bitter herb: Gods hand, that is out against them, and
his judgments that are upon them, poison their comforts, imbitter their
sweets, cause them to wast and consume, bring them to deaths door.

3. General judgment; Judgment springs up in the furrows of the field, in
all parts, in all places; Gods hand out against them in the City, and Gods hand
out against them in the Country, the wrath of God follows them in every place,
and spreads over the whole land, though the people are insensible of it. This
is one fruit of their perjury, and Breach of Covenant.

Secondly, It corrupted judgment among men (for this also is the Judgment
here meant) it overthrew Justice, and righteousness, and faithful dealing,
and bred injustice, cruelty, oppression, and this in all the furrows; in all
parts of the Land, in all Courts of Justice, in all places of Judgment; the
poor oppressed people sought for help, and men in place seemed to hold forth
an helping hand; but the remedy was worse than the disease, the Justice
administered was banefull, the Judgment pronounced was bitter. These were the
fruits of Israel's breach of Covenant; the face of Heaven was clouded upon
them, Gods wrath abode on them there was nothing but confusion and disorder in
the State, till the Assyrian, Gods scourge, came and swept them wholly away.
All this is evident in the history of the Kingdom of Jsrael in it is old age;
me^ti^g times, the times that immediately did praecede the removal of this
people out of the Land of promise. Thus have you the state of these words; the
matter of them being a discovery of those Judgments that did hasten Jsraels
ruin, and a principal sin that did cause those Judgments. I have at
present but one lessen to hold forth from them, namly this.

Doct Breach of Covenant, swearing falsely in making a Covenant, is a very
ruinating sin.

Jn the handling of this J shall show you. 1. What breach of Covenant brings
ruin. 2. How breach of Covenant brings ruin upon a people, or a person, that
are guilty of it. 3. Why this is a ruinating sin. The two former serve for
explication, The latter for confirmation of the point.

1. What breach of Covenant brings ruin; That ye may the better understand
this, know there is a twofold Covenant, a twofold Oath made and sworn by men,
in a promissory way.

1. Jllicitum, impium, an unlawful Covenant, a wicked and hellish Oath, Not of
an unlawful Oath.
when men covenant and swear to do that which is in it self utterly
unlawful, opposing directly Gods glory, humane society, our own or our
Neighbors good. 1. Sam. 25.22. ver. 32.3.
Such was David's Oath, which he made in his passion, of cutting off all that
belonged to Nabal's family: The good man when he comes to himself, blessed
God for his preventing grace in sending Abigail to be an instrument of hindering
him from acting such horrid cruelty. Mar. 6.22, 23.
Such was Herod's Oath in swearing to do any thing (though never so unjust) for
the dancing Damzell. Such was the vow of those Assassinats that out of blind
zeal, covenanted to murder Paul. Or when men covenant to neglect to do that
which the Law of God and of Nature calls for: Acts 23.12.13.
Such was that Covenant and Vow which the Seribes and Pharisees taught their
Disciples to make conscience of, therein making void Gods command and
maitaining their own traditions, mentioned by our Savior, Mat. 15.5, 6. The
breach of such a Covenant, such an Oath as this, is not ruinating; yea the
keeping of it hastens ruin, while men herein add wickedness to wickedness. Such
covenants, such oaths are to be repented of, are not to be performed.

But of a lawful Oath,
2. Licitum, pium, A lawful Covenant, an honest, a lawful oath, when men
solemnly engage themselves either to God, or man for the performing of such
things as are agreeable to the revealed will of God, conduce to the advancement
of Gods glory, the furtherance of humane society, and our own or our Neighbors
good; or for the avoiding, and laying aside of such things as fight against any
of these. This is binding whether it be absolute or conditional, whether it be
voluntary, or coacted, and the breach of such a Covenant, the falsifying of
such an oath, is the sin that the Prophet gives in charge against this people
of Jsraell in this place. Men guilty of breach of Co^enant.
This is that sin that brings ruin upon all those that abide under the guilt
of it. Now the guilt of this sin is contracted.

When they Covenant ^shly
First, when men covenant rashly, swear unadvisedly, engaging themselves
solemnly, for the doing of that, and the avoiding of that which they are wholly
ignorant of, and have no ways in their power; when men make covenanting and
swearing a matter of form, a thing of no weight. Thus in the text, They have
spoken words, (says the Prophet) they let oaths, and covenants pass as
freely from them yea they make no more of solemn covenanting either with God,
or man then of letting fall so many words, which are but wind. The Lords rule
concerning swearing is plain, and full, Jer. 4.2. Thou shall swear the Lord
lives in truth, in Judgment, and in Righteousness. Our oaths must be squared
by the lines of verity, discretion, and Charity. He that swears rashly incurrs
guilt as well as he that swears a lie or an unjust thing, for does not he also
take Gods name in vain? Thence it is that the Lord makes that law concerning
him that swears rashly, inconsideratly, he shall be guilty, and being
convinced of sin, he shall confess it before the whole congregation, and he
shall bring his trespass offering that the Priest may make an atonement.
Leviticus 5.4, 5, 6.

Secondly, when men swear fasly in making a Covenant, When men swear falsely.
as Israel here, the Prophet gives in Charge against them that they were false
in the covenant that they made, either with God or their own King, or the King
of Assyria, that had invaded their Land, and made them tributary. Now men are
guilty of this several ways.

1. Men swear falsely, when they swear with a false heart, With a false heart.
having no purpose to perform their engagements either to God or man; when men
covenant Reformation, but have no heart to reform, when men covenant
righteousness, righteous dealing, but intend to be unjust still. Thus did
Israel when they made a Covenant with God in Horeb, they promised God very
fair, All that the Lord shall speak we will hear it and do it, but the heart
searching God was well acquainted with their falsehood, therefore says he. They
have well said, all that they have spoken. Oh that there were such an heart in
them. etc. Deuteronomy. 5.27, 28, 29. Thus did the Jews in Iosiahs days, they all
covenanted with God for reformation, but they swear falsely, Ier. 5.2. Thus
these Israelites to the King of Assyria, they embraced all opportunities of
Rebellion. Thus Zedekiah 2, Chron: 36.13. Memorable was that of our Edward the
fourth, who engaged himself in a solemn oath to the Citizens of York to be
true to King Henry, when he was resolved before to recover his Kingly dignity,

2. Men swear falsely, when they swear with a false purpose, for a false end,
with an intention to deceive, making Oaths and Covenants their stalking horse
that they may come near their prey, a mean to fetch over plain hearted men,
and a cover for their own wickedness, and weakness. This has been the course
of wily Atheists, seekers of themselves, and slaves to their own base lusts,
that they might the more easily compass their own ends, and make way for the
satisfying of their own cursed lusts. Some their lusts of coveteousnesse, such
were Hamor and his Son Shechem, who used this plea to bring the men of their
City to embrace the Covenant of circumcision, Gen 21, 22 22.23.
shall not their Cattle, and their substance, and every Beast of theirs be
ours? Some their lusts of cruelty and unlawful revenge; thus Jacobs Sons
will contract a solemn league with the Shechemites, Albert Duke of Franconia
having slain. the Brother of the Emperor Jews the fourth, and fearing the
Emperors displeasure betook himself into the strong castle of Bamberg. The
Emperor thirsting after revenge sought for diverse years together to take the
place, but in vain, at length Hatto Arch Bishop of Ments promises to deliver
Albert into the Emperors hand. Going therefore to seek him, and pretending
friendship, he perswads him to make his peace, and solemnly swears that if he
would go with him to the Emperor, he would bring him back in safety into his
castle. Albert by this cursed wile going out of his Castle is brought into the
power of Lewis, who cuts off his head, and bestows his castle and goods upon
perjured Hatto. The Emperor approving perjury satisfied his lust of revenge,
and the false Bishop, acting it, his lust of coveteousnes; But they both went
not long unpunished.
that they may the better circumvent them, and avenge themselves on them, for
the wrong that was done to their Sister Dinah. Genesis 32.13, etc.

Some their lusts of Ambition, Zedekiah King of Judah being in fear of the
Caldeans, who were Masters of the field, and fought against the City, makes a
Covenant with all the people which were at Jerusalem, to proclaim liberty unto
them. He brings the Princes and People to covenant no more to oppress their
Brethren, no more to make them slaves. At present all act accordingly, they let
their Hebrew Servants go free, but upon the removal of the Caldeans they
caused them to return, and brought them into subjection again. What was the
design? Beloved, Zedekiah and his Princes being in danger seek to secure
themselves, to sit last in their seats, by increasing a party, for this end
liberty (a most taking thing with an oppressed people) is solemnly purposed.
That this was the maine design is evident; for no sooner is the danger
removed, but the Covenant is forgotten and laid aside as out of date. It was
the brand of Philip Father of Alexander the great, that he despised an oath,
and never made conscience of any League or Covenant, yet he made often use of
them, for the carrying on of his own Ambitious Ends, in the fetching over of
simple people,

Some their lusts of pride and envy. Thus Saul adjures the people under a curse
not to eat any thing until the Evening; 1 Samuel 14 24.
his pretense is zeal against the enemies, that the pursuit of them may not be
hindered, but his design was to take the glory of the day to himself, being
grieved at the heart that any should act gloriously when himself had played the
Coward. Cursed hypocrite! in this he hindered much of that days glory. Some of
uncleanness, yea what villainy almost can reckon up, which Atheistical
wretches have not made use of an oath to bring about?

Neither is it any marveile that this has been so common among wicked men, it
being the most ready way to deceive. The Apostle tell us that an oath for
confirmation is to men an end of al strife. Heb. 6.16. He that will not take his
word, may be taken by his Neighbors oath. It was the usual saying of
Dionysius the Tyrant. Sicut pueritalis, itae juramentis homines decipiendi;
Children must be fetched over with cockalls, and men with oaths. And this was
the constant practice of Jews the eleventh of France, and therefore he would
have his Son learn that latin, though, no more. Qui nescit dissimulare,
nescit reguare. It was a saying of one of the French Kings (J remember not at
present his name) that he got more by his pen, than the English did by his
sword; his meaning was, he got more by false Treaties, than the other did by
fair Wars. Such as these are hellish Covenanters; The good Lord keep them out
of England, or discover them and bring them to shame if there be any such. The
Turks have had a custom in making Leagues, when they intended falsehood, they
caused the Articles to be written in a foreign language, and these, though
sworn to, they made no conscience of; when they intended Truth* they caused
them to be written in their own tongue, and these being sworn to by the grand
Seignour, were held sacred and inviolable. Jf men will be false, let them wear
outlandish stuffes, and not cover themselves with English cloth.

It is a piece of the Character of a man fit to enjoy communion with God in his
Ordinances here: and rest with God in heaven hereafter, that he is one that
has not sworn deceitfully. Psalm. 24.4. Deceitful swearers are worthy to be
cast out of the Church, and shall certainly (if they abide such) be kept out of
heaven.

3. Men swear falsely, When they break their Engagements.
when having sworn they break their Engagements, making no conscience of
performing those things that they have covenanted for, and sworn unto. And this:

First, Jn a way of Omission, according to the variety of their engagement,
either to God, or man. When men neglect to do what they have covenanted for,
and sworn unto, when men let that lie in the dust, and be laid aside, or come
behind, which they covenanted to advance, and in the first place to regard;
when men let that live, and connive at that which they have by an oath doomd to
death, and sworn to extirpate. Thus did Israel, they kept not the Covenant of
God. Psalm. 78.10. They Covenanted to embrace all that God should injoyne them,
but they refused to walk in his law: They Covenanted to serve God with the
best, and to their utmost to advance his worship and service, but a small
matter must serve Gods turn, and what they can spare must content him. But
Cursed be the deceiver, which has in his flock a male, and voweth and
sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing. Mal. 1.14. They covenanted to lay
aside all Superstition, all will-Worships. But they Provoked God to anger with
their high places, Psalm. 78.58. This brings to remembrance those passages we
have concerning Asa. 2 Chronicles. 15. He and his people covenanted to seek God,
that is to serve, to worship God only, and this in strength of zeal and
integrity: yea they covenanted to bring to condign- punishment any person that
shall act otherwise, and that impartially. ver. 12, 13. This very Covenant at
that juncture of time was very taking, for all Judah rejoiced at the Oath. But
mark (I pray) what follows, Maacoh his mother is marked indeed for her
Idolatry, deposed from her reigning, but not condignly punished according to
the Covenant. Yea the high places were not taken away. ver. 16.17. So soon, so
easily can men grow cold in performing that which they have most solemnly sworn.

Secondly, in a way of Commission, when men Act contraty to their engagements,
doing that which they have covenanted against; when men swearing to advance
holiness, live profanely covenanting for Truth, countenance Error, when men
swear to endeavor Union, and nourish Division, profess zeal, and act
formality, when men covenant righteousness, and to give all men their just dues,
but live upon spoil, and practice deceit and robbery. Thus did Jsrael here,
they acted contrary to their Covenant both with God, and man. Thus did Achan in
taking of the accursed thing, sacriligiously embezilling that, and
impropriating it to his private use, which was by solemn covenant devoted to
the advancement of Gods worship and service. See Josh. 7, 11. etc. And was not
Saul a perjured person who swear that David should not be slain (1. Sam 19,
6.) and yet ceased not afterward to hunt for his life?

The Jews after their return from captivity, covenanted to respect their poor
Brethren and not to opresse them, yea, they Covenanted against strange Wives,
yet acted the contrary, as ye may see. Mal. 2.10.13.14. etc.

It was the great comfort of the godly in very sad times, that they were true
to their engagements, and stood to their covenant. All this is come upon us (say
they speaking of those sad times, and sore troubles they met withal) yet have
we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant Psalm.
44.17. It will be bitterness in the end to him that having sworn to be true
to God, to Man, proves false to both. Thus of the first thing, the discovery of
this Sin. Now of the second.

How breach of Covenant brings ruin upon a people, How breach of Covenant
brings ruin. It let us in ruinating things.
or a person that are guilty of it. It does these 2. ways

First, by letting in ruinating things, opening a wide breach for them to enter
in at. The overflowing scourge of all sorts of Plagues follows this Sin of
Perjury, of Breach of Covevenant. For,

1. It lets in Gods curse, Gods curse.
the curse of that God that is a consuming fire. This we see Zech. 5. The
Prophet sees a flying roll, the Angel tells him it is the curse. etc. ver. 3.
Its entrance is into the House of the Thief, and into the house of him that
swears falsely, it remains there to consume it, with the Timber thereof, and
the stones thereof ver. 4. Beloved, in the Lords favor there is life. It is
God that iustifies, who shall condemn? If God bless none can curse; it is not
in the power of Devils, or any of their cursed instruments to do any harm,
their curses, their charms, their enchantments are in vain. This Balaam is
forced to confess. How shall I curse, whom God has not cursed? Or how shall I
defy, whom the Lord has not defied? Number. 23.8. and therefore he gives council
to them to draw them to breach of Covenant. If God curse, none can bless; all
endeavors to save, to repair the breaches are in vain, till the sentence be
reversed. It is a dangerous thing justly to procure the curse of an earthly
parent, seldom have such curses prooved vain; Genesis 9.25.
Ham in his posterity felt the smart of Noah's curse. Oh then how sad a thing is
it how dangerous to incur the curse of the great God. Cursed be the deceiver
for I am a great King, says the Lord of Hosts. Mal. 1.14.

Gods Judgment.
It lets in Gods judgments, and these are very wasting, when the windows from
on high are open, the foundations of the earth do shake. The earth is utterly
broken down. When Gods judgments come pouring down upon the earth like a
deluge, they carry all before them, there is no avoiding of them. Fear, and
the pit, and the snare are upon thee O inhabitant of the earth. And it shall
come to pass, that he who flies from the noise of the fear, shall fall into
the pit, and he that comes out of the midst of the pit, shall be taken in
the snare, See Jsa. 24.17.18, 19. No sin does more open the Windows of heaven
for the letting down a deluge of Judgments, than this of perjury, of breaking
covenant. This lets in swift judgment. J will come nearer to you in judgment,
and J will be a swift witness against the sorcerors, and against the
Adulterers, and against the false swearers says the Lord of hosts. Mal. 3:5.
the roll of the Curse that enters the House of him that swears falsely, and
remains there to consume it, is a flying roll. Judgment though seemingly
club-footed, has wings to hasten its pace. Though man's judgment sometimes
cannot overtake a faithless person, See Eccles. 8.11.12, 13. conferred with
ver. 2. Raro antecedentem scelestum De seruit pede paena claudo.
yet Gods judgment always follows him at the heels. You shall seldom find a
generation past over wherein faithless men have not bin marked, either in own
persons or in their posterity. Achan by this sin troubles Israel, and God by
his judgments soon troubles Achan. Saul to curry favor with the People
breaks the Oath of God, made with the Gibeonites, and causlesly slaies them:
But God follows them with his judgments, and, though we find not himself
marked for this sin, Lewis the eleventh of France betrays all that trust in
him, and is himself so followed by furies before he dies, that he dares trust
no man. His son Charles the eight by perjury, and breach of covenant gets the
heir of Britain to wife, but soon after in the flower of his years, is
suddenly cut off, and leaves his crown and bed to be possessed by his enemy. A
certain perjured person, hearing a Preacher condemn perjury, and laying open
Gods judgments attending it, presently out of the Atheism of his heart said;
J do not see the arm with which I forswore my self shorter then the other,
but presently the hand of God overtook him, for that very hand with which he
had forsworn, was suddenly so inflamed, that not being able to endure the
torment of it, he was forced to have it cut off. And thus he soon saw one arm
shorter than the other.
yet his posterity in a short time after smart for it 2 Samuel, 21.

Bloody and deceitful men shall not live one half their days, but J will
trust in thee O God. Psalm. 55.23. This lets in the bitterest the sadest
judgment. Judgment springs up as Hemlock. God spends the reserved Arrows out
of his Quiver of vengeance upon perjured persons.

God sends his evil Arrowet of famine upon Jsraell for Saul's breach of
covenant, which they at present did approve of. Ezekiel. 5.16. 2 Samuel 21.1.
God threatens to send a sword to avenge the quarrel of his Covenant. War
with its Attendants, plague and famine. Levit. 26.25.26* Who can sufficiently
depaint the ill shape of the beast-warre? Beloved, Bellum dicitur quia minime
bellum.
if there be any judgment more bitter than other, it is the portion of these
false men. See how the Lord threatens those scornful men that did rule
Jerusalem, who thought to secure themselves against Gods judgments, by making
lies their refuge, and hiding themselves under falsehood. The Lord will bring
judgment to the line, he threatens to follow them with proportionable, constant
overflowing and continual Judgments, so far that it shall be a vexation only
to understand the report. And this notwithstanding all their defenses. See
Isai. 28.14 15.17, 18, 19.20. Therefore is this termed Gods strange work. ver.
21. namely, wonderful and terrible, seeming not to agree with the mildness of
a Father toward his children, but rather with the fury of an enemy against a
stranger. The Roman Censors marked any vice that brought detriment to the
common wealth, but none more than perjury. The Egiptians had a law to behead
perjured persons as being guilty of a twofold wickedness, ut qui and pietatem
in deos violarent, and fidem inter homines tollerent, maximum vinculum
societatis humanae. When the faithful fail from among the children of men,
and false men think to secure themselves, and carry all before them, by
flattery and falls, hood, at the sighing of the needy God will arise. Psalm. 12.

This lets in suitable judgment. This sin usually meets with the execution of
the Law of Like for Like. The wicked has conceived mischief, and brought forth
falsehood. A bad conception and a worse birth. But mark what follows. He made
a pit and dug it, and it fallen into the ditch which he made. Psalm. 7.14,
15. Zedekiah and his Princes, and the People covenant to let their Hebrew
Servants go free. They break this Covenant, and God threatens to proclaim a
liberty for them to variety of judgments, and slavery, J will make you to be
removed into all the Kingdoms of the earth* See Jer. 34.18. Those that against
covenant oppress their Brethren shall fall into the hands of those that shall
oppress them. Memorable is that sentence that comes out against the Assyrian.
Jsa. 33.1. Woe to thee that spoylest, and thou were not spoiled; and dealest
treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee: When thou shall
cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled; and when thou shall make an end to
deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee. The maine sin
provoking this sentence was breach of Covenant. ver. 8. The Assyrian had by
oath contracted a League with Hezekiah, and contrary to his covenant invaded
his land. This was fully executed. Treacherous Sennacherib was slain by his
treacherous sons as he was worshipping in the house of his God. 2 Kings 19.37
And the treacherous Assyrians were supplanted by the as treacherous
Babilonians. It was once good sport to the people of Athens (as I remember)
that a very Knave was driven into exile by a verier Knave then himself. Our
Edward the fourth by perjury recovered his Crown, and his sons by the cruilty
and perjury of their false Uncle soon lost it. God made the imprecation of the
Duke of Burbon true by the execution of it, which he falsified in his continued
oppression of the Milanois. The Lord is known by the judgment which he
executes: Rodulph Duke of Suenia by the instigation of the Pope and his
Ministers, rebels against the Emperor Henry the fourth. After diverse
conflicts, at length Rodulph is mortally wounded, loosing his right hand: being
nigh to death, his right hand being brought unto him, he presently out of
remorse of conscience cries out. This is that right hand with which I swore
featly to the Emperor. Haec violatae a me fidei argumentum est. In this God
speaks plainly that he is an avenger of breach of covenant.
the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. Psalm. 9.16.

3. It lets in all sorts of sin and disorder, sin ruins more than wisdom
reares. One sinner, an eminent sinner swarving from the rules of wisdom and
justice, destroys much good. Eccles. 9.18. This over throws holiness and
honesty. See Jer. 5.1, 2. It lets in Atheism, and prophannesse, and impiety,
and all sorts of oppression. When men are treacherous, and liars, there is no
safe living among them, no trusting of them, it is best for a man to get a
lodge in the wilderness, to leave such a people and go from them. See Ier.
9.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. This sin is the high way to a seared conscience, it is
followed usually with the plague of the heart, the greatest plague that can
befall any people, any person, being commonly Gods concluding stroke. This sin
makes men wise to do evil, Theodorick had a Courtier (a Deacon say some) that
was in favor with him, (upon hope of preferment) became an Arrian, Theodorick
therefore slew him with his own hands (or as others, caused him soon to be
beheaded) saying, that he would never be true to his King, that was false to
his God.
and overthrowes all order among men. It was the saying of Theodorick King of
Jtaly. That he which kept not his faith with God, could never be faithful to a
mortal man.

And it is the saying of the Holy Ghost, that he that loves not his brother
whom he has seen, cannot love God whom he has not seen. 1 John 4.10.
They cannot keep faith with God, that care not to keep faith with men.

Thus of the first way, wherein Breach of Covenant lets in Ruin, now of the
second.

Secondly, By making a breach upon preserving things; It makes a breach
preserving things.
This overthrowes the Defenses of a People or Person, and makes naked.

This drives God away, who is the hope of Jsraell, and the Savior thereof in
time of trouble. Ier: 14:8. God professes he will be with Israel no more,
unless they remove this sin of breach of covenant. See Josh. 7.12. If God be
with us, who shall be against us? But if God be gone all is gone. Except the
Lord keep the City, the Watchman waketh but in vain. Ps. 127.1. Gods favor is
the best cover, Psalm. 5.12. Psalm. 32.10.
Gods mercy is the best circumvallation. Jf Gods heart cannot be toward a
people or person nothing can secure them. See Jer. 15.1. This obstructs and
infatuates councels, the Nerves of State, and preservatives of a flourishing
condition. Jn the multitude of Councillors there is safty, says the wise man.
Prove. 11.14. Rehoboam (the foolish Son of a wise Father) follows this
dictate, he consults with many Counselors, he consults with the old men that
stood before Solomon his Father, he consults with the young men that were grown
up with him, and which stood before him, but all to further a rent, while being
wilful he forsook the council of the old men, and embraced the council of
the young, thereby adding fuel to that fire of discontent which was already
kindled in the hearts of the people. 1. Kings. 12. Will you know the reason of
this? The cause was from the Lord, that he might perform his saying, which the
Lord spoke by Ahiiah the Shilonite, unto Jeroboam the Son of Nebat Ver. 15.
This saying was, that God would rent the Kingdom out of the hand of Solomon (of
his son) and give ten Tribes to Jeroboam. 1 King. 11.31. The cause of this
follows, because Solomon (being too uxorious) tolerated Idolatry in his wives,
which was a manifest breach of Jsrael's covenant with their God ver, 33. The
Roman Senators when they first entered the Senate House engaged themselves in a
solemn oath (according to their then sacred rights) to lay aside self, and all
by and private respects, and in all their consultations to attend and intend
the public good. While they made conscience of this and acted accordingly;
they, and with them, the common wealth were in safty and flourished; but when
giving way to lusts and passions they broke this their oath, they were first
weakened with civil wars, and shortly after became slaves to the lusts of
cruel Tyrants. When a people are outwardly formal in their engagements to
heaven, and inwardly false, God will proceed to do a merveilous work amongst
them: For the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of
their prudent men shall be hid. Isa. 29, 13, 14.

This ruins force: God is the Lord of Hosts, he commands them, he inables
them, God can save by miracle, but God will ordinarily save by means. Joshua
must choose out men, and go out, and fight with Amaleck, while Moses is praying
and acting faith on God, Exodus 17.9. But breach of Covenant will ruin Armies,
be they never so successful, and valourous, and make the Militia of a Nation
nothing worth. Jsrael has sinned (says the Lord) and they have also
transgressed my Covenant. Therefore the children of Jsrael could not stand
before their enemies, The Roman Armies while Fides Legionum, and Fides
Exercituum was current coin, and the Public Faith both in counsels and
camps was as good at any private man's bond, carried al before them and made
almost all the nations of the then known world to stoop unto their yoke, but
when afterward they betrayed their trust, and contrary to the military oath
took too much upon them, praescribing their Masters and commanders, raising and
deposing whom they pleased, loosening the golden reins of discipline, and
inuring themselves to masterfull licentiousness, they became by degrees the
spoil of almost all barbarous Nations.

This insolency and perfidiousnesse of the Janissaries, has caused the Turkish
Moon to be at the full, if not in the wane, every day threatening the ruin of
that mighty Empire. The Hungarians received a fatal overthrow at the battle
of Varna, in reward of their perjury whereunto they were persuaded by Julian
the Popes Legate.


but turned their backs before their enemies, because they were accursed. Josh.
7.11, 12.

This obstructs Justice and Judgment the nerves of Policy, and Bulwarks of a
State Righteousness (Justice) exalts a Nation. See Isay 33.5.6.
Prove. 14.34. This turns Judgment into hemlock.

This makes a breach upon the best means of safety and deliverance even
spiritual means, fasting and prayer, and hinders them. Get thee up (says the
Lord to Joshua. Ios. 7.10, 11.) wherefore lie thou thus upon thy face? Israel
has sinned, and transgressed my Covenant. Fasting is to no purpose, and prayer
will not avail till this sin of breach of Covenant be repented of.

Yea this makes a people or a person forfeit all their excellencies. Thus says
the Lord God, J will even deal with thee as thou have done, which have despised
the Oath, in breaking the Covenant. Thou have cast of me, and I will cast off
thee. Ezekiel. 16.59.
Thou had avouched me to be thy God, and I had avouched thee to be my
peculiar people. Deuteronomy. 26.17.18.
But thou have cast off all fear of me, and I will throw thee out of my
favor. Shall man be loose, and God be bound? With the upright man, God will
show himself upright, and with the froward God will show himself froward.
Psalm. 18.25, 26.

Thus much of the second thing. How breach of Covenant brings Ruin upon a
people or person that are guilty of it. Now of the third,

3. Why breach of Covenant is a ruinating sin.

1. Reas. Because this is a most hanious sin. This a ruinating sin* because
most heinous.
Every sin has its weight, the guilt of it enough to cause the poor creature
to sink under it; but al sins are not alike weighty. There are degrees of
punishment, and therefore degrees of sinning. The more hanious the sin, the more
dreadful the vengeance. God proportionates his measure of punishing to out
manner and measure of sinning. See Lu. 12 47, 48. God will bring judgment to
the line Jsa. 28.17 Make man's punishments aequall with their faults. Now this
is a most hanious sin, a sin of the largest size and weight, for: First,
this is a sin wherein men do most affront Heaven, and rise up most daringly
against the Divine Majesty. A sin wherein most affront heaven.


He that swears by Gods name falsely, prophanes the Name of God. Lev. 19:12.
God gives it in charge against the false sinner, whose tongue frames deceit,
that ownes no relations, no engagements if they cross his lusts. Thou
thoughtest J was altogether such an one as thy self. Ps. 50.19:20:21. Perjured
persons pluck from God his wisdom, not thinking that all things are present
before him; or else argue him of injustice, as if by connivency he did bear
with the malice and faults of the wicked. But God will reprove such. David
concludes that the wicked has no fear of God before his eyes, because the
words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit, Psalm. 36.1, 3. If one man sin
against another, the Judge shall judge him; but if a man sin against the Lord,
who shall entreat for him? 1 Samuel 2.25. God will avenge the wrong that one man
does to another, and shall he not avenge himself on those that manifestly rise
up against his own greatness and glory? Secondly, This is a sin wherein men
appear most false among men. It was the agravation of Zedekiahs rebellion, A
sin wherein men appear most false among men.
that he rebelled against Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God. 2 Chronicles. 36.13. Men love the Treason but hate the Traitor. The Punicks faith was
a byword among the Romans. The Persians imposed everlasting silence on him
that was thrice convicted of lying, and made him incapable of any office,
Selymus the second caused Keretzen that betrayed Giula, to be rolled to death
in an Hogshead full of sharp nails, with this inscription. Here receive the
reward of thy treachery, etc. If thou were not true to Maximilian thy Lord,
neither will thou be to me.
or honor. Scarce any nation so barbarous, that have not looked on perjured
persons as the vilest among the children of men.

Because most unreasonable unexcusable.
2. Reas. Because this is a most unreasonable, a most unexcusable sin. Our
Savior shows the danger of the Jewish nation to be very great, because by
reason of his coming, and speaking to them, they had no cloak for their sin,
no excuse for their unbelief. John 15.22. The more light men sin against, the
more inexcusable are they in their sinning. In this men sin against the Law of
God, his express word, and against the Light of nature. It is a sad thing to
consider how easily men gull themselves in a thing of so great concernment,
with what poor patches they seek to cover this their wickedness. Some not
being able to deny their breach of faith pretend force, they covenanted out of
fear, or by reason of fear, dare not stand to their covenant. Miserable men,
slavish spirits, that fear a man that shall dye, and forget the Lord their
maker; that out of the fear of a mortal man, professedly lay aside the fear
of the everliving God? Isay 51.12.13.
Might not Shimei have pleaded this? But Solomon was wise in executing deserved
Justice upon that perjured wretch. See 2 Kings 2.42.43. Some pretend fraud,
they were overreached, drawn to covenant that which they were not well informed
in. It is a shame that men should be so silly; but this will no way justify
perjury, when things engaged for are necessary, yea indifferent. Joshua and the
Elders of Israel are by a wile, brought to enter a League with the Gibeonites,
to swear to let them live. Afterward this fraud is detected, the
Congregations of Jsrael desire their death, yea murmur against the Princes,
because they resolve to spare them, the people petition their death, but the
Princes dare not but let them live, and their reason is strong, Lest (say they)
Wrath be upon us, because of the Oath which we swear unto them. Josh. 9.18,
19.20. Saul almost four hundred years after breaks this Oath, and Israel and
his posterity smart for it. Some pretend prae-ingagements, or cross
engagements. This no question might in part have been pleaded by Solomon, but
was no way sufficient to justify his breach of Covenant with God, or to sense
off deserved wrath. Solomon loved many strange women, he cleave unto these in
love. It is probable he contracted with them to allow liberty of conscience, it
is evident that out of his uxoriousnesse he connived at, and tolerated their
Idolatry. In this he broke Gods convenant, and made a breach upon his own
house. 1 Kings 11.1, 2. etc. Shall we in paying our vows to men, infringe our
vows to God? Or to keep faith with men break faith with God?

It is a sad thing to consider how men withdraw their oaths, or chip and pare
them that they may suit with their lusts. Some will strain a little, in it
they shall pleasure a friend. Men appearing for themselves (...) ^side natural
affection. Men appearing for God, plead natures, relations, to cross divine
engagements. And is this aequall? Pericles requested by a friend to do an
unlawful act, replied, Oportet me commodare amitis, sed usque ad aras. Shall
not this heathen rise up in judgment against many of us? He that loves father
or mother more than me, (says Christ) is not worthy of me. Mat. 10.37.
Some pretend conscience of their engagements, but say it is not yet seasonable
as the Jews. Hag. 1.2. This people say, the time is not come, the time that
the Lords house should be built. But mark what follows. Is it time for you, O
ye, to dwell in your cieled houses, and this house lie wast? Must we first
attend our profits, Verse 4.
our pleasures, our liberties, our privileges, and then Gods honor?

I speak nothing of those wretches that covenant to curry favor, or to cover
themselves, or to surprise others, their own hearts condemn them. Peter makes
Ananias see himself left without excuse in his lying to the Holy Ghost, his
breaking his vow. Acts 5.1, 2, 3, 4. A pattern for all those to take heed by,
that pretending to advance Religion, and Gods worship and service, only seek
themselves, their own honor and glory. The Lord will have open infringers of
his covenant die without mercy, as being without all excuse. See Deuteronomy. 17.2, 3,
4, 5. It was the judgment of an heathen, that Faith given, Numa.
either in respect of the public, or the private, should be held, and kept,
being the honest bond of humane society, and the foundation of all right and
aequity.

3. Reas. Because this is a leading sin, a master, a mother sin. Because a
leading sin.
The more leading sins are, the more do they speed, and increase ruin. God will
have leading sinners punished, and that without partiallity, be they never so
seemingly eminent, be they never so near, so dear to us, yea though they be
many in number. See Deuteronomy. 13. throughout the whole chapter. Ieroboams sin was a
most ruining sin because a leading sin, and this is the brand that is upon
record upon him, Iereboam the son of Nebat which caused Israel to sin.

Now, this is a most leading sin, for, First it has a strong influence on
others. The heart (in its natural estate) is deceitful above all things. Jer.
17.9, and therefore prove to be infected by deceit. Men's hearts naturally are
prepared tinder on which the sparks of falsehood alightting do most readily
take. Make Duffe fleeing the tyranny of Makbeth, came into England to Malcolme
Cammore and fought to persuade him being right heir to the Crown of Scotland
to seek to recover his right, and therein to free his country from a tyrant.
Malcolme suspecting deceit, pretends insufficiency by reason of horrid vices
reigning in him, as first immoderate lust and lechery. To this Mak-Duffe
replies, that though this were an horrid vice, yet he would take a course to
cover it. Secondly Malcholme tells him that he was the most avaratious creature
on the earth. To this Mak-Duffe replies, that though this were a worse vice
than the other, yet if he would take the crown upon him, there were riches
enough in Scotland to satisfy this greedy desire. But when lastly, Melcholme
tells him that he was inclined to dissimulation, and breach of faith, so that he
rejoiced in nothing so much as in betraying those that should trust him, Make
duffe replies, this yet is the worst of all, and there I leave thee; and so
bemoaning his own, and his countries misery break out into tears.
One perjured person is fit to make many such. It is an easy matter for a son
to imitate a false Father, faithless Cain has a faithless posterity. Aetas
parentum peior avis, Tulit nos nequiores. God alone can set bounds to this
prevailing wickedness, and in exercising his free grace this way appears most
mighty, as well as most merciful. The air is infected where such (...) breath
at liberty. The Indians infected the Spaniards with the f^disease, and the
Spaniards infected the Indians with their unfaithfullnesse. Secondly, it has a
strong influence upon the party that is guilty of it. This is a most
infatuating, a most intoxicating sin. He sticks at nothing that can easily
swallow perjury. Mak-Duffe when Malcolme dissembles with him can find a remedy
for other vices, as coveteousnesse, whoredom, but none for this of perjury, he
looks upon such a one as desperate, as past all cure. He that lives in this
sin without repentance, has Atheism lording it in his heart, and cannot but
more or less have impiety, and dishonesty appearing in his life and
conversation. See how lively the Lord lays open the vileness of such persons.
Isay 59.3. etc. Your lips have spoken lies, your tongue has muttered
perverseness. None calls for justice, nor any pleads for truth; they trust
in vanity, and speak lies. Here is the Character of these men, their fruits
follow. They conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity. They hatch Cockatrice
eggs, and weave the Spiders web, etc. ver. 4, 5.6. etc.

They brood and bring forth al manner of mischief, horrid, hurtful, poisonous,
etc. They are strangers to all good, all honesty, all righteousness, etc. and
therefore no marvel though these times were so dark and dismal. We may well
apply that to these men which the Lord speaks. Deuteronomy. 32.32. Their vine is of
the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorah: their grapes are grapes of
gall, their clusters are bitter. Their nature is very wicked, their works are
worse.

4. Reas. Because this is a sin that God will by no means pass by, or leave
unpunished. Exodus 20.7. The Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his
name in vain. This awakens vengeance in the Lord, and that easily, One Achan
by his perjury troubles all Jsraell, God that is truth, and a God of truth, and
cannot but soon resent, and readily punish falsehood.

Thus much of the explication and confirmation of this truth, the Uses briefly
follow.

1 Use. Let us make inquiry after this. Have we not spoken words swearing
falsely in making a Covenant? Is not this the troubler of our Israel? Is not
this the worm that lies gnawing at the root of that gourd that has heretofore
overshadowed England? We are a tumultuous Nation, the foundations of the earth
tremble, all things are out of course, we looked for peace and behold trouble.
And is there not a cause? can that building long stand, the foundations whereof
are daily undermined? Get thee up Joshua (says the Lord) leave off wondering,
Israel has sinned and transgressed my covenant. This was then hidden, is
England's so? I would it might not be said, that England's breach of Covenant
is written in such capital letters that he that runs may read it. Jeremie
in charity hopes the falsehood and rebellion of the Jews had passed no further
then the common People; but he finds to his grief that the great men also, who
had more knowledge, or pretended to more knowledge had altogether broken the
yoke, and burst the bonds Ier: 5.4, 5. J have nothing here to do to speak of
that horrid rash common, customary swearing which, though the law of the Land
marks, yet passes unmarked in most parts of the Land; I speak only to our
more solemn engagements and the breach of them. Have we not sworn with false
hearts? Are there none that have made lies their refuge, and hid themselves
under falsehood? have we bin true in performing our engagements to God, to man?
have we in the zeal of God according to our Covenant in our several places,
and callings labored to advance what we have sworn to advance, and to ruin
what we have sworn to ruin? I sigh to speak it; how soon is that which God
has upon record in heaven almost forgotten by us? we engaged our selves for
Union, and behold Division. Whatsoever is contrary to sound Doctrine has
gotten daily strength even since we covenanted its extirpation. Never more
profaneness and whatsoever is contrary to the power of godliness, and never
less means among us here in the country to curb it. The time permit to speak
of particulars. Men declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Our first
love is grown cold, we can see truth ly trodden under foot, darkness
praeferred before light, the blood of precious souls drawn forth, and our
hearts bleed not for it. Many of us are forced sometimes to hear cursing and
swearing and blasphemy under our roofes, and out of fear we say nothing to it.
Where are the humbled Covenanters? where are the reformed ones? where are they
that out of conscience of their engagements endeavor to their utmost to give
God, and man their due? Have not all sorts corrupted themselves? where is
almost the free Family? where is the free Congregation? have not private
persons, have not public sworn falsely? Are there no false Ministers amongst
us? have these done their duty? have these stood in the gap now in these times
wherein God has sought for a man? Are there no false Magistrates? there were
such in Ezra's days, in Nehemiah's days, Princes and Priests that with the
first subscribed the Covenant, and were soon Leaders in the breach of it. See
Ezra 10. A Covenant made, broken Nehe: 6:17, 18, 19. so, Nehe: 9.38. and 10. A
Covenant made and subscribed by the Princes, Priests, etc. soon after broken
as we see chap. 13. J would there were none such in England. Beloved the sin
is manifest, and has not God closely followed with his vengeance? has not
judgment broke in swiftly, sadly, sutably? Is there not made a breach upon all
our excellencies? does not our nakedness appear to our shame? The whole head
is [sick* and the whole heart faint. From the sole of the foot, even unto the
head, Allus to John 8.7.
there is no soundness, but wounds, and bruises, and putirfying sores; Isa:
1.5, 6. We are ready all to say bring forth the Troubler, let him be stoned to
death, but who shall throw the first Stone at him.

2. Use. Let us justify the Lord in all his proceedings hitherto, and admire
his patience. The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his
works, Ps. 145.17. Proud Pharaoh whose heart was hardened, is forced by the
diverse judgments of God, and his differencing in them, Exodus 9.27.
to confess that God is righteous, but himself and his people wicked. And
shall we be more hard hearted than he? Beloved, we have had unnatural showers
of blood, unseasonable showers of rain; the Lord has seemed to threaten us in
these parts to withdraw the appointed weeks in Harvest, and to deprive us of
the seed time: we have had strange diseases, and the hand of God is upon many
of our Cattle: Our poor in some parts have bin ready to perish for want of
bread, and our selves want either hand or hearts to relieve them. Strangers
have been ready to devour our store, and we lie under many burdens. We roar
al like Bears, we murmur, yea in our impatiency we rail; but, beloved, we
forget our duty, Isa. 59.11*
It is of the Lords mercies we are not utterly consumed, his compassions fail
not. Lam: 3.22. Have we bin true to our God? have we been faithful in our
dealings one with an other? have we bin careful, according to our solemn
engagement to reform our selves, our families, to advance truth, to further
peace? My Son, my soul, give glory to the Lord God, Hosea 14 1.
for thou have fallen by thine own iniquity. Why will ye dye O house of
Israel? For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, says the Lord
God. Ezekiel: 18.31, 32. But shall he escape that does such things? or shall he
break the Covenant and be delivered? Ezekiel. 17.15. God has not dealt with us
after our sins: nor rewarded us after our iniquities. Psalm. 103 10.

3. Use. Let us labor to ruin this Ruiner, let us repent of this great evil,
and cast away from us this transgression whereby we have transgressed against
the Lord. That ye may be moved hereunto, consider,

1. The folly of this thing. Falsnes this way cannot be hid from God, All
things are naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do. Heb:
4.13. Achan is solitary in his acting perjury, in regard of man, but the eye of
God is upon him. The falsnes of our hearts cannot be hid from him who is the
searcher of the heart, and tries the reins, Can any hide himself in secret
places, that I shall not see him, says the Lord? do not I fill Heaven and
Earth says the Lord? Ier. 32.24. Shall we do well to commit that in the
presence of the All-seeing and immortal God, Josh. 7.18 20.
which we are ashamed to own in the presence of a mortal man? Falsnesse this
way shall not be long hid from men, the Lot of God shall light upon thee, and
the alreaching hand of God shall so overtake thee that thou thy self shall be
thine own betrayer, God will reprove thee, The Devil and thine own lusts
shall be let loose to discover thee. The Lord shall lead thee forth with the
Workers of iniquity. Psalm. 125.5. Evil men and Seducers shall wax worse and
worse, deceiving and being deceived. 2 Timothy 3.13.

2. The baseness of it. It is that which the very light of nature is ashamed
of, ye shall hardly find any so base as willingly to own it. The basest
language you can give to any is to give him the lie; this is enough amongst men
to justify a duel, to deserve a stab: Now this is the basest manner of Lying.
A Thief steals sometimes out of necessity, and we will have him hanged, but
false men live, and the greater Thieves lead the lesser to the gallows. This
makes unfit for any society, any relation, any employment. It was the glory of
our Ancestors that in their enterprises they were plain and faithful, being
willing rather to be deceived, than to deceive: It will be our shame if we be
found contrary minded, The time has bin when among strangers in the way of
comerce and trade, an English man's word has been as good as another man's
bond, but who will trust us, if, proving false to God, we betray one another. I
blush to think, if we go on in breach of Covenant, what a byword we shall be
among all neighbor nations, having proposed our selves as a leading pattern to
them to enter into the same, or like association or Covenant. This will blemish
all other excellencies, what is it to be learned, wise, valiant, if false. The
Duke of Burbou's credit being cracked by breach of faith, could never by any of
his other excellencies be repaired.

3. The danger of it. But of this at large already, only know, that this* (as
some other vices) in the guilt of it runs on in a blood: if grace prevent not,
it ruins families be they never so numerous, never so high and eminent, I
might give many instances. Pro. 14.11.

4. The good of the contrary. Truth and faithfulness commends to the good of
truth. This commends to all men, even our very enemies, and even false men have
somewhat within them bearing witness to men of truth* Saul that makes no
conscience of an oath himself, yet will have David swear he dares trust him.
See 1 Samuel 24.13. This will fence thy heart, and keep thy conscience unwounded,
The faithful shall find the counselling, comforting, See Isay 26.2. ^sa. 59.15.
protecting, delivering presence of a faithful God, and although in this wicked
world, when truth fails, he that refraineth from this evil of falsehood
makes himself a prey, yet, Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for
the end of that man is peace. Psalm. 37.37.

1. Now that we may remove this great and dangerous evil.

1. Let us remember our engagements, and let those vows of thine that are upon
record in heaven, be deeply riveted into thine own heart.

2. Let us be humbled for our bypast failings Mourn over thy self, smite upon
thy thigh, accuse thy self this day, Mourn over the falsnesse of thy heart, and
sickness of thy heart, the feebleness of thy heart, that through fear or
flattery has been brought to deal falsely in the Covenant of thy God. Mourn
over others, who by their falsehood endanger all.

3. Let us stand fast to the Covenant, resolve to pay our vows, arm our
selves with resolution this way, casting up our accounts before hand. In a
faithful course in all losses we shall be gainers, In an unfaithful, our
greatest gains will be our greatest loss.

4. Let us pray to God* 1. for our selves. For pardoning mercy in regard of
former failings, for purging mercy for the present. Create in me a clean heart
O God, and renew a right spirit within me. Psalm. 51. For preventing and
assisting grace for the future, Keep thy servant from presumptuous sins, let
them not have dominion over me. Psalm. 19.15. 2. For Magistrates those that sit
at the stearne, that they being faithful may promote faithfulness, and take
some speedy course that this ruining sin may be solemnly repented of. And
lastly, for all, that God would heal our backsliding out of his free love.

Finis.

