Dr DVRIE'S DEFENSE OF THE PRESENT MINISTRY, Being compared with the Gospel and
Gospel Ministry, turns into smoke, and vanishes.

As is made to appear in the ensuing Treatise, By a Witness of the Gospel,
JOHN BRAIN.

Gal. 2.14. When I saw they walked not uprightly, according to the truth of the
Gospel, I said to Peter before them all, etc. Printed in the Year, 1649.

To the Honorable, the Committee of the County of South-Hampton The Learned
Assembly at Westminster, and the Godly and well-affected of the County aforesaid.
TO you first of the Assembly I commend these things, because you are they to
whom the Supreme Authority of the Nation, has committed the care and judgment
of these, and the like differences, that you may judge between us, and make
public if you please, your dissent from what is not of Gospel proof, on either
part.

To you the Honorable Committee aforesaid, I humbly present these also, that
you hereby may see, that by this, or by the other cries of men of diffe^^
judgments, Is ^^^^^e (...) ^o be spoiled or wounded by you; spoiled of that by
your word, and handwriting, you have, for my Ministerial labors promised me,
it being the life of me and my great family: or wounded in my name, who have
lived, though in weakness, according to the testimonies of Christ; and give me
leave to mind you that of God, That the labourer is worthy of his hire.

To you my faithful and beloved friends of the Soake the City of Winton, and
County aforesaid; I leave this as my loving remembrance to you, advising you to
beware of the secret practices of men against the Gospel, as of works of
darkness, and deep dishonesty in them that do them, from whom, and from which
things keep your selves.

And (...) Mr Doctor Durie, I challenge a breach of promise, who near twelve
months since, by letter promised me your notes on my book, and you contrary
thereunto send my book and your bitter notes on it to my adversaries, what hand
you had in the private communicating of them I know not, but leave to God: Sir,
in obedience to Christ only, I have forborne to return you railing for
railing; nor would I have you for this, think I have forgot any good I have
received from you, but acknowledge the least tha^^uln^sse: Sir, I have not
wronged you a word, as I know, in tr^^scribing your no^es, they shall be
compared with the Original, at your command b^ any indifferent man; Sir, all
that I have done herein is for the Gospel, my deares^ friend, for whom I
desire to forsake all, and althings, and yet rest,

Gladly yours to serve you, and all the forementioned, according to the Gospel
service of God, John Brain.

To the Reader.
Reader,
THese Notes of Dr Duries, I found written on the margent of a Book properly
mine own (being Entitled, The smoke of the Temple cleared by the light of the
Scripture) lying one Shopkeepers Table where I live, which I taking away with
me, was after sent for to make appearance before two Justices of the County
aforesaid, who were desired to grant a Warrant to apprehend me (Fellon-like)
therefore, but honestly refused it, who after on my appearance, because I would
not surrender the said book, chosing rather to obey the Law passively in that
point, then actively; I was, and now stand engaged, to make appearance at the
next Quarter Sessions, to make Answer before the Bench, for thus illegally
seizing on my own proper goods, being a book sent Mr Doctor, upon his sending
to one Mr Ellis, for him to call on me to send him one of my Books, as the said
Mr Ellis told me, and not give him one, nor was it by me given; now that this
only c^u^^ aforesaid, must he taken in the business, I think cannot but seem
strange to all that read it: These Notes made in answer to the Doctor, by me,
were of two days making, which will plead for their imperfection, for thy
better understanding the Treatise, the letter P. is put for what page of the
Book, called, The smoke of the Temple, etc. the Doctor drew his observation
from, and the Scripture added to it, shows the ground the Doctor drew his
assertions from, which I doubt not but will clear many things in Scripture, hid
formerly to the world, and prove profitable to all that read them, by being
compared, things with things.

But to come to the Doctors observations themselves, he passes by the three
first pages, as having nothing to object, and begins with page 4. striving, if
he had strength enough, to remove the Evangelist from his own, into another
place, and so I leave him to his lift and trial of his strength; who may, as
soon by help of a leaver, role the round world out of his place, as the
Evangelist out of his, and sooner too; so unable is man found to be, when he
strives against Truth.

Luke 16.29. compared with Ephesians. 2.20.
P. 4.

Doctor. WHat is here said of the Apostles, is appliable unto Evangelists.

Resp. 1. This is petitio principii, or a begging the thing in question; Mr
Doctor, You would have it so.

2. The Scriptures were given by Divine inspiration to the Apostles and
Prophets, but not the ordinary Evangelists.

3. Nor are the Evangelists to be proved as the Apostles are to be, in any
extraordinary way in the Church: God in 2 Ephesians. 20. says, the Apostles and
Prophets, are of the Foundation, but not Evangelists.

Dr. I say, those Prophets who were before Christ's time, are properly to be
understood, Ephesians. 2.20. because they were the foundation upon which the Church
was built, as appears by Acts 26.22. 2 Pet. 1.19. yet I hold, that the Prophets
which are named, Ephesians. 4.11. are distinct from those Ancient ones, these are not
the foundation of the Christian Church; but these were the Apostolical office
(...) does ementer (...) comprehend these, but not these, for these were before
the Apostles; nor are the Prophets named, Ephesians. 4.11. qua distinct from the
Apostles, but if at all they are to be ^united the foundation, it is only as
in and under the Apostolical office: Then besides, by the foundation of the
Apostles and the Prophets, is only meant the doctrine Apostolical and
Prophetical, whereof Christ is the substance, that is, the one corner stone,
and is it not so also in respect of the Evangelists?

Resp. 1. For Answer to this confused mass, take my own words in my Book; by
Prophets, I understand not only those wrote before Christ's time, but those wrote
since also.

2. Whereas he says, The Ancient ones are not the foundation of the Christian
Church. It is clear the Prophets before Christ, are in the same way, a
foundation to the now Church; as the Prophets that were since: 1 Peter. 1.12.
Not to themselves, but to us, says the Apostle, speaking to those under the
Gospel administrations, they did minister these things in a Church
administration; only they were not in this time.

3. He says, The Prophets are not spoken of qua distinct from the Aopstles,
Ephesians. 4.11. How sad a thing is it to see a Doctor so deceived? are all the rest
spoken of as distinct; and does he dream this is not? see then, if the Apostle
has in any other Scripture distinguished them, if he sees it not here, 1 Cor.
12.28. God has placed in the Church first, Apostles: 2. Prophets. see if God
has not distinguished them by a first, and second. This man would have
confounded the Church Ministry, m^king of two one: with the men of his mind, it
is nothing to make all one.

4. He tells us, by foundation, was not meant the Apostles, but their Doctrine. I
having cited the text, Ephesians. 2.20. this is clear enough expressed, that it is
the foundation of the Apostles; not that the Apostles, as the Papists say of
Peter, are the foundations of the Church; there was no foundation for the
Doctor to make this learned exception.

P. 5.

Dr. The Church of the Gospel, is built on the truths delivered by the old
Prophets, as is clear by Acts 26.22. Luke 24.27. 2 Pet. 1.19.

Resp. To me it is much to see so grave a man fight with his own shadow, for in
this he has not hit me at all; I granted this in my Book, which might well have
saved him his learned labor.

Dr. But the Prophets, subordinate to the Apostles, were no more founders to
the Church, then the Evangelists.

Resp. For men of reputed learning and esteem, I see it is nothing to say any
thing, though never so clear against the truth: Ephesians. 2.20. we are built upon
the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, I provoke you Mr Doctor, to show
where it is said that we are built upon the Evangelists.

Dr. Titus was no where called Evangelist, was he therefore none?

Resp. Mr. Doctor, How shall I believe he was, if the Scripture say not of him
he was one? I am sure you have no Gospel makes him such that ever he wrote,
unless it be one lately brought from Rome.

Dr. What need Mark and Luke be called Evangelists, seeing their work does
speak them such?

Resp. You may easily see Mr. Doctor is good at the begging of the question,
and passing by the matter objected, viz. That the Evangelists office, 2 Timothy 4,
5. is a ministerial Church work, and not a writing work, as I have proved at
large in my Letters sent to the Assembly, and printed, but not Answered,
because you have not leisure, as in your Letters formerly you say concerning
this Book.

Dr. The work of an Evangalist is not only to Preach, but to order matters by
Apostolical direction, Tit. 1.5.

Resp. 1. This then shows your Evangelist was no extraordinary officer in the
Church, for what he did, he did by direction, as you and I should do in the
Church, were we faithful, and no otherwise.

2. In my form of Gospel Government, for Gospel Churches, and in this book
(you so sift to find chafe in) I have allowed as well Government, as Teaching
to the Church Ministry according to Jesus Christ, and you prove no more for
Titus is not for this work here, or any where called Evangelist, nor were any
where else for that particular act.

Dr. Is not the writing the history of Christ's life, the work of an
Evangelist? and if Mark and Luke did this, why should they not be called
Evangelists?

Resp. An risum teneatis amiei, Mr Doctor if they did this, why yet should they
be called Evangelists unless you can canonise them for such by authority of
the Presbytery that now is?

Doctor, And is not the work extraordinary? was it not indicted and directed by
the Spirit, in Mark and Luke as well as in Matthew and John.

Resp. M. Doctor, When you wrote notes on my Book, and had it communicated in
that disgraceful way as this was: I thought you had not vented your self into
such like Quries as these.

2. A man would have thought your reading would have taught you to distinguish
between an Apostle, and an Evangilist.

3. I thought my former letter to you of this point, would have made you blot
out this dull notion; seeing the Gospel, you so much talk of, Luke 1. was by him
but a setting in order; things believed amongst us, as himself says, and not
inspired into him ver. 2. As they delivered them to us. And here M. Doctor, Who
were these, but Mark and Luke? and then by whom, but by eye witnsses? which
were, it is likely, Matthew and John, with the rest of the Apostles, and it may
be said of the seventy, of which Mark and Luke were not; but had it from them
that were; as is plain and clear to him that is not blinded.

Doctor, And is not the hystory of Christ a fundamental truth of the Gospel?

Resp. And M. Doctor, The Amanuenses of many of the Psalms, the Prophets, the
Epistle of the Romans, Tertius, Romans 16.22. were not made there by Evangelists;
yet are their writings not authoritative, they being dictated to by the
Apostles and Prophets.

P. 6.

Dr. Romans 10.15. From Esaias. 52.7. Is not to be understood of the distinct
office of the Evangelist, as he differs from the Apostle Prophet, Pastor and
Teacher: but to Evangelize there, does comprehend all the testimony of Jesus,
in all respects, but especially of the Apostles work; and if this be so, then
from the general denomination of Evangelizing the distinct office of the
Evangelist can be no more proved to be ordinary, then from the general name of
Messengers; 2 Cor. 8.23. (...) that the Apostolical Office is ordinary; as
Preachers are in some sense Evangelists, viz. in respect of the glad tidings
that they preach.

Resp. That Evangelizing, was applied to the whole Gospel ministry I granted,
and thence proved, that it was an ordinary Office in the Church, yet to teach
and apply peace with the good things of the Gospel, to the strong men in Christ
only, was the proper work of the Church Evangelist, to which Paul applies
that of 1 Cor. 1.17. he distinguishing the Teachers Ministry, under the act of
Baptizing, who taught also; and the Evangelists Ministry, which Paul in
Corinth, as an ordinary Minister, officiated with other his fellow helpers.

2. For your parallel place, 2 Cor. 8.23. I would you would take your Bible,
and see how God distinguished these Apostles from the others, 1 Cor. 1.1. Ephesians.
1.1. Collos. 1.1. Paul is an Apostle of Jesus Christ: the Apostles 2 Cor. 8.23.
are Apostles of the Churches; Sir, I may say to you of this, as Christ to the
blind Pharisees, ye errre, not knowing the Scriptures, so that this Scripture
proves not any hinderance to my conclusion, as you seem to affirm, but that
thence, it appears, because the name is given, in common to the ordinary
Ministry, it was but an ordinary office in the Church, which often as Pastors and
Teachers to remain therein to the end.

Dr. That Timothy and Titus were employed only about one place, is so directly
opposite to Scripture, that nothing can be more; and it was aproperty of the
Evangelists office as distinct from the rest, and extraordinary, to be fixed to
no place, but to be fellow helpers to the Apostles, 2 Cor. 8.23.

Resp. 1. Reader, see how willing the Doctor is to catch at flies, and observe,
the thing he quarrels at is no saying of mine, but Chrysostomes, on Ephesians. 4.11.
qui occupabantur circa unum duntaxat locum, ut Timotheus ac Titus, he speaking
before of Evangelists.

2. For his Scripture, being more to be looked after then his arguments, 2 Cor.
8.23. Titus is Paul's f^llow-helper, here he is not called an Evangelist, nor
was he, but Pastor or Teacher in the Church with him only, 2 Timothy 4.5. Paul
being to die, bid him do the work of an evangelist; and before that time with
Paul, he never did it, Paul in fellowship did that work.

P. 7.

Dr. Rule of the Schools is true, quod Theologia Symbolica est argumen^^tiva.

Resp. Sir, I despise not Learning, nor the Schools, but the too much tying of
men to the Rules of Schools, took away all knowledge, and made men fools
heretofore; I think no Scripture but is argumentive, unless by the Scripture
you overthrow my argument; this is a fine way of Answering objections, approved
in the Schools, but not in the Church.

P. 8.

Dr. John's Ministry was, medium quid inter legem, and Evangelium, and made
both one in that which was substanciall unto both.

Resp. I approve of your learned distinction well, which was in my Book made
thus to your hand in English, that he was not of Moses Ministry, Mat. 11.13.
nor of Kingdom Ministry, ver. 11.

2. But that he made both, (...) that is the Ministry of both one, is a thing
found out by long study in the Assembly, who have found a way to make one two,
and two one, as the Doctor in the Church, and the Doct^r in the University, to
be meant in Epb. 4.11. as in your Propositions; or for what end is it set
there, but to blind the world?

Dr. This is a silly weak Criticisme, and there is more inferred upon it then
it will bear; (...) and (...) differ only in mod^, the same word is (...) and
(...), as it is publicly declared in the name of God, it is (...), and as it
is declared to men that are ignorant thereof, it is (...), there is therefore
no ground for a different administration, for he that in respect of God is
(...), in respect of men is (...).

Resp. 1. Sir, If I did criticie, it was not wilfully, and so it may well be
weakly; but you do it over and over, I do not tell you it is sillily done, sure
I am you have overdone it; I am loath to show you, least you should be ashamed
at it, 2 Timothy 1.11. Paul is (...): here lest you critics of the Assembly,
should make the ministry without the Church, and that within the Church one, he
puts the Apostle between to keep them asunder, and prove them too.

2. Here in respect of God, he is not (...) that is, false Doctrine; Mr Doctor,
the Apostle says, as Preacher, and Teacher, he was both in respect of his
ministry to men only, and that in differing ways of ministry, the one before
the Church ministry, which began in the Apostles, and ended in the Teachers; so
that my silly weak Criticism has the strength of a Gospel truth in it, and
seems to beat down your Antichristian Church administration

Dr. The arguments which are taken from the order of words and names are of no
force, except the Scripture add some Characteristicall note thereunto, to
express that it does intend the order should be observed, as in Ephesians. 4.11. it
does add only a note of distinction, but in the 1 Cor. 12.28. it adds a note
of order, first, second, third, and now Pastors and Teachers, are not
expressly distingished; and from the other, as the Apostles, Prophets, and the
Evangelists are, and whereas Ephesians. 4.11. Pastors are named before Teachers, 1
Cor. 12.28. only Teachers are named, and Evangelists, and Pastors are not at
all, so that in the order of words there can be no great matter to ground such
an inference upon.

Resp. Mr Doctor, you know my means is short, so that I cannot be as large to
satisfy the world or you (as I would) but thus, briefly thus, before you
perverted the Scripture, now you seek to take away the glory of it; Sir, the
word is divine, not only materialiter but (...) formaliter, and yet you dare
say, arguments are not to be taken from the order of words, and then come to
set Ephesians and Corinths one to oppose the other, when indeed they both
oppose you, showing you, none but Apostles are of the first rank, and so are
distinct from Prophets of the second; and for the third, they are all Teachers,
among which the Evangelist is one with the Pastor and Teacher, of which, one is
not more extraordinary then the other; Sir, pray see my Letters to the
Assembly, these are both at large and satisfactorily laid down in them.

2. You observe the Pastors and Teachers are not distinguished by (...) as the
Evangelists and Pastors, yet you and the grossest Papists allow of Pastors and
Teachers, not distinguished, but confound Evangelists that are: is this of God
in your Assembly?

P. 9.

Now for an insertion laid down in my Book, that the Ministry without the
Church is to be continued still, to prepare for the Church ministry: Mr Doctor
says this consequence is so very weak, that it deserves no answer, and the
ground of it is taken away by what has been said before.

Resp. Mr Doctor has quickly done with the business, but I cannot but wonder,
that wise men should dally with the truth, and deceive the world: That
Scripture, 2 Timothy 1.11. will one day rise in judgment against some men of
these days; I pray look unto it well you that are concerned in it.

Dr. If a calling of men fitly qualified, and setting them apart according to
the word, makes men ministers, then we have a ministry; but the antecedent is
true, Ergo, the Conse^ence.

Resp. I deny your major, first, that your calling is not according to the
word, nor are you set a part according to the word, nor are you members of a
true visible constituted Church; and so cannot be in that kind fitly qualified:
but of this, pray see my book called, The mystery of the Ministry.

Dr. Also the office of a Pastor and Teacher, is undoubtedly ordinary, and by
his own conf^ssion, it presupposes a Church in which it is exercised; has
not the Church continued ever since the Apostles?

Resp. I would you would learn to confess the truth also as I do; but Sir,
though I confess they are ordinary Teachers, yet I confess not that they are
so ordinary as to be any where, but in a true visible Constituted Church only,
which has, or ought to have, the Evangelist also in ordinary.

As to the Question, I Answer, there has not been this 1240 year a visible
Church, in which rightly have been the true Church ministry, and right Church
constitution, though there has been an invisible Church through all the time
in the world, 1 Cor. 12.28. God has plac^d in the Church these, but not out of
the Church.

Dr. The warrant we have is a lawful call to the ministry, the Apostle James
does forbid a masterly elusorious way of teaching, as is clear by the whole
sequel of his discourse.

Resp. Sir, The smoke of the Temple offends your eyes yet, ye cannot see
clearly; your Church is no true Church, nor that it is as you found the
Antichrist of Rome leave it, and is no better for its constitution then Rome's
Church is.

Now such as your Church is, your call is, and such your ministry; It is true
Indeed, James forbids a masterly Teaching, and such is yours Sir, for you Teach
in the Church so by your single Ministry, as you have no example in the
Scripture for it.

As for James his Church, and Church ministry there, spoke of, was the same
with yours, not a company of Saints, but adulteresses and adulterers, Jam. 4.4.
persecutors and blasphemers, James 2.6, 7. their tongues set one fire of hell,
full of cursing and bitterness; Chap. 3.6, 9 and no where called a Church in his
Epistle; Sir, it seems the more I rub your eyes, the worse the smoke troubles
you^ John's first Epistle was written to another manner of Society.

Dr. It is true, Paul did all, because every officer of a superior degree,
has authority to do the actions of the inferior: but where are we forbidden
to teach? must not a minister be chosen, (...), 1 Timothy 3.12?

Resp. 1. He did them all until the Church was constituted where he was, but
when he had others to Teach and labor with him, he took not their work out of
their hands, 1 Cor. 1.14. thus Peter, Acts 10.48.

2. That ye are forbidden to Teach without a lawful call (that is,
Anticristian) (...), ye^ you are forbid to Teach as you do, 2 Cor. 10.13. we,
that is, Paul, Silvanus, Timothy, 2 Cor. 1.19. in the name of the full Church
ministry, Paul says, we will not boast of things without our measure, (...): Mr
Doctor, pray observe in one Church, every minister has a measure allowed him
to Teach by, which is laid out as by a rule, of which in ministry, every man is
not to take what he will, as you do, but God has parted to each ministry his
doctrine in the Church, yea, to the Apostles, when they taught as ordinary
Teachers, and to those that taught with them, to which Paul alludes 1 These.
2.4. as we were allowed of God; there is a Gospel allowance to Teachers, what
they should Teach, and yet Bishops chosen by teaching that doctrine, he was to
be called to teach in the Church, and not by others.

P. 10.

Dr. Here is no mention of an Evangelist at all, how then is it proved hence
that he is a perpetual and assistant minister in the Church? and if (as he
says) The Apostle does speak here of public Church Ministry, and does not
name an Evangelist in it, then the argument is strong against him, that an
Evangelist is not an ordinary public minister.

Resp. Mr Doctor seems profoundly to argue in this place, against nothing: pray
consider it.

1. That in this Scripture, Romans 12.6, 7, 8. is not mentioned the name of
Prophet, Pastor or Teacher, which he cannot deny, but yet are employed here: but
because the Evangelist is not set down, therefore he has no place at all,
though the other may have, having the Doctor's leave.

2. The Prophet in prophesy which was before him, is employed; and the Pastor,
in his work of exhortation, that comes after him; and the Doctor, in teaching,
is employed: And there is Ministry for one in the Evangelist's place; but he
must not be there, unless he be set down an Evangelist, though all teaching,
and his emmenter, may be called Ministry. Sir, here cannot be understood any
other Church-Teacher whatever; nor your Church-Deacon, or supposed Elder, these
follow in verse: 8. in giving and ruling: Sir, I pray take heed of your taking
too much liberty in making the Scripture speak against themselves; if you
forbear that, I am sure they will not speak for you at all here.

Dr. This is a silly and irregular thought; for how can a Church be
constituted, before God give gifts? Shall we make Evangelists, before God makes
them? All Pastors and Teachers are in a general sent Evangelists, that is,
publishers of the Gospel, but not in a peculiar sent, as he would have the
Evangelist to be.

Resp. Reader, the cause of the Doctor breaking out into this silly cry, is,
for that in my Book, page 10. is written, whereas the Apostle says, there be
diverse gifts, from this Romans 12. (I think, if ever a Church were rightly
constituted, greater gifts would be bestowed on men, then since the Apostles.)

1. The Doctor understands not, that God has distinguished the Church gift
from the Heavenly gift; the Church gifts are called, (...) which are given to
men by the Church, (...), according to the divine gift God had given them to
minister the Church gift, by which is the several calls of the Church ministry,
Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers; and thus indeed the Church is not to make,
before God has made them, but after.

2. For what cause the Doctor troubles himself about Pastors and Teachers being
Evangelists, having before written of it, and so few unworthy observations of a
Doctor, and up with it so often, shows he wanted matter to object, and that the
man is mightily troubled about the Evangelist in his mind.

Dr. This Paragraph is to me a piece of nonsense; for I knew not what he would
say in it, or how it is coherent with this former discourse.

Resp. If the Doctor be silly, as he makes himself, I wonder he would take upon
him, in so unworthy a way, to send down his notions in so secret a way, to
disgrace me and my writings privately, amongst the ignorant multitude: it had
been more honor, having been provoked to the press, or print, to have
published some worthy work in defense of their Presbyterian Government, set out
in the Propositions, which I printed against; or against that form of Church
Government I added to it; or prove their Government by the practice of the
Primitive Church, and disprove that in my Treatise, of the resurrection of fallen
Churches; and not in seeking to correct truth for error in a Book, make ten
errors, when he proves none, but the not understood nonsense he talks of, is
in this, The Church ministry is set out often times by one word in Scripture, as,
(...), Act: 20.17. he called for, (...), thus that, 1 Cor: 12.28. (...) (that
is, that under these words set down in the plural number, the whole ordinary
Church ministry are comprehended, of Ephesus, or Corinth) and consequently, may
be of any other Church.

Now Reader, judge where this be nonsense, where a man but of small
understanding, may not apprehend it, though not a Doctor; and where it agrees
with the whole scope of my Book, or not; and how little cause the Doctor has
to call it nonsense.

Dr. If the thing in question had been proved, these objections might have been
made: but now they are a begging of the question.

Resp. Sir, when God has thrown down Babel, he will prove it unto you then;
and I shall no need beg the Question any more: nor if you would yield to the
truth, I need not come a begging to you for these things at all.

P. 11. The third Church.

Dr. Where was the second Church spoken of? For hitherto he has mentioned only
Rome to prove the point, which has yeild^d no proof at all.

Resp. 1. The first Church, which I now must make the second, was that of
Ephesians, page: 2. O Mr Doctor, have you this twelve month been making
observations on my Book, and pass over the subject of my discourse with so
little notice, as to ask where the second was: sure that text of Scripture does
dazzle your eie-sight, when ye come to look on it, because ye cannot see a
single ministry in it; it was a wonder, that Antichrist did not see this would
destroy his way of administrations ^^r him.

Dr. Nor is here from this, 1 Cor. 12.4. any word of proof, but that there are
several administrations to general pers^n^: And what then? is therefore an
Evangelist a distinct, ordinary, perpetual Officer in the Church? O silly,
silly weakness!

Resp. Sir, take heed, lest you come in the compass of those (...), 1 Cor:
2.17. which are corrupters of the Word. Sir, how can these gifts belong to
general persons, which are to be in every constituted Church ordinarily for
which God has designed several administra^^o^s in the Word. Sir, your
general persons is a term ^o general to be used in controversy: when you
more particularly express your self, I will more particularly answer you, if
this do not suffice you.

P. 11. Mark: 6.7. Luk: 10.1. Christ sends his forth two by two.

Dr. This is a proof like all the rest; from the circumstance of a fact, to
argue a perpetual institution, is very weak: Christ sends his Disciples by two
and two, and the ministry of the Gospel is not a single work: therefore, beside
Pastors and Teachers, there must be Evangelists in ordinary, and perpetually in
office: What a senseless consequence is this?

Resp. This act of Christ was brought only to prove against a single ministry,
as now used; the Church being not yet fully constituted.

2. Whereas you make a great cry of nothing, with a, O Yes: this is proof like
all the rest, from the circumstance of a fact. Sir, what if you had no more to
convince you of your single ministry? is not this enough? was not here the
sending of the Apostles and seventy to teach? according to which pattern,
should not you walk by, if you would walk in the truth? had Moses more then the
pattern, to do all his Tabernacle work by? Sir, was this only done in one, two?
or were not all the eighty two so sent forth, and so commemorated by the
Evangelists? sure if the thing were so slight, as you make it, there would not
have been that care to set it down there was. And as these now, so after they
always did, in the History of the Acts, go two or three together, from this
their former Commission. Sir, if men would believe you, it were nothing for you
to make nothing of overcoming the truth, with branding it with senseless
consequence, drawn by your self, out of that was never intended by me: and so,
if there be any senslesnesse, in the consequence it is your own, and none of
mine.

P. 12. I showed, why Christ sent the Disciples, and seventy, by two and two,
and not by three; because none were to officiate the Evangelists office, while
Christ was living: and in this he was, (...). And whereas I said, I remember
not that the Apostles are said to Evangelize, during Christ's being on earth,
Mr Doctor in his Scholia says, This assertion is false; the twelve did
Evangelize while Christ was alive, the text says it expressly, Luk: 9.6.

Resp: 1. I did not assert the thing, but said, as I did remember; it is not
said, they did not: I, hastily writing, did not examine it.

2. That they did Evangelize, as the Church Evangelists did in constituted
Churches, after Christ's resurrection; I say, that the assertion, if Mr Doctor
will have it so, is true, and the contrary false.

P. 12. The time of gathering Churches was not yet come, etc.

Dr. Those that became Disciples to Christ, to what were they gathered? why,
were not they a Church that were united to him by faith, as his members?

Resp: Mr Doctor may satisfy himself concerning these Questions, without my
Answer: I wonder he uses a why, and what, about it.

1. Were there not many a one with him by faith, that were not in public
Church Fellowship, or in Church Ordinances with him, as Lot, Job, and others
before, not circumcised? many in the Antichristian church, now are of Christ's
invisible church, Rev. 18.4. and no man will say, these were in a visible
church socie^y of Christ: why were they called out else? Nicodemus and others.

2. The Holy Ghost will give another answer, Act: 1.4. they must tarry at
Jerusalem for the Holy Ghost, before they constituted churches: yea, in Judea
and Jerusalem, verse: 4. and Ephesians: 4.8, 10, 11. will show you: Christ went to
Heaven, before he gave the gifts of church ministry to the church, to be
ministered unto in a church way, as they after were to be administered.

Dr. Christ declares, that M ses ministry was at an end with John the Baptists
time, Math: 11.12, 13. Luk: 16.16.

Resp: 1. Neither of these Scriptures say, that it was at an end: but that it
was; (...), until John, (...), etc. from thenceforth the K^ngdom of Heaven is
preached: Note, until John there was none else but Moses ministry, and that it
was not utterly abolished in John's time, or by John, Math: 23.1, 2. Jesus said
to the Disciples, and to the Multitude: The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses
Chair: Whatsoever therefore they say unto you, do ye, etc. This was in the last
year of Christ's ministry, and after John the Baptists death, and yet it is not
abolished utterly; if it were dead, it was not buried.

2. That churches were not constituted, see the History, Act: 6. Deacons are
set up in the church, after 1 Cor: 6.1. the ruling Elder is set up in the
church, and none before: after this, the Deaconesse, and things concerning the
Kingdom, that is, the church administrations were given them after Christ's
resurrection, Act: 1.3. by especial direction.

P. 12. It was gross, when the word, Church, was only taken for your places of
assembly, etc.

Dr. The denomination of your place of meeting by the name, Church, when the
continens is used pro contento, is not incongruous, but consonant to Scripture,
1 Cor: 1.18. with 20, 22.

Resp: Sir, it is incongruous for a man to quarrel with one agrees with him;
and to take the word, Church, in Scripture, only for a meeting place, is worse:
but I think I proved to your hand more clearly, or Mr Mead for me, that which
you here assert in the same Book, p. 56. from 1 Cor: 11.22. But you were weary,
spending any more time and ink in the reading and correcting of this smoky
piece; and so left off, before you came to the end, and saw it not: or rather,
you dare not deal with that, as with this, it comes closer to your coined
government.

Dr. Mixed Assemblyes do not make void the truth of the Church, if Gods
Ordinances be observed therein, and the true Doctrine taught and received.

Resp: 1. This is but your saying they do not, it is little worth with those
argue against you; especially, when it is against the truth.

2. Your Hypothesis is drawn a^ impossible, for God's Ordinances cannot be
observed in mixed societies.

3. Show me one church constituted of the Gospel constitution, of a National
mixed society, and I will show you all others be the contrary constituted; and
more then 100 years after, that were approved by approved Authors.

Page 12. There are to be three distinct Teachers in every Church.

Dr. It is not clear, that these three are to be distinct and perpetual in
ordinary; all this is said at random, and without ground.

Resp. 1. Sir, it is as clear as Scripture can make them; yet as clear as they
are, I cannot make your eyes see them, the smoke being on them: take away the
smoke, and they will appear to be three distinct ordinary Teachers.

2. That, that was ordinary in the Apostles time, that is to be ordinary in
every true constituted Church for ever; and it has a Gospel ground: but your
single ministry has no foot for a foundation from Christ, but Antichrist: you
acknowledge Pastors and Teachers, why have ye not them set up in your
societies? sure it will not suit with the constitution of your Church, or with
your profit, or something.

Page 13. Galat: 2.9. James is Evangelist, Peter Pastor, John Teacher.

Dr. These things are mere fancies, without any proof from Scripture, and
altogether inconsistent with the Apostolical charge.

Resp. 1. Sir, what means 2 Pet: 5.1. where Peter calls himself, (...); If
not that in some constituted Church he was joined with others in the ministry?

2. Sir, in my Treatise, of The Resurrection of fallen Churches, I have proved by
the testimony of Tertullian, Ireneus, and others, that the Apostles were the
Elders of the Church of Jerusalem; men whose testimony is to be received before
all the testimony of the Presbyters living.

3. Is it more inconsistent with these to do thus among the Jews, in the Mother
Church, then with Paul to do these among the Gentiles, 2 Timothy: 1.11. and with
Barnabas, Peter and John, with Philip at Samaria, Act: 8.14.25. and why not at
Jerusalem, ^r Doctor?

Page: 13. That the Gospel was preached in the Synagogue, as to mixed multitudes.

Dr. These proofs are such silly inferences, that it is tedious to reflect upon
them, and examine them, they are even ridiculous.

Resp. Sir, you are not the first have made a mock at the truth of the Gospel;
their disputing, and reasoning, differ^d from Church teaching, as a work of the
Catechist: which when men were sufficiently wrote on, were separated from the
multitude to the believers society; as in the Acts 18.4, 7, 11. and is a thing
deserves more study, then you are willing to spare about it, because it is
opposite to your present designs.

Page: 14. the second part of ministry, etc. L. 1.

Dr. This does contradict that which he has been saying all this while; his
argument formerly taken from the order of words; for if the Doctor be the
second part of the ministry, next the Evangelist, then the Pastor is not the
second to the Evangelist: but these are groundless whimseys.

Resp: In the end of the page before, I showed, from the words of Christ, Math:
23.11. He that is greatest amongst you, shall be your servant: Where I
observed, Christ shows, the Evangelists work was to make way for the Church
constitution, and so ministered to the Teacher and Pastor: And when the Church
came to be constituted, and that there were men fitted for the Evangelists
ministry, then some other was constituted to do that work without the Church,
and the Evangelist did minister the perfecting ministry to the strong men in
Christ, in which work the Pastor is next him; though in the other, his ministry
preceded the Doctor: And this is the groundless whimsey, which was the
practice of the Apostles, in their ordinary ministry: Paul taught at Corinth,
before he baptized, and then baptized: and when the church is constituted, he
leaves baptizing, and that ministry, and Evangelizeth, 1 Cor: 1.14, 17. Act:
18.4, 7, 8.

Page: 14. Of James and John's Epistle.

Dr. The difference of James and John's styles, the one reproving of vices and
faults sharply, and the other persuading powerfully to the improvement of
grace, is no argument of any such thing as he would have inferred, that he was
a Doctor to the Jewish church in particular: But indeed these things are so
weak and silly, that they are not worth the answering.

Resp. See how this silly man makes the difference of the doctrine, to be only
in the style, as if the condition of the persons required it not: as if any man
in that society, and to that people John taught, might have taught that
Doctrine; and applied there, that James taught ^t, e contrario, Mark: 3.17. was
not John, as well as James, the son of thunder? Think you, among the Apostles
was no other conduct of spirit, then in your confused Babylonish teaching? See
if any Epistle writ to any church, be like this of James: Show any ground from
James Epistle, that it was written to a constituted church: I think I shall
show you shortly 20. why it was not.

P. 14. The whole Doctrine is for Babes.

Dr. The Apostle writes to young Men, and to Fathers, as well as to Babes: how
then is the whole Doctrine for Babes alone? but this is like all the rest.

Resp: 1. The Apostle, as Apostle, had an extraordinary call, to write to
Fathers and young Men of the Church, as well as Babes.

2. That he writes to these, is contained all in chap: 2. verse: 14. Now what,
and how much of Doctrine it contains, that this vapor should come from the
Doctor, I know not. Chap: 2. verse: 1. he begins with, Little Children; verse:
12. and verse: 18. chap: 3. verse: 7. verse: 18. chap: 4. verse: 4. chap: 5.21. and
in all the Epistle not a word more, but in chap: 2. verse: 13, 14. of young Men,
or Fathers at all.

P. 14. The third part of Ministry, or second of the Church Mini^^ry.

Dr. This notion of distinguishing the ministry, and its parts, in abstracto,
from Church ministry, to make the third in the one, the second in the other, is
another whimsey which he frames to himself.

Resp. Was there ever man, in so vile a manner, would so secretly have wounded
the truth, and a man's reputation, by reproach, as this man endeavors? calling
my distinguishing the Ministry without the Church, from that within the Church
proudly, Notions and whimseys: I received base terms in his Letters before,
but I answered them in mildness and humility; but this secret treachery I
cannot but take notice of.

1. Where he says, that I make the third in the one, the second in the other,
is a whimsey of his own head, if there be any whimsey in it, and none of mine.

2. If the man were sensible, he would understand, that Paul, 2 Timothy: 2.11. was
a Preacher, an Apostle, and a Teacher of the Gentiles.

1. See here is a Preacher before the Apostle, not in dignity, but did in
ministry precede the Apostle, he being the first in the Church ministry, and
the Teacher the last, as in Ephesians: 4.11. which being the extremes of the Church
ministry, comprehend the rest of Prophet, Evangelist and Pastor under them;
which I dare to maintain against Mr Doctor, by word or writing, and prove his
language to be but little better then blasphemy and railing.

Dr. That Saint Peter's second Epistle was written to the Jews of his particular
charge in Jerusalem, is contrary to Peter's own words, as in 2 Pet. 3.1. it
appears the second Epistle was written to whom the first was, and it is clear
the first was not written to t^o^e of Jerusalem, but to those of Pontus, etc. 1
Pet. 1.1. So that to please himself in these whimsies, he care not what he
says, or what conjectures he makes contrary to the text: sure when he wrote
this, his whimsey did blind him so, that he did mistake the one Epistle for the
other, for it is in the first Epistle, chap. 1. verse 2. that he gives them the
title of the Elect, and the dispersed are the Elect; by this it appears, with
what careless fantasticalnesse this is written.

Resp. 1. Fri nd, in my Epistle to the Reader, I let him know, of which he also
in a Letter wrote me, and rebuked me, for doing this thing in haste, yet see
with what bitterness he carps at a mistake, of putting the Elect to the second
Epistle, which is in the first.

2. That I may when I meet with Truth honor it, though it should have come
from a de^^^l, I do acknowledge the mistake, and the pettish man never spoke
any thing that was considerable but now in this: But

1. I commend to be considered, where an Epistle formerly written may not be
absent by the malice of the Jews, as one seems to be of the Corinths, 1 Cor.
5.9.

2. Lest any man should think I should object this, without ground to uphold
my whimsies and fantasies, pray observe 2 Pet. 3.15. he mentions the Epistle of
Paul to them, which was that of the Hebrews, which without question was written
to the Church at Jerusalem, Heb. 13.23. if Timothy come shortly I will see you,
which was not the dispersed Jews in these several parts of the world, but the
Church at Jerusalem, of which, after most of his Epistles written from Rome to
the Gentiles, he writes to Galatia, and is going for Jerusalem with Titus, 18
years after his conversion; nor did he teach the Gospel but to the Church of
Jerusalem amongst the Jews, Heb. 3.1. he calls them partakers of the heavenly
call, Acts 18.6. (...)

3. Peter's most abode was at Jerusalem, as he that will but observe the History
of the Acts may well find it, and so was James; it being agreed that James,
Peter, and John should minister to the Circumcision.

4. Timothy it may be could not go up with him at that time, for he questions
where he would or not, Heb. 13.23. and he seems to speak to a particular
People, and of a particular place.

P. 15. The whole Epistle does concern such only as are exercised.

Dr. This kind of arguing from some words to infer such consequences is so
silly and frivolous, that a man can scarce consider it with patience.

Resp. I say, It is the doctrine of the whole Epistle, he says, this is only
of some words: he should do well to show that the Epistle doctrinally concerns
excercised Christians, or that joy it is in some one, he begins only with
exhortation to grow unto grace, and ends with the same, the whole matter
tending thereunto; yet he cries, O silly and frivolous, as having nothing else
to say for himself, in which he sounds like an empty barrel.

Dr. Here we have a fourth part of Church ministry, even now we had but the
second, where is then the third of Church ministry? then he said, before there
were but three distinct persons to be Teachers in the Church, and now he brings
in four.

Resp. 1. Before you have the second Church ministry as you confess.

2. You inquire for third.

3. Before you say there were but three distinct persons to be Teachers in the
Church.

4. I have desired you not to take exceptions at the corruptnesse of the Copy,
and yet how the good man catches at a fly, will not any understanding men that
reads it, say you want but matter to carp at, and to rail? a man would scarce
believe your empty terms when you pass by things you know not how to except
against, or what to say unto; to say they are things not to be considered:
(...) predecessors part you act to the life, that was done by the Spanish
Cardinal to the Pope, on the Letter of Grosted, as at leisure you may peruse,
in the book of Acts and Monuments, they were not so wise as you therein, nor so
subtle, as appears in the carriage of this business.

Dr. It contradicts also the former order asserted, viz. that the Evangelist is
before the Pastor and Teacher, and now he is placed behind them; so the
Evangelist is double, both first, and last: these intricacies do show that all
these things are written a^ random, without any judgment, or consideration.

Resp. 1. That the Evangelist is placed behind the Pastor and Teacher, is,
because he is here last handled.

2. He that will enumerate the Church officers, and begin with the Apostles,
and goes downward, comes last to the Doctor: but he that begins with the
Doctor, and goes upward in order to the Apostles, does not destroy the Gospel
order; for as in Nature a man is first a child before a man, though in honor a
man is mentioned before a child: so in the spiritual estate of Christians
likewis^.

3. As for that the Evangelist is said to be double, I have already answered it
to an objection already made there-against.

P. 16.

Dr. All these following conjectures are so silly, and so little worth the
consideration, that no wise man will spend time to refute them.

Resp Sir, I did not spend the hundredth part of time to refute your prudential
Presbyterian Government, which has but little of the Gospel pattern in it at
all; Sir, I took it a broad, call your brethren to put it together again if
you can, I provoke you to it, and do not blind the eyes of the world, and say,
They are silly things, I will charge you with it: your Wit and Learning cannot
do it, and therefore to save your credit you slight it: but this will not serve
you always, there is a day coming, God will call you to an account for your
Stewardship, Luke 16.2.

P. 16. on Colos. 3.10.12.15.

Dr. What he means by this example, and to what purpose it is alleged, I know
not, but I am sure he makes inferences from the Apostles words, which are mere
fancies, and no ways consistant with the Apostles mind in this place alleged;
for the Apostle does not speak of the estate of the Church as it was a society,
but of the duty of every believer as he is a member in Christ.

Resp. 1. For the alleging it, I did it to that purpose before I ever read
Dionysius that he does, who shall tell you for me why I alleged it; Dionysius
chap. 6. Eccl. Hierar. prioris autem vestis posi^io alteriusque assumptio
migrationem illam a media vita licet sacra, ad perfectionem significat sicut in
divina regeneratione promotionem judicabat a purgata vita ad contemplautem
illuminan^emque habitum illa vestis caudentis immutatio: This was a received
truth, when Presbyterian Government, as now it is, was hid in the bottom of
that bottomless pit.

2. That the Church here is spoken of, as to a Society, I will maintain
according to my brief Analisis and exposition, made on the whole Epistle, in my
Treatise of The Resurrection of fallen Churches, as is made to appear, which I
provoke you to object against if you can.

P. 17.

Dr. Suppose all these in the Paragraphs to be true, how will the inference be
made good, that an Evangelist is a perpetual and ordinary ministry in the
Church.

Resp. 1. Methinks you should deal honestly with the truth, and say they are
true, or show wherein they are false, to what purpose is your arguing in this
kind else?

2. How the inference will be made good, that the Evangelist is a perpetual
ordinary officer, lies at the Assembly door proved in my Letters, waiting when
you will be at leisure to give them an Answer, an^ especially in that particular
we have a proverb, no man is so blind as he that will not see, you need not
enquire how, Mr Doctor.

P. 17. 1 These. 2.1. Our entrance.

Dr. From the particle (our) to infer, were ministers joined with him is no
true ground, the Apostle speaks of himself alone in the plural number in many
places, 2 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4. and chap. 1. v. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, and elsewhere.

Resp. 1. That the Apostle in this place had others joined with him is clear,
Ephesians. 2.19. Paul, Silvanus, Timothy, are those he calls us, and our, in the
whole Epistle.

2. The Apostle speaks indeed himself but for Timothy and himself, Timothy is
joined with him.

3. By that chap. 1. with that whole le^ie of verses, in our is the Church
mentioned, (...) as in we, Timothy and Paul, in verse 1. Which proves, he had
others joined with him, and reason and sense will tell, wherein ministers are
one, in the Scripture sense.

P. 18 Apply hence we may, etc.

Dr. From the premises, you may as well conclude, that there is a fourfold, or
five-fold administration in the ministry: for if the number of Paul's
co-adjutors be the medium of the argument, then so many helpers as he had, so
many administrations there are: hence it is clear you are an ex^reamly weak
man.

Resp. Sir, would it not be a wonderful shame, that such a strong man, like
that Philistime, should be overcome by weak means? nay, weakness it self; Sir,
if you will not boggle with the truth, I will mainetaine, that the Apostles
helpers are the medium of the argument, so that you understand it of such, as
at one and the same time, and in one Church only did help him in the Ministry,
but who would think you would take all (...) his helpers in several Churches,
to be accounted of as in one Church, do you (...) the word in simplicity, and
Godly sincerity? now I appeal to God and your conscience in these things.

P. 18. Coming to show how the Extraordinary, and Ordinary Administrations
differ.

Dr. Haec omnia gratis dicta, and do not con^^^^ with that which has been
said formerly.

Resp. Et tibi gratis concessa, for before, I only spoke of the ordinary Church
Ministry, now of ordinary and extraordinary also, and so you are never the
wiser.

At first, Christ administered to Apostles, Apostles and Prophets to Evangelist,
Pastors and Teachers; Evangelists to men, Pastors to youth, Teachers to infants.

Object. You inserted not the Pastor, and his administration.

Resp. As the Apostle 2 Timothy 1.12. putting down the two extremes of the Church
Ministry comprehends the rest, so in the first and last of the ordinary Church
ministry is comprehended the middle.

P. 19.

Dr. These allusions are no ground for a divine institution, which at all has
not been showed. Ergo,

Resp. Allusions, nor nothing besides, are any thing with you, that serve you
not, Romans 2.20. (...), where the Babe is under the Teachers ministry or
administration, the Pastor helps on to perfect us, as youth, that under the
administration of the Evangelists ministry we may be men in Christ, Ephesians.
4.11.12.13. applied to the whole Church ministry.

P. 21. John 21.15, 16, 17.

Dr. This is like the rest of your arguments, to find Mysteries where there are
none, and to build arguments upon them, is all along your way; it may be
granted, and is a truth, that there is a distinction between Lambs and Sheep,
and between the^ feeding and feeding of Sheep, (...) and (...), differunt modo:
the first is properly to feed them with meat, the other rule and guide them;
but all these duties are recommended to one and the same man, and this
instalement of Peter in his office by sufficient grounds to infer that which
you would gather from thence, in the same Pastoral and Doctrinal charge, and
this is to be done without the coining of a new office.

Resp. Mr. Doctor, you must begin with an O yes, still, for fear least no man
would not heed what ye say; and did they heed you rightly, they would take heed
how they read your writings, I hope you are more just in your cases of
conscience.

1. You acknowledge part of the truth, but not all, here are three sorts
expressed, and differenced clearly in their feeding, why do not you ingeniously
confess it, or deny it by argument? but you confess only what will serve your
own turn, this will not avail in the day of Christ.

2. You have two sorts of feeding, the one with meat, the other with rule, yet
both sorts are fed alike; but Sir, where is the third? what, is it, or is it
not in the Text? or are you not willing to have it there, or known it is there?
and then the Lambs are fed with Doctrine, Sheep with rule.

3. These are recommended to one man, but was he not an extraordinary officer?
and were they not several administrations given unto him?

4. If I prove the office from the Scripture by institution, practice, and
continuance, how can you say it is a new coined office? you have not one of
these to show for your single National Church ministry, in all the book of
Christ; yea, in the Name of Christ, either prove your call and ministry, or lay
it down, or this will be a witness against you at the last day.

Dr. If this be your clearest proof, it is clear you have no proof at all, but
make your fancy, and wrong application of the Text, all your proof; this proves
no more, then that Peter was fully re-installed unto his office, and that
notwithstanding his threefold denial, he was again thrice admitted to his
charge, and to all the objects and parts of it.

Resp. Sir, to all understanding men, you clear up the truths of my Treatise,
and bring a darkness on your self and judgment, what, twelve months time to
find out Peter's re-instalement, and to put in a few empty lines, and to put it
in again and again? you should have put it in a little further off, if that
were it you aimed at: but Sir, pray what do you make of Peter? a Pope indeed?
or I pray Sir tell me, what express Scripture have you to prove that Peter
lost, or was put out of his Apostleship? or if you will, his Bishops See, that
he was now re-installed, and that nothing else but his threefold re-instalment
must be understood in this place; I believe you had this from some Popish
Priest or Postill; pray Sir, at the call of any of the Apostles, had they a
threefold instalement as you here set down? if not, why should they have it
at their re-instalment? had Christ prayed that Peter's faith should not fail
before he fell, and shall his Episcopacy? Sir, I know none that lost his
Episcopacy, but Judas, of the Apostles; you are in a Popish dream, the Lord
awaken you; are there several feedings, of which one sort are fed with rule
only (good Mr Doctor?)

P. 22. 2 Cor. 6.1.

Dr. The Apostles meaning is, that men work together with God, that is, every
minister is in his own work subordinate unto God, it is then impertinent to
make this inference, it is not the work of one man alone, many men may work in
one and the same work, and one may have diverse works as the objects differ,
one Shepherd ma^^ at one time feed both Lambs and Sheep.

Resp. Sir, Hereunto I have not had 14 hours time to copy out your breviary,
and return you this Answer, in a little longer time I should deal better with
you; but any rational man that will look on the Text, and see your
falaciousnesse, may tract you and know you; you say the meaning is, that men
work together.

1. What men, 1 Cor. 1.19. are they not we Paul, Silvanus and Timothy? or what
were they?

2. Where did they work? was it not in the Church of Corinth?

3. How did they work? was it not together in ministry? Now to this you seem to
agree: but then after, in your after exposition, because you feared the former,
like fire that might burn your double doctrine, you fly to an exposition quite
contrary to truth, that serves your self, every eye may see where you were
going; and as for part of the inferences, they are like your doctrine, corrupt,
and none of mine, it is your chief art and skill to man inferences, you make
none good of your own, nor deduce those honestly mine.

P. 23. He that plants, and he that waters, are one, 1 Cor. 3.8.

Dr. By one in this place is not meant so much the ministry, as the efficacy
and virtue thereof, that is, they are as to the bringing forth of the effect,
as one thing that is of no efficacy, but only outward instruments and servants
of God.

Resp. 1. I cannot but admire how men do befoole themselves, when they fight
against the truth; says he, they are as to the bringing forth of the effect,
as one and the same thing, that is, of n^ efficacy; it is learnedly cleared.

2. Consider this is first spoke of Paul and Apollo, and here relates to them
and their ministry, in the pronoun, quis, and after more clearly in the word
(...), that is, unum ^^ministerium; again, every one has his own reward,
according to his own labor, ver. 9. we are laborers together; now judge, if
here be not intended only Ministers and Ministry, and the Doctors gloss, very
spurious and corrupt, worse then whimsicall.

P. 23. 2 Cor. 1.15. That in no constituted Church, we read of no more but
three in fellowship of Ministry ordinarily.

Dr. These are weak conjectures, and can make no such in probability, as are
inferred on them.

Resp. I beseech the Reader, see I propose texts of Scripture, and affirm that
in no constituted Church were more, or should be less, the Doctor cannot
disprove it by the word; that confirms it abundantly, and therefore he shakes
it off with a conjecture only: pray see of what authority the Scripture is with
these kind of men, ^or ^y ^ Church pattern in the Gospel.

P. 23. We do that never Apostle did do.

Dr. Was not Peter bound by the charge that was given him, to feed both Lambs
and Sheep, as well the young as the old, by giving them their meat, and ruling
them?

Resp. 1. As Apostle, he had this charge, but this warrants not us in our
practice, being ord^^^^^ ministers, by a ordinary call.

2. The Apostles had ^uthority for all, that from them authority may be
communicated to others in an ordinary way.

3. Ordinarily (and so I intend) no Apostle did the whole ministry; what
means the mentioning of their co-workers so often else? and that of Acts 10.48.

Dr. I say, that every one that is called to the Ministry, is bound to do all
that God does enable him to do, both to Teach and to Rule, as the occasions do
require his service.

Resp. 1. You have Mr Doctor, a dixi for it, if we take your words to be divine
Oracles, it is enough; but methinks it were more like your self, to say, thus
says the Lord; not I, as faithful Paul said; or else say, thus sai^ I, and
not the Lord; but you will say, I say this now, and anon you will say, God
said; but if God had said so, you would not have weakened your cause so as to
say, I say, 1 Pet. 4.10. as every man has received the gift, that is, the
ministerial call from the Church, so minister the same, not other gifts by your
leave; of this I writ fully in my Letters, I wonder I do not hear from you; I
fear some private papers in the dark, as this, are sent abroad by you, to
catch silly souls withal.

Dr. If God send forth fellow laborers (...), they are to do their work
jointly and distinctly, according to their Talent which they shall have, and
shall make them fittest for service; the Apostle, 1 Timothy: 3. Tit: 1. where he
expressly does institute the appointment of Church Officers, does name none but
Presbyters and Deacons; and under that name, comprehends Pastors and Teachers,
not in distinct, but in the same persons; although, if God send forth more
laborers, then are in a particular Vineyard, they may apply themselves
distinctly more to one then to the other, as their Talents make them fittest
for service: but if there be no more then one alone sent forth, he is to deal,
as the several objects, and occasions, require his service.

Resp: Sir, your jointly, which you allow to the Gospel laborers, is, of
necessity you cannot deny that, for the Scriptures are so clear; (but your
leaven lies hid) yea, you allow they must do it distinctly also; but jointly
in a National Church, distinctly in a Parochial; otherwise it cannot be
understood in your societies: Did Paul, Sylvanus, Timothy, do their work thus
Nationally, Mr Doctor? You have not these in any Church, who should have them
in all. And after again, you say the word, Presbyter, comprehends Pastors and
Teachers, not in distinct, but the same persons: I hope when you read this
again, you will be ashamed of it. As for your conceit of a particular Vineyard,
and applying themselves more to one then another, has no ground or proof from
Scripture; and then you tell us of the sending out of (...) Labourer^,
Scripture speaks of no such thing.

P. 25. The true and false ministry are distinguished from the differing
materials, 1 Cor: 3.12.

Dr. This is your ordinary fault, to lay too much weight upon Metaphorical and
Allegorical speeches.

Resp: Sir, the Kingdom of God was set out in Allegories, and is in especial
manner, if ever to be known, to be known from them: Satan now, to keep this
Kingdom hid, has taught men a long time to deny any argument to be deduced
from them to prove any thing at all by: But Sir, why not from them? Is it not
the Word of God? And is not the Kingdom, and mysteries thereof, laid up in
them? It cannot be denied, but thence a discovery comes to be made against the
present practice; Indeed, if you will say, because they are not understood, we
cannot argue from them, it were something, and so may be said of all the
Scriptures.

Dr. You stretch the matter beyond the Apostles scope, and so you do
continually in all this discourse.

Resp. Mr Doctor, Lis coram judicibus est.

Dr. It is clear, the Apostle does presuppose that the same man may at one time
build hay; at another, stubble; and at another, wood; and the same man may
build gold, and silver, and precious stones at different times; nay, and this
is clear, that at one time a man may build gold and silver, and at another hay
and stubble; You stretch the Apostles words beyond his scope, and rack them to
another purpose then the Holy Ghost does intend: and then in all this following
discourse, you make upon this sandy ground a building of fantastical
conjectures to prove your point.

Resp: Mr Doctor, your single stubble ministry may some of them not at one time
build gold and silver; and at another, hay and stubble; but gold, silver, hay,
wood and stubble, at o^^^ teaching, for ought I know. Sir, the question hangs
on these.

1. Where there were a single ministry at Corinth, to do this, or not? or your
supposition is nothing, and your doctrine false and Antichristian, that is
worse, 1 Cor: 1.12. and chap: 4.6, 15. chap: 12.9.

2. Where Paul, in his Epistle, does not endeavor to describe the false Church
ministry, and their work, from the true, and their work, both ministering in
Corinth, or not? as in his second Epistle, written from Philippy, as the first
was, in which this is opened clearly, 2 Cor: 11.4. where the Teacher of each
society is applied unto; who is said, to teach Jesus the foundation; yea, and
the Gospel which Paul taught, but in a corrupt way, as verse: 3. He was afraid,
lest their minds were corrupted from the simplicity of Christ. And now lest the
Apostle should be thought to aim at one individual person in the word, he
verse: 3. compares verse: 13, 14. Satan's Ministers to the Ministers of Christ,
for number, order, way of ministry as Paul in the Gospel had taught to be. Or,
who knows not, that the Church of Corinth could not so easily be seduced by
them?

3. But that this is not meant of a single ministry, as the Doctor dreams, I
commend to his consideration, 1 Cor: 3. verse: 13. The fire shall try every man's
work, of what sort it is.

1. Here is every man, not one man's work then is applied to.

2. Every man's work is of one of these sorts, and not one man's of all of these
sorts as Mr Doctor, I will not say, fantastically conjectures.

3. Verse: 14. If any man's work abide. Verse: 15. If any man's work shall be
burnt: See, Reader, how corrupt the Doctors exposition is, and contrary to the
Scripture, by his doctrine; no man's work shall abide his ministry, builds hay,
wood an^ stubble; nor no man's work be burned; for again, his ministry builds
gold, silver, precious stones: Mr Doctor, your doctrine is wooden doctrine, at
last you will suffer loss by it.

P. 26. 1 Cor: 4.6. These things have I transferred to my self, and Apollo.

Dr. The Apostle transferred the things he spoke, of his Stewardship, of the
Apostleship, received of God, and of his faithfulness therein to himself, and
to Apollo, to teach the Corinthians not to be puffed up so one against another,
and that they should not esteem more of any man then they ought: But you run
out into endless mistakes and mis-applications of the Apostles meaning, and
confound the places together, which have quite different scopes.

Resp. 1. If the Doctor writes two le^^es for refutation, to help fill up the
margent of my Book, he writes two or three of bombast railing accusations,
without giving reason, as here you confound places together, but no^ show
where: Sure he had no leisure to show in what, but he has leisure to reproach,
as if he were angry at this doctrine of the Gospel.

2. He transfers the things of the Stewardship of his Apostleship to himself
and Apollo, as if Apollo were an Apostle, as Paul was; or, as if the
Stewardship of an Apostle were transferrable to a ordinary Church minister,
other way, then in their ordinary Church ministry, as they had been joined in
their ministering to the Church of Corinth, in an ordinary way of ministry.

3. The puffing up one against another, with the Apostles adding here (these
things) must relate to something preceding: and what then, but that in which
Paul and Apollo are mentioned, or at least concerned? 1 Cor: 1.12. Every one of
you says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, I of Cephas: In this these of Paul's
society boasted themselves against those of Apollos; those of Apollos, against
those of Cephas; and those against the Catecumerii. And thus, and no way else,
could every one of the Church be puffed up: Now these were distinguished in
themselves, as well as ministers, 1 Cor: 3.5. where the believers are divided
under their several ministry, as the Lord has given them to believe, verse: 9.
Paul and Apollo are co-workers in the work of the Gospel. Now Paul transfers
these things from them which succeeded them in their place of ministry, the
ministers, to himself and his fellow laborers, who wrought with him in the
Gospel there, for the Churches sake, that they should not think of men above
that is written: Now if any men should have been admired by them, it had been
Paul and Apollo. 1 Cor: 3.5. Who is Paul, or Apollo? Now if these were not to
be looked on more then instruments, much less their own ordinary Church
ministry residing amongst them, who were far inferior to the Apostle, and the
rest: but look on God, and the Ordinances.

P. 26. Of Aaron his sons, the Priests and Levites.

Dr. Truly in all this discourse, from the beginning to the end, I can see
nothing you do, but hunt after shadows.

Resp. 1. Mr. Doctor might have seen by what is said before, that the Assembly
in their propositions, did not place the Evangelist rightly, in putting him
before the Prophet, against express Scripture, Ephesians. 4.11. I fear there was
corruption in it, enough to show he will never see if he can choose, an
Evangelist is an ordinary Minister ^^ought (...) the Church; and therefore put
him before the Prophet, that none should once question it: Did not God foresee
this? and show this was of great concernment? when, 1 Cor: 12.28. he set down,
first, Apostles; secondly, Prophets, not Evangelists, it is clear: And thus on
entreaty ye cannot see to mend, as if it were not so, or no error, though ye
have been called on to do it.

2. Mr Doctor, I use this as a shadow only, as is in words expressed: but you,
in your propositions for the Pastor, confirm your ministry by theirs, as by
Gospel-authority; and you confirm your Governors and Government by them, as in
the sec^^^^ for Church Governors.

3. You confess, they have a representation of spiritual things, why did you
not tell, where of the ministry, or not, you were afraid? To say it did not,
lest every child should descry either your weakness, or wilful corruptnesse;
and therefore you say very warily.

Dr. Now it is not to be denied, but these things have some signification and
representation of spiritual things; but I am sure they do not near your
purpose. Or if they relate to the work of the ministry, in some sense, yet they
will not evince that Evangelists, in your sense, are to be perpetual and
ordinary Officers; and that there must be in every Congregation, such distinct
Officers as you imagine.

Resp. 1. Mr Doctor, do you come with an if they relate to the work of the
ministry: you do learnedly to question that.

2. You are sure not to my purpose; that is, you are conceitedly sure, but ar^
not sure from the word: if you are, why did you not set down, from what
Scripture, that I may be made sure or, as well as you? Sir, think you I may not
as well say, for any ground you have set down to the contrary, sure the Doctor
is deceived in this point?

3. But if they do relate to the ministry, yet they will not evince that
Evangelists are to be, etc. Mr Doctor, I told you, it was but a shadow; I
hunted not for it, to prove the Gospel Government by it, as you do; I used it
only to illustrate and show the ministry in the Jewish Church, in some kind did
resemble this, under the Gospel, in such things as are moral, that the Church
was to be ministered to other ways then by a single ministry.

Sir, in the margent of my Book, page: 27. at Rom: 2.20. that babes are the
Teachers Congregation; you set your mark of (C) upon it, but durst not stay
there, nor say a word, lest you should open a gap for it: You have touched but
little of my Book, and that you have done, is to as little purpose, as ever
Doctor did undertake to do a thing, as every rational unprejudiced man will
say, that sees it: and here is the cry you make with it.

P. 27. Not to baptize, but to Evangelize.

Dr. It is proper to all that preach the Gospel, to baptize: such as did
receive their commission for the one, the other is joint, Math: 28.19. I think
it should be did for the other.

Resp. 1. (...) which is properly to make Disciples, and signifies that
teaching that went before baptizing, as in the order of the words is to be
observed.

2. The Disciples here sent out, had, by (...) extraordinary call, to do all
which we have not.

3. Baptism brought them into the Church; after which, the Apostle
distinguishes again, by another kind of teaching, called Evangelizing, which
differed from that went before baptizing, in Math: 28. Col: 1.17. and from his
teaching baptized.

Dr. To baptize, was no more proper to the Doctor, then the Evangelist.

Resp. This you only assert on your own word; but Sir, in that there are to be
in the Church, Evangelists, Pastors, T^achers; how are these in the Gospel
distinguished, for ministry and administrations? If one have to do in the
Church, as much in all ordinances, as the other: then all are Evangelists, all
Pastors, all Teachers; if nothing be proper to eithers ministry, but all alike:
Sir, though the Smoke of the Temple has blinded your eyes, yet the light of
the Gospel may let you see other things. Sir, by this you would make God the
Author of Confusion, who is the God of Order; and that you so often call
confusion, in my Book, is Gospel order in Gods Book. Rom: 2.20. He that was the
Teacher of Babes, was the Baptizer of Babes: but (...) was the Teacher: Ergo,

Dr. To baptize, was not the main work for which the Apostles were sent, nor
for which ministers are appointed: to preach the Gospel, is the main work, and
the princip^ll: And this is all that the Apostle in the place does intend, and
not to distinguish preaching and baptizing so, as if they did belong to
several offices and administrations: You do in this, as in most of your other
allegations, rack the Scriptures, and make it speak that which it never meant.

Resp. 1. Mr Doctor, At the close ends still with some Monstrum hor rendum;
intending, that when this prog in the dark was carried up and down, the Reader
wherever he opened the Book, and perused his notes, should apprehend that, and
all the rest, to be abominable stuff, without more looking after it, as some
of late, formerly my Friends, told some of my Congregation, that the
Mininisters made but a mock of my Books; chiefly occasioned, doubtless,
through the Doctors silly notes and notions.

2. Whereas you say, to baptize, was not the main work for which the Apostles
were sent, nor for which ministers are appointed; I know none denies it: But Mr
Doctor, the Question is, where it were to be done, or not?

2. Where it were to be done, but by ministers ordinarily, that were sent, or
called to do it, or not?

3. The Apostle says, he was not sent to do that, 1 Cor: 1.17. that is,
ordinarily; and then where others were not sent thereto, the Apostle baptized
few, 1 Cor: 1.14, 16 and yet in Corinth, Act: 18.8. many hearing believed, and
were baptized: Your Countryman Rutherford, a man of judgment, says, in his
Treatise of Church Government; some other, hence, in Corinth did baptize,
beside Paul; and can you think he did it in the same Church with him, without
Commission? And did not this Commission he had, in some kind, give the Apostle
cause to say, being in ordinary Church Fellowship with the other, he was not
sent to Baptize, but Evangelize, and calls him co-worker with him, working in
the same Church Paul taught in: prove the contrary, if you can.

4. I distinguish not teaching from baptizing, but the Teachers by their
administrations; the Teacher teaches, as well as the Evangelist, though not
the same doctrine, nor to the same people.

5. The Apostle, not I, distinguishes Evangelizing from Baptizing; Baptism
being a peculiar act of the Teachers ministry, and in a especial kind
distinguishing him.

6. If this were so common to all, why did not Peter baptize the first
Gentiles, men that received the holy spirit, but command others to do it, A^:
10.48.

P. 28. In saying he was not, the Apostle implies, some are sent to baptize.

Dr. Do you think, that any are sent to baptize, and not to preach?

Mr Doctor, have you my Book to read, and do you ask that question? Or did you
send to Mr Ellis to answer you for me? Do you find any such thing in all my
Book? Is not the contrary set down in many places? Sir, it seems you would beg
me say so, because you cannot make my Book do it: Are things at this ebb with
you, Mr Doctor?

Dr. If the purpose of sending is primarily to preach, and secondarily to
baptize, then the Apostle says right, that his commission was rather to intend
the preaching work, then the Baptizing of Disciples.

Resp. 1. Mr Doctor, What if this be not the purpose? what then? does the
Apostle say wrong? (it is (...) no wrong to me, if you say so of my writings, if
you are so saucy to say so of the Apostles) but Mr Doctor, we know your mind,
which is this, That if the Apostles, or any else, say otherways, then you
would have them say, they say wrong: but when they say as you would have them
say, then they say right; yea, right or wrong.

2. It was primarily to preach, but it was to men without the Church, before
Baptism; and secondarily, baptize; and yet Mr Doctor, the Apostle is wrong in
your sense.

1. Here he speaks of Baptizing first, as the first, and Evangelizing after.

2. This was to a Church constituted, even Corinth, and tended to perfect them
after the Church admission in the faith of the Gospel, being baptized already.

Dr. In your paragraph foregoing, you say, that baptizing was, and the Doctrine
(of B^ptism) the Doctors work; as appears, Heb. 6.1. and why not the Pastors,
and the Evangelists, or the Apostles, do all that either of these do.

Resp. Mr Doctor, Your, why not, has no cause in it, why they, yea, or the
Apostles themselves, should do it ordinarily: yet for these causes not.

1. Because God for edification and order, ordered it otherways.

2. By a Gospel law, God has committed to each one his dispensation in his
proper place: Sir, if a man had asked Moses, why may not the Levites do that
the Priests do? the Priests do that the high Priests do? would he not have
said, it was otherways in your pattern, God will not have it so: and what else
could he have said? for who has been his Counselor?

Dr. Heb: 6 1. The fundamentals of the Doctrine of Christ, are reckoned up: and
has the Evangelist nothing to do with them to publish them? I wonder at this
weakness, and at the whole sequel of this discour^e.

Resp. Mr Doctor, The Evangelist has to do with them, as a beleiver; but to
teach these to the society of strong men in Christ, he has not: I do not know
where you will say the Apostle says right or wrong in saying so, as you did
before; but so he says, Heb: 6.1. Leaving therefore the word, or Doctrine, of
the beginning of Christ, let us be carried on unto perfection; and after, (...)
Mr Doctor, what is here meant by this not again laying the foundation, if not
that they were not to be taught again, to perfect men by the Evangelists, as
they before had been by the Teacher to his babes.

P. 29. Nicodemus. John 3.12.

Dr. What although Christ does speak of earthly and heavenly things, in respect
of the ma^ter; does it therefore follow, that he who teaches the one, may not
meddle with the other? These consequences are so senseless, that a man does not
know what to say of them.

Resp. Mr Doctor, See Joh. 3.3. 1. There is mention of a man, one that is in
the condition of all mankind, before regeneration, merely natural. 2.
Regeneration is required of him, as the means. 3. Before this, he cannot see
the Kingdom of God in himself, or in Church communion, as the end; for these
are aimed at, as ^n verse: 5. is set out by water, for the visible Kingdom, or
administrations of that Kingdom, and then the Holy Ghost for the inward.

1 In the former estate, he is of the earth earthly, as the first Adam was, 1
Cor. 15.47 to whom Christ shows, what that estate is, and what is required to
come out of it. 2. In the Kingdom estate are Heavenly things ministered, which
Christ does not minister to them, not born again, and shows why not, because if
they could not believe that Doctrine, or teaching, did so mediatly concern
their state and condition: how should they believe that concerned the estate of
Saints only: Mr Doctor, methinks this should clear your eyes of your confused
Antichristian way teaching: if you teach the Gospel estate of an Evangelized
Saint, your unregenerate Church Members are never the better, ipse dixit, how
shall they believe them? Here, as in a glass, ye may see the ground of your
unprofitable teaching: yet let Christ say what he will, you will teach so.

P. 29. 2 Timothy 4.5. Do the work of an Evangelist.

Dr. The place of Timothy is perverted, and racked beyond the Apostles pu^^^se,
for the Apostles meaning is not to signify an^ such thing as is here inserted,
but only that Timothy by being sober, and watchful, and painful in the work of
the Gospel, should give unto all a full assurance of the truth of the Gospel,
whereof he was a minister, (...) (...) the (...) which is here required, is the
same whereof the Apostle speaks after, verse. 17. where he says, that Gods
assistance of him in his suffe^ings, made the preaching fully known, and gave
to all an assurance of the truth thereof: so then, to make a full proof of the
mi^istry, is nothing else but to approve ones self to the conscience of all, by
a true and faithful carriage of one^ sel^ in the charge: You do here, as in all
other places, alm^st, you take hold of a word, and run away with it, to apply
it to your fancy, and draw consequences from it, and never look to the Apostles
scope.

Resp. 1. Your beginnings and endings often times are like, you cry out of
racking Scriptures; let the Reader judge of whom the Scripture? cry out of
racking most, you, or me? and who perverts them most? all that you say is meant
in the Scripture every word, but not any such thing as I affirm; idiots that
cannot try you, must trust you, but men of judgment and understanding will the
sooner mistrust you; Sir, you are as error wrapped up in truth's Cloak, let that
be once taken from you, and you will cozen no man more.

2. The maine thing in the text is, that Paul bids him do the work of an
Evangelist, which before he had not done in his former Ministry; if he had, why
does Paul give him a charge to do it now? and then backs it with this, of make
full proof of the ministry, or bear the full ministry: now you leave out, and
say not a word of that which contained the mattter it self, and run to a story
very impertinent to the thing in hand.

3. But that the Reader may understand you the better, the (...), relates to
the Evangelical office here in this verse, and that in verse 17. has respect
to verse 6, 7. (...), which shows with that ver. 17. that he had done by his
Ministry, what God had ordained in this world for him to do, and no otherways,
applying to Numb. 8.24. this is that belongs to the Levites, from 25 years old,
and upward.

It is they shall enter into the Militia, (quasi bellatores) in service, etc.

Sir, I have heard it reported, that you had that honor to be chosen, the man
to reconcile Lutherans, and Protestants: If so, sure you will never have the
honor to bring the Presbytery to the Gospel Government, which would be greater
honor by far unto you.

P. 30. Heb. 6.1. The Evangelists office is higest, and distinct from the
Doctors.

Dr. The Apostle does indeed distinguish between the fundamental doctrine, and
the doctrine of perfection; showing, that he would speak of matters which did
require more higher capacity, and greater attention then these first principles
did stand in^eed of, he speaks of the difference of things to be taught.

Resp. Thus far Mr. Doctor is forced to confess, and assign to truth, there
is a necessity, its so plain, every eye may see it.

Dr. But now of different offices, and officers of Teachers.

Resp. What, not Pastors and Teachers, if no Evangelists? Mr Doctor, you will
thus overthrow your Presbyterian building.

Dr. For he speaks of himself as Teacher of both, only that in respect of
time, and different capacities, the fundamentals were to be taught first, and
the superstructures afterward*

Resp. If you observe Mr Doctor well, he is almost come home, the Apostle as an
extraordinary officer may do all the parts of the Ministry, but in doing them,
he did observe time, and the Capacities of the people, that is in the infancy
of Christians, he taught as a Doc^^r giving milk, and when to be of stronger
capacity, to give them stronger meat; the fund^mentals (^n order) being to be
taught first, and the superstructures afte ward: O that M. Doctor would, or
could show us this Gospel way, in practice amongst the Pr^sby^e^^, o^ ^ut us in
hope when it will be.

Dr. But from hence nothing c^n be ^^^^^ted, which here you would serve out of
it, viz. That here should be a dividing ^f the Ministry to these severa^ works,
as ^f one and the same man (here is Mr Doct^^^ ^^aven, all is like to be lost,
why pray let it go, for Christ and the Gospel, Mr Doctor) should not intend
both, in res^ect of several hearers, the same Ministerial work, in the Pa^toral
and Doctoral charge, is to apply it self to the young and old, in catechetical
exerc^^es to ^he (...), and Prophetical exercises to the other.

R^^p. 1. What, Mr Doctor (nothing) your self have inserted much, ^ut has Go^
set up in the Church differing Ministries, Ephesians. 4.11. and to these are there
appointed several administrations? 1 Cor. 12.5. and then several capacities
accord^n^ly? and yet I need to show you away to screw them hence, if they be
clear in other Scriptures elsewhere? again, these administrations are for
several works, or operations, 1 Cor. 12.6. and thus, Mr Doctor, your scruples
about this all-along moved are satisfied, if you are, by clear Gospel truth
satisfiable, if not, I must leave you to God.

2. See how Mr Doctors Bells hang together; here is the Pastoral, and the
Doctoral charge, here are several hearers, and these hearers of several
capacities; yet for to uphold a single Ministry, one man must do it all.

3. Mr Doctor had forgot the Hebrews were a Church society, that were here wrote
unto, Heb: 3. partakers of the heavenly calling, brethren, and holy breth^e^,
Heb. 12.22. and 5.12. and does Mr Doctor read, that in the first 200 years of
Ch is it, the Catechist did at all Catechize men within the Church, and baptized
as these were, who would think Mr Doctor were so deluded?

P. 30. Must not repentance, etc.

Dr. This Quest. and Resp. to it, and all the following discourse upon it, it
is to me so confused, and intricate, that I can make no sense of it, nor has
it any coherence with that which the Apostle does aim at in the place, nor is
it worth the consideration, it is so silly and so weak.

Resp. I will not open these things, but refer them to the Reader to judge,
where the Doctor could not understand it, or rather would not, as being a fine
way of evasion; it had been his wisest way to have done thus with all that he
could not ob^ect against, which is materially against him as the rest.

P. 32. 1 Timothy 3.14. Dr. This place is neither rightly alleged, nor applied
rightly to the Apostles scope.

Resp. The former part of the words were not truly Printed, the latter, which
has that which was intended, are rightly obtained (to themselves) a good
degree (in the house of God) which was to show, that any office in the house of
God, was of great honor; and men should be content with any therein, though
the lowest.

P. 34. Heb. 14.17. Dr. The Apostle writes to all the Hebrews in the world.

Resp. Mr Doctor, how does this appear, I will not take your word for it, was
Heb. 5.12. said to the Jews of all the world? or chap. 12.22.

Dr. These had many leaders in several Congregations, and he desires them
respectively to be subject to them, that is, that each Congregation should
submit to ^^^ r ^wn.

Resp. Mr Doctor, Does Paul write as John to the seven Churches, or Peter to
the dispersed in Galatia, Capadocia, etc. that you dare affirm this you do on
these terms? and at last for your parochial liberty, or all were lost.

Doctor. From hence you will infer, because the word, Leaders, is in the
plural number, that every congregation has many leaders, which is very weak.

Resp. From whence shall I infer, but from the Scriptures? James 5.14. and I
provoke you to show in all the Scripture, where the whole Church Ministry are
spoken of, of any Church, and are not set down in the plural number: and M.
Dr. to say they should be in every Congregation, is a conclusion of your own,
and none of mine: I say, in every Church; as for the weakness of it, I know it
is not the weaker for your blowing on it. But M. Doctor, What think you of Acts
14.23. they ordained them Elders in every Church 1. these not National
Churches, 2. Nor were they Elders ordained.

Doct. Then you say, that these leaders are to be meant by the ministering
officers and not ruling Elders, by verse 7. but that verse does speak of those
that guide and rule (...) and no ruling Elders should be no others, then such
as are able to speak the word on occasion; nor should those that speak the
word, be without a guiding and ruling authority; for the leading is to be
according to the word, and by it, which makes the Doctor and the Pastor to be
the same.

Resp. Mr Dr. the (...) are all here spoken of, either ruling Elders, or
teaching Elders: I speak according to your own distinstion; but that they are
teaching, and not ruling Elders, verse 7. They have spoken to you the word, and
for that conceit, that the ruling Elder should be such. 1. I require you to
s^ew me the constitution of ruling Elders.

2. The command or practice that any was to, or did do such a thing; if not,
Sir, you do but undervalue your self to write such things at all.

3. You come with your old device, and find away out of this text, and every
text to make the Doctor and Pastor; ^n^ but let me mind you, if by divine
institution they are two, you wrong the truth, and your self, and the Church
also, to make them one, and here spoke of as of diverse persons.

Sir. I shall ingeniously confess, that of all the books I ever read, of my
little reading, I never read any man that endeavored to make Pastor and
Teacher, one, as you have all along done, and altogether opposite to the truth:
yea, the Assembly propositions, Adeo dat, Ephesians. 4.11. the two last ordinary and
perpetual, that is the Pastor and Doctor, Wollebius, Pastores, Ecclesiis,
Doctores, Scholis, Praefecti, Ephesians. 4.11. Arminius, disp Theol. Corrol. 59.
m^diate vocati Pastores and Doctores, Episcopi and Praesbyteri, qui certis
Ecclesiis sunt praefecti, Calvini Just. lib. 4. cap. 4. ex ordine
Praesbyterorum partim eligebantur Pastores and Doctores. Bilson, Vide Zanch:
praecep: 4. cap. 19. and the Churches practice in New England.

Page 35. People, Ministers and ordinary ministry.

Doct. O these allusions and applications, are no proofs of the point,

Resp. which Dionysius they are, as I have since the writing of my book, read
to good satisfaction, and many more of the Ancients, though the Doctor says it
is naught.

P. 35. That the man of God may be perfect. 2. Tim. 3.16, 17.

Doctor. This perfection is the end and effect of the foregoing usefulness of
the Scripture; and from thence is to be inferred, that by the Doctors and
Pastors office rightly used, the man of God will become perfect.

Resp. M. Doctor, Why do ye not add the Evangelists offici? you may as well,
for the Doctor nor Pastors office is not rightly used in your Presbytery; but
these rightly used, with the Evangelist, through the effect and usefulness of
the Scripture make the man of God perfect.

Doctor. And therefore none other distinct office in ordinary, is requisite to
infer; because the word, perfection, is here used, that therefore an
Evangelists office is intimated as a mere fancy.

Resp. (...) Doctor, (...) Pastor, is not mentioned, yet they are allowed; but
there is no allowance for an Evangelist, an ordinary Church-minister, no less
of God intended then the rest; but is still cast off by Mr Doctor, for, and
with the reproach of fancy, notion, whimsy.

P. 36. Evangelized Christian man.

Doctor. What this Evangelized Christian man is, distinct from him that is
taught and governed, I know not, neither do I believe you can show.

Resp. M. Dr. As in Adam, so in Christ, there are differing statures; you may,
being a rational man, understand the one by the other; now as he differs in
stature from children, so should the administrations differ, that are
administered in the Church to him accordingly.

2. That this Evangelized Christian, should differ from one taught, and
governed by the Gospel, is a conceit of your own, and none of mine.

P. 26. 1. Doctrine is not for all, but babes only. 2. Exhortation for young
men only, Evangelical ministry for perfect men only.

Doctor. Is not the teacher and the exhorter a Gospel minister? this is a fancy
indeed which has no ground.

Resp. Mr Dr. See Romans 12.6, 7. Prophecy is for the Prophet; ministry for the
Evangelist; Teaching, for the Teacher; exhortation for the exhorter; and is not
the exhorter, or teacher, a minister in this place? and is not this a fancy the
Apostle speaks in this place? or what says the other then said before?

P. 36. 1 Cor. 4.1. Of that men are Ministers, they are stewards only, the Dr.
of doctrinall part; the Pastor of the pastoral etc.

Doctor. Is not the doctrinall of the Evangelicall part of ministry?

Resp. The Gospel ministry is Evangelicall all, but is divided into three parts
by God in the Gospel, one being not more Evangelicall then the other.

Doctor. Why do you leave out the practical, which is the Pastoral charge?

Resp. Its well you are so sensible, as to miss one in my writing; you do not
miss two in your Church; one is enough you know not what to do with any more;
but see Mr Dr. 2 Timothy 1.12. puts down Apostle, the first of the Church ministry
and Dr. of the last, and under these comprehends the rest; and will you not
allow me this? if not, I will take it.

Dr. There is no more requisite, but faith and obedience, which two are wrought
out by the doctorall, and pastoral administrations; what use is there of this
Imaginary part of the Exangelist distinct from both?

Resp. Mr Dr. Faith and obedience are ministered under Teacher, Pastor,
Evangelist, one as well as the other, according to the capacity of those are
taught; each one by degrees, perfecting Faith and Obedience in the Saints; the
Doctors, Teachers; faith and obedience to Saints as children; the Pastor as
young men; the Evangelist as strong men; and not as the Doctor dreams, one
teaches faith only, the other obedience

Thus the Dr. having done with my book, I have done with him, until he please
to rejoyn and begin again, only this I commend to thee Reader, that that which
follows in my Book did more particularly strike at presbytery which the
Doctleft to some other to do, or to some other time to do, or afraid, it may
be, it would trouble his mind to study it, or what ever it was, he thought he
had done enoug^ in this for once; and so have I at this time. Vale. If thou
have any knowledge of the truth of the Gospel hereby at all.

FINIS.

