THE OXONIAN ANTIPPODES, OR, The OXFORD Anty-Parliament.

First, Setting forth who it is that calls that Parliament. Secondly, Who they
are that sit in that Parliament. Thirdly, What Parliament it is, when the
Members of it are in one body. Fourthly, To what end this Parliament is called.
Fifthly, What they are for their Religion, their lives and conversations, that
bear Arms in defense of that Parliament. Sixthly, That the Parliament now
sitting at Westminster is the absolute lawful Parliament. Seventhly, That
whatsoever is done against this Lawful Parliament, is against God, the
Protestant Religion, the Laws of the Land, and the Liberty of the Subjects.
By I.B. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Lounds, and are to be sold at his shop near
Ludgate, 1644.

To the Reader.
COURTEOUS READER,
THe inexhausted Treasures of the never-dying virtues of this faithful
Parliament has encouraged my quaking Pen to salute you, by presenting unto
your view, the weak endeavors of a Soldiers Quill; And the rather, to give
satisfaction to the world, that I girt not sword to my thigh, till such time I
well weighed the reasons that moved me to it, which were these; To defend the
Protestant Religion, this lawful Parliament, the Laws of the Land, and my
own liberty, from the violence and oppression of proffessed Papists,
Traitors, and Rebels. And now having some leisure, being in my Winter
quarters, after a sad contemplation of my Countries misery, I thought fit to
spend some hours in compiling this undigested fragment, for the better
satisfaction of some various conceits that are amongst us, and for the
stopping the mouths of malignant spirits, who with their stupidity flatter
themselves with the bare name of a King, never arguing to themselves how far
a King may command, or what commands of the King the Subject may not obey. Now
here is discovered how far the Kings power does extend, to Command his
subjects; And what Commands of the King the Subject may not obey. Here is set
forth what the Ruler is by his Counsel, and that a good King will not suffer
wicked Counselors to be about him; All I shall add is one by his request,
courteously to accept my weak labors: And how ever you please to censure, I
wish you a contented life, and an honorable death.

Yours faithfully affected, JO. BRANDON Gent.

The Oxonian Antippodes, or the Oxford Anty-Parliament.
KIngs are appointed by God to govern the people committed to their charge with
wisdom and knowledge, like Solomon who desired of the Lord to give him wisdom
and knowledge, 2 Chronicles. the 7.10. that he might go out and in before the Lords
people: for says he, who can judge this thy people; as if he should have said
that I may govern this thy people with wisdom and knowledge, by establishing
to them a saveing Religion and wholesome Laws both which include a comfortable
Liberty as King Iehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. the 17 the 7, 8, 9. verses, in the third
year of his Reign, he sent his Princes with diverse of his Priests and Levites
to Judah, and with them the book of the Law of the Lord, to teach the people
of Judah the Laws that were written in that book.

Now the Law of God expressed in holy Scripture, is a Law that is written in the
conscience of every man, in the conscience of the King so well as in the
conscience of a Subject, which Law the Philosophers call the Law of Nature, and
the Lawyers call it the Law of Nations whereof the Law of Moses is a plain
exposition, hence it is that the fundamental Laws are grounded upon these
Laws, and the King is sworn at his Coronation to maintain them to the
Subjects, with such Religion and Liberties as the same Laws do allow of.

It remains then that there is a Religion, Laws, and Liberties belonging to
the Subjects of England, and they are to be maintained unto them by the King,
whence is it then that our Religion, Laws and Liberties, had long ere this
been taken from us by him that is sworn to maintain them to us? had not God of
his great mercy stird up the hearts of a Parliament to stand for us? by reason
his Majesty gave himself over to evil Counselors, he did choose rather to
come in a hostile manner to the House of Parliament, to accuse five of his
faithfullest Counselors of high treason, then suffer to be brought to condign
punishment Digby, or Germin, or Windibancke, who are known Traitors to this
State and Kingdom, such Counselors they are to him as Ahab was, and Ahaziahs
mother was to him, she counseled him to do wickedly, wherefore he did evil in
the sight of the Lord, Chron. 2.22. Chap. 3.4. like the house of Ahab for they
were His Counselors to his destruction; it must needs follow that the Rulers
are such as their Counselors be, that there cannot be a good King that
suffers wicked Counselors, if Kings be entrusted with Subjects, Laws, and
Liberties, to the end they should maintain them by the best means they can to
the loss of life, and inheritance, and yet labor to circumvent them of their
Religion, Laws and Liberties, and this being done in a Kingdom, which is
governed by a Parliamentary government, and their Privileges lying engaged
with the Subjects Laws and Liberties, its time then for that Parliament to be
stir themselves and by all the means they can, defend themselves, their
Religion, their Privileges, with all the faithful subjects, with their Laws
and Liberties, from violence and oppression, and from being delivered into the
over ruling power of papists and Rebels, and Violaters of Laws and Liberties
but now the word Liberty has taken that possession in the hearts of English
Subjects, that all the Monarchical Prerogatives in Oxford, or elsewhere cannot
tell how either by declaring against it at common Law by the advice of Banks,
and Heath, or by preferring a Bill in Chancery against it with the advice of
Littelton, or by thundering sentencies out of the high Commission and Star
chamber by the Arch-Prelates to put it out of possession: when these would not
do; to bring their design to perfection, they have thundered forth
Proclamations to terrify the hearts of His Majesty's loyal and faithful
Subjects by proclaiming them Traitors and Rebels, for no other cause, then for
standing in defense of their Religion, Laws and Lyberties, And have raised an
Army to suppress their lawful Parliament: and now they have persuaded His
Majesty to call a Parliament to sit at Oxford, there to sit in council (as I
conceive) against God himself, for the rooting out of the Protestant Religion,
for the destruction of his lawful Parliament, and the Laws and Lyberties of
the faithful Protestants in England, Scotland, and Ireland; You may see to
what end they call this great Council, if we do but look back for seven
years before the sitting of this Parliament of blessed memory, who seeing
what action they have continually been in, as by private ways and means
under pretense of Religion, still bringing in several Innovations into the
Church, by limiting the Subjects in their devotion upon Sabbath days and
others, as if they should have said, God does not give men the power of prayer,
but we must set them a Form how they shall pray, and for what; And if they
do not pray thus, God will not hear them, with diverse other Cerimoniall
actions to be used in the Church; As to bow to the Table, it being set popish
Altarwise, and to bow at the name of Jesus and in many Churches and Chapels
there was set up the Death and Passion of our blessed Savior. And in His
Majesty's own Chapel at Whitehall, there was an absolute Altar, with the
holy Book guarded with Tapers, with worshipping of God at that Altar, by
singing of Anthems in their popish Coapes; All which being burdens to tender
consciences, caused many Ministers of God rather choose to be silenced, other
some to leave the Kingdom, then to give way to such popish Innovations, and to
have their consciences limited to such great inconveniences as these were, and
for other godly learned men, whose judgments did foresee what great opposites
these mountains would prove, to eclipse the pure divine worship of God for
ever being settled in the Church of England. These men (for the discharging of
their consciences to God, as it was his honor that then lay at stake, to the
people of this Kingdom, as it was the means of their salvation that lay at
stake, by making known to the people of this Kingdom, the private plots these
Innovators used under the habit of the Protestant Religion, for the
circumventing of the true Protestant Religion,) were some of them pillored and
Branded, some of them had their Ears cut, and some wh^pt, and all of them had
the sentence of perpetual imprisonment. But it pleased God to raise himself
Instruments of honor contrary to their expectation, to cast out the Babilonish
government which was crept into our Church, and to raise them up again, who
for a long time before, lay under the heavy burdens of the prelaticall
suppressions, when as the Arch-prelates did see that their Gods and god divices
must be thrown down by a Reforming Parliament, than they conspire once more
to exasperate the business a little further, and that must be done by
protesting against all that ever this Parliament had done, to see how it
pleased God they should work their own ruin. I verily believe that
protestation did disable them for ever having Vote in Parliaments any more, or
to be so much honored as to come into the inside of one or both the Houses,
unless it be to receive sentence for condign punishment.

This former consideration being well weighed in an even balance by every true
Protestant, the consequence will be, that sithence they cannot disinherit us of
the pure worship of God by fomenting our Religion, and so consequently to have
disinherited us of God himself, for where the pure worship of God is, there is
God himself, by subverting our Laws, by protecting of Papists and Recusants,
and professed Priests and Jesuits from being brought to condign punishment
according to the known laws of the Land.

It remains therefore, that they will cast in one bone more, and try if they
can pluck up our Religion, the parliamentary government, the Laws of the
Kingdom, the Liberties of the Subject, by the root, striking at the very being
of Parliaments. What color do you think they have for this? They say this
Parliament is a pretended Parliament, wherefore they will have an
Anti-Parliament called to sit at Oxford, could not His Majesty's Cabbinet
Council, with their stupid injenuous advice, advise him to appoint this
Antippodes to be held at no other place then Oxford? there would have been
room enough for himself to have sat with His lawful Parliament at
Westminster, if He had pleased to have come thither, and for His Counselors
too, provided he would br^ng them to receive that condign punishment which
justly they have deserved. The place where this Anti-parliament must be held,
is at no other place then Oxford, even there, from whence should flow both
Milk and Honey, there where the Gospel of Jesus Christ should be in its
greatest splendor; It should be a maine light to the Kingdom, a place where
Kings should be instructed in the ways of peace, and not to war with His own
faithful and loyal Subjects, but to enlarge their Liberties; A place from
whence should flow such streams of Sovereign graces, and spiritual Balsoms
as should purge away all Spanish and French factious Advisers from about His
Majesty, and heal up all differences betwixt His Majesty and His faithful
Parliament. But here we have it quite contrary, for in stead of Milk and
Honey, thence proceeds gaul and bitterness. In stead of giving light to the
Kingdom, it yields nothing but darkness: In stead of Instructing the King in
the ways of peace, there he is advised to war against his lawful
Parliament: In stead of purging streams, to purge away Factious advisers,
there are Rivers that increase, and bring them to His Majesty: In stead of
healing up the differences that are between His Majesty and His Parliament,
there is greater differences made: In stead of Advising His Majesty to come
and sit with His lawful Parliament, He is there advised to call an
Anti-Parliament in opposition to His lawful Parliament. This proves the place
to be Antippodes.

Now it remains,
1. Who it is that calls this Anti-Parliament. 2. Secondly, who they are that
are called to sit in this Parliament. 3. Thirdly, what this Parliament in it
self is, that is called, when the Members of it are in one Body. 4. Fourthly,
to what end this Parliament is called. 5. Fifthly, what they are in their
Religion, Lives, and Conversations, that bear Arms for the defense of this
Parliament. 6. Sixthly, that the Parliament now sitting at Westminster is the
absolute lawful Parliament. 7. Seventhly and lastly, that whatsoever is done
against this lawful Parliament by the Anti-Parliament, is against God,
Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of the Subjects of England.
Question 1. Who is it that calls this Parliament.
Answer.

IT is the King; and true it is, Kings may Command, and Subjects ought to obey
their King so far forth as he shall Command them nothing but what is
warrantable by holy Writ, and the Laws of the Land where he Rules. The name of
a King that Rules with wisdom and knowledge, with peace and Tranquillity,
revives the spirits of his faithful Subjects, when as the name of an obstinate
King, that rules by a Tyrannical government strikes terror, and makes them
careless in their duty to their Prince. That King who by his ruling in
Justice, has the love of all his faithful Subjects, seems glorious in his
Throne, and terrible to his enemies; The King is to be ruled by Law, so well as
to rule by Law, as by making the Law his guide or rule how to govern his
people in love; it is a charge laid upon the King expressly, the 17 Deuteronomy.
18.19.20. verses, That when he shall sit upon the Throne of his Kingdom, then
shall he write him this Law, and in the next verse, And it shall be with him,
and he shall read them therein all days of his life, that he may learn to
fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words of this Law, and these
ordinances for to do them, that his heart be not lifted up above his brethren;
whereby is meant, that Kings ought to love their Subjects as nature binds one
brother to love another, and Kings are to rule by Law, and the Law is to be
grounded upon the word of God, that so it be, what the Law commands, God
commands; And what King soever he be, that commands any thing contrary to Law,
the Subject may refuse to obey. Hence it is that the laws of England being
grounded upon the law of God, the King having already called a Parliament to
sit at Westminster according to the Customs the Law does allow of, and as yet
not lawfully dissolved. Be it to that Subjects conscience that shall now obey
the Kings Command to sit in his Anti-Parliament, and to disert his lawful
Parliament, before such time as the work be finished, to which end they were
summoned; As to root out popery out of this Kingdom to redeem the Subjects
out of oppressions Courts; and out of the hands of oppressions Monopolists, and
to bring Offenders and Delinquents to condign punishment; But if this had been
done, there would be no Anti-Parliament at all, unless his Majesty would sit
by himself, there would be no Inscendiaries left to sit with him, which
brings me to the second thing.

Question. 2 Who they are that are summoned to sit in this Anty-Parliament.
Answer.

PArliament said I, the name of a Parliament is the greatest comfort English
Subjects, have. Lawful Parliaments reform Kings, and their Laws, if they be
not grounded upon the Law of God, they have power to repeal them, and choose
such Laws as shall be rules whereby the King shall rule his people according
to the revealed will of God, we cannot expect these comfortable effects from
this Anty-Parliament, as might be expected by faithful and religious Subjects
from a faithful and religious Parliamentary Council, perhaps you will say the
King himself sits here; Its true he does the presencement, of a gracious
Prince does animate a lawful Parliament to go on courageously for the
advancing Religion, Laws and Liberties for the throwing down of Antichrist
and Antichristian government, but this must not be expected here, although the
King be there in person, for by this you may see of what value his
Protestations and Declarations have bin all along from the first time he left
his Parliament he protested always he aimed at no other then to maintain the
Protestant Religion the Privileges of that Parliament, which at that time, and
now, sits at Westminster, the Laws of the land and the Liberty of the
Subject, he has called God to witness to these his protestations, and yet
used all the means possible, by blood thursting instruments, to kill and stay
all his faithful and loyal Subjects to fire their houses, plunder their
estates, when all this would not do, has summoned all those together, who
were his advisers to forsake his Parliament, to sit in Council with him in his
Anty-Parliament, where he will be furnished with Counsels of all sorts, there
will be Counselors to advise him how to punish Fomenters of Religion and
subverters of the laws of the Kingdom, and in fringers of the Subjects
Liberty, such as will advise him how to thrust out the Spanish and French
factions, such as will advise him, how to punish such as shall betray the trust
that the faithful Subjects of England have entrusted them with, such as
Subjects will advise his Majesty, how to bring to condign punishment, all such
as have had Articles of high Treason drawn against them, such as shall advise
his Majesty how to gain the love of his Subjects, and to secure his own Crown
and dignity.

As for example the Arch-prelates of Armagh and York, and Doctor Fearn, they
will advise his Majesty, how to punish Fomenters of Religion, by Inacting this
present Parliament that Episcopacy with Iuredivino may stand in full force, and
virtue with the triple Crown, Justice Banks, and Justice Heath, and Holborn,
will advise his Majesty how to punish Subverters of the Laws of the Land by
Inacting this their present Parliament that all such causes which have been
tried and adjudged at Westminster sithence his Majesty's Proclamation for the
adjurning the Term to Oxford, the Judgments are of no force nor virtue, but
are contrary to the fundamental laws of the Kingdom, Sir Ralph Dutton and
Sir Henry Poole will advise his Majesty to punish Infringers of the Subjects
Liberty, by Inacting that Parliament, that no Clothier in Glocestershire shall
make any cloth without paying to his Majesty one shilling per piece, and to
themselves two shillings. The Earl of Bristoll and the Lord Cottington will
advise his Majesty how to thrust out of his Kingdom, the French and spanish
factions by making an Act this present Parliament, for the establishing the
Inquisition, the high Commission I would have said, in this Kingdom, and to
keep an Army one foot, to keep his Subjects in subjection to the Commission
of Array. Sir Faithless Foscu and the Lord Littelton, will advise his Majesty
how to punish all such as betray the trust that the Subjects of England entrust
them withal, by making an Act, that it was lawful for the one after so many
Protestations as he did make to be faithful unto the employment which he had
undertaken; yet afterward to betray the lives of diverse men into the hands of
their cruel Enemies, and for the other to betray the Kingdoms Seal; from the
body of the Kingdom, to be a color for merciless actions. The Lord Digby and
the pretended Lord Germin, will advise his Majesty how to bring to condign
punishment all those who have had Articles of high Treason drawn against them,
by making an Act that it is lawful for any such person if he make an escape
before such time as he has bintryed upon the said Articles of high Treason, to
betake himself to his Majesty's Court for Sanctuary, and there to be received
into his Majesty's grace and favor, and to be of his Counsel this present
Parliament. Prince Rupert and the pretended Lord Byron, will advise his Majesty
how to gain the love of all his faithful Subjects and for the securing of his
own Crown and dignity, by making an Act, that it is lawful for any
Commanders and Soldiers that are now in Arms for the defense of the King and
this Parliament, to take plunder, and fire all such Towns, in the Kingom of
England or Scotland or Ireland, as the inhabitants thereof shall oppose the
Array government. Thus having showed you who they are that are called to sit in
this Parliament, I come now to the third Question.

Question. 3. What Parliament this is when the Members of it are together in
one body.
Answer.

IT is an Antippodes or Anty-Parliament the rather called Antippodes in regard
of the contrariety of the place where this Council is held, as I showed you
before, an Antippodes in regard of the contrariety in their several Counsels,
as for example, instead of punishing Fomenters of the Protestant Religion, they
get Acts for the setting up of Popery. Instead of punishing the Subverters of
the Laws of the Land, they subvert the Laws themselves instead of puntshing
Infringers of the Subjects Liberty, they Inact Monoppolies to be lawful and so
it is in all the rest of their proceedings. Wherefore I conceive it deserves
not the name of a Parliament, for Parliaments reform all things that are
amiss, Inact good and wholesome Laws and Privileges, whereas on the contrary
this Anty-labers all it can to confound wholesome Laws and Liberties, which
brings me to the fourth question.

Question. 4. To what end this Parliament is called.
Answer.

Which I shall answer upon this consideration, if you please to consider their
several proceedings from the first beginning of these unhappy differences, and
who they are that sit in this great Council, you will easily find to what end
this Anty Parliament was called, it was called to this very end and purpose
that seeing they could not by all the means they have used hitherto, as by the
Kings Majesty's deserting his lawful Parliament by the Arch-popish Prelates
protesting against all that ever was done in that Parliament, by their
insinuating his Majesty to take up Arms against his Parliament, as also by his
Majesty's countenancing so many popish Lords and Delinquents to his palriament,
in keeping them from being brought to condign punishment, according to the Law
of the Land, all this being done, under pretense of monarchical power and
prerogative, when all this would not enforce his parliament absolutely to
dissolve, and leave themselves and those Subjects who had entrusted them with
their lives, and Estates, to the mercy of tyrannical government, but have used
all just and lawful means to defend their Religion, Laws and Liberties, even
at that very time is this Anty-parliament called, thinking thereby to root, out
all at once, Religion, parliament, Law and Liberty. Argue but thus and we shall
find by what the Counselors are what the Counsels, as if the Counsel be
invected with popery, the advice must needs be for popery, if the Counselors
be invective with subvertion of Laws, the advice is for to subvert Laws, if
the Councillors be invective with Spanish and French factions, the Counell
must needs be for Inquisition and Array; f the Counselors be invective to
Monopoliseing, the Counsel must needs be for Monoppolies, if the Counselors
be invective to plundering, the advice must needs be for plundering and fireing
of Towns, if the Counselors be invective to Treason, the advice of those
Counselors must needs be Treachery: Now hear you may see to what end this
Anty-parliament was called. Now English faithful Subjects look to your
selves, for if this Anty-Counsell go on here is treachery a plotting to take
away your Religion, to subvert your Laws, to Infringe your Liberties, and to
root up the being of parliaments, all these to be blasted by this
Anty-parliament (if it hold) at one time. Thus have I answered the fourth
question and now come to the fifth.

Question 5. Who and what they are in their lives and conversations that take
up Arms in defense of this Anti-Parliament.
Answer.

AS for their General Prince Rupert, it is well known what he is, both for
his life and conversation, glorying in nothing but lisentious luxuries, and
plundering His Majesty's loyal and faithful Subjects: all his Ambition is to
get himself an inheritance by the destruction of our Laws and Liberties, by
an overruling power, with his Majesty's assent, witness so many Towns, as
Banbury, Brummidgham and others, which he has fired and plundered. So likewise
for the rest of the Commanders that are joined with him. How many known
Papists are there that have taken up Arms in this unnatural War. What else
can we expect from such whose Religion is a blood-thirsty Religion; It allows
them to massacre those that profess the Protestant Religion, and can we think
they will fight for the Protestant Religion. Oh! let us not sooth up our selves
with such foolish fancies; As for those of their Commanders that are not
professed Papists, as the pretended Lord Byron, the Lord Wilmoi, and Neale that
was their Scout-Master, they are worse then those who are professed papists; They
are like to subtle Woolves, who devour Lambs in sheeps clothing, who
pretend they fight for the protestant Religion, when indeed they labor all
that in them lies for to destroy it. As for Neale, he has been one of the
greatest highway robbers this day in the Kingdom, yet now Knighted by his
Majesty. Is it possible for those men to fight for the Protestant Religion,
who joined in Commotion with professed Papists, English and Irish Rebels, and
fight for one and the same cause with them, and plot and contrive how they
shall destroy such a Parliament as shall be lawfully called for the defense of
the protestant Religion. The protestant Religion cannot be maintained by such
unjust means. If such are the Commanders what are the inferior Officers and
Soldiers? as for them there are a great many professed Papists and Irish Rebels,
Patentees and Serving-men, broken Tradesmen, Proctors and Officiates,
Stage Players, Fiddlers, and Highway men, and a great many of ignorant Welchmen.
The papists and Irish Rebels they will fight in defense of this
Anti-parliament, against the lawful Parliament, because they know that if the
parliament get the day, there will be a reformation of the protestant Religion,
and popery should down quite, and the Irish Rebels would be quailed, and
therefore they will fight it out to the last, for their Religion lies at stake
as well as their selves. The Patentees they will fight, they will join with
the rest, they know if the King with his Anti-parliament get the day, they
shall renew their Patents, which if the lawful parliament get the day, their
hopes will be frustrate forever Monopolizing more. The Servingmen they will
fight too in defense of this Anti-parliament, because their Masters do; as if
their Masters go to hell, they will go too for company. There are broken
Tradesmen in this Army that will fight against the lawful parliament, because
they will not allow them Protections whereby they might walk the streets in
despite of their Creditors. The Proctors they will fight against this
parliament, in hope his Majesty and his Anti-parliament will get the day, and
then there will be Trading enough at Doctors Commons, for there would be more
Holy Days then ever there was, and Etcetera as common as ever it was, and
therefore they will fight and make as strong a party as they can against that
parliament, that has been the cause of their downfall. The Stage Players they
will fight against the Reforming parliament, for they reform Church and
people, they will not suffer more Stage Plays, and by this consequence their
trading is quite put down, but yet if there could be but a putting down of
this parliament, the King would set their Trade in as great estimation as ever
it was, and therefore they will join also with the rest, and try if they can
beat this Reforming parliament out of all. The Highway men they will fight in
this cause, for that the King allows his Soldiers good store of plunder, and
then they shall not need to fear hanging for robbing their neighbors. The
ignorant Welchmen they will fight too, but it is for no reason at all, but
because hur King is in the field, tell not hur of Religions nor Laws, nor of a
Parliament, for hur fight for hur King against them all.

All this while there is no questioning what Religion they fight for, only by
the professed Papists, and all the rest fight for their own by ends, and yet all
against the Protestant Religion, and a lawful Parliament, and the Laws and
Liberties of English Subjects.

Here you see plainly what sorts of men they are, that are in this Army, and as
they are drawn up in Battalia they seem to be a great many, and who but the
professed Papists have more care of fowls welfare then the seeming Protestant,
in regard they fight for the advancement of their own Religion, and the other
for the exhausting their own by-ends and respects, never thinking of the
advancement of the Religion they profess but fight against it. Now the next
thing is to prove this Parliament the lawful Parliament.

Question 6. That the Parliament now sitting at Westminster is the absolute
lawful Parliament?
Answer.

TO prove that this Parliament is a lawful Parliament, I shall not need much
to dispute, For that Parliament that is lawfully called, is a lawful
parliament; To prove that this Parliament was lawfully called, is only thus;
His Majesty sending forth His Writs to the Sheriffs of every City, Borough,
County, and Corporation in the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales,
giving them full power and Authority to summon the Freeholders of their
several Cities, Buroughs, Counties and Corporations, to meet at their usual
places of meetings, There freely to Elect and choose by voice or pole, such men
for Knights and Burgesses for their several Cities, Boroughs, Counties and
Corporations, as the major part of them shall choose, and these Knights and
Burgesses are to meet at such time and place as shall be expressed in His
Majesty's Warrant. Thus was this parliament called, and if thus lawfully
called, then no question it is a lawful parliament; If this be not sufficient
to prove it so you have ^is Majesty's own Act. For it is enacted by the King,
the Lords and Commons in this present parliament, that it shall not be
dissolved without a general consent of both the said Houses. Thus is this
parliament proved to be the absolute lawful parliament of England. Hence it is
that this must be lawfully dissolved, before there can be another lawfully
called in England; For it is as possible for two Suns to be in one Horizon, as
two lawful parliaments at one instant of time in the Kingdom of England, but
it is with them of this Anti-party in this case, as in all the rest hitherto,
always laboring against this Parliament, that if once they could get it
down, it should never rise again. And seeing they could not prevail, they
will now have some color for their rebellious actions. They will have an
Anti-Parliament to fight for; So by this think to m^ke good all their actions
by having Acts made, that what ever they have done was lawful, why? because it
was done in defense of the King and their Parliament, as it was in defense of
those who now are called to sit in that parliament.

Sithence it is so that His Majesty and his Queen band themselves together,
with popish Rebels and Traitors, with other Incendiaries to this State and
Kingdom, against God, the Protestant Religion, the lawful parliament of
England, the Laws of the Land, the Liberty of the Subject, let us break their
bonds and cast their cords from us, and now stand up for the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, by standing against those who labor to disinherit us of a faithful
parliament, and of the pure worship of God, and so consequently of God
himself, this must be done by uniteing our selves together in that faithful
Covenant set forth by order of parliament, covenanting with our selves that we
will stand in defense of our lawful and just reforming parliament, to the
loss of Lives and Estates, against all that ever shall oppose it, withal
blessing God that ever he sent us such a parliament, to stand so faithfully
for the honor of God, for the advancement of his Gospel and for their own
privileges, and for the Laws, of the Land and the Subjects Liberty, as this
parliament has done, let them not want your prayers, let them not want your
persons to incorage them, nor your Estates to advance that cause they have
undertaken for Gods glory, and for your future comforts, and without all doubt
the God of Heaven will stand for you, if you will stand for the advancing of
his Gospel, and you shall find that the Conspiracies of papists and Traitors,
nor the murmuring of malignants, and the power of Kings shall not prevail
against the Cause of Christ; For God is a light to comfort his people, and a
fire to burn his Enemies.

This is licensed and Entered into the Hall-booke according to Order.

FINIS

